7628 S116528 99851744 17035
CERTAINE BRIEFE NOTES VPON A BRIEFE APOLOGIE SET out vnder the name of the Prie∣stes vnited to the Archpriest. Dravvne by an vnpassionate secular Prieste friend to bothe partyes, but more frend to the truth. VVherunto is added à seuerall ansvveare vnto the particularites obiected against certaine Persons. FORTE EST VINVM, FORTIOR EST REX, SED SVPER OMNIA VIN∣CIT VERITAS ET MANET IN AETERNVM. 5. Esd. 3. Imprinted at Paris, by PETER SEVESTRE. VVith Priuiledge.
NOs subsignati Doctores Theo∣logi Parisienses, ex relatu vi∣rorum fide dignorum testamur Anno∣tationes has grauissimi & litteratis∣simi Viri D. H. Ely vtriusque iuris Doctoris peritissimi, in librum quem∣dam dictum Apologiam &c. Angli∣ce scriptas, nihil inse continere contra fidem Catholicam aut bonos mores, sedmulta cognitu dignissima, tracta∣re erudite. In cuius reifidem nomina nostra apposuimus. IAC. LANGAEVS. IOH. MVLOT.
A GENERALL PREFACE. VVERE it not à principle vvell knovven to all men by the very instinct of na∣ture, that euery one hath greater reason to defend his good name, then any other parte off his riches: and that they principally, vvhose credites are necessa∣rye for the behoofe of others, are by the lavve of God bound therevnto: I should besorie (I assure thee good Christian rea∣der) to heare of any more vvritinge of this lamentable subiect, of our ciuill dissen∣tion, vvho ought (like bretherne) to lyue together in perfit peace and vnity. But hauinge read a most indiscrete and odious Apologye [published vnder the name of vnited Priestes in the maintenance of a ne∣vve founded Hierarchie,] vvhich VVan∣dering
far and vvide from the Question in controuersie, seeeth occasion to sturre in the vnsauorye puddle of humaine frail∣ties, such as he deemeth to haue hapned amonge our poore exiled countrimen, for aboue this tvventy yeares: I could not (I say hauinge seen such à pitifull peece of vvoorke) but esteeme him to haue no feelinge of à true English nature in him, that vvould not be much moued at that not Onely Vnchristianlyke, but vnciuill and Barbarous behauiour: and should not also thinke it very requisyte and neces∣sarye, that à reasonable ansvveare vvere retourned, to preserue and defend our deare countryes, and country mens repu∣tation. VVhich hath been the cause that M. Doctor Ely [à very auncient, vvise & led∣ned Prieste, lyuinge in honour and at his ease, far from his natiue soile, and farther from all such debate and contention] ha∣peninge to read that venemous Apolo∣gye, could not hold his hande any longer, but quittinge his ovvne repose, hastened to come to succour them, vvhom he (to his great griefe) perceiued, to be verye iniuriously set vpon and assailed. Not vn∣like the good bloud in a mans body, vv∣hich feelinge the harte assaulted, flieth frō euery part, to assist aid and confort it.
And truly vvhosoeuer knovveth this right vvourshipfull Doctor (as his auncient stā∣dinge in the seminarie, euen from the be∣ginninge, and his kind hospitality sithen∣ce to all cōmers, hath made him vvel kno∣vven to many:) cannot thinke it strange, that his feruent affection vnto our Com∣mon father, CARD: ALLEN off godly me∣morye (vvith vvhom he vvas very intrin∣secall) and his tender loue tvvardes vs all, hath pushed him on, to sett penne to Paper and to imploy some parte of his goodly talent, about the decision of this contro∣uersy, and appeasinge of our troubles. And to speake in differently, vvho is there of our nation that should be sooner hear∣kened vnto, or better beleeued in this cau∣se, then M. D. Ely? For first he not beinge partiall, but alike affected vnto both par∣ties, (as in his Epistle folovvinge he she∣vveth at large) hath vvith all indifferency heard, read, and diligently perused, vvhat eyther side hath to say for them selues. Then his sound naturall iudgment, refined and accomplished vvith a profound kno∣vveledg of both ciuill and canon lavve, (vvhereof he hath been publike professor in à famous vniuersity for many yeares:) inableth him, to discerne & see on vvho∣se side the right is. Finally his sincere hone∣sty, voide off dissimulation, full of Zeale to
truth and equity, maketh him bold to de∣liuet in plaine tearmes that vvhich in con∣science he knovveth to be the verity. VVherefore enery considerate an aduised reader, must needs giue singular regard to his opinion, and may vvithout any doubt safely relie vpon him, as vpon à most pro∣bable Authour. Notvvithstandinge it is to be eared lest some [ouer vvillfully bent to dvvell in their ovvne errours, and vvho cannot in any sorte endure to be controled] not ha∣uinge any exception against the vvork∣man, vvill coyne some cauill against the vvorke, that so plainly discouereth their deceites: and not findinge any other pre∣text, may peraduenture say, that his holines Brene of the 17. of August 1601. Doth de∣barr them from readinge all such bookes as this is. VVhich scruple I thought expe∣dient to remooue in this Preface. Because those good felovves that thrust into their blind folovvers handes, bookes flatly pro∣hibited by that Breue, vvith vvarrantise: are as earnest on the other side to dissunde them from touchinge others: lest readinge them they should espie their errours, and so for sake them. First then it is to be con∣sidered that these learned notes of M. D. Ely come not vvithin the compas of the bookes forbidden by the Breue. Bicause
they be not vvritten by any of either par∣ty, to kindle more coales and to increase discord and debate: but by à charitable, discrete and indifferent person, to quench the flames of strife & to induceboth sides to atonement. Againe yf ther vvere such à prohibited booke, yet may they novve be read securely, vvithout incurringe the pe∣rill of that Breue. For the sayd Breue vvas not at the first receiued and admitted. The one part seeinge hovve it vvas abused appealinge from it. And the other, to vvitt M. Archpriest, deludinge and defeatinge of it. For it beinge sent to vvardes him frō Rome shortly after the 17. of August, and comning to his hande about Michaelmas, he kept it close and suppressed it vntill tovvardes the end of Ianuarye folovvin∣ge; that in the meane season, the goodly peece of vvorke of their Apologie might be hatched: and then it peepinge out vvith an antidate, might seeme to the simple, to haue been made before the Breue. VVhat boldnes and presumption vvas this? Vievvinge his hol. vvill and Com∣mandement, vnder so seuere a penalty as the greater excommunication, euen hol∣dinge his breue in his hande to be so auda∣cious as at the very nose of it, to thrust out bookes so oposite to it, as darkenes is to light, vvas certainly to contemne it in the
highest degree, & to the greater scorne off it, they gaue out, that the breue did onely forbid bookes of our side, but admitted all of theirs. It beinge made vvithout partialitye as vvell against the one as the other. This vvas the first pageāt they plaid against it, but vvas this all? Noe. For some monethes after both the publishinge off the Breue, and their Apologyes, one in La∣tin, and another in English: To the infa∣mye and exasperation of diuerse sortes off persons both Ecclesiasticall and temporall, there creepeth forth an Appendix to them of the same railinge qualitye: vvhich very peartly playeth at bo-peepe vvith his holi∣nes Breue. The Author confesseth ingen∣iously, that he had in deed heard of such a breue, but had not seē it: orels he vvould not for all the good in the vvorld, haue so violated it, for vvhat vvilfull contempt should that haue been? and yet the seely man vvas so ouerseen, as to relate in the same place the somme of it, and runninge ouer it orderly as it lieth, to cite certayne sentences of it AD VERBVM, vvord by vvord. vvhich plainely bevvrayeth his dis∣simulation, and declareth sufflciently, that he had both seen and perused the Sayd Breue, but meant to jest vvith it. So obe∣dient be they to the see Apostolike. But I vvould faine knovve vvhat shift
they haue yet in store for their larger A∣pologie vvhich is reported to be already published. Shall that also beare date befo∣re the breue? Or shall it be fathered vpon some one that lyeth in an vnknovven cor∣ner? vvho vvill say in like manner, that he had not seen the said Breue: or vvhat other ioly deuise shall vve see next? be not these to vvardly and dutifull Children, vvho vnder the pretext of such triflinge excuses dare so delude and resist our holie fathers authority? vve vvere by them stiled, e∣normous disobedient, rebels, vvorse thē Magitians and Idolaters, for that vve de∣laid to subscribe to a lately deuised subor∣dination, erected by a Cardinall his letter: vvhat doe they then deserue to be called, vvho so vvilfully trangressed our supreme Pastours Autentike vvritts? for euen as there is incomparable difference betvve∣en the Popes Parson and a Cardinalls, be∣tvveen his Breue and this man bare letter: so vvas there in that vvhich vvas commā∣ded. For the Card: imposed an intollera∣ble burden vpon vs of that lavveles subor∣dination: VVheras his holines charged vs onely to refraine from offendinge one an other by inuectiues and bitter vvritinge. Euerie one therfore that is not blinded by affection, May easly see vvhat Difference there vvas in the breach of those tvvo co∣mandementes.
I vvill here passe ouer a fift pamphlet. VVhich they haue also put to light since the Breue. Because the subiect of it is so absurd in it self, and so vngrate∣full vnto all our Catholikes that be in per∣secution, that it cannot be vvelcome into England. It is [if it please you] that vve notvvithstandinge our longe indurance of manifold afflictions, should not accept of a tolleration in matters of religion, noe not yf her maiestie of her singular clemen∣cy, vvould offre it vnto vs. Need you hea∣re any more? do you not thinke these men to haue lost four of their fiue sences? or els that lyuinge to lōge out of guneshott at their ease, haue cast of all humaine com∣passion of their Bretherne? and shall vve be so assotted on them still that vve vvill vphold all they Say? And tather indure any hardnes then once mislike their folish o∣pinions? But to returne to our purpose, seinge they haue four or fiue tymes by ouuert act gone against that his Hol. Breue, they haue made it frustrat & of noe force For (as the learned Casuistes hold) after à Superiours lavve or precept publis∣hed, is by tvvo or three open actes contra∣ried and resisted: it doth not bind any lon∣ger, vvhen the Superiour vnderstandinge off it, doth not rebuxe or punnish such transgressors and renevve his former de∣cree.
Novve vve haue longe since giuen his hol: to vnderstand, by his Nuncios in France and Flanders, and by our Brether∣ne at Rome, of their often violatinge off the sayd Breue; and yet he stirreth not in it vvhich signifieth that he is content that Breue exspire, and bind no longer. But as I aforesayd, if the Breue did stand in for∣mer force and vertue, yet it comprehen∣ded not these notes, vvritten so modestly, by such à Venerable Person, vvho in the spirite of mildnes charitably commendeth or reprehendeth both parties, as he taketh eyther of them to haue deserued. And he∣re I vvould end this preface, vvere it not that I thought it expedient in this place to examine brieflie, that vvhich is cited in the Apologye out of Card: Cap: 2. f: 11. Allens letter vnto M. Mush. For that he novve folo∣vvinge our common cause at Rome, can∣not as yet ansvveare for him self. After the good Card. had exhorted vs secular Prie∣stes to loue, honour, and respect one ano∣ther, accordinge vnto euerye ones age, or∣der and profession, he hath these vvordes: And those of the secular order, specially those that haue been brought vp by the fathers, and haue found so greate loue, charity and helpe at their handes (as verye fevve of late haue done) to be correspondent in all gratitude and thank∣fulnes, reuerencinge them in vvorde and deed, as
is requisite to their merites and callinge, &c. Out of vvhich vvordes the Iesuites and their adherentes dravve, the Card: to haue been of opinion, that the secular Priestes should take them for their Superiours, or at lest, should giue them the preeminence in all places. All vvhich is far vvide both from his vvordes and meaninge. For as I vvill not say but that they, VVho haue found Courtesie at their handes, are tied to acknovvledge and requite it: see doe I affirme, that to fish out of his vvordes any kind of superiority or equality either vv∣ith secular Priestes, sauoreth of Ambition: the Card; I graunte aduiseth and chargeth vs to reuerence them, according to their callinge: but their callinge and profession requireth not, that they be preferred befo∣re vs, as out of the Auncient Fathers, and holy canous may be proued at large: but this place doth not permit it: take for a tast the decree of a councell holdē at Ro∣me abovve 1300. past, vnde pope Silue∣ster, vvhere (charge beinge giuen that in∣feriours giue reuerence to their Superi∣ours) it is declared vvho be those Supe∣riours and inferiours, in these vvordes as it is related in the decrees. PORRO PON∣TIFICI PRESBITER, dist 93. li: a Subdia∣no. ET CET. Let the Priest do rerence to the Bishope. The deacon to the Priest. The Subdeacon to the Deacon. Tha Aco∣lite
to the Subdeacon, the exorciste to the Acoli∣lite, the lector to the exorciste, the portor to the le∣ctor; OSTIARIO ABBAS, ABBATI MO∣NACHVS IN OMNI LOCO REPRESEN∣TENT OBSEQVIVM: let the Abbote giue obeisance vnto the keper of the church dooer in all places asvvell in publike as vvith in the church; as the monke Doth to the Abbote. behold the iudgment of the primitiue church concerninge secular Pri∣estes and religious, in their opinion (vv∣hich vvas most pure and sound) a secular Priest so far excelleth a religious man: that the Abbote vvho is Chiefe amonge them, is to exibite and to doe reuerence, vnto a dore keper the meanest minister aut atten∣dant vpon a secular Priest. VVhich is con∣firmed by another Canon taken out off that true religious, and most learned Do∣ctor of the Church S. Hierome. VVho beinge demaunded by Heliodorus a Bishope, vv∣hether the order of secular Clerkes, Cap. 16. q. 1. alia causa. or of the re∣ligeous vvere more vvorthy, gaue ansvvere that the order of Clerkes vvas far vvorthier, And proueth it by four seueral reasōs as is to be seen in that place. One of the principall is, that they are of the ecclesiastical hierarchy theyr callinge beinge to take charge of soules, to teach others the vvorde of God, and to administers the holy sacramentes, vvhich are the diuinest offices, that the Al∣mighty
hath communicated vnto men. And therefore sayd this great holy father. MIHI ANTE PRESBITERVM SEDERE NON LICET. It is not lavvefull for me to fit abovve a Priest. True it is (as the glos∣se vpon the former place signifieth) that since the religious tooke holy orders, an Abbote is to take place afore a secular Clearke; but noe other monke or religi∣ous. As the ordinary practise of the Chri∣stian vvorld in publike processions and all other solemne assemblies Doth make most manifest. VVhere the precedence is alvvayes giuen vnto the secular. And that these sharpe censurers take no exception of the vvord MONACHVS, vsed in the former places. and say that secular Priestes be there onely put before monkes, but not before such religious as they are: it is to bee vnderstood, that in those Authors, MONACHVS, is taken for all sortes of re∣ligious, for that in those dayes there vvere noe other maner of religious: or yf they vvill needes haue a distinction betvven them: then monkes vvilbe the vvorthier, and must march before other poore friers, as the ordinary course of the vvorld allo∣vveth. And amonge all mendiants, or begginge friers (in vvhich order the Iesui∣tes recken them selues) they are to march in one of the lovvest ranckes not onely
because, their societi is one of the last foū∣ded, but also for that they haue fevvest religious obseruances; they not beinge bound to rough and rude apparell, osten and longe fastes, or continuall risinge at midnight to Canonicall houres, as other ligious mē are the, kepinge onely the essē∣tiall vovves of religiō: of vvhich also some tearme all those that haue not made their last profession but tenantes at vvill, and noe freeholders. For vvhen it shall please their generall to dimitt them, they incōti∣nētly become secular & be no lōger Reli∣gious. All vvhich I say, (God is my vvitnis) not to disgrace any order of the religious, for albeit in the rāckes of the vvorld they be the lovvest: Yet in the sight of God for vvhose sake the leaue all, they may be of the hiest, yf they excell in vertue: as many good deuoute poore vvoman, shall in the kingedome of heauen, be placed far abo∣vve many ladies not so vertuous as they. Yet as vve giuinge the place to a lady be∣fore a poore vvoman here, do not offend God or man: so vvhosoeuer preferreth a secular Priest afore a religious man, doth not offend against Card. Allens graue ad∣uise, of giuinge them such reuerence as is requisite to their callinge. Their vocation beinge inferiour to the other, as hath been prooued. Neither can the addition of re∣ligious
ioyned vnto their Priesthood gre∣atly aduāce thē (of vvhich yet I haue heard some to bragg) vvhen as the hiest dignity of religion, is not equall vnto a poore por∣tershipp in the church of God, as is by re∣cord of antiquity abovve declared. And because I am a litle entred into this matter, Ca. 16. q. 1. Eccles. I vvill to this purpose add one sentence more, out of the next Canon of the same question. The summe and sub∣stance vvhereof is, that it is not lavvefull for monkes and religious to do any thin∣ge (specially belonging vnto the ecclesia∣sticall hierarchie), vvithout the counsaile of Priestes. Thus taught blessed S. Hiero∣rome 1200. agoe: and this holy charch e∣steemed conuenient to be rāged amonge her sacred decrees. VVhat shall vve then say to those vvisemen, vvo leppinge out of the limittes of their ovvne profession, durst avovve, that Priestes vvere out to be trusted vvith the guidinge of the con∣sciences of layfolkes, vnlesse they depen∣ded on some religious man. The discipli∣ne of holy church sendeth religious for direction and Counsail, vnto secular Prie∣stes: this vnaduised vvriter cleane cōtrary, vvould not haue secular priestes credited vvith the charge of soules, yf they be not ruled by some religious: vvhich is also so much the more absurd for that the ma∣naginge
of lay persons spirituall saluation apparteyneth most properly vnto secular Priestes, that beinge their peculiar voca∣tion and profession. And (as all men con∣fesse,) God most assuredly assisteth and concurreth, vvith those instrumentes, of vvhich he maketh choise him self for any purpose: novve the very institution of se∣cular Priestes by our blessed Sauiour, vvas to giue them the charge of both conuer∣ting, instructinge, and guidinge mens sou∣les into the knigedome of heauen: vv∣herfore by the diuine lavve of his ordi∣narie prouidence, he doth more specially perfitt this his holy vvorke by the seruice of secular Priestes, then by any other vv∣hat soeuer. He then that leaueth them, and seeketh after others for the directinge of his conscience, may be resembled to him that forsaketh the hight vvay, and folo∣vveth bypathes, of vvhich be cannot bee so vvell assured. For as I take religious men to be the fittest to handle religious affaires so it cānot vvith any colour of reason be denied but that se∣cular Priestes are the most proper for the conductinge of secular mens consciences. And therfore I chiefly take them to be cal∣secular, for that they liue in the vvorld to be lanternes and guides vnto vvorldly men. VVich should be a singular motiue
vnto all lay men, to cast their eyes princi∣pally vpon them and to loue honour, and respect them abovve the rest, as their or∣dinarie Pastours, vvho haue quitt their ovvne friends and all other thinges to li∣ne and dye amonge them, and to assist them vvhih the vvord of life, and the holy sacramentes liuinge and dieinge: VVheras the religious (loue they them neuer so∣vvell) must needes forsake them on the sudden at the commaundement of their Superiours. VVhich I do not relate to Diminish in a∣ny sorte the orderly affection, that any man or vvoman carieth tovvardes them: but to correct the fond opinion of them, that thinke nothing cā be vvell done vvith out them. And to complaine a litle of the incongruity of such religious, vvho con∣trarie to their rule and profession, plunge them selues ouer head and heares into ec∣clesiastical affaires, vvith such audacity and obstinacy, as they haue tourned all topsie turnie. And hovve can it almost be other vvise so longe as they meddle so peremtorily in matters, vvherin they haue verie smale skill: hauinge neither stu∣died much in the holy canons, by vvhich principally the discipline and regiment of the church is directed: nor had any greate practise in ecclesiasticall affaires; they li∣uinge
as it vvere out of the vvorld, in a di∣stincte and far different gouernmente. And finally God doth seldome blesse the∣ir enterprises vvith good successe, vvho runne before he send them, and intet∣meddle farther then they haue comission from him or his vicar and vicegerent in earth. VVhefore (to conclude) I most hartely request them, to retire them selues vvith in their ovvne boundes, and to ob∣serue that golden rule, REGVLARIA RE∣GVLARIBVS, lett religious men deale in matter appertayninge to religion and the cloister: and leaue SECVLARIA SECV∣LARIBVS. The orderinge of the Com∣mon affaires of the church, to secular Prie∣stes, and so vve shall come to line quietly togither. VVhich Almighly God; of his infinite mercy and goodnes grannt vs spe∣dely, throught the merites of our blessed Sauiour, Christ Iesus. Amen.
THE OPINION OF M. KOB PARKĪNSON PRIEST and licenciate in diuinitie touchin∣ge this controuersie vvith M. Ar∣chpriest: vvhith is vvord for vvord taken out of a letter of his ost the last of May 1602. The vvhich vvas thought vvorthy the relatinge, bi∣cause he vvas longe since Card. Al∣len Confessour and one of the se∣niours and readers in the seminary at Rhemes. In his second assertion to vvars the end he hath these vvordes I Knovve also by relation of many and am fully persuaded, that you ha∣ue sustained iniuries by the erection of your Ar∣chipriest, and some Iesuites: and I con∣fesse vnto you vnfainedly, that if you
had kept your selues, vvithin the cō∣pas of your Appeale, and plainely and orderly proposed to the see Apostoli∣ke (vvhere at first although you vvere repelle, yer in the end doubtles, you should haue had audience and iustice) I vvould neuer haue giuen any signe in mistike of your doinges, but rather to the vtermost of my povver, haue furthered it, as iust and lavvefull. In his postscript thus he saith. YF God spare me health and life: fi∣ne dayes together, I vvill vvrite to F. Persons, concerninge many cō∣plaintes, that I haue heard off his hard dealinge vvith our youthes at Rome, and likevvise off the nevve erection off the Archipriest in England. It vvas thought of longe before F. Persons. began it: and by Gregorie the 13. sup∣pressed and forbidden, as a iurisdi∣ction, vvhich could not be practised in England. I suppose F. Persons did it vvith good intention, &c. But by ex∣perience
and contradiction, he should haue forseen the misehiefe that vvas like to folovve, and sought meanes hovve to preuent it, rather then by force and authority, to beare it out. Thus much by the vvay the good old man vvrote vvel. But in his maine discourse against our soueraine lady, he very grosly goeth against the comō opinion and practise of all our learned countrimen. VVhich may be impu∣ted partly to his lacke of experience, and partly to those his superiours: that commanded him so to doe, as there he confesseth. Some of the same hu∣mour obiect as a great faulte vnto di∣uerse vertuous Priestes and Aun∣cient Confessours, that they in faire humble sorte deale vvith the tempo∣rall magistrate, about their ovvne de∣liuerance, and for the manifold eases of sondry others. VVhere nothinge is more euident by the very light of na∣ture, then that vve may by all honest meanes possible, both helpe our sel∣ues and do good to all others. And yf
vve needed in so cleere a case any longer probation; I could by many examples, of the most Auncient, best learned, and va∣liantest Christiās, both Martirs and Cōfes∣sours, conuince it to be neither vnhonest nor dishonorable, for Catholikes in perse∣cution to fly vnto the clemency of them in vvhose hādes they are, and in most seemely humble maner to beseech thē to haue cō∣passion, on such their poore afflicted coun∣trimen, as be ready to spēd their best blou∣de either to do any of them good in parti∣cular, or for the seruice of their country in generall. But some doe say, bevvare of the coūcel, they meane onely to deceyne you, but vvil do you noe good: vve confesse their honours to surpasse our brethern in vvitt and policy exceedingely, yet hope, by the helpe of God, that ours are of suffi∣cient discretion to looke to them selues: and their longe tried constancy in prison, doth vvith any indifferent man vvarrant them from all suspition of trachery in the Catholike cause, vntill there be plaine pro∣ofe to the contrary. on the other side, are not the hartes of princes in the handes of God? and are not all men inclinable to mercy, vpon true declaration of our innoe¦cency? it is thē rather a singular blessinge of God, thē matter of exclamatiō, to haue ob∣tained the fauorable eare of our gouer∣nours,
that vve may haue the oportunity to purge our selues frō those heinous crimes of attemptinge euill against her maiesties roiall persō, or dealinge vvith forraine na∣tions about an inuasiō; of vvhich through the sinister information of our aduersaries, vve haue been heretofor holdē in great ie∣lousy. It may be that they vvho are not so vvel able to discharge them selues of such imputatiōs, dislike of this fauour: fearinge lest their by, their plottes be easlier espied and them selues become more odious. But the innocet (vvho is by that meanes like to find more fauour) must acknovvledg him self much bound vnto vnto that venerable Auncient Priest and Cōfessour M. Bluett, yf he haue (as the Apologie reporteth) in some part pacified the vvrath of our Gra∣tious Princesse, and of her right honora∣ble councell tovvars the most part of vs, by cleeringe vs from the suspition of the a∣foresaid vvicked attēptes: and yf he could not do as much for some others (it beinge ouer vvell knovven vnto the coūcell, that they had meadled to to much in such mat∣ters) he is not to be clamed, yf he lett the fault lye vvhere it vvas, and leave them to ansvveare for them selues. But I refer it to him him selfe (vven he shall haue leisure) to treate of this subiect more at large.
AN ANSVVEARE VNTO THE PAR∣TICVLARS OBIECTED in the Apology against Ma∣ster Doctor Byshope. CONSIDERINGE that nothinge can be more iust and honorable, then to defend graue and innocēt men, specially such, vvhose trauailes haue been very profitable vnto the church of God, in the seruice of their countrie: I trust that my paines shall not displease the indifferent reader, if I doe bestovve one chapter, in the defence of the vvourshipfull PRIEST M. DOCTOR BISHOPE. VVho beinge vvell descended, and trained vp accordin∣gely in vertue and learninge, for the loue
of the Catholicke Religion and hooly Or∣ders, forsooke the hope of 200.l of yearly inheritance, and ledd in the Colledges a∣brode, an exemplare life. VVhence retour∣ninge home Priest, he vvas taken and cast into prison, for his professiō. VVhere for three yeares space, he did good seruice to the cause, by often exhortations vnto his felovv prisoners, and in disputations vvith many accounted learned Ministers: Con∣nertinge by the grace of GOD, diuers vnto the faith, and amonge others six vvho a∣bovve this Dozen yeares, beinge Priestes, haue laudably laboured in their vocation. At length banished into France, he renued his study in diuinity, in the renovvmed v∣niuersity of Paris, and in fiue yeares finis∣hed the laborious course of Sorbone, as much to the credite of our country, as to his ovvne good and preferment. Aftervvard retourninge into England, im∣ploied his talent amonge his country men, abovve seauen yeares at liberty, noe lesse helpinge his brethren the Priestes, then soccouringe many poore Catholikes: all vvhich notvvithstandinge, because he mo∣ued of Charity, did trauaile, to preuent those pitifull broiles and contentions, vv∣hich he forsavv longe ere they brake out, he is in sondry places of that Vnchristian Apologie, not a litle touched it reputatiō,
but very vvrongefully, as by ansvveringe to all that therin is layd against him, I vvill novv lett you vnderstande. First then before the preface of that A∣pologie, vvhere the principall Authours of tvvo booke, (vvritten against Mr. Archpriest, F. Persons and their compli∣ces) are scored vpp, M.D. Byshope is saied to be one of the three, that haue put their names in printe vnto diuerse partes of tho∣se bookes. I hartely desire the vpright reader, to runne those tvvo bookes ouer the one is in English, containinge the copies of cer∣taine learned discourses, ther other in Latin, intitled, DECLARATIO MOTVVM ET CET. And yf he find D. Bysp. His name, at any other part thereof then at one letter of his ovvne, vvritten in ansvvere vnto an other of F. per. to him: lett him har∣dly repute this nameles Author (shrouded vnder the shadovve of vnited Priestes) for such a one, as may be beleeued on his vvord. But yf not, as in truth it is not, then bevvare hovve you trust him hereafter vv∣ho beginneth at the first to deceaue youi a∣gaine, neither did M. D. By: put his name in printe, Vnto that his letter: but others desi∣ringe to make knovven to the vvorld ho∣vve some thinges had passed, caused it to be printed: as they did also F. par. letter.
vvith his name at it. VVherfore yf he must needs be holden for one of the chiefe doers in those bookes, because one letter theirin is subsigned vvith his name: By as good reason F. par. him self, may be repu∣ted and taken for a principall Author off them his name beinge a svvell sett dovvne in printe to a letter in them. And albeit D. By. make fart better account of those boo∣kes, then F. P. doth, neuer the lesse it is as vntruly inferred of him, as it should be off F. P. that he vvas one of the principall do∣ers in them. Soe that in one line almost, & that the first vvhich toucheth D. By. there are tvvo vntruthes: one in that he saith him to haue sett his hand to diuerse partes off those bookes, vvhen it is but at one onely: The other in avouchinge him to haue put il to, in printe vvhen others did that, and not he. See (I pray you) vvhether this Apologist, be not like to prooue an vnfor∣tunate pilote, that thus before he put to sea, Cap. 19. f. 129. maketh shipvvracke of his credite, as it vvere in the hauen. Of like sorte is that vaine florish of his vvhere he sayeth, Neither is that fond shift vsed by D. By. in his ansvvere, and by this felovve censurer vpon F. P. letter, of any valevve vvith men of iudgment, but rather shevveth that they proceed not by cō∣science, but seeke euasions by cauillation, vvhen they say, that the Notary beinge a father off the
Colledg, might put in and out vvhat F. P. vvould haue him &c: all this is nought els but a fōd amplification of a very tale: for their is noe one such vvord of that Notary in all M. D. By: letter, as euery one that list, may see. Of the same base qualitye is this counter∣point of his, to vvitt, that his holines Breue made in confirmation off the Protectors letters vvas dated the 6. of Apriell 1599. And yet in the same chapter shortly after in fauour of one of F. P: letters, Ca. 10, f. 140. f. 143. that Breue is made to beare date of the 21. of Apriell. But vvhy stand I to note by the vvay as it vvere for a tast, some of those grosse mis∣hapen forgeries, vvhen as vvith the like paltry stuffe is patched vp admost all that peeuish Apologye. it grieueth me I assure you to haue to doe vvith such a peltinge aduersary, QVI POSVIT MENDACIVM SPEM SVAM, vvhose vvhole confidence lieth in conninge conueiance of lyes: But beinge driuen for the necessary defence of my deere friends honour, to coope vvith such a mate, I must intreate the gentle rea∣der ro beare vvith me, yf I doe novv and then, take him vp, some vvhat roundly. be∣fore I enter into the particulars of M. D. Of the Sorbons sentence. Byshops negotiation, I vvill speake a vvord or tvvo in behalfe of that piththy and gra∣ue sentēce of the Sorbon Doctours (vvho declared those Priestes, that delaid to recei∣ue
M. Cap. 8. f. 116. & 317. Archpriest, vntill his hol, Breue, not to haue offended) because D. By, is coated in the margent to haue been one of the sol∣licitors of it. Many odd idle exceptions are there by the Apol. taken against that vveighty and sound declaration: VVhe∣rof some are in the former learned notes, very sufficiently reiected, yet so, as some vvhat more may be therunto added. Certayne it is first, and there vvell pro∣oued; that the addition of protectour, vnto the title of a Cardinall, vvas impertinent to that purpose. Because that circumstance al∣tered not the case, in giuinge either any ne∣vve povver to his person, or more credyte to a Card: it beinge of far meaner quality, then the dignity of a Cardinall. The second exception is, for that in the information of the sayd dd, it vvas related, that the Card: instituted that subordina∣tion, SEQVENS VOLVNTATEM SAN∣CTISSIMI: VVheras the Apol. averreth it to haue bin done EX SPECIALI MAN∣DATO, by his hol: speciall commandemēt. Although he repete this often, and vrge it greatly yet is it a very fiction, vvithout any good ground or probabilitye. For in the Card. his letter of M. Arch. Constitution, are these expresse vvordes NOSSANCTIS1. PIISSIMAM ET PROVIDENTISSIMAM VOLVNTATEM SEQVENTES, HOC I∣PSVM
STATVERE DECREVIMVS: VVe (saith the Card.) folovvinge the most godly, and most prouident vvill of his holines, haue de∣termined to institute this subordination. VVhich are the very vvordes vsed by the infor∣mers. Novve those tearmes, EX SPECIALI MANDATO, are put dovvne before in the proeme about a nother matter, of makin∣ge atonement betvven the lay Catholike gentlemen and the Priests, Relat. cōp. pag. 11. as in the letter it self novve in printe, is evidently to bee seen vvherefore as many tymes as the A∣pol: doth inculcate in this matter, HIS EX SPECIALI MANDATO, (vvhich he doth o∣ften) so many tymes doth he tell a speciall vntruth. The third exception is that the infor∣mers concealed, hovve the subordination vvas demaunded by the English Priestes: true it is that noe mention vvas made of that, because they knevve it to be most fal∣se. As hath been often hertofore declared. Fourthly he excepteth against these vvordes off the information: many Prie∣stes refused to subscribe vnto that subordination: vvhen (as he signifieth) there vvere scarce ten that refused so to doe: VVhat voluntary le∣singe is this? they knevve full vvell, That D. By and his companion M. Charnock, Caried vvith them more thē tvventy han∣des against it. Moreouer not they onely
vvho vvrote against it, refused to subscribe to it, but all those too, vvho vvould not meddle on eyther side. VVho vvere more in number, thē all they set togither, that vv∣ere on both sides formalli: vvhich partly by F. Listers railing against neuters, partly by this vvorthy Authours reckening vp of thē that subscribed, might be prooued, yf the matter vvere not cleere of it self. Cap. 8. f. 106. & 107. For the Apol. accountinge them that subscribed in particular, gathereth but 57, handes, to that subordination, comprehendinge the assi∣stantes vvithall. So that of three hundred Priestes approbation, they euery vvhere vante and Bragg of, there vvere not threes∣core expressly for them. And consequent∣ly not onely ten refused to subscribe to that nevve Hierarchie, but more then tvvo hundred. novve to suppose that for breui∣tyes sake that Author (vvho is so super∣fluous in recordinge many letters off lesse momēt) vvould omit to set dovvne in Cip∣her at the lest, the summa totalis of the rest, vvere extreame folly. VVeigh also I pray you the aduantage they had ouer vs: as vvel through the colour of the Card: his autho∣rity, as by the aid of their 12. assistantes, and all the povver of the Iesuites, vvith the ter∣rour of takinge avvay facultyes & displa∣cinge, and the thundringe out of schisme: And can you maruell then, yf they obtai∣ned
the handes of some fevve more, then vve could doe, beinge destitute of all tho∣se helpes? sithence many at more leisure hauinge cōsidered better of the matter, are come to ioyne openly vvith vs so that our Bretherne vvho novve are at Rome about it, had vvith them more handes for vs, then they haue sheued for them. But not to stray from these exceptions, the fift is a mere cauill. VVere he blameth the infor∣mers for saynig, that they sent speedely to kno∣vve his hol: pleasure. And vvere ready to obey it. As though (saith he) they meant then to yeeld, and to be quiet: vvhen as they neuer thought any such matter. This he mightely presseth in enery Chapter almost, thoro∣vve out his vvhole booke. But plaine proofe to the contrary is sett dovvne in the former notez by the protestation of all on our side, vvhich is also of record in the latin booke Dedicated to his hol, Pag. 61. and in all other vvritinge of shat tenour. And be∣cause it is a point of great importance, vv∣hether vve meant sincerely therein or noe, I vvill, to put it out of all doubt, recite the Confessions of our aduerse party, registred by them selues, in this their Apologie. First M. Archpriest in his letter of the 3. Cap. 10. l. 147. of Iune 1599. to F. Persons: giueth plaine te∣stimony of it, in these vvordes: NOX PRECESSIT, DIES APPROPINQVAVIT:
dissention is put to flight, PAX HABITAT IN TABERNACVLIS NOSTRIS, peace dvvel∣leth amongest vs M. Colingeton and M. Mush, ha∣ue procured the submission, of M. Ed. Benet, vvat∣son, Champney an the rest. Note hovv they submitted themselues vpon sight off his hol: Breue. The same vvitnisseth F. Gar∣nett (superiour of the Iesuites in England) sayng in one of his of the 26. off may to F. Persons. I hope all vvilbe vvell, nay all is vvell already. M. Colinglon and M. Mush submitted them selues to the Archpriest the 19. of may and promised to doe vvhat lay in them, to bringe in others. VVhich also F. Persons himself, in his to M. Mush, of the 17. of Iuly, ackno∣vvledgeth. Finally this great Apologist, (vvhose sayinge you must take to be of as sound record, as the oracles of Apollo) cleerly deliuereth the same in the argumēt of his tenth Chapter, Cap. 10, f. 141. thus: Of the endinge of all controuersyes vpon publication off his holines Bre∣ue, and hovve by the art off the Common enemy, matters vvere brought, to vvorse Breach then be∣fore. So that it is most manyfest, and vvas confessed by both partyes, that the Priestes not onely meant to yeeld and to be quiet, but vvere so in very deed, assone as they savve his hol: Breue. VVhat vnspeaka∣ble malice and impudency, or dotinge blockishnes, (or vvhat shall I learme it?) is it then, to repete more then à hundreth
times ouer and ouer, that they neuer thougth, to submitt them selues, to be quiet and to obey? do they not deserue the prick and prise off audacious and shameles lyeinge, that so often, so bodly and roundly gaynesay that, vvhich in expresse tearmes, they sett dovvnc them selues. Yf the reader be not vvilfully blind, he vvill easly disco∣uer, see and detest such shamefully false & most desperate assertions. The Sixt and last exception they take a∣gainst that information is, That there vvan∣ted at Paris some body on the behalf of M. Ar∣chp: to haue shevved, their reasons vvho infor∣med against him, not to haue been good: name∣ly those tvvo, to vvitt, that the subordination seemed to be haue been granted, vpon false sugge∣stion: and that there vvas great partiality vsed, in the choise of the Archp. and of his assistantes. This the Apol. affirmeth: but doth he brin∣ge any thinge in reproofe of those tvvo reasons? Litle or nothinge. He might in li∣ke sorte bee put backevvith a bare deniall: but that I hold it not sufficient in a diffe∣rent, to presume vpon the readers creduli∣ty as he doth, but desire to giue him some satisfaction. VVherfore I vvill prooue tho∣se reasons to haue been very good. First cōcerninge false suggestion, the tvvo prin∣cipall causes, vvhy the Cardinall instituted the Archpriest and that subordination
vvere both false; as by the Card: ovvne letters is euidently to be prooued. The former vvas generall, vvhich moued him to thinke off some good meanes of pa∣cifieinge all partyes: For that (saith he) Satan had stirred vp the lay Catholikes and the Priestes to Knocke and beate one an other, (VT INTERSE COLLIDERET:) to the vtter ruyne of the vvals of Vnion, & cet. Novve of this runninge one vpō an other, and vvarr betvven the lay Catholikes and Priestes, fevve I vvene euer heard of, besi∣ds these false suborned sollicitors, yet this gross gooyeon they made the good Card: fvval ovve dovvne first: the other vntrue suggestion vvas, That the English Priestes ex∣hibited many gentle persuasions vnto his holines, for that rare hierarchicall subordination of an Archp: and 12. Assistans. For as I haue abo∣vve said, either that matter vvas neuer spo∣ken of in England, till it vvas dispatched in Rome: or in such secrecy, as it could not be, but a very shamefull lye, to beare his hol: in hand, that is vvas the Common request of the Priestes in England. It re∣maineth them most assured that there vvas very false suggestion in the Chiefest moti∣ues of that subordination. Yea that the in∣formers vsed great modesty in sayinge o∣nely, there seemed such default, vvhen it vvas most apparant and manifest.
Concerninge the other reason off par∣tiality in that choise of M. Archp: and his Assistantes, bicause I meane not to touch their Persons in particular, I vvill leaue it, to the vpright iudgment of them, vvho knovve their capacityes, and haue vvell obserued, their odd maner of proceedin∣ge these fevve yeares past. Yet one plaine point of partiality may not be omitted, vv∣hich vvas in makinge choise of such to be arbiters, vvho vvere all affected vnto the one party; & therfore beinge no indifferēt men, vvere neuer like to compose matters and to make any perfitt atonement, as by the lamentable effectes of some yeares ex∣perience, all the vvorld no vve seeth. Thus much about the friuolous exceptiōs of the Apologist against the iuditious, and learned decision of the venerable fa∣cutly of Paris. VVhich proceedinge from deepe experienced men, Vpon due consi∣deration, must (no doubt) vvere passion beareth not the svvay, be holden for most sound and true: as his holines (beinge throughly informed by both partyes) hath already, VIVAE VOCIS ORACVLO, de∣clared it: and shalbe [as I hope] shortly published Authentically. Vnto this sentence of the Doctors off Sorbone, is shall not be inconuenient to ioyne another act done at Paris, vvhich in
the Apologye is deliuered in these vvor∣des. Fol. 154 M. Charnock goeinge to Paris vvhere. D.B. resided, both of them tooke scholedegrees vpon them, the one of Bachelar: the other of Doctor in diuinitye: not vvith standinge his hol, by an ex∣presse Breue had forbidden the same vnto all En∣glishmen some yeares before, vvithout such licen∣ce and approbation, as in the sayd Breue is sett do∣vvne. The incongruity off this Breue is she∣vved in the former notes. Of the Breue a∣gainst procee∣dinge. For vvhat a dis∣grace is it vnto good students, that vvhen their tyme of procedinge cometh, they must be cast behind their felovves, yf they cānot make friends both to the Rector off the Colledg, vhere they studied, vvhich may be in spaine; and to the Protector, vvho is suer ordinality to be no nearer then Rome. And so be forced both to lee∣se their places in the vniuersityes, and their preferment abrode. But vvhat cared the procurer off this breue for that: vvho seemeth to take greate pleasure in bridlin∣ge them, vvho be not at his becke, and in heapinge such yokes of bondage vpon his poore afflicted contrimen, as no other na∣tion I thinke in the vvorld is subiect vnto. But to stand avvhile vpon this Breue: It may first be doubted, vvhether there be any such or noe, it is so diuersely repor∣ted. This Apologist (as you haue heard)
Maketh it to prohibite all Englishmen to proceed either bacchelor or Doctor in di∣uinity. The Copie rehersed in the former notes, saith nothinge of Bacehelars yet forbiddeth not onely Doctors in diuinity, but d. also in one of the lavves. A third (vvho supposeth he savve the originall it self vvith the seale at it) affirmeth that nei∣ther Bacchelars in diuinity, nor Doctors in any of the lavves, but onely Doctors in diuinity are prohibited to proceed. Of o∣ther rumors that runn against licenciates I vvill not speake, because they haue no cer∣taine hedd: but to vvhether of these three opinions, vvhich all come from the same fountayne must vve giue credite? or vntill there be better agreement about the mat∣ter, may vve not very vvell (for feare off doeinge vvronge to the rest) beleeue noe one of them? but rather suspend our iudg∣ment, and stay vntill vve shall see (accor∣dinge to the lavve and Common practise of the vvorld) a Canonicall publication and reception of that Breue, in the Catho∣like Countrie, vvhere vve liue, and that so much the more in the Case of this Breue, as it seemeth to haue been obtained by surre∣ption. Heare the preface of it: Foras much as diuerse yonge men goeinge from the Colledges took by the vvay the degree of Doctor in diuinity: VVhere vpon Cominge into England, and there
takinge their place, accordinge to their degree, be∣fore many auncient graue Priestes, great disorder did ensue & cet. This is the preamble in sub∣stance, vvherein are tvvo falsehoods: the one that many yonge men had proceeded dd. on the vvay: vvhen one or tvvo at the most had so done, vvho for their ripe knovvleage in scholediuinity, vvere estee∣med vvorthy that degree. The second vn∣trueth is, that any such disorder grevve of it in England: vvhere no graduat lightly doth take his place, Priestes seldome meet∣nige togither, and then in disguised habits. Againe yf a yonge graduat, should take pla∣ce before an elder man, yea better learned too then him self: that vvould not bread a∣ny disorder. The Common Custome and order of all Christendome beinge, that youger men hauinge taken degree, should be preferred before more aged, not alike qualified. This Breue then beinge graun∣ted. Vpon vvronge information, let others iudge of the validy of it. Concerninge M. D. Bishope, certaine it is, that he seauen or eyeght yeares before that Breue vvas got∣ten, had done all his actes, and had his gra∣ce giuen him to proceed Doctor. But not beinge so ambitions, (as they vvould ma∣ke men beleeue) stayd tenn yeares after his due tyme, before he vvould stand in act to take the degree vvhich at lengh he tooke
beinge first by decree compelled to make his aboad in the same vniuersity, and there∣fore could nor vvithout his disgrace and great hinderance, put it of any longer. He then also to avoid braulinge and all colour of contempt, requested the Rectors Con∣sent as the Breue goeth: but beinge vvith∣oust iust Cause refused, letted not to take the degree, folovving the best counsell in the vniuersity and citty: first for that he had, more then seauen yeares before the date of that Breue, taken some of the most substantiall pointes, of Doctor Shipp: his exercises beinge all made, and his grace graunted: vvherfore such a penall decree as the Breue is, beinge to be restrained as much as may bee, can take no hold on him, that vvas so far passed into the degree before. Secondly for that this Breue vvas neuer published, much lesse receyued in France, vvhere he remained: and accordin∣ge to a very probable opinion (vvhich by all learned mens cōsent, may in practise be follovved, vvithout all perill of offence:) a decree made at Rome, and not publis∣hed canonically in others countryes, hath noe force there, nor bindeth any man in that place. Thirdly noe humane lavve bringeth any obligation in conscience vv∣hen it is manifest, that the principall cau∣se, for vvhich it vvas made ceesseth,
vvhich is to be gathered out of the pro∣eme that in this Breue is, to debarr y∣onge men from proceedinge. Vpon their departure from the Colledges, before they haue studied foure yeares after in some o∣ther vniuersity, novve this cause vvholy cessed in D. By. Case. For from his depar∣ture fro the Colledg of Rome, vnto the tyme of his proceedinge: VVas litle less then tvventy yeares: and he had ten ye∣ares before the taking of the degree, stu∣died almost six yeares in the noble vniuer∣sity of Paris, and venerable Faculty of Sor∣bone. So that it could not be any meanin∣ge of the Authour of the Breue (yf any such be) to lett his proceedinge. yet be∣cause of a petty addition in the end of the Breue (vvhich for his aduantage, this Apo∣logist vvould make the onely clause) he did (to preuente all exceptions) ask leaue of F. Persons: VVho vvas then Rector, the vvich at that tyme he refused to gra∣unt, yet about ayeare after, not spoken to about that matter, offred it of his ovvne accord, and caused, both the protectors & his holines, to ratify, confirme it, yf it neaded any such rehabilitation: as F. Per∣sons ovvne letters of the 28. of Iuly 1601. to the said Doctor doe testifie. Mary all this courtesy vvas after he had laboured vnder hand vvhat he could, to haue the said Doctorship called in question as it is very
credibly reported. VVhich might be the cause vvhy this Apologist, hauing taken to taske to stirr in all matters that sound ill in his eares vvould not lett this passe, vvith out giuinge it one dashe vvith his blottin∣ge penne. Hauinge done vvith matters of Paris touching D. Byshope: Of their apprehen∣sion. lett vs novve co∣me to the affaires of Rome vvich belon∣ge to him, vvher first presenteth it selfe, his apprehension, shortly after his arriuall vv∣hich beinge contrary to the course of la∣vve, contrary to equity and all good custo∣me, Hath been euer sence greately misli∣ked, and much complained of by many vertuous and vvise men. Cap. 9. f. 123. VVherefore the Apologist casteth about farr and nea∣re, to find some colourable excuse for that fact. And bringeth in tvvo or three bad o∣nes nothing sufficient to serue the turne. First not that far featched, out of certaine letters vvritten from Flanders, longe be∣fore there vvas any talke, of any such mat∣ter as appeareth by the date of them: and besides there is neuer a vvord in any of them either of those messengers, or of that negoriation: and vvithall not one of them addressed vnto his holines. Hovve then could he Pike out of them any raiso∣nable cause to cast Priestes in to prison vn∣heard? Certaynly this Apol. VVittes be∣gin
to faile him that to no purpose laid dovvne at large such impertinent letters. Touchinge the letter from douay, and that of D. VVorthingtons, both vvritten from partiall places and Persons, it is not meet that they be valued at more then their rea∣son is vvorth, vvhich is iust nothinge. For (saith he) Yf these Captaines of nevve broiles doe find fauour, they vvill stirr vp great stormes in England, but yf they be kept dovvne vvith sharpnes, all vvilbe quiet. You haue heard this diuines auguration: You haue also longe ere this seen the contrary euent. For they beinge hardly handled, much more trou∣ble vvas raised then before: VVheras, yf they had been Courteously dealt vvithall, all might haue been quietly composed. So that this first kind of excuse, is far from the purpose. The second is not much better. VVhich vvas (say they) That his holines beinge aduertised by his Nuncios from Prance and Flan∣ders of their Cominge, resolued to haue comitted them at farrara, yf they had come thither. Here seeme to be more lies then lines. First there vvas at that tyme noe Nuncio in France (as far as I can learne) but a Legat the Card: of Florence, vvho had noe Correspondence vvith the Archpriest and therfore: neither receiued nor sent any such aduertissement. As for the right reuerend Nuncio in Flaū∣ders he might vvell giue intelligence of
those messangers cominge, but vvas to vvise to vvish his holines to imprison them, beinge sent to his see about ecclesia∣sticall matters, before they vvere heard. And for his hol: vvho is renovvmed through the vvorld, for his mild cōsidera∣te manner of proceedinge, vvith out any such hast and precepitatiō, it is impossible, that he could vpon the onely clamours of aduersaries, resolue to Comitt Priestes be∣fore they vvere heard. Suerly they doe him no smale dishonour, that so osten and that in printe reporte so euil of him. But to that vvicked audaciousness some are novve grovven, that to excuse them selues, they stike not to lay there ovvne faultes vpon their supreme Pastors Shoul∣ders. VVhat then might be the cause, vvhy they vvere committed before they vvere heard? The right R: Bishope of modina (his hol: Nuncio in France after vvardes) hearinge hovve all had passed, said that it might vvelbe done vvith out his hol priui∣ty, By Card: Caetane his order, vvho bein∣ge lord high treasurer had sergentes at his commandement, and so might com∣mit of his ovvne authority: or it might be perhaps, that at Card: Caetanes greate im∣portunity, his hol: hauinge heard many he∣ynous complaintes against them, condis∣cended, to haue them retired to the Col∣ledg
to conferr in priuate after a friendly sort of their matters: meaninge nothinge lesse, then that they should be there vsed like prisoners, as they vvere, vvel of this, our bretherne that novve folovve the mat∣ter at Rome vvilbe better able to say more here after. But vvhat I pray you vvere those com∣plaintes, vvhere vvith the pope eares vve∣re filled, against the messengers? forsooth, That they vvere tumultuous and seditious felo∣vves, that they obstinately resisted the right R. Archp: and stirred vp many others to do the li∣ke, to the greate scandall of both Catholikes, and and Heretikes that they vvent about to disere∣ditt the pope and Cardinall: that they vvere co∣me to Rome to make nevve Garboiles in the Col∣ledg, and finally vvould fill the court of Rome vvith rumours, yf they vvere not restrained. These vvere those irreligious and damna∣ble slaunders, vvich D. Byshope in his let∣ter said vvere no less falsly then vvickedly inuented against them, to haue them layd vp, before they vvere heard. Vnto vvhich the Apo. ansvvereth after his old fashion, cleane camme as they say: in this sort. Is it so heynous or damnable to restraine a coople of Pri∣est, fol. 177. Cap. 11. vvhere so many complaintes be made of their presumption, contempt and scandall raised by their contention? doth not euery Prince doe so? No good Sir, not one iust Prince doth soe,
vvhen the party presenteth him self, and meaneth to stand to his triall, as they did. For by vvhat lavve or reason can he vpon hear say, and fals bruites perhaps Chastise him: VVhom he may duly heare at leisure, & findinge him guiltye may punish accor∣dinge to his desertes? But to our purpose, the enormous slaunders, vvhere of D. By: Complained in his letter, vvere (as euery one may see) not the Castinge of him and his Companiō in prison, as this Apol: mis∣construeth it: But those vile and mischie∣uous rumours abovve rehearsed: to vvitt, that they vvere tumultuous and factious, and obstiuately disobedient to all sorte of superious & cet. VVhich faultes are as far∣fro M. D. By: manners (of vvhom I novve treate) as vvhite is from blacke, and light from darknes. For his behauiour for tvventy yeares before, as vvell in the col∣ledges as in all other places, vvas vvel kno∣vven vnto all that knevve him, to haue been very mild and quiet: hauinge neuer had his finger in any such sturres, and ther∣fore most iniuriously stiled, tumultuous and seditious. Moreouer vndertakinge that iourney to Rome at the request of diuers venerable personages, he vvas so farr of from makinge any vprore against that late erected authority of the Archp: that he ac∣quainted none of the house vvhere he ri∣sided,
vvith the particulars of that affaire. Yea he conferred most quietly vvith M. Archp: him self of the matter. Mary perce∣iuinge that no good Could be done the∣rin vvith out F. Persons, on vvhom all de∣pended: he determined for Cōmon quiet∣nes, to vndertake that painfull and peril∣lous iorney, giuinge vnder his hand the cause of his goeinge vnto M. Archp: and takinge vvith him a copy of it subscribed by M. Archp: that it might appeare vnto all, hovve peaceably he departed from him. VVhat presumption and contempt of the Archpriest, vvhat dispargement to the Card. letters, vvhat scandall and offence of the vvorld in all this? VVho seinge any thinge amisse, and desirous to seeke re∣dresse of it, could more orderly or more quietly haue done it? The like mild and temperate course held they in Rome, pre∣sentinge them selues to both the Card. Protectors, and dealinge vvith F. Persons him self about some reasonable pacifica∣tion of all parties: as in M. D. Byshops letter is to be seen more at large Most false therefore vvere all those slaunders, vvith out all conscience cast out of them, and consequently very irreligious and dam∣nable, of their mission. as M. D. By: tearmed them. No vve lett vs come vnto their mission and Comission. VVherabout D. By: beinge
asked, vvho sent them? VVith vvhat au∣thority? VVhy he and his felovve abovve the rest? and other like pointes: VVas so∣mevvhat troubled in his ansvveare, sayinge, NESCIO QVIS FVRIT: J knovve not vvho vvas the first Author of this mission, nor I knovve not for certaine, vvhy vve vvere chosen for this missiō abovve the rest. These are his vvor∣des, by this you may perceaue, vvhat an authenti∣call mission and comission this vvas. Fol. 132. Hitherto the Apologist. Nay rather you may vievv and behold vvhat fraude and Coseninge he vseth, to backbite those good Priestes, and to abuse and deceiue his readers. For suppressinge vvilfully D. By: his an∣svvere vnto those questions, VVho sent him? and vvith vvhat authority? he chop∣peth in his ansvvere vnto an other particu∣lar demaunde to vvitt, vvho vvas the first author of that mission? vnto vvhich, the Doctors ansvveare is direct, that he kne∣vve not vvho vvas the first man, that mo∣ued that mission. These Questions vvere much vrged, because they thought they had great aduantage against them, for that they vvanted à Princes letter of Credence for their message, and brought the Priestes testimonyes in smale peieces of Paper. Vnto all vvhich D. Bysh: ansvvered in par∣ticular, and kepeth à copie of it. The vv∣hich I haue gotten to sett dovvne in this
place, that you may more liuely discouer the paltry dealinge of this Apologist. vvho vvantinge subiect of iust reproofe vvould needs forge and coyne some. To those Questions then, vvho sent them, and vvith vvhat authority, this vvas the Doctors an∣svere. There vvas not in England eyther Prince, or Catholike Magistrate, to giue vs any Customary letters of Credence. Nor any noble lay Cath: could vvrite for vs to his holines, vvithout imminent dā∣ger of his liberty and life. And vve ha∣ue no other Ecclesiasticall Prelate, Besi∣des M. Archp: vvho neither vvas confir∣med in that authoritye, nor vvas it to be expected, that he should vvrite in our co∣mendation. Knovvinge full vvell, that vve vvent about the moderation off his povver. VVhom neuerthelesse vve gaue to Vnderstand of our enterprise, and he vvould not prohibite it. vve bringe vvith vs the humble petitions off nine and tvventy learned and vertuous Priestes, vvhich vvere for the most part addressed vnto his holines in forme of supplica∣tion. Seauen of the auncientest of them, comitted the charge of presentinge off them vnto vs, as their letters do beare vvitnesse. Neither are simale peeces off Paper brought out of an yland, vvhere most norrovve search is made at euery
porte, to be smally esteemed: vvhich off purpose vve made choise of, for the saf∣fer conveiance: misdoubtinge nothinge lesse then that the vertue of a testimony, should lye in the largenesse of the Pa∣per, vvherin it vvas vvritten. Assone as vve came into à Catholike country, vve got letters of commendations, from the right R. Byshope of Paris, in the name al∣so of Card: Gondy his vncle, vnto Card: Aldibrandino his holines nephevve. Thus furnished vve came, presuminge that his hol: graue vvisedome and expe∣rience, vvould not stand vpon such for∣malityes vvith vs cominge out of a coun∣try, vvhere vvas neither magistrate nor Notary Catholike. Neither vvere the humble requestes of fevver Priestes then they, to be contemned: consideringe vvith vvhat perill of their liues, and vvith hovve smale vvorldly recompence, they had à longe tyme laboured in our bles∣sed lordes vineyard. Principally vvhen some of them vvere of the most Ancient, best qualified, and best esteemed Priestes of England. Thus farr his ansvvere, vvhich you see to haue been some, thinge els, then NESCIO QVIS FVERIT PRIMVS AVTHOR. And this might the Apol: haue sett dovvne as vvell as the other, & should in honesty
haue done it, bicause it vvas the direct an∣svvere; but it vvould not fitt his purpose, vvhich vvas to depraue and calumniate, but not to tell the trueth. Of these Questions, vvith their ansvveres I collect and gather tvvo thinges. First that it is à palpable vntrueth that D. By: beinge demaunded hovve many Priestes he kne∣vve of his party in England, should ansvve∣re that he knevve but tvvelue, as the Apo: affirmeth: fol: 131. vvheras you see by his last ansvv∣ere, that they had 9. suflrages for them: be∣sides their ovvne tvvo, and sondry others, both in and out of England, vvhom he knevve to fauour their party, although they feared to set their handes to it. Secondy by these and such like ioly Que∣stions, is iustyfied that vvhich D. By: sayd in his letter, that many vaine impertinent Questions vvere asked them: as for exam∣ple, vvas it not fond, to demaund of them, vvhom they knevve to enter into a mat∣ter longe after others, vvho vvas the very first that motioned it? but it passeth all vvi∣sedome and folly, to ask messengers vpon their oathes, vvhy choise vvas made off them, before all others, for that message: as though they could enter in to the secretes of other mens hartes, and did se their hid∣den counsailes. yf no Princes Ambassadors comission, should be allovved, before they
had resolued those tvvo Questions, VVho vvas he that made the first motion af that imbas∣sade: and vvhy they vverc chosen abovve all o∣thers in the realme to performe it. I vvene vve should haue fevve Ambassadors or agen∣tes admitted any vvhere. These and such like peeuish intertogatoryes D. By: taxed vpon great reason. And did not vvrite (as the Apol: falsely chargeth him,) that he vvas not examined at all, vpon any substan∣tiall pointe of their message: but he said that those materiall pointes vvere barely and nakedly taken vvithout there proofes and persuasions: Copie of dis: Pag: 171. yea vvere often vvrested and peruerted. See his ovvne vvordes. Let vs goe on to a vvhile, and heare vvhat the Apologist hath more to obiect against him. Mary [saith he] those tvvo messengers seemed scarsly agreed in the cause off their comminge. For M. Charnock did say and svveare (orels the Apol: lyeth) that their onely comminge vvas, eyther to haue the Archpr: Changed, or yf he vvere already confirmed to haue some other order ap∣pointed vvith him. D. By: enlargeth him self vnto six causes. Fol: 13. The first vvas deuo∣tion to see the holy places. The second, to haue Bys∣hops, the third, yf that vvould not be graunted, then that the povver to confirme and consecrate oyles, might begiuen vnto some of the Auncien∣test Priestes. 4. that their sodality might be con∣firmed,
5. that order might be taken to compose all matters in vvisbich, 6. about the like order for the Colledges. They had not then so litle to say as F. Pet: in his letter (pag: 58,) affirmeth of them. In all vvhich there is scantly one [as the Apol: avverreth] vvhich concur∣neth fully, vvith his felovves petitiō. No∣vve I pray thee (good Reader) iudg, vvhe∣ther yf Byshops had bin granted, (vvhich is D. By: second cause,) Mr. Archp: must not haue been chaunged, or els some other or∣der appointed vvith him, vvhich vvas M. Charnock onely petition, as this false cō∣panion blusseth not to affirme here: and yet in the very next leafe, forgettinge him self, he bringeth M. Char: in sainge that a∣monge other thinges, he came to deman∣de, that noe such bookes should hereafter be vvritten by Catholikes, vvhich vvere like to exasperate the state. Oh hovve ne∣cessary a thinge it is, for à lyar [as the pro∣uerbe goeth] to haue à good memorye, o∣thervvise he may sone shame him selfe: as you see here by this Apologist, vvho in the next leaues, Bringeth in one man speekin∣ge contradictoryes. But pardon him I pray you, for it vvas for à good end. For vvhat good end must he needs lye in that sorte? Mary to proue those tvvo Messen∣gers to haue disaggreed in their matters. For M: Charnock vvould haue such boo∣kes
prohibited. But D. By. did not like that pointe. Yf they agreed in the other more materiall pointes, it imported the lesse. But D. By: beinge asked about that, saith that he remembreth not, that he vvas exami∣ned thereon, nor knovveth not vvhy he∣should. But in priuate talke he might haue said, that he knevve some in England vvho liked of that booke of titles, because it opened very particularly the state of that high Question. For that pointe [he saith] the booke vvas liked, but for many other respectes, he affirmeth it to bee much mis∣liked, and chiefely for tvvo of very greate vveight. VVherof one is in the former parte of that discourse, of the peoples po∣vver ouer their Princes, vvhich if it be not very vvarely read and discreetly vnders∣tood, is a most perillous and pestiferous peece of doctrine. The other tovvardes the end of the later: VVhere his lavvier ha∣uinge argued at large of seauen or eight seuerall houses, pretendinge right to the crovvne after her maiestye, & [like a good contry man] blemished most of them bor∣ne vvith in the realme, vvith bastardye, he neuertheles concludeth very grauely, and like à sound lavvier, I vvarrant you. That euerye on of their titles is good in lavve: And vvarranteth on his credite, ech pre∣tendor, that he may rightofully put him
self in armes, & call his friends about him, to porsue his interest. A paradox; and ve∣ry strange assertion, that so many seuerall pretēdors, to one and the same thinge, can ech one haue lavveful title to the vvhole. And yf after his holy counsell, so many should push at the crovvne vvith all their forces, (as vvho vvill not giue the venture for a kingedome, hauinge iust claine to it,) it vvould sett all England together by the eares, and the vvhole country in com∣bustion. VVhich perauenture, Might be part of his meaninge, vvho made that trea∣tise, that vvhiles they vvithin the realme, vvere bickeringe one vvith another, so∣me stranger might stepp in, and conquer them all. Those pointes thē, as, I said vvith some other D. By: vtterly, misliketh. and touchinge other bookes against the state, [as that vnpure and loathsome one of ley∣sters common vveale, and that malepert and ra linge one of And: plilopari is, vvith such like] he doth vpon mature considera∣tion of that matter, greatly disalovve off them. As bookes vvholy vnnecessary, and vvherin to smale purpose, much folish pas∣sion and splene is vttered against some mighty personages, vvho thereby beinge highly offended do vvourke our Catholi∣ke bretherne that liue vnder them in En∣gland greete vvoe. VVherfore he taketh it
for an intolerable ouersight, to publish so farr out of season, such satiricall invecti∣ues. Novve one vvord (before I make a∣uend) of D. By: his ansvvere vnto the Co∣missarye enquiringe of him, vvhat he kne∣vve of the man vvho vvrote the letter off presidences. It vvas that he vvas so farr from knovvinge the Author of it, that he had neuer before, heard one vvorde off that matter. But supposed it to haue been framed by their aduersaryes to vvourk their disgrace: and that the letters vvher∣vvith it vvas sayd to be subscribed, agreed vnto Mr. Archp: as vvell to him: For that copy vvas shevved him in Latin to vvhich F. Par: sayd his name vvas subscribed. And so might as vvell be Georgius Blackvv: as Guil: Bysh: then F. Per: replied that is vvas on M: VVatsons letter: yet he had before (contrary to his ovvne knovvledg) char∣ged D. By: vvith it. Note his tender con∣sciēce. after he demaunded of D. Byshope vvhether he knevve M. VVatson or vv∣hat he had heard of him: to vvhich the d: ansvvere vvas farr other vvise then this Apologist reporteth. to vvitt, L. 139. that he had heard exceedinge vvell of one Mr. vv: VVatson priest, hovve he had many yea∣res very fruitfully trauailed in his vocatiō, reducinge diuerse vnto the Cath: faith, &
by the assistance of God his grace had cau∣sed 25. Aulters to be erected to the singu∣lar seruice of our blessed Sauiour. VVhich fevve in Englād had (as he thought) done besides him: Sorie I am that to some ble∣mish of his former vertues, certayne boo∣kes sett out of late, cary the letrers off his name. Because the style seemeth to sharpe, and some thinge in them soundeth harsh∣ly in sondry Catholike eares. But to myti∣gate the matter, the occasion of vvrittin∣ge, vvhich tyme and place ministred must be duly considered, and vvithall hovve he & others vvere before grieuously hur∣te in their reputation by the other party; and that in defence of their iust honour, they might lavvfully Discredite the iniu∣rious aggressors. but of this, some other ty∣me, more at large; to dravve novve vnto the vvindinge vp of this matter concerin∣ge M. D. Byshope, finally the Apol: saith, that the Messengers duringe the tyme off their restrainte had all maner of iustice of∣fred them for their defence: and after their deliuerance vvere bidden to follovve their matters, &c. For ansvvere vnto this faire tale, see vvhat is sayd in M. D. By. let∣ter and in the censure vpon F. Per. letter. I vvill here repete most Briefly and most truly, hovve they vvere vsed, and leaue the iudgment of it, vnto the reader: beinge
both apprehended, all their letters and in∣structions, vvere taken avvay from them, & they vvere kept close prisoners apart, so that one could haue no helpe off the other. Yea vvere seuerally examined to try yf they could dravve out of one, that vv∣hich might hurt thother. their aduersaryes vvere their kepers, examiners, and iud∣ges, not alovvinge them any helpe of co∣unsaile, so much as of one another. And by interrogatoryes (such as it pleased them to propound) they vvere cōpelled to deliuer the message they vvere sent a∣bout. Thus stood the case vvith them vvhyles they vvere in durance: neither goeth the Apol: about to confute any of these particularites. Then before they vvere deliuered, they had sentence to de∣part the city vvithin ten dayes, vvhich respite they obtayned to visite the holy places. One beinge enlarged, tho ther vvas kept styll in the Colledg safe, as it vvere in hostage off the others good behauiour a∣brode. And not thinkinge that enough, for more suerty they lodged the Doctor enlarged vvith D. Haddocke and M. A∣ray, that they might looke vnto him for dealinge vvith any body. All this is so cer∣tayne, that noe one iote of it can vvith any honesty be denied. novve lett the vpright reader determine, both of the forme of iu∣stice
held vvithin the Colledg, and vvhat possibility there vvas after, to seeke for re∣dresse. This is that I had to say touchinge tho∣se pointes, vvherevvith M. D. Byshope standeth charged in the Apology. And [as hath been shevved] looke hovve many charges, and assaultes so many eyther ap∣parant falshoodes or couert guyles and deceites, to infect the vnvvary and credu∣lous reader, vvith errour and euill opiniō of him vndeseruedly. VVhat good Christian, vvould not vv∣onder to see men esteemed other vvise neither folish nor dishonest, so to forgett them selues in their ovvne cause, that they seeme, duringe the moode and humour, eyther to haue lost their vvittes, or to ha∣ue cast aside all honesty. Hovve could they els contrary to their ovvne knovv∣ledge, so misreporte, disguyse, and peruert other mens sayinges and doeinges, and so contradicte them selues, vvhich are certay∣ne signes of voluntary blindnes. And yf the Author of this Apologye by longe custome of canuassinge and vvran∣glinge, or that his iudgmēt in his elder ye∣ares beginneth to faile him, doe soe gros∣sely ouersee, and ouersute him selfe. Yet [I hope] that you vvhom he tearmeth the vnited cleargy of England, (for that you
belike ioyne vnder his ensigne) remem∣bringe the holy honour of your coate and callinge, vvill not any longer endure to be made such base vnderlinges, as to suffer that deceitefull vvourkemā, vnder the pre∣texte of your names, to disgrace and brin∣ge in contempt our vvhole order. VV∣herfore (deere bretherne) take harte and courage: Disavovve, and disclaime boldly from all such lyeinge, staunderous and vvicked libels: pull of your maskes, from other mens faces; teach them hereafter so much good mamers at the lest, as eyther to aske you leaue first, and make you ac∣quainted vvith vvhat they vvrite, or els hardly to speake in their ovvne Persons. Othervvise by your silence, (as you best knovve) you ratifyeinge and confirmin∣ge their factes, are made partakers of their faultes. And so consequently you stand deepely charged and your consciēces de∣adly vvounded vvith that hainous crime of backbitinge and infaminge your felo∣vve labourers in our lordes vineyard, to the greate scandale of the vvorld, and ex∣ceedinge hinderance off the Catholike cause. Our blessed Sauiour giue you grace to looke to it in tyme, and to amend it.
AN ANSVVERE MADE BY ME CHARLES PAGET ESQVIER, TO certayne vntruthes and falsi∣tyes, tochinge my selfe, con∣tayned in a booke, intitled a briefe Apologie or defence, of the Catholicke Hierarchie & subordination in Englan∣ce, & cet. IT is not longe since that I sa∣vve your booke intitled a briefe Apologye or defence of the Catholicke Hierar∣chye and subordination in Englande, & cet. VVherin you treate off manye matters, name manye persons, and
enterlace and mingle the one vvith the o∣ther, in such disorderlye and confused ma∣ner, as one may easlye see that your mea∣ninge is not to make appeare to the vv∣orlde, vvhat is the veritye; but thinke you haue gayned much, yf by your obscure and darke narration you may colour and co∣uer the defects, errors, and faultes, that iustlye are to be imputed to you and your associats and dravve men to doubt yf not to condemne the sincere and honest proce∣edinge of those you esteeme the contrarye part. Hovv absurdlye you haue behaued your self concerninge the matters and per∣sons of others you vvrite of, I refer you to their ansvvers: but hovv vncharitablye, and levvdly you haue gouerned your self tovvards me, is to be seene by that I shall set dovvne in this my defence. Jn the 3 leafe of your booke after you haue sayd that in the yeare 1578. the contentiō began betvve∣ne doctor levvis late bishop of Cassano and the En∣glish scholers at Rome & cet: and that the same∣vvas nourrished by some spies sent from the coun∣sell of englande, namelye vaughan and Aldrid & cet. and vvithal the counsell of englande endeuo∣red by all meanes possible, to maintaine suspition, ielovvsye, and emulation, betvvene those that fa∣uored doctor levvis on the one side, and the rest that vvere ioyned vvith doctor Allen and the Ie∣suistes on the other, thoughe much no doubt a∣gainst
both their vvills. Then you say that that at∣tempt of thers vvas holpen soone after by a nevv accident that fell out in paris in the yeare 1583. and 1584. vvher tvvo or three lay gentilmen be∣longinge (as vvas sayd) to the Quene of scots, then prisoner in Englande, fallinge to be discontented vvith doctor Allen, F. parsons, Sir Frauncis En∣glefielde, and others vnited together in the affaires of our countrye, these gentilmen partinge them selues and their actions from them, and goinge by an other vvay: increased the foresaid breache, and made a farre stranger opposition against the fore∣said men, and vvhole bodye of Catholikes ioyned vvith them at home and abroade: vvherof manye great inconueniences did insue, and amonge others as the vvorlde doth knovve the ouerthrovve at lenght of the Quene her self and manye more of her frendes: as more particularlye shalbe she∣vved vvhen it cometh forth in our larger apologie. These be your ovvne vvordes. Vpon the margent you name my celf, master Tho∣mas Morgen, and master Thomas Throck marton, as the three foresaid persons you speake of. By this speache of yours you taxeme vvith tvvo thinges: the first is that vvheras ther vvas a breache betvvene doctor levvis and his partye, and doctor Allen, F. persons, Sir Frauncis Englefield vvith them of the other partye, that I vvas one of those, that increased the sameand made a stronger op∣
you as a detractor. In the meane vvhile vn∣till you haue vttered better stuffe then yet you haue done, for the reprehendinge of my dealinges and actions in Fraunce, it is not vvorth the loking on and much lesse vvorthye anye credit. Jn the S. Leafe and yeare 1589. you say priour Arnauld vvas sent to spayne to discredit the Cardinall Allen vvith the kinge of spayne, and to set vp his emulator against him in the same di∣gnitye vvhile he liued & cet. It folovveth not that Doctor levvis vvas Doctor Allens emulator, yf he had sought to be Cardinall, or those that shoulde assist him in that course should be counted fa∣ctious, as you vvould haue men to thinke, since his good partes did merit the di∣gnitye for as ther be of Frenche, Italiens, and of other nations diuers of one nation that be Cardinalls, and yet they be not estea∣med emulators one against an other: so vvith any charitable interpretation may ther be the like in our Englishe nation. But in truth I vvas nether priuye nor knevv of that priors goinge into spayne, or vvhat he negotiated ther. So that your naminge me in the margent, as one to be touched here∣vvith is of no force, and a manifest vntruthe. Jn the 6. leafe and yeare 1594. you say they began in Flaunders against Father vvilliam holt an Englishe Iesuist (in great credit vvith the
Gouernours ther) and master Hughe ovven con∣ioyned vvith him, vnder pretence that they vvere partiall, and furthered not those of that faction, in their pensions, and other suites by them pretended. & cet. in the margent you set dovvne master Char∣les Pagets letters and memorialls yet extant: by the vvhich you vvould haue it thought that J vvas the principall cause therof. True it is that the said Ovven vvas called in question, by the count de fuentes then Gouernour of the lovve countryes for the kinge of spayne, (and as I haue harde by the sollicitation of Father Creton a Scottish Iesuist) for some disseruices he had done to the said kinge, (vvherof as I heare he is not yet purged) tvvo Commissioners, one Monsieur Martin and one other, Counsel∣lors of Macklin vvere appointed by the sayd count to examine not onlye Ovven of his vndevvtifull behauyour tovvards the said kinge, but also had authoritye to force anye they vvoulde by iustice, to say vpon their oathes, vvhat they coulde to such ar∣ticles, as vvere to be ministred to them, by the said commissioners. The late Earle of vvest merlande, Sir Thimothye Moket, master VVilliam Tresame, master Pansfote, master Ligon, master Stonor, master Brou∣ne, master Gage, and my self vvith diuers others, (vvherof some vvere reuerende Preistes) vvere summoned by iustice to ap∣peare
afore the said commissioners, before vvhome vve vvere examined. VVe ansvve∣red sincerlye and trulye vpon our oathes to that vve vvere demanded of. Father Holt VVent to the said Martin and tolde him, that he vvas not to geaue credit vnto vs, for that vve vvere men transported vvith passion and partialitye. VVe the said noble men and gentilmen vnderstandinge of his said information geuen against vs, and that he meant to deface vs as men that vvere corrupted, and respected not our oathes: complayned of him to father Oranus his Superiour: desiringe to haue satisfaction of him for it. His said Superiour charged the said. F. holt vvith it. He denied it. And said he vvas so far from doinge anye such thinge as he neuer savve the said Martin in fine proufe vvas made that he had bene vvith the Said Martin in for∣me aforesaid. VVhere vpon his Supe∣riour vvilled him to declare the truthe v∣pon his obedience. (And as I haue bene crediblye informed) then the said. F. holt ansvvered, that it vvas true that he had be∣ne vvith the said Martin as is afore reher∣sed: but vvith intention, his Superiour shoulde not knovv of it. His Superiour beinge iustlye offended vvith his equiuo∣catinge ansvvere, vvorthelye) as I haue har∣de enioyned him a good penaunce for the
same. And both for this his irreligious be∣hauiour tovvards vs, and manye other fou∣le and most vnseamlye partes played vvith vs in generall, and vvith euerye one of vs in particular: beinge the cheife and only cause of our disunion and seperation, vvho vvere afore in charitye and vnitye one vvith an other: vve the abouesaid vvith manye more (and not I alone as you vvould haue men thinke) did present diuers arti∣cles: vvher in (as I remembre) vve shevved that he vvas of a rude and insolent nature, subiect to passion in the highest degree: ve∣rye inciuill in his behauiour, verye credu∣lous of false reports, very suspitions in his conceipts, verye obstinat in his opinion, partiall in presentinge, and aduauncinge of pretences to the Gouernours: that he nourrished faction and deuision, and vvas chefe head of the same. That he vvas dis∣dainfull and of a commandinge humor, that he vvas improper to giue or take co∣unsell: easye to breake amitye, and readye to taxe reuenge: and in fine vvas incompa∣tible to liue vvithall. All vvhich thinges vvere so true, as euen some that loued him verye vvel much misliked him for the sa∣me. And these errors did vve finde in him by experience: hovv so euer you comende the said F. Holt for his modestye and mild∣nes.
I can assure you that vvhen these differences aforesaid, vvere afore Seigneur Babtista de Tassis (novv Spanis Embassador in Fraun∣ce) and Father Oliuerus Iesuist apointed by the Archduke Albert to heare them: F. Oliuerus said to some of his frendes in conference, that vve the sayd noble men and gentilmen, that bare the svvorde, vve∣re more mete to be churche men, for our quiet and temperat behauiour, then F. holt and his associats; vvho proceaded vvith great passion and coler, vvhich I repeate to shevv the error of your opinion touchin∣ge Father Holt. And vvhen by your larger apologie (vvhich doubtles vvilbe some bulbegger to feare children vvithall because almost in euerye leafe you threaten vs vvith the same) you shall further vrge vvhat is rehersed of the said Father holt, then shall it be seene vvhat proufes and probabilityes vvere of these thinges obiected against him, as also shalbe set dovvne his malicious dealinges against the lorde Dacres, the lord Paget my bro∣ther, master Bridgvvater, master Couert Prestes: Late master Thomas Throckmar∣ton, master Godfrey Fouliambe, master Broune, master Gage, master Thomas Mor∣gē vvith diuers others and my selfe: vvhich novv for breuityes sake I let passe. as also I vvould haue it appeare hovv loath I am
to discouer his turpitude and vnsauorye dealinge novv he is dead: Vnlest you or some of your faction force me ther vnto, for the defence of the noble men and gen∣tilmens reputations, and mine ovvne, you seake so much to staine and blemish. Onlye at this present for that vvhich con∣cerneth this point, I shall pray those vvhich be free from partialitye, to consider the qualityes of these noble men and Gentil∣men aforesaid: their sufficientye, the cause they endure for, their constancye therin, the losses they haue had for the same: their longe exille vvith manye comendable par∣tes that be in them: and let-them Iudge from vvhence these broyles and sturres did springe, vvhat seruice. f. holt did for the ad∣uauncinge of the comen cause, and vvhat good to his so cietye, vvhen as vvith his sayd imperfections he disgusted the sayd noble men and gentilmen & ioyned most intrinsically vvith master Hughe Ovven, George Herbert an Inkeper, George per∣sons a black smith his son, Daniell an apo∣stat, tipins a double spye, George Stoker an ordinarry seruinge man, Rouland alias ver∣stegan a coupers son, vvith such like, vvho vvere the famous Bodye of the Catholic∣kes in Flaunders on f. persons side, that you so much vaunt of. and vvho in deede vvere of. F. holts priuye counsell, and most em∣vvin
presented fishers Papers, and exami∣nations you speake of, vvithall thinges he coulde deuise or imagine, to proue Master Doctor Gifforde and my selfe to be the inuentors of the said memorialls, and chea∣fe instruments of the broyles amonge the Scollers at Rome. VVe vvere sent for by the said nuntio vve appeared. For my self the nuntio vsed some speaches vvith me to accorde vvith. F. Persons: vvhich I offred to do, so as he vvould geaue me that satis∣faction, that reason and conscience boun∣de him vnto. But nether then, nor since to this houre, vvas ther eyther accusation off fisher, or any other, by vvorde or vvritin∣ge obiected against me, to proue me to ha∣ue knovven of the said memorialls, or to haue meddled vvith the broyles off the English Colledge at Rome. VVhich F. Persons vvith his lienge affermatiōs vvoul∣de nedes face me out vvas so. The matter being so cleare on my side the Nuntio ne∣uer spake to me of it againe. But prayed me to be a meane that some good ende might be made betvvene Master Doctor Gifforde, and F. Persons. F. Baldvvin vrged as much as he could Master Doctor Gif∣forde to giue some satisfaction, he vtterlye denied it, and sayd ther vvas no cause: and vvished for the clearinge of all doubtes that F. Baldvvin vvould proceade by or∣der
of iustice against him: and then vvho∣soeuer vvere founde culpable should be forced to giue satisfaction. F. Baldvvin vvould in no vvise harken to this course: for that in lavv ther must be an accuser a∣gainst Master Doctor Gifforde, vvho yf he coulde not make his allegations good, vvas to receaue the same punishment, and shame, as the said Doctor should haue do∣ne, yf he had bene founde culpable. It is euident that vvhat F. Baldvvin vvas to say and alledge vvas of no substance against Master Doctor Gifforde: or ells he vvould not haue refused to haue proceeded by the course of Iustice. VVhich aduauntage comenly he and some of our English Ie∣suists do not vse to let slippe and speciallye the broyllers, vvhen it is for matter of re∣uenge. To be short as the said nuntio tol∣de me him selfe, F. Baldvvin desired that those differences betvvene Master Doctor Gifforde and the Iesuists might be ended. VVherupon they both beinge vvith him, he sittinge in his chaire and they standing, he tooke one hande of eche of them, and helde them fast together, F. Baldvvin and the said Doctor stoupinge dovvne toget∣her, the said father began and sayd to this effect: that yf eyther the Iesuists or F. Per∣sons had any vvay offended Doctor Gif∣ford that in their names he did aske them
forgiuenes, and aftervvard the sayd Do∣ctor in like maner repeted the like vvor∣des in effect, that the sayd father had vsed: and sayd that yf he had offended the Ie∣suists, or F. Parsons, that he asked them for∣giuenes, and so they parted good frendes, both promisinge before the sayd Nuntio, that the accorde should be published, but the maner therof kept secret, and (as I re∣mēbre) he tolde me likevvise, that in their presences the Sayd Papers and vvritinges vvere burnt, or to be burnt aftervvards: vvhich vvas done to the ende these thinges should neuer be spoken of againe. The Sayd Nuntio vvrote in particular to Cardinall Cayetan then protector of our nation, hovv these matters passed, and vve∣re accorded. F. Persons got a copye of the said letter, and vvrote to one (as I remem∣bre) in dovvay, that Master Doctor Giffor∣de had asked the Iesuists forgeuenes vpon his knees, and Sayd Nothinge, hovv F. Baldvvin Began in forme a foresaid: but leaueth it out, knovving it vvould haue bene to his disaduauntage. In this you may see he left out that vvhich vvas against the Iesuists, vvhich cleane changeth the matter And by his seditious report, he vvas the cause of a nevv breache: And yf he had tol∣de the truthe in the vvhole, then should it haue bene founde, that, F. Baldvvin had
bene ihe seaker and beginner of this accor∣de. And so F. persous had had no cause to triumphe against Master Doctor Gifforde, as he did. But rather the said Doctor a∣gainst him. It is vvell knovven that this is not the first time that. F. Persons hath v∣sed these trikes, as in addinge, deminishin∣ge, equiuocatinge, vsinge of subintelligi∣turs, yea and yf neede be flatlye to lye, so as it may serue his turne. All vvhich narra∣tion of these thinges I haue made because one may see, that you rather discouer your malice, then aduaunce your pretence, in speakinge of the foresaid memorialls and letters: as also of fishers papers and depo∣sitions, vvhich you say be reserued, vvhen as by the sayd Nuntio they vvere con∣demned to the fire, not vvorthye after euer to be remembred. You say fisher vvas very repentant for the offences he had committed, and confessed of him self frelye such matters, as you alled∣ge from him against me and others, but I say yf he be free from feare of punishment, and came face to face before them he hath accused, he vvoulde for the dischardge of his conscience, (at least yf he be a good Christian) acquite them of the most prin∣cipall poynts you take most aduauntage of, because they be false, and excuse him self by the rigour and roughnes you caused to
be vsed to vvards him, vvhich maketh ma∣ny times men of vveake spirits and coura∣ge to say vvhit is black. And for that con∣cerneth me, I do not so far dispaire of the acknovvleginge of his errors and faultes, but that yf I might speake vvith him afore indifferent persons, I vvould make him lay dovvne the truthe of the speaches and a∣ctions (vvhich vvere verye fevv) that pas∣sed betvvene him and me, and to shevv that they vvere nothinge in that sort, and sence, you giue them out, but vvere verye vvell to be iustified afore God, and man, and tendinge to no other ende, but to the aduancement of gods cause, and re∣formation of such as hinder the same. And vvher as you reherse diuers peces off letters of the Cardinall allens and others in the leafes 36.37.86.87.88. vvherby you vvould make men to thinke that Master Doctor gifforde, Master Thomas Throck∣marton, and my self, vvere in faction a∣gainst the said Cardinall, (all vvhich let∣ters yf they be vvell examined, proue no∣thinge to the purpose) it is vvel knovven that the said Cardinall did so esteeme of Doctor Gifforde, for his vertue, learninge, and other singular giftes, as vntill his dieng day, he made accompt of him as his sonne: and vsed him, about him, as for his Theo∣logall, vvhich is a place of honor and con∣fidence,
and as for master Thomas Throckmarton, he esteemed him so much, for his rare and vertuous partes: as he de∣termined, (yf he had liued) to haue maried him to one of his neces. VVhich shevveth he tookenether of them in faction against him, hovv soeuer it pleaseth you to inter∣pret the said Cardinalls letters contrarye to his meaninge. And put the case ther might haue bene some small difference in opi∣nions amonge vs about some priuat mat∣ters, vvhich happeneth manye times bet∣vvene the dearest frendes, that aftervvar∣de vvas lapped vp in a louinge and kinde maner: it folovveth not that they be in fa∣ction one against an other, as you vvoulde haue it. And as for the concepit vvhich the sayd Cardinall had of me, you shall heare out of his letter vvritten vvith his ovvne hande, not longe before his death dated the 16. of Iuly 1594. as folovveth. Good Master Paget, Doctor Gifforde, and Master Mushe tolde you no lye, vvhen they aduertised you of mine affection and desire of your frendship: for so it is in deede, and so haue Jeuer thought of your callinge, dis∣crete and honorable comportement, that you are vvorthye to be employed, and to ioyne vvith me, or anye other in the seruice of our countrye. I neuer had other opinion of you in my life. & cet. This letter is of latter date then any I am
sure you can shevv to the contrarye. And in truth I haue diuers letters vvritten vvith his ovvne hande of latter date then this, that vvitnes the good conceipt he had of me, and the confidence he reposed in me, by comunicatinge freelye vnto me matters of vveight, vvhich it seemed he vvould not haue nether you, nor Father Persons knovv of: because ther vvas some straung∣nes grovven betvvene him and F. persons, and as I haue bene crediblye informed, by those vvho vvere most intrinsicall vvith the said Cardinall, he began in his latter ti∣me to mislike yours and F. Persons violent humors in such sort, as yf he had liued he vvould haue courbed you shorter, for med∣dlinge eyther in matter of state, or in the se∣minaryes, or mission of Preestes. And this vvas seene by his causinge F. Cresvvel to be remoued from the gouernement of the English colledge at Rome, vvhose in dis∣crete and tirannicall behauiour deserued the same. And for the vvhich act, both he, and F. Persons vsed against the said Cardi∣nall amonge their secret frendes and folo∣vvers, such vnciuill and irreuerent spea∣ches, as euer after ther vvas but holovv li∣kinge betvvene them. Novv you Master Libeller or Father Persons (because I vvould be sure to hit rightlye of the author of this libell) I ad∣dresse
my self to you both, and do aske you. VVho haue bene the beginners of these sturres and broyles, amonge English Catholickes at home and abroade, hath it not bene you that haue assaulted men in their reputations and credits, by causinge to be spred abroade of them slaunde∣rous reports, and calumnyes, for that they vvil not yeelde and subiect them selues to your obedience and pride? the cheife gro∣vvnd of your exceptions to me, is it not for that your selues say, I vvould not make you priuye of my courses and actions? and yf I had dealt in anye matter of practise for our countrye besides you (as I neuer did) but that you vvere the inuentors of the same, and the persvvaders of me the∣runto, (the more infortunat that I had such directors) vpon vvhat prerogatiue do you chalenge of me that slauerye that I must deliuer to you my conceits and vvhole course of life, by vvhat authoritye do you demaunde it. haue you such commission from his holines? or anye forraine prince, that is to force me to render you accompt, of vvhat I speake or do? I am sure you ha∣ne it not. Or yf you had it, I vvoulde not obay it, no farther then my likinge, for temporall iurisdiction: for that I ovve in that case no obedience but to my soueraig∣ne Prince. Yf you demande the same in re∣pect
you thinke your selues to haue a su∣perlatiue vvisdome, experience, and pietye aboue allothers of our nation, you are de∣ceaued, for men see that manye off your practises be rashe & vngo dlye, and to haue fayled: And your liues to be full of errors and imperfections, and are to be amended. Yf vpon hope off vvorldly preferment, or profit, their hath bene or perhaps may be some of our nation so folishe, and childishe, that beinge temporall men do make vovves vnto you in such sort, as they haue and vvill vvholye be disposed of by you, both in spirituall and temporall affaires, and that you haue and do place di∣uers of them in honorable houses and ells vvher as your spyes to make secretlye rela∣tion to you of all that passeth in their hou∣ses, I am not to be brought to that bent, therfore neuer looke for it, for you shall neuer haue it. I vvill acknovvledge that devvtye to my soueraigne Prince, & coun∣trye, that I am bounde vnto, that respect to my superiours I ought, that affection to my parents and frendes they shall deserue: but to such as I esteeme mine enemyes as you be, that seeke to spoyle me vniustlye of mi∣ne honour and reputation, I am not to be blamed, yf I seperat my self from your cō∣panye and actions. And yf men vvould but obserue, as both I and manye haue do∣ne,
your ambitious desire of directinge and commādinge both priuat Persons, Prelats, and Princes, and vnlest you obtayne it ther is nothing but vvarre vvith you, they vv∣ould be of my minde and should see that vvhersoeuer you liue, the most of your a∣ctions and practises tende to that ende. I presume in ansvvere of this, ther shal co∣me nothinge from you but detractions, I vvill say vvith Plato beinge iniured: conti∣nue to detract, for hardlye can you speake vvell: and I vvill say vvith lisander beinge outraged vvith bitter vvordes: vomit bol∣dlye and often your slaunders and calum∣nyes, & spare not, it may be a meane to em∣ptye your mindes of enuye and malice, vv∣her vvith they be much infected & posoy∣ned. For mine ovvne part the profit I vvill reape, shalbe to make me more vvarye, and fearfull to fayle, more carefull and diligent to direct my maners, to cōduct mine actiōs and to reforme and correct mine imperfe∣ctions, vvhich thinges God graunt in me, and that you may haue repētaunce of your faultes past, and a charitable behauiour for the time to come, vvhich is the right and re∣diest vvay, to procure peace, an quietnes, amonge vs, of euerye one to be desired & embraced.
THE EPISTLE OF THE Author to his frend. M.D.VV. Right VVorshipfull. I Haue receaued the Apologie you sent me as a token of your auncient good vvill continued tovvards me, and a signe that you are not forgettfull of me, for the vvich I yeld you most hū∣ble thankes, earnestly requesting your vvor. to conti∣nevve the same courtuous good vvill still tovvards him, that vvill not be forgetfull thereof, nor omitt any occasion to acknovvledge and requite it accor∣ding to my poore habilitie. And in fevv vvords to tell you the truth, the booke vvas at the first vvell∣come to me, as nevv thinges ordinarily are to all men But vvhen I had read it ouer, it vtterlye misliked me, for the causes you may see in this discours anne∣xed. Truth it is, as your vvour coniectured, I had the other bookes, but not sent me by any of that fa∣ction, vvith vvhom I neuer had any dealing or en∣tercourse of vvriting, but out of Ingland from one
vvho vvith the rest acknovvledged the Archpriest at his first institution. He sent them vpon this occa∣sion. In August last N. N. (vvho passed by you) ha∣uing occasion to goe into Ingland I dealt vvith him to goe dovvne into my countrey to see vvhither my friend vveare liuing or no, and to bring me certeine nevves thereof. He seeeng theis bookes vpon his ta∣ble and telling him that they vvere nouellties in the∣se contreys, he sent them to me by him: and so rece∣uing them in Septembre last, vvhen I had read them curssorely ouer, I threvv then in a corner ne∣uer thinking to look on them againe (so vnpleasant are contentious bookes vnto me) but hauing receaued this Apologie and conferred them together, I began to perceiue vvhat the grovvnde and substance vvas of this sandalous controuersie, the vvhich before I neglected and cared not for. And findinge this Apo∣logie to be vvritten rather to augment then to extin∣guish the contentions, and perceuinge that the others vvent simply to vvorke, in setting dovvne truly & simply the causes of theese controuersies, but the A∣pologye to flye as from a serpent the true causes the∣reof. And beside seeing the chief hedd of this contro∣uersie, to depende vpon a pointe of lavve, I could not hold my hand, but vvas driuen in recompence of the booke you sent me, to send you these pointes vvherin I mislike the Apologie, and vvherin they
ought to haue satisfied (as they do not) their frendes and readers. I hope in reading it vvithout affection you shall perceaue vvho those be that Sibi impu∣tare debent, qui causam dederunt, quique illi sunt, as you note of our holy Martyr S. Thomas, & vpon them the vae illis &c. is like in thend to fall. For my part I mislike vvith the discontēted brether∣ne for one thing, vvith the Iesuites for 2. thinges: vvith the Archpriest for as many: and vvith the Apologie for a great nomber of faults it hath com∣mitted, as by this discourse is made euident. VVith the discontented pristes, not for vvriting, for it vvas ne∣cessarie for them so toe doe, bicause it stood vpō their honor, honestie and credite: but for vvritting as they did hardly both of the vvhole societie, and of diuers particular Fathers and priests. If they had kept thē selues vvith in the compas of their matter in the latin booke to his Hol: as they did in the latin booke to the Inquisitors: the Apologie maker must haue held his peace for any aduantage he could haue had against them. The first fault of the Fathers vvas, for that they meadled in a matter nothing at all apparteinning to them. For vvhat haue religious men (that haue a distincte bodie, and a distinct common vveale, and haue distinct Superiors,) to doe vvith an other bo∣die, and common vveale distinct and separt from them? VVhat had they to doe vvith the affaires, as∣sociations and contentions of secular priestes? yea
vvhat had the Iesuites more to doe to meadle in it, then the Benedictines, Charterhovvse Moncks, & Capuchines? of vvhich orders vve haue diuers of our natiō as desirous of, and as zealous for the good of our contrey as the English Fa. can be? Their second fault vvas, in vvritting of that vnlearned and scanda∣lous booke of schisme against the Priestes that vvere innocent thereof and farr from the note of sedition and rebellion, for that vvithstanding the Arch∣priestes institution vpon a Cardinalls letters, vvith∣out his Hol. Bull: as in this discourse is sufficiently proued. I find not so great fault vvith the vvritter (for he might be commanded to doe it) as vvith the Superior for commanding it to be done, and vvhen it vvas done so vnadvisedly by his subscrip∣tion to approue it. for our rule in lavve saith: ea no∣stra facimus quibus nostra impartimur au∣thoritatem. VVe make those things our ovvne, to the vvhich vve doe impart our aucthoritie. One of the ARchpriestes faultes vvas, for that vvithout iudgement and prudence he subscribed also to that booke and by his approbatiō made it as cur∣rant as he could. His other faulte vvas, his ouer much seueritie tovvardes his bretherne: as vvell appeareth by his ansvveres to them laid dovvne in their appeale, and neither checked nor controuled by this Apologie. I might ioyne to this his tossing of the censures vvithout any regard or reuerence.
Novv for the faultes of this Apologie, I referre you to that vvhich follovveth. If I haue vvrōged the Authors thereof either in my vvords, or by mi∣staking the sence of theirs, I submitt me self to the iust reprehension of any learned and vnpassionat man vvhosoeuer, and promisse all due and charitable sa∣tisfaction. And that I my self vvas free from all affection or passion vvhen I vvrote it, (except that some times I may vtter some sharpe vvorde, their fault being so euident and exorbitant, that an An∣gell vvould haue dipped his pene in gaule) may be ea∣sily cōiectured, by that I vvas neuer, (as I haue said) of the one faction or th'other: but all vvaie kept me self free and cleare from all passion, loving and honoring both sides and parties as my deare con∣treymē, hauing vvished and desired that some good peace and appointment might be made amongst them. Novv for more proof of my neutralitie first, I neuer vvrote or subscribed any letter in my life ei∣ther against the Fathers for the others, nor for the Fa. against them, nor euer vvas dealer in any actiō Pro or con, for either partie. Secondly, there haue passed throughe this tovvne men of both sides, and also haue lodged vvith me somtimes men of either faction, at one and the self same time: The vvhich vvere equally vvellcome vnto me, I gaue them all∣vvaies the like and equall countenāce, bicause I loved them egally, for that they vvere English Priests or
Catholikes. And for this I referre me to the report of such of either side, that haue done me that honor and pleasure as to visite me. Lastly if I could be par∣ciall or affected more to one side then an other (as in truth I cannot be) there are many reasons and cau∣ses, vvhy I should leane rather to the Archpriest & his side, them to th'other. for that I haue many old and deare frēds of that side, both at home and abrode: to omitt the Archpriest him self vvith vvhom I haue bene acquainted aboue theese 35. yeares, as vvell in Oxford, as in Dovvay, and since that in Ingland. My brother vvho should be the dearest to me in this vvorld (as I vndrestand) is of that side: So is M. Henry Shavve my oldest frend, one of the 6. assi∣stāts named by the Card. M. Brāston, ād M. VViggs, vve hauing beene brought vp together & fellovves of one and the same colleage. and to the last very par∣ticulary bound for a singuler frendshipp he once in Dovvay shevved me. Besids M. Archer (vvhom these nicnamed the discontented bretherne seame egerly to pursue) is my deare frend and godsoon. To omitt a great nombre of my acquaintance that are amongest the vnited Priest (as they are named) the supposed Authors of this Apologie. On th'o∣ther side I knovv no man vvith vvhom I am fa∣miliarly acquainted but M. Edvvard Bennett, nor to vvhom I am bound for any benefitt or extraor∣dinarie frendshipp receaved, but to M. Bluett, vvho
some 25. yeares since, did me a good turne, the vvhich if euer occasion shalbe offered, I meane to requite in eodem genere amicitiae. By these fevve you may perceive hovv free I am from faction and cleare frō all passion to either partie. You may ask me then, hovv chauuce you begine novv to entremeadle, the strife and sturre being at the vvhottest? I ansvvere. If I had neuer seene the Apologie, I should neuer haue thought vpon the matter: but seeing such fond and foolish matter therin, and by that booke percei∣uing the iustice of the cause of those called disconten∣ted Priests, I could not hold my hand I confesse, but for your sake and in recompence of the booke, to send you my aduice there vpon, hoping you vvill looke more deeper into the cause and cōsider of it beter and not geve such credit to the Apologie as you seeme by your letters to doe, and vvith all to see more clealy vvhere the faultes of all these scandalous and vncha∣ritable troubles are to be laid, and vvho vvere the first occasioners of it, and after that, the renevvers therof. This is the end and scope of my vvritting. I haue not respected my fore said frends, nor the Fa∣thers amongst vvhō I haue many a good frend quia magis mihi amica est veritas. truth and true dea∣ling betvvene Priests and Religious, ought to be pre∣ferred before all vvorldly respects and carnall frēds: as I haue endevored to doe in these notes of myne. And so after my humblest and hartiest commenda∣tions
to you and by you to all the Seniors of my ac∣quaintance vvith you. I committ you to god and my self to your deuout Memento from Pont. a Mus∣son. Your Wour. to serue and honor. H. E.
TO THE VNI∣TED PRIESTS. MY Reuerend and dee∣rely beloued in our sauiour the vnited Priests, the supposed Authors of a brief Apolog. vvhich is sett out vnder your na∣mes, against certaine venerable Priests, an∣cient and constant Confessors your brethren & companions in this fight against hereti∣kes, and defence of the Catholike cause, by you yet termed & called Discontented Bre∣thren, I haue seene and read that Apologie not vvithout great greife and sorrovve of mynd, to see the, children of one happy and vertuous father (I meane that learned pious man of vvorthy and famous memorie Card. Allē) to be so amongst themselues de∣uided, to be so in hart and mynde seperated, to be so in loue and affection disvnited, that
the one parte vvriteth against the other vvhat doe I say, vvrite? nay doe so calumniat one an other, and as it vvere teare in peeces the fame, name, and good renovvne, one of the other. A lamētable case no doubt to see such as are in durance and fetters for the faith, so farre from Charitie; to see holie Confessors and designed martyrs so farre from brother∣ly loue and affection: to see such good Priests quite forgett the second cheifest precept of Christian Religiō vvhich is Diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum. hovve can any man be persvvaded that you loue your selues or your ovvne soules helths, that doo not loue your egall Christian, men of your ovvne coa∣te and qualitie? men of your ovvne educatiō, vvith vvhome you haue been brought vp in the hame house, in the same studie, and at the same table. I doubt not but that blessed prela∣te doth see it ƲƲiih greate cōpassion; as I myself one of his eldest children, and one of your aucientest brethren doo most hartely. Seeing therefore this dissention among you, and my fathers house as it vvere ou fyre, imitating that holie man Aphraates of vvhom Nicphe∣rus maketh mention, Lib. 11. c. 25. I haue gotten out of myne hermitage, that is, I haue left for a time my lavve bookes, and am come to aduertise you my vnited brethren frendly and bro∣therly of 2. things especially. The first is, that if you be the Authors of this Apologie, that
then you leave and desist to pursue this con∣tention and controuersie, because you hane the vvorser end of the staffe; and defend a∣gainst your conscience and knovvledge (as in these notes is manifestly proued) an vniust and ruinous cause. The other, yf you be not the Authours (as I suppose you are not) that then you doe not suffer your selues to be any longer abused, and your names to be borrovved, to th'end to continue cōtention and dissention betvveene you and your bre∣thren, to one of these, to consent or satisfie you are bound in conscience. for hovve can you or dare you being in persecution and as it vvere at the persecutors disposition, be∣ing once aduertised of your faulte and errors, continue still in the same, vvithout a notori∣ous marke of obstination, vvch is the mo∣ther of heresie? And vvith vvhat conscience can you lend your names not onely to the continuing and furthering of contētion: but also to the debasing, disgracing and defama∣tion of your ovvne coate & vocatiō, yea and to the defacing of your ovvne selues as is oftē noted ād tolde you in these notes. I haue doō myne endenour to vvarne and aduertise you, it is your part to follvve the good counsell of a frend, and especially of a common frend, as you all doo knovve, I am vnto you all, both vnited & discontented. For myne ovv∣ne part, (as I hane often protested & stil doe)
I am not passioned, nor leaning more to one side then thother, nor affectioned more to thone, then to thother: but have many moe deere frends amongst thvnited then amongst thother. Yet the truth vvhich is to be prefer∣red before all vvorldly ftendship, and the in∣finite faultes of this Apologie, haue driuen me to runne amongst you vvith Aphraates, to see if I can quench the fire, that begynneth to ruynate and destroy our Saluiours church at home in our contrey: by shevving you hovve vniustly you receued the Archp. vpō a Cardinals letters, hovv scandalouslie and falsely your brethren for their iust resistance vvere sclandered to be schismaticks: and hovve vniustly and vncharitablie the Archp. and Iesuites after the Popes bull vvas comē, ād their submissiō made thereto, these vvere nevvlie & freshlie slandered to be schisma∣ticks for the former occation. I doe heere shovve you that these are the cheifest points novve in controuersie, that your brethren had both lavve and reason for them, that this your Apologie is so farre from cōming nee∣re to these questions, and the handlinge the∣re of, thath it hath not ansvveared any one of abdoue 30. Reasons, vvhich your brethrē bring for their defence. Hovve can you by this kinde of vvriting, I vvill not saie satis∣fie your reader, but your ovvne conscience and knovvledge? This paine I haue taken
both for your sakes, and your readers also, to thend they be not deceiued by this Au∣thor vvhosoeuer he be. yf you take it in good part, and vvith that affection that I vvrott it, I shall haue thought my paines vvell em∣ployed: but if you take it in euill part I can∣not doo vvith all, myne intention being to doe good. Yf you replie, I vvil triplicat as vvell as I can. Yf you shall iudg me partiall, in tyme and place I vvill prooue the contrarie, soe that you shall beconstrained to confesse as much. yf by this meanes I shall open but somme of your eyes and make you to con∣ceiue the indignitie of the thinge I haue my desire. I beseech God so open your harts and eyes, that you suffer not your selues to be carried avvaie hereafter vvith toyes and tri∣fles, as it seemeth hitherto you haue beene, and to give you the grace to looke more dee∣pely in to the matter, and not permitt your selues and your names to be borrovved & a∣bused for the extolling of somme and the de∣pression of your selues and of your qualitie, and vocation, as you haue suffered hitherto, to your ovvne discredit, the contynuance of strife, hindrance of the cath: faith, Gods dis∣honour, and our contreyes great hurt, and so I committ me self to your deuout Memen∣to, and to your chaynes.
THE PREFACE. TO omit the 2. places of scripture, put in the begynning of your Apo¦logie, bicause the first is imperti∣nēt, for neither the Protector nor the Archp. vvas their superior before his. Hol. Bull. ca∣me, as is often proued in these notes. the other may be very aptly applyed to the Ar∣chp. and our english Iesuites in Inglād, vvho vvere the first Authors and causers of all the∣se contentiōs abroade and at home, by vvri∣ting and teaching that the Priests vvhich re∣fused to receiue the Archp. vpon a Card. let∣tres vvithout scripp or scroule frō his Hol. vvere Schismatikes, seditious, rebellious, and I knovv not vvhat: as also is proued in these notes. Beside, the Archp. after the Bull vvas come and the priests had submitted themsel∣ues thereto, began the broyle againe by pro∣nouncing and proclayming them Schisma∣ticks as before, vvhich also is sett dovvne in these notes. S. Paul vvilleth vnquiete people but especialy the Authors of vnquietnes to
be repressed (as you say) or to be rebuked (as I say): but the Arch. and Iesuites vvere the Authors of this vnquietnes, as is shevved at large in these notes, ergo you haue brought S. Paul against these, vvhome you pretend to defend and cleere from vnquiet∣nes. I beseech you then (my vnited brethrē) to looke better to the matter, and to pluck of the maske of affectiō that novve blindeth you, and to cōsider vvell that the renevving of the crime of schisme by the Archp. vvas the onely cause vvhy they vvrote in defence of their good name honor and fame, as is proued hereafter. But these scriptures are not so impertinēt∣ly brought, as the place vvhich you alledge out of S. Augustin, vvhich is flatt against you for in this Apo. (as he saith) you knovv not to dis∣tinguish betvveene true ād false yea you dare not once approche and come neere the truth. nor betvveene probations & criminations: many criminations indeede you put dovvne, but you bring noe probation at all. betvvene in∣structions and fictions: your Apol. being vvhol∣ly compiled of fictions and fittons, of toyes and trifles, so farre is it from geuing any in∣structions, pertayning to the matter in que∣stion & controuersie. betvveene handling the cause, and runing from the cause. neuer vvere men so liuely described by these vvords as you are for you are so farre from handling the cause
that all your drifte is to runne from the cause as is manifestly shevved in these notes: and I doubt not but that your readers hauing once read these notes vvill much vvonder at your audacitie for alleaging a place in the very front of your booke that maketh so euident∣ly against you: and that doth so palpably controule and descrie your Iuggling, fraude, and guile. yf you knovve it not? viz that this your Apol. dooth not distinguish betvveene true and false, that it hath many Crimina∣tions and noe probatiōs at all of the matter in quetion that it is full of fictions, and voy∣de of all instructions: that it handleth not the cause, but rūneth and roveth quite from the cause, yf (I say) you knovv it not? then Jam not sorie that I hane had this care to instruct you. and if thereby. your harts vvill not be turned to peace, yet our peace returneth to vs as it did to S. Augu∣stine. In the verie begynning of your epistle to the Pope, n the epistle to his Hol. you tell his Hol. vvith vvhat greife of mynd and confusion of countenāce you are constrai∣ned to defend the ecclesiastical Hierarchte vvhich God inspired him to institute amongst vs. you may vvell say: vvith Confusion of countenance for to make so false a report to his Hol: in the verie entrie of your booke: vvhich Ecclesiastical Hierarchie I pray you doe you defend in this your Apol? you should here hane distinguis∣hed vvith, S. Augustine, betvveene true and
false for there vvere (you knovve) tvvo insti∣tutions of this Hierarchie, one by the Card. letters, as you confesse in the 8. pag. of your epistle and in the 10. you talke of an other institution made by his Hol: breue 1599. In defence of vvhich of these 2. Institutions, I praie doo you vvrite? yf of the first, thē may you vvell in deede, haue greife of mynde and be confused in countenance, yea and cautherized in conscience for abusing his Hol: vvith so no∣torious a falshood. But tell me in good ear∣nest is, This Apol. vvritten to the Catholicks of Ingland in defence of the ecclesiastical Hierarchie, in∣stituted by the Cardinals letters? yf you say yea: these notes doo vtter your impudencie, and doe shevve to all Catholicks in Ingland and out of Inglād, that you neuer dare come neere the question, but that you flie from it as from a Toade: and thar you haue not as yet ansvvered one onely reason of moe then 30. that your brethren bring against it, albeit your account thē but fonde and of no for∣ce at all. Let all Catolickes novve Iudgee if you ought not vvorthely to be cōfused in coun∣tenance to make so flatt a fitton to his Hol: and that in print, in making him and all men to beleeue that you vvrite this your Apol. in de fence (forsooth of the Ecclesiastical Hierar∣chie, by him so fatherly and prudently instituted a∣mongst vs: vvhen as (I say) I shovve to all such as are not starke blinde, in these my notes:
that you flie from and shoone that matter, as from a venemous Serpent: yf then you haue abused his Hol: touching the first institution hovve can you excuse your selues and say: that this your Apol. is vvritten in defence of the second institution, made and confirmed by his Hol: buls? A faire peece of vvorke vvho I praie you dooth or hath impugned it? you fight vvith your ovvne shadovve in ma∣king his Hol. beleeue, your vvriting is in de∣fence of his institution of the Archpr. you should first haue prooued it to be impugned, and then to haue defended it. Nay, it is so far∣re from being impugned by your brethren, that you confesse frankly in this and many other places of your Apol. that so soone as they savve his Hol: Breue they by and by yeel∣ded and vvere recōciled to the Archp. novve the cause bothe of this first and latter breache also, vvhich vvas, for that they vvere holden and proclaimed by bookes and lettres, and confirmed by the Archp. sentence, for schis∣maticks, rebellious, and factious (vvhich is the head and ground of all this controuersie) you mention not at all. and yet you are so shameles, as to tell Christes vicar, that you vvrite in defence of the Archp. for the resi∣sting of vvhose institution vpon a Card. let∣ters your brethren vvere defamed vvith the horrible cryme of schisme. VVell, if you haue in this your Apol. defended neither the
first nor last institution hovve are you able to defend your selues from a most haynōs fals∣hood? I charge you vvith it and that in good earnest, and in your next either discharge your selues in shevving, that you haue de∣fended the one or the other institution, and that by solid and substantiall prooffes, orels I vvill leaue you the vvhetstone, as vvorthi∣ly gayned by you, and that in fittoning to the highest povver and Potentat vpon earth. The reader may gather by this epistle, hovve substantially you hādle the matter through out your Apolog. for the same order you keepe heere, the same kinde of prooffes you obserue and bringtherein. you haue taken v∣pon you to defend the Ecclesiasticall Hierar∣chie institured by his Hol. lett vs see hovv coningly and learnedly you doo it. First, in the yeare 1558 her Maiestie began to raigne, and the Protestants gayned more in the first 10. yeares of her raigne, then in the 34. that haue eusued, ergo, the institutiō of the Arch. made, by a Card. lettres, vvas lavve full and to be obayed. In the yeare 1568. the colledge at Douay vvas erected by D. Allen. ergo, the institution of the Archp. vvas lavvfull. And heere is to be noted, you haue sett the Cart before the horse. for first you mētiō the semi∣nary of Douay, ād fondatiō thereof, ād then after, hovv learned men placed them selues in diuers vniuersities, and vvrote bookes in
confutation of heresie. vvhereas, these men you meane, hadde vvritten their bookes ma∣ny a faire yeare-before there vvas any Semi∣narie thoght or dreamed of. I vvould pray the Reader heere to marke vvell the order of this tale laid dovvne in their second note, and I vvil maruell if thou maruell not much at it. The Councell, bent themselues vvhollie to persecute the Seminarie ergo the Arehp. &c. The counsell labored to dryue the Semina∣rie out of Rhemes ergo the Archp. &c. The counsell raised sedition amongst out selues go. &c. But by your leaue, this is ano∣ther fitton. for there vvas neuer any dissen∣tion much lesse sedition in the Seminarie of Rhemes so long as D. Allen gouernd it vvith this therefore, as vvith a manifest fittō I char∣ge you, discharge your selues for your ovvne honor in your next: and in that you name Ba∣nes, I vvould you should knovve, he vvas not sent thither as a spie, but there in the Semi∣narie he became a naughtie spie, and vvas ta∣ken and punished there as a spie, by the vni∣forme consent of all from the highest to the lovvest: so farre vvas he from making any se∣dition there, as vndecently you informe his Hol. in this place. But I praie you, vvhat see∣de of sedition sovved John Nicols, or Salomon Alread, or Monday, or Sledd, in Rome? I doo oppose you novve. I beleeue as vvell as you
that they vvere spies, and I knovve that they vvere aftervvards in Ingland very naughtie fellovves, and did much hurt there: but I am ashamed that you shold either say or thinke that such base varlets coulde sovve any see∣de of sedition in Rome: all those that knevve those companions vvill controule you of ouersight in this point, asvvell as I doo. But be it they sovved seditiō in Rome in the yea∣re 1578. go. the institution of the Archp. ma∣de by a Card. letters in the yeare 1598. (iust 20. yeares after) vvas good and lavvfull, for this must be your conclution, othervvise all that you haue there set dovvne is to no end or purpose, neither doe you shovve thereby to vvrite in defence of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchie instituted by his Hol. amongst vs, but rather of o∣ther gugavves and by matters. In the yeare 1580. fa: Parsons, and fa:  Campio vvere sent into Ingland. go. if the skie fall, vvee shall haue larkes, beit that by their co∣minge, religion begāne to go vvith more fer∣uor yet is not that true that diuers ancient and graue priests vvent in vvith them by their example and persvvasion. not by their example (I say) for many a priest vvas gone in many yeares before the Iesuits vvent in. and those that vvent in eithervvith thē or after them, vvere priests sent in by the ordinary mission, and not by their example: onely 3. or 4. that had beene Chaplyns in the Rom. College vver
persvvaded by D. Allen (from vvhome you vvould take this praise) and not by the fa∣thers, to go into Ingland: and this I referre to the conscience and report of M. D. Bauande, vvho onely is yet living (as I vnderstand) of all those ancient and graue Priests. novve as I vvould not take any right full praise frō the fathers: so can I not endure other mens prai∣ses to be vniustly attributed to them. In the yeares 1582.  and 1584. there beganne an emulation in Paris of somme Gentlemen a∣gainst D. Allen and fa. pa. go. the Archp. vvas rightly instituted. I beleeue you doo iniurie toe those gentlemen in sayig they induced Tyrell, fol. 26. Gifford, and Gratley to ioyne and treate vvith thē. for in your booke you lay it dovv∣ne thus: A combination vvas made by somme of our order vvith vvalsingham to the preiudice of D. Allen and fa. pa. and in your mergent you put dovvne the confessiō of G. G. suppose that he vvere VValzinghams spie, yet I doo not beleeue that the Gentlemē knevve somuch, and you are not of such credit vvith me, that I should take all that you speake for gospell. They haue both vvit and meanes to defend their honor, seing you haue geuen them the occasion, and so often blotted your Apolog. vvith their names. Tvvo priests vvrote seuerall booke in fauor of the hereticks in the yeares 87. and 88. and and one vvas a spie for the Counsell of Inglād
&c. go. Povvles steeple and charing Cross. may meete. The counsell of Ingland omitted not to maintenie the faction and emulatiō all Card. Allens life. go. &c. and the Card. a little be∣fore his death perceaving a factiō to grovve in Ingland against the fathers, vvrote most earnestly against it go. the Archp. vvas vvel instituted. Cardinall Sega dedicated the visitation of the Rom. College to his Hol. go iumppe as before. His Hol. by vvord of mouth comaunded the priests that vvent into Ingland from Ro∣me in the yeare 1597. to be quiet for the tyme to come. go. the discontented brethrene are seditious. And heere are vve come to the sub∣ordination that vvas ordeyned by the Card. Protectors letters, vvhich is the point in cō∣trouersie VVither any laufull subordination, or a∣ny dignitie may be giuen or instituted by the bare let∣ters of a Cardinall saing he did it. Ex expresso man∣dato Sanctissimi. vvithout the Popes bul or bre∣ue? your brethren and I vvith them say no. and both they and I, haue proued our asser∣tion. you say yea, but doo proue nothing in all this your Apol. albeit (as you doe falsely flapp is Hol. in the teeth) you haue vvritten it in defence of his Institution but I hope at length after your long vagaries and runing at Rouers, you vvill be so good as your vvord
and proue that the Ecclesiastical Hierarhis vvas lavvfully and duly instituted by the Card. Protectors letters vvithout the Popes Bull. for this you must proue, or els you may looke vvith a confused countenance and be much greeued in mynd, to haue promised more to his Hol. then you haue hitherto, or euer shalbe able to performe. I pitie your case, and am in deede full sorie, to see hovve you hane plucked an old hovvse vpon your hed. ƲVith this Subordination all good and obe∣dient Catholickes vvere contented and cōforced (you saie) go it vvas lavvfully instituted. but vvhea∣re you saie, it came from the see Apostolicke; by your leave you fitten. for nothing is said to comme from the see Apostolick, except it come vnder the Breues or Buls of that see, as in the∣se notes shalbe prooued. but heere vvas no Bull from that See, go you say not vvell, that it came from the See Apostolike, seing it ca∣me but from a Card. Protector vvho had no authoritie to doe it, nor any iurisdiction or povver at all in Ingland. you add: that they cal∣led in question the Card. letters, and that vvhich follovveth, so they did in deede and that in∣stly, and still doe, for any thing you haue, or can say to the contrarie, or in defence of the Card. or his letters. In all this your Apol. (vvhich you make his Hol. beleeue is vvritten in defence of the Card. institutiō of the Archp.) you haue not
one vvord or reason. I say, not one, for the defence of the Card. and his dooings: you say: they impugned his Hol. meaning. hovv I praie you could they doe that, hauing nether that breue, bul, nor letter frō his Hol. explicating or declaring to them his meaning? it is but your imagination. hovve (I praie you) can I tell vvhat your meaning is, except you expli∣cat the same to me, ether by vvord of mouth letter, or expresse messēger. But his Hol. by none of these meanes shevved or declared his meaning vnto them. go. they could not impugne it. But that vvhich follovveth is a meere ca∣lumnie: yea they called into quostion your authoritie it selfe, vvhither you could doo it vvithout them or no. this to be a nanghtie slander and a fovvle calumnie is often proued in these notes, to the places I referre you. At last vvee are come to the Popes breue in cōfirmatiō of the said Hierarchie, to the vvhich you confesse your brethren did obey, but af∣ter sought occasions to breake againe. vvhat vvere these occasiōs? for shooth, as you calumniat: thē they vvere so engaged to the councell that they could not hold long. The counsell serueth you vvell for a maske, to couer the cause of this last breach: vvhich yet they lay dovvne o∣thervvise both simplie and plainly, and lay it vpon the Archp. and Iesuits backe, and that so firmely, that in all your Apol. you cannot
as yet clavve it of, neither in deede doe you goe about it, the matter is so plaine and eui∣dent. Hovve iustlie they appealed, is shevved hereafter. I knovve not vvhat you meane in this your epistle by Scandalous and temerarious propositions: But sure I am, that you your selues haue accused and accompted the cheifest points of our Cath. religion, for scandalous, dangerous, and offensiue doctrine, to your eternall shame, as in these notes vvill appeere. I vvould to God they or any other could get libertie of conscience in Ingland, vnder conditiō that all the fathers vvere out, and I my self banished vvith them neuer to comme in so longe as I liue. yf you or the fathers had that zeale and charitie to your contrey, you should not mislike of this con∣dition, if libertie could be gotten by it. But I see vvel, you are farre frō the zeale of S. Paul. vvhy (my Maisters) cannot Cath. religion, be taught and planted in Ingland vvithout the fathers? it should seeme you are of that opi∣nion, bicause you like not of that condition, vvhich all good men ought to like of: if vvee could haue the libertie of our conscience re∣stored vnto vs so good cheape. VVell, as you began vvith a fitton, so I per∣ceiue you vvill end vvith a flatt lye: for (say you) in this Apol. vvee doo late dovvne by cleere historicall narration and authenticall testimonies the groundes of all. Of vvhat all? of the controuer∣sie
betvveene the Archp. and your discontē∣ted brethren? nothing lesse, as hath beene often said. your historical narratiō is nothing but a recapitulation of the seditions of the Rom. college, of the factiōs in Paris, against D. Allen and fa. pa. of the factions in Flan∣ders against fa. Holt and M. ovven, of G. G. spierie and books against D. Allen, and fa. par. of R. Fishers examination, of the praise of the fathers, of M VVatsons common vvelth and of the sturres in vvisbich. No narration at all, either historiall or legal, of the contro∣uersie novve in question. your authentical te∣stimonies are a great nomber of tedious let∣ters vvritten by priuat men, either the fa∣thers creatures, or vvhollie addicted to their faction: vvhich yet for the more part prooue not that for the vvhich they are brought and alledged. Authenticall (qnoth you) euen as authenticall, as an obligation sealed vvith but∣ter, and all one. vvho euer heard priuat mens letters missiues to be called and termed au∣thentical testimonies? in deede such are the au∣thentical prooffes you bring and none els. hovve durst you so abuse his Hol. vvithout blushing, as to tell him, that euery priuat mans letter is an authentical testimonie? God of his mercie open your eyes, that you may see your ovvne error and follie, that thereby yeelding to the truth and leauing all conten∣tion, you may goe on forvvards as you haue
begunne, to vvynn Soules, to aduance Gods glorie, and relieue and comfort his afflicted English church, vvhich groneth more bitter∣ly vnder the vvaight of this dissention, then it euer did, or dooth vnder the greauous burthen of persecution. There you abuse your Reader againe ma∣king him beleeue that your Booke vvas vvrit∣ten to laie forth the progresse and successe of the vvhol Controuersie, by a serious and orderly narration of the Cheife matters: a strange thing to see your va∣nitie, you lay foorth in deede a serious nar∣ration of all the factions that haue beene since the Seminaries begunne, but vvhat is that to the Question novve in controuersie? haue you laide dovvne by a serious and or∣derly narration the cause of those 2. breaches the occasion of this dissention? Mumme. haue you laid dovvne their Reasons that mooued them, not to receiue the Archp. vpon the Card. letters? No. haue you laid dovvne hovv fa. Liester by vvriting vvould prooue them schismaticks for the same? Ne∣que: haue you laid dovvne hovve after their vnion vvith the Archp. the same Archp. pro∣nounced them Schismaticks for nor admit∣ting him vpon the Card. letters, and forba∣de all Priests to absolue them? no forsooth. And vvhy so? bicavse vvee vvill not talke of it, and are sorie that euer it vvas mentioned. these are the controuersies in question, these are the
cheife matters, and hereof you should haue sett dovvne a serious and orderly narration. but you dare as vvell eate your fingers as to co∣me neere to these questions and cheif mat∣ters: you ly a loofe, for feare of knocks. I cannot blame you, Leo est in uia. the Truth is so dredfull, that you dare not approche it. you stand a farre of, and cast your shuttcock of Rom. seditions, factions of Paris, and flā∣ders: examinations, common vvealthes, and bundels of letters, as it vvere at their heads. but therevvith you cannot hurt them. and to approche and close vvith them in the cheif matters novve in controuersie, you dare not. Fie vpon impudencie, you ate not content vvith your serious and orderlie narrations of your flym flābs: but you vvill also sett dovvne their vntruthes &c. as they lye, that thereby the reader may iudge of their spirit and manner of proceeding. In Gods name goe on then. First, you finde no lesse then 5. or 6. deceipts shifts, and falshoods in th'inscription of the latin boo∣ke. to vse your ovvne vvords, Reader heerby thou mayst gesse vvhat truth thou maist ex∣pect at these mans hands in the rest of their booke, vvhem they begin vvith so deceipt∣full a calumnie. For, fol. 111. & seq. in the place by me heere noted is shevved, that they haue not com∣mitted any one deceipt, shift, or falshood in the inscription of that booke: but that you (vnited brethren) haue committed so noto∣rious
and grosse a falshood, that it passeth all their 6. vveare they such as you terme them, The second, is out of the 3. pag. and not out of the 2. as you qnote it. these are their vvords: hinc enim &c. on one side vvee are greuou∣sly vvounded and murthered by the common enemy, on th'other side vvee are grevvously oppressed vvith mutual contentiōs and strifes. vvhat deceipt, shift, or falshood, is theare in these vvords? are you not vvonderfully blinded vvith mallice to set them dovvne for such? no (say you) bi∣cause fevve of these men haue beene vvoun∣ded or putt to death by the common ene∣my. For putting to death I beleeue you, for they are all yet liuing: but if you dare say, that none of those that haue beene of their opi∣nion haue suffred death: then dare I saie, you dare saie an vntruth. VVounded (qnoth you) vvhy? haue not many of these endured im∣prisonement, banishmēt, losse of their goods and libertie for the cath. cause soe vvel as you my vnited brethren?) and doe they not by Gods grace, stād as firme and stable, against the common ennemy in defence of the cath. cause, as you doe? Impudencie it self cannot gainsay it. To omit the slander of their secret nouris∣hing by the counsell: you ansvvere fondly that their oppressiō is none, but such as they list to imagin, vvhen all men haue seene thē vvithout imaginatiō in fact ād deede to haue
beene oppressed these many yeares. let your Reader consider heere, vvith vvhat goodly toies you fill your booke: and vvith all, your infidelitie in nipping of your latter vvord of the sentence, vvhich shevved vvherein they vvedre greuousely oppressed vvith mu∣tual contentions, the reader may vvell coniectu∣re vvith vvhat spirit you vvrite, and in vvhat manner yov intend to proceede. The 3. Cogimur, &c. vvee are forced te flie to the feete of your Hol. &c. vvhat vntruth is heere? did they not flie to his feete by printing their booke? knovving that somme copie thereof vvould come to his Hol. hands or knovvle∣ge, vel per notum aliquem (as they saie elsvvhe∣re) vel ignotum amicum vel inimicum, casu vel de∣dita opera. but hovve proue you this to be a falshood? bicause they neuer sent yet any of their appellations to his Hol, nor any man to prosecute them. fol. 54. cum seq. & fol. 110. I giue you a sufficient rea∣son therefore in these notes. But hovve dooth this follovve they neuer sent any of theire appellations as yet to his Hol. ergo, it is false and fayned, in that they saye, they are compelled to flie by this their printed boo∣ke to his Hol. feete. this argument is tied to∣gether vvith points. pagin. 5. The 4. Haec autem &c. vvee are forced (sai you) to diuulgate thes things in print &c. but they saie thus: vvee are forced full sore against our vvills (in∣uitissime
sane) you haue herein descouered your ovvne falshood in nipping of these vvords in the Parenthesis, vvhen you goe a∣bout to shevve a falshood, vvhere there is none at all. And of this compulsion against their vvils, they add immediatly 3. reasons, vvhich you deceipt fully omit. vvhat deceit, shift, or falshood are in these vvords my blinded brethren? or in the 3. Reasons they yeeld for this their dooing? O hovve mallice dooth blinde, if not a religious man, yet desi∣gned martyrs? this force (say you) came frō the councell. hovve soeuer it came, they cō∣mitted neither deceipt nor falshood, for saying they vvere forced to doe it. Nay, this force proceeded of fa. listers scandalous boo∣ke, and of the indiscrete subscription and ap∣probation thereof, by the superiour and the Archp. they vvere forced (I say) to defend their honour, good name and fame, so stay∣ned and blotted vvith the haynons crime of schisme by the aforenamed, as in their. 3. reasons heere they tell you plainly. but you are blind and deaf: your (for informing his Hol alone,) printing vvas not needefull, is refuted in these notes follovving. Your 5. Is in the 6. and not in the 5. pag. as you vvote. Jgitur dum, &c. ƲVherefore vvhile Card. Allē our cōmō father vvas liuing, &c. cough out? vvhy, haue you the chyncough? thus
they say: vvherefore vvhile the Comon father of vs all (Priests and Iesuits) and the health and sauegard of ovvr Contrey vvas living, that honora∣ble man of blessed memorie Card. Allen a most vvi∣se and holie man, all our affaires asvvel abroade in the Colleges, as at home amongst the Priests that la∣bored in the Englisch vineyard, vverre happily go∣uerned & manured. vvhat deceit, shift, or fals∣hood finde you in these speeches? Doeth the Author envie the Card. iust titles? dare he deny that all vvent vvel so long as that blessed man gouerned? he seemeth so to doo, els knovve I not vvhy he shold reckone vp these speeches amongst deceite, shiftes, & fals∣hoods. hovve soeuer they glorie of the Card. novv dead, yet commit they no falshood nor deceipt in the vvoordes by you alleaged. By the same vvoordes they secretlye inferre that these contentions brake out after his death, and not in his life. vvhich is so true that you your selues confesse it in 3. Fol. 6.48.6.65.6. seue rall places of your Apol. This my brethren is to plaie at smallgame rather then to sitt out. but rather then you vvould not thaue them noted of falshood, you vvil accuse them of true and orderly speeches, as fondly you doe in this preface for deceit & falshood. The 7. Desudantibus, &c. Pag. 7. vvhile the semi∣narie Priests did thus svveat in the haruest of In∣gland (vvhich haruest vvas then vvel manured & almost ripe) somme Iesuits vvere called in by
D. Allen to helpe them, vvhose intentiō vvas that they (the Iesuitz) should be ayders, helpers, & fello∣vve laborours vvith the Priests in our lords vvorke, this vvhole Narration you saie, hath many falshoods and vanities. let vs see one. Mary, hovve vvel manured and ripened vvas the Inglish Cath. harnest 22. yeares ago, vvhen the Iesuits vvear sent first in? I ansvveare: So vvell as it hath beene at any time since, for the space of time, and the nomber of the vvorkemen. you say, noe and I say, yes. you talke of 22. yeares manuring by the trauell of 400. Priests and Iesuits to helpe them. and I talke of 5. yeres space onely, and of 100. and odd vvorkemen, If the Priests in that tyme had not manured it vvel and brought it to somme repenes, vvhere had the Iesuits found harbor or hovvses to re∣ceiue them, or men to mainteine them in that order they vveare mainteined? it vvas the secular Priests that brought them into honor and credit, and this thanke they haue for it. vvho is so blinde, that dooth not see by this place, that the Author of this Apol. is a Iesuit, attributing to him self and his, the manuring and ripenes of our English har∣uest: and that 2. Iesuits (although othervvise learned & vertuous men) could doo more good to the ripening of the haruest, then a 100. seminarie Priests: this in deede is both falshood and vanitie. But let vs examine your
brethrens vvords, and see vvhat falshood and vanitie they haue committed. Theysaie, that the seminarie Priests did svveat in the har∣uest of England before the Iesuits came in. yf the falshood be in that there vvere seminarye Priests in England before the fathers vvent in? I can assure you there vvere somme for v, yeares space before the fathers entred. and that there vvere at the least a hundreth be∣fore they vvent in. M. Barlovve beinge the first seminatye Priest that entred, can testifie so much. So can the R. Archp. and diuers of his assistantz vvhoe had beene in Ingl: somme yeares before the fathers. Is the fals∣hood or vanitie in that they say: they svvet in the haruest? yf the suffering imprisonement and close imprisonement and martyrdoome (as somme of them had done before the coming of the Iesuits) losse of goods and li∣bertie, may not be termed svveating? then I confesse they haue committed falshood and vanitie for saying so. But lyeth the falshood and vanitie in that they say: there vvas a har∣uest then in Ingland? O vanitie of vanitie! o blindnes! o shameles vvriter! are these fals∣hoods? are these vanities? are they not the ve∣rie solid Truth it selfe? vvhat poore Priests are you to vvrite against your ovvne knovv∣lege, and against your ovvne consciences, vn∣truth? vae vobis that say: darkenes is light and light darkenes. But peraduenture there
is falshood and vanitie in the vvordes follo∣vving: vvhich haruest vvas then vvell manured & almost ripe, somme Iesuits vveare called in by D. Allen to helpe them. vvhy? vvas it not vvel manured? vvere not men taught to leave hanting and frequenting hereticall seruice? did not the Priests preache and teach, say Masse and administer the Sacramentes? you vvil say peraduenture the falshood or vani∣tie is in the vvord vvel, because nothing is vvel done, but that vvhich the Iesuits doe. and by consequence, before they appeered in the vvorld, there vvas nothing done vvel. Is the falshood in Almostripe? yea forsooth. and vvhy so? bicause nothing can be ripened, but hy the Iesuits. vvhere they comme, all is ripe incontynent. Is it a falshood or va∣nitie to saie, that somme Iesuits vvere called in to helpe them by D. Allen? vvhy, all the vvorld knovveth this to be truth: and I vvonder hovve the Author of this Apol. is so shame∣les, either to deny it, or compt it a falshood or vanitie. Let fa: par: call to memorie, that vvhich I sett dovve in these notes of D. Allens going vp to Rome, Fol. 13. and he must needes beare vvitnes, that D. Allen procured the sending in of the Iesuits into Ingland, and that to helpe the Priests that trauelled there. By this you hane proued your selues both falsyfiers and vaine men: to extenuat your ovvne trauells and labours, and to∣geue
the praise thereof to others that then deserued them not. But let vs novve see your ovvne falshoods and vanities. First your saie: that There vvere but fevve Priests in Jngland. vvere a hundred Priests but a fevve? and that theare vvere a hundred, I can shevve out of the Register of the yeares they vvent in, and of their names. it follo∣vveth: as hauing had but one onely Seminarie vntill that tyme the Jesuits vvent in: if this be falshood or no, let the Reader Iudge. The Rom. Seminarie vvas instituted (as you con∣fesse) in the yeare 1578. Fol. 3. the Iesuits vvent first into Ingland in the yere 1580. about mid sommer: so that that Colledge had beene founded at the least 2. yeres before. and yet there vvas but one onely seminarie till that ty∣me and so by an arithmeticall substraction, of 2. you make but one. and that the Reader may better perceiue, this to be a notorions fals∣hood: Diuers Priests vverre sent out of the rō. Colledge in to Ingl. before the Iesuits vvēt thither: as M. Sher martyr, M. Haddok, Array, Hide, & Meredeth. And fevve knovvne Catho∣licks. this is indeede a vanitie. vvhere (I praie you vvere all these seminarie Priests besides the old Priests, vvhich vvere then many in nōber, receuied ād harbored? by heretickes or schismatickes by like. vvhere (I praie you vvere the fathers receiued and almost a hun∣dred Priests that entred the yeares 1580.
and 1581? if there vvere then but fevve knovvne Catholicks? I confesse the nomber then vvas not like to the nomber that vvas aftervvards, and to that that is novve: bicause tyme and nomber of vvorkemen, haue gay∣ned more. And this that I haue said is kno∣vvne to most men that knovve our case, and for this your misdemeanor are to lament our comon case and cause. The 8. Ostentans, &c. A certaine Iesuit van∣ting him selfe among our people as though he had beene Legat to the see Apostolike, &c. It maie be their vanitie is in saying he vanted himselfe to be, &c. but sure I am in fact and deed he vsed the Authoritie of a legat in assembling Syno∣des vvhich you confesse, and say that nei∣ther D. Fol. 164. b. Allen nor fa. pa. did allovve of it. vvherein lyeth then the falshood in these vvords? for sooth, that he did not vant him∣selfe, &c. but in truth and in act as you your selues confesse, he plaied the Legat. it is not then a material but a verbal falshood, such as you commit full many in this your Apol. And to prooue this falshood, your saie it is spoken Of fa: Hayvvood, a graue and learned man as all men knovve: as vvho should say a graue and learued man cannot be ambitious, or synne in ambition, or as though all Iesuits vveare Angels and sainctes, and cannot be ambitious, or commite the like synnes. I vvould to God they vveare, for then this la∣mentable
diuision had neuer happened in our contrey. Novve vvhere you referre vs to the thirde chap. of your book, and to the 11. chap. to see hovve false and malitious this lye is, vvith diuers others vttered against him. I haue reade ouer very diligenth your 3. chap. and find no vvord there, of fa. Hayvv. at all. Is not this then, a flat lye) to vse your ovvne termes) to say you shevve in such a place hovve false and malicious the lie is, vvhere you make no mention at all of it? except vnder the generall name of Iesuits (vvhome you defend in that chap.) your Reader must con∣iecture that you defend fa. Heyvv, perticu∣larly in the 11. Chap. you say: Fol. 164. b. And as for that biting florish brought in pag. 8. against fa: Heyvv. that he did vant & brag in Ingland, as legat of the see Apostolick, called a prouinciall Counsell, abro∣gated the vigils and fasts of our lady, prohibited th' Acts of our Martyrs vvritten by D. Allen, they are partly plaine Calumniations, and partly odius and malitioas vvresting of his dooings. vvell, touching the vvord vant and bragg, I am content, lett them be a Calumniation, for albeit they per∣aduenture can prooue it, yet cannot I. hovve say you? is that also a Calumniation, that he called a Prouinciall Synode, that he vvoulde haue abrogated the fasts of your ladye, that he hindred and letted the Acts of our Mar∣tyrs to be published? speake out? if you af∣firme it to be a Calumniation, then you con∣demne
your selues, for in this place you con∣fesse that it is true, that 16. or 17. Priests mett together, behold the Synode, that they vvould haue had all the nationall customes of Ingland a∣bout fasting, to be reduced to the Common order of the Rom. Church. and vvhat is this, but to abro∣gat the fasts of our ladye in Ingland. and you confesse that D. Allen and fa. par. and others did not allovve thereof. Tell me in your lar∣ger Apol. in vvhich vvord of theirs consisteth this Calumniation, odious & malicious vvre∣sting of his dooing? vvhen as you your selues confesse, all they saie to be true, and his dooings to be disliked by D. Allen and fa. par. hovve haue you shevved in this chap. hovve false and malicious this lye is? you are poore Priests, vnited in falshood and mallice against your innocent brethren. they say the truth, you doo confesse it, and yet your Reader must needs beleeue and thin∣ke, that in the places by you quoted, they may see hovve false and malicions a lye is made against fa: Heyvv. a graue and lerned man. and yet such is your impudencie, that in one place you say neuer a vvord of it, and in they other, you confesse all and more too then your aduersarie dooth say. you knovve vvho aduertiseth that in accusing honest men ought to be precise and punctuall. Fol. 190. Can there be greater accusations then to com∣mitt a false and malicious lie? then to be Odious
and malicius vvresters of mens dooings? these be your Accusations. you are taken for honest men, therefore you ought to haue beene precise and punctuall in your prooffes. but vvhat tell I you of prooffes? for you haue svvorne as it seemeth in this your Apol. to say vvhat you list, but not to proue any thing at all. The 9. toucheth the Rectors gouernemēt of the College: my opinion touching that you shall finde in these notes. Pag. ibid. Conspectis, &c. Fol. 15. vvhere is reported that D. Allē vvas vvōt to say, that the fathers sought more their ovvne good then that of their Coutrey or the Colledge. you ansvve∣re, it is meere false and a notorious vntruth. hovve doo you make, or prooue it a noto∣rious vntruth? you referre vs to his letters in the 4. Chapt. and for any thing in those let∣tres, he might haue said somuch. you referre vs to your 11. Chapt. vvhere you haue these vvordes: All that they tell after this of Card. Fol. 164. Allen from pag. 6. that he fauored them or misli∣ked the Jesuits, or concurred vvith these factious & their emulations against them, is refuted largely before in the 3. and 4. Chap. of this treatise. vvell, in the tvvo chapters you allege heere; this saying is not prooued meere false or an notarious vntruth. let vs see the 3. Chapt. I haue read it diligently ouer vvhith my spectacles, Fol. 24. and finde Card. Allen once onelye named in it.
but no one lettre of his in that chapt. to the vvhich yet you send vs. you say there, that the Iesuits procured the first 100. Crovvnes for the seminary of Dovvay, as the vvorld knovveth and Card. Allen did allvvayes con∣fesse vvhile he vvas living. ergo by Card. All∣ens ovvne letters and dooings this report is meere false and a notarious vntruth. such co∣monlye are your prooffes throghout your Apol. vvell for all you haue said as yet to the contrarie it may be true vvhich they report of Card. Allen. I doo not say it is true. but for any thing you say or bring here or elsvvhe∣re to improoue it, it may be true. You aske, vvhat priuat good can the Iesuits pretend for them selues vvorth their labours & perils in Ingland except the good of soules? they haue ansvveared you and still doo: that the Iesuits seeke to rule the roste, to haue all mē at their beck and commandement, to haue nothing doon vvhithout their aduice and appointement and that they vvil haue all Priests their Prentizes. thus they ansvvere the question, but hovve true, Time vvill he∣vve. And vvhere you aske: of vvhat consciēce then are these men that print so manifest Calumniations? I ansvver: of the same conscience you are, vvhich print and in this Table, haue impu∣ted deceipt, falshoods, vntruthes, manifest lyes and Calumniations vnto them, vvhen
there is no such thing, as hath beene she∣vved. Looke in to your ovvne consciences first and clense them, and then aske hardlye, vvith vvhat conscience your Brethren can print such manifest calumniations, after you haue prooued them such: other vvise, you doo but dally in vvoords, and vvith excla∣mations abuse your. Reader. The 10. pag. 11. it is the 10. Iam tu, &c. you nippe their vvords, for thus they saie to his Hol: At that time both the College, and all the schollers had beene vndoonn if youe hol. had not sent Card: Tolledo, vvho after he had heard both parties & iudged the Controuersy vvhith equall, ballance opposed himself as a vvall for the schol∣lers, our contrey being desti tuteof Card. Allen their father. you haue nipped of, that he vvas sent by his Hol. to be a Iudge in the Cause. by vvhich your Readers might perceiue that Card. Tolledo seeindg the schollers to haue right on their side, stood vvhith them and for them all his life. he vvas not then a fauorer of troublesome and seditious schollars a∣gainst their superiors as you vvould inferre, but a patron and defender of the youthes from the vniust dealings and gouuernemēt of their superiors, and that sent by his Hol. as they say and you confirme by nipping of these vvords: missus. à tua S. The 11. pag. ibid. ƲƲhiles these things, vvere a dooing in Rome, the troubles of vvisbich
began, Fol. 6. &c. Doo you not say so much your selues, vvhere you ioyne the troubles of the Rom. Colledge, of slaunders, and vvisbieh Castle together? but vvhere is the deceipt, shift, Ju tabul. Apo∣logiae. and falshood of these speeches? for this cause you haue thought it convenient to note some points touching their vntruthes, &c. vvhy did you putt dovvne these vvords, can you tell? No suerlye, but onely to make vpp a nomber. The 12. you vvill your Reader to note the phrase of Ʋnited. and vvhy could they not name them selues the vnited Priests? you ansvver: bicause they vvere farre the lesser nomber. a good reason a fevve in nom∣ber cannot be vnited, or so termed. vvhere vvere your vvitts? Nay, (say your) besids this, they vvere deuided from their head. hovve could a companie that haue no hedd, be deuided from their hedd? for the Ar∣ch. vvas not then their hedd, but an vsurper, and an intruded person, Fol. 47. b. till the Popes bre∣ue came, as is prooued at large in these no∣tes. seeing there vvas no hedd, there could be no bodye. and so could they not be deui∣ded from the rest of their bodye the En∣glish Clergie. you seeke very narrovvly and are desirous of contention, that hunt so after vvords and syllables, and yet vvhen you haue all said, they might be iustly vnited Priests, not as the vnited Prouinces
terme them selues, for they have a hedd, the king and Gouernor. these had none in In∣gland, that vvas their superior, nor out of Ingland, but his Hol. onely. All that vvhich follovveth, till you com∣me to the 18. are matters of storie and fact, and therefore to be omitted by me, and to be ansvvered by the Actors. The 18. you reprehend them for their association and choosing to them selues Pre∣lats, being but a fevve and that they vvould doe it vvhout Comission and consent of the rest of the Clergie or vvhithout licence of their Superior. hovve and vvith vvhat face can you repre∣hend 13. Priests (for you graunt they vveare so many in vvisbich, besids those that vveare at libertie and of their association) for choo∣sing of Prelats, vvhen you haue had a pre∣lat given you by the information of 2. Iesuitz and one secular Priest onely, and that vvith∣out commission and consent of the rest of the Clergie. vvhich is the greater fault and greater absurditie, for secular Priests to thinke of choosing themselues Prelats (for as yet they vvere not comme to the choi∣ce) or for Religious men to meddle vvithout Commission to procure a hedd to the se∣cular Clergie, vvithout their knovvlege or consent. That vvhich you add: VVithout the li∣cence of their superior is a meere fitton. for
they tell you pag. 23. Si quando id (. Pater) tibi approbandum videretur. to vvhome not the election (by ordinarie lavve) but the confirmation apperteyneth they might then lavvfully choose their Prelatz vvit∣hout licence of any superiors, but they are to be confirmed by the superior before they can administdrat and exercise their dignitie or offyce. The Rest of the Ar∣ticles, touch not the Controuersie, but the estimation of perticular persons, vvhome I deeme to be vnduly and vncharitably bo∣th named and taxed, and there fore leave it to their satisfaction, vvhich they are in my Iudgement bound to make, and that in print. I must yet aduertize thee (gentle Rea∣der) of an egregious vntruth before I ma∣ke an end that is: vvhere this Author saith in the end of his table, that he vvill not cite any thing out of the English booke, be∣cause he hath examined the same sufficiently in the 1.2.7. & 11. Chap. marke (Reader) vvhen thou commest to those places ho∣vve sufficiently he hath examined it. there it shalbe shovved thee, that he hath left the cheif points and Reasons thereof, both vnansvvered and vnexamined. But you say: it may be somme other vvill examine more exactly these bookes. indeede so he hath neede, for you hane examined
them as lightlie and as slenderly as any man vvell could doo. Yf fearefull fleeing from the Truth, ansvvearing to no one Reason, and filling your Readers eares vvith tittle tattle, be an exact examination. and as you conclude, this vvill in deede be sufficient for him that vvill not take the peaynes to Reade your Apol. but to beleeue you or your vvord. but to him that vvill reade it vvith care and diligence and seeke on vvhich fide the Truth lieth, the same vvill prooue verie insufficient and not vvoorthie the na∣me of an Apologie, vvhich is a defence of truth: and so shall see to your Confusion of countenance hovve poorely, faintly, and vve∣akly you defend your Eccliastical Hierarchis sett vp and iustituted by a Card. Prote∣tectors letters. And for an end of this table, I must aduertise thee (Reader) that the Priests haue printed another booke in La∣tin dedicated to the Inquisition, in vvhich they hane simplie and plaiuly sett dovvne the controuersie, and haue not roved therein at bymatters, nor touched the name or fa∣me of any parson in perticular or in ge∣nerall: to the vvhich booke, these men are so farre from ansvvearing, as they doo not once name it, or make mention of it, in this their breif Apol. I knovve not vvhat they vvil doo in their more larger and ample vvhich they promise thee. and if the Priests
had kept them selues vvith in the compasse of their matter, in this booke sent to his Hol. vvee had lost this vvoorthy peece of vvoorke, the vvhich is vvritten in the defen∣ce of somme perticular men, and of the so∣cietie, and not in defence of the Hierarchie, as they vntruly vvould make his Hol. be∣leeue. for, as I haue often sayd, and must oftentymes hereafter note, the Author ne∣uer commeth neere the matter or the con∣trouersie. vvhich I must aduertize (the Rea∣der) to note and mark diligently. In the preface to the Reader, In the preface to the reader. you are of a suddaine become very holie and chari∣table men, for those vvhome a little before in the table you accused of vntruthes, shifts, deceipes, falshoods, Calumniations, & slanders, are novve forsooth your most entierly beloo∣ued Brothren. O hypocrisie! vvhen the fox precheth, bevvare your gheese, bevvare their gaule hidden vnder sugred vvords. your Reader forsooth must thinke and beleeue that this Controuersie vvhich is betvveene fomme Priests, the Archprieste and English Iesuits, to be against the church of God and all good men: as though there vvere no good men, but such as stand vvith the Arch∣priest and Iesuits, and as though they, made the church of Christ, or at least vvere the principall menbers thereof. O follie! And vvhy may not that vvhich you bring
bring out of S. Cyprian touching the later sort, be applied to those, vvhome you take v∣pon you to defend. vvhoe vvere more trou∣blesome then they? vvho began this con∣tention and strife: but they? vveare not the Iesuits the cheif informeres and persvvaders of this subordination and that it should be instituted by the Protector and not by his Hol.? you confesse somuch your selues. vvas not fa: lister, the second cause of all this trouble by vvriting that booke, vvherein he vvould prooue them schismaticks, for not obaying the Protectors letters? his booke is printed verbatim in theirs to the Inquisition, the vvhich you doo not ansvvear. vvere not fa: Garnet and the Archp. mayneteyners and incensors of this trouble, by subscribing and authorizing that booke? you confesse it by your deepe silence in not refuting them vvhē they obiect it. vvas not the indiscreat letter and opinion of the Archp. the cause of this last breache, by vvriting and pronouncing them schismaticks for not receyuing him v∣pon the Protectors institution? pag. 63. pag. 60. they put dovvne his epistle in bothe the latin bookes, and his decree after their appellation. you slyly let all passe vvithout ansvver and yet vvill needs haue vs beleeue them, and not you, to be the Authors of all this trouble. You obiectt to them their association, pag. 21. they confesse it, and giue you the reasons vvhy
they made it. you accuse them of the trou∣bles in VVishich Castle, pag. 51. they tell the Pope thereof, and put dovvne the storie: (trulie or falsely, that is elsvvhere to be examined.) you accuse them of disobedience to their su∣periors, the Protector and Archp. they pro∣ue and that by 21. reasons al in rovve, that ne∣ther of them vvas their superiors. You are dumbe, and ansvvere not any one of those reasons. you accuse them of disobedience, and contemptuous speeches against his Hol. in diuets partes of these notes, you are she∣vved to speake vntruly of them. you accuse them, of all the factions and seditions, that haue beene betvvixt englishmen, in diuers contryes, euer since vvee haue liued in ba∣nishment, and yet somme of them vvere thē vnborne, and the greatest part of them, but yong stvdients, vvhen those dissentions hap∣pened. Lett any in differēt reader iudge novv vvho haue beene these trouble somme fellovves, and apt to sett debat, and of vvhome S. Cy∣prian talketh vvhether you discontented brethrē or those in vvhose defence you vvritt this Apologie? You say full vvell (but you follovve it not) That scandall should haue vvitheld you from vvri∣ting. for hovv can it othervvize be, but you must contynue and mainteyne scandall, vvhē you defende these that vveare the Authors of this scandall? your brethrē vveare vniustly
accused of schisme, rebellion, contention, and sedition, lo, the scandall giuen, they vve∣re forced to defend their name and fame by vvriting, and to prooue they vveare not schis∣matiks. you come on their backs vvith this Apol. doe you not mainteyne the scandall? I aske pardon: in deede you neuer come neere the marke, neither vvill you make mention of this schisme, vvhich yet is the fundation of all this controuersye. I knovve not vvhat pointes your reader knovveth al readie, but sure I am, they are not like to knovve or perceiue any point that is in controuersie by this your Apolog. I knovve they shalbe choked vvith the Rom. sturres, G.G. his spieries, Paris fa∣ctions, Flanders tumults, Fishers examinatiōs VVisbich contentions, praises of somme re∣ligious men, detractions of the discontented vvith heapes and bundles of priuat mens let∣ters (vvhich you terme authenticall testimo∣nies) from all coasts, and somme of them (as by reading you may easely coniecture) inter∣cepted, but none of them to the purpose. and at last (to make you merry) vvith M. VVatsons common vvelth. lo here, the substāce of this Apol. this if you knevve not before, you shall novv knovve & perceiue by this Ap. but yov shall not knovve all. vvhy so? Mary, much is kept for the larger Apol. vvhich shall out as∣sone as the Informations comme asvvell out of our contrey (to Rome vvhere the penner lieth) as other forraine Realmes. tys great
liklihood, that singular matters vvill be con∣teyned therein. for things farre fecht, are deinty. You send out this your Apol. to fore vvar∣ne and forearme men lest, their books infect the good and trouble the strongest: vvhen they see such enormous matter passe vvithout controulement. suer∣ly for any thing you say in this Apolog. tou∣ching the matter in question, the good may contynue infected, if to hold and beleeue the Truth be infection, and not onely the strōgest, may stand still in his strength: but al∣so the vveaklings may be made strong: as I doubt not but many vvill be, hauing read these notes: in the vvhich your vveakenes and nakednes is laid open to the sight of all that be not vvilfully blinde. I knovve that by enormious matter heere you meane, not the question in controuersie, but either the vn∣decent speeches they haue vttered against the societie, or other particulars in their boo∣ke. tell them home for it hardly, and take them vpp bitterly, for they seeme to haue deserned it: but doe not mock your Reader, and make him beleeue, that vnder these vvords, you comprehend the fact and mat∣ter betvveene you and your brethren in que∣stion. for as I haue often inculcated, you co∣me as neere the question as London is to Lin∣colne. If this I haue said prooue true, then the
more grauo and vviser sort of readers vvill consider vvith them selues, of the iustice of the cause and of your iniquitie and vniust proceding, that make his Hol. and them beleene, you vvrite in defence of the Hierarchie, by him instituted: vvhereas you vvrite onely in de∣fence of somme certaine men, defamed, and vncharitably vsed, by the penner of the La∣tin booke to his Hol. and not one vvord for the defence of the Hierarchie: vvhich you confesse your selues here so apparently, that a very Idiot may perceiue it. The principall point (you say) that by ansvvearing you can note to thē is: first the Extreame passions of these libellers (no∣te you vvrite against their passions, and not in defence of the Hierarchie) in descending to such kind of reuenge, if they had beene iniuried. a∣gainst this reuenge then, you reuenge your selues, and care full little for the matter in question. If they had beene iniuried, quothd you) vvhy, can there be a greater iniurie offred to ca∣tholick Priestes, that imploy their trauaill in an hereticall cōtrey, vvith the hazard of their liues, to vvith dravve and reclaime others from heresie and schisme, then to be called, compted, published, pronounced, and by vvritten bookes prooued to be schismaticks them selues, See fa. Listers booke. § 7. yea to be men vvorse then vvytches soothsayers, pagans, and Idolaters? doe you not knovve thus much? hovve can
you be ignorant of it? if you knovve it, vvith vvhat brasen face, dare you vvrite to english∣men, and Cath. men, If they had beene iniuried? vvhere is your consciēce? nay vvhere is you charitie? are you vvorthie the names of con∣fessors, or of Priests either, that so impudētly in print, ād to English Catholickes, that kne∣vve full vvell, they vvere called and counted schismatikes, you dare say If they had beene in∣iuried? Reade the greiuous punishments ena∣cted against Schismatikes, sett dovvne in fa∣thers Listers booke, and you shall see vvhi∣ther they vvere iniuried or no, by being es∣teemed, held, and called schismatikes. You goe on: the most bitter and opprobious stile of speeche this then, and not the matter in controuersie hath sturred you vp to vvrite, and to reuen∣ge. and these, (as you note in your mergent) are the points to be considereed in the libels sett forth. Mark (Reader) is it not true I haue oft told thee, that these vnited priests, doe neither de∣fend, nor touch the matter in controuersie, but onely defend the name and estimation of certeine persons, bitten vvith this bitter and opprobious stile and speeche. I doe not finde fault vvith them therefore: but am sorie they abu∣se his Hol. and you english catholickes, in making you beleeue, that this their Apolog. vvas vvritten, in defence of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchie: vvhen it is vvritten in the defen∣ce of particular men onelie, and against con∣tumelious
libelling and vvriting, vvherein vvor∣thy men are defamed. Not a vvord of the Hie∣rarchie. you should haue shevved that the Archp. vvas lavvfully and dulie instituied, by a Card. letters, vvithout the Popes buls. you should haue prooued the discontēted to ha∣ue beene scismatikes, for vvithstanding and not receiuing the Archp. vpon those letters: you should haue ansvvered the Reasons, they bring in defēce of their dooings: you should haue controvvled them, for denying the Protector or. the Archp. to be their superior you should haue declared, that the Arch. did duly and lavvfully, pronounce them schis∣matikes for not receyving him vpō the Card. letters, yea after they had yeelded to the Popes buls: these are the questions in cōtro∣uersie, these are the points vvhich the more graue and vviser sort ought to consider of. these are the points to be considered in the libels set forth. but in these points you are so dombe, and flie so vvillinglie from them, that I am ashamed (for your sakes) of your covvardlines. you add: no certaine author, &c. of this point I haue talked in these notes, little to your credit. I hope and presume vvith you that euerie di∣screet reader vvill of himself novve ponder both your points, and the others that I haue laid dovvne, and thereby iudge, hovve vvell you defend the matter in controuersie in this your Apol.
And vvith all vvill consider ƲVhat manner of men these be you vvrite against, and hovve they haue aduentured, backed by the lavves, Ca∣nons and cōstitutions of the Church, to vvith stande iustlie, lavvfully, and in consciēce, the intrusion of the Archp. thrust vpon them by a Card. letters, against all lavve, iustice, and practise of Gods Church. By this that hath beene said, and is hereafter in these notes to be said, the reader shall easely see, vvho are the authors of so intollerable a scandall in our English Church, and hovve impudently vvithout all kynde of proof or shevve of proffe, these v∣nited Priests vvould thrust it from the true Authors vpon innocent men. your Conclusion then is, that this brief Apol. (being sent out as a cock boat before the great ship your larger Apol.) is vvrirtē for the honor of our nation (but to the little honor of the Author) and for somme defence of innocencie exceedinglie iniuried in these vvritings. so, as I said before, this is not a defence of the Hierarchie but of priuate men, vvhich pretend thē sel∣ues to be iniuried, and so you may haue a con∣fused countenance for promisinge his Hol: chee∣se, and giue him in steade thereof Chaulke. you vaunt, that you haue vvritten this A∣pol. in a far other style then the Authors of these bookes haue: lett the Reader iudge. I beleeue he shall finde as bitter a style and as opprobrious spee∣ches in this your Apol. and that vvorthy men
are (if not defamed) yet taunted, as bitterly by name, as thothers are in whose defence they write. But you promisse a larger Apol. which shal∣be more substantiall and authentick. wherefore? bicause you will haue informations and let∣ters, not onely out of our contrey, but also from forraine realmes. as who should say, that priuat mens letters, especially of the assistāts and of such as are creatures or fautors of the Iesuits, are to be accompted, of any graue or wise man, either substantiall or authentick, mary, if you bring vs the signes and publick seales of Princes, or citties, then I will hold with you, and call them anthentick, other wise to thinke your Reader will take priuat letters for substantiall and authentick matter is to thinke him to be a verie fole and an asse. Well, you will get informations, letters, and o∣ther vvritings concerning this affaire. which affai∣re I praie you? to defend the institution and subordination of the Archp. made by the Card. letters? there is no neede of other wri∣tinge to proue that, but by the canons, the interpretors, and the Glosse. other writinges are of no forse in this point. or is it to prooue your most entierly belooued Brethren to haue bee∣ne Schismaticks, for not receyuing him? I am suer you can doe no more, nor say more in that point, then fa. Lister hath done, or is it to prooue that the Archp. receiued a letter
from the mother cittie by which he was adui∣sed to hold them for Schismaticks after they hadd obayed the Popes bull, for with stan∣ding the Card. letters? this matter your belo∣ued brethren haue committed to the inquisi∣tion to iudge and resolue, to whome and not to any priuat letters, the decision appertey∣neth. Or to be short, will you bring authenti∣call informacion to proue that the Protector of Ingland hath power or iurisdiction, vpon Inglishmen, in Ingland or out of Inglād? this in deede were a worke worthie such wnited hedds. But in truth, this affaire, is the defen∣ce of the name and credit of somme that ha∣ue beene vncharitably bitten by your bro∣therne and nothing els. you haue wearyed vs alredie, with your Romaine sturres, Paris ād Flanders factions, Giffords and Gratlies boo∣kes, fa. Westons praises, Wisbiches troubles, fishers memorial and examinatiōs, Watsons common welthe, and with a great bundle of tedions letters. for the loue of God no mo∣re. But if you will be doing, touch the points in controuersie, twang vpō that string: shoo∣te at the marke, and riun not a rouing, as you haue doon in this: otherwise you will loose, both your paines, costes, and creditt: and of this I warne you as a frend, and as one that wisheth your honor, and your quietnes. for if you sett dovvne things at length, in your next in that order, and after that fashion you haue
doon heere: certaynly, both those that liue presently, and the posteritie after vs, will wonder to see howe God hath blinded you, and left you to your fantasies, and made you to pronounce your selues, to be the cheife disturbers in this cause, to impugne the Ca∣nons and constitutions of the Church, and not to decide, but to run quite from the Cō∣trouersie nowe in hand. Besides I pronostica∣te vnto you, that if in your next you giue not better stayes and stoppes then in this: the diuers good mē vvho vrged you to vvrite and at vvhose requeste, you haue published this booke, if they haue so much witt as goodnes in thē: will not one∣ly be sorie to haue requested you to write so foolishlie: but also, will quitt you, and pro∣nounce you to haue more care to write a∣gainst the intemperat manner of proceedinge, of your brethren, then to defend the Ecclesia∣sticall Hierarchie, instituted by the Card. let∣ters, as in your Epistle you promised his Hol. well, when these informations come from so farre contreyes, I doubt not, but they wilbe veiwed and sifted, as wel as these are, that came not so farre. and then the Readers will weigh and consider, which side writeth, ƲVithout all regard of truth and modestie, and on which side the truth lieth and leanethe. In the meane tyme, till your other be re∣die to succeede I shall desire the reader to pervse this diligently, and to conferre these
my notes there with: whereby they shall see, howe you are bound to doe that, you wish your brethren heere to doe, that is, christian∣ly to correct your selues, confesse and satisfie for the faults, you haue committed, in slan∣dering and calumniating them, for such faultes (I say) as your owne consciences shall accuse you of, and then to amend & correct all the faulte I note herein against you. For if it pleased God to giue you this spirit of hu∣militie, this controuersie would quickly be at an end, ād all should be in order and quiet againe. And as you wish your brethrē to doe in respect of them, whome they haue iniu∣ried or infamed, so doe I wish and exhort them to it, as they are bound in conscience to doe. and you to doe the like againe on your part: you (I say) my vnited brethren, or whosoeuer (be he Religious or priest) that is Author of this Apologie. for your so doo∣ing, the Angels in heauen will reioyce, all mē will be thereof full gladd, the common ene∣my shalbe confounded, the haruest at ho∣me, wilbe better cultiued, Gods glorie wilbe augmented, loue and amitie betweene bre∣thren wilbe encreased, infinit Soules wilbe gayned, your old glorie and renowne recoue∣red, and all strifes, troubles, and controuer∣sies remooued, and forgotten, yea and many a one of you with martyrdoome for this hū∣blenes crowned, but if you go on as you ha∣ue
begune, and as you seeme to continue, the contrarie of all this will happen, to your dishonor and discredit in this world, and to your shame at the dredfull day of iugement. God of his infinit goodnes mollifie your sto∣nie harte, open your eyes, make you yeeld to the truthe, and in the end bring you, your brethren, your Readers, and my self to his eternall blisse. Amen.
CHAP. I. THe first fault I find vvith you (vni∣ted Bretherne) is that by vvriting of this Apologie, you blovve (as it vvere) the trumpett to an nevv onsett, as men desirous to continevve in vvrangling and dissention still, and prouoking your dis∣contented brethrene to breake their silence, for their ovvne defence: by vvhich doing you haue not only broken Charitie (vvhich in such a nombre as you be, shoulde more abounde, then in a lesser nomber, not so vvell vnited as you are) but also highly disobaied his holines commandement (vvhich disobe∣dience you oft obiect in this your Apologie, to your brethrene) vvho in his last bull sent into Ingland for the pacification of theis con∣tentions, forbadde all bookes vvritten on both sides, to be read of any vvith in Ingland, or others to be vvritten, vnder paine of ex∣communication. If you (vnited bretherne) be herein obedient childrene? let all men that haue either seene or heard thereof, be Iud∣ges.
Besides that, you might very vvell haue spared his labour, for you doe nothing in all this your booke, but rove vp and dovvne vvith by and impertinēt matters, neuer tou∣ching or comminge neare the prick: filling vp your booke novv vvith old quarrells, apper∣teining neither to the matter you vvrit of nor to the men you vvrite against: then, vvith letters, examinations, and other trifles (as those of M. vvatsons deuises) not vvorth the labor (certz) of such men as you are, and much lesse vvorthe the reading of any vvise, graue or learned reader as in place shalbe noted. The second fault I find, is vvith the title or inscription of your first chapter (imitating herein your selues, vvho find fault vvith the title of the latin booke, but hovv iustly, shal∣be shovved in his place) vvhich you haue put dovvne in generall termes and yet in deed do proue nothing at all of that vvhich you pre∣tend. So as it may vvell be said of this title, as our Lavviers often times say of our Rubri∣ckes, viz, that Rubrica est generalior nigro, the Rubrick (or title) is more generall and am∣ple then the text. yon say: The emulation of secular pristes against religious: bothe theise vvord secular pristes and Religious being put dovvne indefinitly, that is generally, for in lavve Indesinitum aequiparatur vniuersali. An in∣definite proposition, is equall to a vniuersall
proposition. So that you say thus, (if you say any thinge) The emulation of all secular priestes against all sortes of religious men, hath brought great hurte to Ingland. And all your profes yet are but of some secular prie∣stes, against other secular priests and religi∣ous. And whē you haue all done, ād come to the pointe of this controuersie, you grant it is the emulation of 13. priestes, (brought af∣terwards to 7.) against their fellow priestes, and one Iesuit. and elswhere you confesse a∣gaine, that this emulation is but of somme fewe secular priestes against the fathers. By this generalitie of speach then, you doe not only accuse your selues, (for you are al∣so secular priests but do also drawe me and o∣thers with in the compasse of this emulation, who were neuer of the one nor of th' other faction, but haue hitherto and so will still kee∣pe our selues indifferēt and free, from passion or affection to either side, in this so piti∣full and slanderous dissention. Now as touching Religious. all this emu∣lation is but against one order of Religious viz: the fathers of the Society, as you confesse throughout the whole booke, and so it must needes be, bicause there are not many in Ingland of any other or∣der. Thus then you should haue intitled your chapter: vvhat great hurt hath come to Jngland by emulation of the laytie against the Cler∣gie,
and of a fevv secular Priestes against other se∣cular Priestes, and the Religious of the Societie of Ihesus. For other emulation then this, your doe not proove, either in this chapter, or in the vvhole booke it self: I feare much that the vnited Priestes, are not the Authors of this booke, for that I cannot iudge so hard∣ly of them, that to extoll, praise, and defend the societie and some certaine persones of the same, they vvould so farre forgett them selues, as to accuse men of their ovvne coate and order, of so hainons a crime, as not only in our daies, but from the beginning of Chri∣stianitie in our contrey, the emulation of se∣cular Priestes against Religious should bring great hurts to our Nation: Out vpon such base Priestes, as so vniustly and vncharita∣bly, accuse them selues and theirs, to please others, out vpon such vnnaturall birds, that defile their owne nestes, by slaundering their owne vocation in words without any profs, as anone shalbe shewed. In an other place, to a base and bring in to contempt, your owne order and vocation, you say: That the greater parte of you were serving men, souldiers and wandrers. but to be plaine with you, I do not thinck that any secular Priestes would be so iniu∣rious and vngratfull to this order and vo∣cation. And therfore I thincke some reli∣gious man hath borrowed your names, the
better therby to extoll his religion, and com∣panions, and to abase and bring into con∣tempt, both with layty and Clergie, the state of secular Priestes: to thend he may so reveng him self, of some of them his aduer∣saries, and so for the fault of afewto offer in∣iury to the rest. This is no no veltie for the re∣port goeth of a religious man, that borrowed M. Dolmans name, (a secular Prieste in a booke dedicated to the Earle of Essex, when he was in his ruffe: the which trick, as it brought that Priest, into some danger then, so this toy is like to bring you (the vnited Priestes) into disfavour, mislick and discre∣dite, with all well meaning and vnpassiona∣ted men, both Priestes and lay: to see you so farre from all love and charitie towards your bretherne, that you are made not only, in∣struments to vexe and discredite them, but also Authors, to renewe, and proclaime the warre a freash against them, with fire and sworde, which will fall out but little to your owne creditt. If you do iustly mislike the discontented bretherne, for touching the whole bodie of the Iesuits, you haue to pardon me, if I mislike with you in touchinge so generally, the body of the secular Priestes, where of I am a member. But lett vs see first wherein the seculer Priestes haue emulated the Religious with so great hurt to Ingland? Sure it must
be that they envied them, for their lands and livings, for their Iurisdiction and autho∣ritie, or for their liues and behaviours. Now touching the first twoe, it is well knowen our secular Clergie in Ingland, to haue had such honorable meanes to live, as they had litle cause to envie the religious herein. be∣sides who knoweth not the authoritie, and Iurisdiction of secular Pristes, to hane bene farre greater, then that of any religions or∣der: yea to haue extended it self, over the Religious them selues. And as for the last point, the Priestes are so farre (especially in this age) from envying the lives and maners of the Societie in speciall, that I am assured, and all men will confesse, more secular Prie∣stes to haue entred, and daily doe enter, into the Societie alone, then into all the other orders of Religion, putt them all together. If you knowe any other cause why the Prie∣stes should envie them, let me vnderstand it, for my learning in your larger Appologie, for sure Iam that in this Apologie you haue not as yet prooved, that the secular Priestes haue emulated the Religious, either in any of the foresaid 3. pointtes, or in any other point els what so euer. Novv to your examples. The first is of Ihon of Gant, which proo∣veth only this, that there was (for that Prince his sake) Emulation of some secular Priestes, against the 2. Bishopps there named, and the
rest of the secular Priestes, and Religious, that tooke their parte as it is now betwene some secular Priests ād the Archpriest, which the rest of the Priestes and Iesuites that hold with him. Doth this proove the emulation of the secular Priests in generall against the Religious in generall? and yet very likly it is, that the kniges vncle duke of Lancaster had both Abbots, Priors, Monkes and friers, that tooke his parte, as well Bis∣hops as secular Priestes, and so was it emula∣tion of Religious and secular Priestes against Religious and secular Priestes, which proo∣veth not your intention. You, your selues also doe in that place, restraine the worde Religious, to such religious men, as had pos∣sessions: excluding the 4. orders of sriers, which yet are conteyned vnder the genera∣litie of the worde Religious in the title of your chapter. You seeme elsvvhere to contradicte your selues herein, Fol. 15. b. saying: That some of the Clergie banded them selues against the rest with Iohn of Gant to sett vpp Wicliff. theare you saie, that the statute of Premu∣nire, was begone to be treated of, about the time that Wicliff arose, when emulation was in heat against the Clergie. If against the Clergie, then this emulation, was of the laytie against the whole Clergie, secular and regular. How can it stand, that in Wichffes
time emulation was whott against the whole clergie, and that some of the clergie emula∣ted the rest of the clergie? these two cannot well stand together. In the next example you bring in 3. kings, like Mummers, for they say nothing: neither doe you there prove any thinge but in the margent, you note a malitious sugge∣stion. of whom, I pray you? you name no man, and yet would you haue your reader to vn∣derstand it, of the secular Priestes, against re∣ligious: and that the secular Priestes did sug∣gest these kinges to take away the Abbay landes. for if you meane not so? then the ex∣ample is to no purpose to prove the hurte that hath come by emulation, of secular Priestes, against Religious. If you meane so? then turne your note in the Margent vpon your owne malitious hedds, in so malitious∣ly slandering men of your owne coate, wit∣hout desart of their part, and without proof of yours. For who knoweth not, that if the secular clergie would hane yelded, or agreed to suppresse Abbeies, then especially. when heat of emulation was great, against the whole clergie, (as you say:) but that all had bene lost, both howses and lands. No, no, the secular clergie was so farre from ioy∣ning which the envions laytie in that yssue, that their constant withstandinge and cha∣ritable cleaving to the Religious at that ti∣me,
conserved both their landes and posses∣sions. From those 3. kings, your make a great stepp downe to Henry the 8. god be bles∣sed, that our secular Priestes, for 200. yeres al∣most, bare no emulation against the Reli∣gious. but lived in love and charitie toge∣ther, till this kings latter daies, when all the Religious vveare turned out of their howses, and their lands taken from them. But hap∣pened this (I pray you) thronghe the emu∣lation, that was betwene the secular Priestes and the Religious? Put your hands to your consciences, were the secular clergie the doers and sticklers herein? If you say, they gaue their consent in the Parlament, I grant. But not for any emulation, they had against the Religious. Was it not for frailtie and fea∣re? Fol. 15. or was it not (as you say well elswheare of the bringinge in of the statute of Premunire) for that our Catho. Bishopps and Prelatz did not willinghy consent, but sore against their wills, was it passed in the Parlement, by the streame of temporall power and emulation against them. Why may not our Prelats of king Heury the eights time, be aswell excu∣sed for consenting, to the supperssing of Re∣ligious howses, as the Prelats of an other king, for consentinge to the statute of Pre∣munire? who is so blinde as to thinck, that the vnited Priestes, are the Authors of this
booke? or thay ther vvould be so shame∣lesse, as to accuse men of their ovvne coate, the vvhole clergie of Inglād, in kindge Hen∣ry the eighths time, by emulatiō and mallice vvhich they bore to the Religious, to haue consented to their destruction, and to the euersion of their hovvses and Cloisters? Suerly, if this vvere true, you said some vvhat. For this emulation in deed brought, vnspeakable hurt and domage, to our poore contrey of Ingland. I ghesse therefore (as I said before,) that some other hath borro∣vved your names, to make emulation a∣mongst you secular Pristes your selues. If I ghesse amisse? I aske perdon. seeing it is law∣full for euerye man (as you knovv,) to de∣fend his order, vocation, name and estima∣tion, so it be not done vvhich contempt, dis∣gracing or dishonoringe, of any others order or vocation. The 4. example vvhich you bring, to proue the fore said emulation, is of Q. Ma∣ries time vvhich seameth very strange to me. For both at her comming to the Crovv∣ne, and duringe the time of her raigne, there vvere but fevv Religious men (God kno∣vveth) specially of such as had possessions, to be emulated or envied: a fevv Benedi∣ctines in Westminster Abbay, and a fevv Carthusicas onely excepted. Hovv lykly is it then, (I pray you) that the emulation
of the secular Priestes against the Religious in Q. Maries time, bronght great hurt to In∣gland? But you seeme so deeply plonged in this emulation your selues, that you date a∣gainst the knovvne truth say: that the fore said emulation hindred much in her time the reconsiliation, vvherby no perfect reformation could be made, nor such restitution of Religious or∣ders, as in iustice should haue beene, and as the good Q. Her self desired. And here you cannot co∣ver your selues vnder the cloake of the Laye∣tie, saying you meane heere of the emulatiō of the Layetie against the vvhole clergie: bicause you say: by the same emulation, that vvas in Iohn of Gants time, for you repete in all your examples, that doe follovv that of Iohu of Gant, by the same emulatiou, that is: of secular Priestes against Religious. But each one of my age, or elder, that savv the begi∣ning and ende, of that vertuous Princesse her Raigne, can controvvle you in this pointe, and tell you: there vvas no such emulation at all. euerye man desiring, the perfect re∣formatiō of Religion, and entire restitution, of religious orders and hovvses: and the cau∣se, vvhy neither the one, nor thother vvas performed, vvas not (as it pleaseth you to say,) the emulation of secular Pristes against religious, but rather the shortnes of her Rai∣gne, vvith the difficultie to get the Abbay lands, out of the possession, of the Nobilitie,
and Gentlemen, vvho kept them, as hither∣to most vniustly they doe. You are vvellcome at last, to her Maje∣sties Raigne, vvithout any good or lavv∣full proof, of your former proposition: (vvhich the Reader must haue in mynde) that the emulation (forsooth) of secular Priestes a∣gainst Religious hath brought great hurt to In∣gland. Novv you are come to the last cast, I hope you vvill say some thinge. Tru∣ly as much as you did before, vvhich is iust nothinge. You say: There vvas small vnion of diuers clergie men amongest them selues. What is this to the purpose? The emulation or small vnion and affection vvas betvveene secular Priestes, and not against the Religious. And so you are vvell come home, having made a longe Iurney of 200. yeres, and brought vs home nothinge: you haue fayrely fis∣hed, to catth a frogg. If all vvere true you say, in the disgrace of our constant clergie, (vvhich you shall neuer be able to proue,) and if diuers clergie men, holding vvith Hereticks and polliticks, gave occasion of the totall ouerthrovv of Religion in Inglād, yet doth it not prove, your pretended pur∣pose. For that vvas the emulation of secular Priestes, against secular Pristes, except you ta∣ke the vvorde Clergie mē in generall, Can dno. 12. q. 1. as it doth comprehend vnder it, both secular Priestes, and Religious men: then as vvell Religious,
as secular Priestes, did hold vvith Heretikes and politiks, to the totall ouerthrovv of Re∣ligion. And so in this case it vvas emulation betvvene the secular Priestes and Religious, against secular Priests and Religious, and so vvithout the compasse of your proposition. Suppose I say, (for we must be Pythagorians, to beleeue vvhat soeuer you say vpon your vvords, (quia ipse dixit) that some clergy man, follovves the time, ād holds vvith the Here∣tiks, in heat of faction: vvill you therefore, in heat of detraction conclude there vpon, that in the beginning of her Maiestates Raigne, the emulation of secular Priests against Reli∣gious, hath brought great hurt to Ingland? You might haue spared this paine, vvith Inck and papier. The 3. Fol. 2. a. fault. That the true opinion, of not going to Hereticall seruice, was taught then, by Priestes and Religious men, from beyond the Seas. I perceiue that this Religious, the Author of this booke, vvould vvillingly ha∣ne his parte, vvith secular Priestes, vvhen they doe any thing praise vvorthie. But I tell you (my vnited brethren,) you might hane putt vp the vvorde Religious, in your purse. For the best opinion, vvas knovvne, taught and folovved, many a yere, before the Iesuits (vvhom you meane) came or vvrote into In∣gland. It came from beyonde the seas I con∣fesse, but yet out of a secular Priestes shoppe,
Doctor Sanders having vvritten a booke in En∣glishe of Images, made a long preface to it, vvherin he admonished, ād exhorted all such as vvere Catholiks in hart and mynd, to shunne and avoide, all Communication vvith Hereticks, in their seruice. The vvhich boo∣ke made many to abstaine, from their con∣uenticles, and amongst the rest, (I give God hartie thanks therefore) I my self vvas one, and therfore can best tell, vvhich vvay and from vvhom it came, that I forsoke the he∣reticall church, vvhich is novv 37. or 38. ye∣res past: at vvhat time, the name of the Socie∣tie, vvas scarsly hard of in Oxford, I am assu∣red. I speak not this to detract any thing, frō the vertuous, painfull and profitable labors and travells, vvhich the fathers of the Socie∣tie haue taken, in manuring the afflicted vi∣niard of or Conutrey, but to give every man his due praise: The second praise, of plāting and teaching this better opinion, belongeth as vvel to ma∣ny ancicient Priestes, of Q. Maries daies, that stood firme and stable in their faith, and dre∣vve daily some out of the mire of schisme, by their preaching and teaching, vvhereof I my self am a vvittnes, having knovvne many that vvere reconciled by them, many a yere, before any Religious, either from beyond the seas, or at home, taught this doctrine. And as for our Seminarie Priestes also vvho entred
some yeres before the fathers, there vvere (vvhē they cam in) aboue an hundred, vvhich had travailed in this pointe to vvith dravve men from communicating vvith Heretickes, And God so blessed their travaills, that the fathers found the harvest vvel aduaunced, before their arrivall, to their great ioy and consolation, as I can best testifie, vvho vvent into Ingland vvith them. Besids diuers of our Seminarie Priestes, had suffred glorious Mar∣tyrdome, for teaching and preaching this do∣ctrine, before any Religious vvritt thereof, or came into Ingland, as M. Cutbert Maine batcheler of diuinitie, and the first Martyr of the Seminaries, M. John Nelson and M. Eve∣rand Hanse. What meand you then (you vni∣ted Priestes,) to take avvay the praise from your selues, and to give or divide that vvhich is due to your coate only, to others, or vvith others that haue no part therin? There vvas, as I said before, (as by the Registre thereof vvhēnead shall require, I can shevve) above a hundred Seminarie Priestes in Ingland, that taught this perfect doctrine, some yeres be∣fore any religious man, putt his foot into In∣gland. If you knevv not thus much before, learne it novv. But let vs putt the case, that the foresaid true doctrine, of not going to Hereticall seruice vvas taught by Religious men from beyond the seas, vvill you therfo∣re conclude that the emulation of Secular
Priestes against Religious, hath brought great hurt to Ingland? This you must prove, or deceive your Reader. For the title of the chapter importeth so much. In your next edition, or in your larger Appologie, vvhich you promis, putt out hardly, or els correct, this bragge of Religious men teaching, from beyond the seas, the perfecte doctrine, of not going to Hereticall churches, bicause they came too late, to haue that glorye, vvhich is only due to Secular Priestes: albeit you vni∣ted Priestes, do seeme both vvrongfully and vniustly, to give it to others. such honor bea∣re you to Religious, that you vvill for their sakes, dishonor both your selues and your brethren. At last vve are come, from Iohn of Gant, to vvisbich castle, vvhere you say, vvas emu∣lation of secular Priestes against Iesuites. er∣go your haue proved that vvhich you tooke in hand to prove. Nothing lesse. bicause that emulation (as you confesse) vvas but of some fevve against one Iesuit and 19. other secular Priestes, and so proveth it not that vvhich you pretend. You say, those fevve Priestes vvere the cause of that contention. They say: fa: Edmonds and his adherents vvere the cause. so that Lis est adhuc coram Iudice, to be decided and resolved not by these Appolo∣gies, but by our Superiors authoritie. I pray God it may be so done vvith charitie.
But for better proof of this emulation you all eadge the first contention, of the En∣glishe Romaine Colledge, then G. G. and G. vvrittinge against D. Allen and fa. Parsons, vvhich appertaine nothing at all, to this con∣tention betvvene the discontented brether∣ne, and the Archpriest and Iesuits. This con∣tention being grovvnded vpon tvvo other matters. thone for not receaving the Arch∣priest, vpon the Card. Protectors letters, for the vvhich fa: Lister proved them Schisma∣ticks. thother, for that after the comming of his Holl. breue, and their submission, the Archpriest then, vvould not admitt them to be absolved, of any Confessor, except they confessed their schisme, and abiured it. This is the state of the controuersie, in question betvvene you, and your discontented bre∣therne. This is the cause of their vvritting, both in Latin and English, in their ovvne de∣fence. But this you vvinck at, and vvill not see, yet this you must prove, not to be the state of the question, and cause of this con∣tention, or els you must aske them forgiue∣nesse, for so slaunderous, and scandalous in∣iuries done to them. Theese questions you touche not: but vvith toies and trifles, fill vp your booke and cast dust (as it vvere) in your readers eies, to blinde, or at the least vvise to hinder them, from vievving the question, and controuersie it felf.
For example vvhat doe the troubles in Ro∣me in the yere 1578. or the death of Vanne the spie 1581. or the deuision that fill amongst En∣glishmen in Paris 1580. or all ther memori∣alls made against the Seminarie, (if any such vvere) 1583. and 84. or B. Sega his visitation 1585. or G.G. and E. G. Writting againsts D. Allen and fa? Parsons 1587. or all the factions that vvere made against D. Allen: or M. Wat∣sons common vvealth, appartaine to this cō∣trouersie? What doth all this stuff (I say) ap∣partaine to the sturres begone in Wisbiche 1595. and the contentions vvhich since hath folovved? vvere your discontented brether∣ne, either Actors, Abettors, Doers or stick∣lers in all theese Tragedies? Had they their hands or pennes therin? Nothing lesse. You might as vvel accuse them, of all the conten∣tions and quarrelles that hath happened be∣tvvene the Englishs, since Noes floud, as vvith these. Many of them to my knovvledg, being but yong youthes in those daies. To vvhat purpose then is this vnprofitable and vnsave∣rie rehersall, ripping vp and reviving, of the faults and follies of many yet living, vvho peraduenture are sorie for the same? Is this charitie? commeth this from a peaceable, or a contentious spirit? to revive old soares qui∣te forgotten, and buried many yeares since in deep obliuion? and that to no purpose at all? Doth it prove the great hurt, vvhich the e∣mulation
of secular Priestes, against the Religious, hath brought to Ingland? as iust in sooth as Germaines lipps, that stood 9. miles a sonder: even so these actions stand at least 10. or 11. yeares one from an other. The ripping vp of the Actions of those 2. Priestes of the Romaine Colledge G. G. and E.G. the willing discoverie of their filthines after 20. yeres almost, makes me beleeve, that the Author of this booke, is not you (vnited Priests,) who for shame would not, nor without your owne dishonor could not, ripp vp the rottē naughtines of men of your owne coate, thone (as I haue bene aduertised, by a good father his Confessor) dying very sory and penitent, for his sinnes & offenes: thother yet living, and of abilitie and lear∣ning, to sett vpon you, and to refute you, of many things, vnduly sett downe in this your Apologīe. And yet all that you haue said of theirs and other mens frailties, maketh no∣thing to the matter now in question, as I haue noted before. I pray God, some Religious Parson then offended, hath not kept this v∣pon his stomack, till time hath served him, to vomitt it out, to the disgracing of secular Priestes. If it be so, God forgiue him, and send him grace, not by such vndecent meanes, ei∣ther to diuert others, from esteaming of se∣cular Priestes, or to make secular Priestes,
to lesse esteame him and his compaignons, as he geveth them iust occasion: seeing he seeketh euery cornere and hole, & omnem mouet lapidem, to disgrace them, vvith the faults and follies of some one or two, deser∣ving reprehension. And bicause you make mention, of some former troubles happened in the college of Rome, I will for the readers better instructiō sett downe in order, the fiue seuerall trou∣bles, that haue falne out in that vnfortunat Colleage, with in the space of 20. yeres. since the fondation thereof which was in the yere 1578. This colleag had bin an hospitall, to recea∣ue English pilgrimes at their comyng to Ro∣me, and there were some 8. priests in it, vn∣der a hedd: the which hospitall, by the pro∣curement and industrie of D. Lewes, after∣wards B. of Cassano, (as they confesse) was erected by Pope Gregorie the 13. into a, Col∣lege: the 8. priestes by violence (allmost) put out, bicause they would not obey to the Po∣pes commandement. Schollers were sent from Rhemes to supplie their places, ād one of the said priestes M. Do: Morrice Clenock a Welchman, being Do. Lewes frend, was made Rector there. Into this college were receaued aswell welch as Inglish, as to this daye they are indiflerently receaued. There were not then many welch men, but some 32.
Inglish schollers. Their first complaint was, that the welchmen were better clothed, and better looked vnto, thē they were, and that the Rector was parciall, in so much that the∣re grewe great strief, and dangerous quarrels In the end the Protector (who was thē Card. Morono, a great frend and vpholder of D, Morrice: and it may be M. Do. Lewes for frendship and contrey sake, might also bac∣ke him) expelled the 32. English schollers v∣pon a Shrouetewsday: whiles this sturre was amongst them, th'English for the causes you mention, and with great zeale desired to be gouerned by the Fathers of the Societie. Being thus expelled the next day being Ash∣wensday, they dispersed them selues in diuer∣se Churches, requesting the preachers to re∣commend their case and pouertie, to gett them some money, for they had determyned to returne alltogether in Procession (as it we∣re) and with a crosse before them to Rhemes or Ingland. In the meane while his Holl. was informed of all by Father Parsons, and Fa. Al∣fonso, who gathering such of the schollers together as he could meet withall, and brin∣ging them to the Pope, there was old wee∣ping and crying on both sides. The good old ffa. Weept, as one loath to loose so many ze∣lous and to Wardly children, and they on thother side cried for sorrovve, that they should be constraind against their vvilles to
leaue and forsake so louing a father. But after they had vviped their eies, the Pope sent thē vvith one of his chamber in their compaine, to commād the Rector to receaue them agai∣ne: and at their returne, they tooke 2. others into the college vvith them, vvho aftervvard proued naughtie fellovvs called Novvell and Moonday. Not long after, they had their de∣sier: for the gouernement of the college vvas giuen to the Fathers, to the schollers great contentement and good of our countrey, ād so ended this first sturre and dissention. The second, happened the next yere 1579. vvhich vvas rather a certaine murmure then dissention: the vvhich if by ffa. Parsons vvis∣dom and industrie it had not bin preuented, vvould in time haue grovvne to an open se∣dition. The cause vvas this. Our schollers ha∣uing obtained their desire and falling to their studies vsed very zealously all the godly exer∣cises of mortification, in such sort, as some o∣ne or tvvoe of them became so contemplati∣ue that they vvould needs be Iesuits. Which vyhen their companions vnderstood, they begane to mislike of those spirits, alleaging that the college vvas founded for the educa∣tion of vertuous and learned priestes to help their contrey, and not to bring vp men to en∣ter into Religion, and leaue the haruest at home. Where vppon fa. Parsons procured D. Allens comming vp to Rome, vvho obtained
of the Pope, to command the Generall of the Iesuits to send of his Religious into Ingland. the vvhich appeased all this murmur. For (quoth the Schollers) let as many novv enter into the societie as vvill, for vvhen they haue beene sufficiently brought vp therin, they shalbe sent into Ingland. And thus each par∣tie vvas pleased. The fathers, for that they might receiue of the schollers into their soci∣etie, vvithout grudg or mislike: and the schol¦lers, by cause such as entred, most of all (if not all) should be in time emploied for their countrey. And so the 2. schollers that first en∣tred into the Societie of that college vvere M. Wright a constant Confessor novv in In∣gland and Iohn Barton, vvho after fell from them and looked back to the vvorld againe, as I am credibly enformed. The 3. vvas that, vvherein M. Doctor Bag∣shavve and M. D. Stafferton (dead long sin∣ce) M. Warford (novv a Iesuit) and diuers o∣thers had their parte. I haue heard, they vvould haue had the gouernemēt of the Col∣lege giuen to the Dominican friers, or to ha∣ue it gouerned by English secular priestes. In th'end it fell out that good fa. Alfonfo vvas displaced and an other put in his place. Not many yeres after fell out another cō∣trouersie betvveene the schollers and father Cresvvell then Rector, D. Allen being then Card. ād a spectator. I knovv not vvell vvhat
the cause vvas. but this I am suer that a ver∣tuous priest novv a holy Martyr in heauen named M. Iohn Ingram, vvas not ouer vvell vsed. This sturre in the ende procured father Cresvvells removing from thence to Spaine. The last sturre vvhich vvas the vvhottest endured longest and vexed most the fathers. It began (as you say) after Card. Allens death about the yere 1594. vpon this occasion, as you aftervvard insinuat, and the Actors cō∣fesse: father Harvvood the minister finding 2. youthes clapping them selues on the bree∣ches, or rather one for some reveng ierking his fellovve on the buttock vvith a rodd, be∣fore he vvas out of his bed, had some suspiciō of vvorser behavior and should (as I haue heard) say, he founde thē at Buggerie, vvhich vvhen the rest vnderstood, it did gtieue them full sore, that the fathers (and specially In∣glishe fathers) should suspect any of our na∣tion vvith that abhominable sinne, ād calling to mynde some of the fathers former actions tending to this suspition, as cutting the priuie dores beneath shorter by half a foote, to see if there vvere any more then tvvoe feet at once at one priuie, and cutting dovvne a faier groue in the vineyard, bicause they vsed on their daies of recreation, to vvalk there by tvvo and tvvo. They fell first into such a ha∣tred of the said fa. Harvvood, that they ma∣de a supplication to his Holl: desiring him to
send the said fa. to the Gallies, for dishono∣ringe and discrediting the Colledg, them sel∣ues, and their nation, vvith such a calumni∣ous report. Vpon this they fell euery day mo∣re, and more, into mislike vvith the fathers, and into this last sedition. Whither the schol∣lers had cause to be offended, and to cōplai∣ne, I leaue it to the iudgment of others. Thus much touching these troubles, vvherin if I haue misreported any thing, I desier to be better enformed, for I tell it, as I haue heard it of others, according as you tell your tales also by hearesay. My meaning herein not be∣ing to defend the schollers, or discredit their Superiors, but to tell the truth only, If any do muse at these frequent seditions, and vvould knovv the causes thereof, albeit my opinion is, but one doctors opinion: yet such as it is, I vvill communicat it to you, ha∣uing duly marked the causes my self, and ha∣uing heard other mens iudgmente also ther∣ein, That vvhich I vvill say novv, I sent once to father Cresvvell then Rector vpon an oc∣casiō vvhich vvere to longe here to set dovv∣ne, and nothinge to the purpose. After I had called to his mynde the contentions, vvhich had often before that time happened in the Colledge, and recounted the nomber of Spies, and revolters, from the faithe vvhich had been menbers of the same college, and that till that time, there had neuer happened
any one sedition in the Seminaries of Douay or Rhemes, nor any knovven or notorious spie, gone ont of them, one Banes (a reuol∣ted priest, vvhich yet vvas apprehended and imprisoned) only excepted: I told him that I thought the causes of those seditions in Ro∣me, vveare one of theise that follovve. Either the ayre did infect them, or els our contrey men vvere of a levvde and seditions nature, or other vvise that the gouernment of that college, vvas not convenient for our En∣glish natures. If the first should be the cause, then there vvas no other remedie, but to transport the college into a better ayer. For the second, I could not so hardly iudg of my contrey men, especially hauing seene them allvvaies in Rhemes, to be both vertuous ād obedient youthes: and to the third, I neithet vvould nor durst attribute it to the fathers. F. Generall and Prouinciall, the Rectors, su∣periors being so neare, and hauing so vigilāt an eye on the gouernment. What shall vve thē doe novv quoth I? Mary, father, chaunge the gouerment for a time, to see if they vvill doe better, and liue more quietely. And if they doe not, then the vvorld must neads attribu∣te it, to our evvill and seditious natures. Vn∣till then vve must suspend our iudgmēt. this vvas the effect of my letter. for the vvhich he courteously thancked me, and said he vvould communicat my reasons vvith his su∣periors.
But seeing I am on this point, I will boldly sett downe what I haue all waies thought in that gouerment, to be not conuenient to out English nature, but is rather the cause both of rancor and diuision amongst the schollers, and of the dislike and discontentment of the gouernment and Gouerners. I was pensioner in D. Allens companie in in that Colleage 4. monethes and more, and then I marked and vnderstood the mislike of this gouernment, by those that had bene most desirous of the fathers gouernment, I meane M. Sherwin, M. Array, M. Haddock M. Ris∣hton, and others my familiares then in the colleage. The first is, their open penances done in the hall, and their dicitur culpa. which is as farre from all good orderly discipline, that when a man doth it at the first, he is so farre ordinarily from amendment, that in his hart he doth grutch, and repine at his supe∣riors, for the geuing of it. But when he is v∣sed 3. or 4. times to doe it, then he maketh a very scoff and mocking or may game of it: so farre it is from a true penāce, at is engendreth (as I said) both hatred and mockery. If you say it is not the superiors fault. I say it is, if he knoweth it will bring forth no other effects and yet will vse it. The second is their Spies, which the Re∣ctors haue allwaies in store, which by an ho∣nester
name are called Angeli custodes. Theise spies at recreation time, and in o∣ther places, speake liberally against their su∣periors, of their gouernment and vsage to∣wards them, of their apparell, meate and drinck, and against the straight keaping of them in, and against what soeuer they thinke is not wel done in the colleadge. And all this to sounde their compaignons. Now if one or twoe hap to discourse, as he doth against the Superior: theese spies carry the wholy dis∣course straight to the Rector. After a fewe daies the other are called Coram nobis, ād are ei∣ther punished or rigorously reprehended for the same. Theese good felowes afterward recall to mynde, before whom, and in whose presence and what companie, they spake such thinges, and hauing discouered this good fe∣lowe, they from that day forewards, hate him as a spie and traitor. If this be a charitable way of gouerment iudge you, and whither this be true, and practized continually or no, I referre it to the conscience of as many of you (vnited brethrene) as haue bene brought vp in that Seminarie, and to the knowledg of all others, that haue bene brought op the∣rin, yea to those them selues that haue be∣ne these good Angells. Nothing so contra∣ry to an englishmans nature, as to be betra∣yed by him whom he trusteth. If such spies were in Oxford (whose colleges haue as good
statute and ordonances for bringing vp of youthes, if they were put in practise (no displeasure to the Fathers) as they haue or can deuise) if such spies I say weare in our colleages of Oxford, they would be pluc∣ked in peeces. The 3. cause of discontentment, mother of sedition, is when such schollers as haue whollie addicted them selues to priest∣hood to serue their countrey, see others which entend to be of the societie, to be more fauored, more cherished and more often in Fa. Ministers chamber at collati∣ons, haue more free accesse to the Rector, and to be better countenanced then they: this affectiō which the Fathers beare to such, can neither be wisely hidd of th'one, nor well digested of th'other. The 4. and which aggrauated the con∣tention in Fathers Creswels time, and was the occasion of theise last and gretest trou∣bles, as you seeme to confesse afterwards, is: that the Rectors and Ministers are ouer much suspicious of our English youthes thinking them to be giuen to that sinne, which is not to be named. thereof came the cutting downe of a faire groue which was in their vineyard wherein they vsed somtimes to walk for their recreation, two and twoe or more together. Which doings did wonderfully animate the schollers a∣gainst
their superiors, as I vnderstood by a vertuous priest, vvho since by Martyrdome is no doubt a blessed Sainct in Heauen. The cause, grounde and beginning also of theise last troubles came they not of that vvhich Father Harvvood said (albeit after, he svvore the contrary:) that the found tvvo, of those libertine ladds committing that abho∣minable sinne? the man you note in the mar∣gent and your fellovve priestes now in In∣gland say so, and you your selues vnderstand so much by your Somme thinges much amisse. If it be true that Father Harvvood affirmed so much as in the 43. leafe you insinuate: their dissolucion in corners to hane bene so secret a sinne, that he could neuer be brought to vtter it for the sauing their ho∣nors and the nations, till (forsooth) he was commanded by obedience a litle before his deathe. that he might dy, belike, vvith that glory, to haue infamed the students. Had not those Northen and southren laddes good cause, thinck you to defend their honors and the honor of their countrey? Had they not iust cause to require the Pope (as they did by supplication) to send Fa. Harvv. to the Gallies, for defamyng both the colleage and nation? Whither it vveare true or false god knovveth, neither vvill nor can I decide it: yet vvas this Father much more to be com∣mended, then a nother Father, vvho in re∣uenge
of the factious schollers, vvithout respect of their honor or of the honor of our nation, or of his ovvne conscience, letted not to send about the vvorld gene∣rall articles against all the schollers and prie∣stes of that faction, the vvhich contained more greuous and abhominablē sinnes then Father Harvvood discouered. Of this oc∣casion then begane all that fovvle sturre vvhich as the disconted bretherne say, had like to haue vndoone and ruynated that Colledge. The 5. is, that the Rectors (yea our English Rectors) in the Romaine Colled∣ge haue no respect of such Graduates as are made in our Vniuersities in Ingland, but vvill make more of a boy, and giue him better countenance, and place him hi∣gher at the table, then to a Baccheler or a M. of arte, vvhich cannot be but a great cori∣siue to such graduats a great fault ād in gouer∣mēt especially of English Fa. vvho either doe or should knovve, vvhat esteeme leatning ād degrees takē in scholes (albe it many in deed are vnvvorthie of them) are in Ingland: and hovv an vnlearned man hauing a degree, is of greater respect and credite then a mo∣re learned then he hauing no degree. This is the good custome of our conntrey that carrieth such respect and honor to the de∣gree, albeit the Graduat be not vvorthie
therof, bicause all men presume he hath the learning requisite to the degree. But the Fathers, whither it be vnder the couler of making them humble, or for somme o∣ther cause best knowen to them selues, doe giue very litle, or no credit or countenan∣ce at all to Graduates. And a nother thin∣ge) which hath bene noted of somme men) they neuer sent any from that col∣lege into Ingland with any degree of scho∣les on their backs 2. only excepted, D. Barrett. D. Stillinghton. who being specially fauored and loued of Father Alfonso were made Doctors in Rome be∣fore their mission, yet neither of them went into Ingland, but were both staied at Rhemes. You goe abont afterwards to defend the Fathers from this calumniation (as you tearme it) how I pray you? Fol. 92.93. Mary they ha∣ue receued many Graduates into the Socie∣tie. What is this to the complaint of not respecting Graduats in the Seminarie? yes (say you) for many Graduates haue liued in the Seminarie with them much esteamed and honored by the Iesuits. You name 4. and yet 3. of them vpon my knowledg, we∣re fauored as the first Authors and bringers in of the Fathers to that gouernment, and honored not for their degrees, but as Prie∣stes, and as Priestes they sate at a higher
and more honorable table then the rest. But if rheise 4. haue beene respected, how many others haue bene neglected? You con∣fesse in the same place, that they are great∣ly made of by the Fathers, if their vettue answere to their degree. Who seeth not, that you confesse, they are not respected for their degree, but for their vertue only? Put case he be not so vertuous as his superi∣or would haue him, shall he therby loose the respect that is due to his degree? There are punishmētes for his faulte, his degree still respected. But with the Fathers who you say, are men of order, in this case of degrees, is keapt litle order. To the man you note in the mergent (who complayned of the disgrace of degrees) whē he was sent from Rhemes to Rome, I said thus to him. Master Bagshawe your are going to Rome and in your companie such and such (namyng 2. poore schollers that serued him and the rest at the table) when you come theare, you shall see theis boies (your seruants here) aswell clothed, lodged and served there as your self, paraduenture more in fauor, and better liked of the su∣perior then you, and to sitt higher at the table them you, can you abide this? thinck on it, for so it will happen, as it did in deed. Which made him, Maester Stafferton, War∣fotd (now a Iesuite) Fixer, D. Cicill and o∣thers
hauing bene all Graduats of ād good ac∣compt in Oxford to dislike and storme at it, as many others haue doone since, and still wil doe, till Graduate, be better respected. If one poore Doct. iudgment might be heard and allowed, I thinck veryly, if those fore said impedimētes weare taken awaie, the Fa∣thers and our yonthes would liue louingly, & in peace together. But if this be not remedied then I say (though I be no Prophet, yet beare I a Prophets name) that these discontent∣ments may well for a time lye smothering in their breasts: but one day, doe the Fathers what they can, they will flush out into flames of dissentiō as th'others haue done before. It is naturall to that college the foresaid impe∣dimente not remoued, but remayninge in their force. And to augment mens suspicious and sur∣mises of the small accompt the Fathers make of degrees and Graduats, they haue obtay∣ned a strang and exttaordinary Bull to the di∣scredirt and dishonor of our whole nation, to stopp all English students in their banishmēt from the degree of Doctorshipp either in di∣uinitie or lawe, I wonder they putt not in Phisicke also, (Doctor Norden, a Doctor of Phisick being so great an enemy to them as you the vnited bretherne do shewe in this your Apologie) and by consequence to stopp them from all perferment and pro∣motions
in straung countreis in this time of their banishments. I may well call it strang, bicause all strangers do wonder strangly at it. And I may well terme it extraordinarie, for that since Sainct Peter sate in the Sea of Rome, and that Vniuersities haue bine erected, theare was neuer such a Bull sent out into the worlde. The Sea of Rome hath ever bene so fauorable to learning & degrees, that it hath instituted and confir∣med many Vniuersities, hath geuen aucto∣ritie to certaine, to giue degrees and ma∣ke Doctors. Yea Canons that are bownd to residence, Quia datur beneficium pro∣pter officium, And to serue in the Church Yet in fauor of learning may be sent to the Vniuersities to studie, and theare to receaue their fruits till they haue taken their degree. But alas? our poore English∣men are not sufficientlye afflicted with ba∣nishment from our countreye and parents, but more affliction must be putt vpon their shoulders, and as it weare segregated from all other nations, and bounde to be men vnworthie and vncapable of Doctorshipp and that by the highest iudge, and Tri∣bunal on earth. And why? for sooth bi∣cause our yong Doctors must not sitt above (I will not say Iesuits, but) other grauer and elder Priests. For this cause the Pope hath annulled and abbreged the Ptiuilegs
of all Vniuersities in respect of vs poore Soules. This is a point of Mortification in deed, but lett vs here the Bull, which in ef∣fect saith thus. Our will and pleasure is, that none of th'english nation hear after so long as Hereticks prevaile in Ingland, &c. doe take degree of Doctor in Diuinitie or in one of the lawes, vnlesse they haue studied 4. ye∣res in the same science or profession. Those ended, to studie 4. yeres more to make him prompt and solide, and to become more ma∣ture graue and learned: Nor then neither shall he proceade, without the consent and approbation of the Superior of the College or Seminary wherin he hath studied or bene brought vpp, nor without the approbation of the Protector of the Nation or his vice∣gerent in those partes where those English∣men would be promoted, &c. Who soeuer then shall take the degree of Doctor in any place or contrey with in the time and yeres above prescribed, or without the leaue of his Superior, Protector or his vicegereut, we pronownce the degree to be none, nor such a one to be called a Doctor. And besids this he shall encurre the sentence of excomunic∣ation, the absolution there from we speci∣ally reserve to our selves and to the Sea A∣postolick, &c. And we will this to be in force, not with standing any Apostolick decree what soeuer, or any statute, custome or pre∣viledgs
of Vniuersities given them by the Apostolick Bulls, &c. The reason of this Bull is, least youg men be made Doctors and by that meanes the degree come into contempt in Ingland viz: So great care had these informers of preser∣ving the respect of degrees in our contrey: for in all other nations in the world, young men may be made Doctors this reason not withstanding. An other reason is, least by this doctorshipp, they should goe or sitt before auncient Priestes and learneder, then they are. And this last reason seameth to be the chiefest motiue why, this Bull vvas procu∣red, and yet not with standing this Bull, a younge man may march ād sitt before an el∣der and grauer Priest. For example. If a young man be a Bacheler or Licentiat either in di∣uinitie or lawe (which is nothing els with vs, but an Inceptor Doctor) would not an el∣der and grauer Priest thinck you, give him place in respect of his degree? Noe doubt he would. Then what haue you gotten by your Bull? You must gett out an other, if you will stopp them from Bachelorshipp or Licen∣tiatship, or els those that tak such degrees will sitt above you, be you Iesuit or vnited Prieste not graduated. Be of good cheare all you that haue not studied in the Seminaries, for this Bull toucheth you not. Next note that it saieth in altero Iuris, that is, in one of
the lawes, as if it vvould say. No man can proceed Doctor in the Civill lawe alone, or in the Canon lawe alone, without the fore∣said conditions. But vpon my words you may procead in both lawes without incurring the penalties of the Bull, because it is a pe∣nall Constitution and therfore to be restrai∣ned to his case, which is in altero Iure in one of the lawes, and not to be extended ad Do∣ctoratum in vtroque Iure to Doctorshipp in both lawes, for the rule is. Odia restringi & fauores conuenit ampliari. Besids, if I should say the bull to be of no force bicause it may easly be proved to be Surreptice, as also it vvas not promulgated publickly, and in the place, and with the so∣lemnitie, that all like penall Constitutions are accustomed to be, you would haue much adoe to prove the contrarie. This Bull was obtained immediatly after the peace made with the schollers in the Ro∣maine College viz. the 19. of Sept. 1597. but yet was it not printed till 3. yeres after (when it pleased such as had obteined it) viz in the yere 1601. The cause as I suspect was for feare least others vvould followe the exam∣ple of D. Bagshaw D. Stafferton (dead long sinces) Do: Weston (vvho hath bene a Rea∣der of Diuinitie many yeres in our Semina∣ries of Rhemes and Doway) and D. Norris (Whom in contempt you call Italian Do∣ctors)
vvho going from the College tooke their degrees by the waye. See yet the great diuersitie of Iudgment betvvene D. Allene the Father of our Semi∣naries, and the Procurers of this Bull. When D. Bagshavve and D. Stafferton came to Rhe∣mes and had signified to him they were Do∣ctors, he was so farre from contemninge them, that the next day at dinner he brought them into the hall and placed them him self in their due places, next to th'other Doctors in Diuinitie, th'one above M. Licentiat Par∣kinson and th'other above me, being but Doctor of Lawe. And this place they keapt so longe as they remained there, to all mens liking and contentment. If such a Bull had either bene necessary profitable or honora∣ble to our contrey, wold not do: Allene (who had as great care of our cuntrey as these In∣formers haue) haue pro cured it? Yes I war∣rant you. But god be blessed that some of vs vveare Doctors before these men cam to governe the court and cuntrey, els might we haue gone begg our bread, and many a one blovv their nailes besids. But vvill you see the absurditie of it? In most vniuersities (as in this also of Pont a Mousson) theare are cer∣taine benefices affected to the vniuersitie, and due (when they fall) to the Senior Do∣ctor. Put the case an Englishman hath stu∣died his time and is made Licentiat in Diui∣nitie
(as those are here before they be Do∣ctors) with one or twoe more with him who∣se Senior he is. when the time cometh to proceade Doctor his fellowes passe, and he is staied by the vertue of this Bull. Some mo∣nethes after falleth out a benefice, which one of his fellowes catcheth, and he by reason of this bull loseth it. See what good then it bringeth to our Nation. Againe one that hath studied the lawes some yeres is Licen∣tiat, and may when he will take his Doctors∣hipp. he is in a vniuersitie where a Doctors place falleth vacant ād he is otherwise found capable for it, but by reason he prooceded not Doctor (it being a Doctors place) he lo∣seth it. And so by this buggy Bull, all hope of promocion and preferment is taken away hereafter from vs poore Englishmen. Honos alit artes. Who will now studie with any cou∣rage either in Diuitie to conuince heretiks, either in the Canon lawe to gouerne the church, when they are barred of the reward of their studies and defrauded of the fruites of their labors? But you vvill (perhapps) say to me here, as you do often in your Apologie to your discontented bretherne, that I find fault with his Holl: actions and doinges. for answere wherto, I say: I do so in deed and vveare I in Rome and worthie to be admit∣ted to his presence, I would appeale in this point from his Holl: ill informed, to his Hol:
better informed. The 4. fault I find with you, is, that you say: That the Cardinall Caietan and the Ge∣nerall of the Iesuits did hinder the promo∣cion of D. Lewes B. of Cassano, butfalsly as you haue credibly heard, Nay, that vvhich you heard to the contrary was credibly false. For, vvhich of you haue not heard that the said B. and fa: Parsons stood for the redd cap, and that the report wēt, that one of the two should vveare it? so that euery man as he af∣fected the partie vvished and desired it. yea, the report runneth abrode that many hands and subscriptions vveare gathered in Ingland and Flannders in Fa: Parsons favor for the redd hat. The suspition that the 2. before na∣med labored for him against the B. vvas en∣creased by this, that the yce beiug now bro∣ken to the Cardinall shipp by the creation of Tolledo one of the Societie, and Tolledo beiug dead, that the generall of the Iesuits and the Protector, (who was vvholly the Ie∣suits) vveare more vvilling to haue a man of their ovvne and wholly addicted to the so∣cietie to be preferred, rather then a man, whō for many yeres they accompted of as one not at all addicted to the societie, but ioyned to the faction that vvas against them, as you in∣sinuate before, and in this place also. Besids, as theare vvas no man of our vvholle nation thought so hable for that dignitie as fa: Par∣sons,
so no man vvas so fitt to be opposed to the B: as he, for by all licklyhood vvithout any opposition, the B. might haue carried it avvay. An other presumption of fa persons preferment vvas, that having (as the reporte runneth) made a booke of the succession of Ingland in favor of the Infante of Spaigne, he had gotten therby both favour and credite vvith the good old kinge, vvho could doe much in the obteyning of a Cardinalls hate. And besids all this at that present time, vvhen these rumors rane abrode, fa. Parsons came from Spaigne to Rome, in the companie of tvvo Spanish Cardinalls. All theis ptesump∣tions put together made some proofe he as∣pired to the redd hate, and that the Protector and Generall vvould stand for him against the Bisshop. Yet to giue you more certaine satisfaction that Fa: persons and his frends did all they could to hinder the B. (for vvhat cause god knovveth) I vvill (to imitate you) sett dovvne the Bishopps ovvne vvords in his last lettere that euer he vvrott to me, da∣ted the 10. of march 1595. after some fevve perticuler affaires thus he saithe. We haue lost our good Card: Allene, he made me executor of his vvil vvith 3. Cardi∣nalls, and vve euer haue bene frends though some euill disposed did seeke to seperat vs for their ovvne gaine, and ill purposes. And novv there is such a stinck iug sturre in Flan∣ders,
Spaigne and Rome, to make Fa Parsons Cardinall and so by consequente to exclude me, that it is allmost incredible. But yet it is so thoughe it be lick to haue no other effect, but the discovering of Ambition, the blot∣ting of that blessed Religion and discord a∣mongst our nation and persecution against me, least I step before and stand betvvene them and the fire. The doers of this are but 2. or 3. of our Nation, vvhich tumble all vp and dovvne. All the rest, best and vvissest do loue and honor me. And in this Court it is merveiled at of strangers highe and lovve. They say I am an Italian, that I passe not for the Nation, that I am Brittannus and not ve∣rus Anglus. That I vvil neucr returne into Ingland, if it vveare Catholick: false impu∣dent lies and sclanders, vvhich I pray you cō∣fute as occasion shal serve. By lies, they may hinder others, but neuer are like to helpe them selues. In deed I am 61. yeres old, and am not therfore like to see Ingland, but if the way were open, I vvould leave Bishop∣prick and all vvorldly states in this case, and go to serve my naturall conntrey and coun∣trey men, vvhom in banishment I haue euer serued and loued more then all theis good fellovves. I seeke not to be Cardinall, bicause I knovve not, An ille status expediat & saluti animae meae conveniat. But let god do his devine prouidence, vvho knovveth vvhat is beast
for vs all. Thus I confidently tell you my mynde, bicause I knovv you love me and I will ever loue you. Thus much the Bishoppe. Novv of theese premisses, coniecture I be∣seech you vvhither the schollers vvho desi∣red the preferment of him, vvhom they too∣ke to be founder as it vveare of that Collea∣ge, and the fittest and vvorthiest of all secu∣lar Priests of our nation to haue that honor after Card: Allens death, had not iust cause to suspect the forenamed to be his aduer∣saries, and hindrers from attayning that hi∣ghe dignitie? For my parte, as I vvas no de∣aler either for the one nor th'other, so I vvis∣hed one of the tvvoe to be advaunced, I ca∣red not vvhich. For knovving that those tvvoe that stoode for it, to be fittest and ca∣pablest men of our vvhole nation, both at home or abroad, I stood indifferent, both in respect of our contreis good, and of my ovv∣ne particular, both being able men to serve our countrey and my especiall frends. Mary, yet to tell you the truth, I beleved as much then that Fa. Parsons should or vvould be Card. as I beleave novv the report of travail∣lers vvho advouch that M. Geffrey Poole or M. Tho. Fitsherbert shalbe Card. And although it might be true that Fa. Par. Hin∣dred the B. all he coold, (for some iust causes best knovvne to thim self) yet of this I am assured, that Fa. Par: had no vvill nor inten∣tion
to procure it for him self. For I savve a lettre vvritten from Rome by a dere and se∣cret frend of his, that Fa. Par. vvith much a∣doe and traveill, and at the great suite of his Generall had missed or refused the redd ca∣pe, vvishing that some fit man of our na∣tion had it. vvhich is an invincible argument to prove, that if Fa. Par. had had the vvill and intention to be Card. he should not haue had neade to employ all his frends to per∣suade the Pope to the Contrarye. A nother fault is, The 5. fault fol. 6. your impertinent dis∣course theare of the controuersie of the En∣glish Gentlemen against Fa. Holt. Hovv doth this prove that vvhich you haue taken in hand? They vveare but some of the laitie in emulation against one religious man. It is a great fault of you throughout your vvhol∣le booke, Impertinent matter. to stuffe it vp vvith impertinent matter. For if a man vvould make a table of your impertinent matters, tales, toies, and di∣gressions, it vvould be bigger then half your booke. Well, theise Gentlemen accused Fa. Holt ād M. Ovven of parcialitie. Surely they might say true, for any thiug you bringe or prove to the contrary. Why should not I or any other Reader (I pray you) rather beleave vvorshippsull and Catho. Gentlemen affir∣myng by vvords ād vvrittinge that they were partiall, then to beleeue you (vnited brether∣ne) talking vvithout booke ād by heare say,
vvithout any disproofe of that vvhich they say? men must beleeve all that cometh from you vvithout proof, who gaue you that pri∣veledge? At leugth you are come from Iohn of Gāt to Wisbish castle, and from the yere 1577. Fol. 64. to the yere 1595. vvhen these sturres began the∣re, hauing not (as you promise in this chapt.) brought any sufficient proof for 200. and odd yeres space to shewe what great hurt the emula∣tion of secular Priests against Religious hath brought to our countrey. Both your bookes do testifie, that at that prison began all these vnfortu∣nate and scandalous prison contencions. And although you attribute here, their living many yeres a religious life to haue happened by the instructions of a Religious Father of the So∣cietye, Fol. 6. Contradiction Fol. 65. yet after vvards (forgetting your sel∣ues) you attribute the cause of their so quiett living, to M. Licentiat Metham, and that it continuvved so long as he lived, and after this blessed mans death the sturres began. I aske you then if it be true, that for diuers yeres they had bene governed by Fa. Ed∣monds good instructions, how felit our they continevved not to harken still thereto? You ansvvere. D. Bagshaw begane the diuision. Aetatem habet. Lett him ansvvere for him self. But I rather esteeme it to be that vvhich you say alitle before the good Card. vvas dead, Card. Allens death cause of the diuision. vvho∣se auctoritye, as it keapt the Iesuits vnder,
so the reuerend respect that all Priestes bare him, as to their loving fostering Father, made them depend vvholly on him, and to refer∣re all their doubts and controuersies to him, and not to Religious mē. But after his death, the Priestes like Fatherlesse childrene, did seek helpe and confort vvhere they could find it. Some then liked this, some liked that, and so of diuers humors and liking grevv discontentment amongst them, the vvhich drevve after it, this miserable contention. The 6. The 6. fault is irreverence to∣vvards his holl. Fol. 7. fault is, in speaking so vnreverent∣ly of his Holl. (of vvhich irreuerēce tovvards their superiors you often accuse your discō∣tented bretherne) saying that his holl. should be enforced aftervvards to confirme their officers and Prelates. An vndutifull speach. hovv could his holl. (I pray you) be compelled by a com∣panie of discontented bretherne, vvhich do not amount (say you) aboue the nomber of 30. to confirme the Prelats chosen by them? A strang case, to see hovv great vvant of chari∣ty driveth men hedlong to such vncomly spe∣aches, ād to bring their bretherne gods Prie∣stes into contempt and discredit. The Prie∣stes in their book to his holl. make mention of this Association, of their Rules and consti∣tutions and lay dovvne their intentions in these vvords: Sedi Apostolicae confirmandas pro∣ponere decreveramus. vve had decreed to present them (our Rules) to the Sea Apostlicke to be
confirmed. And aftervvards talking of their Prelates or Bishopps they say: Si quando id (beatiss. Pater.) tibi approbandum videretur. If at any time it should haue seemed good to your Hollines to approue it, vvould these men compell the Pope to confirme their Prelats, vvho protest their association and Prelats to be of no value, nor their election of any for∣ce vvithout the Popes confirmation? Many other thiuges they say there, vvhich you lett passe vntouched, and being not to my pur∣pose, I omitt also. You add, that vvhen his Hollines savv this mauer of proceading. What mauer of procea∣ding? Mary their nevv association, and that he should be enforced if they choose officers and Prelates, aftervvards to confirme them, thought it vvas time to looke to the matter, and to preuent their force, by prouiding them of a Prelate of his ovvne making. Cer∣tes, your vvords must tend to this, or els to∣nothing. But his Holl. being in Rome, hovv could he see this maner of proceading in In∣gland? Pag. 23. Your discontended Bretherne attribut it to the Iesuits and especially to Fa. persons, vvhich you your selues do graunt here, but more modestly saying: Fol. 7. The Pope caused the Pro∣tector to call to him Fa. persons and other English∣men in Rome. vvhich other Englishmen as you say afterwards vvere Fa. Baldvvine and M. Fol. 98. b. Standish. one a Iesuit and thother a secular
Priest (being latly come ont of Ingland) each of them vrged the same (subordmation) in be∣half both of th'one and th'other order. Informes. Fol. 99. So you see theare are 2. Iesuits and one secular priest to enforme of the maner of theese pro∣ceadings. Besids theise, th'oppinions of M. Haddock, M. Martine Array, and M. Thomas Allene vveare asked in Rome. So that his holl. vvas informed by tvvoe Iesuits and 3. Priests most affectioned (as all the vvorld knovveth) to the Iesuits against the Associa∣tion of the discontented bretherne. And as for M. Thomas Allene, as he is put last, so I deeme he vvas putt in to make vp an nom∣bre, as a Cypher in Algorisme. Let all men iudg vvhither your bretherne haue not cause to complaine, that the church of Ingland must be gouerned and ruled according to the iudgment and information of Iesuits, the cause touching them not at all, but the secu∣lar Priests only, vvhich are neither called nor heard. Well it seamed good to theise 6. English∣men to giue the Priests in Ingland a Superior of their ovvne order. Fol. 7. b. Who should not be a Bis∣hopp, whose dignitie being Culmen dignitat is the highest order in gods church, vvould ha∣ue obscured and dymmed (as your brether∣ne say) the estimation of the Fathers in In∣gland, Pag. 23. but an Archpriest vvhose ordinarie of∣fice ād dignitie is the lowest in gods churche.
The next conclusion in that Cōsultation of diuers moneths was, that it vvas not thought expedient for his Holl. to vvrit him self. vvherfore? Mary, for the same cause and consideration. what vvas that cause and consideration? for∣sooth for the avoiding suspitiōs and troubles of the state of Inglād. For no other cause or cō∣sideratiō but this, you alleage before: for not having a Bishopp. Where were your wits when you vvrot this, vveare they a woolga∣thering? or do you not know, that all things that come from Rome are suspected in In∣gland and construed to be against the state? be he Archpriest, or be he Bishoppe? or whi∣ther it come from Pope or Protector? either theise were not the considerations that mo∣ved the informers to informe, that it was not thought expediēt for his Holl: to vvrit him self, or els they weare of no force and effect, or af∣terwards reiected and neglected. For this not∣with standing it was thought afterwards ex∣pedient for his Holl. to write, and to send his Bulles (as he did). vveare not those causes and considerations as forceable when his Holl. wrot, as before he wrot? yes, yes, you know it full vvel. But theare lay a padd in the stra∣we, the which in time wilbe discouerd. Toching M. Black well, Fol. 8. whom you praise for quietnes, learning and vertue, true it is, that for such a one he was taken before thei∣se sturres began, and for such a one I haue
knowne him many yeres together. And if the Bishop: or Archp. had bene made by ele∣ction, I should haue giuen my voice to him, so soone as to any man I knovv in Ingland. honores mutant mores. if all be true that is sett downe in the Priests appeale Qnantumque mutatus ab illo. M. Blackvvell faults. it is not the same M. Blackvvel. I knevv him to be (I must tell the truth for I looue not to flatter.) in those his answeres and doings he shevveth neither quietnes, modestie nor learning: but rather haughtines, seueritie and much indiscretion, tossing the censures of the church like tennis baules, for euery defaulte, threatning the taking avvay of faculties, Suspention, interdictiō or excō∣munication. Worthily vvas he cheaked in his Holl. last bull for his ouer much seueritie. In Prelats clemencie is extolled more then Se∣veritie, Plus erga corrigendos agat beneuolentia quā seueritas: plus cohortatio quam comminatio, plus cha∣ritas quam potestas. Can licet. dist. 45 Beneuolence (saith Pope Leo) worketh more vvith those that are to be corrected then seueritie: exhortation mo∣re then theatninges and charitie more then auctoritye. I leave to M. Blackwell to me∣ditat that vvhich follovveth in the same Canon. If I had bine by him in Ingland I vvould haue vvished him to haue followed the example of S. Gregorye of Nazianzen. Who seing a contention amonge the Bis∣hoppes about him, quitted rather the Arch∣bishopps
Sea of Constantinople, then to be cause of such sturres and contentions. So vvhen M. Blackvvell savve vvhat stur∣re and contention began to arise about his extraordinarre office, a man of his mode∣stie in the time of persecution, the offi∣ce being not profitable but dangerous should haue quitted it. But being vvell vnited in loo∣ve and iudgment vvith the Iesuits (as you say here) seeing they had procured him the dig∣nitie, he wovld not leave it so easlye, but for the looue of them hold it, and for their sa∣kes, to his no litle discredite, subscribe to the booke of schisme which the Iesuits wrote a∣gainst the prests, which resisted him. Next you talke of the 2. priests that were sent to Rome and there imprisoned. I mer∣uaile how you can without blushing, twange so oft as you doe vpon this string, which soū∣deth in euery mans eare, and worketh in e∣uery mans hart (but your) pittie and compas∣sion, as well for their vndue and vniust im∣prisonement, as that it should be thought that Fa. Parsons should procure it, as also for his Hol. degenerating so farre from his name of Clement and from all iustice and equitie, as to imprison (vnheard) such as came ab vlti∣mo orbe, as appeallants to that Sea. But here parhaps you wil cry out and say that I do not respect his Hol. nor speake so reuerently of him as I ought. Whereto I answere. I beare
as great a respect and reuerence to his Holl. and his actions, as any of you do or can doe: But I cannot flatter as you doe but am. Tom tel troth. Is not his Hol. the supreame iudge on earth? Is he not bound to doe iustice? To obserue his owne and his predecessors Con∣stitutions and Decrees? Hath not god and na∣ture giuen him 2. eares, to heare each partie? Is he not a mā and may be misinformed? hath he not his passions as other men haue to cre∣dite one man more then a nother? If all this be true, as you cannot denie but that it is, if you be Christians, Why might he not vniu∣stly imprison them, being preoccupied with euell and false informations? Numquam est auditum à saeculo. specially in Rome that men appealling to that Sea, weare imprisoned be∣fore they weare heard to speake in their de∣fence. In your next and larger Apolog. bring me one like example and I will yeld to you. They weare there a fortnight (say you) before thei weare imprisonned. what if they had bene there a whoil yere, being no heard the time of their being there doth neither ag grauat their fault nor purge the iniustice of the fact. If they had ben hard and found faul∣tie? All the world would haue liked of the iu∣stice done to them, as now they mislike of the iniustice shewed to them. the matter pas∣sing as it did, assure your selues, all the water in Tiber will neuer wash or cleāse the Actors
herein of iniustice, nor stopp the mouthes of the posteritie from speaking against it, if it should be committed to memory and vvri∣tinge as you haue done here. It followethe. That his Holl. Fol. 8. b. tooke order that they should be retired to the English Colleage in Rome, but in a nother place you say: it vvas at Fa. Parsons Request. Retyred (quoth you) from such re∣tyring Liberanos Domine. If close prison be but a retraict, I know not what prisonmēt is? You do well to couer and mitigat so grat in∣iustice with so mild and fauorable a word as retyred is. Certz, they were retyred to the English colleage, as M. Bishopp was retyred in Ingland to the Marshall sea, and there put in close prison by an hereticall Iustice of pea∣ce. But to tell you more, this retyring of thē to the English colleage, was as great an iniu∣stice as their apprehension was before they weare heard. What lavve doth permitt men to be imprisonned in the hovvses of their ad∣uersaries? It is vvel knowe and you cannot denie, but that their comming to Rome was asvvell against the Iesuits as the Archpr. and specially against Fa. Parsons, vnder vvhose custodie they vvere imprisonned. In vvhat common vvealth vvell gouerned are prison∣ners committed to the keaping and custodie of their aduersaries? Why are common gailes built but to keape offendors ād malefactors? If you haue any like example in your next,
for our satisfaction that doe mislike of this dealing, bring vs one. Aftervvards you treat more at large of this imprisonment. From fol. 120. dovvnevvards. Cloak and disguize it so vvell as you can novv, the posteritie hereaf∣ter vvill vvonder to heare or reade that 2. ca∣thol. priestes comming as appellants to Ro∣me out of an hereticall coūtrey, in the vvhich they maintained constantly vvith danger of their liues, the honor and preminence of that Sea, and one of them had suffred somme yeres imprisonment vvith banishment after∣vvards for the article of S. Peter and his suc∣cessors supremacie ouer all Princes and Pre∣lats vvhosoeuer, that theise priests (I say) should before they vveare heard, what they had to say, be cast into prison, yea and impri∣sonned in the hovvse and vnder the custo∣die of their aduersaries. Neuer vvas theare hard of such iniustice since good S. Peter sate in that chaire. Suerly, as strange, vnvsuall ād neuer before hard of iudgment, as the ap∣pointment and institution of the Archp. vvas, the vvhich they vvent to impugne. the ma∣ner and fashion also of their imprisonment, to be keapt close prisoners and not to see or communicate one vvith th'other for somme monethes, doth make the iniustice much more greater. Murtherers, manquellers, and traitors are not euery vvhere, nor in common gailes so handled. They cam to pleade against
a nevv Prelacie instituted vvithout his Holl: bulls, and obteined (if not by evill) yet by the information of some fevve parsons. Was this so hainous a crime, that it should deserue such rigourous punishment? Are not his hol. bulles and breues euery daie almost in eue∣ry court impugned, and reiected vpon such pretences as surreption and ill information? And yet such reiectors are quietly heard, and neither imprisonned nor punished albeit they proue not their intention. These men came but to impugne a Card. letters, and yet vvere haynously punished for it, before they vvere hard, and as though they had commit∣ted Crimēlesae Maiestatis vvere cōstrained to ansvvere ex vinculis. Yea, Fol. 121. but (say you) they persisted to vvrangle, and vvent about to mis∣informe diuers principall men of the citie of the affaires of Ingland and diuisions. bicause they informed othervvise then the 3. priestes and 2. Iesuite, before named had before informed it is misinformyng. In deed they vvere not called by the Protector to counsell as the o∣thers vvere, but came to impugne the infor∣mation giuen to him, and his appointment of the Archp. and therfore they vvere but vvrā∣glers and misinformers? seeing you vvill haue it so, be it so. They paied vvell for their vvrā∣gling. After you haue told the tale as cunningly and as smoothly as you can in defence of the
Agents and actors of this imprisonment, you fall a mockinge the poore priestes saying this then is the hainous fact vvhich our discontented bretherne since that time haue so much aggra∣uated through the vvorld by clamors, and doe at this present both amplifie and vrge in these their bookes against his Holl: the Card. and spe∣cially Fa: Parsons, &c. Come hither (I pray you) Is it not a hainous fact to committ iniu∣stice and to imprison innocent parsons vn∣heard? that they vvere innocent the time of their imprisonement (how soeuer they vvere found guiltie aftervvards) is notorious to all men, for in lavv, Quilibet praesumitur bonut vsque dum probetur malus. Euery one is presu∣med to be an honest and innocent man, vn∣till he be proued to be an naughtie fellovve, but nothing vvas proued against them before their imprisonment, ergo honest and inno∣cent men vveare imprisonned. If this be not a hainous fact, I knovv not vvhat is a hainous fact. Haue so much aggrauated? (quoth you) if men had not vttered it, the stones them sel∣ues vvould haue cried out against it, and (as I haue said) all posterity heare after vvill no doubt vvonder at it? Call you the setting dovvne of the truthe exaggeration? That 2. priestes comming out of Ingland to Rome vvith appellation, vveare cast into prison, before they vveare heard, vvhat they had to say, and that in such hast, as they must needs
be caught and carried to prison on S. Thomas of Canterbury his day, a day so highly sole∣mnished troughout all Chrestiendome of all Englishe Catholickes, vvhere any companie of them dvvell or Remaine? then, to be im∣prisonned in the hovvse of those, against vvhō they came to cōtest? Next to be keapt close prisoners some monethes, not to be permitted to speak one vvith another, nor to companie or haue conference (vvhat say I vvith any Aduocat or Procureur for their instruction) no not vvith any English in the tovvne or scholler in the colleage, no not to be suffred to goe to Church, to say or heare Masse vpon Sondaies, Nevv yares daie and tvvelf daie? is this to aggrauat the matter? Thinke they to dazell mens eies by saying: They aggrauat the matter? haue they not iust cause to cry out, and notifie the iniustice to the vvhole vvorld? yea, but they vrge it a∣gainst his Hol. the Card. and Fat. Parsons as vvho should say his Holl. the Card. and Far. parsons vveare Angels ad not sinfull men, or such as could doe no iniustice, that haue not their passions and affections a svvell as other men? as vvho should say, his holl. cannot err and misse in matters of fact, such as this is? by creditinge one partie too much, and by pre∣iudicing thother partie? By these great braggs you vvould, terrifie your reader, and dravve him from the due codsideration of the fact it
self. But all in vaine, vve knovv as vvell as you vvhat is due to his Holl. and Cardinals vvit∣hout flattering thē, as you do to your owne and other mens hurts. Next your ansvvere to their poore obie∣ctions that, Fol. 123. if they came to trouble that church of Ingland: his Hollines might vvell determine to re∣straine them for their disobedience at their first arri∣vall. Which is a poore ansvvere. For had they come to trouble 20. churches, yet they ought to be heard before imprisonment. For hovv could his Holli knovv they came to trouble the church of Ingland, before they vveare heard to speak against that churche? you vvill ansvvere: his holl: knevv it by heare say. And vpon hearsay innocent men be imprisonned. And might not these informatiōs he had out of Ingland and Flaunders (especially being giuen by those of the contrary faction) be false? Good God? my iudg is informed against me by myne aduersarie against vvhō I plead, the iudge giveth eare and credit to his infor∣mation and vvil not heare me speake and de∣fend my self, but condemneth me to prison. Is not this good iustice thinck you? And yet this is the case of the tvvoe priests. Informa∣tion vvas made against them to his Holli∣nes by the contrarie faction, vpon vvhich in∣formation, vvithout hearinge their defences, they vvere condemned and cast into prison in such order as you haue heard.
And as for that which you add in defence of this fact, that this a is course vsually held in all Princes courts of the world at this day, viz to imprison a man first & thē heare him after: as they doe in kendall, hange a man in the fo∣renoone, and sit in iudgment of him in the afternoone, if it were true in temperall prin∣ces courtes, yet the Sea of Rome neuer vsed any such course before in Church matters as these are, neither in any Princes courte in the world, are men prisoned in ciuil matters, such a one as this is, before they be heard. Nay, I say more, that ordinarily in criminall causes there is made a secret inquirie of the life ād behauior of the accused by the Princes offi∣cers before the delinquant be apprehended and imprisoned. Can. non ita. 2. q. 6. And weare it true you say of Princes courtes, I answere you: Non ita in Ecclesiast. agendū est negotiis sicut in seculari∣bus. Ecclesiasticall affaires (quoth the Pope Eutichianus) must not be handled as secular affaires are handled. The 7. fault, The 7. fault. The state of the question not sett dovvne as you promis. is that you promisse in this first chap. to sett downe the state of the present cō∣trouersie in question. and yet you do nothing lesse but throughe out this whole booke you shūne it and fly from the points in question, as from a snake or serpent. Your discontented brethrene in the preface of their English booke put it downe thus: The strief and dissention at this day, &c. is a∣gainst
those priests who did forbeare to sub∣iect them selues to the Archp. constituted in auctoritie ouer all the Seminary priestes in England and Scottland by a Card. who was Protector of the English colleage at Rome, and afterwards honored with the title of Pro¦tector of Ingland, for the which forbearing &c. the Priestes were accused of schisme, se∣dition, faction and rebellion. &c. Loe how plainly they goe to work, wher as you still roue abrode, and will not come neare the prick. You should haue confuted this, and putt the case more truer if you could They did putt it more largly downe to the D. D. of Sorbonne which you mislike and fin∣de 5. faults therewith. Therfore being parci∣all to neither side, I will put it downe truly and as it is in deed. Fol. 116.117. Fol. 7. The true case of the first contro∣uersie in questiō When his Holl. saw the proceadings of the priests in Ingland touching their associatiō and endevours to make them selues officers and Prelats of their owne institution. He vvilled the Card. and Protector to call vnto him fath. parsons and other English men in Rome, to see vvhat remedie vvas best for theis disorders. Where it was concluded that the priests should haue a superior of their owne order, and for somme causes, it was not thought good that this Superior should be a Bishopp but an Archp. with 12. assistants, and for some considerations it was not thought expedient
that he should be instituted or constituted by his Hol. his bulles. Where vpon his Holl. gaue full and expresse commission to Cardi∣nall Caietane the Protector to appoint the same with conuenient instructions. The pro∣tector according to his commission appoin∣ted and constituted M. Blackwell Archpriest with as grat iurisdiction ouer Ingland, and also Scotland as al the Bishopps of those 2. realmes had before. The Card. Fol. 116. b. letters whe∣rin he said he did this Ex expresso mandato San∣ctissimi. by the expresse commandement of his Hol: being receiued in Ingland and com∣municated to the priestes. The Archp, Fol. 7. b vvas receued and obayed vvillingly and ioyfully by the English clergie, excepting only a fevve that misliked the facte, Fol. 8. bicause it hindred their asso∣ciation. And for that the Archp. being a quiet learned and vertuous man, and vvell vnited in loue and iudgmēt vvith the Iesuits, they mistru∣sted euer to be able to dravve him to be indifferēt and for that cause deuised many scrupulls and lets, partly of the faith and credence of the said Card. letters, then vvhither his Hol. could (ac∣cording to the canons and constitutions of his Predecessors and according to the vvrittē lavve and style of the court of Rome) institute a nevv office and dignitie neuer hard of before in Christs churche in respecte of his large and āple iurisdiction, by that meane, that is, by the let∣ters of a Protectour vvithout his Holl. bulles?
This is the case sett downe plainly and trulye Now the question is. First. First question. whither a Card. Protector is to bele∣ued vpon his worde, saying: that he hath ex∣presse commandment from his holl: to doe this or that? Next whither not only a new and extraor∣dinary dignitie, (as this is for his ample iu∣risdiction) but any other benefice or digni∣tie what so euer, cā be made, Instituted or gi∣uen to anye, or by any other meanes, then by the Popes expresse bulls and breues? Thirdly whither those parsons vpon whō such a superior is putt and thrust, may not, yea are not bounde in lawe and cōscience to withstād him and not to admit or accept him? Fourthly Whither a man put in possession of a dignitie or benefice by other meanes thē the Popes expresse bulles, be not an intruded parson: that is, an vninst possessor of that di∣gnitie or benefice?. Fiftly, Whither our English cletgie that re∣ceued him and obayed him so willingly and Ioyfully did not offend against his Hol. con∣stitutions and are punishable by lawe for it, or no? Lastly, Fol. ibid. b Whither those few priestes that mi∣sliked the fact, and would not admitt such a Superior thrust vpon them by such letters, without his Holl. bulles, did synne, or weare to be counted and proclaimed Schismaticks
and worse then sooth saiers for the same. Theise questions touch the quick of the first controuersie in question by the decision of the which, you and your reader shall see and perceiue (if they be not stark blinded) whither the fault Was in your discontented bretherne that refused to receiue the Archp. and to acknowledg him their Superior vpon the Card. Protectors letters, written as he said ex expresso mandato Sanctiffimi, or in the Archpr. that would accept and occupie such a dignitie vpon such letters: or in you (vni∣ted brethrene) that vpon such letters did ha∣zard so willingly and ioyfully to receiue the Archp. and by this your Apologie goe about to auerr and allowe of the same. Touching the first question. For the decisiō of the first que∣stion. Fol. 108. b It seemeth that a Card. Protector is to be beleaued vpon his worde, by the text, glosse and reasō which you alledg for the saime. For the Canon No∣bilissimus dist. 97. doth report that the Pope receiued a Princes Ambassador as Ambassa∣dor, and beleaued all he tould him in his Maist. name that sent him, For the Cardin. and Archp. albeit he brought no letters of credence from the Prince that sent him. Ergo if the Pope him self did belea∣ue an Ambassador without letters from his Prince, why should not a few secular priestes beleaue a Card. their Protect. affirming, that what, soeuer he did, was done by his Hol. ex∣presse eommandmēt, allthough he shewed
no letters from his Hol. for confirmatiō the∣reof. Now if the Pope beleued a man of far∣re lesse qualitie, dignitie and credite then a Card. (yea a Card. Protector of the wholl na∣tion to whom he wrott) is, and that without letters vpon his bareworde: per argumentū à minore ad maius, certs, priests ought to ha∣ue beleued a Card. Protector being of so e∣minent a dignitie as (vnder his Hol.) theare is no higher in gods church, and by conse∣quence theise few secular priests did not well in not beleauing the Card. and in withstan∣ding and not acknowledging the Archp. con∣stituted by him, by the expresse command∣ment of his holl: as by his letters he affirmed and testified. The glosse by you alleaged reckenyng vp many priuiledges that Card. Fol. ibidem. Ad C. vnic. in extr. Joann. 22. de praebend. sn verb. sublimita∣tis. haue above other prelates in the 8. priuiledg saith that a Card. saying him self to be the Popes legat, is to be beleued without any letters at all. But Caieta∣nus who instituted the Arch. was a Card. and which is more Protector of the contrey in the which he instituted that dignitie. Ergo he was to be beleued without letters, saying he did it by the expresse commandment of his holl. I see no reason of diuersitie. For why is not this Card. aswell to be beleaued saying he did this by this holl commandment, as the other Card. saying he is the Popes legate, till you discontented bretherne bring me, some reason of diuersitie, I must conclude thone to
be as well beleeued as th'other, and so both to beleeued without letters, on their bare words, and by consequēce, you to haue offē∣ded in not beleeuing him, and in not admit∣tinge the Archp. vpon his letters, attesting it to be done by his hol. expresse cōmandment. This reason also, Fol. 108. is against the discontented bretherne vvho doth not knovve vvhat a Card. testimonie in any Chrestian Catho. court is vvorthe? especially a Protector testifying and professing in his letters to doe it by the speciall commandement of his Hol. as this man dooth in this letters? If then Card. be beleeued in Christian Princes courtes, v∣pon their words, why doe you poore priestes call his credit in question, vvhy doe you not obay him, thinck you that your disobedience is of greater force to discredit him, then the obedience of all Christian Princes is to geue credite to his vvorde and testimonie, you are farre deceeued if you thinck so. This is all (my vnited Bretherne) that you haue said or can say in the defence of the in∣stitution of the Archp. by the Protectors let∣ters ex mandato Sanctissimi. I haue vrged your arguments syncerely, and as farre (I thinck) as you can doe your selues, and yet for all that, your allegations doe not proue your intention nor disproue the fact and do∣ing of your discontented bretherne. If you haue no better stuff to bring in, in your next and larger Apologie, I must needs pronoun∣ce
you to haue an iniust cause in hand, and these fevv priestes against vvhom you vvrit, to gaine the victory of you. and to haue done like good childrene of Gods Churche, in ob∣seruing her ordonance and Constitutions by reiecting Superioritie so vnduly and vn∣canonically putt vpon them: and you to be (as it vveare) bastards, so vvillingly and ioyfully to receiue an intruded parson thrust in vpon you against the Ordinanances, Decrees, Constitutions and Canons of Gods Churche, The text, glosse ādreasō brought for the Cardin. doing make not for him. as an one shall appeare. The Canon Nobilissimus is so farre from making for you, that it vtterlye ouetthro∣vveth the Constitution of the Archp. and doth proue that a Card. be he Protector of ten Realmes is not to be beleeued except he shew his holl. letters. This saith the Ca∣non: Nobilissimus vir atque strenuus vestrae sublimitatis Legatus licet nullam epistolam iu∣xta consuetudinem à vobis nostro Pontificio de∣tulisset, licet nnnquam Apostolicae Sedis modus fuit absque signatis apicibus vndecumque lega∣tionem suscipere: nos tamen vos in illo honoran∣tes eiusque grauitatem & eloquiorum illius ve∣ridicas cognoscentes assertiones, nihilominus eum & sicut decuit suscepimus, & ei sicut ho∣nestum fuit oredidimus. Thus farre Pope Ni∣cholas, Which is to say. All though the most noble and valiant man your highnes Legat
brought no letters from you vnto vs, and albeit it vvas neuer the maner of the Apo∣stolick Sea to receive any Ambassage from vvhat place soeuer vvithout signed or sealed letters, yet that notvvith standing, as it beca∣me vs we haue received him, (without let∣ters) and as honestie required vve haue be∣leeved him. Honoring you in his person, and his grauitie acknowledging his assertions to be true. If this Canon proue any thiuge, it is this: that the Sea Apostolick neuer vsed to receaue Ambassadors from Princes vvithout letters of credence signed or sealed by the Prince thet sendeth such Ambassador, ād that the same Sea neuer sendeth Ambassador or giueth commission to any whosoeuer vvith∣out letters from the same Sea. And therfore the Card. Protector by this Canon vvas not to be beleeued Sine signatis apicibus, that is without the Popes bull or breue. And by consequence this Canon brought by you doth discharge your discontented bretherne from all disobedience, and charg your ow∣ne selues vvith ouer muche lightnes to ad∣mitt a Superior vpon a Card. lettre without letters from the Sea Apostlick. which as your Canon proveth is not accoustomed to giue Commission to any man vvithout letters signed. The truth is, this Canon neither ma∣keth for th'one, nor against th'other, for it spaketh in a case farre different from this
that is in question. For it treateth of sending Ambassodors to the court of Rome, and our questiō is of sending from Rome. And wher∣as Gratian a litle before this Canon by you alleadged, said: That it vvas not the custome of the church of Rome either to receeve Ambassadors from any place, or to send Ambassadors or Legates to any place vvithout letters signed or sealed: And for proof ther of alleadged the vvords of Pope Nicholas: the Correctors of the decret ap∣pointed, and after approved by Gregory the 13. Do takaway theis words. (Or to send.) In vulgatis sequebatur: Neque mittere, quae absunt a vetustis neque conveniunt cum his quae sequenti Ca∣pite afferuntur. That is. In the vulgar copies it did followe, Neither to send, vvhich words are not in the ancient copies, neither do they agree with those thinges that are treated in the chap. follovving. vvhich chapter is your Canon Nobilissimus. And vvhy do not those vvords agre vvith that vvhich is treated in that chapter? Bicause that chapter treateth of sending Ambassadors to Rome and not of sending Legats or Ambassadors from Rome, and so the case is altered (quoth Ploydon.) Your Canon saith that the Pope of courtisie extraordinarily and against the custome of that Sea received an Ambassador that came without any letters of credence. This is all. Hovv proverh it that the Protector was to be beleeved without letters vpon his ovvne
woorde that he did it by expresse comman∣dement from his Holl.? even as much as: Hovv farre is it to london? A poake full of plumbes. Novv to your Glosse. You haue throatled this glosse. Who if it had not had the chyn coughe, and that it had not be∣ne (at it vveare) throatled by you, least it should haue spoken out, vvould not haue made muche for you. The 8. priuilege (saith the Glosse) is, a Cardinall saying him self to be the Popes Legat is to be beleeved vpon his vvorde. allthoughe some call this priveleag in doubt. You are nippers. vvhich latter words you nipped quiteof, bicause they marred the markett. If you had putt them dovvne, your Reader vvould straight haue seene, that that priveledg vvas not so firme and stable, that you should build any solide or firme Doctri∣ne vppon it, as in deed it is built vpon a hea∣pe of sande, and not vpon a Rocke, as you shall see anon, after the answeare to your reason. No vpright dea∣ling. Why (my vnited brotherne) this is fals∣hood in fellowshipp to deceiue your selues voluntaryly, (for you could not but see thei∣se vvords if you saw the other) and your vnlearned Reader (that vvould not seek the glosse, but credit you vpon your vvorde) vvillingly, I will not say malliciously. you must in your next Apologie confesse here vvhither you will or no, either your igno∣rance
or your mallice. Ignorāce for alleaging vntruly an Author you neuer savve, mallice, if you savve him, ād yet alleage him corrupt∣ly, in cutting of that which confuteth the thing, for the which you alleage him. This is no nevves to you for elswheare you do the like, as in place you shall heare of. This is to immitate Iewell and Novvell and not Cath. Writters. That your reasō is not good ād that it hol∣deth not in any Christian and Catho. Your reason holdeth not. Courts (as you vvould make men beleeue) is pro∣ved out of Robuffus a French man, who was a great Practicioner in the court of Rome and Fraunce, Jn concord. in rubr. de regia ad Prelaturas? verb. Certa. and a Learned Canonist. He saith thus: Secundum praxim in Francia non creditur Legato a latere asserenti se viuae vocis oraculo dispensandi vel aliam potestatem a Papa habe re, nisi eam ostendat, & in Parlea∣mentis eius potestas registretur, &c. According to the practize of France a Legat of Latere is not to be beleeved affirming that by wor∣de of mouth he hath power from the Pope to dispence, or to haue any other auctoritye, except he shenw it, and that his auctoritye and povver be registred in the parliaments. This is taken out of a booke dedicated to Fraunces the first king of France, whom I trust you vvill graunt to haue bene a good Christian and Catholike kinge. So that your vvho doth not knovv, Fol. 108. pro∣vethe
your intention nothing at all. for if a Legat of latere be not beleeved, whē he saith he hath some specially auctoritye given him by mouth from his holl. how vvould a bare Card. or a Protector be beleeved in the like case? And suer I am neither Legat nor Prote∣ctor should be beleeved in Spaigne or els∣vvhere in our case, which is the Institution of a new office or dignitie, that neuer vvas seen in Christe his church before, without expresse letters from his Hollines. Novv to returne to your glosse which saith: The glosse. Licet aliqui hoc revocent in dubium althou∣ghe some call this in doubt. for aliqui, some, he might haue better said, omnes. All inter∣preters call it in doubt. First and foremost then, Against the In∣stitution of the Archpriest. the first glosse vppon your Canon Nobilissimus saith: here it is proved that Legats are not to be credited vvith∣out letters, and so condempneth the said 8. priveleage. The second glosse theare addeth: A Legat then or Ambassador must shevv and exhibite the letters of his Legation, if he vvilbe beleeved. You see by this that your glosse said vvell: Some doe call this in doubt. To this glosse I add the opinion of Bar∣tolus the Prince of Ciuilian Interpretors. L. Ʋnic. C. de superindicto lib. 1. the Emper or forbidding all men to pay any tovvle or taxe ad solas prefectura lettras, vpon the Capitaine of the Garde (vvho vvas the
next person to the Emperour in auctoritye) his letters, except they weare cōfirmed by the Emperors letters, saith thus: Canonista tamen dicunt quod Cardinalibus creditur etiamsi literas non ostendant, &c. The Canonists do hold that credit ought to be given to Cardinalls, all∣though they shewe no letters for it. vvhich is flatt against the text of this lavve, by which faith is not given to the Capitaine of the guarde or Constable vpon his owne letters without he shewe also the Emperors letters. ergo a Card. is not to be credited vnlesse he shewe the Popes letters, the which Cardinall Caietane did not. ergo. The Lawier that maketh notes or addi∣tions vppon Bartolus in the same place, Notes vppon Bartolus. no∣teth full well, that the lawe cited is to be vn∣drestood of such things as are due to the Prince only to doe, or are reserued only to his auctoritye, as the imposing of taxe, tribu∣tes and gabells vpon the subiects belonge only to the Prince, and no man els of vvhat preheminence or dignitie so euer he be, can doe it. And therefore (quoth he) Si quis dicebat se habere talem promissionem a Principe, non est du∣bium, quod non creditur sine literis, & maxime quando certatur de preiudicio alterius. if any man should say, he had permission of the Prince (to tovvle or taxe the subiects) without all doubt he is not to be beleeved, without the Princes letters and chiefly vvhen that vvhich
he saith he may doe, is preiudiciall to others. Mark hovv he saith. Jf the thing belong to the Prince onely. C. 10. ext. de translat. Cpi. But the instituting of new offices and dignities, belonge to his Holl. only as also doe the collations of benefices depen∣ding of his gyste, and not to Cardinalls Pro∣tectors or Cardinalls Legats, vnlesse it be ex∣pressely sett downe in the faculties of their legation. ergo there ought no credit to be given to the Protectors letters, instituting a new dignitie vvithout shevving his Holl. let∣ters for discharge, and by consequent the discontented bretherne in lawe and con∣science did vvell, not to admitt the Archpriest as their Superior vpon the Cardinalls letters: and you (vnited bretherne) did against lavve and right to admitt him so lightly and vvil∣lingly as you did. Iason also a Learned Ciuilian after he had alleaged (according to his customet) the opi∣nions of all that vvrot before him at last cō∣cluded: Jason. Jn repetit. Li. admonnendi ff. de iureiur. 11. 189. Quod si etiam Cardinalis a latere diceret Papam sibi aliquid commisisse quod respicit damnum & preiudicium tertij non creditur sibi, nisi Bullas Apostolicas commissionis ostendat & ita procedit Glossa ad ca. Nohilissimus dist. 97. If a Card. yea a Card. Legate should say that the Pope (by mouth) hath committed some thing to him that is hurtfull to a third person, he is not to be beleeved, except he shevve the Popes Bulles of his Commission, and so ought the
glosse vpon the Canon Nobilissimus to be vn∣derstoode, he meaneth the third glosse vpon the same, which saith thus: Credit ought to be giuen to a Card. that is vvel knovvne in any Pro∣vince vvithout any letters at all. Maxime cum non contingat Cardinalem vnquam abesse nisi Legationis causa. Chiefly, bicause it doth not lightly hap∣pen a Card. to be absent (from the court of Rome) but when he is seent in Legation. Be∣sids Petrus Rauenatus a singuler good la∣wier, Petrus Rauc∣natus. In bre∣uiario Juris Can. tit. ext. de foro compe∣tent. is of the opinion of the glosse, that a Card. is to be beleived affirming him self to be the Popes Legate, bicause customably Cardinalls do not depart from the court of Rome, except he be made a Legate. But both are to be vndrestood as Iason saied before, except that vvhich they say be preiudiciall to others. And besids, they talke of Cardinalls which be out of Rome that are presumed to be Le∣gats. And our Card, was still in Rome, and so the case is altered. Andreas Alciatus also saith: Alciat ad C. cū contingat in 11.35. ext. de Iure∣iurand. Neque Car∣dinali creditur in alicuius preiudicium. Nei∣ther is a Card. to be credited in an others pre∣iudice. Note he speaketh in general of all Cardinalls be they Legats, The Emperors. l. vnic. C. de mandat. princip. Protectors or not. To conclude with Civilians. The Emperors their lords and Maisters say: Si quis asserat &c. If any affirme that he commeth to you vvith our secreat commandements, be it knovven to you all, that you give no credit therto, except he prove
it by shevvinge our letters. And be you not terri∣fied vvith the dignitie or peruissance of any man, but aske hardly for our letters. This then you see is a rule in lavve, that none that say they ha∣ue this commandement from the Prince, or, the Prince hath given me this office or au∣ctoritye to constitute such an office or offi∣cer are to be beleeved, except they shevve the Princes letters for it. Card. Caietane did not shevve his Holl. letters for the auctori∣tye he tooke vpon him in constituting the Archp. ergo by lavve he vvas not to be be∣leeved or credited, nor the Archp. vpon his letters only to be received or admitted. Let vs novv heare vvhat the Canonistes saye. Petrus Rauenatus in the place before alleaged saith: Siautem diceret, &c. Petr. Rauena∣tus. againe. But if he (the Card. Legat) should say that some thinge vvere specially committed to him, vvhich is not conteined in his faculties, Commission, or generall office of his Legation, he is not to be credited, except he shevve his letters. This not vvhithstandinge some doe saye: That by custome credit is to be given to him, yea in an other mans preiudice, vvhen he affir∣meth some thing to be committed to him by vvorde of mouth. a. In c. sicut ex∣tr. de sent. ex∣com. But the Abbot Panormitanus doth not be∣leeve it, forvvhom is a notable a glosse. and for my part I am of his opinion and doe alleage a singuler text, vvhich is alleaged ordinarily to proue, that the Pope cannot make a lavve: that faith be giuen to one in the preiudice of an other. Thus he.
But let vs heare Panor. Panormit ad. d. c. sicut. the Prince of Ca∣nonists speake: Nota singulariter, &c. Note singularly, that a Card. is not to be beleeved affirming any thinge in the preiudice of an other. And therfore if a Card: should say, that the Pope committed some thinge to him by vvorde of mouthe (vvhich is all one vvith ex∣presse commandement) tending to an others pre∣iudice, he is not to be beleived, except he pro∣veth it othervvise. keepe in mynde this Glos∣se, vvhich doth notably limitate the Canon Nobilissimus. And allthough Nauarre doth seeme to advouch and hold, Nauar. Jn con∣sil. 12. tit. de te∣statis. that a Card. is to be beleived euen in an others mans preiudi∣ce, yet he saith, three thingh must concurre. The first that he testifie of things commit∣ted to him by the Pope, or to be sēt to others by him. The second. That they be things ac∣customed, to be graunted. The third. That it turne not directly to the preiudice of an other. Novv as the first point might helpe the Protector, so the tvvo others make di∣rectly against him. So that in effect Nauar, saith as much as th'others doe, that a Card. is not to be beleved in the preiudice of another The reasons vvhy a Card. Reasons vvhy a Card. nor any other is to be be∣leeved on his vvorde. C. Cum a nobis ext. de test. is not to be be∣leived on his only vvorde is: bicause the lawe doth forbidd Any credit to be giuen to the vvor∣de or saying of one Iudge, of vvhat soeuer auctoritye he be. And that no Judge doe easely suffree the te∣testimonie of one alone in vvhat cause soeuer, to be
admitted. And againe. L. Jurisiur. C. de testib. Ca. si testes Par. vnius 4. q. 3. L. Nullus ff. de testibus. We vvill not that the de∣position of one vvitnes be heard at all althoughe he be of great honor in the court. For in such a case the Card. should beare vvittnes in his ovvne cau∣se vvhich cannot be, bicause, Nullus idoneus te∣stis in re sua intelligitur. No man is counted a lavvfull vvitnes in his owne cause. For by the lawe of god and nature (vvhich neither Pope nor Protector can change) it is decreed: that in ore duorum aut trium stet omne verbum. Theare must at the lest be tvvo vvittnesses to proue the thinge that is in controuersie. Alexander the 3. after he had alleaged the fo∣resaid vvords, addethe: C. Licet. ext. de testib. Quia licet quaedam sunt causae, quae plures quam duos exigant testes, nulla ta∣men est causa quae vnius testimonio (quamvis legiti∣mo) terminetur. For albeit theare be some cau∣ses that require more then tvvoe vvittnes∣ses, yet there is no cause that cā be ended or decided by the wittnes of one alone, be such witnes neuer so lavvfull. And to end this cō∣trouersie vvith Pope Bonifacius the 8. say∣ing: Nec simpliciter creditur se asserenti Legatum. C. Iniunctae par. asserenti in ext. com. de elect. Nor is he to be beleived that saieth simplie (vvithout our letters) he is a Legat. Marke hovv he speaketh indefinitly, vvithout ad∣ding vvhether it be in the preiudice of an o∣ther or noe, he is not at all to be credited with∣out letters from the Pope. By this that hath bene said you see, that your discontēted bre∣therne had iust cause and good reason not to
beleve the Card. Protector vvithout the Po∣pes Bulls, and therfore might well say, that they vvere not bound to beleeue him vvith the rest that follovveth in your 17. leafe b. put dovvne by you as not vvell spoken, vvhen as it is the truth it self, as you see hath bene heare proved. But novv vvhen I haue all done, you will say: the Priests in Ingland vvere not preiudi∣ced by the Card. letters, and therfore by the opinion of the Authors by me alleged, they ought to haue beleeved and obaied the Card. affirming to haue done that vvhich he did by the expresse commandement of his Holli∣nes. My vnited bretherne, my Authors do not say that he is to be beleeved vvhen that vvhich he saith is not preiudiciall to an other. But they say: he is not to be beleeved maxime chiefly vvhen he doth therby preiudice an other. vvhich vvord maxime doth not inclu∣de, that if he doe not preiudice any he is then to be beleeved. And besids Bonifacius saieth simply: He is not to be beleeued vvithout letters. It importeth not then vvhither this action did preiudice the Priestes or no. but vvhither he vvas to be beleeved and obayed therin vvithout the Popes letters? But novv, if all the Priests in Ingland vveare preiudicied in this action, then must you hold downe your hedds for shame and graunt you vveare too hastie to admitt' such a superior to be putt v∣pon
you to your owne preiudice. That you and your bretherne vvere pre∣iudicied by this subordinatiō so instituted by the Card. letters may easely be proved thus. That all Priest in Ingland vve re preiudicied by this Jnstitu∣tion. Euery Superior as Pope, Archbishop, Bis∣hope, Deane, Prouost, Abbott Abbesse and some sort of Priors De iure communi & ordi∣nario, by the ordinary and common course of lavve ought to be chosen by those, ouer who∣me they are aftervvards to gouerne. Tit. de elect. ext. in 6. in clo. & in ext. This is proved by the generall title de electione of ele∣ction vvhich is put asvvell in the Decretalls as in the Clementins and extrauagants. in vvhich title are sett dovvne many notable constitutions touching the maner, order and direction of theis elections. And that in In∣gland elections haue had place is euident, by some constitutions directed to the Archb. of Canterbury, the B. of vvorcester, and others, to end some Difficulties vvhich arose vpon elections there. Besids this his Holl. asked M. Standish vvho vvas nevvly come out of Ingland vvith Fa. Baldwine, whither the de∣siere to haue a superior as he then informed him, was by the consent of all the Priestes in Ingland, or no? vvho ansvvered that it was. And vpon this information of Fa. Pag. 31. persons and Fa. Baldwine (as you confesse) it was re∣solued to giue the Priestes for Superior an Archp. but not a Bishop. That question of his Holl. vvas an euident signe and token
that his Holl. meaned not to giue them a su∣perior vvithout their consents, nor to take away the right of election that vvas due vnto them by his predecessors decrees and Con∣stitutions. C. Ecclesia 2. vers. neque enim ext. de elect. For to vse Gregorye the 9. his words, talking of this matter of election. Ne∣que enim credendū est Romanum Pontificem (qui iura tuetur) quod alias excogitatum est multis vigilus & inuentum, vno verbo subuertere voluisse. It is not credible that the B. of Rome (who doth defēd the lawes) would with one vvorde ouer throvve, that vvhich otherwise with much paine and care hath bene excogitated and invented. Euen so I say, the Popes holl, is not to be presumed vvith one vvorde said to the Protector, to take a vvay the right of ele∣ction, vvhich by lawe belonged to the Priests in Ingland: specially being informed (thou∣ghe falsely) that all the Priestes consented therto. Vppon which information, thinking they vvere contented that his holl. should appoint them a Superior, he appointed then one. Besides you must learne, that all that vvhich his Holl. decreeth or granteth by his Bulls and commandements is all wai∣es to be vndrestood. Saluo ture alieno, & sine alterius detrimento, C. Lcet ext. de officio iud. ordinand. sauing other mens right and vvithout the hurt and hinderacem of o∣thers. Nostrae (inquit) intentionis non est Episco∣po preiudicium generare. It is not our inten∣tion to preiudice the B. saith Alexander the
3.) And Innocentius the 3. vvritting to the Archb. of Sens in France saith. Quia tamen intentionis nostrae nec fuit nec esse debuit Iurisdi∣ctioni tuae per mandatum huiusmodi derogare. Bi∣cause it neither was, nor ought to be our in∣tention by this commandement to derogat thy Iurisdictione. I think if Clement the 8. vvere vvell informed hovv all matters doe goe, and in vvhat sorte he vvas deceived, he vvould ansvvere vvith his predecessors: that it vvas not his intention to derogat the Iurisdiction of the Priestes, by taking from them the election of their Superior, vvhich vvas due to them by the Ecclesiasticall lawes. By this you see, that vvhat soeuer the Protector vvrott, you vveare to haue an eye to his Holl. intention that comman∣ded him, as your bretherne hadd. Certz for this your facte of admitting the Arch∣priest. vpon the Card. letters vvithout Bull. or breve from his holl. you rather deserue to be called Blinde, then th'others for their lavvfull resisting him discontented brether∣ne. This vvich I haue said may suffice for this present to aduertise you that the Card. Protector vvas not to be beleeued in the preiudice of all you Priestes in Ingland both discontent and vnited vvithout letters from his Holl. nor his Archp. to be by you receiued and by consequence your dis∣contented
bretherne to haue had iust cau∣se, of discontentment for such vnlavvfull intrusion, and to haue duly and lavvfully refused to accept and acknowledg the Arch∣priest to be their Superior, before he she∣wed them the Popes Bulls for his warrant. The second Question is. C. 1. ext. de trāst. epist. Whither not only a nevv and extraor∣dinary dignitie as this is, (touching the larg Iurisdiction ouer 2. Realmes) but if any ordinarye Dignitie or benefice vvhat∣soeuer, can be instituted and constituted by other meanes, then by the Popes expresse Bulles or letters? The negatiue is so euident and appa∣rant true, that no instance can be giuen against it. Besids that, the Pope affirmeth it him self. Search I pray you all the court rooles in his Holl. chancerie, turne ouer all the bookes and records that are in the office of the Datarie, if you find any one President (since the Popes begane to in∣stitute and geive benefices) that a Card. Protector vpon his bare letters (with this clause in them: By the expresse commandement of his Holl.) vvithout the Popes Bulls ioy∣ned to them, ever gaue the least benefi∣ce of the Popes gifte, then call me Cutt.
Mary, if you can shew me that a Protector hath Without bulls by the expresse commā∣dment of his Holl. instituted a new dignitie Which was neuer in Ingland or in the church of Christ before, then Will I burne my lawe bookes and quitt that profession, C. beneficium de regu. iur. in 6 for it is a∣gainst expresse lawe, against custome, and a∣gainst the style of the court of Rome. Be not offended if I terme it a new dignitie, neuer hard of before in Christes churche since Chri∣stes Assension. I meane for the amplenes and extention of his iurisdiction. For, an Archpr. Archp. dignitie is nevv, and ne∣uer hard before to haue as great and ample yea greater, iuri∣sdiction ouer all the priestes of 2. realmes, as had all the Bishoppes of those realmes when they weare Cathol. is new and extraordinary. Fol. 99. It is a mockery that you call it an ancient di∣gnitie in Christes churche. who knoweth it not The question is not of the ancientnes of the dignitie, but of this new and neuer before heard of iurisdiction and auctoritie. The ordinary di gnitie of an Ar∣chp. is the lovv∣est and basest in gods Church. Tot. tit. ext. de offic. Archipres. It is an ancient dignitie in Christes church you say. I confesse, but with all I saie, it is the lowest & basest dignitie in Christes church. It is such a one as follo Weth. His iurisdiction did not further extend then the churche. his office is to gouerne the Quire, to see that the seruice be decently said, and in the Bishops absence he must sing masse vpon holie and festiuall daies. It is his office to begine the seruice, ƲVhat is the ordinary officie of an Archpr. or to appoint another to begine it. To his offi∣ce
it appartaineth to see that sick parsons dye not vvithout confession and receiuing the blessed Sacrament. This vvhich I say I spea∣ke not in contempt of the man or his office, but to giue you to vnderstād, wherfore your discontented bretherne call it a new, extraor∣dinary, and neuer heard of dignitie in Gods churche viz: for this ample auctoritye: and with all to aduertise you, that you doe very fondly and childishlie controle your dis∣contented bretherne very often in your booke, Ʋncharitable dealing. for termyng the dignitie thus. Your ow∣ne conscience nov will accuse you, either of ignorance, if you knew not before that an Archp. auctoritie extended no further then the church dore: or of splen, (if you knew it) for so often tvitting, vpbraidinge and chea∣king your bretherne for saying a truthe, which you your selues knew so to be. Which dealinghs of yours througheout your whole booke, maketh your reader to see and bele∣ve, that you haue greater desier by such ta∣unts and toies to discredit your bretherne, then to looke into the truth of the matter & controuersie in question: vvhich (as I haue said) you fled from as from a toade. This is the spirit of contention my bretherne and not of charitie. I say then, that the first insti∣tution of the Archp. without bull or breue from his Hol: is mirabile in oculis nostris. vnto vs Lawiers, and so exhorbitant a case in lawe,
as the like vvas neuer heard of before. I pray you giue me some instance for my learning. For hitherto I haue learned and doe teache daily the contrary viz: that none but the Po∣pe and that by his bulls can institute or erect a new dignitie or office in Gods churche. C. 1. ext. ne se∣de vacante: &c I haue learned that Innocentius the 3. a pro∣foud lavier and diuine did reprehend a Card. Legate for meadling in such things as belon∣ged to his Holl. charge. C. quod trāsla. ext. de offic. le∣gati. Licet in regno Sici∣liae generalis sit tibi commissa legatio, ad ea ta∣men sine speciali mandato nostro non debuisti manus extendere, quae in signum priuilegii sin∣gularis sunt tantum Summo Pontifici reseruata &c. All thoughe we haue made the our gene∣rall Legate in the kingdome of Sicill, thov oughtest not for all that to meddle with such things as are reserued ōly to the highe Bishop in signe of his singuler priuileage, without our speciall commandment. If you say this maketh not against the Protector, bicause he had the Popes speciall commandement to institute an Archprieste? You say that vhich is in question. For I say he had not, neither am I to belewe him saying so, as before is suffi∣ciently proued. Then I say more, that the Po∣pe in the place alleaged doth vnderstand of his speciall commandement in writting, bi∣cause a Cardinal is not to be beleiued on his worde without letters and writting. I meddle not here with the Popes superame power, I
know he may doe great things, ex plenitudi∣ne potestatis, C. 2. de praebēd. in 6. by the plenitude of power spe∣cially in matters of benesices (such is this) for he is Dominus beneficiorum, the lord and M. of benefices, and may at his pleasure dispose of them: nor of his right of preuention, for he may by collation preuent all election and e∣lectors. But I speake of his ordinarie iurisdi∣ction, by which he giueth and conferreth be∣nefice and dignities. And therfore I say, that a Card. Protector can not by his letters con∣teyning the expresse commandement of his Holl. conferre or geue the poorest benefice in Ingland that were at the Popes disposition For not vvithstanding such letters, the bene∣fice stood still vacant and as vacant, might be asked ād obteined ouer his hedd, that should take possession thereof vppon such letters. If this be true, let the Archp. consider how iustly, he possessed that dignitie, till the Po∣pes bull cam so confirme him. And let him further cōsider, vvhither such a dignitie could be iustly obteined vvithout the Popes bulls, and vvaigh that vvhiche Bonifac. C. 29.1. de prae∣bend. in 6. 8. decreed: vve doe (saith he) ordaine by the same auctori∣tie, that neither Churches (he meaneth bis∣hopricks) dignities, Parsonages or other be∣nefices that shall happe heareafter to be va∣cant in the Cour of Rome be not conferred, but hy his Hollines only, and that no man of vvhat auctoritie soeuer he be vvhither he ha∣ue
ordinary right to conferre benefices, or vvhither he haue generall or speciall leaue to conferre and giue benefices vacant (except he haue speciall and expresse commandment giuen him by his holines to conferre those that be vacāt in the court of Rome) doe pre∣sume to conferre them. If a vacant benefice that vvas extant before cannot be giuen by a∣ny but by the Pope him self, much lesse a nevv dignitie or benefice can be institutad by any but by the Pope only, and by his Bulls. Pag. 6. C. Jniunctae Pa∣praesenti. in ext. communibus de electione. To conclude this question the extrauagant iniū∣ctae alleaged by your bretherne (but by you not ansvvered) doth euidently proue that no∣ne ought to take any dignitie or Ecclesiasti∣call administration vpon him, absque dictae se∣dis litteris, vvithout the letters of the Sea of Rome. vvhich extrauagant iniunctae If Father Lister had read, he vvould neuer haue an∣svvered so vnlernedly to his ovvne obiectiō. Father Lister ouer seene. At (saith he) Bullam nullam aut breue Pon∣tifex confecit. The Pope hath sent no bull or or breue to institute him. His ansvvere is ine∣ptissime, most foolishly spoken, and vvhy so good Father. Quis enim sacrorum canonū hoc vnquam praecipit. What one of the holy ca∣nons hath euer commanded it? I vvonder so learned a man to be so blind and ouer shot: but a greater vvonder it is to me, to see hovve the English ayre hath chaunged his old svveete and good nature (for the vvhich es∣pecially
he vvas honored and reuerenced of all that knevv him) as is seameth by his boo∣ke. Well my good olde frende and Father I doe novv aduertise you of the Canon In∣iunctae alleaged also by the discontented bre∣therne. Pag. 60. Novv vvhere you obiect that they might haue sent to Rome, Fol. 119. b. Obiection. and haue enquired of the Pope or his Nephevv vvhither that Card. did it not by his hol. expresse commandment, or no? I ansvveare they vveare not bound in cō∣science to doe it, much lesse by lavve, bicau∣se by this extrauagant by them alleaged they vvere assured of their doing, being by it ex∣pressely forbidden to receiue any Superior vvithout the Popes letters. The 3. question. The third question, vvhither those vpon vvhom a superior is thrust in such sort ought not in lavve and conscience to vvithstād him and not to receiue him? This question is briefely decided in the fo∣resaid extrauagant Iniunctae. Wheare it is said: Nullique eos absque dictarum literarum osten∣tione recipiant aut eis pareant. And that none doe receiue them or obey vnto them, except they shevve the foresaid letters or bulls. See you not hovv vniustly you accuse your bre∣therne throughout this book for not obey∣ing their superiors. You meane the Prote. ād the Archprist. You accuse the Pope and not them, vvho forbiddeth thē by expresse vvord
not to obey any that commeth vvithout the Popes bulls, as did both the Protector and the Archpriest. The fourth question vvhither he that en∣treth into a benefice or dignitie (as the Arch. The 4. questiō. did) be not an intruded parson, that is, an vn∣iust possessor of that benefice or dignitie? Panormitanus is of the opinion that such a one is intruded. A c. 2. extr. de restit. in inaegr. N. 4. Intrusus appellatur qui obti∣net dignitatem ab eo qui non habuit potestatem illam conferendi. He is an intruded parson vvhich hath obteined a dignitie of him that had no auctoritie to conferre or giue it. M. Blackvvell vvas an intru∣ded parson till the Breue cam. But the Protector (as hath bene proued) had no auctoritie to make M. Blackvvell an Archp. Ergo M. Blackvvell taking that dignitie of him, vvas an vniust possessor, till the Popes bulls came, and by consequent, the Priestes had reason to vvithstand him, and not to acknovvledg him for their Superior. Joan. 10. You knovv hovv the holy scripture termeth such as come in at the vvindovve and not in at the dore, that is, by lavvfull, vsuall and ordinarie meanes. If you aske me rhen, vvhither all that vvhich M. And all he did vvas of no for∣cet thill the bre∣ue cam. Blackvvell did vntill the Po∣pes bulls cams, vveare frustrat and voide, as his excommunications, suspentions, inter∣dicts, taking avvay, or giuen faculties, &c. The same Panormitanus ansvvereth thus: Loco citato. knovv thovv, that all that the intruded doth to be of no force howsoeuer or of vvhō soe∣ver
he be tollerated, obeied, or vpheld in that dignitie: bicause tolleration hath no ef∣fect in one that is intruded, the reason is: bi∣cause he had not his entrie by one that had auctoritie to put him in that place or roome, If you vnited bretherne reply and say, Replie. that your receiving of him, obeyng and bearing reuerence to him as to your superior, is suffi∣cient to install and confirme him in that au∣ctoritie: the same Panormitanus ansvveareth Sed tu dic quod reuerentia exhibita intruso non facit illum Praelatum. But say thovv, that the honor and reuerence that is borne or giuen to an intruded parson, dooth not make him a Prelate. Can. 1. dist. 62. And the Pope Leo speaking of intru∣ded parsons hath theise vvords. Quis ambi∣gat nequaquam istis esse tribuendum, quod nec docetur esse collatum? Who doubteth (quoth he) that is not at all to be attributed to those (intruded) vvhich is not taught or pro∣ued to be conferred or giuen vnto them? vp∣pon vvhich vvords the Interpretors gather that an intruded Bishopp is no Bishoppe: nei∣ther hath he the executiō of his Bishoprick, office and dignitie. Can. Si per. 63. dist. And Pope Nicholas the first. Recipi nullatenus meretur, quem indebitè ordinatum cognoscunt. He doth in no vvise de∣serue to be receiued, vvhom men knovve to haue ben vnduly ordeined or constituted. By all vvhich is refuted that vvhich Fa. Lister puttheth dovvne § 6. D. 3. for allbeit the
Archp. had bene receued and admitted, by the greater, better and learnerder part: yet you see by Panormitanus their admission ma∣keth him not a Prelate, bycause he Was not lawfully instituted. Note. Let all such of your vni∣ted crewe as receued faculties of M. Black∣well to heare confessiōs before the Bulles ca∣me, looke to them selues, L. Nemo ff. de regul. iuris. whither they had auctoritie to absolue or no? Quia nemo plus iuris ad alium transferre potest quam ipse ha∣bet. his intrusion further proued. Maister Blackwell had no auctoritie then to giue faculties, as you see: ergo you that re∣ceiued them of him had none at all. Further more, the vnlawfull and vniust entrance of M. Blackwell is proued thus. C. beneficium de regaur. in 6. Beneficium Ec∣clesiasticum non potest licite sine institutione ca∣nonica obtineri. An Ecclesiasticall benefice (as the Archprist is) cannot be laufully obteined or gotten without canonicall institution. But M. Blackwell obtained not his benefice by canonicall institution. Ergo he cam not in by the dore, but by the windowe. I proue the Minor thus. Dinus the best and learnest Inter¦pretor on the rules of the Canon lawe, saieth the rule intendeth to say thus much. That if any be instituted by him who hath no right to institute, or if the forme be not obserued that ought to be obserued in institutions, that then the Institution is not canonicall, bi∣cause it wanteth that which is of the substan∣ce of the Institution: and therfore by such
an Institution a benefice cannot be lawfully obteyned. But M. BlackWell was instituted by him that had no right to institute as hath bin proued sufficiently: ergo he gote that be∣nefice vnlawfully, and by consequent Was lawfully resisted by the discontentsd brethe∣ne and vniustly admitted by your vnited bre∣therne. In comment. de spoliis clericorū pa. 7. no. 3. Beside this, Nauarr teacheth that Iu∣lius 3. by his decree did fo explicat and extēd the chapter Iniunctae, that if any one had ob∣teined the Popes signature for a benefice, and vpon that signature should take possession before he had his bulles, that he should loo∣se that benefice for the same and be made vn∣capable therof. Now M. Blackwell tooke possession Without either signature or bull and therfore was made vncapable of that dig∣nitie. If you ansWere that this dignitie of Ar∣chpriest is not rekened vp amongst the dig∣nities that are rekened in that chapt. Iniun∣ctae, and so the extension made by Iulius 3. not to apperteine to him? Ad c. accepta extr. de restitut. spoliat. oppos. 8. N. 24. o. The same Nauarr an∣swereth that Iulius 3. doth not only meane of these Prelates named in the saide chapter, but also of all such as be put in their place, or are equall to them. But the Archp. is put in the place not of one, but of many bishopps, and is equall to them in Iurisdictiō: ergo the chapt. Iniunctae, is extended to him by the ru∣le: Pa. licet instit, de testatis. Surrogatum sapit naturam eius in cuius lo∣cum surrogatur. And by consequence Maist.
Blackvv. was intruded taking the possession without bull or breue of his hollines. The fifthe question, The 5. question. Whither those priests that receiued the Archp. as their Superior v∣pon the Card. letters without the Popes bul∣les, did not offend, and are punishable for it? This question is decided in fewe wordes by Bonifacius the 8. in the forenamed extraua∣gant Iniunctoe, alleaged by your bretherne for their defence, but by you drowned in the depth of silence. A signe you writt not with a mynde to search out the truth, but With in∣tention to brable, and to continewe strief ād contention concealing and omitting the streingth and proof of your aduersarie, ād rū∣ve aroving after by matters and childish toies nothing at all apparteynig to the matter in question. All chapters of churches (saith he) and all couentes of religious howses, or a∣ny other whosoeuer that shall receiue or o∣bey any of the aboue named, except they bring with them his holl. bulls, shalbe so lon∣ge suspēded from receiving the fruit of their benefices, D.C. Iniunctae pa. capitata. The vnited priests punisha∣ble for recea∣uing the Archp. vpon the Card. letters. till they haue deserued to obtaine againe the grace and fauor of the Sea Aposto∣lick. You perceiue by this thē if you had had benefices, for your willing or rather light admitting of the Archpriester in the order you did, you had lost all the commodities of them, till his Holl: had forgiuen you that of∣fence. I and albeit you haue escaped the pu∣nishment,
yet can you not but see, and con∣fesse, that you did not well, but directly a∣gainst the Popes institution, Can. consequens dist. 11. (Nam qui ab huius sedis Rectoribus plena auctoritate sanci∣citur, &c. firmiter & inconcusse teneatur. For that which is ordeined by full auctori. of the gouerners of this Sea, and ought firmly and stably to be keapt) to receiue any Prelat whosoeuer or by vvhat meanes or order soe∣uer he vvas sent you. Yf he came not vvith his Holl: letters, beside the canon Nulli fas est distinct. 19. alleaged to no purpose by Fa∣ther Lister in the 5. § of his booke doth flat∣lye condemne you, saying that it is not lavv∣full for any man in will or dead to transgres∣se the commandement of the Sea Apostolick &c. but you by receiuing the Archp. vvith∣out the Popes bulles did transgresse the com∣mandements of Bonifacius the 8. Ergo you transgressed the commandement of the Sea Apostolick: and by consequent fell into the penalties by Gregory the 4. sett dovvne in the foresaid Canon. Look to it. Thus then you see your selues to be charged vvith ouer∣much lightnes, and your bretherne to be di∣scharged of disobediēce schisme and sinne ād all. Nor can you excuse your selues by saying you knevv not thus much before, bicause Ignorantia iuris neminem excusat. C. Jgnorantia de regu. iur. in 6 to be igno∣norant of the lavves, is no iust excuse or to be admitted. According to these promisses
your discontented brethern if they say it, (for you note not the page) doe full well and truly say, that which you impute to thē, viz false informacion, (why? was not his hollines enformed only by 2. Iesuite and a secular prieste, that spake against his knowledge) not hard of in the Church before (this I haue proued to be true) and that it is against all e∣quitie and iustice (This y haue sufficiently proued also) and that his holl. could not lavv∣fully appoint it vvithout their consentes, which is full true meaning by the ordinarie maner of proceading, according to the Canons and Decrees of his predecessors) and that the meanes by vvhic he appointed it is insufficient, (as done by a Card. letters vvithout the Po∣pes bulls, which is as hath bene proued insuf∣ficient to erect a new dtgnitie) binding no man to obey it, (bicause it was doon against the canons, decrees, and cōstitutiōs of the church and contrarie to the custome and stile of the court of Rome. As lik wise that is true they say. A nevv and extraordinary authoritie, &c. Which you very absurdly haue put dow∣ne as absurdly spoken, as in place will beshe∣wed. The last question, Fol. 14. The 6. and last question. Whither rhat those priests that withstand a superior put vpon them in order a forsaid, be schismaticks or whether they do sinne atall for thus withstandige him? To begine vvith the last, sure it is they sined
not at all. The priest did not sine innot receiuing the Archp. L. iustè ff. de acq. possest. For vvhosoeuer doth that vvhich the lawe or their Superior cōmād thē to doe, doth not sine at all. But theise priests did no∣thing but that Which the lawe ād their Supe∣rior the Pope commanded them to doe, as hath bene proued out of the extrauagant In∣iunctae, Ergo they did not sinne in refusinge, to obey the Archp. instituted by a Cardinals letters. This question of Schisme is the chiefest cause of this controuersie, The chief cause of all this con∣trouersie. not only for that they weare counted, yea forsooth by a scan∣dalous and vnlearned booke proued to be schismaticks, ād that by the approbation of the Prouinciall superior of the Iesuits, ād the Archpriest, VVhether the priests that refu¦sed to receaue the Archp. vpon the Card. letters vvere schisma∣ticks or no. They cold not possible be schis∣maticks. for that they did not receiue the Archp. vpon the Card. letters: but allso for that vpon the sight of the bull they did not, acknowledge them selues schismaticks, and make recantation thereof, or els not to be admitted to confession and absolution. Oh follie! o ignorance! o scandall! o wante of cha∣ritie! how is it possible that men who still pro∣tested to be obediēt childrē to the Sea Apo∣stolick and weare in prison (some of thē) ma∣ny yeres for the defence of the Sea Apostolik that promised all obedience vpō the sight of his hol. bulles, could be schismaticks? Schis∣ma (saieth Pope Pelagieus) Scissuram sonat, C. Schisma 24. q. 1. VVhat is schis∣me. Schisme soundeth or signifieth a cutting of. But theise mē did not cutt them selues of not
from the Sea Apostolick ergo no schismatic∣kes. Againe in vnitate (saieth he) scissura esse non potest. In vnitie can be no cutting of. The∣se men remaineing still in vnitie vvith the sea Apostolick how could they be cutt of? Can. non vevo quisquis 23. q. 5. The same Pope saieth elswhere. Quisquis ergo ab Apostolicis diuisus est sedibus, in schismate eum esse non dubium est. Who soeuer is then deui∣ded from the Apostolicall Sea it is not to be doubted, but that he is in schisme. A contra∣rio sensu. he then that is not deuided frō the Apostolick Sea, is not in schisme. Your bre∣therne weare not deuided from that Sea, For Fa. Lister hath tould you in his § 6. ergo they were not in schisme. you know how gre∣uous paines and penalties are adioyned vnto it. how great thē was the fault of hī that ma∣de the booke of schisme to proue those that cōmunicated with the sea of rome to be schis¦maticks? how great was their fault that by their auctoritie and subscriptions auctorized that booke? a folish book in deed grownded not vpon a rocke, but vpon the sand. For, for his foundation he put that for a certaintie which was and is in question viz: that the Car∣din. letters wherin was made mention of the Popes expresse commandement, weare suffi∣cient to institute this dignitie, he erred in the lawe, and therfore gaue vs such poore diuini∣tie. But let vs suppose that the Card. had the Popes letters, to shewe in confirmation of his auctoritie, (as he had not) and that the
priestes, not Withstanding, that did resist him yet in this case it was neither schisme nor re∣bellion: bieause they might alleage the Po∣pes letters were gotten by surreption and fal∣se information. Ar all such as impugne the Popes bulles and breues vpon these 2. occa∣sions, or any other iust occasion (which are daily impugned in Rome it self) accompted schismariks, rebellious factious or seditious? or contemners of their Superiors for the sa∣me? nothing lesse. But of this matter which is the chief hedd and cause of this contention, (as your discontēted bretherne do shewe to his hol. and the Inquisition) You say: You vvill not talke of, and that you are very sorye that euer it vvas mētioned. or brought in que∣stion, and why? bicause vnquiet people hath taken occasion therby to continue contention, and to make more brables then vvcare neadfull. Thank those vnquiet heds that would be meadling he in other mens matters. Thanke those thar auctorized it, and be not offended with those vvhom you call vnquiet people, for defending the truth yea for defending their honor good name and fame, for cōplai∣ninge of the iniurie doon vnto thē by so sclā∣derous and scandalous a booke. you cry out on them, you hunt and chase them through∣out your boke for hauing touched the name fame, and honor of somme particuler men
for lesser faults (I do not find fault when you tell them their faults in deed) and yet you are offended vvith them, for defending them selues from the blame of so horrible a crime as schisme is, vvhich I dislik in you. Fol. 81. b. If to shew the great strief and dislick you haue conceaved against Do. Nordone for calling one graue Priest a knight sonne, arrant kna∣ue, not openly but in his eare and at another time knave and Montebanck in the presence of 2. Priests. (You do not spare his ashes, but by this compt, do all that in you is, to deface a dead mans memorie): how great cause then haue so many graue Priestes yet liuing to be offended. First with Fa. Lister vvith writing then vvith the Prouinciall, Archpriest, and you vnited brethern for callumniating them not in corners and in mens eares, but openly not before 2. Priests only, but before the wholle vvorld publickly, not for writting or callinge them knaues or Montebancks but to be infinitly vvorser, baser, and more abiect in all Christien mens eares, then arrant knaves or Montebancks can be, for no Christian man can be more iniured and infamed. then to be cal∣led accompted and as it weare proued Schis∣maticks, yea vvorser then southsaiers, wiches and Idolaters? If you in reason may mislik vvith Do. Nordon for the one, farre greater reason haue they to mislike with theise ter∣mes, names and shamefull reproches. Was it
not highe time for them to look about them, and to defend their honor estimation, good name, fame and renowne? But you will not talkeat all of this schisme: Why so? for they weare either iustly or iniustly accused therof. If iust∣ly: What cause haue you to hold your peace and to be sorry that it vvas mentioned? seing you lay so at them, vvith hands and heales for far∣re smaller matters. Example, For not putting the name of the printer, nor the place whea∣re it vvas printed, vvith such other trifles. Ve∣ry lick it is, if you could iustly haue accused them of schisme, you wold not haue spared them. If they vveare accused vniustly (as they vveare by your owne confession, and as his Holl. since by a Breve hath declared, by con∣demning that slandarous booke that vvas vvritten against them) with what face and cō∣science can you extoll aboue the skies these persones that were the writters and appro∣vers of that booke, wherin they vvere con∣demned for schismaticks, yea to be seditious and worse then sooth saiers and Idolators. And why? for sooth, for obeying, and keapin∣ge the decrees and Canons of the churche, in not admitting an Archpriest constituted and sett ouer them without his Holl. Bulles. This accusation of schisme so haynous a crime, The second point in controuersie is for renevving the crime of schisme after his Holl. breue vvas come. is the chief point also of controuersie betwene your discontented bretherne and the Iesuits and Archpriest ioyned vvith them
in affection and error. The vvich being for∣gotten and forgiuen on both parts after the commyng of his Holl. Bulles, and the vnion made: the Archpriest begane againe to sett a broach the vnsauory licor of schisme, cal∣ling and holding them for schismaticks, bi∣cause they denied him obedience vppon the Card. letters. The cause vvhy the Priests vvrot in Latine and Englishe. This is the occasion of writting their bookes in their defence, this is the cau∣se of their complaining to his Holl. and this was also the chief cause of their appeale from the Archpriest. The 2. chief points you touch not, neither come you neare to them in your Apologie: The vnited neuer come neare the point in controuersie. But fill vp your booke with old dissentiones and practises against D. Al∣leine with impertinent letters, vvith Fishers exami∣nations, with praises of perticuler men, vvith disgra∣ces of your ovvne coate and profession, and to be btief with words talke, tatle, and babbell, all quite from the purpose, and nothing to the controuersie in question. To omitt that the Iesuits had not to doe or medle in theis points and contention bet∣wene the Archpriest and the Priests: I say, The fault of our English Iesuits at home. it apperteined to their coat and profession ra∣ther to haue vsed all charitable meanes to ha∣ue vnited them together, then to haue vsed such strang meanes to disloyne and seperat them more then before by exasperating the Priests one against another. I know the socie∣tie vvas at first founded and grovvnded vpon
love and charitie tovvards his neighbor, vpon teaching and making concorde and vnitie: But alas? some in this point doe stagger and haue fare svvarued from the first foundation, and seame to begine to build and vvorke vpō other mens discordes and dissentions, the vvhich as I feare me in the end will work dis∣credit on both sids, so am I sure in the meane time it is the cause of the losse of many a Sou∣le. God amend all that is amisse and geue you grace either to absteine frō setting out your larger Apologie, or els to sett it out with bet∣ter stuff then is in this your first, vvith more truth in handlinge of matters, vvith more charitie to vvards your discontēted brether∣ne and vvith more respect to your ovvne or∣der and vocation, vvhither the Author be an vnited Priest or a Religious Parson. Theare you talk of appeales, Fol. 9. Of time appea∣ling. as thoughe they did Iniurie to the Archpriest to appeale from him. The Iudge a quo from vvhom a mā appealeth, is neuer iniured by appealing frō him. Bicause by appealing a man is constrai∣ned to doe it, rather in his ovvne defence then to dishonor or iniure the Iudge. But they appealed for others asvvell as for them selues. Nei∣ther is this so absurde as you vvould make men beleave for as in some cases, if one gaine the victory by appellation, it doth help all his companions, so lickvvise one may appeale for an other or in the name of a nother. Sisit
eadem causa defensionis, C. Penult. ext. de appellat. & 161. D. D. if it be the same cause of defence. As our Interpretors note. and so it apperteineth not to sedition, as you say, but to defension. But none hath as yet appeared in Rome to present the appeale. Good cause vvhy. their bretherne were so vvell handled there vvith their appeale. It is periculosum for thē to come theare, and therfore are excusable. Besids de iure comuni the appellāt hath a whole yere to prosecute his appeale, Argument. c. ex parte 1. de appel∣lat. Auth. Si qui c. de temp. ap∣pellat. & clem. sicut de appell. c. ex ratione ext. de appell. and if he hath lette that yere, for that cause, the second yere is granted him to persue his appeale. and if he be so lett, that he cannot the second yere persue it, for a iust cause and lett the third ye∣re may be graunted to him to persue his ap∣peale. And what iuster cause of lett can theare be to your brethern, then the might of their aduersaries at Rome, their imprisonment at home, and their vvant of money and meanes to goe or send to Rome? And as for M. M. Charnokes appeale vvas lavvfull. Char∣mocks appeale made in Lorraine it vvas law∣full and to be admitted, as he well proveth in his letter to Card. Burgesius and Nauar. saith. Pag. 91. Ad c. cum cou∣tingat de re∣script. 14. cum nullitatis. no. 7. Hoc verum enim, &c. This is true (that a man cannot appeale from the excommunication af∣ter he is excōmunicated) vvhen the excōmu∣nicatiō is pure and not condicionall: But whē it is vnder condition, except you do this or that, (viz you are excommicated) then it is otherwise. for a man may appeale from a con∣ditionall excommication, yea after the 10.
Daies (allowed to appeale in) before the con∣dition fall out. Which is M. Charnoks case, vvho vvas vvilled not to goe into Ingland without leave vnder the paine of excommu∣nication. Before the condition fill out, that is, before hewent into Ingland, he appealed frō that sentence, and that iustly, as you see out of Nauarr. Fol. 9. b. C. Romana Pa. cum vero de ap∣pella. in 6. You obiect as a great fault, That in the meane space no obedience or regard is had to the Superior During the dependance of the appeale. Why? are you ignorant of this that appella∣tion doth ligare manus Iudicis a quo? bind the Iudgs hands from whom one appealeth. that is, that all Iurisdiction is taken from that Iud∣ge in the matters wherin it is appealed from him. But their appeale is in generall and in all matters from the Archpriest ergo in no mat∣ter hath he iurisdiction ouer them. Mary if they appeale but in some matters only, and disobey him in the rest, they offend hey nous∣lye by that disobedience. And as for the ap∣peale it self (if all be true they lay dovvne theare, as I deame it to be, bicause you do not cōtrovle or refute any part theroof) I thinck neuer men had iuster cause to appeale then they had. Reade then who list, and if he haue any iudgment he vvill confesse as much. As you accuse them here very vniustly for ap∣pealing. so they do full iustly (bicause you do not correct nor cheeck them for it) complai∣ne of the Archpriest iniquitie, Pag. 54.70. for suspending,
interdicting them and taking away their fa∣culties, after their appellation, and after that his hands were bound. Pag. 53. The Archpriest doth against lavve. The lettre with which he suspended them is sett dovvne verbatim in their booke to the Inquisitors. I thincke he is not so ignorant as not to knovve, that nihil debet innouari a iudice a quo, post appellationē. If he knew not so much, yet for the respect and reuerence he ought to haue borne to his Holl. to whom they appealled, he should ha∣ue abstained from those rigorous and seuere actions. If I had bene one of them, I beleave I should haue said. accordinge to the Prover∣be. Hold your hand M. Blakvv. for god sen∣deth a shrevvde covve short hornes. You push at vs vvith the hornes of your suspen∣sions and interdicts, but you hurt vs not, as he did not hurt thā indeed, and therfore they did lavvfully and iustly exercise all the fun∣ctions of Priesthood notwith standing those censures quia latae fuerunt a non suo iudice they having taken all iurisdiction frō him by their appeale. Besids M. Blackw. C. De priore ext. de appell. l. quoniam iudices c. eod. is punishable by lawe, bicause he did not, admitt their appeale. by this and diuers other of his actions, men may see how vnfitt diuines be to gouerne the church, vvithout the aid of Canonistes. The 8. fault is, The 8. fault. Fol. 9. b. for finding fault vvith thē for printing their bookes vvithout perticular name of Author, vvithout licence of Superior and other circumstances of modestie, &c. When you
your selues doe committ the same fault. what perticular name of Author hath this your A∣pol. forsooth, The vnited Priests. and theirs hath By Priests that vveare accused of Schisme. You say: Permissu superiorum, by the permission of our Superior. And they say: Printed at Roan by Ja∣cob Molens. they name the place and printer, and you putt neither place nor printer in yours. For their want of modestie, course them hardly, I do not find fault therewith, so that you your selues had not fell into the sa∣me fault. for in many places you passe also the bands of modestie. Remembre who saith. Turpe eisim Doctori, &c. In this leafe and the next you lay load on them, vvhether iustly or no, I vvill not iudge, but doe leave it to their owne defence. If they haue deserved it, I am full gladd they are tould of it so rovvnd∣ly, to teach them and others that vvrit hea∣reafter to be more modest, and to keape thē selues vvith in the compasse of their matter. In the same leafe it is a vvorld to see, hovv you lay about you to persuade the Readers, that for the causes by you theare alleaged, your bretherne fell againe to contention (af∣ter the receipt of the Bull) against the Arch∣priest. The cause of the last contention since the Bull. came. But they tell another tale, ād put dow∣ne other causes of their contention, vvhich, as it vvas the chiefest moriue of their appeale and of their vvritting to his holl. Pag. 61. you haue quietly omitted theare vvith silence. Thus
they say in effect to his Holl. As soone as they savve his Bull, they submitted them selues to the Archpriest and being desirous of peace, they forgate and forgaue all iniuries passed and specially by vvhich they vvere proclaimed through out Ingland for Schismaticks, by a booke vvritten against them. Then in the next page, they tell their tale thus. Not long af∣ter the common ioy, that ensued of this vnitie, vvhich proceeded of the receipt of his Holl. Bull, the Archpriest of his ovvne accorde, or sett on (as they rather thinck) by the Iesuits, be∣gane againe to renew the ovld vvarre in char∣ging them vvith the ovvld calumnie of schisme, vvritting letters thereof and dispersing the co∣pies abrode euery vvheare (the letter is put dovvne in the 63. pag. of their latin booke) vvherin he reporteth he had receaued a resolu∣tion from Rome, that all they vvhich did not ad¦mitt him for their Superior before the Popes Bull came, vveare Schismaticks and that they should satisfie therfore (that is: recant their schisme) before they be absolued of any Priest that vvas not noated vvith the marke of that schisme. Pag. 120. And for proof hereof they sett dow∣ne in th'end of their appeale, the forme of abiuring this schisme, that euery Priest that vvithstood him, must make before he be ab∣solued in confession. For theis iniuries they appealed and vvrot to his Holl. to haue his iudgment, whether they vveare schismaticks
for this fact, The Pope repre∣hendeth the Archpriest for his seueritie. And quitteth the Priestes frō Schisme. or no? His Holl. since in a Bull of Pacification sent dovvne before Christmas (the which I sawe and read) doth not only ex∣hort both sids to peace and vnitie: But also re∣prehendeth the Archpriest for his ouer seue∣re and austere gouerment, and quitteth your bretherne from the crime of schisme, in con∣demninge the booke that was written by Fa. Lister against them, and approued by his Pro¦uinciall and the Archpriest. The state of the question. This is then the question. Whether the Archpriest did call and compt them Schismaticks after their obedi∣ence made to him vpon the comming downe of his Holl. Bull, for not obeying him vpon the Card. Protectors letters? This is the tre∣ble, vpon vvhich they plaie, and the vvhich they sound against the Archpriest. For either this is true, vvhich they say, or false. If true? (as I haue already proved) they could not be schismaticks therefore, the Pope affirmeth them to be none, and you your selues cōfesse so much, as being sorye that euer mention vvas made thereof) then doe you writt against your owne cōscience, by writinge against a know∣ne truth, defending a falshood, or disguisinge a veritie. If it be false, then had it bene your parte to proue it, ād to shevve that the Arch∣priest neuer vvrot such a lettre, nor prescri∣bed such a forme of abiuration as before, The vnited are bound to ask the other Priestes forgeivennes. If you cannot proue this in your next larger A∣pologie. then are you bound in cōsciēce and
of charitie to aske them forgivenes, for the iniurie you doe them in this your booke, in making the vvorld beleue vvith words vvith∣out proof, that they, and not the Archpriest were the Authors and beginners of these tro∣bles and contentions, since the receipt of his holl: bulles. Look vvel to your selues in this point, least the threats and comminatiōs you mention elsvvhere fall not vpon your ovvne heads, for concealing ād adultering the truth and the causes of this contention, ād for put∣ting them vpon other mens shoulders. Is this to deuise nevv Iniuries offred by the vnquiett, vvhen they are indeed ovvld Iniuries rene∣vved to make and encrease disquietnes and dissention? In the tenth leafe, Jmpertinent. you applie againe the last contention of the Romaine colleage to this quarell novv betvvene the Priestes and the Archp. and the Iesuits: but hovv vnaptly hath ben noated before, ād euery reader that is not starke blind may easly see, ād it is flatt against the rule in lavve that saieth: a diuersis nō fit illatio, theare can be made no good illanciō or consequence from things that be diuers or opposit. Your 9. fault is in calling Card. The 9. fault. Fol. 12. Fol. 103 104. Caie∣taine the Protector your higher Superior and a∣gaine Our highest Superiour vnder his Hollines and from so highe a Superior. vvhich in deed is a fowle ignorant fault in you. Why? is the Protector
of Ingland, The Protector of Jngland is not superior to any Englisman. in that he is Protector your Supe∣rior? Nay, hath he any auctoritye or Iurisdi∣ction vpon the poorest Englishman that is, either at home in Ingland or in Rome? Dare you be so dull as to affirme it? He is called Protector a protegendo, that is: he is honored vvith that title, to helpe, aide and assist the cō∣trey, or any of the nation in their suits and af∣faires they haue in the court of Rome. But as for auctoritye or iurisdiction he hath none ouer any vvhereof he is Protector, as Card. or protector. You are vvillfully blind, and so vvould make your Readers also in making them beleeue that the Protector of the natiō is not only a superior but also the highest Su∣perior our nation hath vnder his Holl. for I tell you, he hath no more auctoritye ouer an Englishman as Protector, then I haue vvhich is none at all. vpon this error or ignorāce Fa. Lister founded and built his ruinons booke of schisme, vpon theis vvords. Qui vos spernit, &c. as thoughe they had dispised the Prote∣ctor their Superior. Novv you see hovv the good Fa. was deceaved. In your next Apolo∣gie recall this grosse and palpable error, or shevve vs your reasons, Why he is our Supe∣rior as he is Protector. And hereby is made voide all your speaches, of gods iudgment. kin∣ge Saules example, Fol. 12. b. disobedience so often iterated, &c. Bicause the Protector vvas not their su∣perior, ād next he did not proue, neither can
you prove for him, Fischers memo∣riall. that he vvas the Popes Delegat to institute an Archpriest ouer thē. In the 11. Fol. 7.13.26. b. 68.80. b. 81.82.95. VVhat vvas this Fissher. leafe you repeat againe the as∣sociation and make mention of Fischers me∣morialls as you doe in many places of your booke, stuffing ād farcing the same, with one and the self same thinge often repeated. But vvhat vvas this Fisher of vvhose examination you make such accompt as of a Ievvel? In your ovvne conceit he vvas a levvde Felowe, a Rogge and of no credite and by your ovv∣ne report one of the most exorbitant disorderly fel∣lovves in the Romaines sturres. And yet forsoo∣the you vvill haue all the vvorld beleaue his examination. Fol. 93. But your Reader must vndre∣stand, that this miserable fellovve comming to Rome, after that the sturres in the collea∣ge vveare happely finished, he vvas caught by the back in Rome by those against whom he had written and dispersed the often named memoriall vvritten in D. Fol. 97. Griffith his hovvse in Cambray. and so was putt into the hands of the officers of his Holl. The miserable fellovve being apprehended and fearing the Gallies or the gallovves, to saue his life and limmes, vvas readie to svveare and forsvveare, yea and to writt and speake Placentia. that is to say, such thingb as he knevv vvould best please the offended persons, and by which he might ob∣teine for him self perdon and libertie. And albeit the Author of this booke counteth
him a naughtie fellowe, yet would he haue his reader beleeue, that all that he spake or vvrott vvas ghospell. Fol. 82. And vvhy so? Mary bi∣cause he subscribed his examination: Ego R. Fish. it a dico. iuro, & ratifico. IR. Fish. do say so, sweare and ratefie. And bicause Fisher deposed much more, then you haue laid dovvne here ta∣ctis Euangelijs putting his hand vpō the ghos∣pell. Fol. 97. b. The 3. reason vvhy vve ought to be∣leave all vvas true, Fol. 82. was bicause. All this is consirmed againe by the subscription of his Holl. of∣ficer. Ego Acharitius Sqorsionius, &c. vvhich you ad for more credit of the matter forsooth as though the Popes officers do not subscribe to many a lye, that false fellowes make in their examination. He did not subscribe to giue more credite to the matter thereby, as you ignorantly say, but to giue faith and cre∣dit that that vvas it vvhich he deposed or said in his examination, be it true or false. But vvhy should I or any other gyue cre∣dit to Fishers depositions, Fisher vvas pariured by you ovvne Confessio. vvhen your ovvne consciēce make you to tell vs that all he spa∣ke in a manner vvas but lyes. For thus you say: Fol. 95. And albeit vvee vvill not affirme all to be true vvhich he said, yee many things are such a coold not be vvell fayned, and are confirmed other∣vvize, and the speaking voluntarilie vpon his each must be presumed to haue had somme care also of his conscience, &c. vvhy doo you not beleeueall he said to be true, but Many things seeing he spake
voluntariely vpon his oath, and must be presumed, to haue hadd somme care also of his conscience? Yf you beleeue not all he said vpon his voluntarie oath, why should you or your Readers be∣leeue Many things he spake and vttered vpon his voluntarie oath, and constrayned for feare of his life? I see no reason vvhy I should not deeme him periured in all he sayd, and to ha∣ue said all against his conscience, to please them in whose hands his life lay, as well as you Deeme him to haue bene periured in so∣me things, and in some thinges to haue spo∣ken against his conscience. For if you thinck not all to be true he said, vpō his oth? I thinek nothing at all he said vppon his oath to be true, for the reasones a soresaid. For Qui semel presumitur malus, semper presumitur malus in eo∣dem genere mali. Yf he be periured in saying some things, he is presumed to be a periured person in all he vttered vpon his oath. Consider Fi∣sher standing quaking before his iudge. Your reader must considerer Fisher to haue bene one of the chiefest Doers in the Romane sturres against the Fathers, and after to haue gone into Inglād there to defame them, then to haue commen into the Lovve countreis and there to haue vvritten against them a slanderous libell or memoriall (all this you report in your booke, Fol. 94. b. in the places before quoted) at last to haue cōmen againe to Ro∣me (more then half conuerted as you say) and there to haue bene apprehended and
pursued by such as he had before defamed standing before the Popes Atturney, qua∣king and quivering through feare of his life, and then to depose or say vvhat he knevv vvould please and like those in vvhose hands the thred of his lief lay either to be lenght∣ned or shortened. Novv coniecture you, if this vveare a voluntarie oath or no if he had any remorce of conscience or respected what he said saue only that vvhich might procure his libertie? Add this, that the Authors of this Apologie doe not beleeue them selves, that all was true, vvhich he said vpon his oa∣the. All theise circunstannces laied together, vvhat haue you gotten by namyng Fishe and his examination so often as you doe? Truly with vvise ād prudēt Readers nothing at all: but it doth reather make against you, and so you might vvel haue leaft it out. The fault you lay vppon them, Fol. 14. No fault to call the Protectors povver in que∣stion. for calling into controuersie the Protectors actions and povver no fault at all, bicause he had no auctoritie o power to institute an Archp. nor was he their Superior as hath bene shevved before: but the fault was in the Archp. in accepting of that dignitie in such sort and yours in consenting vnto him and taking him for your Superior, vvho vvas then no more your Superior thē the man in the moone. And in that you add. They bring in contempt vvhat so euer hath bene de in Rome hitherto, about the institution and conti∣nuation
of this Hierarchie: You may vvell put hitherto and continuation in your purses, for it is vvell knovvne both by their confes∣sions and yours that they impugned the in∣stitution made by the Card. only and obeid, so soone as they savve the Popes bull. A fitten. And therfore thit is one of your accustomed figu∣res called a fitton: to bring them vnduly into discredit. This Archp. au∣ctoritie is nevv And to proue they speake contem∣ptuously you add, they call it a nevv and ex∣traordinary auctoritie. Ergo they speak con∣temptuously. If to speak truth be to speak contemptuously. I grant your conclu∣sion: but if that be newe and extraordina∣rie, that neuer was in Christs church before (as this officie with soe large a Iurisdiction, of which they meane, and you your selues kno∣we it well but that you list to wrangle) full su∣re it is, that this Archp. office was neuer in Christs church before, and neuer in Christs churche before. and so is it nevve and extraordinary, and you haue she Wed your vanitie in correcting Magnificat. They kne∣we so well as you that it is an Ancient dignitie in Christs church, and haue read so well as you the title de Officio Archypresbyteri, of the Ar∣chp. office, but withall they knewe more then you (as it seemeth) that an Archpr. had neuer the same iurisdiction, or greater then all the Bishops of 2. realmes had, Neuer Archpr. had such Juris∣diction. when they weare in possession of their Bishopricks. This is in deede a newe and extraordinary
dignitie, is it not my brethren, what say you? tell m, (I pray you) in your larger Apolog. what you iudge of it, and why you complai∣ne of your brethren heere for calling it, a newe auctoritie. Mary if they had said or written that his holl. could not giue him so large and ample iurisdiction and auctoritie, then might you haue iustly reprehended thē for so fowle an error. But for attributing cō∣tempt to them for saying truth, and that your conscience doe tell you to be truth, surely you haue committed a sowle fault, and take heede that it proceedeth not of Splen: assured I am that you taske them vniustly for it. Besides, a fovvle fault. your fault is in taking your aduer∣saries words by peece meale onely, as here∣ticks are accustomed to doe, and leaving out his discourse. Yf you had meant vvell you should haue ansvvered the foundation and ground of their discourse, Pag. 9. the which you pas∣se ouer in silence, bicause in truth you are not able to answere it. I egge you lett vs see vvhat you can doe in your larger Apolog. for this vvas sett out in hast, as it seemeth by the sub∣staunce thereof. It follovveth: Fol. 14. Your brethren vnpleasing and obtruded au∣ctoritie. vvhich are bothe true: vnpleasing to them to haue an Archp. (the verie inferior di∣gnitie in Gods church) in steade of a Bishopp vvhich they desired. Obtruded, by Fath. Par∣sons
and other englishmens aduice in Rome giuen to his hol. as you confesse your selues. Fol. 7. disorderly procured. bicause it vvas procured not by the vsvall and accustomed order of procuring dignitiesād offices in Gods church and by such men as it touched not, neither by right or lavve (being dead to the vvorld) had they to deale or meddle att all in that. Fol. ibid. for 2. Iesuits (as you confesse before) did mittere falcem in messem alienam, meddle vvith other mens matters. Secularia secularibus, regula∣ria regularibus, saith the lavve. Lett secular priests meddle in matters apparteining to se∣cular priests, and religious men in matters belonging to religious men. Exorbitant frō the office of an Archp as hath beene shevved before: for by reason of his large iurisdiction it may vvell be called Exhorbitant, vvithout offence to his holl. or any man els: so long as it is not denyed but that his hol: may institu∣te such an Archp. Disonant from reason, Fol. 14. that is to say: that one man should haue the Iuris∣diction of all the Archbishops and Bishops of Ingland, and Scotland. For if they had much a doe, each one to gouerne his ovvne diocesse, by vvhat reason cane one mā vvith his 12. assistants gouerne them all? C. de multa ext. de praebend. Be∣sides the holie Canons and reason it self vvill not that one man should haue 2. benefices, much lesse 2. bishoppricks. Ergo it is much more dissonant from reason, that one man
supply the place and roome of so many Bis∣hops. Beside, all this vvas spoken by your brethren before the Popes bull came dovv∣ne. for so soone as they savve the bull, they subiected their reason, to his hol. vvill and auctoritie, vvithout asking a reason either vvhie or vvherefore. bicause his vvill in mat∣ters of benefices, Ʋaine reprehē∣sion. is reason. and therefore you did ill to taxe your brethren, for that they said both trulie and dulie before the coming of the breue, and vndulie to impute it to thē as spoken since the coming of the said breue. the vvhich is a fovvle fault in you, if to dis∣credit men vndeseruedly, be a fault vvith you. your vvits a vvoll gathe∣ring. And to the accustomed practize of Gods Church. I meruell vvhere your vvittes vveare (if you haue any at all) vvhen you laid this dovvne as spoken Contemptuoufly of the dig∣nitie and office of the Arch. hovve can a most assured and knovvne truth be cōtempt? you are very ignorant of the practise of Gods Church if you knovye not this: for, vvither it be to be vnderstood of the instituting of the Archp. by the Card, letters, or of his am∣ple iurisdiction: it is most true they saie, as hath bene euidently proued before, and you shal neuer be able to giue one instance to the contrarie. Giue one in∣stance. Fol. 14. b. Yf you can, bring it in your larger Apol. and I vvill say as you saie, they spke ō∣temptuously of the dignitie. The speeches vvhich follovve are not al∣lowed
or liked either of me, or of any such vnpartiall priests as I am▪ and I leaue to them either to explicat their meaning or to recall that which they haue vnduly vttered. The which I would aduise both them and you to do, wherein you are both faultie. the which weare an euident signe of sinceritie an chari∣tie in both. God grannt you so to doe, this is all the hurt I wishe you. It is a fowle fault also to call their preten∣ded association a popular regiment. Fol. 15. Another foul fault. But the desire you haue to discredit your brethren, make you to forgett what you said before, ād so to contradict your selues, as commonly al doe that flowe in words without matter, and say what they list without proof, as you doe ordinarly throughout your booke. For befo∣re, you tell the tale, Fol. 7. that they resolued to be∣gin againe by deuising a certaine nevv associa∣tion amongst themselues vvith officers and pre∣lacies of their ovvne institucion, &c. and that his Holl. should be forced aftervvards to con∣firme them. Nowe by these Prelats they mea∣ned Bishops, as they them selues say, ād you confesse somuch your selues, that Bishopps weare demaunded. and afterwards you obiect to M. D. Bishopp ād M. Charnock, that they vveare appointed to be Bishops. Yf this be true, hovve dare you call that a popular regi∣ment, vvherein are Ecclesiasticall officers, vn∣der a Bishopp their hedd and conductor?
That Which ensueth: Fol. 16. Contradiction. And thus much a∣bout their contempt of impugnation of the au∣ctoritie instituted by his Holl. and confirmed aftervvards by an expresse Breue, sauoreth of cōtradiction. to be first instituted by his hol. and aftervvards to be confirmed by his Hol. bicause the Popes institution or collation of a benefice al Waies containeth in it expresse confirmation. and therefore if he had beene instituted by his Holl. there had beene no neede of confirmation. But bicause he was not lawfully instituted by the Card, as your brethren sayd, and is abooue proued, there∣fore he hadd neede in deede of a bull called, perinde valere to coroborat and giue force to the first inualiditie and imperfect institution. and so vvhether you vvill or no, your bre∣thren are deliuered from Contempt and im∣pugnation of the auctoritie instituted by his hol. seing theare was no such institution made by his Hol. but by the Card onely. The 10. The 10. fault is an enormious fault. Fault I finde vvith you, is a fovvle and enormous fault. and I am ashamed for your sakes, that euer vnited priest should be so farre ouer shoes as to impute that for a fault, vvhich is a solid and certaine article of our faith: Yea, that vvhich they say, is the foundation of the Cath. faith. and yet you that fight daily for that faith, finde fault vvith it. Fol. 16. b They aske: vvho vpon earth is vvar∣ranted from erring, but one? and not he in all
things neither, You vvonder at this doctrine and yet you confesse it to be true in some sen∣ses and interpretations: and aftervvards you say: it is dangerous and scandalous to teach the people in this generall manner, that auctoritie is not an infaillable rule of truth, in all that haue auctoritie, and by consequence, that no man is bound in all things to beleeue vvhat euery man in auctoritie shall teach him, bi∣cause theare is no man vpon earth vvarran∣ted from erring but one, and not he in all things. Is not this true and cath. doctrine? is not this our faith? that euery Archbishop, bi∣shop, and Archpriest may erre, and that but one in the vvhill vvorld, hath the priuilege not to erre hovv can true and cath. Hovv can cath. doctrine be scā∣dalous to cath. men. doctrine be either dangerous to be taught or scandalous You haue doon both dangerously and scan∣dalously, to mislyke it in your text, and to note it in your mergent: dangerous and offen∣siue doctrine, but to whome? mary, to men blinded vvith mallice, as you seeme in this place to be. vvhat? Priests that suffer for cath. Religion to finde fault vvith this propositiō: None vpon earth is vvarranted from erring but one? Why! looke better about you. is it not for this onely article that you endure pri∣sons, chaines, and most cruell death? viz: that all men in the vvorld may erre in religion ex∣cept the Pope? is not this the article that ma∣keth vs to beleeue the Ghospell to be the
vvord of God? bicause the Pope that cannot erre teacheth vs, that it is the vvord of God. Haue not all those that haue succeeded th'o∣ther XI. Apostles in their Seas, most dange∣rously erred? and vvhy? bicause they had not this priuilege vvhich vvas giuen to S. Peter and to his successors onely. My beleif, for the vvhich I liue in banishment, is: that all the Prelats and superiors in the vvorld may erre except his holl. vvho is Christs vicare and S. Peters successor. And vvhat els doe they say? If I haue an erroneous faith, I praie you teach me an other in your expected Apol. In this faith I vvas baptized, in this faith norished, and for this faith (by Gods grace) I shall be reddy to shedd my blood. For this faith, our blessed brethren haue most constātly suffred martyrdoome, and for this faith heere you check your discontented brethren. Oure poore contrey may sing vvelladay, The priests che∣cked for laying dovvne a cath. proposition. vvelladay, to see heere Cath. priests and con∣fessors to be so blynded in contention and de¦sire of reuenge, and discredit of their bre∣thren priests, and that in defence of other men, that to their ovvne dishonor and euer∣lasting discredit they check and finde fault vvith them for speaking catholickly ād chri∣stianly, to call the teachinge of the cheifest point and article of our Religion, dangerous, scandalous, and offensiue doctrine. vvhither vvill mallice leade you in the end, if you goe
on as you haue begune? A strange vniō. Are you so vnited a∣gainst your brethren to discredit them what soeuer it cost you, that you disvnite your sel∣ues from the cath. doctrine, from his Holl. and the cath. church? Fie vpon it. I am both ashamed and sorie that you haue so ouerlas∣hed your selues. They say: All the prelats and superiors in the vvorld may erre, his Holl. onely excepted. You say: The Pope can∣not erre in deci∣ding controuer∣sies of faith or religion. It is scandalous and offensiue doctrine. They say. Auctoritie is not an infaillable rule of truth but in one onely. viz the Pope (who by reason of his auctoritie cannot erre) You say: That it is a dangerous doctrine. They say: that Archpriests, Archdi∣acons, yea Archbishops haue doone amisse and svvarued from the truth. You say: it may pro∣ue dangerous and scandalous to teach the people in this manner against their superiors. Why? (my maisters) must truth be lest vntaught for feare of scandall? where haue you learned that? and if there were any scandall in tea∣ching this doctrine, as it is impossible there shoulde yet is it Scādalū acceptū nō datū. they gaue no scandall in saying the truth, but you haue taken scādall thereby, and doe by your writing scandalise others. Ʋaevobis, What? do you not teach the people thus much? that all may erre except the Pope. Yf you doe not, you must answeare for it, bicause you teach them not the truth. yf you doe so teach, (as I am sure you doe) what a shame is it then for you
to taxe and cheek your brethren for the sa∣me, The priests vn∣duly checked. as so Wers of dangerous, offensiue, and seā∣dalous doctrine? I conclude th with them (yea with the Cath. church) that the Pope is the onely prelat that cannot erre in deciding a controuersie or doubt in faith and religion, all the world els may erre in deciding of such doubtes. But (say they) and not he in all things. That is: The Pope may erre in matters of fact. the Pope him self who hath so singular ād eminent a priuilege not to erre in matters of faith, may yet and often dooth erre in some thinghs. I coniure and charge your conscien∣ce, as you shall answere for it at the day of iudgment, first, whither you did not knowe when you wrot this, that they meant of mat∣ters of fact: that is, that the Pope in matters of fact may erre so well as an other man. yf you did knowe it? why doe you reprehend it? Is it not a true and cath. assertion and propo∣sition? Doe you make the Pope a God, or a man? Is not this good, true, and cathol. do∣ctrine? The Pope is a man, and as a man may erre and synne, The Pope is a sinfull man as others are. for he hath his passions of lo∣ue and dislike, of affection, and not affection to a man, as other men haue? he may be ill informed, and by that information doe wrōg and iniustice to another. yea there is no syn∣ne except heresie but he may commit it by his frailtie, if the bridle of Gods grace doe not keepe him in order. Is he better then
S. Peter, to whome he succeedeth? dooth the Prophet lye him self that saith omnis ho∣mo mendax. yf he or you for him should say he weare no synner, you weare both lyers by S. Iohns verdict. yf wee respect his spirituall and supernaturall auctoritie in forgiuing and retayning of synnes, in not erring in questiō of faith? Wee may well say, The Pope for his povver, is as it vvere a God on earth. he is a God on e∣arth. but if wee respect him as a man? he is a meere synner as others are, and may erre ād be deceiued by affection or information as an other man. doe you hould it for an Article of faith, that all Popes be saued? all in heauen and none in hell? albeit I doo piously thinke them all to be in heauen, yet am I not bound to beleeue it. Ans if all this which I haue said, be as true as the ghospell, ƲƲhereein the Pope may erre. why may not the Pope erre in somme of his commandemēts in his instituting of Bishops and Archb. by false information? aswell as the Archp. may erre in his decrees ād comaūdements? which yet with great absurditie, you thinke to be absurd, teach me (I pray you) in your lar∣ger Apologie, who hath giuen the Pope that priuilegie that he cannot erre in matter of fact, so Well as his inferiors, or that he hath not his passions so well as other men, or thar he cannot be deceiued and abused by false∣hood and flatterie and by fraudulent infor∣macion, so well as inferior prelats may be∣teach me this, Et eris mihi magnus Apollo. this
is not to flatter the Pope (as you doe) nor to mainteine false doctrine, as you seeme heere to doe, by disalowing of the true and sincere doctrine. But this is the Christian and Cath. faith that a lawyer hath learned and is bound to teach it you (you vnited diuines) Which seeme to be ignorant of it. The Pope him self permitteth euery man (that hath in∣terest therein) to scann and examyne his let∣ters and bulles, and liketh well of it, bicause they may be gotten by surreption and ill in∣formatiō: and so confesseth him selfe he may be deceiued and erre in matters of fact ād in∣formation. but the iust examen of the Arch. institution by the Card. letters, haue so nett∣led him, and you his vnited brethren, that to disgrace the dooings, ād the iust fact of your discontented brethren, you fall hedlong by forgetfulnes, Grosse absurdi∣ties. into these grosse and intolle∣rable absurdities in such men as you are, as to call the Christien and Cath. doctrine, dange∣rous, scandalous, and offensiue, and to compte it absurditie to say, his holl: may erre in some of his ordonances and commādements. Fol. 16. b In your next I praie you tell me, why a man may not argue against his Holl: (touching erring in matters fact) by the same arguments vvhich they vse against the Archp. and others. For matters of fact, is he not a man, and a sinfull (as hath beene said) as they are? Ergo vbi est eadem ratio, ibi erit eadem Iuris dispositio.
But you vse your common fraude heere to deceiue your necligent reader. they doe not, Fraude. argue agvinst his Hol. by the same argument vvhich they vse against the Archp. but doe say the quite contrarie. They say: All Archpri. in the world can erre both in matter of faith and matter of fact also. but his Hol. of all mē in the World hath onely that priuilege, that he cannot erre in matter of faith, albeit he be not priuileged more then others, frō erring in matters of fact. howe say you? is this to ar∣gue against his Holl. by the same argument vsed against the Archp. truly these your doings are to argue against all conscience, (I will not say) all honestye. You aske: ƲVhat othervvaie heresie tooke at the begynning against Ecclesiast. Gouuernors, Fol. 17 ƲVhich vvay came hersy into the vvorld? vvhat other gate did some open to heresie? sure∣ly, not this common gate, but another back gate, quite opposit to this. For these mē tea∣che that the Pope cannot erre in matters of faith. and those that opened the gate to here∣sie taught and doe still teach (which is the foundation stone of their heresie) that the Pope and all doe and can erre, that the wholl Church (whereof wee beleeue the Pope is hedd) doo and may erre, not onely in fact (as your brethren truly teache) but also in faith, and religion. howe say you, is not this true? did not heresie begyn with this doctrine, and dooth it not continue in the same still? And
thus your questions are brieflie answeared. You goe on to showe howe they passed onto diminishe the credit ād estimacion of their Su∣periors, Fol. ibid. ƲƲranglers. ādparticularly of the Arch. I see right well, that you are but wranglers. The Archp, in those daies you talke of, was not their Su∣perior as hath beene before prooued that is, before the Popes bull came to confirme him Of which tyme, you talke heere quite out of time. Nay, they went about to diminish the credit of their immediat and higher superiors in Rome, to vvytt, the Card. protector and his Hol. you might haue putt his Hol. in your purse. for they honor and reuerence him in word and deed, asmuch as you doe, and as they are bound to doe, as by Reading their bookes may appeere. but you will needs dra We his Hol. into the quarrel with the Prote∣ctor and the Archp. as in the first chapt. you drawe your brethren by force into all the quarrels of Paris, The Card. vvas not the superior Rome, and Flanders. Tou∣ching the Card. he was no more their Supe∣rior then you are myne, as I haue shewed be∣fore and therefore it is but a roy of yours to deceiue your reader and: to seeme to say somthing, when in deede you say nothing to the matter or purpose. Let vs heare their vndulifull speeches a∣gainst a deade Cardinal, erueillousvu∣dutiful speaches but yet a good Car∣dinal as you say, That vvas protector of the English college at Rome, and aftervvards ho∣nored
by the title of Protector of Ingland. what vndutifull speach is heere against him? dare you for shame deny that he was Protector of the college, before he was Protector of the Realme? I my self and many yet liuing can re¦prooue you. but suppose he was not: what vn dutifull speach is it to saie, he was protector of the College? or is the vndutifull speach in saying, he was honored with the title of Pro∣tector of Ingland? Why: was is not an honor for him to be Protector? Is not Cardinal Far∣nesius honored this daie with the same title? thinke you any Car. Would take it, if he we∣are not honored by it? what a vaine toy is it, for you to finde fault with this wherein the∣are is no fault at all? you replie: Fol. 17. they doe not graunt he vvas so in deede, nor they did not ac∣knovvlege him for such howe proue you this? Mum. That which followeth, The pratector no Superior. seemeth to be a high matter in a lowe howse, as to say, they weare not bound to beleeue him in a matter of such cōsequēce. That they said true herein, is pro∣ued already, that they hild him not for their superior, and therefore weare not bound to obey his Ordinance. That he was not, nor that the present Protector as Protector nowe is not their Super. hathe al ready beene she∣wed, which being true, they weare not then bound to obay him. And where you add, that they are not to giue
creditt to the Card. bare words &c. it is the same you repeated before, and is before like wise answeared. The protector affected to one partie. For their accusing him of too much affection to the one part, you can finde noe fault with them for the same. for as you report your selues, he was informed and in∣structed by the one partie onely, and follo∣vved the same parties counsell, to reiect the request of the Priests, that would haue hadd a Bishop or tvvo, and to make an Archpr. and such a man Archp. as that partie aduised him. If this be not, to be too much affected to the one partie, ād to be ouer partiall, I knovv not vvhat partiallitie and affection is. To leaue to other men to iudge hovve dee∣re a Patrō and father, Fol. 17. b A super fluous complaint. Card. Caretane vvas to our nation, I cannot omitt your accusation of your brethren For vnkyndly and vnreuerē∣tly speaking of him specially in the English boo∣ke. yf you could haue found any vnkynd or vnreuerent speache, you vvould not haue passed it ouer so sleightlie vvith out setting it dovvne, seeing you haue sett dovvne many things of lesser importance: note the pag. and then I vvill beleeue you, no nor then neither, till I see it vvith myne eyes, you haue so oft deceiued me. you meane perhaps that which follovveth: for that they doe soe contemne the institution of the Arch. made by hī. they are so farre from, to be counted vnkynde ād irreuerent for that fact, that they are to be
highly praised for it. He did against the de∣crees of the church therein, and they did as the Canons and constitutions of the church commaunded them, as hath beene sufficiētly prooued before. You sett this matter of resi∣sting the Protector often a broche, to fill vp your booke, and vvith poore silly Readers to bring your discontēted brethren into dis∣credit. but the discreditt turneth vpon your ovvne heds that, are so ignorant to beleeue and thinke, a Cardinalls bare letters contey∣ning in them (by the expresst commandement of his Holl.) Ignorance. can conferre a dignitie or benefice to any man. I am ashamed of your Ignorance being so many heads as you pretēd to be, ād hauing so many eyes amongst you, that not one could discouer this fault and grosse igno∣rance, but still beat vpō it, as vpon your chei∣fest defence and refuge. But alas for wo? Fol. ibidem. (my vnited brethren) vvhat is this that followeth? They go about in one place of their booke to hevve (the institution of the Archpriest made by the Card. Prote∣tector) to be voyde and vaine and of no force by 21. fōd Reasons. what is this I heare? haue they 21. Reasons for them against the institution of the Archpriest? vvhat? Not one of 21. Reasons ansvve red. haue you answeared them? No forsooth. vvhat! not one of 21? no, not one. vvhy so? (pray you)? bicause they be fond and deuised by them selues, Fol. ibidem. vvhereof no one hath any force at all. Is it possible? you might
easely then haue answered one or tvvo of thē at the least, if your leysure, or hast offeing foorth your booke had not permitted you to haue ansvveared all. vvhat! meane you to leave the victorie to your aduersaries, or will you ansvvere these reasons in your larger A∣pol. that is comming? I blush for your sakes that so many vnited Priests, that your Supe∣rior, and the Iesuits vvhose cause you defend, did not ansvvere one fond reason of 21. vvhereof not one hath any force at all. here your Reader be he neuer somuch affected vnto you, must needs stay and admyre your silence, he must needs stagger also to see you lett your aduer∣saries ronne avvaie vvith the victorie. The Priests ha∣ue gotten the victorie. I praie you, vvho is most likely to haue the truth on his syde, he that aleageth Reasons for him self, or he that sayth onely: your Reasons  fond, The vnited flie from the matter in question. and of no force at all, and yet prodeth no one of them to be such? This is it which I haue ould you alwaies, that you flie from the matter in question. The question is this whi∣ther the Archpriest was not trulie and dulie instituted by the Card. letters? your Aduer∣surie saith no. and for profe of his assertion, he layeth dovvne 21, reasons. You comme and say: he vvas rightly and duly instituted by the Card. but you prooue it not by any Rea∣son, neither doo you confute any one of their Reasons, but onely by saying. They are fond all of no force at all. the poorest and simplest Co∣bler
in a toune, cann after this sort answeare the learneest man in a vvholl contrey. A false conclu∣sion. You conclude as vntrulie that a Card. letters beare credit vncontrovvleable in any Catholick Court Christian as hath beene shewed before out of Rebuffus. Lett the Protector of Spaigne or Frānce send his letters to these courts saying he hath expresse cōmandemēt from his Hol. to institute and constitute an Ecclesiasticall office that was neuer theare before, or to cō∣ferre any benefice: his letters should not be esteemed, nor take their effects, without his Hol. expresse commission in writing. You charge them vvith not sparing his Holl. him self, Fol. 18. The Priests are vniustly charged vvhich con∣tempt. but yet according to your cu∣stome you prooue it not. Their vvords nip∣pingly by you aleaged, as they may be vvell spoken in their sense, so prooue they not their contempt or irreuerence against his Holl. which you should prooue. For your brethren in the pag. by you alleaged, doo ma∣ke a comparison betweene them selues and their aduersaries. that as their aduersaries thinke them selues more stronger to vexe them, so they, the more iniuries they suffer, the more bould and coragious they vvill be, in freely repelling of them. this is the sense of the sentence. Nippers. from vvhich you haue nip∣ped these words. vvhat immodestie (I praie you) is heere against his Hol. or what profes∣sion of libertie of speaches, is heere against
all things and all men, as you (like spiders) doo gather? the comparison there made, is betvveene thē selues oppressed, ād their op∣pressers, vvhich toucheth not at all his Hol. much lesse all men. Amend amend, I am wea∣rie vvith repeating your faults and follies. Indignum quippe nimis gloria nostra (say they) net amplius ferendum duimus, Fol. 18. b. &c. Wee esteeme it to be vnvvoorthy of our glorie, and no further to be tol∣lerated, &c. As you doo imitate heere M. Ie∣vvell in your & cateras, so must I say to you, as one said to him: Th'vnited haue the chyncoughe. Coughe out my vnited Brethren, what haue you the Chyncou∣ghe? add that which follovveth in their boo∣ke, and see if any Christien man vvill finde fault vvhich their vvords. Euery honest man I am sure, vvill mislyke of your false plaie, in taking that which serueth your turne (as you thinke) to discredit them, and leaue out the substaunce of the matter. you haue learned this trick of nipping their vvords with an &c. of Iewell, ād such ennemyes of Gods church. this then they said: vvee esteeme it to be vnvvor∣thy of our glorie and no further to be tollerated, that vvee, A vvorthie Speache. vvhich are sent by the Sea Apostolick (in to Ingland) to dravve other men out of Shisme, and to bring them into Christes fold, should be falsely de∣famed throughout the vvholl vvorld to be Schism∣ticks our selues, and to haue giuen such horrible scan∣dals and to be coumpted and iudged such. your, &c. being thus discouered and enlarged, vvhat
fault cann you finde vvith this speache? a speach vvorthy men of their professiō. they were haynously slaundered by Fa. Listers scā∣dalous booke of schisme, wherein he affir∣med (vvithout proof) that they were schis∣maticks and vvorst then sooth sayers. vvhat contempt of his Hol. is theare in these words? and yet forsooth to prooue they contemned him, this place is brought and alleaged. surely your witte vveare ouer whelmed with ouer much mallice or passion, when you vvrott this your Booke, the which so blinded you, that you thought euery thing they vvrott, vvas in contempt of his Hol. els would you neuer haue cited this place for an example. As foolishlie you sett downe their words out of the English booke against thē, Fol. 18. b. vvell spoken. which are spoken very prudently and Iudiciously. For if the Pope dooth not vse to giue the simpliest benefice that is, but by the ordinary waie, vvith his Bulls: vvho cann presume, that he vvould so basely esteeme of the English Clergie, vvhich is in contynuall fight vvith the enemyes of that Sea, and specially for the preeminēce of that Sea, as to gieue them a Superior by thaduise of 2. Iesuits and one secular Priest, extraordinaryly and without his buls. You should haue answered this ve∣hement presumption, which stādeth on your discōtented brethrens side, against the Card. letters, and not to haue drawne their vvords
(vncharitably) as spoken in contempt of his Hol. which are nothing so. Then they tell you plainly that there is greet reason why his Hol. Fol. 18. b. A reasonable Speache. should not appoint a Supe∣rior ouer them vvithout their aduise and allovvan∣ce: and that in dooing contrarie he should de against the Canons of the Church, and against the decrees of Popes and Emperours, &c. howe say you (my Maisters)? Tot. tit. Ext. de Elect. is it not great Reason the Clergie should chose their Superior? haue Popes a∣gainst Reason made so many notable decrees touching Elections? haue they occupied their vvitts and auctoritye in a matter vnrea∣sonable? yf Election be reasonable in others, why is it not reasonable in Ingland? yf it be reasonable that the Clergie of other Con∣tryes chose their Bishops, Deanes, and Pro∣uosts, vvhy is it not reasonable in Ingland, that the Clergie should chose their superior I see no reason of diuersitie, touching the Reasonablenes of the fact or act. You thin∣ke it is a sufficient confutatiō to alleage their vvords onely, and you thinke all men so blinded as you your selues are that cann see no Reason in them. vvhen they are most rea∣sonable you answere neither their Reasons, their examples, Th'vnited neuer ansvvere Rea∣son nor auctori∣tie. nor auctorityes, and yet you vvill haue men of Reason to beleeue you vvithout reason at all you quoate their au∣ctorities in your margent, and yet you vvill make vs beleeue they haue no Reason, and
by consequent the Canons which they alea∣ge, to be against Reason, bicause they are a∣gainst you, and that you cannot answere them. The Canons (say they) doo allovve, that the Clergie may and should (if they finde them selues vvronged by having a Bishopp put on them against their consent and liking) resist and vvith stand the intruded. But they haue an Archp. sett ouer them without their consent and liking, ergo according to the Canons, they may resist and vvithstand him. and so by consequence, this their resisting him is reasonable bicause they are vvarranted by the Canons. what say you to this argument? you are as Domb as Fishes. heere you shoulde haue shevved your con∣ning, learning, and Rhetoricke, and haue answeared this argument or Canons, Th'vnited tri∣umphe before the victorie. and so haue triumphed after the victorie, and not before, as often you doo. but being by the Truth strooke starke domb, you leaue, vvill you or nill you, the victorie to your aduer∣sarie, and giue thereby your Readers to vn∣derstand, that they had reason to withstand, and not to accept the Archpriest at his first comming in so desorderly, and against the Canons as he did, your Brethren in all their books and discourses, The corner stone of the question untouched. putt this dovvne as an infaillable ground, ād as it vveare the corner stone of all their vvritings and sayings: that the Archpriest vvas put on them at the first, against
th'orderly course of appointing and constituting Su∣periors either by the Canons, or of the Pope. This is in dispute, and this ground you should haue vndermyned, and shewed the contrarie, ei∣ther by lawe or by practise. but as I haue al∣waies told you, you flie from it, and shewe your selues cowards. This is not the questiō vvhich you seeme to insinuat, and would ma∣ke your Readers to beleeue it, that they should saie and hold: Not the que∣stion. that the Pope could not giue them such a Prelat vvith so large and ample Iurisdiction, or vvithout their consents and election. Note well, they neuer said or thought this, neither can you of this iustly accuse them. if you cann shewe me that they teache or ha∣ue vvritten this, then vvill I crie out on them as yon doo, and call them Schismaticks iust∣ly, as they haue beene called vvrongfully. For this were to abbridge in deede the emi∣nent power his Hol. The Popes emi∣nent but not ordinary povver hath Ex plenitudine potesta∣tis, to giue Iurisdiction to vvhome he list, and as largely and amplie as he list. Marke the∣se points vvell. for it is one thing to say: A superior is putt vpon vs against Reason and the or∣derly manner and practise that euer hitherto hath beene obserued in Christes church, and a nother thing to say: his Hol. cannot appoint vs such a su∣perior vvith such auctoritye ouer vs against our vvills: for the former, is a lavvfull and iust cō∣plaint, and the seccond is a schismaticall Pride.
But what if they doo not speake as you make them to speake? vvhat if you vse M. False plaie. Ievvells tricks, to foyst in vvords that are not theirs, as if they had spoken them, so to dis∣credit them vvith your partiall or negligent Reader? vvhat if you haue put dovvne your ovvne vvords in a small and distinct lettre, as though they vveare their vvords? if you haue done all this, cann you abstaine from blus∣hing? are you not ashamed of it, The Readers are fraudulently de∣ceiued, and the Priests falsely accused. pretending to defend truth, and to committ so great an vntruth? hovve cann your Reader beleeue you in other points you say against them, vvhen he shall see you so fraudulently both to accuse them, ād deceine him? vvho vvould haue thought vnited Priests to be so much ouer seene? I pray God you be not vnited as Sampsons foxes vveare, to destroy by your contentious spirits the good corne of gods church, and by this occasiō of ouer much af∣fecting one partie, be not the losse of many a Soule. Yf you be vnited Priests that speake, and not an other vnder your name, I vvill sett dovvne their vvords, as you haue sett them dovvne in your booke, and afterwards the same vvords according as I finde thē in their booke, in the pag. by you noted, and leaue the iudgement hereof euen to the partiallest Reader that is, if he haue any vvitt, Iudge∣ment or honestie in him. Thus you say: And a little after they tell vs plainly that theare is great
Reason vvhy his Hol. should not appoint a superior in Ingland vvithout their aduice and allovvance, and that in dooing contrarie, he should doo against the Canons of the church and against the decrees not onely of Popes, Distinct. bb. ca. 12. & dist. 61. cap. 3. but also of Emperours (as though this vveare more) vvhich appoint that the Clergie may resist and vvithstand any Bishopp put vpon them against their consent and liking. All this you haue putt dovvne in a small and distinct let∣ter as their vvords. Novve let vs heare them speake. For, Pag. 14. vvhose aduice, consent, and allovvance are required to the chosing of a Superior, if not theirs that are to obey and liue vnder the said superior vvhen he is chosen? doo not the fellovves of euery hovvse in oxford (and according to the statuts and founda∣tion) chose and elect their hedd and Rector? Doo not likevvise all the Religious companies chose their su∣perior? Nay, doo not the Canons of holy church de∣cree, Dist. 63. c. 12. dist. 61. c. 13. that Priests should haue the election of theirs Bishopp? and this late auctoritye is for amplenes in punishing more then Bishoplike. yea the Canons alovve further, that the Clergie may and should (if they finde them selues vvronged, by having a Bis∣hopp put on them against their consent and liking) refuse and vvithstand the intrusion and iniurie. and not onely Popes haue decreed that their Clergie should chose their Bishopps, but Emperours haue con∣stituted the same, as appeareth by the ordinary Glosse vpon 63. dist. cap. 34. all vvhich maketh our frends refusall much more iustifiable. Where doo they
tell vs plainly, that there is great Reason why his Hol. should not appoint a superior in Ingland without their aduice and allovvance? False addition. haue you not foysted in these vvords aduice and Allovvance? and that in dooing contra∣rie, he should doo against the Canons? vvhere is the∣re any one word of his Hol. or of his power in the former vvords? they shewe both by ex∣ample and by auctoritye that the ordinary comming to superioritie ouer others, is by the election of such as are to liue vnder that superior: and that the Clergie may refuse a Bishopp sett ouer them against their cōsent and liking. and there vpon conclude, that the Priests which vvithstood the Archpriest sett ouer them vvithout their cōsent and liking, to be iustified by the same examples and au∣ctoritye. Falshood. you put your ovvne vvords dovvne for theirs, as thoughe they spake contempt∣uously of his holynes (for that you goe about to prooue in the same leafe before, ād bring this for example) vvhereas it is you your sel∣ues and not they, they not once mentioning his Hol. but laying dovvne a true and solid Doctrine proued by example and auctoritye to the vvhich you ansvveare not one vvord heere. And you are not content to corrupt their vvords onely, but their allegation also, Corruption of vvords and alle∣gation. as the Reader may perceiue heere in the mar∣gent, sett dovvne both at your vvords and at theirs And vvhen you haue framed them
such a speech as pleaseth you, A false conclu∣sion. then you con∣clude thus: By all vvhich, is not hard to Iudge of these mens haughtie spirits. But I conclude: By all vvhich, your vniust dealing vvith your brethrē, it is not hard to Iudge of your naugh∣tie spirits. for you haue corrupted both their sense and their text. Fie vpon Contention vvhich ingendreth mallicie, and Mallicie is the mother of willfull blyndenes. For whe∣re as they saie: Not onely Popes but Emperours ha∣ue constituted, &c. thereby to shovve hovve the lavves consent with the Canons, as the Emperour him self often saith: Auth. de mo∣nach. §. huic autem. Sancimus, sa∣cras per omnia sequentes regulas. vvee doo ordaine, follovving altogether the sacred Canons. and the Pope saith: C. 1. Ext. de novi operis. Quia vero sicut leges non dedignan∣tur sacros Canones imitari, ita & sacrorum statuta Canonum, principum constitutionibus adiuuantur. Novv as the lavves doo not disdaine to imitat or fol∣lovve the sacred Canons: so the statuts of the sacred Canons are ayded by the lavves and Constitutions of Princs. False Jnterpre∣tation. You interpret their vvords, that they alledge the Emperours auctoritye after the Pope, as a greater auctoritye then the Popes, for so your words in the text (and for more suretie, sett dovvne in the margent also) doo notifie. (as though this vveare more.) as if you vvould say: these men allege the Emperours auctoritye, after they haue aleaged the Ca∣nons, as thougs it vveare more, that is, greater then the auctoritye of the Canons. you may
aswell accuse the Pope for saying, that the Canōs are helpt by the lavves of Princs. what blindenes is this against your ovvne consciē∣ce and skyll, to misinterpret mens vvords, Blinde and mis∣interpretarum. and to make your Reader to note a false sen∣se, which your brethren neuer intended, nei∣ther cann it by any spider be sucked out of them. this is not a haughtie, but a cōtentious and seditious spirit. A haughtie ansvvere. To conclude for ansvve∣re to their Canons and ordinary glosse, you say, they are of a haughtie spirit. vvhy so? for∣sooth bicause they alledge the Canons and theordinary Glosse. I pitty your ignorance, and bevvaile the vveakenes of your cause. For in steade of solid ansvveres, you corrupt both the sense and the text of your Aduer∣sarie. you make him saie vvhat you list, and vvhen all is doon, that which you make him say, remayneth still firme and stable, vntou∣ched and vnanswerred by you. Suerly you are like to get great honor and creditt by this kynd of writing and dealing: euen asmuch as Iewell (vvhome you imitat) did get, vvhich vvas shame enough. Novve you accuse them of disorder for that they did call into suspition of forgerie the Po∣pes breue it self, Fol. 19. that came to confirme the Protectors letters. They say the contrarie. Contrarietie. Pag. 1. in the preface. that a Peace was made to the great comfort of all Catholicks, vvhen his Hol. breue vvas presented vnto them, and that all vvas forgiuen by the Priests so greuously iniu∣ried.
and you your selues confesse, Fol. 109. that in vvords they acknovvledged his auctoritye a∣leaging their words vvhich are these: Pag. 4. in the preface. yf they meane thereby that the Priests doo not acknovvlege M. Blackvvell for their Archpriest and superior (since his Hol. breue came) they may if it please them correct this their vnderstanding, Fol. 109. &c. You replie yet for all this, that they seeke by all possible meanes to discredit his auctoritye. Fol. 19. and vvhy? by∣cause they say: the breue vvas procured, God knovveth out of vvhat office. you note not the place vvhere they say it, and therefore I will not beleeue you, nor your, &c. But suppose they did suspect the breue of forgerie, yea and vvent about to proue it also, One may lavv∣fully suspect a breue or bull of forgerie. vvhat then? Is this a fault, or a synne? is this contempt of his holynes? nothing lesse. for somuch as it is lavvfull for all men against vvhome any Breue or bull is obteyned, to impugne it, yea and to prooue it false and forged too, if they can: and good Reason. for it may be obtey∣ned by false information, and so his Hol. may be deceiued, vvho intendeth not to gra∣unt any thing in the preiudice of an other, or against an other mans right. this is no con∣tempt of his Hol. or of his bulls, but lavve and Reason. you doo very ill therefore to accuse your Brethren falsely in saying: False accusatiō. they called into suspition of forgerie the bulles. vvhereas so soone as they savve it, they yel∣ded vvithout further enquierie, vvhither it
vveare obtayned iustè or iniustè, or vvhither it vvas forged or no. That vvhich you aleage out of the En∣glish booke, Fol. 19. b. Pag. 29. & 103. might be more charitably in∣terpreted, and not to the rigour you doo, Ʋncharitable interpretation. and as I beleeue, contrarie to their sense and meaning. which I leaue (vvith many other things) for them selues to ansvvere. for as I haue often sayd, I doo onely aduertise you of such faults as you committ in this Apol. not intending to defend them in their faults and errors, but am full gladd vvhē you take then: vp iustly, and correct them vvherein they are faultie. for as I meane not to defend them, vvherein they are reprehensible, A disorderly conclusion. so doo I not meane to flatter you vvhen you are faultie. As for example, in your vnchari∣table and disorderly conclusion of this your second Chapt. vvhich proceedeth not of that spirit, vvhich should be in men of your cal∣ling and qualitie, tovvards your brethren ru∣ning the same course, and perill of persecu∣tion that you doo: but rather of the spirit you make mention of there, pride, vvrath, Envie, Emulation, and vvorse passions if worse may be. God send the one and the other of you his holie spirit of vnitie and charitie, for suerly it is high tyme.
CHAP. III. THE Fathers of the societie are vvorthy of greater praise then you giue them, Fol. 20. b. and wea∣re vvorthy of more, if they had not meddled in this con∣trouersie, which nothing per∣teyned to them, One il herbe marreth a vvhole pott of pottage. and had suffred the secular Priests to followe their affaires, being 2. di∣stinct bodyes ād comō wealthes as they are. But this medling so farre in a matter not ap∣perteyning to them, doth giue mē suspition, they tend to somme other end, and make their frends full sorie to see contemplatiue men plonged so deepely in vvorldly affaires, and so vp to the eares in strif and contention. But that vvhich followeth as it should see∣me greatly to please you, so it much disliketh me, Disgrace of se∣cular Priests. and all of my humor, as spoken in disgra∣ce and discredit of secular Priests, but espe∣cially of such as haue and doo trauell in In∣gland, for the gayning of Soules. I vvill sett it dovvne to see if it can make you blush, so to discredit your ovvne coate and vocation. Yea diuers, Fol. 20. b. that be hedds novve of faction a∣gainst them (the Iesuits) are so farre beholdinge to them, as probably they had neuer beene men of learuing and accompt, if these Religious men, and their charitie had not beene. What an im∣pudent
ly is this? vvhy? D. Bagsbavv, an impudently. whome they accompt the cheif, D. Bishop M. Champeney, and others the heds of the faction against thē, Would they (thinke you) neuer haue beene men of accompt, if they hadd not gone to Rome? what if they had staid in Rhemes, or Douay? is theare no lear∣ning but in the Rom. college at Rome? be they all Asses and vnlerned not able to write bookes that weare brought vp in the semi∣naries of Rhemes and Doway? All you vnited priests (the gratest part neuer being brought vp vnder the fathers) are you not men of lea∣ring and accompt? and able to vvrite bookes how then wrote you this your Apologie? par∣aduenture it was vvritten by a Romist and not by a Rhemist. but vvhat? are all the lear∣ned men of our contrey beholdinge to the∣se Religious for it? God forbid. yea but Why are men somuch beholden to thes religious: Mary, Fol. ibidem. Jmpudencie. somme of thē (the secular priests) going ouer poore seruing men, other soldiers, others vvanderers in the vvorld, and none lightlie but more or lesse, one vvaie or other, in neede of their helpe and fauor, &c. Far othevvise doth their great friēd And. Philopatris (pag. 199.) vvri∣te of them: that those vvho come to the Se∣minaries, are for the most part descended of vvourshipfull families, and borne of rich pa∣rente. What! diuers of these that be heds no∣we of the factiō against the Iesuits, weare they
such men as you mention heere? name one of them to saue your honestie. For heds, in al your booke, you recken D. Bagsh. D. Bish. M. Mush. M. Bluet, M. Chāpeney, M. Col∣llington, M. Charnock (put in also M. Wat∣son if you will:) vveare these poore seruing men, souldiers, or vvanderers, vvhen they came ouer? what impudency is this? vvhat ca¦lumniation both of the vocation and of the persons? you tell the reader heere, that the heds vveare such companions as you haue named, but name no man heere. yet after∣vvards, you recken these vvhome I haue na∣med for the heds of the faction, by conse∣quence then, you vvould haue your ignorāt Reader, (that neither knovveth the men, nor their education) to thinke, that those vveare these poore seruing men, souldiers, and vvande∣rers vp and dovvne, vvhich if the Iesuites of charitie (forsooth) had not taken in, they vvould neuer haue come to this learnīg to be able to vvrite books against them. Beleeue them vvho list, this I am assured of, that if it vveare true, and that a Iesuit vvrot this boo∣ke, An vnhappy Covve. he then dooth like an vnhappy covve, that after shee hath giuen a good meales mil∣ke, striketh the payle downe vvhich her hee∣le. Euensoe, if the Iesuits had doone somuch for these kind of men as your pretend, you should not by vpbraiding them therevvith blemish and deface all the good deeds you say
they did them. And yet this not vvithstāding vvhich you saie heere can scarcely be true. for these Souldiers, seruing men, and vvan∣derers, did very rarely goe to Rome to be holpen by the Iesuits, and very fevve or no∣ne of thē were made priests there, but vvere still receiued in Douay and Rhemes, there brought vp, and priested. Besides, vveare it true, that all these Souldiers, and Ʋvanderers had gotten this learning to vvrite bookes of the Iesuits, yet the opposition of these priests against that vnorderly and exorbitant superi∣oritie obteyned by the Iesuits, is so farre frō ingratitude against them, that it is, a notable fact of conscience and Iustice both. And your Probably they had neuer beene mē of learning or accompt, nor able to vvrite boo∣kes, if they had not beene brought vpp vn∣der the Iesuits: is very fondly said on your part, A speache dis∣honorable to the Iesuits. and to the Iesuits them selues also dis∣honorable, and cause of iust enuie. As vvho should saie: that either there vvas no learning in the vworld before the Iesuits appeered, or no learned man novve, if he hath not beene brought vp vnder the Iesuits, vvhich is both folly to beleeue: and shame to vtter and vvri∣te. But lett vs examine these 4. vvhome you sett dovvne as cheif hedds: viz. D. Bagsh M. Bluet, M. Collingt. and M. Mush. Fol. 29. b (vvho to you seeme the cheifest broachers of all thes
suspitious reports. Fol. 68. b) The first, to vvhome you attribut the penning of the Latins booke, vvas a Graduat and of accomptin Oxford before he came ouer. Yf he had cont ynued theare, and neuer comme ouer, or if he had staid at Rhe∣mes and not gone to Rome, is it not proba∣ble he might haue proued a man of learning, and able to vvrite such a booke? vvhie: did he learne his latin tong in Rome? as for M. Bluet and M. Collingt. they vveare neuer vnder the Iesuits, but brought vp in the seminarie of Douay, and vveare both gone home to serue their contrey, before any Iesuit had a∣ny gouernement in our seminaries, and so for the learning and abilitie they haue, not bound to the Iesuits, and consequently can∣not be ingratfull: In deede M. Mush (vvho yet by your ovvne iudgment is the auctor, but of 2. letters, and of no one booke) he vvas brought vp in Rome for somme yeares. but hadd he not gone thither, but remayned and spent so many yeres in Douay or Rhemes, should not he probably haue gottē learning enough to vvrite 2. letters and a booke too, if neede vvere? three of these heds therefore at least are not endebted to the Iesuits for their learning and hability to vvrite bookes and therefore cannot commit any ingratitu∣de, The beds not in∣grat to the Je∣suits. in vvriting in so iust and equitable a cause as they haue to vvrite against somme of thē, especially those that vvrott and confirmed
the booke of schisme, which Was written ād penned against them. Besides the style and manner of writing, this place aiso dooth dis∣couer the penner of this Apol. The author of the Apologie discouered. who omitteth noe occasion (as before I haue noted) to a∣base and bring into contempt the vocation, of secular priests. For howe can it be proba∣ble rhat you vnited priests should obiect to your brethren as a great disgrace to them, of a seruing man to be made a prieste, of a soul∣dier to be priested? Tot. tit. ext. de seruis non ordi∣nandis. The canons of the church do not repell from priesthood the verie sla∣ues, so they be made priests after they haue beene sett free by their Maist. yea he whose Father was a slaue, C. fin. d. tit. so his mother be a free vvoman, may be made a priest. and was not I praie your the founder of the Iesuits order a Souldier, and is the societie to be vpbraided therewith? God forbid. Bought slaues I say a∣re admitted, and you obiect to free men, as a wrinckle and fowle blott to priesthood: by∣cause of seruing men and souldiers, they be∣came good and vertuous priests, and for that they forsooke the world to serue God in his church, and for that they let the killing of bodies, to helpe to saue Soules. You doe in∣iurie not onely to many of your selues (my vnited brethren) amongst whome yet I kno∣we somme that weare seruing men: The vnited doe iniurie them selues. but also to many a holie martyr, that of seruing men yea and of meane qualitie, by their zeale and
constancie haue come to the height of perfe∣ction which is Martyrdoome, to the with I feare me, the Author of this Apol. vvhosoe∣uer he be Will neuer attaine, so long as he hath his hedd soe full of these contentiōs ād vncharitable dealings, augmenting them by such fond bokes, as haue neither rythme nor reason in them. howe say you to one (whom synce I haue heard to be martyred) that vvas first a Cobbler. then a Porter, after that vn∣dercooke in the seminarie, Coblers and smythes, priests and martyrs. and at last by his extreame diligence gott asmuch learning as was sufficient for a prieste, and finally such fa∣uor at Gods hands to be a Martyr: Whereas you by Gods secreat iudgments hane beene as it weare for saken, and left to be dealers ād sticklers in this vncharitable dissention. what say you to M. M. Joannes Cleyton. Iames Cleyton Who being a smith in Ingland came to Rhemes, and thea∣re trauailled somuch and profited so Well in his studie, that D. Allen (a man of an other iudgment and spirit then this author Who∣soeuer he be) adiudged him worthy of priest∣hood. D. Allen of an other iudgmēt. he was not deceiued in his iudgment, for this man after long imprisonement, was at length condemned for his faith, but died in prison before the day of execution. Goe nowe and obiect to that vvorthy Prelat of pious and famous memorie Card. Allen, that he made not onely seruing mē and souldiers priests, but also Coblers and smithes. I refer∣ue
the names of many seruing men that after they came to Douay and Rhemes weare ma∣de priests, Many seruing men priests and Martyrs. and haue doon much good in their contrey, and many of them haue died for the cath. faith most constantly. Yf you knovve them not, their names are written in Libro vitae. You may asvvell and iustly reproche to S. Peter, S. Andrevv, S. Iohn, that they vve∣are fischers and so vnfitt to be Apostles. Souldiers (quot you?) hovve many I praie you? tell their names. I knowe seruing men that became Souldiers, and aftervvards co∣ming to the seminarie were made priests: but any that vvas a mere Soldier, I knovve none especially of the heds, as you terme thē, nor any of the 30. vvich subscribed to the appea∣le, except the tvvo Bennets, vvhereof the o∣ne in deede vvas a Souldier, and after made Priest in Rome, vvhither the other vvas or no I knovve not, but for the rest, I can ans∣svvere negatiuely. Well? these Seruing men, Souldiers, and vvā∣derers, one vvaie or other, stoode in neede of the Iesuits helpe. What! to make them priests? and to haue the habilitie to vvrite bookes? or els in that they gaue them bread at their gates, a meales meate, or a nights lod ging. For the first, they gayned it in the Se∣minaries. For the seccond, I knovve hereto∣fore our contreymen haue found charitie ād frendship at their hands, but for some yeares
since, if all be true that Passingers, trauaillers and vvanderers (be they seruing men, soul∣diers, schollers, or others) report. they may assoone breake their necks as their fasts, The Jesuits ould charitie tovv∣ards Euglishmē changed. at a Iesuits college. And might starue if they foūd not more charitie and better releife at other mens hands then theirs. Somuch is the old helpe of the Iefuits changed, that they vvill haue no Inglishman stand in neede of them. For if he doe, he may be deceiued. I am sorie our contreymen haue giuen such occasion: but more sorie to see the fathers for somme respects, so to change their charitable natu∣res. For hovvsoeuer thes Souldiers and vvan∣derers. shevv them selues forgetfull and vn∣grat full, yet should not the Fathers for that becomen nigrads and vncharitable. But to close vvith you. I praie you vvhat helpe and fauor haue these seruing men, soul∣diers, and vvanderers, specially the heds of them, found at the Iesuits hands. I vvould faine knovve for my learning. I am sure of this, that the greatest part (if not all) haue foūd helpe and fauor and not of the Iesuits as you insinuat, but in the Semin. to be norished in learning. More charitie vsed in the Se∣minary of Dou∣ay and Rhemes then in those gouerned by the Iesuits. yf in our semin. of douay ād Rhe∣mes, theare had not beene vsed more cha∣ritie to commers and vvanderers then is or hath beene in the Seminaries gouerned by the Iesuites, or that novve is in the seminary of Douay gouerned by their vvill and dire∣ction,
you had lost this good argument of Seruing men, souldiers and vvanderers, our cō∣trey had lost many a good priests and holy martyr that haue beene receiued, entretay∣ned and norished in those seminaries, vvhich nowe may go a vvandring in deede, if they ha¦ue neither money in their purse, nor com∣mendations from certaine men in Ingland! The seminary of Douay meruey∣lously changed. O good Cardinal! thou seest the great change that is happened since thy death, and no doubt thou doost lament it. thou receyuest all that came, Seruing men, sonldier, heretick, and all: thou refusest none, and thy charita∣ble dealing brought forthe the frute that followed. Not onely Seruing meu, and soul∣diers, vnder thy happy, wise, and discreat go∣uernement weare made priests, but many an heretick also Was conuerted, priested and sent back, and aftervvards became a blessed martyr, so God blessed they zeale and chari∣tie. But novv alas! both charitie and zesle a∣re vvaxen so colde, that fewe comme ouer, and many of them retorne, not onely frustra∣ted of their zealous hope, but malcontented and keycold. To conclude, yf these seruing men, souldiers and vvanderers, nowe priests haue not recey∣ued such helpe and fauor of thelesuits as you pretend, then you taxing them with ingrati∣tude is vndue. and if all be true you say, then you conclude against your selues (Yf you
weare the Authors of this Apol.) in that the are are amongst you, mo of these seruing mē, souldiers; and vvanderers, novve priests, then amongst your discontented brethren, and so haue you made a fayre spoke, The vnited pro∣ue themselues ingrat. by proouing your selues ingratfull fellovves, as you are in deede to your ovvne coate and vocation, in abasing and bringing it into cōtempt to, plea∣se and praise others. That which you say in the same leafe and elswhere, Fol. 22. Vvhat is to be disliked in the priests? touching their disordinat writing against the fathers in generall and against fat. Parsons in particular, I dissalowe vvith you, and for that kind of writing, I haue alvvaies founde fault with their bookes, and am as so∣rie that euer they vvrott so as you are for the booke of schisme. yf they had kept them sel∣ues with in the compasse of the question, and not spoken so against the parsons they doo: their boke vvould haue passed without con∣trovvlement. but seeing they haue beene so bold, touch them hardly, and lay loade on them, I will not mislike vvith you. so that still you call to memorie, that the biting, pas∣sionat, and sclanderous book which fa. Lister wrott against them, might haue pusshed thē into the like disordered heate, and liberty of speech. For Wee haue a rule in our lawe, that Compensatio habet locum in delictis, thar is: o∣ne iniurie may be compensed vvith an other, The Iesuite called them schismaticks, and
worse then sootsayers and idolaters, and for recompense they call the Iesuites ambitious &c. one is as true as the other, both are false and so an end. To putt downe my verdict touching your discontented brethrens censure of these so many seminaries that nowe are in respect of the two vvee had onely before, true it is. The authors iud gment of the nō bers of nevve seminaries. The fathers and especially fa. Parson. (by vvhose speciall trauaill and industrie they haue bee∣ne erected, D. Cicil. in his spectacles yet at∣tributeth the begynning of th' seminaries in in spaine in to his industrie, ād that fa. Pars. did build vpon his foūdation. and as yet are maynete yned) are highlie to be thanked, and gretly to be este∣med for the same. and no doubt but in tyme our contrey shall reape great good and pro∣fitt thereby: so is it true also, that the 2. elder Seminaries did fend into Inglant mo priests, and norished in them greater nombers of schollers at one tyme (I thinke) then these newe seminaries, vvith the old now decayed vvlll furnishe to send into Ingland in diuers yeares. and for the nomber of studēts, priests and proper yonthes, theare vveare moe for many yeares together (so long as D. Allen gouerned) in those seminaries at one tyme, then are novve, or here after like to be in all the seminaries put them all together. I haue seene 50. The 2. Sem ina∣ries flovved mo∣re in nomber, then all doe to∣gether novve. And vvhy? priests in one yere sent out of Rhe∣mes, and yet 50. other priests remaine in the college still. haue all the Seminaries so many in them novve? No no, the reasons vvhy the seminaries flovved then in nomber, are: first
bicause all rhat came to Douay or Rhemes vveare receiued and vvellcomme nonevve∣are reiected, All vvere vvel∣comen. had they money or had they none, brought they commendations or brought they none. After they had beene tried theare a vvhile, such as vveare not foūd fitt (vvhich god knovvth vveare but fevve) vveare graciously and courtuously dismissed vvith money in their purses. But nov if they haue no money, no meate: if they haue no commendations from speciall parsons in Ingl., Nescio vos, and so retorne as they came When it vvas knovvne in our vniuersities, hovve all vveare receiued and full vvelcome that came, a nomber of the cheifest and best schollers and vvytts of both vniuersities ca∣me flocking ouer. but no Wit being knowne that none are Welcome Without money ād particular commendatiōs, The gouernemēt more svveete. none or verife We dare aduenture. Next, they liued then very quietly Without rigourous rules and penaū∣ces or dicitur culpa, gouerned and ruled by the countenance and looke of one mā, Who∣me all from highest to the lovvest did looue, and highlie reuerēce. But no Wne We la Wes haue altered the state of the seminarie, and make men vn Willing to come theare. yf you Will ans Were here (as you doe elsvvhere) that the Seminarie is novve poore, Fol. 25. Obiection. Ansvvere. and the∣refore must diminish the nomber to paie their debts? I mervell it hauing so fevve, it
can be so poore-the Popes exhibition con∣tynueth, and so dooth the kings of Spaigne. Who as you report. hath euer since the yeare 1583. giuen the seminarie 2000. Fol. 24. Crownes a yeare, the payment whereof hath euer since beene procured by Fa. Parsons labor and tra∣uaill. But for all your saying, I thincke the king of Spaignes exhibition hath beene the slower paid, bicause his liberalitie Was with∣drawne from thence, to be bestowed on the seminaries that weare in Spaigne. I thinke al∣so the poore seminary getteth litle out of England, bicause since Card. Allens death, theare haue beene newe collectors that be∣stowe it elswheare, as tyme the daughter of Truth will discouer. Fol. 25. b But whie doe I call your seminary poore, that hath but fewe moone∣thes since receyued 2000 crownes. And ex∣pect dayly 2000. moe? I may then very well conclude with your discontented brethren, that the newe seminaries haue almost de∣stroied the old? as reason and experience it self dooth teach. For euery man by nature is more addicted, and more carefull of that which he hath him self begonn and sett vp, ād to ēcrease it, rather thē to mainteyne that. Which was begoone by another. For that which one liketh, another disliketh. That of Douay Was founded by Card. Allen now de∣ade and out of mynde: the others, by fa. Par. that hath credit to mainteine them. Another
may comme after that will care for none of all these, but sett vp another elswhere, Este∣nim vicissitudo rerum, I doubt not but fa Par. dooth endeuour to mainteine the old Se∣minaries, if not in their ancient splendour, yet at the least to see that they doe not vtter∣ly fall downe and decay. Which weare great pittie, Fal. 27.29. The author of the Apol. disco∣uereth him self to be a Iesuit. The Iesuits at∣tribut to hem selues the con∣uersion that is made in Ingl. and a Wonderfull losse to our contey In the end of the 3. Chapt. the auctor of this booke discouereth him self to be a Ie∣suit (as I my self alwaies gessed and as all men that reade it diligently, must needs gesse also For, the conuersion of all in Ingland is attri∣buted to them, and you vnited brethren, are but lookers on, and made but Cyphers in Algorisme. Mary, yet least he shold take all the praise from you, in recompence of bor∣rowing your names, he will content you with this short parenthesis (vvhich labor vvellād zealoufly also) Truly, if so fewe Iesuits as are in Ingland, in respect of somme hundreds of priests that be theare, haue (as this fellove braggeth) conuerted infinitly moe then you all: and haue holpen to saue moe soules then you all, it must needs be a great shame for you all. The vnited con∣fesse them selues to be lazie. For, you confesse your selues heere to be very idle and lazy priests. VVhy what doe you theare? If you be but lookers on, ād doe no good? I doo not mervell that so eg∣ly you discouer your brethrens priuitids, when you lay your owne shame so willingly
open to all the world. Yf you haue writtē this Apol. blott it out in the next impression for shame, and endeuor to employ your selues better in the vocation and mission you wea∣re sent for? or els cast of your gownes, and gett you a spade and mattock in your hands, for you are not woorthy of the vocation you haue. For, is it possible that priests brought vp in learning, order, and discipline, and sent to labor in such a haruest, should be so idle, that a fewe Iesuits should surpasse them in paines and trauaill of gayning Soules, and that by their owne confession? or that they cann without blushing discouer their owne drowzie necligence to the world? Yf you ha∣ue not written this Apolog. nor discouered your ydlenes in action, or ignorance in want of abilitie to gaine and wynn soules, then as∣ke reason of this good fellowe that hath bor∣rowed your names, not onely to declaime a∣gainst your brethren, but to calumniat, dis∣grace and dishonor your owne selues. Or els I will (as you doe theare) request all godly ād pious mynds to ponder and consider how far Mallice hath blynded you in pursuing your Brethren, in defence of Religious men, that rather then you would hold your peace ād say nothing, you are content to disgrace, and dishonor your owne selues.
CHAP. IV. IN this chapt. Fol. 29. Amā of strave You haue putt vp a Man of strawe to fight against, re∣peating with great teadyousnes, the faction of M. Morgan against D. Allen, which appartayneth nothing to this question, but serueth onely to fill vp your booke, and to make it bigger. as also that of G. G. and Pri∣our Arnold. Yf a man should vrge you howe you came by their letters that weare sent se∣creatly betweene frend and frend, Intercepting of letters. I beleeue it would fall out, they weare intercepted, as many a letter is, by such as should haue con∣science to open other mens letters. At least wise it is taught to be a case of conscience to doe it. And the world must needs deeme that the parson that hath furnished you with all the letters in this your Apologie, and who hath yet I warrant you a heape for you in sto∣re for your larger Apol. hath hadd more ca∣re to assemble and keepe them, then to saie ouer his beades.
CHAP. V. FOR their charging the Re∣ctor, Dislike vvith the Priests and vvith the vni∣ted. I dislike all such vndue digressions from the Questiō in controuersie, as I doo you your selues also for reporting the diuers seditions ad nauseam vsque that we∣re in the Rom. College, bicause it is nothing to the purpose and question betvvene you and your brethren, which is: whither the Card. The questions in controuersie. Protector vvithout the Popes bre∣ue coulde or might constitute a new dig∣nitie in Ingland? and next: vvhither the Priests (that hild and taught he coold not doo it) vveare schismaticks, seditious, and rebellious for the same or no? vvhat apper∣tayneth this to the faction of M. Morgan ād M. Paget against D. Allen, or to the discon∣tentement of our Gentlemen in Flanders a∣gainst fa. Holt? The question (I say) is: vvhi∣ther the Iesuits, Arhp. and you vnited Bre∣thren, haue iustly or vniustly by writing pub∣lished them disobedient and vvoorse then footh sayers for not receyving the Archp. vpon the Card. letters? ād vvhither the Arch∣priest (with vvhome you are vnited in this scandalous action) after their submission vn∣to him, vpō the comming of the Popes buls,
did well and charitably to renevve the old wound (vvhich was before by their submis∣sion healed) againe or no, in not admitting them to be absolued, except they did first confesse and recant the foresaid schisme this is the cheife ground of this later contention vvith the Archpriest and the occasion of their writing to the Pope, VVhy the Priests vvrot to the Pope. and to the inquisition to haue their Iudgments (seeing the Archpriest reiected the Iudgement of Sorbonne) whither they are Schismaticks or no? Th'vnited doo neuer comme neere the point. this point you touch not, but make extrauagant discourses vpon factions vvhich were in the world, ma∣ny a faire yeare before thes Contentions grewe amongst you. but somme thing you must saie to make your booke the bigger, ād to bleare the eyes of your Reader and contēt his affectiō. Bicause then this chapt. vvith the 2. follovving pertaine nothing to the hedd question in controuersie, but containe one∣ly the repeating and ripping vp of the begy∣ning of the troubles betweene the Priests and the Iesuits, together with Fishers exami∣nations, I passe them ouer. Where you accuse them to be the first that appealed from his Hol. Fol 68. b. breue, for you say: The Priests vvronged. They vveare the first that appealed from it▪ you doo them wrong, for they appealed no from the Breue, but from the strange seue∣ritie and gouernement of the Archpriest who as it seemeth by the Articles of their appea∣le,
and by his strange answeres made vnto them, could not vvell tell howe to behaue himself in this nevve and vnvsuall dignitie, and Iurisdiction laid vpon him. All this ap∣peereth by their appeale. You add: Fol. ibidem. that somme of them are presumed to beprincipall dooers in these late printed libels. a gre∣at fault I assure you. for defending them sel∣ues and their honor in print. If they had kept them selues with in the compasse of the con∣trouersie, neither had they offended, neither coold their writings haue beene called libels. But what iustice and equitie is therein you my vnited brethren? Iniquitie. you are contented that the Iesuits vvrite scandalous books against them (which in deede deserue the name of libels) and that by your approbation: and yet you thinke it not lawfull for your brethren to defend them selues in print against such infamous accusations as are Schisme, sedition and Rebellion. why! Blind affection. hovve are you so blin∣ded vvith affection, that you dissalovve that in secular Paiests, which yet you well alovve in Religious men? and are you so drovvned with passion that you can like of the Iesuits calling your brethren Schismaticks, and wor∣se then soothsayers, and I cannot tell vvhat: and yet mislike of them for purging the sel∣ues from those haynons accusations, ād com∣playning of this vncharitable dealing. You might (my Brethren) for Modesties Fol. 82.
sake, haue passed ouer in silence the 6. or 7. Butteries for 13. Priests (if it vveare true, as all is not ghospell you write in your booke) for re∣spect of their vocation, and not to giue Here∣ticks occasion of laughture and mocking. surely in the Iudgement of your owne factiō, it is much vnworthie the Modestie and Chri∣stian sinceritie and honest dealing that ought to be in the cōfessors of Christ towards their brethren of the same profession and confes∣sion you your selues be. but the order of wri∣ting, Fol. 83. the phrase of the booke it self, vvith the store of leters, and other particularities doo shevve to the ey, that it was vvritten by a Ie∣suit and not a secular Priest. I coold lay dow∣ne the first letter of his name if I listed, but it is very easy for euery man to coniecture it onely this I say: The vnited vvrouged by th'author of the Apologie. he hath doon you (my vni∣ted brethren) great vvrong, vnder you na∣me, to defame your order and vocation. CHAP. VIII. THE vvhol discourse of the be∣gymming of this chapt. By vvqose in∣formation, the subordination vvas made? tendeth to shevve, that this subordinatiō that is nowe in Ingland vvas, ma∣de by the information of Fa. Par. Fa. Baldw. and 2. or 3. other Priests, vvhollie affectioned and ledd by Fa. Fol. 99. Par. and as you say, of diuers
principall men (naming none) frō Spaigne ād Flāders. All vvhich principall men are vvcll knowne to be the deere frēds ād creatures of the Iesuits. The sōme is: that this subordina∣tiō vvas procured by the Iesuites, ād that the Iesuits weare the chief medlers in this subor∣dinatiō, Subornation. which might be better termed A su∣bornation of his Hol. making him beleeue, that all vvas iump as they told him. Yf I might aske you this Question? A lavvfull question. what had those prin∣cipall men in Spaigne and Flanders more to doo vvith the affaires and gouernement of the Clergie of Ingland, then the Priests that reside and trauell theare? vvhat reason is thea∣re, that these vnquiet weare not demaunded dvvelling in Ingland, and yet the others dwel∣ling in Spaigne and Flāders must be demaun∣ded? you ansvvere: bicause they be so small a part of the English Clergie.  I replie, yet for learning, ancientie of Priesthood, and for the long ty∣me they haue trauailled in that contrey, not to be reiected. They knevve vvhat gouerne∣ment vvas best for Ingland better then those Spaniards and Flemings. They vveare 13. Fol. 67. b. in nomber, and vveare to liue vnder that subordi∣nation: by right then their voyces and con∣sents vvas rather to be asked, then the voyces of 2. Iesuits and 2. Priests out of Ingland, and not subiect to that subordination. hovve soe∣uer the matter vvas handled, The Fathers in excusable. the Fathers can∣not be excused for medling in a matter not
appertayning to them, Deut. 16. and so to haue putt their falcem in messem alienam, vvhich both in the scripture and in the lavve is accompred a great fault. what hadd the Iesuits to doo to procure the secular Priests a superior? no∣thing at all, except (as your brethrē say) they vvould play sure, and haue such a one appoin∣ted, as should alvvaies relye vpon them, and gouerne by their appointement and pre∣scription. Presumption against the Fa∣thers. Theare is in deede great presum∣ption of this against them, their actions and endeuors in this behalf considered. You fin∣de fault with your brethren Priests for med∣ling in the troubles of the Rom. Colledge against the Fathers: and yet the Fathers com∣mitt the same fault (or a greater) here, as being the cheif medlers and dealers in the contentions that weare amongst the secular Priests. Here a man may iustlie turne the catt in the pann, and say as you doo in the first chap. of you Apologie. That the medling and dealing of the Fathers in the secular Priests matters and contentions, hath brought great hurt to Ingland, and is like to bring much more, if this wri∣ting of Apologies by them or for them doo still conntynue: as also somme disgrace to the vnited brethren, and no lesse blemish to the Fathers: seeing they be compted and e∣steemed rather for spirituall and moatified men, then for contentious or seditious per∣sons. and for my part I haue alwaies thought
them to be such, and haue against their detra∣ctors for such defended them. But yet for all that, wee lawyers say: that there is noe rule so generall but it hath his exceptiō. so no doubt somme theare are in that holie companie. Marke. that are too too much giuē to pollitick mat∣ters, and are as it vveare ouerwhelmed vvith the affaires of the vvorld, and more intentiue to them, then appertayneth to Religions mē, or aggreeth vvith their profession. And albeit men vvynck novve, and will not see them, yet in the day of Iudgement they vvilbe ma∣de knowne to all the vvorld. Where you say: Fol. 104. b. that the Popes breue did not satisfie them, but they begann to stagger and doubt, and to discusse their Superiors commandement, The vnited abu∣se their Rea∣ders and them selues. you abuse your Readers ād your selues. your Readers, in saying they staggered at the Po∣pes breue, doubted and discussed their supe∣riors commaundement. for they did nothing of all this you aleage, but by your owne cō∣fession yelded, and obeyed the Popes Breue. you conceale the cause why they vvrott to his Hol. and the Inquisition in Latin, and to the English Catholicks in English. vvhich vvas not as you say, for refusing to obey the breue, but for that the Archpriest vndiscre∣atly renevved the old vvound of schisme (the vvhich you vvil not talke of, and are sorie that euer it vvas mentioned, as you and all peaceable men may vvell be) in forbidding Fol. 115.
them to be absolued except they confessed and recanted the said schisme. the which as it is the cause of all these contentions boo∣kes, so doo you still rove at randame, and will not comme neere the marke to ansvvere thereto. you abuse your selues, for that you confesse their voluntarie submission to the Breue. Fol. 146.147. and there you sett dovvne the Con∣gratulations of Fa, Garnet, the Archpriest and others for the same submission. The testimony of the 6. assi∣stants not vvoorth a ruth. For proof of yourformer saying and their stag∣gering, &c. you bring the testimony of the reuerend brethren forsooth the 6. assistaunts nominated by the Fathers as the Archpriest was, and as vnorderly installed as their supe∣rior the Archpriest vvas, vvhose letters and testimonie you doo vse oftentimes in your booke, which is not woorth a rush in any in∣different mans Iudgement. nor vvould be receiued in any Tribunal in the vvorld, they being the parties, and knovvne aduersaries to those against vvhome they beare witnes. you may please your selues therevvith and becō∣tented to enlarge your booke vvith them as you doo vvith many letters of diuers men, that are knowne to be vvholly affectioned to the Fathers, and to be of their faction (if these contentious sydes and part takings may be called factions) the vvhich men vn passionat, and such as stād indifferent to both parties make little accompt of, and giue lesse
credit vnto. You thrust the synne and scandall that hath ensued and falne out by this contentiō vpon your Brethren, Fol. 105. b. vpon vvhose back the scan∣dall of this con∣tention lieth. but I praie you giue him his part, that vvrott the scandalous booke (condempned by his Hol. and all the Iesuits that are out of Ingland) of schisme, and part also to those that aucthorized it, and subscri∣bed to it. Take part your selues also not onely for contynunig the scandall by your Apologies, but by your ignorant accepting the Archpriest vpon the Protectors letters. for hadd you stood to your Brethren in the iust refusall thereof, these synnes and scan∣dall had not happened. this vvriting and li∣belling one against an other, had neuer bee∣ne heard of, as novve it hath to the vvon∣derfull and vnspeakeable greif of all your frends and vvell willers. I vvonder hovve you dare say: Fol. 107. b. that in both their books they haue sett dovvne their Rea∣sons confusedly and tumultuously, Th'vnited giue them selues the ly. and in no one pla∣ce distinctly and in order: for in saying so, you giue your selues the lye. For, a little before you say, that in one place of their booke, they vvould shevve the constitution of the Archpriest by the Cardinalls letters to be voyd and of no force by 21. Reasons. Yf I cann proo∣ue, that they haue layd 21. Reasons together in one place of the English booke, and that by dis∣tinct nombers, then are they not sett dovvne
confusedly in both their books, Fol. ibidem. and by con∣sequent you say not true in saying: and in no one place distinctly and in order. yet you say: vvee doe lett passe the 21. Reasons vvhich this Cen∣surer layth together by distinct nombers. Fol. 176. b. ergo you giue your selues the ly by say∣ing: they haue nott sett them dovvne in any one place distinctly and in order. And in their latin booke vvritten to the inquisition (vvhereof you make no mention in this Apol. because it toucheth the point and roveth not at any parson, and bicause it hath in it Fa. Listers booke, vvhich you are sorie to thinke of) they haue layd dovvne many Reasons (not confusedly but orderly,) vvh they did not receiue the Archpriest vpon the Card. let∣ters vvithout the Popes buls. you ansvvere neither to those 21. nor yet to these sett downe in the latin booke before mentioned. But to these Reasons confusedly sett dovvne you say you vvill ansvvere. In Gods name. I praie God you ansvvere them not so con∣fusedly and tumultuously, as you say they are laid dovvne in their books. It vvas gotten say they by the instance of the aduers partie. Fol. ibidem. Doo they not say true? vvho is their aduers partie? The Priests say true. By your ovv∣ne confession, the Iesuits and specially Fa∣thers Pars. vvas it not gotten at the instann∣ce of Fa. Par. Fa. Baldvv. and 3. other Priests the Iesuits creatures? you confesse somuch
your selues. This benig true, Fol. 99. Fol. 7. b. haue they not iust cause to presume that it vvas gotten by vvrong and false Information? for what hadd the Iesuits to deale therein, more then the Capuchins, Dominicans, or any other Religious order? It follovveth: a∣gainst all equitie and Iustice. vvhich they pro∣ue by the 21. reasons, by you mentioned, but not ansvveared, and as I haue proued before, against the lawes and Canons, ergo against equitie and Iustice. And yet they doo not put dovvne this their saying as a Rea∣son, but as a Consideration. But vvhy did you not go on, and say as they doo: that this superioritie vvas so established by their aduerse partie, that the superior so by them appointed, must needs remaine a punie and inferior to them, &c. vvhich vvords make a vehement presump∣tion against the Fathers of stickling and medling so farre in these matters nothing at all apertaynenig to them. But vvhat doo you ansvvere to this Rea∣son (if you vvill needs haue it one?) For sooth, this hath beene euidently prooued to be false. viz: that it vvas not gotten, at the instaunce of the aduerse partie onely. but I say, it vvas prooued by your selues a little before to be true, Fol. 99. as is to be seene in the place al∣leaged in the margent. Next, you giue a probable ansvvere touching their vvill and
knovvlege, but to that they say: it vvas con∣trarie to all equitie and Iustice, you are Mumm, and not a vvord; bicause your con∣science tell you, thay said true. so that to the cheifest part of their Reason you haue yelded no ansvvere, although you vvould make your Reader beleeue, you vvill ans∣vveare all their Reasons. You doo as it vveare controwle their se∣cond Reason, both at the begynning and at the end. Pag. 5. for they say thus: Furthermore of their interest (the Iesuits) vveare not great in this auctoritye vvhy should they be so vnvvilling to procure, or suffer to be procured somme bull or breue for the confirmation thereof, that it might be an absolute and independent auctoritye? Fol. 108. To pardon your nipping of the essentiall vvords of their reason both in the begynninng and in the end, Nipping and adding. and your adding thereto the vvords vvhich they say not, viz yf it came from his Hol. howe ansvvere you the Reason? Forsooth, the question and reason is novv ansvvered, for that a breue is procured. they talke of cheese, and you ansvvere chaulke. They aske, why the Iesuits vveare so vnwilling to procure or suf∣fer to be procured a bull for so many mone∣thes as the Card. letters weare in controuer∣sie and doubt? and you ansvveare: novve a bull is procured. they aske of the tyme past, and you answeare of the tyme present. They
knevve so well as you that a bull vvas pro∣cured, and sent before they vvrott this boo∣ke. I maruell hovve you dare put dovvne their Reasons, and ansvvere them (I vvill not say so confusedly, but,) so childishly. That vvhich you add: Fol. ibidem. Th'vnited spea∣ke vvithout booke. that the Bull is not much more esteemed of them thē Card. letters, you say vvithout profe, contrarie to your selues, and contrarie also to their protesta∣tion. that vvhich you add also, Fol. ibidem. Pag. 2. to proue their little esteeme of the breue (viz: god knovveth out of vvhat office) as it is but the words of one, so are they not to be drawne in generall to all, and yet that one may haue spoken them in a good sense. bicause theare be diuers of∣fices out of the vvhich the Popes Buls are procured. but be it that it vvas ill spoken of him, yet doo you not for all that ansvveare his Reason, but sett his words downe falsely, thereby to make them sound more adious∣lie. vvords sett dovvne fals∣lye. thus you sett them dovvne in a distinct lettre: That they doo not knovve out of vvhat of∣fice it vvas procured by Fa. parsons meanes, vvhe∣reas the paraphraze vpon Fa. parsons letters, sayth, vntill the 3. or 4. day after that Fa. pa. Pag. 82. had procured (god knovveth out of vvhat of∣fice) an Apostolicall breue, &c. you haue sett the vvords downe as spoken of all the dis∣contented brethren (saying they doo not knovve) vvhen they are spoken but of one. besides you sett them dovvne as spoken sim∣plie
and absolutly, vvhereas, they are putt vvithin a parenthesis as spoken in pas∣sing. Thirdly, Of many Rea∣sons put toge∣ther not one ansvvered. you put many Reasons toge∣ther, bicause you faime vvould be at your letters againe, and at Fishers examination. and for hast, you cote not the place vvhere you found them. but vvee must beleeue you on your vvord, that haue so often deceyued vs in aleaging their vvords. but in Gods na∣me vvee vvill beleeue you this once. The first. Fol. 108. that the Card. letters patents are not suffi∣cient to giue the matter credit, your easy ans∣vveare: vvho dooth not knovve, &c. hath bee∣ne ansvvered before, and shevved, that a Card. Protectors vvords and letters for the constituting of a nevve dignitie, or confer∣ring of an old, hath no credit in any Chri∣stian court in the vvorld, albeit they com∣me a hundred tymes, vvith Ex speciali man∣dato Sanctissimi. your Canō, lawe, and Glos∣ses, haue beene turned against you before, and make still against you till you doo bring vs better. Secondly that he hath beene found partiall tovvards the Iesuits. this may be true, bicause he vvas a man as others are, and al∣lied to the Generall of the Iesuits as you say. The 3. Reason. that he (the Protector) is not their lavvfull superior, as he is not in deede. neither lavvfull nor vulawfull, for he hath no superiortie at all ouer any English man
by that office, as hath beene shewed before. The 4. Reason. And the like. A vvise reason vvhat (I pray you) doo you answere to these 3. last reasons? euen thus. But not to stand vpon these matters, Fol. 108. b. it is a fovvle thing, vvhen for couering our ovvne vvills of not obaying, vvee seeke holes in the coate and auctoritye of our superiors as these men doo, &c. You haue well shot and kild a busard. Th'vnited can∣not stand, but must be rouing. you vvill not stand, bicause indeede you cannot stand against Reason, then sitt a vvhile and compt howe many mo of their Reasons (left vnrehersed and vnansvvered) are conteyned vnder your last vvords, And the like? that vvee may see them answeared, vvith your ansvveares to them, in your larger Apologie, in the vvhich as you promys vs more abonn∣dannce of letters, and a larger discours of Fisher and his examination, Fol. 95. so I feare me vvee shall finde as little reason and matter as vvee haue found in this. Well, these discontented brethren doo not onely seeke hoales in the coate of their Superiors the Card. and the Archpriest (the first being neuer their superior, no nor yet, Marke the hoales found in his hol. coate. the next vntill his Hol. bull came) but also in this Holynes (coate) but in couert vvords. But let vs see the hoales made in his Hol. coate and auctoritye? for sooth, they persvvade the people, that he hath beleeued false information. A sore matter. but vvhere haue they persvvaded the people thus much? For sooth, in both books,
and especially the English, (you say in the margent) and almost in euery pag. but you note no one pag. Well! they make the people be∣leeue, His Hol. may beleeue false information, benig falsly in∣formed. that his Hol. hath beleeued false in∣formation. Why may not his Hol. beleeue false information? is he not a man as others are? and is he not subiect to passions, as be∣fore hath beene noted? yf he hath beleeued false Information, it is not a hole in his cote, but a fowle hoale in their coates and con∣sciences that gaue such false information. It follovveth: Pag. 35. and thereby appointed a subor∣dination most inconuenient. they giue a good reason thereof in the English booke. For by this subordination gotten by false in∣formation the Iesuits haue the Archpriest as their punie, and inferior to them, and by conse∣quence all priests must be their apprentizes, The reaso vvhy the subordinatiō is incōuenient. and stand at their command, and thereby may keepe the Archp. in avve, that he shall da∣re doe nothing that may displease them, for fea∣re they should thrust him out &c. and these be hoales, Hoales in the fathers coate. not in the Popes, but in the Fathers coates, and sufficient causes of inconueniēce Next, And not heard of in the church before. Tell vs (I pray you) in your larger Apol. if e∣uer it was heard of in Christes church before, that an Archp. should be superior to all the priests in 2. Realmes, and that his iurisdiction. should extend so largely out of the quire ād church, ouer these Realmes. When you can
shewe this, Jgnorance. then vpbraid them for such spee∣ches: for vntill then, you shewe but your owne ignorance, in imputing this to them, as an vndue and vnreuerent speach. Thē they say: It is against all equitie and iustice. that this was well and truly spoken, hath beene suffi∣ciently prooued before, and you your selues could not answere it. It followeth, Truthies. Fol. 107. b And that his Holl. could not lavvfully appoint it vvith∣out their consents. The word laufully being ta∣ken for that vvhich is doon by lawe. And vn∣lavvfully. for that vvhich is doon against la∣we, they say full true His Holl. coold not doe it lavvfully: that is, obseruing and following the lawes, constitutions, canons, and decrees of his predecessors, as hath beene shewed be∣fore, Lastly, And that the meanes by vvhich he had appointed it, is insufficient, bynding no man no obay it. All this is true, if there be any truth at all. For as it hath beene proued be∣fore at large, a Card. letters are not sufficiēt to constitute a newe dignitie, or to confirme an old. and the meanes weare so farre from bynding any man to obay it, that all such as obayed it, are punishable by the canons, as hath beene before declared. Of all these tru∣thes cōclude you vvhat you list, but I cōclu∣de, that you are by these words so farre frō finding many hoales in his Hol. coate, as you cānot thereby finde one hoale at all, the sa∣me being truly and lawfully spokē. And I cā∣not
a litle maruell, that you are not ashamed to reherse them, Without making ansvvere thereto, being so euident against you in the question that is in controuersie. Fol. 109. It followeth They acknovvledge the Archp. and his aucto∣ritie in vvords, yet doe they seeke by all meanes possible to discredit his auctoritie. They acko∣wlege the Archpr. Pag. 4. in the preface. Pag. 3. auctoritie in more ample manner and vvords then you doe sett downe heere. That is: they acknowledge him since his Hol. bull came. before, they forbare to acknovvlege him, as in the same preface they franckly confesse. But their deeds are con∣trarie to their vvords. In vvord they confesse him, in deeds, they discredit his auctoritie. ho∣vve prooue you this? bicause M. Collington and M. Charnock reported, the Archpnest dubbled vvith them. ƲƲiselie. But vvhen dubbled he with them? before the Popes breue came, thē vvhē they did not acknovvledge him either in vvord or deed to be their superior, as they confesse in the preface of their English boo∣ke. Pag. 3. Hovv dooth this prooue they seeke to discredit his auctoritie since the Popes breue came? Your proffes hang by Gimboles, and had neede to be knitt together vvith points. Besides, A deceiptfull obiection. you vvould deceiue your reader by obiecting that to them novv since the breue came, vvhich vvas lavvfully do on by them before the breue came. Yf then you vvill prooue any thing, you must prooue that in
deeds and facts they haue gone about to dis∣credit his auctoritie since the breue came ād your parenthesis (For of their tvvo relations onely all the matters are raised against him) see∣meth to in ferre, that 2. vvitnesses although they be priests, are not sufficient testimonie to proue any thing in question. you ought to knovve, that the testimonie of 2. parsons is sufficient by the lavve of God and man, but you thinke it an absurd thing to admitt the testimonie of 2. priests, and yet you are of∣fended vvith thē (throughout your booke) for that they vvill not credit one parson, viz, the Card. through vvhose relation and let∣ters, all these troubles are raised, betvveene the said priests, the Iesuits and your selues. You cannnot comprehend hovve these things should be spoken, that the Archprie. should at the first say? His Instructions came from Rome. and yet aftervvards say: they vveare made in Ingland. you cannot compre∣hend then hovve a man may be contrarie to him self: or that he may vpon better delibe∣ration, correct that vvhich he had said befo∣re. Suerly, your comprehension then is verie feeble, if you cānot comprehend thus much. I doe comprehend it vvell, and beleeue it al∣so, bicause theare are 2. vvitnesses as you re∣port that affirme it: vvhich are asvvell to be beleeued in this cause, as your reuerend bre∣thren the 6. assistants are to be beleeued in
their ovvne cause. The next proof is that they giue out he had spoken an hereticall proposition. this toucheth the discredit of his parson, and not of his au∣ctoritie a sore matter. vvhoe knovveth not, that not onely an Archp. An Archpriest may erre. (vvhich is the lo∣vvest dignitie in Gods Church) but an Arch∣bishop also (being so eminent a dignitie) is not priuileged, but that he may erre, ād that this gifte is not annexed to his office or dig∣nitie, but that he may somtymes vtter an he∣reticall proposition vvhither this vveare said or no, maketh nothing to that vvhich you haue taken in hand to prooue. viz: that since the breue came, ād since they acknovvleged him in vvord. They haue sought all meanes to discredit his auctoritie and parson in deed. For these vvords vveare spoken before the bre∣ue came, and before they acknovvleged him to be their superior. Ergo not spoken to dis∣credit him as their superior, as you vvould make your simple reader beleeue. That which you obiect to them of forrai∣ne auctoritie and of the premunire, Fol. 110. The priests vn∣rdelie speach. was (in truth) foolishlie and vnorderlye spoken, ād therefore they are iustly reprehended of you for the same. But the words annexed, viz. that his Hol. cannot doe it lawfully vvithout their consents &c. as they are not in the 14. pagin. by you noted, and haue beene often tymes by you repeated, so are they true and irre∣prehensible,
as in diuers other places, hath before beene shewed. And althought it seemeth strange to you, Fol. ibidem. ƲVhie (their books) vveare no vv printed af∣ter the breue is comme foorth, and hath not vvrought that effect for quieting them, vvhich theare they promyse, to me, or to any vnpassi∣onat and indifferent reader, The reasōivvhy they printed their booke af∣ter the coming of the bull. it seemeth not strange at all. Bicause the calumnious crime of Schisme, being renewed against them sin∣ce the comming of the bull, for that they did not obay the Archp. vpon the Card. letters, they weare driuen to yeld their reasons, why they did not receiue him vpon the said Card. letters, and so to cleere them selues frō that calumnious accusation of schisme, ād to she∣we to the World, See their rea∣sons in the 2. and 3. Aphoris∣me, to the Popes Nuncio in Paris that they are much lesse to be counted schismaticks, since that they yel∣ded to his Hol. bull. The vndiscteat dealing of the Archp. and his counsellours gaue the occasion of writing and publishing these books, the vvhich they weare bound in con∣science to doe, to conserue their good name and fame. Well, seeing you haue omitted abooue 30. The vnited ha∣ue omitted aboo ne 30. reasons, and lett them vnansvvered. reasons Which they haue laid downe in their 3. books, and haue chosen certeine speeches onely (naming them reasons) to answere, ād yet haue not satisfied to any one of them, I meruell not that you lett passe (as you say) the 21. Fol. 176. b reasons vhich this censurer laieth together
by distinct nousbers to discredit the Protectors letters: seeing you cannot answer their sim∣ple speeches. But you Will not lett M. Champeyneyes, Epistle escape so good cheape, you vvill an∣swere all his reasons. The first is taken out of S. Thomas who as you confesse, Fol. 110. b Fol. 111. M. Champeneys first reason. saith: That The subiect must knovve the vvill of his Supe∣rior, othervvise he cannot be said truly to diso∣bay him. But these priests did not knovve the vvill of their superiour the Pope, Ergo M. Champeny saith true, that they vveare not disobedient to his Hol. in not admitting the Archp. Replie. vpon the Card. letters. But you re∣plie out of S. Thomas that theare is a secreat and a manifest commandment. but it vvas a secreet commandment of the Pope contey∣ned in the Card. letters.  The which they and I both deny: and hovve shall wee knowe it was a secreet commandment? bicause the Card. saith he did it Ex expresso mandato San∣ctissimi, No mā is to beleeue him on his word as hath beene sufficiently prooued before, ād by consequence, not to beleeue that it was the secreat commandment of his Hol. Agai∣ne his Hol. in the extrauagant Iniunctae dooth expreslie commaund no man to beleeue or accept of those that cōme vvithout his bul: ergo in such a case no secreat commandmēt can be presumed. and if it vveare, yet not to be credited, against an expresse commande∣ment.
Our lavve saith: Expressa nocent, non expressa non nocent. As it bindeth vnder synne to obay, when the Superiors vvill dooth by any meanes appeere, as you say out of S. Thomas: so it is no synne or disobedyence, vvhen the superiors vvill dooth by no mea∣nes or vvaies appeere, as it dooth not in the case of this question, and so lett any man con¦sider vvhither S. Thomas his speach of obe∣dience touch your brethrē or no, as it dooth not in deede. You haue beene told before that you may be ashamed to call that A perillous and scan∣dalous doctrine about obedience, as you note in your mergent, and more ashamed to putt a patche or a peace of their sentence in your text, vvhen it hath beene proued before that it is a true, Christian and Catholick Doctri∣ne. From M. Champeney you leape backward to your fare you vvell, Fol. 112. b and are not ashamed to putt his vvords dovvne for absurd, peril∣lous, and scandalous doctrine, vvhich is a most iust and lavvfull doctrine, not at the first sight to admitt any auctoritie but such as is orderly procured and lavvfully promulgated. A peece of a se∣tence. They a∣re vvarranted to say so, by the fore alleaged Extrauagant Iniunctae, Haue at, fare you vvell. and diuers other pla∣ces of the Canon and ciuil lawe. Their reason annexed you cutt of vvith your accustomed &c. your ansvvere is: &c. Helpeth much the vui∣ted. But vvho shall iudge of
this? I ansvvere. his Hol. their superior, to whome in this case they are to retire: but not euery subiect as you guilefully would make your reader to beleeue they thinke and saie: All that you can alleage out of the fathers of ready prompt and simple obedience, is to be vn∣derstood of a true Superior, or vvhen (as S. Thomas saith) they knovve the vvill of their Superior. Your first rule out of Fa. Your first rule nothing vvorth. Gregoire hath no place in this controuersie, bicause the man∣ner of constituting the Archp. by the Cardin. bare letters, vvas contrarie to the comman∣dement of a higher superior the Pope, vvho in the foresaid chap. Iniunctae forbiddeth any prelat to be receiued vvithout he bring the Popes Buls vvith him, for proof that he is constituted in that dignitie. And besids, the Protector did exceede the limits and povver of a Protector, vvho hath no povver or Iuri∣sdiction to constitut any nevv or old dignitie in Ingland as Protector of the nation. And so might you haue put vp this rule in your pur∣se, bicause it maketh quite against you. But lett vs see the marke you shoote at. Marke (quoth you) that a man is boond to obay in all vvherein he hath not euident knovvlege to the contrarie. Marke (my Maist.) that this mar∣ke is a false marke. Marke a false marke. For Fa. Gregorie saith no such thing. take your spectacles and read him ouer once againe, and so it is not quite oppo∣site
to your mens doctrine. The first corollarie of fa. The first corol∣larie is not for you. Fol. 113. Gregorie maketh asmuch for you as the rule before aleaged: It is sufficient to bynd the subiect (vnder obediēce) that he dooth not knovve euidently to the contra rie, to vvitt: that it is either euill, or vvithout the limits of his superiorsauctoritie. Ergo if that vvhich is commaunded be euill, or without the limits of the auctoritie of him that com∣maundeth, those that refuse to obey, are not disobedient to their superiors. Now the thing it self, as the priests haue often said and proo∣ued also, is euell of it self, next, the Prote∣ctor that commaunded exceeded the limites of his auctoritie, for he had none at all. by cō∣sequence then your brethen weare not diso∣bedient, ād you haue brought this corollarie to curry your selues. By euidēcs heere (quoth he) I vnderstand that vvhich shalbe so iudged not by the passionat subiect, but by other good and learned men. But it hath heene iudged by the good and learned men of Sorbonne that they did not somuch as synne in refusing the Archpr. vpon the Card. letters, ergo heere is no disobediēce. Yea it is iudged by the Pope him self, as hath often beene said, D. C. Jniunctae that no man can be installed in any Ecclesiasticall dignitie, without his buls, Ergo it was euident to the priests that the Card. commandement (if he had beene their superior) exceeded the limi∣te of his power and auctoritie, and so by the
former rule and corollarie: committed no dis∣obedience against their superiors. The second and third corollarie, Fol. 113. b The 2. and 3. co∣rollaries make nothing for the vnited. brought out of the same father, make as little against them as the former. for he talketh in them of a subiect, and so presupposeth a man that is subiect to an other. But no Englishman is subiect to the Protector of Ingland, and the∣refore it appartayneth not to your brethren, nor prooueth them disobedient for not oba∣ying the Card. protectors commandment. That which you add: that the priests rune vpon passion may be well applied to your sel∣ues, whome passion hath so blinded, that you will not or doe not vnderstand the Author you aleage, when they are so farre from being against your brethren, that they confirme ād prooue their lawfull endeuors and actions. At last you come to materiall disobediēce, vvhich consisteth in omitting that vvhich vvas commaunded, Materiall diso∣obedience. or dooing any thing contrarie the∣revnto. viz to the commaundment of his Su∣perior. But the Protector as you must still be told (for you vvillinglie forgett it, and yet harp still vpon yt) was not their superior, nei∣ther was it euident that it was commaunded by his Hol. and therefore they haue not com∣mitted this material disobedience. I graunt with you that both kinds of disobedience are damnable in such as commit them, but you neither haue nor can prooue, that your
brethren haue committed either of them, & therefore are not culpable of that damnatiō. At length you comme to iudge of their in∣tentions, of their thoughts and cogitations, you iudge of mens thoughth and cogitations falsely. Fol. 113. b seeing you can proue no disobediēce in their words and outwardactions. You vvish it vve∣are not opēly seene in this fact of theirs, and thei∣re perseuerance therein. What (I praie you) we∣are not seene? forsooth, their intention not to obey. yf men may expresse their inwards thoughts and intentions by words (for words Weare inuented t' expresse mens inward intē∣tions) I will shewe you their intentions, and then lett the reader iudge whither you vtter these vvords with a good intentiō or no, thus they say in English. Pag. 2. ƲVee haue and doe vovve all obedience vnto Gods church, and doe ackno∣vvlege and embrace all auctoritie lavvfully pro¦ceeding from the Sea Apostolicke, Pag. 7. and are most ready to shevve all obedience therevnto, &c. and elswhere: vvee protest and vovve all obedience due to Gods church, and to all her lavvfull au∣ctoritie, and therefore can be no schismaticks. If they say: vvee doe not obay this auctoritie (of the Protectors) let them shevve vs that it is a lavv∣full act of the church, and vve obay, howe dare you in conscience reflect so vpon their inten∣tions (hauing read these words) as to indge quite against their intentions. you should in your booke haue shewed that the institution of the Archp. by the Card. vvhat the vni∣ted should haue doon. Protectors letters
was a lawfull act of the church, and then had you gained the victorie: thē might you in so∣me sort haue compted them (if not schisma∣ticks) yet seditious and rebellious for withstā∣ding a lawfull act of the church. But this rock of theirs is so strōg ād immouable, that you da¦re not thrust at it, but you scatter the sands of discourses, not apparteyning to the matter ād question in your readers eyes, to hinder him from seeing the force and strength of their cause, and the barenes and weakenes of your pretended defence. From reasoning, Fol. 114. b 115. you turne to charging the consciences of your discontented brethren, at the day of iudgement, to tell you in sinceri∣tie and without passion,  whither the Card. mo∣rally vveare not to be beleeued, or vvhither he vvould dare presume to doe or to attempt so pu∣blick an act vnder letters patentes: and that ex∣pressely in the Popes name vvithout sure cōmis∣sion?  They may answere you sincerely and tru¦ly as at the day of iudgment, that they might both probably and morally doubt of the Car. credit, weare his letters neuer so patēt, or said he in them to haue neuer so expresse cōman∣dement of his Hol. as hath beene shewed be∣fore in the question: Whither credit is to begi¦uen to a Card. saying he hath expresse cōman∣dement from the Pope to doe this or that? where the cōclusion is negatiue, that neither probably nor morally he is to be beleeued.
and thither I referre you. The fine faultes you finde in their informa∣cion sent to the DD. of Sorbonne, Fol. 116. Of the vfaults found in the in∣formation sent to the DD. of Sorbonne. are suplied and put in the case proposed by me in the be gynning of this pāphlet. but to say something to thē as they ly in your booke. The first faut you say is: bicause they added not, that he vvas protector of the natiō. the first is of no importaunce. Which is in deede a fault in you to thinke, that that wold haue chāged the case, and made the DD. not to haue pro∣nounced as they did. As who should say: he being the Protector had more power and au∣ctoritie ouer our nation, thē being a bare Car. and not Protector. Euery Card. in Rome hath as much auctoritie and iurisdiction ouer vs as hath the Protector. For as I haue often told you, he hath none at all. The second is no fault. The second they said he did it according to the vvill and good liking of the Pope. And you would haue them haue sayd it was Expresso mandato, by expresse com∣mandement. Is not his will and good liking conteyned in this expresse commandemēt? or is not his expresse commandment his will and good liking? The 3. fault is of as small waight, bicause no such subordination could be made without his Hol. The 3. of small vvaight. breue (vvhich is the thing in them for saying Many. why may not 13. The 4. is foolish. Fol. 67. b persōs be called Many parsons? yf they might say in latin mnlti, why not in Engl. many? The 5. is vvith∣out fault. Fiftly they say: that they refused onely to subscribe till he
had obteyned letters from the Sea Apostolick. and this was true. howe say you was it not? did they not still petsist in their refusall till the breue came: what fault finde you with this in∣formation? when you your selues in many pla¦ces of your booke affirme it to be true? ād for their so resisting weare accōpted fchismaticks and so are still for the same resistaūce. you add: as vvho vvold say, that this being doō they meāt to be quiet. theare being quiet or not quiet af∣terwards dooth not change the case proposed to the Sorbonnists. and as though (you say) in the meane speace they had behaued them selues o∣bediently. To whome (I praie you) should they haue behaued thē selues obediētly? to the Ar∣chp. whome they iustly and lawfulli denied to be their superior, ād rightly reiected him as an intruded parson? as one that came in at thewin dowe?  yea but say you) no man vvas the are pre∣sent of the superiors side to informe the good Do∣ctors.  yf any hadd beene present, ād coold ha∣ue said no more then you haue said heere, the good DD. would haue said as they did. for this which you haue aleaged, altereth not the case proposed at all either in substance or circun∣stance of any valeur or respect. Fol. 118. The vnited dea∣le not syncerely. Vvhy the priests did breake from the Archp. after the comming of the Breue? You accuse them for breaking out againe after the sight of the Popes breue, but you tell not why, nei∣ther put you downe the cause as they doe, ād Why? bicause you defend an vniust and scāda∣lous cause. They say it was, for that the Arch. after their reconciliation to him, did renewe
the old teare of schisme, and hild them for schismaticks for not admitting and receiuing him vpon the Car. letters. Pag. 63. thus they say in ma∣ny places of their Engl. booke, ād in their la∣tin booke writtsn to his Holl. they set downe M. Blackvv. letter forbidding any priest to ad-mitt them to confession, or giue them absolu∣tion except they acknowlege them selues for schismatickes: Pag. 59.60. in their latin booke to the in∣quisitiō after they had mentioned the peace that ensued vpon the coming of his Hol. bre∣ue, and of the congratulation of the Archp. & Iesuit, ād specially of fa. Pars. they add: that o∣ne Rob. Iones a Iesuit did raise vp againe fa. Fa. Iones. li∣sters opinion that thny vveare schismat. vvhich Iones taught and preached that all that did not hold then for schismat, The Arehp. in∣discretion. did encurre the Censures of the church. Now the Arch. quoth they did not onely approue Iones his teaching but did also publish euerywhere the resolution befo∣re specified viz: that they were schismatickes, & weare not to be absolued except they recanted. thus they lay dovvne to the wholl vvorld the cause of their writing and appealing from the Arc. you finde fault vvhich thē for it, The vnited doe not refute this cause, nor giue any other. but yet you neither refute that with they saie, nor giue any other probable cause of this reuolt and contention. To vvhat end vvrott you this booke? not to refute your aduersaries reasons not to reprehend them for laying dovvne a false cause of these contentions? no truly, The substaunce of their Apol. for you doe neither the one nor the other. but ra∣rather
to discourse of old dissentiōsin Rome Paris & Flanders, in laying dovvne loades of letters to no end or purpose. ād this is the ve∣ry substāce of this your breif Apol. that which you add: they bring against the newe breue, hath beene ansvveared before. Fol. 118. Lastly, you charge your brethren being not scarse 10. against 300, howe they durst make so dangerous a diuision? they may ansvvere that this dangerous diuision proceeded from tho∣se 3. or 4. at Rome, that gaue the informatiō & counsell to haue an Arch. without asking the consent of the priests in Ingl. and their procu∣ring him to be so disorderly and vnlavvfully constituted: and not frō those priests, that ac∣cording to the decrees of the church, yea by the expresse commandment of the holie Ca∣nons refused a prelat so disorderly and vnca∣nonically thrust and put vpon thē as it vveare by violence, against the expresse lawe and ap∣prooued custome of Christs church. The vnited may be ashameth, to put the cause of this diuision v∣pon the priests. For my part I much maruell hovv you can in consciē∣ce an hovve you dare for shame put the cause of this diuision vpon them: vvhē as they in all their booke giue solid and lavvfull reasons of their dooings, lay the occasiōs vpō the Iesuits and Arch. ād yet you neither ansvvere their reasōs, nor defēd the others frō the blame put vpon them: neither doe you obiect any reaso∣nable cause against thē vvhereby a man may see or coniecture that they vvere the authors and begynners of this diuifiō & cōtēsion. And
yet forsooth they are the authors they made this diuision, I talke not of those dissentions that fell out at Wisbith, but of those nevve controuersies, the cause of all these scādalous cōtētiōs, ād vncharitable vvriting one against an other. viz: the subordination and the re∣newing of the quarrell of schisme. whereof they shewe and prooue the Iesuits ād Arch∣priest to haue beene the Authors. vvhat the vni∣ted shoold haue doon in their Apologie. and you doo not cleere and deliuer them from these accusations. this you should haue doon, and this should haue beene the scope of your booke, if you meaned to haue doon any thing that Good is. the fault (so farre as I cann parceiue) lyeth yet vpon their shoul∣ders, for any thing that you cann saie in this your Apol. to the contrarie. I knovve not ho∣we you vvill handle the matter in your pro∣mised larger Apologie. If little releif commeth to your brethren (as you say) by this definition of Paris: Fol. 118. b. Pag. 110. what needed the Archpriest to make this seuere edict a∣gainst it, as it is put downe in your brethrens appeale: Th' edict of Paris maketh for the Priests. that neither directly nor indirectly they mainteine or defend in vvord or in vvriting the censure of the vniuersitie of Paris, &c. belike it made for them, Fol. 116. b. & 117. as in deede it dooth still not vvith standing your 5. additions that you would should haue beene added vnto it. For these circunstāces and considerations neither do aggrauat as you would make men belee∣ue, nor at all change the state of the case or
question proposed. and so th'Academicall sentence standeth firme still and maketh substantially for M. Champeney without florish or ostentation. Wee haue shevved (quoth you) in the former chapt. Fol. 119. vvith hovve little reason our discontented brethren being so fevve and such as they vvere (Ser∣ving men, Soldiers, and wanderers) opposed thē∣selues at the begynning to the first Institution of this Hierarchie, Fol 29. b. &c. beleeue you vvho list. this is a florish in deede with ostentation of an vnited fitton. And vnited fitton. where haue you shevved it? no∣te the place leafe, and lyne sure I am you ha∣ue reported, that they haue layde downe 21. Reasons against that Institution, but that you haue ansvvered any one of them, as yet I fin∣de not. you haue heere and there picked cer∣taine speeches out of their books, but hovv poorely you haue answered them, I leaue to the Readers Iudgement, that will but cast his eyes vpon the same places, and yet vvee must beleeue you bicause you are a nomber, that you haue shevved vvith hovve little reason your brethren opposed them selues to the institution of the Archpriest. Th' vnited play vvith mens noses. You may well play which the noses of boyes, vvomen, and your owne cre∣atures, but in different men pitty your case and laugh at your so vaine affirming that which you neuer did. Shevve hovve little Rea∣son (quoth you) mary he that hath read the former chapt. and will beleeue you, hath in deed but little Reason. These be gugawes
and toyes to mock at or to please foles, and not vvorthy such graue men as you are or ought to be, and such constant Confessors. What! make you no conscience (sauing your reuerence) to fitton and that in print? hovve doo you abuse ād detract them behind their backes, that dare in print say: you haue she∣vved hovve little reason they had? hauing not ansvvered to any one of their Reasons as yet. VVhat the vnited should prooue. You add, ordayned by his Hol. this you should prooue. This is the Question. vvhither at the begynning he vvas ordayned by his Hol. or no? they say no. and bring abooue 30. Rea∣sons to proue their assertion. But you say of∣ten yea, and for prooffes and reasons, you gi∣ve vs nought but bare vvords. vvho is then bound to beleeue you? As they asked you before, Fol. 108. Fol. 119. b. Question. vvhy in so many Monèthes space the bull was not procured? so you aske them heere: vvhy they sent not a let∣tre to Rome either to his Hol. him self or to his Ne∣phevv, or to any other acquaintannce of theirs there? And as you answered them (but howe Iump iudge you) bicause it is novv ansvvered for that the breue was procured, so say I:  they weare not bound to send either Messenger or lettre ei∣ther to his Hol. or his Nephevv, or to any o∣ther acquanitannce to knovve vvhither this matter came from his Hol. or no: or vvhither the Protector had abused the Popes name or no? bicause it was ansvvered by the Pope long since that none vnder paine of depriuation of the frui∣D.c. Jniunctae. tes
of their benefice should receiue any man to any office benefice or dignitie vvithout he brought the Popes buls. L. 1. §. fin. in fin. ff. de act. empt. Novve vvee hauea rule that saith (Qui certus est amplius certiorarinon debet. he that is alreadly acertyned of a thingh ought not to be certisied againe. They vveare certi∣fied by Pope Boniface, not to admit any such: to what purpose then should they send to his Hol. to be certified againe? And if they had sent and that his Hol. had certified them that it vvas his will, yet could they not in co∣science haue received and obeyed him as their superior, bicause he vvas not canoni∣cally instituted, being instituted without his Hol. buls, and by him that had no auctoritye to doo it, albeit he had had a hundred expres∣se commandementes from his Hol. quia subla∣ta forma, tollitur res. it is of the forme and es∣sence of a canonicall institution to be institu∣ted by his Hol. buls, if the Collation (as in this case) partaine to him. but this forme was not obserued, ergo the institution vvas not canonicall, and by consequence if they had receiued a hundred letters from Rome, that all vvas doon by his Hol. Good will liking and consent they had neuer beene the bet∣ter for it, neither yet discharged in conscien∣ce, for acknovvleging and admitting an in∣truded person that entred in by the vvyndo∣vve and not by the dore, A fend obiectiō often repeated often ansvve∣red. but vnorderly. that is, without his Hol. Bulls. Hovv oft commeth in this fond obiectiō
affirming that the Pope could not doo it vvithout them except he violated the church Canons. sithens it is an infaillable truth, and yet this you lay still downe as an absurd saying, so blinded you are in affection. howe say yow? th'ordina∣ry meanes that heaue alwaies beene in Gods church to appoiot Ecclesiasticall superiors, vvas it not by election? Runne ouer the tit∣les De Electione. and therefore the Pope follo∣vving the ordinary meanes and waies of the church Canons, could not giue them a supe∣rior without their consents. C. Bonae memo∣riae 2. in fin. Ext. de elect. For in matter of election this is the rule: Plus obest contemptus vnius quam contradictio multorum. the contempt of one that hath a voyce in election dooth more hurt, then the contradiction of many. Wherefore, if these fevve 10. Priests had beene contemned and all the 300. Priests had consented, the election had beene of no valure. howe then cann it be said, that he vvas ordinaryly insti∣tuted, and according to the Canons of the Church? vvhen both the 300. and these 10. al∣so vveare contempned, and their voyces nec∣lected? I speake of the ordinary waie, and so doo they vnderstand (els vvould they not ha∣ue made mention of the Canons) not of the Popes plenitude of povver and auctoritye, by vvhich he may take awaie all Election, and alter and change all the churches canons, ād constitutions, and make newe in their places. but by the ordinary vvaie of Canon lawe, as they say well, the Pope cannot appoint a su∣perior
vvithout the consent of the subiects, Follie and igno∣rance. vvhich are to liue vnder that superior. I mu∣se at your follie or ignorannce to obiect to them this, and that so often as a great ouer∣sight fault and cōtempt: the vvhich (as I said) is truth it self, sound and canonicall doctri∣ne. CHAP. IX. TOuching the imprisonnemēt of the 2. Priests in Rome, of the vvhich all the 9. chapt. al∣most dooth treat, I haue put dovvne my Iudgemēt befo∣ré. onely this I add: that all the principall men vvhome you notifie to haue vvritten against them, vveare such men as all the vvorld knoweth to be in this cause too too much affected to the Fathers, Affection of blindeth men. and by af∣fection vtterly blinded in the state and que∣stion of the Controuersie, that is betvveene the Priests novv, and the Archpriest and Ie∣suits. I knovve them all both by face and af∣fection, and therefore may be the bolder to say it. The first man you name is M.D. D. Stapleton proueth not your intention. Staple∣ton vvhome his Hol. purposed to preferre to higher dignitie. if he vvere nowe aliue he vvould tell another tale against those that hindred him
from that higher dignitie, and that told him a tale in his eare, when he vvas ready to put his foote into his litter and made him staie at ho∣me, and loose that higher dignitie. He vvas be∣reeued of his higher dignity. the storie (of like) if you contynue your Apologies vvill comme out one day. Well! but vvhat sayth D. Stapleton to the matter? dooth he exhort or defire his Hol. to chastise by impri∣sonnement These tvvo Priests? Nihil minus. A dead man fo∣re man of the quest. Fol. 173. b. He neuer dreamed of it, and yet is he made the foreman af the quest to condemne them, beinge dead himselfe by your ovvne confes∣sion before the Priests came to Rome. What kinde of vvritinge is this to saie that a dead man gaue his verdite after he vvas buryed? And vvhy? because (vvhen he vvas senceles) he agreed in sense and Iudgement vvith other princi∣pall men that vvret (after his death) to Rome. Next to the fore man of the quest that gaue his verdite after his death ther march seventeene hands of the principall of ovvr Nation in Flanders, When wrote they? some monethes before they (the Priests) came out of Englande. But to whom vvrote they? I praye you? forsouth to the generall of the Iesuits, the head of those, against vvhom the Priests vvere in cō∣tention. But vvhat doe they desyre? Impri∣sonement? Nothinge lesse. onelye to doe Justice, The 17. princi∣pall men of ovvr Nation did not require their imprisonement. and so to make peace. A Iust and reasonable re∣quest. I see not to what end you put dovvne a peece of their lettre here. Who would not
request Iustite to be done? Why? did not the Priests them selues goe to Rome to aske Iu∣stice? that is: If they were founde faultye: to be punished: If innocent? to haue their Iust requests graunted. Doe these 17. principall men request the generall to get them Impri∣soned before they were heard? No. Neyther if they had requested it (I deeme) should they haue bene heard. Howsoeuer he was after∣vvards brought by one mans persuasion to consent thereto. for I thinke Fa. Parsons durst not haue gone with the Popes Officer to appre hended them, ād to imprisone them in the Colledge vvithout the Generall his knowledge and Consent. And so by this mea∣nes the Generall hath his part also in this vniust and vnaequitable action of their im∣prisonement, before they were heard, For be∣sydes his consentinge to their apprehension by permitting one of his order to be present and cheife actor in it, this memoriall of these 17. sent to him, was also by him to be presen∣ted to the Pope as you insinuate. After this, Fol. 12. b. follovve the letters of the Zea∣lous men, the former vvere principall men, these are but zealous, although it be the president and the Doctors of the seminarye. In my ty∣me, such men vvere counted amongst the principall of owr Nation but it vvas then, vvhen they vvere their owne maisters, not subiect and pinned to others, and directed by
others, as they are novve, The president and his three Doctors desyre not their impri∣sonement. the more is the pi∣tye, and it is the great hinderance of doinge good in owr Countrey. But to vvhom vvro∣te these zealous men? forsooth to the prote∣ctor. and not to his holynes? And vvhat do they request? to haue them imprisoned befo∣re they vvere heard? (for therein consisteth the iniurye and the Indignitye of the fact.) not a vvord thereof. onely they thinke it good, Fol. 125. that some example of severe correction should he vsed vpon them, to hold others in dutye. Novve if these three Doctors vvhich are yet livinge and subscribed to that lettere vvere exami∣ned on their Consciences, vvhether they meant these Priests should be imprisoned before they vvere heard, or that they meant to haue thē punished, being found factious, and comming vvith no matter of importan∣ce, but onelye to trouble his holynes: I am assured they vvould ansvvere, they meant not the first, for tvvo of them being Doctors of lavve should othervvyse speake against their ovvne knovvledge skyll and practyse. And some of thē I beleeue haue bitten their singers since, for subscribinge against their will, to please and Content others. Well then these foure zealous Doctors though not before, yet nowe counted amongst the principall men of ovvr Clergie proue but litle your Intention. Fol. ibidem b. In the fourth place is set dovvne a letter,
(M. D. ƲVorthing∣ton novv presi∣dent desyred not their imprisone∣ment. President) vvherein he iudgeth them to be repressed vvith some severitye? ergo saie these men, he vvrote to haue them impriso∣ned, before they vvere heard vvhat they had to saie, or to impart and vtter vvhat they came for, comming as appellannts to the see Apostolique, this they saie, or els they saie nothing. and for profe thereof they haue printed the letter. I am assured that that vvas not his meaning, vvhat soeuer els he meant by severitye. But by these my notes he may see, hovvmuch he and others vvere deceived that thought them Culpable and seditious, because they vvithstoode the Archpriest, so vnlavvfullye and disorderlye set vp, by the Protectors letters. as also his predecessor with his 3. Doctors that Confes∣sed this subordination to be most vviselye and vvholsomelye instituted. I speake not against the subordination, neither do I mis∣lyke of it, but of the maner of instituting of it at the first, vvhich vvas against all lavve and reason, as those zealous Doctors might haue seene, if they had but turned ouer their Common lawe. After your letter, The names of 3. Doctors abu∣sed or borro∣vved. there are 3. Doctors brought in, and albeit they saie nothing, yet vve must beleeue, that they vvrot most ear∣neslye and grauely to the same effect. although (as I haue said) they said neuer a word to the sane effect. What! to be imprisoned before they
vvere heard vvhat they had to said, to iusti∣fye their comming to Rome? Lansweare, if I vveare with some of thē, they vvould saie, that you abuse their names and credit, to ma∣ke men beleeue they vvere so vniust, eruell, and vncharitable men, as to vvyshe the im∣prisonement of innocent men. For vntill they be Iudiciallye conuinced of some cri∣me or fault, they are presumed innocent, as before I haue proued. In the end you sett dovvne M. No vvord at all in M. Licen∣tiat VVrights letter of the tvvo Priests. Licentiat ƲVrigts (my old and deare frends) letter. Who albeit he speaketh as a zealous frend of the Fathers, as he euer hath beene since I haue knowne him, yet not a vvord in the let∣tere of the tvvo Priests at all, nor of punis∣hing them, much lesse of requesting them to∣be imprisoned before the vvere heard. Fol. 127. By all these letters I see no iust cause, vvhy the Pro∣tector should incite the Pope, or his holynes be moued iustlye to resolue to restrayne thē (as you saye) or to imprison them (as they saie) at their arrivall or some 20. dayes after, being as yet neyther heard nor examined vvhat they brought or had to saie. These letters do not discharge Fa. Par. Surelye vvhether Fa. Parsons procured these letters or no, these letters do not discharge him frō their accusation, that he vvas the cheife pro∣curer of their imprisonement (I doe not saie he vvas) but I saie these letters which speake never avvord of their imprisonment is not
a sufficient argument (as the thinke) to dis∣charge Fa. Par. of the suspition they haue of him. At lenghe after your long trauayle in set∣ting dovvne letters that make nothing to your purpose, Fol. 136. in vvrangling vvith your ad∣uersaries, and not ansvvearing their reasons: in talking of factions in Paris and Flannders and of the last troubles in the Romaine Col∣ledge, after all these great travailes (I saie) you begin to make your selfe merrye, and to en∣riche your Apologie vvith M. Watsons com∣mon vvealth. and haning first disgraced him for not being a scholler of the Colledge for a god vvhile, f. VVatson disgraced for being a poore scholler. but a seruant to make M. Boasts bed and dresse vp his chāber. If this be a disgrace vn∣to him to haue bene a poore scholler in the Seminarie, then is it not onely a disgrace to some of the subfcribers of the former letters, vvhich yet you saie to haue bene the princi∣pallest men of our Natiō, Manie of you vnited Priests, some Iesuits, and some of them vvhom you call the prin∣cip allest men, vvere poore schollers in the seminarie. but to a great num∣ber of your selues (my vnited bretheren) and to some of the Fathers also in England, that haue bene also poore schollers and seruants before they vvere schollers of the Colledge. If you vrge me in your next I will name thē noman knowing thē better then I, as having liued manie a yeare in the seminarie, yea euen from the first setting vp of it. A poore schol∣ler is a principall man vvhen you list if he hold with the Iesuits: but if he be against
them, then it shal be laid in his dishe I vvar∣rant you. What man having anie Iudgment cann think, VVant of hone∣stie and con∣science. that vnited Priests vvrot this A∣pologie? Hovv can they vvith honeslye and conscience obiect to another as a disgrace and in contempt the state vvherein diuers of them also liued. If it were abiect, and M. Wat∣son to be counted abiect therefore, yet the same Iudgmēt is to be giuen of a great num∣ber of you your selues, that liued also in that estate, except by holding with the Fathers you are restituti in integrū, vvashed cleane frō that spot, the others still remaining all to be smyred thervvith. A question to be ansvveared. But vvhy (I praie you) might not M. Watson a secular Priest, make a common vvealth for Ecclesiasticall gouerne∣ment, so well as a Religious man (as it is re∣ported) make a common vvealth hovv En∣gland shalbe gouerned both in Ecclesiasticall and temperal matters. vvhat priuiledge hath this man mote then the other? the vvhich (if it vvere put in print) perhapps vvould make the reader as merrye as this doth. But you ha∣ue set it downe at large in recompence of the setting dovvne af Fa. Listers booke, A comparison betvveene Fa. L. Booke and M. VVatsons common vvealth if that be his vvhich the auctor of the Apologye Fa∣thereth vpon him. ad longū sine require. I would to god his booke had do∣ne no more hurt then M. Watsons common wealth. For this maketh men merrye, that maketh men grone, this stirreth vp laughter, that breedeth melancholy this reioyceth the readers hart after the reading of so manie te∣dious
and vndeacent letters ād matters that maketh manie a man bleede at the veriehart throughe greife and sorow. this derogateth but a little the credit of a ordinarye Priest but that doth blemish not onelye the name and fame of the writer, hertofore held for a verie pious, modest and a great learned man: but somvvhat also of the societie it selfe. I knowe manie a Father in these coasts, that byte the lipp, so soone as they heare anie mentiō ma∣de therof. And you yourselues that vvill not talke of it, but are soerye that euer it vvas mentioned, for the greife you haue concei∣ued of it, cann yet make your selues merrie vvith M. Watsons common vvealth. Cettes your vocation and grauitye might haue ad∣uertised you to haue spent your tyme better then in these follyes, and to haue studied to ansvveare your aduersaries Reasons and ar∣gumentes and to haue filled vp your booke vvith sound Reasons, rather then vvith these flymflams. But vvhy do I speake to you, whé I knovv you are not the Authors, he hath discouered himselfe (as vvyse as he thinketh himselfe to be) as in place you maie vnder∣stande Bonus quandoque dormitat Homerus, even so in this booke he hath ouershot himselfe, and discharged you of all blame, but onely of lending your names vvillinglye to the disgra∣ce, contempt and abasement of your order ad vocation, as I haue often warned you. If this
vayne of vvryting goforvvard as it hath be∣gun, Manie merrye tales are kept in store. credit me there are tales and stories in store, that will make some men blush (if they haue anie blood in their bodie) vvhen they shall be set out in print. Maie I not for these your follyes better crye out then you doo. Good lord, to vvhat vanitye are these owr vnited bre∣thren grovvne by contention that they cann lose their tyme in filling their booke vp with these toyes! Fol. 138. whee∣re is the spirit of charitye? vvhere is the vertue of modestie become? is this fit for designed Martyrs, or for good Confessors? to disgrace and deface a man of their ovvne coate and vocation, to make him a mocking stock to the readers without iust occation: his vvords ād vvritings nothing at all appertayning to the matter inquestion? But dravvne as it vvere vvith a cart rope to make your selues merrie? one daie you vvill ansvveare for this Idle tyme so scandalou slye spent. Doe you designed Martyrs giue your sheepe such edification? Doo you good con∣fessors instruct your flocke vvith such stuffe and exhortations? hath contention and mali∣ce so blinded you, that you forget the hono∣rable state and vocatiou you are in? Yes true∣lye, els vvould you neuer commit the absur∣dityes you doo, and espetiallye about the cō∣tempte of men of your ovvne coate and vo∣cation, Amend, amend it is highe tyme. Fol. 139. Who I praie you sent the common vvealth vnto Rome to be Cōmunicated to the Cardinalls that laughed so hartilie at it? who translated
it into Italien or Latin, or vvho did explicat it to the Cardinalls to make them so mertye? (for I suppose it vvas written in English for anie thing I can perceiue in this Apologie to the Contrarye.) vvho but the Author and vvriter of this Apologie, to vvhō it vvas sent from England to Rome. Me thinkes I see hovv he laughed whē first he did read it. And then hovv he hasted to Communicate the sa∣me to the said Cardinalls to make them mer∣rye, and then vvhat discourses there vvere of the insufficientie, vnlearnednes, and ambitiō of these Priests that stood against the Archp. because this commō wealth maker vvas one of them. vanitas vanitatum that Religious men vvho should spend their tyme in studie and contemplation, do take their greatest plea∣sure, delite, and contentement in vvriting ād receiving packets of nevves from all coasts ād cuntreyes, making that their vvhole stu∣die ād trauaile. Would to god they would cō∣tent thēselues vvith such packets as are di∣rected to thē, ād not forestalle, and take vp, other mens that appertayne not vnto them. We are come at last to the Question that standeth in this vvhich part hath broken the pea∣ce, VVhich side broke the peace after the com∣ming of the bull. that vvas made by the comming and sigth of his Holines bull. You saie they did by a nevv deuise they shortlye after cast out, that satisfaction must be made to them for some former hard speaches vsed and vvrytten against them in the tyme of contention, &c. this you saie but doo
not tell vvho began, vvhich vvaie, in vvhat place and at vvhat tyme and this you proue onelye by cui bono. They saie the breach be∣gan on the Archp. his side when they had for∣giuen and forgottē all the foresaide hard spe∣aches and iniuries done vnto them (so farre were they from requiring satisfactiō for thē) ād this they proue in both their Latin booke, Pag. 65. in the one and 60. in the other. by putting downe the Arch. letters, vherein he saith he had receiued from the mother ci∣tie a resolution that the detractors of the pro∣tectors authoritie were schismatickes, and that he would not absolue anie that made not a conscience of it. Beside they put downe a forme of recantacion or satisfaction which is to be made by such as held against his institu∣tion before they could be absolued. Pag. 120. This breache crediblie beg∣on the Archpr, syde. These are better and more substantialle proofes then, cui bono, that this pitious breache began on the Archpriests side, and not on your discon∣tented brethrens syde. the vvhich I beleeue to be true, because you answeare not one word therto in this Apologie, neither goe you about to cleare the Archp. of it. For this being the cheefe cause they pretend of this conten∣tion, and affirminge so oft as they doe that the Archp. renewed the old quarrel of schis∣me, in all wyse mens iudgment you should haue spent your labour in proouing the con∣trarie and in discharging the Archp. from this fowle fault. the tyme, (I saie) inke, and pa∣per spent in setting downe M. Watsons com∣mon
wealth, had bene much better imployed in controling your aduersaries of an vn∣truth, by laying the breach of the peace vniu∣stlye vpon the Archp. and his coūsellours but fortis est veritas, the truth carrieth such a ma∣iestie with it, that the verie aduersaries them selues dare not approche it, much lesse impu∣gne it. And to prooue they broke the peace made after the comming of the breue you al∣ledge an Appeale made by 3. of those priests from the Archpriest before the comming of the said breue. Wiselye, but yet according to your custome throughout your booke, The vnited put stil quid pro quo where you put still quid pro quo, and the cart before the horse. The question is, Who bra∣ke the peace after the comming of the breue? And you prooue they brake it, bicause some of them appealed before the breue came downe. Fol. 154. Where you obiect the one was made a do∣ctor of Diuinitie, and the other a Bacheler in Paris, against an expresse Breue that forbad the same in all Englishmen. I maruell that this Author the procurer of that Breue is so for∣getfull, as to saie, it is forbidden to all Englis∣men to take the degree of a Bacheler, where as Doctorship is onelye forbidden. You maie correct the fault in your next, Fol. ibi. in mar. Pag. 91. as that also, in calling the Appeale made by M. Charnocke verie ridiculous, for he proued in his letter to the Cardinall Burghesius which is put dovv∣ne in their booke to the inquisition and that
authoritie of the learnedst Canonists, that it vvas a lavvfull and not a ridiculous appeale. you should haue ansvveared his auctorityes, and them haue termed it ridiculous. But lea∣uing his authors vntoucht you shevve your selues to be verie ridiculous people, that would haue men beleeue you vpon your ba∣re vvords, and not beleeue those that bring good stuffe and authorities for them. Touching the speciall point (you saie) to be noted that they haue not procured anie one of their Appeales to be presented or prosecuted in Rome. the note is easily to be ansvveared, Fol. 159. b ƲVhy the priest did not prosecu∣te their apeales. be∣cause the place is not tutus sure for them, ha∣uing experimented it first in ther messengers, Fol. 137. and next hauing Fat. Parsons in the tovvne, vvhom you confesse they take to be their cheefest aduersarie, and vvho for his creditt (you saie) in the Romaine court dooth great lye lett and hinder their designemens. ād this their saying vvas not manie monethes since confirmed by one of his ovvne coate passing by this vvaie, vvho said: fa. Parsons could doe vvhat he vvould vvith the Pope. Iudge if such a place be sure for your brethren to persecu∣te their appeale. And vvhere you adde, that they ought to haue prosecuted it vvith in cer¦taine monethes, vnder payne that all is voyd if it be not doon: you talke like diuynes and not lyke lavviers, as I haue shevved els vvhe∣re before.
And vvhere you saie that the Archpri him∣selfe presented their appellation to his Hollines. Fol. 160. If he haue presentēd that appeale vvhich they have put in the end of their Latyn bookes Certes, either the appellants are egregious. lyers and shamels men, or els the Atchp. had a brasen face: they shameles to exhibit to his Holynes, and to all the vvorld such faulsityes and vntruthes against their lavvfull superior: but if they be truthes and not forged, then had the Archp. a brasen face to exhibit or cau∣se to be presented to his Holines such true, but yet vnvvorthye stuffe against him selfe. If they had kept themselues vvith in the compasse of their matter, Fol. ibidem. The cause vvhy the priests prin∣ted their bookes. the booke vvritten after the appeale, had neither beene libelles (as you tearme them) neither yet vnduelye printed. Why should they not informe his Holynes, and giue notice to all all the vvorld hovv vniustlye and vnchristianlye they vvere dealt vvith all before the coming of the bre∣ue, to be called, counted, and by vvriten boo¦kes prooued Schismaticks, for not admitting an exorbitant dignitie vpon a Card. bare let∣ters. And againe after the comminge of the bull. and their acceptatiō of that dignitie, the same crvme to be renevved, and so horrible a cryme to be imputed to them againe. If you iustlye accuse them for imputing far lister faults to Fa. Pars. and others, and take them vp egerlye for the same? hovv can you finde fault
with them for defending and clearing them selues from so horrible a sinne, next cosyn to Heresie? and worse then soothsaying and I∣dolatrie it selfe they wrote then both for the defence of their good name and fame, which is iust and naturall, and to aduertyse his Holy∣nes of their vsage, requesting him either to quit, or condemne them by his sentence. To this end they published their booke, as they affirme, and you selues cannot well denie. the which sentēce of his Hol. which (you saie) you expect, is come out alreadie (as I haue heard) and if I be not deceaued I haue read it also. In the which he condemneth expressely fat. Li∣sters booke of schisme, and theirs also com∣manding silence and forbidding anie more writing. the which yet you (that so often ob∣iect contempt of his Holynes and his doings to others) doe neyther obserue nor obey. Fol. 162. Of the 6. abuses you finde in the title of their la∣tyn beoke. The first of the 5. or 6. abuses which yov fin de with the title of the latyn booke is. Becau∣they make the strife to be betweene them ād the Iesuites and the Archp. fauoring them. this to be false and that their strife is cheiflye with M. Blackwell, whom they make in their title but an Appendix, you proove, because the Appellation is made against M. The cheise strife is vvith the Je∣suits. Blackewell But they shew, and your selues elswhere con¦fesse that their cheifest strife is with far. Pars. for giuing false informatiōs for this subordi∣nation, and With Fath. Lister for writing his
booke of schisme, and fa. Garnet for the ap∣prouing thereof. Yet was their first falling out with fat. Weston and the others before named, manie a daie, yea some yeares be∣fore they appealed and therefore it is playne truth and not falsehod, that they put the Ie∣suits in the first place and M. Blackw. in these cond. For much strife and contentiō had they with the Iesuits long before M. Blackw. vvas made Archepriest. Your second fault also is faultles in them. The second fault is faultes. for had they said: and all the Seminarie priests, thē had they lyed in deed. but saying onely and the Seminarie priests, they said true, for they are Seminarie priests, but you saye this vvas but a poore faulte and therefore passed it o∣uer lightlye. Thirdlye they saye from the death of Card. Allen. you adde that this sturre against the fa∣thers vvas begonne in England in his dayes. If in his dayes? then might it be continued from his death. you looke verie narrovvlye to sin∣de hoales, vvhere none are, they doe not saie the troubles beganne but from his death, but that haue rysen from his death. that is, haue beene increased. And here by your ovvne vvords is prooued that vvhich I said before: your ovvne vvords against you. Fol. 162. that these priests vvere in trouble and concē∣tion vvith the Iesuits some yeares before the Instituting of the Archpr. for your saie: That the contentions against the Iesuites vvere
begonne in England euen in Card. Allens daies. by consequence then, they committed noe abuse to put the Iesuits before M. Blackvvell and much lesse is it then a playne falshood. The fourth is no abuse. Fourthly, they say: Ad S. D. N. Clementē octauum exhibita ab ipsis sacerdotibus, that this declaration vvas exhibited by the Priests them selues to our most holie father Pope Clemēt the 8. I see not to vvhat purpose you put this dovvne, you do not acknovvledge it your sel¦ues to be an abuse. What matter is it I praye you (so it be exhibited to his Holines) vvhe∣ther it be exhibited by them selues or somme other therir frend or foe? as it vvas exhibited by the Archp. as you saie before. For the ap∣peale and the booke being printed and boūd together, I cannot see hovv the one could be presented vvithout the other. except the Ar∣ch. did cut of the booke, and send the appea∣le onely. What matter (I saie) maketh it, so it come at lēgh to the Popes knowledge (which is the scope of their vvriting) as it did come indeed, the vvhich maie appeare by the bre∣ue he sent dovvne, to condemne both theirs, and Fa. Listers booke also. Neither is this vvord exhibit, to be taken so strittly, as you seeme to take it, that is: to deliuer vp into the Popes hands, but in his vs∣uall and common signification: vvhich is to set abroad for euerie man to behold, or to offer and she vve a thing to another. But why
did you not put dovvne all their vvords at lenght vvithout nipping of the latter vvords vvere you afraid of somme buggs? Nippers. or did your consciences accuse you for the former iniurie of schisme laid against them? of the vvhich you talke not vvillingly: and are sorie to heare of it. Why did you not speake out ād saie as they doe: ab ipsis sacerdotibus qui schi∣smatis aliorumque criminum sunt insimulati. exhibited by those priests that vvere vnduely ac∣cused and appeached of schisme and others cri∣mes. The vnited doe iustlye abhorre the vvord schis∣me. I cannot blame you if you abhorre the vvorde schisme. because the vniust, vncharita∣ble, and vnlearned accusation of your brethrē of this schisme vvas ihe springe and fountaine of this trouble, your consciences doe testifie as much, and therefore you nipped of these vvords vvhich declare the cause of their vvri∣ting ād exhibiting their latin booke to his Ho¦lynes. And besides in this vvhole booke you neuer enter into speech of this matter, albeit the same be the ground of all this contention but vvith other to yes and flymflamms, you turne your readers eyes and intention from marking this point. As for the 5. Fol. 162. b abuse vvhich you gather by the application of the verse of the Psalme to their booke: I passe ouer being no diuyne ād therefore cannot iudge vvhether they or you explicate it most aptlye. You 6. reprehension is verie foolish: the
which as for saying: The 6. is a foo∣lysch reprehēsion 163. their booke vvas printed at Roan in the hovvse of Iames Molens, and you confesse you knovve not vvhether there be aine such signe or man dvvelling in Roan or no. If you cannot precisely saie their is no such mā, why doe you finde fault with thē for say∣ing there is such a man. You should haue doō well if you had followed the same counsell which you gaue them a litle before, to send a letter to Rome to his Hol. his nephewe or some other frend to know whether the Car. instituted the Archp. by his Hol. consent or no. So might you with lesse cost and charges, haue sent from Flaundres (where this booke was printed) to Roan, to knowe vvhether their be such a printer so named or no, If not? then you might haue precisely said, there is none such, and as precisely taxe them: but if you had found such a printer there. Then might you haue saued this labor. but you are lyke to such as can giue good connsell to o∣thers, but will followe, none them selues. Well then, seeing that all yours. Fol. 163. and 164 absurditi∣es, be neither absurdities, shifts, nor falshoods, but that you haue committed a manifest fals∣hood in nipping of these words. Their 6. faults if they vvere such not comparable to your ovvne fault. ab ipsis sa∣cerdotibus qui schismatis aliorumque crimi∣num sunt insimulati, to which one shift &c. falshood, all their 6. are not comparable, al∣beit they vvere shiftes and falshoods novve your readers maye imagine vvhat stuffe the
Remnant will be. And if we maie presume (as the lawe saith a praeteritis de futuris) by that which you haue alreadie said, of that which you are like hereafter to saie: then sure I am, that you will not saie much to the matter, nor come neere the question. nor yet ansvveare there reasons, for as yet you haue done nei∣ther of the three. To their 2. Pag. 5. reasons that caused them to print their bookes. Fol. 164. The first reason for printing their booke is good. The first: They could not haue copies inough in vvritten hand: You ansvvere is: That manie copies vvas not needfull, if they vvere onelye for his Holines information as they pretend. Indeed if they were onelye for his Holynes information so manie copies nee∣ded not: but where doe they pretēd that they wrote for his Holynes onelye information? their intention was not onelye to informe his Holynes, but also to defend their innocē∣cie, fame, and good name, that was blotted & blemished, both at home, and in forraine cō∣treyes by Fa. Listers booke, the copies vvhe∣re of flewe ouer into strange countreyes, sent and dispersed euerie where by the Fathers. And this is the third reason, wich they giue in that place in the margent, which you willing∣lye omit. The seconde reason. Pog. 5. The secād reae. Fol. 164, To get their good na∣mes againe in forraine nations taken avvaye by the Iesuits wherto you answere, that in your opinion it vvill fall out quite contrarye: to witte
vvhere before they vvere not infamous nor yet knovvne: novv they shalbe both by their infa∣matorie vvritinge. Take heed this prophecie fall not vpon your selues. This is perchaunce but your owne opinion. Howsoeuer it will fall out vvith them, my opinion is, yea I am full sure of it, that somme others that haue beene medlers herein, especiallye the writer and the consirmer of the booke of schisme against them, haue lost much of their credit alreadie by the devulgating of these bookes, and that their best frends hould downe their heads for shame when it cometh in talke. And as litle credite I beleeue, you will get (by the∣se your Apologies) both at home and abroa∣de, as you deeme maye happe to them for theire bookes. From the 164. you repreend them iustly. lease of your booke to the 168. you rune ouer their latin booke and doe duly reprehend them for their writting a∣gainst certaine reuerēd and vertuous parsōs. VVilling omis∣sion. But yet I marke, you willingly omitt and ne∣glecte their quarrel against some Iesuits and specially Father Lister, for writting against them and Father Garnet for approuinge the same. This is, as I haue often repeted the grownde of theis troubles and contentions. Hinc fundi nostricalamitas. Here you should either haue defended Father Lister or haue condemned him (as in your conscience you doe) but you are of that veine, that if you should condemne or dislike of any thinge in
one Iesuit, you thinke it would denigrat the praises you attribute to thothers. Speak truth. But for all this, you being priestes and confefessors should speake the truth and shame the deuil and lay the fault, vvhere it is. You knovv vvho said: Amicus Plato, Amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas. But vvith you, the Fathers and their praise are more respected, then the truth it self. They goe about (say you) to shevve that the Archpriest hard proceeding with them, Vneuē dealing. vvas cause of their nevve contentions and sturres. This you prooue by 2. Marginall no∣tes of theirs. But vvhy did you not put dow∣ne the text also? Why did you not sett downe the Arcpriest his epistle renevving the woun∣de of schisme and coūting them schismaticks? Why? bicause you loue not to talk of the mat∣ter. albeit the same be the chiefist pointe in the controuersie. Markstill the question in con∣trsuersie. That is: Whither they be Schismatickes for vvistanding the Card. let∣ter? But bicause you will not talk of it, and that you are loath to heare of it, and especial∣ly for that I would inculcate into the memo∣ry of the reader the true cause of theis con∣tentions, and call to his mynde, What you should haue handled, I doe so much the ofte∣ner and vvillinger repete it. But is not this a prettie trik? You alleage the page vvhere the epist. is, you knovv that the Arch. ouer shott him self in it, and yet you come in with, But
suppose he ouershott himself, and then, Foolish suppos∣alls. vvas this a sufficient cause for priests, &c. Yea fors∣ooth, and for monkes toe, to defend their good name and same, and especially to ac∣quitt them selues of so hainous a crime as schi sme is in that contrey, The pestes vve∣re bound to de∣fend their good name. in time of persecution for the satisfaction of their spirituall childrē, and contentment of all that knevve them. for had they held their peace, they should haue beene iudged and holden for such in deed, and that worthily our Sauiour him selfs gaue them example to defend their fame. By the example of our Sauiour. For whē the Ievves had said to him. Samaritanus es tu & Daemonium habes. He ansvvered: ego De∣monium non habeo. And so defended his good name. What man of reason or religion vvill not allowe of this? Who will say (With you) that these mē are out of the right or true path of priestly proceeding, vvho doe but that vvhich god ād nature permitt thē to doe: that is to defend their good name against slaunde∣rous and exorbitant calumnies. Fol. 167. b Lett euery indifferent reader consider well vvhat you do in this place, and they shall find, a mā of clovvtes that you make your selues a man of clovvtes to fight against, and then you rune furiously at him vvith hedd hand and feet, but for all that, you hurt him not. VVhat the vni∣ted people shold haue doone. No more doe you any thing at all heere touching the matter your take in hand, vvhich is to confute your aduersaries
booke. For if you vvould haue confuted it, you should haue shevved and proued that, that the epistle of the Archp. vvas not his, or that that epistle did not giue the first cause of this breach, after the comming of the Po∣pes breue. But vvhat (I pray you) doe you herein? Nothinge, but Suppose it vvas his Epistle, and then you rage at their tvvo notes in the margent. They say: the be∣gynning of nevve contentions vvas a violent Epistle of the Archpristes and that the Arch∣priest renevved the vvarres. And this they proued by producing of this Epistle. But you What? Mary But suppose he ouershott himself. Well, Suppose he fovvly ouershott him self in calling them Schismaticks, yet say you Priestes that professe modestie, obedience, and mortificacion &c. Can. Non sunt. 11. q. 3. S. August. bjd∣deth them to de∣fend their fame. should suffre it. Are they more modest obedient and mortified then Saint Augustine? Saying: Proinde quis∣quis à criminibus flagitiorum atque facino∣rum vitam suam custodit, sibi bene facit: quisquis autem famam: & in alios misericors est. Nobis enim necessaria est vita nostra, aliis fama nostra. Therfore vvho soeuer keapeth him self from synning and offen∣ding greuously, he doth good to him self, but vvho soeuer doth keap his good name is mercifull to others. Can. Nolo 12. q. 1. For our life is ne∣cessarie to vs, our same to others. And the same Doctour againe. Conscientia ne∣cessaria
est tibi, fama proximo tuo. Qui fi∣dens conscientiae sua negligit famam, crudelis est, Thy conscience (that thov liuest well) is necessary to thee thy self: but they fame (that thovv liuest vvell) is necessary in re∣spect of thy neighbour. He therfore that trusteth to his conscience and neglecteth his fame, is cruell. Are they more modest and mortified then our Sauiour? Who (as I haue said) ansvvered his calumniators, Salomon vvil∣leth them to doe the same. Eccl. 41. S. Paule defen∣ded his fame. 2. Cor. 12. that he had not the deuill? And Salomon commandeth vs, Curam habere de bono no∣mine. To haue care of our good name. And S. Paule defendeth his good name. Good and iust cause then had these Priestes by reasons and examples alledged, to defend them selues, from so haynous a crime, put vpon them by the Arehpriest in his let∣ter or Epistle. Which you vvill not see, but only suppose at it. To conclud this pointe notvvithstanding your bigg and lo∣ftie vvords of Scandalous tumults, Fol. 168. exorbi∣tant passions, and furious rages (very vn∣fitt termes for such Priests, as you are that professe modestie and mortification, and that are in Ingland, not only to suffre, but also to dye for Christian Religion) with which you vvould make babies afraide. The Priests had iust cause to ap∣peale. They had very iust cause to appeale from so vniust a iudg charging them both falslye
and vncharitably, with so hainous a crime as schisme is. And that men iustlye defending their honor and fame, do nothing at all dy∣minishe, eitherof their modestie, mortificatiō or obedience, neither haue they stepped for that, out of the path of Christian Religion, or priestly proceading, as you would make not your wise but passionate and affected reader here beleeue. Fol. 169. And thus much you ha∣ue said of the Latine booke. A short horse is soone curried. A vvhole boo∣ke briefely an∣svvered If you can answere whole boo∣kes so briefly, you nead no more large Apol. you are men of dispatch, I see wel, but no marwell: many hands make light work, you are many vnited priestes together, and ther∣fore you haue the soener done. And yet as brief as you are, you haue spoken more then, at the beginning you thought to say in this pla∣ce, Truly if at the beginning you thought not to say so much, you thought to say ve∣ry litle o nothing. Thouchinge the pridcipall you haue as yet said nothinge. For touching the princi∣pall pointes of the booke, ād the matters the reof in controuersie, you haue yet said no∣thing at all in this chapt. I know not what you will doe here after. Now to the English booke for as for the third booke vvritten to the Inquisition, You touch not nor mention their booke to the Inquisitors. you touch it not, bicause they keapt close to the matter, and did not fling out at the Iesuits and specially at Fa. Persons as in th' other they doe, ād so doing gaue you
no occation of vvritting. Fol. 172. If the thad bene as modest in their book to his Holl. vve had lost the notable peece of vvork of this A∣pologie. Dixit Piger, leo est in via. Prouerb. 26. The slouth full excuse them selues sayinge, there is a lion in thewaie. What soeuer they meane by it, or hovv soeuer you interpret it of ouer thro∣vving all that stand in their way, Superioritie, Reason, Religion, and S. Peters koies, &c. This peec of scripture inter∣preted against the vnited. I may vvell applie it to this Apologie of yours. For you are so slouthfull or so fearefull of the lion that lieth in the vvay, that is, to co∣me neare the points in question or to handle any one of them, as you ought to haue done, that for feare of that lion or of the iustice of their cause you dare not put out your head so much as once to looke them in the fa∣ce. You vvent veryneare in deed, Fol. 167. b. yea so nea∣re as the margent, but you durst not looke ouer into the text, for there lay the lion. that is, the Archpriests epistle, vvhich was the ori∣ginall and foundamentall cause of these last controuersies, and writting of these bookes. If you had not bene slouth full covvards you should haue caught that lion by the eares, and plucked him out of his denme. Such as vvrit vvith conscience should haue done this. and if you had foūd him to haue had venyme ād no hony in his mouth, you should haue torne him in sonder as Sampson did: that is, haue freely confessed the truth, and blamed your Archp. for such an vncharitable act. other∣wise
if you had found him a vvolfe in a lious skine, you should haue pluckt the skin ouer his eares: that is if you had found that it vvas not M. Blackvvels letter, then you should haue discovered their falsehood and impo∣sture by fathering that vpon him that vvas none of his. But it was in deed a lion and nei∣ther wolf, fox or beare, and therfore you lett him alone, and durst not come neare him. So that this sentence man vvell be applied to the fashion of your writting. hovv you dare not come neare the lion, Fol. 172. An vncharita∣ble vvronge. that is, examine the true question of this controuersie. Why do you vvrong your bretherne by saying, That they taking vpon them in the place (of their English booke) to the Reader to sett dovvne the true state of the question, putt it dovvne vvholly to the contrarye. Lett vs see, The first con∣trouersie. if you be true men of your vvorde, There are handled in their bookes 2. contro∣uersies (the vvhich being lions, you shonne and feare so much that you dare not come neare vnto them) The first is: that the Arch∣priest was not orderly instituted, by the Card. letters and them selues vniustly called schis∣maticks for not receauing him vpon those letters. The second con∣trouersie. The second. That after the Bull came and all had submitted them selues thereto, the Archpriest sett abroch the old matter of schisme, and as schismaticks forbad (by his letters) them to be absolued of any Priest ex∣cept
they acknowleged their Schisme and disobedience. The first they sett downe in the said preface thus. The striefe and dissen∣tion at this day too great and scandalous in Ingland is maynteined by the Archpriest the Iesuits ād their adherents against those Prie∣stes vvho did forbeare to subiect them selues vnto the Archpriest constituted in authori∣tie ouer all the Seminarie Priestes in Inglād and Scotland by a Cardinall who was Prote∣ctor of the English colleag at Rome and af∣terwards honored vvith the title of Prote∣ctor of Ingland, for the which forbearing to subiect thē selues at the first making know∣ne of this auctoritye, the Priests were accu∣sed of schisme, sedition, faction, rebellion, &c. Doe you putt downe the question in cō∣trouersie so simplie and plainly in your first chapt. as you make your Readers beleeue by your title you would doe? Nothing lesse. Let any man reade ouer that chapt. and he shall find no case or state of the questiō proposed. You fly it, as it were from a lion. From fol. 2. to b. There you shall find a ragmans roole of all the conten∣tions and factions that hath bene in Fraunce, Fol. 6. b. and 7. Fol. 7. b. Italy and Flanders for many yeres. Fa. Parsons retorne from Spaigne to Rome, mention of a nevv association, of Fishers confession, of Fa. Parsons information, and of the conclu∣sion taken to make an Archpriest rather thē a Bishopp, and that he should rather be in∣stituted
by the Card. letters then by the Po∣pes bulls: Fol. 8. b. Fol. 9. Fol. 10. of a great nombre of letters, of D. Bishopp, and M. Charnoks examination, of the new Breue, of Fa. Parsons letters to M. Collington ād to M. Mushe, of appeales wit∣hout prosecution, of M. Charn. letter to Card, Burghesius, of the Archpriest being ma∣de Prothonotarius Apostolicus, and so the ende. Wheare is the state of the present controuersie in question, You promise much, but par∣forme nothing. that you theare promised. Lett the vvorld iudge, who are rather to be beleaved, they that goe plainly and simply to work, and that sett downe the questiō truly ād nakedly without pompe or florish of words? or you that promise mountaines, and do not giue vs so much as mowlehills? that make men beleue by the title of your chapter, you will goe plainly to vvorke, but in the end serue them vvith title tatle and nothing els. What appertaine all theis things recovvnted vpp before, to the controuersie in question? and yet you say nothinge els. If I haue least out any substantiall point of your first chapter chardg me hardly in your next, if it be right∣fully, I will ask forgiuennes, if vniustly, I will haue my right. The first cause thē of all theis troubles, is, for that the Iesuits wrott, taught and auovved that the Priests that refused to obay the Archp. and to take him for their Superior, being only instituted by a Card.
letters vvithout the Popes Bulles, vveare Schismaticks seditious, factious and rebel∣lious, &c. but of this you will not heare. Leo est in via. You dare not come neare it. This you confesse also your selues in say∣ing. you vvill not talk of it: You vvill not meadle vvith the point in controuersie. that is as much to say, you vvill not meadle vvith the pointe in controuersie, but vvil rune at Random, and discourse and talk of vvhat matter you list, thoughe it come not noe nearer the questiō then Barwick comes to London. The second controuersie they put downe in the same preface in theise vvords: Pag. 3. A peace was made to the great confort of all Catho∣licks, vvhen his Holl. breue vvas presented to them. But this peace vvas soone after bro∣ken by the meanes of the Iesuits, who revi∣ved the same calumniation against the Priests and by the Archpriest vvho did not only a∣verre the assertions of the Iesuits, but publis∣hed also that he had receved a resollution frō the mother Cittie (to vse his termes) which avowed that the refusers of the auctoritye vvere schismaticks. The cause then of this deuision is not for any resistaunce of the Priestes against the Archpriest but for that the Priestes vvill not acknowledg that in the time of their forbe∣arance to subscribe to the auctoritye they vvere factious, seditious rebellious schisma∣ticks, enormously disobedient, in continuall
mortall sinne, practising their functions in irrigularitye, &c. Loe hovv plainly simply and truly (for any thing you say to the con∣trary) they putt downe the case. You say it is sett dovvne vvholly to the contrarye, you proue it not. Vnited you are neuer otouch the question. We must beleaue you, bicause you are vnited stedfastly in this, neuer to touch the question, but to evacuate the say∣ing and disgrace the persones of your bre∣therne all you may. You say in putting theis cases, they debase the Archpriest and the Pro∣tector: but you tell vs not vvherein. You are men of vvonder full auctoritie that you must be beleaved vpon your word. Marke. I haue proued to you before, that a Card. is not to be belea∣ued vpon his bare word in an other mans pre∣iudice: ād why shall we beleaue you in sclaun∣derīg your bretherne vvithout cause? Shewe me in your next by vvh'atwords in theis 2. cases by thē proposed, they haue debazed the persones by you named. for vntill then, you haue lost your credit with me. They haue sett it downe (you say) wholy to the cōtrary. Why are you in such hast, that you cannot stay to tell vs wherein? What Asse vvill geue credit to your bookes, vvritting so negligently and so fondly, that you are not able to shevve one reason of your negatiue doctrine. You add that in the end they lay a foundation to all disobedēi∣ce. But you tell vs not in which end, either of the preface or of the book: for in the 2. cases
proposed, there is not the least surmise the∣rof. But peraduenture you meane theis ends you lay dovvne, in the vvhich, Fol. 172. b. thone Thirsteth the good of his Reader and th'other biddeth you Fare vvell. A foolish toye. In deed theise be your impertinent discourses, as you note vvell in the margent, and I add to the text foolish also. No no, S. You send vs to a chapt. that hath no such thing in it. (say you) you may see more noted before in the se∣cond chapter. Well in Gods name. Let vs goe back againce thither. What shall I see theare? That they haue put downe the state of the question vvholy to the cōtrary. Is it true? that vvould I faine see. Fiat voluntas tua. Fol. 10. b. for so you begine, and the Sermon contineweth vntill Card. Allens letters sent to M. Fol. 11. Mushe inter∣rupted the prechear and Card. Sega his visi∣tation. Fol. 12. You thirst (by all liklihood) the good of your Readers that begine so devoutly, ād goe on so honorably vvith 2. Cardinalls in the fore frōt. But bevvaire (Maisters) of your geese when the tox precheth. Then after the Cardinals march the Popes speeches sent in∣to Ingland Exhorting and chardging men to liue in vnitie. Next to his Hol. marcheth Fi∣shers memoriall against the Iesuits, being one of the most exorbitant disorderly fello∣wes in the Romaine sturrs, and yet thought a fitt man by you to be put in your booke. Next to his Hol. after Fisher in stead of a Trumpettor marcheeh. No alas, Fol. 13. is this the ver∣tue of obedience? is this humilitie? is this, &c.
Next follovveth that vvhich I haue before confuted, so that I cann see nothing in that chapter, that proveth They haue putt the state of the question wholly to the contrary, and yet I promise you I did read it ouer with my Spectacles vvherfore I beseech some of you, that haue a cleerer sight then I haue, and that can see more vvith tvvoe eies them I can do vvith foure, to note me the leafe whe∣re I may see more noted in that chapter. A suttle sen∣ding. You did vvell to send your Readers from the 11. chapt. to the second, to seek for that, vvhich they shall neuer find there, and that vvhich you should haue shovvne them in this place, if you could. The force of truth. But Leo est in via. Truth lay in your vvaye, vvhich is more impregnable thē a lion, and more immovable then a Rock. If you had had a desire to instruct your Reader in good sooth, ād not to haue him deceaued: you vvould not, or at least should not, haue sent him to rune ouer a longe chapter to se∣arch that vvhich vvas not to be found, but for his more ease to haue quoted the leafe of your booke vvherin he might haue found it. And vndecent shiefte for vni∣ted people. But your intention vvas if not to deceiue him, yet to deliurer your self by that shifte from shevving and prouing that they put the question vvholly to the contrary. Theis fovvle shiefts may for a time hold some fooles in suspence, Fol. 168. Fol. 172. but in the end it vvill turne to the shame of the Authors.
You answered the Latine book bricflie, Tvvoe discourses ansvverd vvith tvvo vvords. as before, but here you ansvvere tvvo vvhole disconrses Maruaillous Lacoanically ād very merrely. The one, with, he thirsteth the good of the Readers, th'other with Fare yov vvell. This in sooth is to play vvith your Readers nose ād shew your selues to be mo∣re like Scorners then graue Priestes. Fare you vvell, and vvhy did you not add, ād I ack shall haue Gill. You are counning men that can answere twoe treatisses vvith tvvoe vvords. You should haue much a doe to ansvvere M. Watsons common vvealth, (vvhich yet is not so long as theise 2. treatisses) vvith such Scholasticall or rather sophisticall brevitie. It should seame, that either you haue great cō∣fidence in your cause, vvhen you may be ad∣mitted to ansvvere your aduersaries reasons vvith a fare vvell, or els that you do not gre∣atly thirst the good of your Readers ād much lesse care for their satisfaction, You should haue esnfuted the Reasons that ba in those discour∣ses. that expected from graue vnited Priestes the confutatiō of Reasons laid dovvne in those discourses, and not a Iest of vvil Sommars budgett. Who is so blinded, that doth not see their Reasons to stand firme and solide, vvhich are sett dovvne both in the letter, that thirsteth the good of the Reader, as also in th'other that biddeth you Fare vvell: for all that you haue said ei∣ther here, or in the second chapter noted in your margent. For of 5. considerations putt
dovvne in the letter that thirsteth the good of the Reader, you seeme in your 2. chapt. to answere one vvhich is of the Premunire as for th'other 4. Fol. 15. your bidd them fare vvell. And so great is the thirst you haue of the Readers good, A notable cu∣stome. that it is your custome through out your Apologie, to ansvvere some one argu∣ment or reason, and then make him beleue you haue ansvvered them all, and so he must content him self vvith a peece, either that, or none at all. And albeit you ansvvere nothing here to the Reasons of your namelesse frende Fa∣re you vvell, yet afterwards leaping (accor∣ding to your custome) disorderly from one thing to another: and after a flinge at M. Chā∣peneis letter, Fol. 174. you leape back to Fare you vvell againe to ansvvere to the ostentation of their Canon so often cited. Dist 63. can. 12. Dist. 61. can. 13. I know not hovv often they cited it, but suer I am, you cited, it once before, and their vvordes false∣ly, as I haue there noated. You ansvvere not the Canon there. Fol. 18 b. But now after you haue ta∣ken your breath ād bethought your self bet∣ter, you vvill answere it (I trovve) very suffi∣ciently: bicause any man of meane learning way dis∣couer hovv litle this maketh for them. If this be true then no doubt but mē of your learning vvill discouer to vs, hovv litle this maketh for their purpose. vvhich if you performe, then will I bidd them and you both Fare well
and meadle no further in this matter, but thirst my ovvne rest and quietnes. Well on then Maisters myne. After you haue shevved your skill in au∣tiquitie and of diuers meanes of constituting and appointing Bishopps, at last. Fol. 174. You thinck your bretherne vvill not denie the preeminent aucto∣ritye of the Sea Apostolicke in all theis elections, and aboue all that he might, and hath lawfully chan∣ged the same. I ansvvere for them, they vvill not denie this. But vvhat then? Mary If his Holl. can alter election in ordinary Bishopps, much more he may appoint an extraordinary Prelat as the Archpriest is, with vvhat Iurisdiction he thimketh expedient. Transeat, and therfore so much to vrge this, is great presumption to call it no vvorse. haue you said? Then say I, A foolish ans∣vveare. your ansvvere is but a meere folly to call it no vvorse. for they talk of chease ād you giue them chalke. They tal∣ke, speake and meane of the ordinary and ac∣customable meanes of election, Distingo. constituted and appointed by the Canons and decrees of the Sea Apostolick, C. 2. de prebend. in 6. & Clem. 1. vt lite pen∣dens, &c. and you talk of the su∣pereminent povver or plenitudine potestatis that his Holl. hath ouer all benefices and Iu∣risdictions to giue them to vvhom he will ād by vvhat meanes and order it pleaseth him. If you thinck your brethern are not ignorant of this, you might haue leaft it out, The Canon is not ansvered. for it ans∣vvereth not their Canon that talketh of the ordinarie meanes by election. And so their
Canon standeth still for them. Note heare that you your selues call this auctoritye of the Archpriest extraordinarie and that he is an extraordinary Prelate. Fol. 14. Rash reprehen∣sion. Why then are you so rash I vvill not say impudēt to make your reader beleaue, your bretherne speak very con∣temptuously of the dignitie, and Archpriest, bicause they call it a nevv and extraordinary auctoritye well either you speake contemptuously here in calling his dignitie extraordinary, and so fall into the same fault your bretherne did, or els if you do not, The vnited are bound to ask their brethern forgivennes. you must ask them forgiuenes for slaundering them vniustlye vvith con∣tempt for saying that the Archpriest dignitie and Iurisdiction is extraordinary. This is a rule of nature quod tibi fieri non vis, alterine fa∣cias. You vvould be loath to be counted to speake this in contempt, so then must you iudg of them, that they did not speake it in contempt, as in deed they did not, and ther∣fore be vniustly taunted ād noted of contēpt by you for it. Gloss. 1. ad can. 13. dist. 61. The glosse is a∣gainst you also. The glosse you alleadg theare is against you. for it vndrestandeth of ordina∣ry election vvherein the nomber of voices carrieth it avvay, and so if the greater parte choose one to be a Bishoppe and the lesser part or fevver in nomber choose him not, he shalbe their Bishopp against their vvills, bicause he vvas canonically elected viz by the greter nomber of those that had right to choose him. So that your contradicting
brethern nor none els comming to the ele∣ction are not condempned, neither are they the lesser parte, vvhere vvas no part at all. Mary, if it had come to the election and 200. Priestes had choosen M. Blackvvell, and your contradicting bretherne vvith an hundred moe on their side had chosen an other: M. Blackwell had bine their superior against their vvills, as chosen by the greater nomber. Your error. And yet this lesser nombre had not bene cō∣dempned by the Canon as you say, but by the glosse, neither yet absolutlie by the glos∣se. For if the lesser part (saith he) hath iustam causam contradicendi. iust cause to vvithstād the election. A Bishopp cannot beginen to them against their vvills. Your glosse then talketh of the ordinary way of election, and you of the extraordinary povver, and Iurisdi∣ction of his Holl. you haue allvvaies good luck to alleadge lawe against your selues, as those accustomedly doe, Ignorance. Fol. 174. b. that impugne a truth as you doe. But here by the waye I must a little note your ignorance in that you say that his Holl. Legates and Nuncios often be neither Bishopps nor Archbishopps: I am suer the eldest of you all neuer savve or hard of any of the Popes Nuncios, but they vvere Bishoppes. Neither doth his Hol. make any, at least Nuncios, but such as are Bishopps. And as for Legates, for some hundreth yeres, theare hath bene neither Bishopp nor Arch∣bishopp
but alwaies Cardinalls vvhich are called Legati a Latere, per excellentiam quia sem∣per mittuntur a latere Pontificis. The siege Apo∣stolicke sendeth no other Legates but Car∣dinalls, nor none other there is, but such as vve call Legatinati, C. 1. de offi. Legati in 6. C. pen. ext. de offic. Legati. such as is the Archbis∣hopp of Canturbury in Ingland, And as his Holl. giueth more ample or more strickt au∣thoritie and Iurisdiction to his Nuncios, so doth he allvvaies restraine the Iurisdiction of his Legats: for if he did not, they had de iure almost as great as he him self hath. I once saw an indult giuen to a Legat a latere vvhe∣rin vvere but 4. things reserued from his povver and Iurisdiction. The first that he had no auctoritye to alienat the patrimonie of S. Peter. The second he had no povver to alienat the goods of the churches vnder his Legation. The 3. he had no Iurisdiction to conferre Bishopprickes. The 4. I do not remenbre. You may then see by this that so lardg is the Iurisdiction of a Legat a Latere, that the Pope doth dyminish his Iurisdictiō, rather then amplyfie or extend it. And so good reader fare well for we must back agai∣ne to M. Champ letter, to see vvhat he can say for him self. If he be as fond and childish, Fol. 172. b. 173. as the former dis∣courses, the vvhich you neither haue nor can answere, but by a farewell. thē were you chil∣dish to putt them dovvne, and by your not
answering him, vtter your childishnes to the vvorld. First and formost you exagitat his example of a noble man, Fol. 173. vvhich you say is no more li∣ke the case in controuersie then London is to Lincolne. And vvhy so? bicause the Prote∣ctor vvrott by the expresse commandement of his Holl. Hovv shall vve knovv, that? Ma∣ry he saith so in his letters. But I haue proved to you before that a Cardinall be he a hūdred times Protector, is not to be beleaued abso∣lutly vpon his vvorde, and letters: A false dissimi∣litud. the dissi∣militude (you say) consisteth in this that the Cardinall is of the Popes Counsell, ād to him is committed all the affaires of Ingland, and so vvas not the Gentleman M. You ansvvere vvas prevented Pag. 24. Champeney talketh of. Be it so, yet M. Champeney pre∣uented this your ansvvere, the which you will not see, you are so vvillfully blinde. For theise be his vvords: Tvvoe disparites paraduenture they vvill alleage in the case. First, that I putt the case in ciuill gouermēt vvhereas it ought to be in Ecclesiasticall. The secōd, that I putt the case in one that is not knovvne to haue any ordinary authoritye in theise affaires, vvheras it is contrary in our affaires, the Car∣dinall being Protector of our Nation. Loe here your answere sett dovvne for you in this chisdish lettere the vvhich he āsvvereth thus. I omitt the ansvvere to the first (as imperti∣nent to this place) the second is as frivolous. For albeit Card. Caietane vvas our Protector
and also Chamberlaine of the church of Ro∣me: yet it is euident that by neither of theis offices had he any ordinary Ecclesiasticall Iu∣risdiction (he might also very vvell haue ad∣ded nor extraordinarye Iurisdiction) by thei∣se offices) ouer our clergie especially to erect any nevv gouernement. And therfore if he had any auctoritye in this matter it must needs be delegat and extraordinary and con∣sequently, vvas as vvell to notifie to vs the sa∣me (his extraordinary auctoritye) as the Chaunceler of Ingland is to shevve his vvar∣rant, The younge scholler putteth you all to schole. if he intend to take vpon him an other office, not appertayning to the Chauncellors∣hipp. Thus farre this younge man come latly from schole vvho by that he hath here said, putteth you all in sooth, so to schoole, that he maketh you all as dōbe as Fishes, not saying herevnto so much as Baff: and vvhy? bicause Leo est in via. The truth vvhich he alleageth is so stronge, that it stoppeth your mouthes, so that you cannot open your lipps against it. Fol. 173. If he not the best learned amongst his fellovves be able to stopp your mowthes, so that you can∣not ansvvere him, and to make you so blinde, that you will not see this reasō. What vvould his learneder fellovves doe, especially if they were vnited to writ, as you are. How say you? Hath he not cleerly shevved, that there is no disparitye betvveene the case putt in the Car∣dinall, and the case he putt, &c. in the Gentle∣man. All those that are cleare of sight can see
ād vvill cōfesse it. And here by the vvay (you my bretherne) hauing read this, ād seeing he flattly and truly denieth the Protector to haue any ordinarie iurisdiction ouer the En∣glish clergie, why are you so impudent in all this your booke, yea in euery leafe almost, to obiect to them disobediēce to the Protector as their superior? how are you so impudent as to tearme the Protector their and your supe∣rior? yea your highest superior next his Holl. I say impudent, for if he were, and they denie it so flattly and apparently, it vvas your parte to controle them for it, and to proue the con∣trarie, that he was both theirs and your ordi∣nary superior, in that he is protector. But the thing being denied by them, and the contra∣ry not proued by you, it is extreme impuden¦cie so often to affirme it, Note. and to put it downe in your booke, as a thinge vndoubtable and a knowe truth, when it is kovven to all that haue but a cromme of witt and experience, Tit. ext. de off. Iud. ordinar. & tit. ext de offie. delegat. that it is starke false to say. That the Prote∣ctor of Ingland is Superior to any Englishmen in the vvorld, Be he clark or lay, be he in Ro∣me or in Ingland. Note beside reader, his le∣arned distinction of Iudgs. That euery iudg is either an ordinary iudge, or a iudg delegat, that is extraordinary. An ordinary iudg hath iurisdiction ordinary ouer all such as are sub∣iect to him: but a delegat iudge hath no iuris∣diction of his owne, he hath only the vse of an other mans iurisdiction, that is to say, the
iurisdiction of him that doth delegat him, and hath no more thē th'other doth giue him the vse of, neither must he passe the limites of his delegation, but obserue it diligently. But the Protector vvas not our ordinarie iudg. Ergo if he be at all, he must be our delegat iudge. But a iudg delegat (saith M. Champeney) must shevve his warrant, and the letters of his commission. But the Protector shevved no such letters. Ergo they were not bound to be∣leaue that he was a iudg delegated to institu∣te a new dignitie. In your larger Apologie, I pray you shevve your learning, Fol. 174. and answere to this youngmans argument. Where you aske vvith vvhat modestie can he say that this gouerment of the Archp. Impudency. vvas neuer hard of before. I aske you with what bra¦sen face you dare reprehend him for it, and with vvhat front you dare say, that this gouer¦ment Was euer hard of before? Fol. 174. b Nay, where is your modestie and honestie to find fault with him, for saying that vvhich your selues say aftervvards? Desirr of contra∣diction blindeth men. Where you affirme his Holl. May appoint an extraordinary Prelate as the Archp. is. If it be extraordinarie vvhere was it euer hard of it before? A desiere you haue of contradiciō hath so blinded you that you vt∣tet infinite absurdiries, and seeme to say you care not vvhat. Yes vve say some vvhat, for vve say. That it is vvel knovvne to be an aun∣cient dignitie in gods churche. In deed the offi∣ce of an Archp. is an auncient (albeit a very
lovve) office in Christes church. But o blind∣nes. Is this gouerment, I say. this, an auncient gouerment in gods church? Was this, I say this, (I must often repeate it, bicause you are become deafe, dombe, and blinde, this Leo in via, hath put you in such a fright) gouer∣ment vvhich the Archprist hath novv in In∣gland, an auncient dignitie in Gods church? I knovv the name is auncient, you must recant or be counted liars. but this gouer∣ment he hath is nevv, and therfore in your next, recant theis vvords or giue your selues the lye, for saying it is an extraordinary Pre∣lacy in the place noted in the margent. Fol. 174. b And here also you confesse as much. That his or∣dinary iurisdiction did not commounly extend so farre and ouer so many as this doth. An Archpriest ordinary iuris∣diction goeth not out of the church dores. Commonly (quoth you) no neuer since Christes Ascension, did it extend out of the churche dores. For sauing of your honesties, and for my learning, in your next promised larger Apologie, bring one example I pray you. you fighr still with your owne shadovve, who I pray you doth not knovv so well as you vvhat the Pope may doe? How great iurisdi∣ction he may giue, and that to vvhom he ple∣aseth? Theis are fonde and childish matters in deed to treat of, and not novv in question. We are at last comme againe to M. Champe∣ney vvho in effect addeth notinge to the 2. for∣mer discourses but certaine bold assertiōs. What need he? when you haue ansvvered no one of all the assertions conteined in these twoe dis∣courses,
But the thristing the readers good and the farevvell? Hath he added nothinge? What is that he talketh of ordinarie and extraordi∣narie iurisdiction, shewing the Protector to haue neither, M. Champeney reasones vnan∣svverable. as you haue sene before. Sure he addeth enoughe for all you vnited priestes and take to helpe you all the Iesuits in Rome and Ingland, to answere to, whiles you liue. except the Pope doe chaunge the canon and Ciuill lawes to helpe you out of the mire. His argument is this, His argument. all superiors haue either ordinary or extraordinarie iurisdiction. But protect. of natiōs haue neither ordinary or extraordinary iurisdiction, as they be Prote∣ctors. Ergo Card. Caietane as Protector was not the Superior to the clergie or laytie of In∣gland. But lett vs see theis bold assertions, Fovver true J sayes, ansvvered vvith you say. Which are 4. I sayes, and all true for any thinge you bring to the contrarye. For asweare therevn∣to, you say, He is a younge man come latly frō te schole, and not the best learned amongst his fel∣lovves. And againe, all this you say (not, bi∣cause such graue men as you that hath bene so long from schoole, doe say it:) cannot but import great presumption of Spirit, and so dis∣crete men (vppon your vvordes and credit no doubt) vvill iudge of him and his, and their cause accordingly. you haue so sufficiently an fvveared his I say with your you say, that dis∣cret mē cānot but wonder at the order ād ma∣ner
of your vvritting. That is, to put dovvne your aduersaries vvords, which containe nought but truth it self in them, and then to make such foolish discourses as aftervvards you doe, vvithout touchinge or answearing them. you vnited lo∣vve to maintai∣ne contencion. Surely euery man of any discretion in the vvorld must needs iudg of you and your cause, that loue vvith vvords to mainteine contencion and quitt your cause and abandō it vtterlye, as bringing nothing either to vp∣hold it, or to vndermyne and ouerthrovve the cause of your aduersaries. But is not this a bold or rather a false assertiō of yours to say: A false assertiō. ƲƲhich (I say) so often repeted against the au∣ctoritie of his Superiors, When as the Protector (as he told your before) was not his Supe∣rior nor the Archp. at that time when he spa∣ke this, I meane before the bull came for he was no iust possessor of that dignitie, but an in¦truded parson, and so had no superioritie as I haue alreadie proued. You had nead to goe to schoole againe to learne to leaue falsifying, and to forget slandering and vniust imputing of vvords and sences to your aduersaries, or els to the nouiciat hovvse to purge you of theyse foule faults. We haue (say you) answered such reasons as he brought sufficiently before. you haue not an∣svvered his rea∣sons at all. Ergo not sufficiently. and shevved his ignorance in diuinitie and considered of the de∣cree of the Doctors of Paris. Where hare you done this doughtie deed? Mary, in the 10. ch.
of this booke, you would say the 8. chaptre. I haue ouer vewed your 10. chapt. Fol. 107. b Where first and foremost I find your iumbling at certaine reasons brought out of the discourse that Thristeth the good of the reader, as you terme it, Fol. 108. you iumble a theis reasons on∣ly. thē at other words of theirs (as you say) for you haue not quoted the place) Iumbling (I say) as I haue proued there. Thirdly you heape vp many thīgs out of both bookes but especially the English. You note not the pla∣ces, bicause you say they are allmost in euery page. Other reasons you alleage out of the di∣scourse, which you call fare you vvell. At last in the same leafe you come to M. Fol. 110. A fitton. Fol. 174. Champe∣neys epistle out of the vvich you alleage but one reason, and so you Fitton in sayinge. Such reasons as he brought whē you brought but o∣ne of his reasons to ansvvere. Where I haue shewed his reason to stand firme and his diui∣nitie not to haue bene spilt by ignorance as you say here. Where also is considered, hovv well you considered, Fol. 118. b VVhy did you differr to ans∣vvere him thea∣re. of the decree of the Do∣ctors of Paris. In the end of the 8. chapt. you say: The rest vvhich he hath in this epistle shal∣be considered of aftervvards againe in a devve and conuenient place. VVhy? when you vvere in hand vvith him there, vvhy did you not dispatch him and crush him in the head, and so deliuer him at once from the paine and fe∣are he had how you would trovvnce him af∣tervvards? or vvhy doe you not ansvvere the
rest of his reasons here, seing the young man is vnder your ferule, and standeth quaking at the consideration he hath of your nōber ād grauitie, and that you are old schollers. But be of good cheare M. Champeney pluck vp your hart, they haue no more to say to you here, all is remitted to the 8. chap where they considered but one of your reasons, and that to their ovvne losse and discredit. I noted this foule shist of yours before, A fovvle shift. that when you cannot ansvvere, you send your reader to an other place to seeke that vvhich he shall neuer finde. So doe you here, you sēd him to seeke your ansvvere to M. Champe∣neis reasons in the plural, vvhere they shall find but one of his reasons laid dovvne in the singuler nomber. Thow must knovv reader, Fol. 110. that beside his first reason laid dovvne by them, there fol∣lovveth a second reason handled by me befo∣re, vvherby he proueth the Card. Pag. 25. had no au∣ctoritie to institute the Archpr. because he was neither their ordinarie nor their extraor∣dinary iudge. the force of the vvhich reason, I haue laied dovvne before. Thirdly, This yong man more resolute being come latly from the schoole, vrgeth you yet further, you mightest ob∣iection is ans∣vvered fourt∣souldly. and presupposeth the mightest obie∣ction you haue against your discontented bre¦therne (the vvhich in deed you haue, if not in euery page, yet in euery leafe allmost of
your book, vvhich he also ansvvereth foure∣foldly) and the vvhich he termeth your A∣chilles viz: that to deeme or doubt of that vvhich the Card affirmeth is to call his credit in questiō vvhose authoritie ought to be sufficient testimo∣nie for vvhatsoeuer he saieth. and shevveth that it concludeth not. If these vnited people had any desiere to opē the truth to the world and not to deceive their readers, ād still vval∣lovve in contencion they should in steed of this (I say) haue taken his ansvveres made to the chiefe piller of their cause, and haue con∣futed them, and so by learning and authoritie haue rebarred this youge scholler that gauleth thē so much, and shevved to the vvorld that he vvas not the best learned of his fellovves. But alas? they durst not, for Leo est in via. the roaring lion of truth made them take their heeles and rune avvaie. Fol. 173. Truth is so terrible to those that main¦taine a false cause (as these vnited bretherne doe) that they dare not behold it. After this, this young man more resolut and more peremptorie goeth forvvards vvith secondly, Pag. 26. thirdly, and fourthly. you lett him goe, for he being younge is toe quick of foote for you el∣der fellovves: pursuing his matter he putteth dovvne 3. other reasones, of his not accep∣ting the Archpriest. Pag. 29. The vnited broken their per∣iuis and decei∣ued their reder? And albeit you promi∣sed to consider of the rest of his reasons, as be¦fore you haue touched but one and so haue broken your promise and deceiued your rea∣der
that expected a greater matter at your hands, bicause omnis promissio honesta est ob∣seruanda. and we Canonists doe hold that nu∣dum pactum producat aectionem, so that I, and other your readers may take an action against you, and call you into lavve to make you pro forme that which you haue promised vs, your reader shal be constrained to bidd you ffa∣re vvell. that is: to consider of the rest of this yong scholers reasons, or els we shalbe driuē to beleue him, and bid you fare vvell, as the second disconr∣ser said to his frend. This yong scholler is so resolute and peremp∣torie, that he doth that, Pag. 34. 35. which you dare not talk of, and for the vvhich you are sorrie, that euer any mention vvas made of it. What is that? Mary, to sett downe simply, M. Champeney seteth dovvne simply the cause of this last con∣tencion. plainly and wit∣hout shifte or fiction, the cause of this last cō∣tention, and the occasion of his and others vvritting. What is that? forsooth that the Ie∣suits or Archp. renevved as it should seeme the slaūder of schisme in more intollerable maner then before: for novv they sayd, that vve vvere not only schismatiks but that vvho soeuer should dogmatizando say the contrary: should incurre the cēsures of the holy church, &c. ād a litle af∣ter vvhē therfore vve perceiued our late cōposed peace cōtrary to all expectatiō to be thus quick∣ly broken, and that our good names be gane to bleed a freash, the old gaules being not yet firm∣ly cured, vve requested the Archp. &c. Hovv say you (my vnited bretherne) is this true or
false he saith? If true? hovv can you in consci∣ence defend so vniust and ruynous a cause? If false? you must confu∣te or els confesse. Why doe you not confute it? Why is then not one worde at all of this in your boo∣ke? No. And vvhy? bicause your conscience doth prick you Conscientia mille testes, You confesse it you selues, for you say, you vvill not talk of it, you are sorry it vvas euer mentioned. Hovv say you, had not your penne papier and inck bene better bestowed in cōfuting this, if it be false, then in setting dovvne his. I say it is no sinne, &c. you should haue bene better occupied also in confuting, as false the six cō∣ditions and articles (he saith) vveare on their side offred and proposed to make peace and vni∣tie, Pag. 33. and by your side reiected: Then in setting dovvne either M. VVatsons common wealth Fishers memoriall and examinations, or the trouble of the Romaine colleage vvith the fa¦ctions in Paris and Flanders, vvhich come as neare to this controuersie as London to Lin∣colne. You quitt M. Champeney for troublinge him or his reasons any more, bicause by all liklyhood you foūd his first to be hard of dis∣gestion: and you will visitr M. I. B. his censu∣res vpon Fa. Parsons letter to M. D. Bishopp. Course him lustely, I vvill not lett you. But where you talk according to your custome of this controuersie vndevvly, I vvilbe bold to rencountre you. As I must neades ask one
question of you. Fol. 176. b Falshood. VVhy you doe so vvillingly and Franckly lett passe the 21. reasons vvhich the Censurer hath laid together by distinct nōbers to discredit the Protectors letters vvhich his Hol. confirmed. You ansvveare. ƲVe haue spo¦ken of it before. I ask you vvhere? here you ha¦ue forgotten your old custome, vvhich vvas to send your reader to an other chapter. For you haue noted nothing in the margent but pag. 48. for vvhat cause or end, god kno∣vveth, neither can I, or any man els iudge? but yet in th'end vvith much searching I haue found this before in the 2. chapt. and 18. leafe where thus you say: Fol. 18. as in one place of their boo∣ke, they goe about to shevve it to be voide and of no force by 21. fond reasons deuised by thē sel∣ues vvherof no one hath any force at all. This is your spoke, and therto you add, that you are ashamed here to lay open the vanitie by more par¦ticulars. then you haue by like done already. A short ans∣vveare to 21. reasons. this then is your ansvveare to 21 reasōs which you in your margent call Cauillations in stead of reasōs. you are well come to the butts, hovv came this qualme ouer your stomack, as to take so great pittie of your aduersaries as to be ashamed to lay open the vanitie (of their rea∣sōs) by more particulars. you mey be ashamed if you haue any shame in you, A sharmfull an∣svveare. of so shamefull an answeare: and these tvvoe ansvveares are, th'one here, th'other in the 18. leafe. And why? vvhat, did you thinck that none but
beastes and dizards should read your bookes. I thinck so, or els you would neuer haue han∣dled the matter so shamefullye. Truly (my vnited bretherne) the Protector and the Ar∣chp. The Protector and Archp. doe con you litle thanckes. are to giue you but litle thanckes, that taking in hand to defend them, their causeād doings, are not able to ansvveare one reason of 21. being as you say your selues, but fond, And that not one hath any force at all: truly then the more easye to he answeared. The broctors and the matter are a lock that is nothing vvorth But like matter like Procters. The matter you ha∣ue to defend is nothing vvorth and you de∣fend it accordingly I am sure that the simplest man or vvoman that shall read theis places, Will stay here and vvonder at your necligen∣ce or ignorance, that vvill not or cannot an∣svvere one of 21. fond reasons of no Force at all, being laied together by order and distinction. yea they are laid together to discredit the Protectors letters, and yet you will not do so muche for the Protectors credit, as to answeare one of them. O follie, to thinck any man so madd as to imagine you to haue a good cause in hād that cannot or dare not answere one of so ma¦ny reasons that are brought against you. None but madd men can think you to haue a good cause. Here in dead Leo est in via. But who saieth so? Dicit piger. yf euer there was any slouthfull and ne∣cligent writter. you may therin beare the bel. Well? you proue heare that the Proe∣ctors letters are of force. his Holl. aftervvards (say you) con∣firmed the Protectors letters, and therefore you lett passe the said reasons. you haue rea∣son.
If his Holl. confirmed them, then they vveare of no force before, and so you pleade for your discontented brethern, For regularly that vvhich is confirmed, vvas be∣bore of no force or valewe. For if it had, it should not haue neaded any confirmacion. You conclude very substantially that one one¦ly reason of humilitie modestie and obedience, Fol. 167. b would haue gotten them more credit then all theise 21. reasons of disobedience against their Superiors. I willingly yeld vnto you, An humble conclucion lost. if the Protector had bene their Superior? Or that you could haue proued him so. He then not being their Superior, you haue lost an hum∣ble and modest conclusion and their 21. rea∣sons remaine still firme and stable. Theise cockish, schollers haue me thincks so troubled your vnited heads and braines that you writt neither rithme nor reason: Their reasons haue troubled your vvitt. ād they haue so affrighted you vvith their rea∣sons, that you knovv not well on vvhich side to turne you. Here you should haue laboured and sweat to haue ouerthrovvne not one, but all all their fond reasons, and to haue proued the Cardinall to haue had sufficient auctori∣tie to institute the Archp. Here you should hauc employed all your eloquence and pow∣red out your skill, learning and knovvledg, in diuinitie, lawe, histories, and what els, to haue proued them if not schismaticks, yet disobedient and rebellious to god and their
superiors. you proffes are but title tatle. Proued (I say) not by a bold and baddtatle, as you endevour, but by good & solid arguments and reasons. But alas? and welladay? you yeld vp your armes, and hauing taken the foile, you giue them the victorie. For (as I haue said) seing you are not able to confute any one of their reasons, all reasona∣ble readers will iudge them to haue had good reason to withstand the Institucion of the Ar∣chp. by the Card. letters: and you your sel∣ues against all reason (not being able to ans∣were to one of their 21. Reasons) to fill their eares and feed their eies with bare words only without any reason. I haue often warned you and put you in mynde that this is the chief & principall pointe of this controuersie, and if you touch not this stringe, you labor in vai∣ne, to persuade men that your discontented bretherne doe defend an evell cause, and that they be the beginners of this diuision and cō∣tenciō. What a shame is it for you, to fill your booke vvith so much impertinent matter as you doe? and vvhē you come, where you hould close Witth your aduersarie, then yovv turne your back and flye, Fy, fy vppon it. I am also ashamed (and so may all your frends and vvell willers be) to see an nomber of vertuous priestes (if you be the Authors of this Apologie) daily fighting against the en∣nemies of God and his espouse for the defen∣ce of the infallible truth, so much to forgett them selues and their vocation, and to be ei∣ther
so blinded vvith mallice against their bretherne, or to be carried away with inordi∣nat affection to their parte and faction, as to committ here such an exorbitant falshood as you doe in this place saying: Fol. 177. An exorbitant falshood. vvherin for that there is nothing singular from those reasones vvhich his fellovves haue alleaged before, and by vs in diuerse partes of this Apologie haue be∣ne examined and shevved to be either false or feeble, vve passe them ouer in this place. The vnited ha∣ue gained the vvheatstone. You will gaine the wheatstone I see well. and tru∣ly I vvill leaue it vvith you, till you shewe me where, in this Apologie, you haue examined his fellovves reasons, and where you haue she∣vved them to be either false or feeble. This is your third passe ouer or retyring when you should stand firme and stable. But as often as you mention their reasons, you passe away in such post hast, as in the 18. leafe, then in the 176. ād lastly here in the 177. leafe, as that with in the compasse of one leafe, you make 2. pas∣se ouers. Such hast you make to the 12. chapt. there to defend F. Parsons from the iniurie done vnto him by your bretherne. I am con∣tent you goe, and if you had need of myne ai∣de also, I would willinglie helpe you. For I protest I doe as much mislike that kinde of writting as any man can doe: And in truth am glade and reioyce, when you paie them ho∣me for it. And as for theise faults of yours vvhich I
haue here noted: That Authors intencion. I take god to wittnes, I haue not done it either of Spleen or mallice, nor for that I am more on their side then on your or more their frend then yours, but being indifferent betvveene both I thought friend∣ly to admonish you thus much, that hereby you may amend the faults. or giue me and other you frends satisfaction in shewing the to be no saults. If you take it in euell parre, I would be full sorry for it, myne intention be∣ing by this aduertisment to deturne you ra∣ther frō the old troubles ād contenciōs, thē to giue any occasion of new sturres. Consider your states ād qualities. remenbre where you are, wherefore you are there, and amongest whom your are, and for gods sake, and the sa∣ke of the honorrble quarrel you fight for, ād for his sake vnder whose banner you fight, ād at whose hands you looke for revvarde and recompence: for theis considerations (I say) to forgiue and forgett all that is past, ioyne in vnitie vvith your bretherne, liue in loue and peace with them, gaine them by lenitie and charitable conuersation: and then god allmi∣ghtie will blesse all your actiōs. To the which I pray God bring you, your bretherne, all our frends and me my self also, Amen. FINIS.
AN ANSVVEAR OF M. DOCTOR BAGSHAW to certayne poyntes of a li∣bell called. An Apologie of the subordination in England. A Libell lately hath been sett out in English, called, A brief Apologie or defence of the Catholick Ecclesiasticall Hierar∣chie and subordination in Englād, &c. Wherein I finde the creditts of many, & of my self aboue others moste iniuriously impeached. Howsoeuer it be diuulged vnder the name of vnited Priests, it is nothing els, but a certayn narration of English matters, tolde ouer and ouer, by one Parsons a Iesuite, in Rome, to the English students there, and by some of them rightly tearmed his mother Hubberds tale, as con∣teyning not any one thing of worth, but a fardel of Idle and boyish surmises, vntru∣thes,
and detractions. That he should vse other mens names to this Apologie, (vvhich hath been a former practise of his, and that somtymes pernici∣ously, as in setting out his titles vnder the name of Dolemā,) mē of modesty do not so mutch vvonder, as that a mā professing him∣self religious, being publikly charged vvith eyght imprinted libells, of moste euill and scandalous successe, already, should persist in the same infamous manner of vvriting. My silence almost twenty yeares now, may testi∣fy my vnvvillingnes to handle sutch matters, more then for the necessary defence of my Good name: which, besides the former En∣glish libell, I see impugned in an other sett out in Latin, to the view of the whole world, something resembling the English, but so al∣tered and peruerted, as by the conference of the one and the other, a man may se the va∣nity of bothe. Three or fovver generall im∣putations, vvhich the libeller vseth, I leaue to other men & better opportunity to an∣svvear: as his pretended zeale for superiors, his magnificall talk against passion, his cloa∣king himself vnder the whole Society of Ie∣suits, and his vaunting of a body of Catho∣liks (as he tearmeth them) vnited vnto him. His talk against disobedience and passiō, as it onely beateth the ayre, and is obiected but of colour and course, so to be imputed to
others, by a most exorbitant and discompo∣sed man, doth shevv as much excesse of a prowde and hipocriticall humor, as defect of a good conscience to reflect duty vppon himself. Of the Society of the Iesuits, (the liking vvhereof because it is an order allowed in the Churche hath been and is professed by vs, &c.) I doubt not but there are many, vvhich know not, and many, vvhich vtterly dislike of the practises of the libeller and his complices: and therefore he doth them no small iniury and disgrace, vvhich maketh the credit of his order a mask for his owne disor∣der: since those be castra rebellium, vbi esse est mereri. What a goodly body of Catholiks the libeller hath had to ioyn with him (by brag∣ging vvhereof he endaungereth all whome he inuolueth.) For his seditious practises from tyme to tyme, for the procuring of M. Blak vvells authority, for the stirres in Flaun∣ders, for the oppression of the Romaine Col∣lege, for the defaming of the secular Cleargy of England with schysme, and other strat a∣gemes, vvhen iudicious men consider, they vvill see (according to our prouerb,) great boast and small roast, and the ranking of him self vvith Cardinalls and principall men of our nation, doth shew the mans humors, cō∣ceipts, and meditations: whereas in the end he vvill marre the play, for that he seeth not hovv euill his acts become the stage.
The first particular thing agaynst me vvhich he obiecteth, is close dealing vvith the Coūsell, in his marginall note of the En∣glish but not of the Latin Epistle to his Hol∣lines. And it is the last thing fol. 207. wherehe sayth. As soone as they vnderstood their tvvoe messengers were restrayned at Rome, and not like to preuayle, then Doctor Bag∣shaw vvas sent for from Wisbich to London to treat vvith the Councell. And what follo∣vved? Forsoothe the remoue of twoe or three Iesuits to the Tower with daūger of their li∣ues. A greate matter I warrant yow. And how doth all this appear? by a letter of N.N. 15. of Apr. 1599. vvho may not be named for fear. The letter is cyted fol. 150. conteyning fo∣wer coniecturall surmises, all foolish, and the twoe first grounded vpon playne vntruthes. For the first. The day (sayth he) after D. Bagshavv vvas gone, the Minister of the tovvne comming into the Castle, sayd, that D. Bagshavv tolde him, that he looked to be remooued ere it vvere long: & therefore it is thought he vvas cause of his ovvne re∣mooue. First, I vvill not except against the testimony of a Minister whome this letter-maker vvould make to vtter a secret, if not an vntruthe, because I know him, and diners others of that towne, to be of such moral ho∣nesty and sincerity as in that respect they vvould haue nothing to do vvith the Iesui∣ticall
faction, as hauing often by others and themselues experienced their perverting & deprauing mens speeches. Then if I had told him I expected my Remooue, (as I neuer did for I did not once think of it) he & the whole tovvne knew, that I might haue doubted my Remooue, because it vvas threatned frō one of the Iustices, fourteen dayes before, falling out with me vpon matter of disputa∣tion in Religion. Agayn, I had Receaued a letter, (which is well knowne, & vvas a great meanes to declare myne innocency to the LL. of the Councel,) that I should look to my self, for that there was a plott layd to ouer throvv me, by the English Spaniolized prac∣tisers. So that the first is but a false grovvnd, and a malitious inference. And so is the secōd, that I should send M. Bluet vvord, my sen∣ding for vvas, concerning certayn matters, vvhich vve had talked of, &c. For clean con∣trary, I being debarred to vvrite at all, or speak but in the hearing of the Pursuiuant, sent M. Blu. word, that he should not greeue himself, with deuising, vvhat the cause of our trooble is: for that he could neuer per∣fectly knovv it, vntill I, or some which were priuy to it, did vtter it vnto hī. For the third, M. Archers vvords are not worth the spea∣king of, nor his Remooue a matter vvorth three stravves one way or other. for the laste, if there vvere a false brother in Wisbich it
might be assoone the vvriter of this letter as any other and perhapps sooner. Are not heer accusatiōs, proofs, and witnesses passing suta∣ble? Ar not these goodly authēticalls where∣of the libeller so much braggeth? But to omitt these bibble babbles. My first dealing (as the libeller scoffingly tearmeth it) with the Councell was to defend the honor of our Religion, and euen vvith suffering torments, to declare mine innocen∣cy vvhich was brought into great doubt, spe∣cially by one Anfield, seruant to F. Parsons & after a Pursuiuant. My second dealing with the Councell vvas, to shevv myself guiltles of an horrible treason, layd to Squire and his fellovves: vvho auerred the contriuer, moo∣uer, and vrger therof to be one Walpool a Ie∣suit, subordinate (as the other English Iesuits are, if F. Parsons say true,) to the sayd Par∣sons. How farre he is to be charged vvith sub∣orning or concurring vvith the one, his ser∣uant, or the other his subiect, I leaue to the due place of discussion. It is vvell knovvne to many, and some of great honor (men vvith∣out exception) can testifye in my troble a∣bout Squire, that the Earle of Essex vvas sent from the Queen, to take order for my com∣mitting to the Tower. And M. Wade, whome novv the Iesuits make so fauorable to me & others, vpon the first information giuen a∣gainst me, wrote to the Earle of Essex and M.
Secretary, that there was no vvay to deale vvith me but with extremity: although af∣terward he changed his mynde whē the mat∣ter disguised probably at first, vvas afterwards better opened. Novv vvhat a pregnant con∣iectural head hath this libeller, vvho writeth, that I procured myne ovvne sending for to London, to treat vvith the Councel? And vvherfore forsooth? For that vve vnderstood, the tvvoe messengers sent to Rome vvere imprisoned, &c. That year vvith the libeller vvent backvvard, as the sunn did in Achabs Dyall, or else he folyshlye professed the arte of lyinge, hauinge so vveake a memorie. My apprehension was in the beginning of Octo∣ber, and theirs in Rome vvas in December after. Whereof the libeller should haue had good cause to haue some Remembrance for he knovveth that amonge a number of tales of the like qualitye and truthe he tolde the tvvoe Priests, that I had a pēsiō of the Queen of England: vvhich was but the ordinary al∣lovvance to close prisonners, but that it plea∣seth his loose tongue, to vse such insultations and indignityes. Therefore by putting such a fovvle, grosse, and palpable vntruthe for the first accusation, (the first in euery order of things being the measure of others,) a man may ghesse of the rest. And I vvishe the li∣beller in due fear may vvay, hovv abhomina∣ble to God pondus & pondus is, (as the vvise
man sayth) a vvayght and a vvayght. My Re∣mooue from Wisbich vvas (sayth he) a pre∣ferment to the Queens pension: and yet the remooue of Iesuits from Wisbich, hauing the same allovvance, vvas no preferment but a detriment. If the libeller had had any true zeal of the honor of God and Religion, he should haue vvished the remooue of the Iesuited from Wisbich. Their separatiō there had made the greatest scandall, that vvas giuen in this tyme: vvhereof no cause could be imputed to the vnited Priests, vvhich con∣tinued as before, vvithout the least innoua∣tion. The Catholiks had vvritten thither that they had rather haue susteyned death of their bodyes, then such an offence to soules. Some of them had com thither, and vpon their knees requested F. Weston, for the ho∣nor of God, to desist from so scandalouse an enterprise, and being discontented vvith his inso lēt ansvvear, vvent avvay detesting pride and faction. Some of the temporall Magi∣strates had tolde them to their faces, that Ie∣suitisme from a serpigo vvas becom a gangre∣na, and therefore to be cutt of: and the kee∣per had longe before my trooble sovvght to remooue some for theire seditiousnesse. Their Agency and consistoriall common wealth was often hādled by Ministers in pul∣pets, to the great disgrace of Catholik Reli∣gion. Their seditious and disorderly beha∣uiour
vvas such that not onely the Iustices in commission disliked them but euen some youths of the tovvne of Wisbich, scattered abroad, & offered to iustify most disgrace∣ful vvritings against them: Grieuous accusa∣tions had been vttered against some of them, by three vvoemen their proselites, vvhereof ensevved examinations, Rumors of indight∣ments, expectation of arraygnments terrors to them selues, troobles to the quiet, and dis∣content of all iuditious Catholiks. In vvhich case some of the Iesuited offering vvith mo∣ny to procure their ovvne Remooue, (vvhe∣ther vpon shame or Remorse God he kno∣vveth,) Gods iustice may appear, in that the book of titles made for the aduancement of the English Iesuited, and turned in their Re∣mooue to their disgrace and daunger, some of them being principally called into questiō for those titles, and the cunning plott of sub∣orning Squire and others, serued to bring to passe, that the tovver vvhich vvas intended for me and others vvas assigned othervvise, and the politik canuasers fel into the pitt, vvhich thēselues had digged for others. An∣other cause of close dealing vvith the Coū∣cel, the libeller imagineth to haue bin, to in∣forme them that the subordination was not for Religion, but for state practise: and by likelyhood some promise to them that it should not stand. For M. Blackvvels titles
vvhether they vvere begon for God, or for God shall be ended, God in his iudgement and fitt time vvill descrye. I knovve one much Iesuited signified to the Counsell his likinge of M. Blackvvills authoritye the ra∣ther because it should not be displeasing to the Councell for that it tended onlye to the taking awaye of facultyes and so consequēt∣lye to the hinderinge of reconciliation, which in time might be the ouerthrowe of religion. For other dealing vvith the Councel about him, I am ashamed of the vnworthines of the libeller vvhich himself discouereth. What vvant of modesty is it to blase such false and foolish narration? What indiscretion to abuse the name of the Councel about such toyes? It is well knowne if it pleased God so to moue their honorable vvisdomes, they could ridde England of all the Iesuited vvith lesse labour, then the libeller bestowed in this his paltry Rapsody, and vvith lesse adoe then was my Remooue from Wisbich to London. But vvhat fear doth a vvicked conscience cary vvith it? Allane late Cardinall of vvorthy me∣mory in his Apologie of the Seminaryes, fol. 71. vvriteth. We protest, that neither the Re. Fathers of the Society of the holy name of Iesus, vvhome the people call Iesuits, (an ex∣presse clause being in the instructiōs of their mission into England, that they deale not in matters of state, vvhich is to be shevved, sig∣ned
vvith their late generalls hand of worthy memory,) neither the Priests either of the Se∣minaryes, or others, haue any commissiō, in∣struction, or insinuation from his Holines, or any other their superior either in Religion, or of the Colleges, to mooue sedition, or to deal against the state or temporall gouern∣ment. Fa. Parsons himself also vvriteth in his ansvvear to S. Fran. Hastings fol. 71. in the third person: So then Fa. Parsons protesteth, (as I am credibly informed,) that he vvas ne∣uer consenting, vvitting, vvilling, inducing, yelding, or priuy to any (such) personal attēpt against her Maiesty in his life. Parsons In the supplication to the Queen made by one Ie∣suit for all the rest and they all subiect to Fa. Parsons, is not shee tearmed mose mighty, most mercifull, most feared, best beloued Princesse, the shott anchor of all their iust hopes, perfect in all princely duty, sacred Ma¦iesty and vvhat not? Is not protestation made vnto her that they vvill yeeld and persvvade in conscience all tēporall obedience, and take her parte euen against the Popes army? In this libell, is not Fa Parsons made a most free and innocent man from treasons, neuer tou∣ched, neuer named in the arraygnment of any? And doth nor M. Blakvvell himself in one of his decretalls forbid bookes made against the state? Nay goeth he not fur∣ther and chargeth M. Mushe and his con∣sortes
that they be medlers in state matters? Is it not a common obiection against the se∣cular Cleargy that they goe about to bring the king of Scotland to the crovvne of En∣gland being an Heretik? Doth not Fa. Par∣sons say that M. Doctor Bishop. and M. Charnock vvith their associats were found to be Scotish in faction? And in this libell is not M. Watson sayd to be sent by the secu∣lar Priests to the king of Scotland? And are not vve charged that vve are to deal vvith the king of Fraunce to subiect England vn∣to him? After such protestation, such zeale for the state, such charging of others, did any fear remaine in the libeller that he should not be beleeued? Would any man think that the opinion of tvvoe or three Priests could sway vvith the Councel or mooue any thing, and that against the libeller and his body of Catholiks? No no the libeller knoweth well ynough the great vigilancy, experience, and iudiciousnes of the Councell in state mat∣ters. It is well knovvne that Fa. Parsons in Englād after contrary Protestatiō first made, and that vnder his obedience to farre and foolishly dealt in state matters, that some principall Catholiks sent him vvorde to de∣parte the realme for othervvise they would deliuer him to the temporal magistrate. And this is the true cause of his departure which the libel would ridiculously colour
that he might be freed from being thought to be a renegado. His cariage since (vvhich particulerly hath been proposed befor com∣petent iudges) hath been sutable to that wor∣shipfull perswasion vvhich he vsed at Rome to the students there, that they should haue at state and all: for with state medling they could but dy, and dy they should if they were taken vvithout state medling. Now after all his turmoyles, browilleryes, libells, attempts, and inuasions ended with shame and confusion, to retayn still his body of Catholicks in good opinion of him (a fevv God knoweth, whereof some are syncere with scrupulous ignorance, and others very facti∣ous vvith partiall preiudice) he telleth thē an olde stale tale of close dealing with the Coun∣cel which in very truthe being tolde in plain tearmes is this, he must strike & we may not warde: he must accuse, and vve may not de∣fend: he must irritate against religion, and we may not pacifie: he must falsely pretend and by pretending disgrace the Catholick fayth, and we may not syncerely cleer it: he must ex∣pose as much as in him lyeth our prince to di∣struction, our country to inuasiō, our friends and our selues to slaughter, our profession to contempt and malediction, and vve may not refuse to receaue his woūds in our whole bo∣dy. But since his ouerweening of him self is so great, let him assure him self that vvhat lo∣yaltly
he deceiptfully protesteth, vve vvill dutifully performe against all trayterous pra∣ctizers vvhatsoeuer. It is so far from vs to be afrayd of dealing vvith the Councell wherein we haue and vvill alwayes vse syncerity that vve think he had little vvitt vvhich did ob∣iect it, himself being charged to haue dealt most dishonestly vnderhand in that kinde ād we vvould count it the greatest earthly be∣nefit vvhich could happen to vs, if the LL. of the most honorable Councell vvould deal with vs for the building vp of that which this libeller hath to his power ruined. And in this point, not onely our better warrant, but the infinit leuity of the libeller may appear, who alwayes maketh Cardinall Allen his copesmate, and in his table of men abused by vs hath put him in the ranck. Now let any indifferent mā of commō sence iudge whether he be abused by those which seek to credit his protestation before mentioned, to follovv his direction, and to imitate his quiet & Apostolicall course, or by those that by their seditious shufflings haue made his protestation to be thought perfidious, and by thinking them selues somebody, vpon emu∣latiō haue runne another cleā cōtrary course to that vvhich he did. And for further marke of the same ridiculous vanity in his Cata∣logue, the moste reuerend Bishop of Trica∣nica novv Nuncius in the Lovv countryes is
put in as disobeyed by vs and refused to be iudge of our cōtrouersyes. This is not only a notorious ly, but the clean contrary is true. He hauing his instructions and commission for England from the Pope himself, in his let∣ters to the secular clergy vvilleth them so to comport them selues as they doe not irritate the temporall state. Doe vve or the Iesuits disobey in this point? And the lyke might be sayd of euery other point if opportunity ser∣ued and pacience in men to hear such illimi∣ted & audacious boldenes in vttering vntru∣thes as this libeller vseth. One point further I vvould not omitt. The same Bishop tolde me and others and vvilled vs to intimate it to our countrymen, that in the Spanish inuasiō in the year 1588. vvhen all English asvvell Ca∣tholicks as others vvere designed to slaugh∣ter, the Pope had no interest, no he vvas not so much as priuvco the particuler circumstā∣ces of that designe. If any man compare this spoken of his credit vvith the booke publi∣shed that year in the name (vsurped as may be thought) of the Cardinall and other sembla∣ble pamphlets since vvherein the libeller hath been a speciall stickler he shall see in a principall point of our difference, who be the abusers of the Pope and his Nuncius, Cardi∣nall Allen, and others? That is pleaseth therefore this goodly li∣beller to tearme our actions treacherous, he
shevveth vvhat be his ovvne, by vvhich he vvould measure other mens. And vvhereas he likeneth M. Bluet and others to Alcimus and Simon in the bookes of the Machabees, vve hope in God the iust iudge of all men, that in tyme vve shall haue satisfaction, and in the mean vvhile vve make not our selues better then the vvhole army of the liuing God, which by his permission vvas exprobrated by an vncircumcized and bastardly Philistim. An appendix of state matters is the incur∣ring of the lavv of premunire vvherein vnne∣cessarily, vnprofitably, and most daungerou∣sly the libellers faction inuolued them selues and their abettors, and are discontented that we auoyded it our selues & vvarned others. And in this point the libeller pleaseth himself in retorting a dilemm against our associaci∣on. For ansvvere may it please him to knovv that the Agency of F. Westn in Wisbich in∣uolded him and all his abettrs vvithin the premunire, according to the iudgment of ma∣ny and namely of M. Doctor Windham, a most excellent and renowmed lavvyer. And it is admirable, that any men should so farre be giuē ouer to their ovvne sence, as for pride vvithout any shadovv af the least good vn∣der heauen, they should infolde them selues and their friends in such dangerous statutes, and there is no doubt but vvyse men vvill looke to the causer of these inconueniences.
The association as it vvas wholly to haue bin referred to the good liking of his Holinesse, and vvas grounded vppon such syncere indif∣ferency as the Iesuits aboue hand were fayn to commēd it, so it should haue bin vvithout any cause of exasperating or dislike of the temporall state, and so the often repeated sa∣tyricall ād false surmises against it, are grown∣ded vppon emulation and passion, vvithout reasō & iudgemēt. And it vvas well prouided in the rules of the association, that vve in prisō should haue no authority: that it might be seen vve sought the common good and not of our selues. And vvhereas he cyteth a letter of myne Fol. 64. to say the Agency in Wisbich vvas vvithout title, place, and supe∣riority, it is a fitton. The thing it self sheweth that vppon am∣bitiō and emulation (for they sayd they were not honored enough) they ouerthrew the credit of one of the moste famous places in Europe. The introduction and grownd of the rest was an Epistle vvhich 18. of thē vvrote to Fa. Gar. beginning, Cōtulimus ab heri & nu∣dius tertius &c. In the English Apol. it is may∣med, and in the latin in the first Catalogue of fraudes Num. 14. that parte vvhich is left out is sayd to be an imposture of others as∣cribed vntruely to the 18. I did vvonder, at the lightnes & folly of the libeller vvhen I savv the tvvoe Catalogues, the one of frau∣des,
the other of men abused, sett before the Libell. Scarce a true vvorde is in ei∣ther of them, and many notorious vntru∣thes, but this denying of parte of their epi∣stle, is to beare the bell. The letter in the first true edition is turned into English (as I hear) vvith a commentary, and is intitu∣led Epistola prima obscurorum virorum. And I knovve some vvho at the sight of it at the beginning sayd, they vvould neuer consort with the Agenists for the absurdity of that let∣ter. It may be novv they see they spoke truer then they vvould vvhen they affirmed Fat. VVeston to be a paralytik in his bed not able to vvalke, in via Iustorum, in the way of the Iust. And they must needes perceiue that the remedy for him vvas as ridiculous and puppish as their conceipt, that they vn∣riled the hovvse and lett him dovvne in a couch before his Superior. And if he had bin a vvhole man, yet he vvalked another way then his superior prescribed since. His letter to me is auouched vvherein he saythe he vvas neither author, nor counsaylor, not approuer of the separation. And it may be they see vvhen men perceiue by their ovvne confession, they pulled of the tyles of the hovvse, they may doubt whether they inten∣ded not to pull dovvne all the rest. When I savv so egregious an vntruthe and deniall of a thing moste notorious in the beginning, ād
all the rest sutable (a very bundle of lyes) I determined to referre men to the English narration of wisbich matters, vvhich hath vpō necessity sparingly sett out some things, though it hath passed many other worthy the knowing. Tvvoe vntruthes may not be vn∣touched proceeding of splene and malice, to obfuscate the estimation of tvvoe Priests, the one dead the other aliue. The dead is M. Do∣ctor Norden vvho vvith me is made to haue drawen M. Bluett to opposition against Fath. Weston, and so to haue caused the dissention. Besides that M. Bluett is of that vvorthinesse, vertue and iudgmēt, that he vvould be drawn to nothing but that vvhich is right: it is no∣toriously knovvne that the separation vvas made before D. Norden came. His dislike of it proceeded from many causes, vvhereof one vvas: the night before he came to the castle, remayning in Wisbych tovvne vvith his keeper of London from vvhence he vvas remooued, one of the separators (vvhose name I spare) vvrote him a letter conteyning the names and prayses of the separators, and sundry detractions against those vvhich kept their former vnity, and a persuasion to him therefore to be one of the separation. The next day for fear he should be searched, he burnt the letter before he came to be priso∣ner in the Castle. In processe of tyme seing many the like vnpriestly trickes of the sepa∣rators,
he grevv to great dislike and open plain reprehension of them, especially for that they spoke and vvrote euill of others, alleaging among other proofes the letter Written to himself. The party vvho vvrote it knovving it to be burnt, denyed it in such sorte that D. Norden affirming it vppon his Priesthood, charged the other to be a flatt Atheist. Many such things he charged the Ie∣suited vvith, as F. Weston himself and Archer, vvith auerring and defending the stevves to be as lavvfull as the Pope himself, the denial of vvhich propositions in this Apology is so vvithout the compas of humane modesty, as it seemeth a very league vvith hell against truthe and honesty, for saluing the credit of F. Weston and his complices: a strange and mar∣ueillous kinde of death must be ascribed to D. Norden, vvho yet as he had euer liued ho∣nest and syncere, so he dyed in prison for the confession of his fayth of an Appoplexy, in quiet and Christian manner, referring his cause to be discerned by God betvvixt him and his factious detractors, vvho are not con∣tent onely to rake in all the cannels of the liuing, but needes must be ransaking the graues of the departed, vvho if they cannot discommend, yet vvill conceale, or as much as they can dissemble due commendations. In the booke to his Holinesse in discribing the stirres of Wisbich it is sayd: There came a
certain priest to bring almes to the impriso∣ned, &c. In the first Catalogue of the latin booke. Num. 18. These prayses are sayd to be giuen to M. Mush. If it vvere a mista∣king to putt M. Mush for M. Doleman, it vvere a strange boldnesse of him that would write any thing out of the authenti∣calls (as he calleth them) so much to erre in the narration of one of the chiefest points of the matter: and by this one may see what wise information the author of the Apolo∣gie had, and what creditt is to be giuen to all the rest of his tale. If it were of purpose (as othervvise it vvas a dull ouersight) it could not be lesse then enuy against M. Dolman, a man as it is vvell knovvne of singular sollicitude tovvards afflicted Catho∣licks, and of long tyme a speciall prouider for prisoners, in vvhich respect he vvas and is a great moate in the Iesuits way, which are sayd to seeck themselues and not Christe or his. The mention of M. Dolman is made in the booke to the Pope, to shevv Gods prouidēce in sending him to Wisbich so opportunely, to be an Arbiter of the se∣peration, vvho vvas a man besydes his rare charity of such experience iudgement and syncerity as none fitter could haue been chosen, whereby the peruicacity of the se∣perated may more be conuinced, vvho vvould not desist at the compassionate per∣persuasion
persuasion and teares of so vvorthy a man, nor for the aduice of other excellent men vvhom he had conferred vvithall, nor at the laste as they had promised (at his vnderta∣king the arbitrement at their requestes) be∣fore and vndertaken and vvere in conscience bound vpon his sentence giuen that they could not go forvvard vvithout sinne. And therefore no maruayle though the libeller vvould haue that seem to be spoken of M. Mushe, vvhich could be ment of none but M. Dolman. The vvhole narration no lesse foolish then maliciouse, I leaue to any in∣different and Christian iudgement. At the close I am charged vvith a contradiction for vvriting to Father Garnet in commendation of Father Weston, vvhome elsvvhere I repre∣hend. The truthe vvas, Father Garnet com∣maunded Fa. Weston (vvho had been cause of much troobles and scādalls) so that there might be a formed peace to desist from his Agency in his letters to me, my self M. Mush and M. Dudley dealt vvith him, he vrged the making of some rules which he thought could neuer have been procured, yet they were contented vnto. That vvay being de∣ceaued he pretended a great desire of reconci∣liation vvhich he knevv to be difficult, consi∣dering the iniuryes and detractions procee∣ding from him and his, to the preiudice of the others, yet vvith great difficulty we obtayned
consent of remissiō of priuate iniuryes: being thus also frustrated he assembled his party & tolde them he hoped they would not leaue him, for he vvould not leaue them: some of the vviser answered, the scandall of their se∣paration vvas so great, as they would returne to their former vnity, and without him of he would not. Being thus driuen from all hope of retayning his dominion, he desired that he might haue the credit of perswading his partye to reunite them selues by making to them an exhortation, in pronouncing where of he fell downe amongst them, and at the first was thought to be dead: howsoeuer the libeller would haue it thought to be a fiction, which is a manifest signe of want of honesty and grace in the libeller. At length after ma∣ny tergiuersations, a tyme and place, was ap∣poynted for the reuniting of all agayn. In which assembly F. Weston to giue example came first to M. Bluet and vpon his knees de∣sired the forgiuing and forgetting of things past. After he came to me and others, which example the rest mutually followed. Vppon this occasion I wrote in his commendation, thinking then that he had desired this recon∣ciliation vnfaynedly as others I knovv did, from which he was so farre that his party had dealt before hand and vnderhand with M. Mush and M. Dudley for the ground of a nevv breach. If I vppon iust occasion misli∣ked
F. Weston, yet vpon beleef of his humi∣lity and charity vvas content to commed him to his superior and others, vvith desire of a∣bolishing the memory of all vnkindenes, what shallovv vvitt hath the libeller to make me contradict my self? At the making of the seperation they did make great protestations that they did not make the least exceptions against any mans behauiour. We knevv thē to be false and vrged seperation from men for pretended faults to sauour of Donatisme: and novv the libeller vttereth the contrary to their protestations. VVhich party is guitly we referre to euery christian to iudge by this that to counteruayle their vnpriestly pasquils we sent to the Pope for a visiatiō of Wisbich. F. Parsons intercepted our letters and so hin∣dered it, vvhich vvas not onely an iniury to vs labouring to declare our innocencyes, but one of the great abuses & indignityes vvhich he hath offered to the Sea Apostolik, vve for forming our consciences and satisfying the vvorld, sought to the Pope for discussion and reformation, they audaciously impeached it, And further to trooble the vvater diuulge to the vvorld one Fishers confession. I vvould fayn knovv vvhat thing vvere so absurd vvhich the libeller vvould not take holde of vvhen he cyteth him vvhome vvithall he discrediteth? When Fisher came into En∣gland he voluntarily sett dovvne in vvriting
the affayres in Rome as they had passed be∣twixt the Iesuits and the students. Notvvith∣standing it imported that the students should haue bin cleared of those detestable infa∣myes vvhich Harvvood and other such bad fellovves had raysed, it being vvritten and bruyted that for extream euill behauiour they vvere disciplined in the open streetes. And this vvas it fol. 81. For vvhich he sayth one vvas derided and miscalled, giuing good and spirituall Councell, vvhich was indeed a perswasion to one to beleeue the most hor∣rible slaunders raysed against the English students in Rome. yett vvere Fishers vvri∣tings cōcealed, vntill vnexpectedly a search caused by a vvicked seruant and occasioned by some indiscretion of one Iesuited they vvere brought to knovvledg. A memoriall (they say) he caused to be exhibited to the Pope, and fol. 97. He had letters vvritten by me, intituled. Copia literarum Catholicorum in Anglia degentium. Why was it not giuen vpp, and the authors conuented if they could not haue iustifyed their complaints. If it vvas gi∣uen to the Pope as the Iesuits vvrote in En∣gland, why did they procure letters of com∣mendatiōs from men (some vertuous indeed as S. Fr. Inglefield & others, but vninformed, credulous, & many tymes for priuate inter∣est partialized) to stop the course of Iustice? Whye did they by euill meanes extort letters
from some vvho novv repent theyre vvri∣tinge? in vvhat place of the vvorld was it euer held for a lavvfull manner of proceeding to elude sufficient testimony against one in a criminall cause, by procuring hands in com∣mendation of the accused, and from such ma∣ny tymes, as doe not knovv him, ād yet must testify generall negatiues, against law, and the light of reason? The libeller confesseth, my letters among others vvere intercepted, and thereby discouereth himself vvho he is, for that he auerreth them to be foorth com∣ming, vvhich, (with Gods grace) before a due tribunall vvill be discussed, vvhether letters sent to the Pope, and inquisition, may be in∣tercepted. That is a stale shift, vvhich he bringeth, for my letters vvritten to the stu∣dents, that they vvere deliuered to some in Millane, and the libeller most dishonestly ād falsely affirmeth, that they vvere seditiouse: vvhereas indeed they vvere contrarily, to persuade the students to peace and patience, and to leaue reuenge to God, to vvhome it did belong. For that I euer neglected priuate vvrongs, in respect of publik scandalls: al∣though in his sence euery thing is seditious, vvhich is not fitted to his humor: vvhich is no lesse then to call good euill, ād euill good, vvhich as vertuous and moderate men con∣demne, so hath it anexed from God a male∣diction.
This Fisher at his comming to Rome was brought to the Colledge, and imprisoned vn∣der the custody of the common iaylor, for that office he executeth, and as it seemeth af∣fecteth. Being in close keeping (as I of certain knowledg, doe knovv he himself relateth it & promiseth to iustify before his Hollinesse) Once for a shevv Acarisius came to examin him, but ordinarily his keeper Fa. Parsons offering to put hott Irons to his armes, if he would not cōfesse what he would haue him. These tymes God hath reserued vs into, wherein our English College foūded by our kings for the good of our country, should be possessed by those vvho make it a place of imprisonment and torture. A number of sheets of paper vvere vvritten of tales, sur∣mises, and incoherent lyes, vvhich is one of the most principall authenticalls of the libel∣ler. And if there vvere nothing else, that is a sufficient discouery of the packing of Fishers confession, and of much malice else, that he maketh him, fol. 96. to say, he vvas principal∣ly commended to M. Christ. Bagshaw, M. Robert Dolman, and M. Iohn Collington. And yett must needs this vvorthy vvorke be printed in disgrace of those, vvho are tovv∣ched with Fishers confession. If Fishers re∣ports be of any credit, the libeller and his Rovvte be arrand honest men. If they be of no credit the publishing of them deserueth
a furred capp. Among other narrations of Fishers, a number of incoherent fooleryes, collected vnder his name, one is of some great familiarity which he saw betvvixt some of vs in Wisbich, and the keeper, and also the keepers vvife. A detractiō according to their custome generall, sovvnding bigg, and a toy in particular discussion. The libeller hath very bad luck in his Chronology, for M. Medley our keeper his wife was a very olde vvoman, and dead some years before Fisher came to Wisbich, yet his cunning is to hurt by a confused suspicion if he can, and no man in particular shalbe able to vrge satisfaction. I could haue vvished for the honor of Reli∣gion, the libeller had not vvith so much vn∣truthe and improbability, corraded such base shew of matter against men of knovvne in∣tegrity, for that it discouereth very bad dis∣positions in himself (and many things dayly begin to be imputed to his complices, I hear more and more) the displaying vvhereof if hereafter it grieue him and them, they must thank themselues, and haue the amends in their hands. I haue heard (and truly dissvva∣ded) some threatning such publication, and I could vvish that the libeller with Harwood & all the rest of the pack of detractors, vvere vvith their accusations remitted to Gods iudgemēt, if it vvere not preiudiciall to their soules vvhich is much to be feared. One de∣uise
vvith Fisher is not to be omitted. After Fa. Parsons had made him say and vnsay vvhat he vvould haue him, he caused him (being still garded by some of his creatures) to come before some of the students, and tell them in solemne earnest, of his knowledge, that the stirres in the Romane Colledge against the Fathers vvere caused by the Councell of En∣gland, and therefore to be abhorred. Where∣by may be seen vvhat vvise opinions he vvould imprint in our vertuous youthes, vvhat auersion he beareth and bewrayeth to the state of England, vwhich others sought to haue concealed, and vppon what grounds he chargeth men vvith dealing vvith the Councell. And yet this serued him for a prin∣cipall grownd to vvrite into Spayn, that the English students were alienated from the king of Spayn vntill he came to Rome and altered them. By which and a number of like shifts and surquedryes, he hath abused both England and Spayn, which in due tyme here after may come to the light and laughter of the worlde. And because in the Latin libell he maketh the Councel, or I know not what enemyes, beginners of the discontents and garboyles in Rome, and vvould dravv a cer∣tayn cohaerence of the late stirres vvith things which fell out in my tyme, and ma∣keth me expelled thence by the Cardinalls ovvne hands vvhereof I neuer heard before.
I redd the libell nor know not now vvhat it meaneth. I must say something of my depar∣ture out of Rome. Although to be expelled thence, or from any place for that vvhich he calleth sedition, be to be counted I doubt not reputatiō and merit, (which if he had or durst haue explicated in particuler vvhat he mea∣neth by seditiō,) would more easily appear. For any act or worde of myne in Rome or els vvhere let him obiect vvhat he can, I giue him leaue, & in iust defence of myne honor, I defy all such contemptible companions, as shall any vvay oppose themselues against it. But to clear the mysts which he casteth. Being made Priest in Fraunce, with that freedome and resolution for England, with which ma∣ny excellent and innocent Priests had bin made before, I went to Rome, to visit that holy and renowned place, with leaue and ad∣uice of the late Cardinall Allen of happy me∣mory, to stay or return according to myne owne liking, for vvhich and many other fa∣uours I was singulerly beholding to that mā. At my first cōming to Rome, seing the state of the Colledge, the number of the discon∣tented, and that for notoriouse iniuryes, I de∣termined to return agayn with the first op∣portunity. Which resolution I vvould neuer after alter, amōg many other causes, for that I had gotten the Italian payn in the brest in taking the spirituall exercise in the Romane
Colledge for vvhich I vvas driuen for a tyme to liue in our vinyeard, and vse other meanes of recouery, but all in vayn, for which and other causes, Cardinall Allen wrote vnto me to come into Fraunce. Whilest I was expe∣cting opportunity of returning, D. Levvis Bishop of Cassana came to Rome, and lay in the College, vsing often conference with me about English matters. Fa. Agazarius kno∣vving moste of the students to dislike his proceedings, and doubting that he should be driuen out of the hovvse (vvhich fell out immediately after in Sixtus Quintus his tyme vpon a visitation vvhich was procured after my departure, vvherin M. D. Ely hath bin misinformed, as though I had bin one of the procurers of that visit) dealt vvith me very earnestly, that I vvould resolue to stay and be intirely vnited with the Fathers. My answear to him and others vvas still resolute for departure. The fashion of the Iesuits is to haue one vvhose name they may vse for their disignes, to the end things laudible may be attributed to themselues, and things dis∣commendable to him. So vvas Cardinall Ca∣ietane for their matters of England, and so vvas at that tyme Cardinall Boncompagno, vvhom vvith no credit to himself (to say the least) the libeller nameth, nor vvith honor to the Cardinall, but that he vvould play smale game rather then sitt out. The Cardinall
asked me vvhether I vvould stay, and I tolde him no, the Cardinall sayd then I should re∣solue to departe, I ansvvered rather that day present then the next. After this vvhē I came to the Pope himself of blessed memory Gre∣gory the 13. he moued my stay vnto me, I ansvvered his Holines, I had a firm resolutiō to go to my country, vvhere vppon he dis∣missed me vvith the rest, vvith most fatherly vvordes and affection, and graunted all the requests vve proposed vnto him. And F. Aga∣zarius gaue such testimony to me and others then departing vnder his hand and the Col∣lege seale, vvhich is yet extant to be seen, as if the libeller had vievved it, call he sedition vvhat he list (his calling not being vvorth a blevv point) he vvould confesse our expul∣sion (if any had bin) to be most iniuriouse, & vvith no aduantage to the libeller remem∣bred. The records of the College be nothing but foolish partiall vvresting and reporting of things according to priuate humors, vvhich is at length grovvne to that narra∣tion of mother Hubberd, vvhich I remem∣bred in the beginning. Within the compasse of vvhich since, he vvill needes dravv his de∣parture out of Oxon, the conference of one parte vvith another vvill discouer the whole. For. Parsons his departure out of Oxon he tel∣leth a tale vvithout head or feet that because he vvould haue punished on M. Iames Hau∣ley
his owne scholler for going to a play, I ioyned vvith the Protestant party, vvhoe vvould needs throw him and all his out of the College the same night, except he would yeald to departe. If he had not a marueilous conceypt of his ovvne vvitt, he vvould not vtter such narrations, not onely voyd of sub∣stance but of all probability or colour of truthe. Long tyme he hath bin suffered to reporte, that he was putt out of Oxon for his Religion, vvith some touch of credit to me and others, vntill at length his exorbitant grating vpon euery one vvho stood in his way, gaue some occasion by some insinuatiō of the truthe to giue him a caueat, not to be so sawcy in medling vvith other mens mat∣ters, and so farr so forget his ovvne imper∣fections. True it is that M. Squier did not like M. Parsons, but that he did obiect any particu∣ler matter against him is so farre from truthe, that he made protestation to the contrary. For Religion M. Parsons then did professe himself a Protestant and that vvith such af∣fectation, as he dealt with M. Squire for di∣rection in the study of diuinity, and cōferred ordinarily in the reading of Caluin with M. Hyde, a fellow in the hovvse, a knowne Cal∣uinist, but othervvise learned and a very mo∣rall Gentleman. Yea being bursar he had dis∣furnished the College library of many aun∣cient
bookes, and rare manusscripts (and of some of them as is thought dishonestly) and in their steed brought in a number of Here∣ticall bookes the first that euer were there vvhich yet remayn for an argument of his want of Religion, and for a corraziue to his conscience vvhylest he liueth. The resolute∣nesse of some of the fellovves to be ridd of him vvas such, that they had prouided the tolling of a bell for him as the manner is for one vvhich is to departe the vvorlde, vvhich as it might proceed from some discomposed∣nesse, so I protest before God I did not know of vntill I heard the bell toll, and there vppō asked the cause. He had indeed the fauour graunted him to resigne (being first lavvfully expelled) his submission vvith many teares & promise to vs all vvhoe vvear there that he vvould euer after cary himself in good sorte. That he hath borne malice tovvarde me, I am sory he hath giuen such cause to think, as in the libell is vttered, and I could haue vvished that his vertue had obliterated all those things which then passed, and that he had not by his comportemēt since, lost those good motions vvhich his humiliation caused him to vtter then. For being charged in Oxon amongst very many things (vvhich I vvould be loath to vtter) vvith forgery by one Stāc∣kliffe his fellovv bursar, it seemeth strange to me that in this libell mention is made of so many things, vvhich must needs be foysted
(as Fishers memoriall Fishers confession, for a great parte, my letters deliuered in Millan) and amongst many other one fol. 135. And vvhich is further (sayth the libeller) it vvas disco∣uered by tht same papers and other letters out of En∣gland that they had particuler designements to make themselues Bishops and Archbishops (speaking of D. Bishop and M. Charnok) vvherevppon in some letters it vvas vvritten to your LL. And not vnlike is the narration of M. Iames Hauley his going to a play, and keeping in my chamber for fear of correction, as he is novv a Gentleman of great vvorth and commen∣dation, so was he in his yong yeares of rare expectation and cōposed behauiour. I doubt not but M. Parsons remembreth well he vvas one of the tvventy nine or thirty vvhich to his face came before the Masters and fello∣vves of the College, to demaund iustice, yet vvith that modesty vvhich for the tyme (o∣thers being eager enough to speak and vrge) made him sylent, which since I haue often re∣counted vvith and commended him. And therefore I maruell at his boldenes in men∣tioning him but much more in remembring the matter of eating flesh, except he vvould register his ovvne perpetuall infamy. For going about beyond all extremity of lavv, to dravv diuerse (seuen or eight as I remēber) of good reputation in daunger of their liues for taking after the fashion of schollers certayn
puddings frō a pupill of his called hims, dealt with the youths Fa. & would needs haue him enter into bāds vnto him, that he should not release the prosecution of fellony, vvhich M. Parsons vvould haue the matter brought vnto. The indignity vvas so great as the mat∣ter was signified vnto the priuy Councell and by their order ended, the partyes accused being made secure and Parsons notorious for giuing occasion of a common by worde, Parsons puddings. Wherein he should haue giuen me thankes for saying (if it had bin true) that in Oxon vve vvere vvont to drawe all matters to fellony, in transfiguring that to my self vvhich was true of him. Whereas for myne owne priuate, I thank almighty God, I neuer in all my lyfe accused any man of fe∣lony, or any other thing, nor euer commen∣ced any action either criminall or Ciuill a∣gainst any man, nor vvas euer conuented be∣fore any Magistrate vvhen I vvas at liberty, but for matter of Catholik fayth & Religiō. Concerning which the libeller maketh an obiectiō about a place of Scripture of the day of iudgement not knowne to the sonne of man, alleadged for defence of equiuoa∣tions. For my defence of the Scriptures and euery title of them I trust I haue giuen suffi∣cient proof. This place is absurdly alleadged for equiuocations as out of the vvord sre, with vvhich the libeller is little acquaynted, So to doth learnedly prooue in his booke De
tegendo & retegendo secretum. And some of the Iesuits confesse, that this place vvere allead∣geable for equiuocation in matters of fayth if it were in any, for that Christe his knowledg of the day of doome is a matter of fayth, nei∣ther vvill this letter discharge F. Wallpoole, (for vvhich purpose it seemeth framed) of whome concerning Squires matter it is well knowne vvhat the sayd party confessed if I doe not mistake him. But his latter letter and manner of his taking is so impudēt a forgery, as I see not how any man can giue credit to the former, if the libeller say true, that the same man wrote bothe. I might take occasiō here to speak of the propositions vvhich the libeller maketh daungerous, and I know not what, vvhich he obiecteth in his owne name concerning obedience & confirmation, &c. and in the name of one Bensted against me concerning equiuocations. But to deale with him out of the sphere of his actiuity were no victory, and yet might increase a swelling hu∣mor in him which redoundeth already. Nei∣ther need I to defend the letters sent from Wisbich and Framingham signed by my self and others, they be extant, let him vrge them to the vttermost. Those particulars vvhich he rehearseth in the Apologie, come out of his ovvne forge. He sayth certayn perempto∣ry demaundes vvere sett downe to the Pope fol. 134. and there vppon calleth me a resolute
lavvmaker: I must call him a resolutely-ma∣ker. The title prefixed to those demaunds vvas. The points for vvhich most humble supplicatiō is to be made to his Holines. He sayth vve haue abused M. Blakvvell. We vvish M. Blakwell had not abused himself & the vvole vvorlde. Befor the brief he vvas an vsurper and since his pretended decretalls and censures he is holden to be excommunicate vvith all his cō∣plices, of vvhich as he hath written to the Nuncio in Flaunders, so may he to the Inquisition or his Holines. Since tvvoe or three lavvfull appeals made to the sea Apo∣stolik (vvhich are acknowledged in the Apo∣logy) his authority (if euer he had any) being suspended, it vvas a playn rebellion against Gods Church in him to medle further to hin∣der as much and as dispightfully as he could all appellation, to oppose himself against the Vniuersity of Paris, to cōtemne the learning, practise, and canons of the vvhole Churche (a fevv cōplices of his ovvne excepted) & to make himself in his ovvne cause a supreme, peremptory, infallible and inappellable iudge. The most Reuerend Bishop of Trica∣rica Viceprotector of England vvrote vnto him to see all things restored in integrum. His despicable answear shevveth vvhat indeed his regard of the Popes deputyes is, and con∣sequently of the Pope himself. We vvrote vnto him from Framingham of diuers falsifi∣cations which he vsed in cyting our letters,
vvhereof one vvas, vvhich is recyted agayn in the Apologie fol. 82. that he should send 2200 pounds to Flanders. Is not this an admi∣rable vvorld vvhen an vntruthe shalbe auer∣red, noted, iterated, corrected, and yet agayn and agayn repeated? specially in a matter of such iniquity as is the indeuoring to starue the confessors of Christe in prison. Which in∣iustice (wherevnto besides a number of like intollerable grieuances to the Saynts of God M. Blakvvell hath concurred) cannot be counteruayled in Gods iudgement or an vn∣cauteriated conscience with a vayn, vnprofi∣table, daungerous, and surrepted title. F. Parsons vvho standeth so much in the A∣pology vpon his booke of resolution, I vvish not the diminution of commendations due to his labour (althogh it be nothing so much as he vvould haue the vvorld beleeue) but his continuance in handeling that obiect. As to some priuate friends of his, some yea∣res agoe talking vvith me about the myse∣ryes of the Churche of England, and sygni∣fying they heard some vvere about to sett out Parsons life I then tolde, that I vnder∣stood many vvere exasperated vvith him for diuers and iust causes, and knovv no reason vvhy they should spare him, and therefore vvished he vvould leaue of with detractiōs & practizings to irritate men: so in one commō letter vvhich in the Apol. he sayth vvas to be
shewed to the Pope, we gaue a sufficient ca∣ueat Cito indignabitur libertas si opprimitur. or as he eyteth it (if truly) fol. 18. si prematur. That vvhich he should haue taken for a war∣ning to him self he maketh a matter of excla∣mation against vs (saith he) these good liber tines. &c. And I know not vvhether some of them from vvhome it proceeded will say, see this calumniator, see this ignorant censurer, see this vnlearned Atheist. They be the wordes of S. Hier. in his Epistle to Theophi∣lus Patriarch of Alexandria, against Iohn Bi∣shop of Hierusalem, and now Aristippus vvill make S. Hierome a libertine, I know not how farr in rigor his reprehension may be drawen in speaking against defence of liberty, special∣ly Ecclesiasticall. Is not such a mans talke of peace like the speach of frier Rush after he had set all by the eares. He wrote I knovv letters to M. Col∣lington and both the Bennetts pretending a desire of peace. And I am vvitnes that all three most sincerely and charitably indeauored to procure peace, offering all reasonable con∣ditions, and more then vvas fitt. M. Colling∣ton at the first comming of the brief came to Wisbich and vppon his conscience protested, that he thought M. Blackvvells authority vvould do good to England (a great induce∣ment for quieting things then) vpon fayre wordes and promises made to him and M.
Mush by M. Blakvvell, vvherein of M. Blak. ment truly as is thought then and of him self he did, he hath bin egregiously abused and transported since. If he ment fraudulently (vvhich the euent might persuade) he is as faythles a man as liueth vppon the earth. A∣mong other things he promised the return of D. Bishop and M. Charnok the restoring of facultyes to M. Benson, M. Hill, and M. Tē∣pest, and diuers other things in particuler which he knovveth, besides a generall & in∣uiolable atonement for all matters passed. Nothing was performed but new picking of olde quarrells (vvhich the Pope in his laste brief sayth he sorrovvfully repeateth) Heer∣vppon a nevv and vvorse trooble arising be∣sides the requests, letters, and caueats of ma∣ny to M. Blakvvell and the Iesuits. M. Clerk and M. Mountford (tvvoe vvorthy priestes) came to conferr vvith vs at Wisbich, wrote to M. Blak. deliuered their letters to M. Hues, who vvith M. Wright and others vvitnessed M. Blakvv. promis made to them in London, that all olde quarrels should be buried, M. Iohn Bennet and his brother came to Lon∣don at the same tyme to procure pacification, M. Iohn Bennet in his ansvvere to F. Parsons (vvhich I think before this he hath seen) re∣counteth vvith vvhat trauayles, expences, & demisse offers, they sought for quietnes. with inconstancy disdayn and intollerable haugh∣tines
all their indeuours vvere requited. Herevppon the Appeale vvas forced and the vvant of conscience in the libeller disco∣uered, vvhich pretendeth I knovv not vvhat compact vvith the Councell to make the Ap∣peal, and yet not intent to prosecute it, one being as true as the other, and both shameles and vvitlesse surmises, vvhich kynde of dea∣ling if he continue in, he shal deserue in steed of a redd capp a blevv whetstone. The giuing and debarring of orders and facultyes, parti∣ally and almost sacrilegiously, the hindering and excluding of graduated and mature men from our Seminaryes, the factious admitting of them vvich come thither the alluring of some there vvith the oppressiō of others, the contempt of the secular priestes being the body of the Clergy, the infaming so many Saints of God vvith horrible and continuall slaunders, the manifolde irritations of the temporall state, the indaungering of Catho∣licks, the variouse fraude in getting mony within the realm and transporting it without, the superfluous and scandalous expences of many, the supporte of many vnworthy men, vnlawfull assertions and enormous iniuryes, the indeauoring to starue many Worthy Ca∣tholiks at liberty and confessors of Christ in prison, the contempt of all lavves, all canons all appeals, and all Christian proceeding with vs doe conuince the libeller of the necessity
and intended pursuite of the Appeal. Three reconciliations the seculer Priests vvith yiel∣ding of their right, haue condiscended vnto, vvhich all haue bin broken by their aduer∣saries, for the fourth nothing vvas omitted vvhich was requisite, and more tendered then iust hope and desert occasioned. The persons of our aduersaryes vve pray for, their iniuryes vve haue referred to God and our lavvfull Magistrate, not onely affir∣ming but also vvishing, and not vvishing also but indeuoring to effect that vvhich the Pro∣phet sayth, Iustitia & pax osculataesunt. By Christopher Bagshavv Priest and Doctor of Diuinity. FINIS.
