91 99836247 506
The Loves OF CLITOPHON AND LEVCIPPE. A most elegant History, written in Greeke by ACHILLES TATIUS: And now Englished. Senec: praefat: ad contr: Nunquam imitator par fit autori. OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM TURNER for IOHN ALLAM. 1638.
On the Frontispiece. SEE for the sceane a troubled Sea, whereon Float faire Leucippe and her Clitophon: But churlish Neptune (who for Venus sake Me thinkes on Lovers should some pitie take) Quels not the raging Ocean, while each wave Presents the ship, and passengers, a grave. No Castor here, or Pollux to be seene, But the celestiall influence of Loves Queene, Which seeing her Darlings to such straits were come, As to take boat to goe t' Elysium, Sets Cupid at the sterne; who well may free These paire of Turtles from the tyranny Of angry Neptune, since from his first birth Ha's beene the Lawgiver to Sea and Earth.
THE LOVES OF Clitophon & Leucippe A most Elegant History written in Greeke by Achilles Tatius and now Englished. Nunquam imitator par fit autori Sen praefat: cont▪ Oxford Imprinted for Iohn Allam. W.  1638.
The Translator to the Reader. COurteous Reader, how this recreation of my idle houres (whose hard for∣tune it is now to come under thy cen∣sure) shall please thee, it matters not much; since I begge not thy approbation, or feare thy dislike; either because thy phancy may be mother to the one, thy prejudice to the other; or because I my selfe cannot —digito monstrari & dicier hic est: wherefore thou maist condemn the Translator, not me. If thou cry me downe for a dinquent, I may perhaps be sory for taking so much pains to offend, yet never feare comming to executi∣on. But lest I should so farre betray my owne cause, anticipate thee in thy censure, or passe too hard a censure upon so petty a crime (as abusing a Readers patience is now adaies accounted) heare what I can say in my owne defence. First, how difficult a thing it is to maintaine the ele∣gancy of a Greeke author in our language, I ap∣peale to thee, if thou hast read either Aristaene∣tus, Eustathius, Longus the Sophist, or Parthenius; from whose pens, as sometime from the tongue of Vlysses, —: A voice more sweet than hony did distill;
yet were they Englisht, they would bee as little esteemed of, as the Latine translation of Plato, or that of my Author done by Hanniball Crucei∣us; which I may in Photius language truly call : The second thing which may excuse me, is, that by the exection of the two testicles of an unchaste dispute, and one immo∣dest expression, I have so refined the author, that the modestest matron may looke in his face and not blush. Besides, I present him not here clad in the raes of mine owne phancie, nor yet in language rackt and disjoynted out of its proper idiom; but I have observed a medium betwixt both: I could with some unnecessary paines have given it a flourish, but I preferred the fide∣lity of the Translation before the Ornament. That little which I have spared to English, pro∣stituted my author not onely to the censure of the Patriarch of Constantinople, but also of some of these times, and would have appeared as a mole in his face; whose worth, were it not so great, I might have good colour to piece out my unseasonable advertisements with; but sparing thee, and not willing to injure him, I bid thee farewell.
Amico suo in elegantem Achillis Tatii Translationem. PRioris aevi si quis indigenas sales, Autocthonas{que} voculas Latii colit, Graecosque latices, Attici fontes soli, Hîc obstupescat: Tatius lepôrum satur Graecorum Achilles, qui invidens cineres sacros Orbi prophano, latuit ignotus domi, Nec ad triumphos ire litterarios, Agamemnonémve visere in bello Ducem Dignatus antè, prodit; & dignum creans Pretium nitoris (blattulis spolium licèt, Tineisque fuerat,) novit antiquum decus, Amatoriaeque flammulas Briseidos, Vel Clitophontis, redditus Britonum stylo, Et charactêris Anglici idiômati Cantare; vel quid Charicles & Clinias, Cynops scelestus, Matris astutum quibus Leucippa ludit Panthiae ingenium dolis. Ostendit etiam mille quas nectunt vafrae Artes Puellae, quanta sors iniquior Possit, profundi purpura insano tegens
Rostrata amictu transtra lethi murice: Quid praedo Terrae coluber infestus suae, Sicariaeque sanguine aspersae manus, Dirúmque fulmen. Cuncta nec fari datum est. At cuncta vestris (Antoni) calamis tamen Debentur: ista nulla cum superet dies, Et nulla taceat, perge laetus, aemulo Vincas Achillen igne, dum reddis Tuum. Sic optat Fr. James A. M. è Coll. Novo.
In the Translators praise. TO make the dumbe to speake, or raise the dead, The chief'st of miracles tis reckoned: A wonder then thy powerfull pen hath showne, 'Mongst many wonders worthie to be knowne; That this dumbe Author, who hath tongue-tied bin For many yeares, should now at last begin To speake our language: and that he likewise, Who had so long layne dead, should now arise. O let him live then, and with him thy praise, Who for thy worth and work deserv'st the bayes▪ JOS: FORDE.
To the Ladies. FAire ones, breathe: a while lay by Blessed Sidney's Arcady: Here's a Story that will make You not repent Him to forsake; And with your dissolving looke Vntie the Contents of this Booke; To which nought (except your sight) Can give a worthie Epithite. Tis an abstract of all Volumes, A Pillaster of all Columnes Fancie e're rear'd to wit, to be Little Love's Epitome, And compactedly expresse All Lovers Happy Wretchednesse. Brave Pamela's majestie, And her sweet Sisters modestie Are fixt in each of you, you are Alone, what these together were: Divinest, that are really What Cariclea's feign'd to be; That are every One, the Nine;
And on Earth Astraea's shine; Be our Leucippe, and remaine In Her, all these o're againe. Wonder! Noble Clitophon Me thinkes lookes somewhat colder on His beauteous Mistresse, and she too Smiles not as she us'd to doe. See! the Individuall Payre Are at oddes, and parted are; Quarrell, emulate, and stand At strife, who first shall kisse your hand. A new warre e'rewhile arose 'Twixt the Greekes and Latines, whose Temples should be bound with Glory In best languaging this Story: You that with one lovely smile, A Ten-yeares Warre can reconcile; Peacefull Hellens, awfull, see The jarring languages agree; And here all Armes laid by, they doe Meet in English to court you. Rich: Lovelace, Ma: Ar: A: Glou: Eq: Aur: Fil: Nat: Max.
To his Friend A. H. on his Translation of Achilles Tatius, on the Loves of Leucippe and Clitophon. Incipit F. J. FRiend, I thy boke compare with swilk of yore, With mighty deeds of worthy Heliodore, Proud Antioch's Prelate: whan he wrote his werk And was forthy depos'd: Thilk Asian Clerk Hight Bishop too, yet lives, whose buxom pen Maugre all envy made him man of men. As whilom for the lore of Engelond Gaufrid an orpyd Knight toke upon hond To wryten thilk throwe; for all ages after Of Troyl hight Pryam's son and Cressida. Calchas daughter; "The double sorrows of those wights to tellen, "Froe woe to wele how their aventures fellen. Clepend on Muse, to help for to endite His balefull verse that weepen as he write. Forthy a Sir Francis Kynaston. Muses sonne in gret nobles, That can of Knighthode chivalrie and prowes The lore; whos goodship algates did deserve The studdie of thilk Goddess Minervae Musaeum. hight Minerve, Chaucer▪ Payne Roët's Nephew so did understond, As shope him to the lenguage of Rome's lond: So I full lewd and (though I not the quill
Of doughtie Knight, ne eke of Sir Philip Sydney. Astrophill) In tiny connyng which me underfongeth, Do thee all preyse as it of right belongeth, And sikerlie endevor to avance Thy goodship, and the Muses chevisance: Yf yn some oder lenguage clerks that conne Will put in verse Leucip and Clitophon. Explicit Fr: James A. M. of New Coll.
On Clitophon and Leucippes Loves translated. THus thrive the Printers: the wise Gnomists paine Might well be spared now; each humerous braine Knowes, that his knowing profits not, unlesse Others know't too: this agitates the Presse: This stops the Passenger, when he shall spy Some pamphlets glorious front courting his eye. Some love-toy, such as this, whose furious zeale Will not permit Antiquitie conceale Her follies past: as if our age could throw Them in her teeth without a blushing brow. Are Clitophons so scarce? doth not each street Afford us Melites? every cloake you meet May wrap Thersanders rising forehead: though Exc'lent Leucippes peere we scarce can show. Thus may some sager Criticke, who would have Vs straight from Cradle thinke upon the Grave, Condemne our youths delight: we must expect The worst of censures for the least defect. Love is a Passion, and who e're will touch Ought that is his, must looke to finde him such.
Nor shall the wounded onely bleed, but Hee That dares describe Cupids Artillerie. And yet he shall not suffer, let me call Lovers, the better part o'th' world, who all Will vindicate our Author. Here may youth Loves Copie draw, to act their owne in truth: Here may the Non-plust wooer fetch a wile To breake all Remora's, plots to beguile All Fortune's crosses: and if language faile, Here may he learne to court, triumph, bewaile▪ I'th eloquentest straines. Nay here the man Of a severer brow may deigne to scan Maximes of morall goodnesse: tis the End Of both our Authors, by delight to bend Our Soules to Good, which in its owne course dresse Would move her faculties, would please them lesse. This thanke Wee'le owe their labours, and let them Commend their owne, that others paines condemne. H. Allen è C.C.C.
To his Friend. DEare Friend, I will not say what's due to thee Either from Court or Vniversitie; Both are upon thy score; For some there be. In each place, that may tender thee a fee For what they learne by thy Translation, We are not all borne Greekes; nor is't a fashion To speake all Tongues: many there be 'mongst All Who might have read the first Originall, But in the end, profess'd, we cannot tell What the man meanes, but yet the Greeke sounds well. But here the Criticke spatters like a Cat, And with a Pish damnes all, and cries 'tis flat And dull what thou hast done. But we say no; Till he shall better it, or equall show. Tatius hath had no wrong, if through thy pen He seemes to be one of our Countrimen: Or if thou, Words and Sense, dost by thy light Make that, which seem'd to some meere black & white. Doe we take from an Author, if we looke With Spectacles on a small-printed booke? Or is't a wrong, if, to set off a bright Taper, we put a Christall 'fore the light?
A Pearle's a Pearle, though in the shell 'tis coucht; Yet 'tis more glorious, when ta'ne forth and oucht In glittering gold. Then gemmes more briskly shine, Not when they're in the Sea, but when they're mine. Thy Lovers had without thy second Forme Beene more obscur'd i'th Greeke, than in the storme. And though they scap't by Sea, yet had we found Thy Amorous Paire still in the Language drown'd. Well (Friend) thou dost excell thy Authors fate; He made the Sound, thou dost Articulate. W: Wallwyn: S: Io: Bap: Col:
To the ingenious Translator, on his ACHILLES TATIVS. SEE here your convert Sir, I must confesse, I dully thought, that Englands barrennesse Could not produce by her best Artists toile An Olive rich as grew on Graecia's soile. The gallant Muse which freely revell'd there, Translated once, became a prisoner Fetter'd in English chaines; and seem'd to me Like the wrong side of rich Embroiderie. But when I looke on you, and see each line Of Tatius wrought in more pure thred and fine Than ever fill'd his loome, o'recome I cry Tis not Translation this, but Alchimy, Or turning drosse to gold. This Muse before Went homely clad, like to some Countrey Boore, Now 'tis turn'd Court-like; and, O blessed hap, May rest it selfe on each faire Ladie's lap. So have I seene great Titans powerfull ray With active streames of heat exhale from clay And miry bogges a fume, which climbing high Shines like a Starre in Heav'ns bright Canopy.
Goe on brave friend, and from the shore of Greece By your new paines bring home the Golden fleece; Enrich our language so, that if agen Apollo spake from his darke hallowed den, The minde of Fate hee'd rather chuse to tell In a pure English, than Greeke Oracle. Meane time as due receive this graine of praise, Which neither guilds, nor blasts thy glorious bayes. Leucippe's face thou here hast drawne so well, That which the patterne was no eye can tell. And Clitophon doth now his love expresse As well as ever in the Grecian dresse. I. Metford Art. Bac. Aul. Edm. To the well deserving Translator of the Booke. HOw shall we (Friend) thee gratifie, That hast inricht our treasury? A piece of coine of old Greeke print Th'ast chang'd to new and English mint. Leucippe thou made common hast, And yet (what's strange) hast made more chast. Why should Clitophon complaine In Atticke onely, not our straine?
Severall tongues we praise in men, Why not severall in bookes then? Cannot a Queene, because in one Apparell she hath glorious showne, In another dresse be faire? Does a Jewell cease to beare The name of Jewell, when the earth It leaves, and place of proper birth To see a forreigne land, and there Be fixed in a golden spheare? The copie which thou wroughtest by Thou answer'd hast so evenly, (As if the Greeke words summ'd had bin And as many of ours put in) That men in times to come may misse, And take Achilles to write this. So then I need not happinesse Wish, and pray bookes Fate to blesse This thine; for none can blast with hate These which all Love insinuate: But yet for custome, not for need, I here make vow, and drop a bead, That this amorous paire, exprest In answerable language, drest In fin'st attire, in waves so tost, (And happy we that not quite lost)
May now not flote againe; but rest Where they deserve, in Ladies brest. O may they still finde in the Readers looke Such smoothnesse as the Reader in this book. Tho: Snelling A.B. Ioann. To the Translator my Friend. ME thinkes I heare our age complaine, That ev'ry sicke and crazy braine Which ha's a tympany within't, Do's cure it selfe by being in print; And that she feares, bands being so small, The price of paper will marre all: I cannot blame her, since we fill Our Presses (which ne're yet stood still) With such stuffe, as t'were a sin To wrap Tobacco, or Macrell in. But for thy booke (judicious Friend) Upon it I'le this censure spend; That to perpetuate our tongue, This issue from thy phancy sprung:
For should an English word e're dye, Hence might we fetch a new supply. Greece shall not us Barbarians call, Thy Atticke stile ha's free'd us all. T. C. To the Translator. PArdon (sweet Six) if on your Worke I spend My little judgement, and (unknowne) befriend With needlesse verse, what claimes no other grace Than its owne naturall dresse, nor begs a face That's not her owne; no, she is still best seene In her owne colours, Spring-like cloath'd in Greene. 'Twas then officious zeale, Sir, to your worth Prompt'd me to language; I had ne're set forth My selfe in verse, but that by' th interview Of your well-polisht lines, my sicke Muse grew Bigge till deliver'd, your most gracefull straines Were the first widwife to my pregnant braines: The charming sweetnesse of your flowing quill, Makes me hold Transmigration, and that still Sydney's soule lives in you, else I am sure, None could with such a pleasing grace allure▪
Since then you are so happy in your charmes, Goe on, let Ladies laps shield safe from harmes Your innocent Booke, let it their fondling be, And 'tice their tempers into extasie. So let them freely in their rosie bowres, Crop th'early fruit of your not serious houres. A. H. To the Translator. AS richer Grapes bloud often rackt, at last Loses the former, pleasant, rasie tast; Nor Rhodian art can to the life expresse At second draught the Archetype: No lesse Presume we in Translation, where we seeke With English pencill to pourtraict the Greeke; Whose ev'ry pondrous word in ballance set, Drawes sixe of ours: Which striving t'interpret We torture language, making the intent Of Authors such as what they never meant. Mistake me not; I blame not this in thee, That rendrest all in pure integritie, And faithfulnesse Nor gives thy 'Edition place To that in Latine, or the Tuscan phrase. Though some may lash these labours, and repine They were not spent on subject more divine; Whom nought but Pulpit-travels please: We say Who made time to be serious, made to play▪
Did not sweet Heliodore and Eustath lend Stolne houres to Fancies, and made condiscend The Venerable Mitre, for to prove To handle pen drawne from the wings of Love, The sacred Crozier laid aside, whereby Lives Chariclea to eternitie, And faire Ismene? Sage, and grave, and wise, Who pitcht their contemplations on the skies, And liv'd among the Starres; whose nimble braines Ran o're the Pole, such as thine Authors, deignes To decke our thoughts in amorous slavery, Offering no force or rape to modesty: Longus his Shepheards stories, and, not knowne Yet, Aristaenetus, with cleare Alciphron, May safely still be handled; and above All learned Worthies of the schoole of Love The godlike Sydneys workes. It doth not skill Though Cato Florals see, he's Cato still. May not I, honest too, great love behold Slide into Danaes lap in drops of gold? May we not from the windowes of our hearts View Cupid ayming with sweet-bitter darts, And still be shot-free? or discerne the fire His flaming torches yeeld, and scape his ire? Bookes are like bogs; heed with what foot we tread, We may not sinke; so with what minde we reade. Iudge others what they please: what you have done, Certes 'tis good: shew it the glaring Sunne. Fr: Roui.
The Loves of CLITOPHON AND LEVCIPPE. THE FIRST BOOKE. The Argument. Clitophon telleth his parentage. Leucippe with her mother Panthia, by reason of the wars which were at Byzantium, where they then lived, were sent by Sostratus to Hippias Clitophons father, there to live till the warres ceased. Clitophon falls in love with Leucippe; Clinias his friend instructs him how to court her. SIdon the chiefe Citie of Phoenicia, and which gave the first originall to the Thebans, is situated on the shore of the Assyrian Sea; having to it two very faire havens, but a narrow entrance into
them: for where the right side of the Bay twines and windes, there lyes open another passage through which the water runnes again: So that the two havens being joyned together, in one of them the Ships may harbour safely in the win∣ter; in the other in the summer: Whither by the violence of the tempest being cast, I sacrifi∣ced to the Goddesse Venus, whom the Sydonians call Astarte (which solemnity is usually perfor∣med by those who have escaped the danger of the Seas) then viewing other parts of the City, and seeing the donaries which hung up in the Temples of their gods, I chanc'd to cast mine eye on a picture, wherein was most curiously re∣presented the Sea and the Land, the fable also of Europa: the sea I descried to be the Phoenici∣ans, the land the Sidonians: part of the landskip was a meadow well replenished with beautifull Virgins: in the sea a Bull swamme, bearing on his backe a maid, and bending his course to∣ward Crete: the meadow seemed to smile, being adorned with such variety of flowers and trees, whose boughes and leaves with their mutuall embracements were so wel knit and united, that they served for an arbour. The painter also had made a shade under the trees, but with such art that in some places the Sunne shone in, yet
through no bigger a space than hee pleased to leave. The whole meadow hee had environed in with sedge, under the trees were planted beds of Roses, Daffadillies, and Myrtles: Out of the earth sprang a fountaine, which dividing it selfe into many streames, watered the whole mea∣dow, flowers, and plants; nor was there one wanting who with a spade digged a passage, through which the water might the more easily diffuse it self. In that part of the meadow which toucheth upon the Sea, hee had painted the vir∣gins, seeming by their lookes to bee both mer∣ry and sad: they had garlands on their heads, their haire hung about their eares, their sandals were off, and their legges bare; their counte∣nance pale, their cheekes thinne, their eyes were fixed toward the sea, their lips standing apart, they seemed to mutter somewhat for fear; their hands pointed toward the Bull, and so neere they went toward the sea, that some part of their feet toucht the water: to be briefe, the whole posture of their body was such, that faine they would have followed the Bull, yet loath they were to expose their tender bodies to the mer∣cilesse fury of the waves. The Sea was of two colours, for that part which was neerest the Land was of a mixt red,
the farthest and deepest of an azure colour; in it were rockes, which were made white by the some of the waves, swelling and beating against them. The Bull, Neptune (out of an awfull re∣verence as it were) gave such kinde entertain∣ment to, that the sea went backe, and where hee trod, the water which but now was as smooth as glasse, grew to a mountaine. Thus rode hee on the water, and on his backe the virgin, not a∣stride, but both her legges decently hanging downe on one side, holding in her left hand the horne, as a charioter his reines; for the Bull o∣beyed her checke, and seemed willing to bend his course which way shee pleased to steere it. The virgins upper parts were covered with a white vesture, the rest with a purple robe, yet so, as one might discerne each part through her garments, which being girt about her, were truly no other than the looking-glasse of her whole body. One hand she had on his horne, the other on his taile; and the winde, never till now painted, getting into her veile, made it swel like the sailes of a ship. About the Bull were ma∣ny Dolphins skipping and playing, whose wan∣ton gestures you would sweare to bee no others than were there painted. Little Cupid stretching out his wings, with one hand led the Bull, in his
other hand were bow and arrowes, and torches, who looking backe on Iupiter seemed to mocke him, that for his sake hee should so transforme himselfe. All other parts of the picture I much commending, but more especially this, & there∣fore looking more earnestly on it, burst out into this admiration; See how a little infant ha's the command of sea, of earth, and of heaven it selfe▪ Which speech of mine a young man that was there present, hearing, said hee found what I spake to be true by his owne experience, seeing that Love had beene the cause of all the sad dis∣asters which had ever happened unto him: Tell me Sir, said I, what in this kinde you have suffe∣red, for by your lookes you seeme to be a lover: You call me backe, said he, to the remembrance of a promiscuous and confused heape of mise∣ries, the greatnesse whereof would make them seem fabulous; I desired him for Venus sake that the relation of that should not bee troublesome to him, which thogh it were not true, yet would much delight me. So having taken him by the hand I led him to a grove adjoining to the place in which was a fine shade of plane trees, and a brooke of water, so cleare and coole, as if it had beene snow newly dissolved; there when I had placed him in a little valley, and I my selfe had
taken my seat close by him, I told him that it was now a fit time to beginne, seeing the very opportunitie of the place, which full of delight, and therefore most fit for love-tales, seemed to invite him, so he began. I am by birth, saith he, a Phoenician, my Coun∣trey is Tyre, my name Clitophon, my Father Hip∣pias, my uncle Sostratus, my mother I remember not that ever I saw, for shee died while I was young, therefore my father married another wife, by whom he had a daughter named Cali∣go, her he intended to have espoused unto mee, but the Fates, whose power is able easily to o∣ver master the decrees of men, reserved another for me. And indeed many times the gods are wont to foretell things that shall come to passe to mortalls in a dreame, not that wee being forewarned of the evill might shunne it (for no man can withstand his desti∣ny) but that we may the more patiently endure it when it shall happen, for that which suddenly and unexpe∣ctedly assaults the heart, strikes it with a deep terror; but things foreseene, and so consequently taken heed of, whilst by degrees they entice the minde to thinke on them, doe lesse afflict it. When I was nineteene yeeres of age, and my father not long after was about to marry mee, Fortune beganne to play her prankes with mee;
for on a time sleeping I dreamt that I was in love with a virgin, and so intimately knit unto her by the bond of affection, that wee seemed both of us to have but one soule; with her as I was sporting, me thoughts there appeared unto us a woman of a most horrid aspect, an immense stature, a rusticke countenance, bloody eyes, rough cheekes, snaky haire, holding in her left hand a torch, in her right hand a sickle, with which she gave such a stroke that shee parted us as we were embracing; at which dreame much affrighted I awak't, not revealing it to any man, but keeping it lockt up close in my breast: In the meane time letters were sent from Byzanti∣um by him whom I even now told you was my fathers brother. Sostratus to his brother Hippias, &c. I send unto thee my daughter Leucippe, and my wife Panthia, for at this time the Thracians wage warre with the Byzantians, keepe therefore these my deere pledges till the warre bee ended. Farewell. My father so soone as hee had read the con∣tents
of the Letter, arose, and went downe to the sea to meet them, and not long after retur∣ned, a great number of servants and maidens, whom Sostratus had sent to attend on his wife and daughter, accompanying him. Leucippe a∣bove all the rest was costly attired, on whom I had no sooner cast mine eyes, but I straightway thought on Europa. Shee had an angry eye, yet it was qualified with a merry aspect: her eye∣browes were blacke as jet, her cheekes white as snow, onely that in the midst they were dyed with Lidian purple, her mouth was like the rose beginning to bud, so that when I had fully viewed her I was almost dead: For beauty strikes deeper than the sharpest arrow, whilst piercing throgh the eyes it opens a passage to the heart, and wounds it too. In the same moment I was forc'd to praise her stature, to be amazed at her beauty, to trem∣ble at my heart, and warily to eye her, still fea∣ring lest I should be observed; and endeavoring to draw mine eyes from her, but they would not, for being still inticed by the sweetnesse of her countenance, they obeyed not my com∣mand, but reflecting on her got the victory over mee. When the women were brought in, and had one part of the house allotted them, my father
commanded supper to be set on the board, and that we should all sit at severall tables, he having so contrived it that hee and I should bee in the middle, the matrons on the left hand, the virgins on the right: which when I had observed, I had much adoe to forbeare kissing of my father, that he had placed the maid so luckily that I might still looke upon her; but for any supper, God knowes I ate no more than hee which dreames he eates; for still leaning my elbow on the table, I viewed her, and that was meat and drinke to me. After supper was ended, a boy came with a Lute, and tuning the strings, it gave a gentle low sound, but afterwards taking his quill, and striking up louder, hee added his voice, which made the musicke more sweet. Hee sung how Apollo complained of Daphne for flying from him, how neere he had like to have caught her, how shee was turned into a Bay tree, with the leaves whereof he made him a garland, which song added more violence to my inflamed love. For an amorous story is a great enticement to lasci∣viousnesse, and though a man may be of himselfe con∣tinent, yet he is drawne by a strong example, and the more easily, by how much the more that vice is patro∣niz'd by some great one: for shame which at the first did revoke him from offending, being posted forth by
the dignity of some one which is better than himselfe, yet guilty of the same crime, turnes into licentious∣nesse. Wherefore thus I resolved with my self, was not Apollo in love? did not he cast away all shame, and openly pursue his Daphne? whilst thou like a foole benumm'd with sloath, and o∣vercome with modesty containst thy selfe. Art thou, or wouldst thou seeme better than a god? The evening drawing on, the women went to bed first, and not long after we. Some having bestowed the pleasure of the supper on their bellies, I on mine eyes, so that I was glutted, and as it were drunk with love; wherefore I betook my selfe to my chamber where I used to lie, but slept not one winke. For nature hath so ordained, that all diseases and wounds of the body are most trou∣blesome in the night, especially when we cannot sleepe; nor is a wounded heart in a better state, for when the body moves not, it being hurt is farre more troubled, because when the eyes and eares are busied about di∣verse objects, it feeles not the goads of care, but di∣stracts the minde, so that there is no leisure left to grieve; but while the members are at ease, the minde recollecting it selfe, is sensible of its calamity, for such things which before lay as it were asleepe, are then rouzed up, & are at hand, to wit, to those that mourn, sorrow; to those that are sollicitous about any civill
affaires, distraction of thoughts; to those that are in danger, feares; to those that are in love, fire. At length the morning approching, sleep took pitie on me, and afforded me some rest; nor then was shee out of my minde, but all my dreames were of Leucippe, with her I playd, with her I talkt, with her I supt, then enjoying more de∣light than when I was awake, for me thoughts I kist her, and that truly. Whilst I was in the midst of this delightsome fancie, one of the ser∣vants called me, whom I curst that hee had wa∣kened me out of so sweet a dreame; then rising out of my bed, I went on purpose to walke in a place that the maid mought see me, where hol∣ding downe my head I read in a booke which I brought along with me, that as often as I turned backe to her doore, I might cast mine eyes on her. Thus having done, I departed with a mind most miserably perplexed, and so I spent three dayes. Now I had a kinsman two yeares elder than my selfe, whose father and mother were both dead, his name was Clinias, which had former∣ly beene in love, against whom I had much ex∣claimed that he should have nothing else to do, but he laughing at me, and shaking his head, re∣plyed, that the time would come when I my self
should be caught in the same snare; him I went to, and having saluted, thus I began: Ah Cli∣nias, now am I justly punished for all those scan∣dalous and opprobrious obloquies which I cast on thee, seeing I my selfe am now caught. At which clapping his hands, and most excessively laughing, he saluted me, and said, Truly I per∣ceive by thy very lookes that thou art in love. He had scarce said this, but immediately came in his friend Caricles, on whom he had formerly bestowed a most gallant horse, who comming, said, Clinias, I cannot be at rest till I have revea∣led my minde unto thee. Clinias, as if his soule had beene joyned with his, and not onely com∣passionate, but really sensible of what harmes might befall Caricles, with a stammering tongue replyed, Thou kill'st me with thy silence, tell me thy grievance, what is it troubles thee, or with whom art thou to fight? My father, said Cari∣cles, is providing me a wife, and such a blouze that I shall bee tormented with her above mea∣sure; if a handsome woman bee an evill intole∣rable, what is an ill favoured one? but my fa∣ther he gapes after her wealth, and there is no hopes of mee poore wretch, but that I must bee betrayed to a little money. Which when Cli∣nias heard, hee waxed pale, and inveighing a∣gainst
the whole sex, disswaded the young man from marriage in this wise. Doth thy Father provide thee a wife? how hast thou so ill deser∣ved at his hands, that hee should cast thee into bonds and fetters? doth not Iupiter say in the Poet? The fire that bold Prometheus stole from me, With plagues call'd women shall revenged be, On whose alluring and enticing face Poore mortalls doting, shall their deaths imbrace. And such truly is all pleasure wee take in any thing that is bad, not much unlike the Syrens, who deluding poore Mariners with the melo∣diousnesse of their voice, slay them. Me thinkes the very pompe and provision (if there were no other evill in marriage) were e∣nough to deterre a man from it, the noise of mu∣sicians, the crackling of doores, dancing, sing∣ing, revelling, and the like, were able of them∣selves to make a man miserable; for in my mind one were better be in a skirmish. Were you not a Scholler you might perhaps bee ignorant what history and antiquity have related concer∣ning the wickednesse of women: but seeing you are so good a proficient in your studies, that you are able to relate to others of how many trage∣dies
womens cruelties have been the argument, how can you seeme to forget Euriphyles brace∣let, Philomela's banquet, Sthenobaeas calumny, Ae∣ropes incest, Prognes salvage murdering of her childe? Agamemnon was ensnared with the beauty of Chryseis, Achylles of Briseis, who proved the ruine of both their armies. Candaules married a beautifull wife, and was murdered by her: Hele∣na's nuptiall torches set all Troy on fire: Nay more, the chastity of Penelope proved the death of many suiters: Phaedra slew Hippolytus whom she loved: Clytemnestra Agamemnon whom she hated. O women ready to attempt any mis∣chiefe, who are as pernicious in their love, as in their hatred! little reason was there that Aga∣memnon should be slaine, a man of so exquisite a composure for his beauty, To be compared with th' immortall gods. Yet though hee was endowed with such excel∣lent perfection, a woman was the death of him. And all this may bee said of those that are beau∣tifull, in whose embracements there is an indif∣ferencie of infelicitie, for beauty doth a little qualifie the calamitie, it being the onely good a∣mongst so much evill: But if as you say she bee ill-favoured, the misery is farre greater, and no
man able to endure it, especially a proper man, and in the spring of his youth, as you are. By all the gods, Caricles, make not a slave of thy selfe, nor suffer the flower of thy age to bee cropt be∣fore its time; doe not, as thou lovest mee, spoile thy selfe, by letting so fresh a rose bee pluckt by the hand of so rude a husbandman. Then Cari∣cles answered, This hath beene as much my care as the gods, who (I thanke them) have given me respite to bethinke my selfe, so at my leasure I will consider better on it; but now I must to the horse-race, for as yet I have not tryed the horse which thou gavest me, this bodily exercise may perhaps somewhat asswage the griefe of my minde; so he departed and run his first and his last race. Now I proceed to tell thee Clinias how my affaires stand with me, how I fell in love, the sa∣tiety I had in seeing Leucippe, the hearty meale I made on her beauty, and now me thinks I speak I know not what, my griefe having distracted me; for love hath poured all his fury on me, not allotting me so much time as to sleepe, Leucippe is still in my minde, still in my sight, nor is there any hope of release, since the cause of my griefe lives at home with me. Sure, saith Clinias, these are the words of a madman, could you desire a
fairer opportunity for your love, seeing you need not stirre out of doores, nor use a spokes∣man for you to your mistresse? Fortune hath not onely bestowed her on thee, but hath put her in the same house with thee; other lovers count it a great happinesse but to see her whom they affect, and getting but an houres confe∣rence, they thinke they have attained the full height of that happinesse, but thou seest her, tal∣kest with her, art ever in her company, dinest and suppest with her, yet complainest, wherein thou arguest thy selfe guiltie of the greatest of∣fence that can bee committed against Love, to wit, ingratitude; for doest thou not know that beauty is far more pleasant to the eye, than the hand; to the sight, than the touch? For while the eyes look mutually each on other, they receive the ima∣ges of our bodies like looking-glasses, whence those sparkes of beauty being sent, and conveyed into our soules through our eyes, they are united, though our bodies be separate: which conjunction is farre more sweet than that of the body. The event as I guesse will be very successefull, for the eyes being as it were loves factors, your living with her will be of much consequence, company and society be∣ing so prevalent, that the very bruit beasts being among men a while wax tame, and shall not a
woman? Againe you have another advantage, in as much as you are both of one age. But you must commend her above measure, for every maid would faine be accounted faire, and is ne∣ver gladder than when shee is wooed, and will still be praising her sweet heart, as the witnesse of her beauty; and if there bee any with whom no man was ever in love, shee scarce beleeves that she is handsome, though perhaps shee bee. Therefore I counsell you to make it your chie∣fest care to possesse her so farre forth with your minde, that she may perceive you love her, and you shall see that not long after shee will follow your example, and love you again. But by what meanes may I effect that which you tell me? you have given me a remedy, but I would desire you that you would prescribe me how I shall apply it, for you have been a scholler in Loves schoole longer than my selfe. What shall I doe, or what shall I say? You need not, saith Clinias, learne of others, for in this case every man is his owne master, children are not taught to sucke, for by naturall instinct they know there is milke provi∣ded for them in the dugge; so young men being first pregnant with love, need not the helpe of a midwife to bring them to bed. Though thy tor∣ment grow greater by delay, yet feare not, thou
shalt have a happie deliverie, onely take some generall notions of such things as are common, and need not the opportunitie of time to further them, which are in briefe these. First, be sure you talke not obscenely to her, but dispatch your loves with silence, for women though they be most lascivious and wanton, yet in this they are modest, detesting to heare that spoken, which they make no bones of doing, accounting the words more filthie than the deed. Those that have made shipwrack of their virginitie will suffer you to talke more freely, and perhaps will in plaine termes reveale their minde; but maidens have other preludiums to their loves, a nod or a becke. Therefore if you talk wantonly to her she will blush, and be much offended, esteeming it a great injurie to her ho∣nour, and though she may entirely love you, yet shame not suffering her to give consent, you may quite take off the edge of her affection. Next if you have tried any other means, and thereby have displeased her, so that shee chide you, make no reply, but by little and little draw neare and get a kisse from her, For a kisse to a wil∣ling minde is a silent petition, to an unwilling a prayer. Againe, if you see her resisting, yet doe not
you give off, for in this matter much circumspe∣ction is requisite; yet be sure if you see her ob∣stinate, use no violence, being that shee is never past all perswasions, how backward ere she may seeme. Lastly, if nothing will prevaile, dissemble with her, and I doubt not but thou mayest bring to passe thy intended purpose. Then I replyed, thou hast furthered me much O Clinias, in my love, but I feare this happinesse will turne to my mischiefe, and more enflame me, which if it do, what course shall I take, I can∣not marrie her, for my father hath betrothed me to another, and shee none of the unhandso∣mest, but I at this time can no more judge of her beauty than a blinde man, nor can I see ought any where but Leucippe, by reason whereof I am distracted betwixt love to Leucippe and obedi∣ence to my father: how shall I decide this con∣troversie, seeing necessitie fights against nature? I would give sentence on my fathers side, but I have so potent an adversarie I cannot, hee threa∣tens to torment me, pleading his cause with ar∣rowes, and torches in his hand: I will obey him, father, for I am encompassed with flames of fire; thus did I reason about the god Love, when suddenly one of Caricles familiar friends came
in, in whose countenance you might reade some ill message, whom as soone as Clinias saw, he said certainly some ill is befalne my friend Caricles, which words hee had scarce uttered, but the messenger replyed, Caricles is dead. At which words Clinias was so astonisht, that he neither spake nor moved, but stood like one that were thunder-strucken. The boy going on with his message, said, O Clinias, Caricles moun∣ted on thy horse, at the first put him gently for∣wards, till hee had finished two or three races, and then let him rest, but the reines being slack∣ned, and he sitting on him, wiping off the sweat, wherewith the saddle was wet, some noise was made behinde him, at which the horse affrigh∣ted ranne up and downe like mad, biting the bridle, and wreathing his necke to and fro, and mounting with his two fore feet, whilst the two hindmost hasted to follow them, he was hurri∣ed like a ship in a tempest, and at last fell back∣wards: poore Caricles shaken with his praun∣cing, was one while throwne backe on his taile, another while forward on his maine, and with this waving up and downe was most miserably vexed; at length when he could no longer hold the bridle in his hand, hee committed himselfe wholly to the blast of Fortune, but then the
horse being most vehemently enraged, turned out of the path way, and flung into a wood ad∣joyning, where he dasht the poore young man against a tree, who tumbling out of his saddle, and thereby freed by a lesse torment from a greater, had his face wounded in as many places as there were prickles on the tree, but his bodie tangled in the bridle, and not onely affrighting the horse by its fall, but hindring him in his flight, he trampled on, and hath so defaced him, that now you can scarce know him. Clinias at this held his peace for a while, at length as though hee had begg'd leave of his griefe, hee burst forth into a most bitter crie, and ranne straightway to the carcasse; whom I followed, administring him what comfort I could: meane time Caricles was brought forth, a most lamenta∣ble spectacle, so torne and mangled that none of the standers by could refraine weeping at the sight of him. Moreover, his father being at that time present, and a sad beholder of his dead sonne, with many a sigh and beating of the brest burst out into this lamentation: What a one was thou when thou wentest from home, and what a one art thou return'd? O the accursed art of riding! thou truly dyd'st no common death, for other men though dead
have something left that may speake them men, but thou hast not: In other carcasses, whether the lineaments or the beautie of the face perish, yet there is some effigies left, which deluding the spectators with hope that they are asleepe, abates their griefe. Death truly robbes a man of his soule, but usually leaves his body un∣toucht, yet this also hath thy injurious face vio∣lated, wherefore thou art twice dead, first in thy soule, next in thy body, out of which thy breath is fled, yet I finde thee not there neither. When wilt thou marry now my sonne, when shal I pro∣vide for thy wedding O thou unskilfull and un∣happie rider? Thou art now espoused to death: wherefore I must for thy chamber give thee thy sepulchre, for thy marriage song a funerall ele∣gie: I hoped to have kindled other lights for thee, but envious fortune, together with thy life hath put them out, and in stead of them hath kindled funerall torches. In this manner did the father bewaile the sonne, but Clinias on the contrary (for the father and the friend strived to out-vie one another in their griefes) said thus: I truly have beene the sole cause of what evill hath befallen Caricles, for why should I give him that fatall gift? have I not a golden goblet in which I sacrifice? would
not that have beene a present farre more accep∣table to him? but I unhappy wretch must be∣stow this horse on him, tricking him up with sil∣ver trappings, golden bridle, and other orna∣ments for his breast and forehead, all this did I doe for him which slew thee. O salvage and un∣thankful beast, abhorring from all acknowledg∣ment of thy masters love! he commended thy pace, wiped off thy sweat, and promised thee that thou shouldest runne in a fat pasture, yet for all his promise, for all his commendation, thou slewest him: me thinks thou shouldst have been glad of so faire a burden, and not have cast it on the ground. After wee had dispatcht his funerall rites, I ranne straightway to Leucippe, who was then in our garden. There was a grove of a most plea∣sant aspect, environed with a row of trees thinly set, and all of one height; whose foure sides, for there were so many in all, were covered with a shelter, which stood on foure pillars, the inner part was planted with all sorts of trees, whose boughes flourisht, and mutually embrac'd each other, growing so thicke, that their leaves and fruit were promiscuously mingled; upon the bigger trees grew ivie, some of it on the soft plane trees, other some sticking to the pitch
tree made it tenderer by its embracements; so by this meanes the tree served to beare up the ivie, and the ivie was a crowne to the tree: on both sides many fruitfull Vines bound with reeds spread forth their branches, which dis∣playing their seasonable blossomes through the bands, seemed like the curled lockes of some young lover. The walkes which the trees han∣ging over shaded, were here and there enlight∣ned, whilst the leaves driven this way and that way with the winde, made roome for the sunne to shine through. Moreover, divers flowers strived as it were to shew their beauty; the daf∣fadilly and the rose, whose beauties were equal, made the earth of a purple colour, the upper part of the rose leaves was of the colour of blood and violets, the lower part white as milk; the daffadilly differed not at all from the lower part of the rose; the violets were of the colour of the sea when it is calme; in the midst of the flowers sprang up a fountaine, which was first received in a fouresquare bason, and running from thence it fed a little rivulet made with hand: in the grove were birds, some used to the house, and to bee fed by the hands of men, others more free sported on the tops of trees, some of them being eminent for their singing,
as the grashopper and the swallow, some of them againe for their painted wings, as the pea∣cocke, the swanne, and the parrot. The grashop∣per sung of Aurora's bed, the swallow of Te∣reus table; the swan was feeding neare the head of the fountaine; the parrot hung on the bough of a tree in a cage: the peacocke stretching forth his golden plumes, seemed to contend in beau∣tie not onely with the rest of the birds, but even with the flowers themselvers, for to say truth, his feathers were flowers: wherefore willing to ge her a hint of my intended love, I fell in talke with Satyrus my fathers man (who was at that time in the garden) taking the argument of my speech from the peacocke, which by some chance spread her wings just over against him: This peacocke (said I) doth not all this for no∣thing, for being in love, and desiring to allure that female to him which he most affects, thus he deckes himselfe. Looke (and then I pointed with my finger) doe you not see that peahenne under the plane tree, to her he shews all his bra∣very, that meadow and garden of his wings which flourisheth more than this, for in his taile which is distinguished with a row of eyes, that part which resembles gold, is on every side clo∣thed with purple. Then Satyrus well perceiving
the drift of my speech, and to what it tended, replyed: The power of Love is so great, that it extendeth not onely to birds, but serpents, foure-footed beasts, and (as it seemes to mee) even stones; for the load-stone loves the iron, which if it but see or touch, it drawes to it, as if it were some amorous flame: for what is it in the stone but a kissing of the iron? Concerning trees, now that they are in love one with ano∣ther it is the common received opinion of Phi∣losophers, which I should thinke fabulous, did not the experience of all husbandmen subribe unto it, that the palme trees are distinguished by sexes, and that rhe male is much in love with the female, for if she be planted farre from him, he waxeth dry and withereth: wherefore the husbandman gets to the top of some hill, and markes which way the male inclines, (for hee bowes toward the female) and finding his dis∣ease, he administers a remedy by taking a cions of the female, and ingrafting it into the male, with which he is much recreated, and moving his body seemes to be rouzed, revived, and de∣lighted with the embracements of his beloved; and these are the marriages of trees. There is another wedding betweene the river Alphaeus and the fountaine Arethusa, this river passes
through the sea with no more alteration than through the earth, for it relishes not at all of the salt water, so that by this meanes hee arrives safely at the fountaine Arethusa; every five years or at the celebration of the Olympicke games, many will fling divers toyes into the river, which he presently conveyes as love tokens to his mistresse Arethusa. Among serpents there is another kinde of love, for the viper is in love with the lamprell; now this lamprell is like a serpent, yet as usually eaten as any fish: when they would come together, the viper standing on the shore and hissing toward the sea, gives no∣tice to the lamprell, shee having perceived it, comes out of the water, yet hastens not straight way to her bridegroome, whom she knowes to have poisonous and deadly teeth, but getting upon some rock, stayes there till he hath cast his venome, then they stand and view one another, but as soone as the lover hath freed his mistresse from all feare, by casting his poison on the ground, shee slides off the rocke and embraces him. While these love-stories were a telling, I nar∣rowly observed how Leucippe was affected with them, who seemed to me to heare them gladly; but let them say what they will, Leucippes coun∣tenance
farre surpassed the rare and exquisite splendour of the peacocke, nay the whole gar∣den, for in her forehead were daffadillies, in her cheekes roses, in her eyes violets, her locks were more curled than the twining Ivie, and every part held such correspondence with the garden, that I may truly say the best flowers were in her face. Not long after she departed, being called away to her Lute; but to me she was still present, imprinting her image in mine eyes at her depar∣ture. Then beganne Satyrus and I to applaud each other, I him that he had told such fine sto∣ries, and he me, that I had given him the hint: immediately it was supper time, and wee sate downe in the same order as before. The end of the first Booke.
THE SECOND BOOKE. The Argument. Clitophon meeting Leucippe courteth her, they breake their mindes each to other, and after many kisses and embraces part. Clitophons father, who had intended to espouse him to another, pro∣videth for his marriage, for the better successe whereof hee doth sacrifice: now a dissolute young man, named Callisthenes, who had desired to have Leucippe to wife, and was denied, resolved to take this opportunity to steale her away; but mistaking Calligo Clitophons sister for Leu∣cippe, he carieth her away by violence, with which tumult the sacrifice and marriage are both defer∣red, and Clitophon solliciteth Leucippe againe; afterwards being admitted to her bed-chamber by Clio, is almost caught by Panthia, who hearing a noise in the chamber, strictly examineth Leucip∣pe,
but she pleads ignorance; afterwards fearing lest the matter should be knowne, hee, Leucippe, Satyrus, Clinias, and two servants, resolve to flye; and finding a shippe bound for Alexandria, they enter into it, where they fall acquainted with an Aegyptian called Menelaus. WHilst wee were thus commending our selves, wee came to Leucippe's chamber to heare her sing to her Lute, whose voice was so plea∣sant, and musicke so sweet, that I could not withdraw mine eare from it: for first she sung the combat betwixt the Bore and the Lyon, described by Homer; next a more plea∣sing song in commendation of the Rose; and if I shall wrong it so much as to say it, and not sing it, thus it was: Should Kings o're flowers appointed be, The Rose should beare the soveraignty, That maiden blush of modest earth, Appearing ere she ha's brought forth Her summer fruits, that flowre so faire Perfuming, where it growes, the aire; Giving our sense the sweetest kisse, It patroniz'd by Venus is.
This was her song, though me thoughts the rose was all this while on her cheekes; which she had scarce ended, but immediately it was supper time. Now about this time were the fe∣stivals of Protrygaeus Dionysius celebrated, whom the Tyrians make their tutelar god, the originall of which solemnities sprang from hence. In for∣mer time there was no wine in the world, for the blacke wine which they call Anthosmia, was not yet found out, nor Bibline, Maronian, Chian or Icarian, but all these came from the Tyrians, and the first inventer of them was borne amongst Them: for they say that Dionysius upon a time happened into the house of a certain shepheard, who was much famed for his hospitality, and when this shepheard had set before him all which the earth would afford, or his team could labour for, he had no other drinke for him but that which his cattell dranke: So Dionysius highly commending his liberality, in recom∣pence thereof invited him to a cuppe of wine; which when hee dranke, hee demanded of the god whence hee had that purple water, or in what countrey she found such sweet blood, for it was not such he thought as ranne in the veins of the earth, because that goes not downe halfe so pleasantly; but you may feele this in your
nose as soone as you put it to your mouth, and though to the touch it seeme cold, yet it heates the stomacke. Then Dionysius answered, This is the water of the grape, and the bloud of the vine; so straightway bringing him to a tree, and pressing a cluster or two of the fruit, said, This is the water, this is the fountain, by which means (say the Tyrians) wine was found out; where∣fore this day was solemnly kept in honour of that great god, which my father willing most magnificently to celebrate, provided a costly supper, drinking out of a goblet of wrought glasse, in the which was the picture of Dionysius crowned with a vine, the grapes whereof hang∣ing downe on the inside of the cuppe, seemed greene while it was empty, but red and ripe when it was filled with wine. By that time that two or three of these boules had gone round, I began to eye the maid most shamefully: For Bacchus and Venus two power∣full deities, invading a man, doe so inflame him, that they make him exceed the limits of all modesty, the one setting him on fire, the other adding fuell to that fire: for what is wine but the nourisher of lust? nor was the maid much afraid to looke on me then: so we spent ten dayes, receiving nothing from each other, save a looke, not daring to doe any
more. At length I made my minde more fully knowne to Satyrus, and desired his helpe in the businesse. All this I knew before (saith hee) but seemed to be ignorant of it, for a secret lover, if any reveale his intents, hates that man worse than a backbiter or slanderer. But my good for∣tune, I thanke her, tooke care for you, for Clio who hath the charge of Leucippes bed, is growne in favour with me, and yesterday shee told mee that you neede not trouble your selfe, for shee would helpe you to faire opportunities, and the like. But in the meane time this is but a weake triall which you make of the maides good will towards you by her eye onely, I would councell you to speake to her, which perhaps may bee more prevalent. So Pallas helpe me (said I) you councell me well, but I am afraid, for in these kindes of warres I am but a fresh water souldier. Satyrus replyed, Cupid hates a coward, for hee marches arm'd like a warriour, his arrowes, qui∣ver, darts, fire, you see are weapons shewing his audacity. Canst thou entertaine the least co∣wardly thought▪ being inspired with such a dei∣tie? Take heed I finde you not a dissembler all this while, and that at length you prove not to be in love. What I have promised I will per∣forme. I will make Clio privy to your designe,
and will see that you have an opportune time to converse with Leucippe, where no body shall in∣terrupt you. When he had said this he went his way. So I being alone, and somewhat heart∣ned with Satyrus words, strived so to compose my looks, that when I came in her sight I might not bee dasht out of countenance, saying thus with my selfe: How long thou effeminate foole wilt thou feare? why art thou so obstupified, being the souldier of so powerfull a god? what doest thou looke that shee should wooe thee? Then a little while after my minde changed, But why doest thou not rather repent thee that thou shouldest so immoderately affect her, see∣ing thy father hath provided another for thee, and she none of the deformed'st, love her I say, and thinke on her whom thou maiest marry without danger, so I seemed to perswade my selfe to this: but on the contrary straightway love speaking as it were from the bottome of my heart, gave me this answer, Durst thou take so much upon thee as to resist my power? I have wings to flye after thee, arrowes to wound thee, torches to burne thee, how canst thou thinke to escape mee? Thou maist perhaps shunne the stroke of the dart, but the fire of the torches will burne thee, and though thou hold up the shield
of continence against that too, I shall catch thee by my flight. While I was reasoning thus with my selfe, I straightway met Leucippe, whom as soone as I saw I waxed pale, and presently again blusht, (she was then all alone, for Clio had left her) and though greatly astonisht, and partly with feare, partly with shame much dejected, yet I cryed God save you mistresse; at which she sweetly smiling, and by her smile signifying that shee knew to what end that salutation ten∣ded, replyed, Am I your mistresse Sir? you doe not well to say so. Sure I doe, for I am solde to your service, as Hercules was to Omphale's. As Mercury, said you? for Iupiter gave the selling of her to him, and then she laught. What Mercu∣ry meane you, sweet? what trickes are these, see∣ing you know wel enough what I meane? while thus we wove our speeches one within another, a certaine accident stood me in much stead, for by chance the day before, about noone, Leucippe was playing on her Lute (where I was also pre∣sent) and Clio sate by her, at that time a Bee fly∣ing unexpectedly into the roome, stang Clio on the hand, with that she cryed out, and Leucippe throwing her Lute aside, lookt on the wound, and bid her be of good cheere, promising her with two words to ease her of her paine, for shee
had learn'd of a gypsie how to cure those which were stung either with Bee or Wasp; so straight∣way shee repeated some certaine spells, after which Clio confest her selfe to bee much eased: now at this very time as I was talking with her, a waspe flew about me, so catching hold of this occasion, I clapt my hand to my face, feigning my selfe to be stung, and in great paine: she pre∣sently running unto me snatcht away my hand, and askt me what part was hurt? I answered, my lips, my dearest Leucippe, why dost thou not con∣jure? then shee put her mouth to mine as if shee would have charmed, and touching my lips she mumbled I know not what; in the meane time I stole many kisses from her, whilst shee in spea∣king, sometimes opening, sometimes shutting her lips, made her inchantments kisses, wherfore I grew bolder, and kist her againe, offering also to imbrace her, but she straightway started back, saying, What will you doe? will you conjure too? Yes said I, but I will kisse out my conjura∣tion, for by that meanes you cured mee even now. Which when shee had understood, and smiled on me, I beganne to take courage, and spake to her on this wise: Ah my dearest Leu∣cippe, I am prickt worse than I was before, for the sting hath pierc't even to my heart, and re∣quires
thy helpe to cure it, thou truly carriest the Bee in thy mouth, for therein thou hast ho∣ney, and in thy kisses a sting, wherefore prithee once more charme againe, but dispatch not so soone lest the wound bleed afresh. So I embra∣ced her, which shee seemed to resist, yet never∣thelesse suffered mee to doe: meane while her maid comming a farre off, wee parted each a se∣veral way, I very unwillingly, but she with what minde I know not. Ever after that, my hopes were augmented, and the kisses she gave me, me thoughts I plainly felt still on my lips, the sweet∣nesse whereof I was as wary in keeping, as of a magazen of treasure, for this is the first and greatest pleasure which lovers take, comming from the most comeliest and beautifull part of the body. For the mouth is the instrument of the voice, and the voice is nothing but the shadow of the minde; now the touch of the lips working delight in the heart, drawes our mindes to kisse each other. Nor truly doe I remember that ever my senses had a more pleasing object, for I never tasted any thing halfe so sweet as those kisses shee gave mee. As soone as supper was ready we sate downe againe, and Satyrus which filled our wine would change Leucippes cup for mine promiscuously,
so I observing which part of the cup she put her lips to put that to my mouth, feigning it to bee a kisse sent unto me, which shee observing did the like to me; this pleased mee the more, because we did not doe it once, or twice, but all the day long. When supper was done, Satyrus met mee and told mee, now is the time for you to shew your selfe a man, for the maids mother is gone to bed you know, and Leucippe will walke with Clio, and her I will draw away with some talke or other; so every thing went as we wisht; for Clio was led away, and Leucippe was walking by her selfe, wherefore taking the advantage of the evening, and imboldened with the successe of my former onset, I came upon her like a souldier that had already conquered, not fearing the danger of the battaile, for I had many weapons to trust to, to wit, wine, hope, love, and solitari∣nesse; so I saluted her, and when we should have conferred farther for our marriage, wee heard a great noise behinde us, at which affrighted, wee parted, Leucippe to her chamber, and I to another part of the house, much grieved that I had lost so faire an opportunity, and cursing those that made the noise; whilst suddenly Satyrus meetes me with a merry countenance, who seemed to be an eye-witnesse of what we did, while he sate
under a tree to watch whether any one came, so spying some body, he knew not who, comming towards us, he made the noise. Some few dayes after, sooner than he had in∣tended, my father beganne to provide for my wedding, by reason of many strange dreames that troubled him, for he dreamed that so soone as hee had kindled our nuptiall torches, they were immediately put out, and which troubled him most of all, the bride and bridegroom were stolne away; so the day of our marriage was ap∣pointed, and all things necessary for the bride; an ornament for her necke set with divers pre∣cious stones, her garment all of purple, only that part which in other garments is purple, was in hers woven with gold. The precious stones seemed to contend with each other in bright∣nesse, the Iacinth was the colour of the rose, the Amethist inclined somewhat toward the colour of gold; in the middle were three stones so pla∣ced, that one received the colour from the o∣ther, for they were all joyned in one, the lower part was blacke, the upper part which was sharp as the top of a speare, was red; the bottome be∣ing white cast his rayes on the red and blacke: the stone it selfe set in gold lookt like a golden eye: nor were her garments of the common
purple, but such as the Tyrians say was found out by the Shepheards dog, & such as Venus veile is dyed in. There was a time whē the use of purple was not knowne to men, for it was hid in a little shell, some few wherof a certain fisherman took, supposing them to be fish, but seeing the shell so rough, hee cast them away, which by chance a shepheards dogge lighting on, brake with his teeth, the bloud whereof dyed his jawes; so the shepheard seeing his dogges mouth bloudy, and supposing him to bee wounded, went to the sea side to wash it, but the colour was the brighter for washing: hence the shepheard knew the na∣ture of the shell, that it had in it some excellent tincture, and that he might the better search out the whole matter, hee let some of it drop into a piece of wooll, by this meanes unlocking the rare mystery of purple, and adding a new trea∣sure to the fullers trade. My father now as the custome was, did sacri∣fice before the marriage, which when I percei∣ved I judged my selfe quite lost, and was think∣ing on some meanes to defer all till some other time, when suddenly as I was thus thinking, a great shout was made, the reason whereof was this: when my father had slaine the sacrifice, and laid it on the Altar, an Eagle snatcht it a∣way
maugre all the standers by. This being taken as an ill omen, there was no wedding kept that day, but my father sent for Augurs, and related to them what had hap∣pened, so they councelled him to goe to the sea side, and to sacrifice to Iupiter Hospitalis, for that way the Eagle flew: but this matter was quickly husht, for the Eagle was never seene af∣ter; at which happy event I was much deligh∣ted, commending the Eagle above measure, and saying that for this one act shee well deser∣ved to bee styled the Queene of birds. But that which was portended by this omen not long af∣ter came to passe; for Callisthenes a young man of Byzantium, who having a faire estate left him by his parents (which not long before dyed) was rich, yet withall very luxurious. This Calist∣henes hearing that Sostratus had a very beautifull daughter, though hee had never seene her, de∣sired to have her to his wife: For so inordinate are the desires of an intemperat man, that a rumour will set him on fire, and his eare can challenge as much part in his love as his eye. Therefore before the warre beganne, hee desired of Sostratus that hee might have the maid to wife, but he, misliking it seemes his debauched life, denyed him: at that Callisthenes supposing himselfe to bee underva∣lued,
and condemned by Sostratus, was much enraged, yet dissembled his anger, & bethought himselfe how hee might have his will on the maid, and be revenged on Sostratus. Now there was a law amongst the Byzantians, that if any one had stole away a Virgin, and had offered violence unto her, he should have no other pu∣nishment inflicted on him than to marry her. Callisthenes calling this to minde, thought on a fit opportunity to steale her away, and though the warre was hot, and hee knew shee was at my Fathers house, yet he desisted not to lay wait, in which businesse this matter was a great helpe to him. There was this Oracle given to the By∣zantians. A little Iland you shall see, Which tooke its first name from a tree, Seeming by a small streake of land, To take the continent by th'hand: You may bee sure to finde the place Where Vulcan Pallas doth imbrace, There see that to Amphytrions sonne, A solemne sacrifice bee done. Whilst they were doubting what Iland the O∣racle meant, Sostratus for he as I told you was a
chiefe commander in the warres, said, that it was time that they should to Tyre to do sacrifice to Hercules, for by all likelyhood that should be the place the Oracle intended, since the answer was this, the Iland took its name from a tree, & Phoenix in the Tyrian tongue signifies the branch of a Palme tree. Now Tyre is an Iland of the Phoenicians for which the sea and the earth con∣tend, this drawing it to her selfe, the other stri∣ving to wash it away being it lyes on the sea, and yet is not parted from the earth, but by the help of a narrow path, is joyned to the continent, which path is as it were the neck of the Iland, not lying on the bottome but floating upon the top of the water, affording a strange spectacle, a City in the Sea, and an Iland on the land. Now what was meant by Vulcan and Pallas wee may construe to bee oyle and fire, both which are there joyned together; for in a certaine holy place an Olive tree growes, incompast in with flames, which consume not the tree but make the Olives the better, as if betwixt them there were a mull league▪ and here Minerva refuses not the society of Vcan. Then Chaerephon Sostratus colleague in the warre, and of more authority than him, because hee was of Tyre, extolling him above measure
said, thou hast well interpreted the answere of the Oracle: but dost thou think that the nature of fire onely is to bee admired, water hath its miracles too, some whereof I my self have seen. There is a fountaine in Sicilia containing water mingled with fire, wherein you may see the flames leaping up from the bottome, yet if you but touch the water, it is as cold as snow; nor yet doth the water extinguish the fire, or the fire heat the water, but betwixt them there is a truce. There is also in Spaine a river, which you would thinke at the first sight differed not at all from other rivers, but if you listen more atten∣tively, you shall heare it make a great noise; for when a little winde hath raised the waves there∣of, they are like so many strings of an Harpe, which the winde being the quill playes on. There is also a Lake in Lybia, the sand whereof differs not much from that in the Indian rivers, which Lake the Virgins in that Countrey know to bee rich for its wealth, which lies hid under water, mingled with the mud; a fountaine of gold flowing there: now they let wn a long staffe besmear'd with pitch▪ & even as the hook is to the fish, so is this sticke to the gold; for it catches it, and the pitch serves in stead of the bait, to which as much gold as it toucheth stick∣eth,
and by this meanes they take it out of the the Lybian Sea. Chaerephon having spoken this he sent those to Tyre which should do sacrifice, the City allow∣ing of it, wherefore Callisthenes feigning himselfe to be one of the overseers of the sacrifice, made what haste he could to Tyre, and having learned where my father dwelt, laid snares for the wo∣men who came to view the pompe of our sacri∣fice, which was most sumptuously set forth, with great store of incense, & all varieties of flowers; the chiefest of the incense was Cassia, Franckin∣cense, and Saffron; of the flowers, the Rose, Daf∣fadilly, and Myrtle. All of them smell'd so sweet that they seemed as it were to contend which should delight much. The beasts to bee sacri∣ficed were many, the chiefe whereof were Ae∣gyptian Bulls, which are not only admirable for their colour but their height: a huge stature they are, of having a fat neck, broad shoulders, a great belly, and hornes not like those of Sicilia bending downward, or deformed as those of Cyprus, but such as sprouting out to a great length, are by little and little so bowed, till their toppe come to be distant each from other no further than the rootes; representing in a man∣ner the forme of a full moone; the colour they
are of is that which Homer commends in the Thracian horses: this beast marcheth with his head stately erected, as if hee were King of the rest, into this kind of Bull sure did Iupiter turne himselfe, if the story lie not, when hee stole Eu∣ropa. Now at that time it happened that my mother in law was not well, Leucippe also feign∣ing her selfe to bee sicke, (for wee agreed it should bee so till all were gone forth) stayed at home, so that no body but my sister Caligo went forth with Panthia, Leucippe's mother. So Calli∣sthenes which had never seene Leucippe, took Ca∣ligo to bee her, for hee knew Panthia very well, and consulting with no body whether it were her or no (for I thinke now he was quite blind) made no more adoe but shewed her to one of his servants, in whom he put trust, and comman∣ded him to provide theeves to steale her away; prescribing withall the manner how it should be done, telling him that the solemnity was at hand, wherein all the virgins were to goe down to the sea side; which when he had spoken, ta∣king no care for the sacrifice, he departed. Now he had a private ship, which hee had furnished before hee came forth to the furtherance of the businesse which hee intended; the rest of his company, which seemed to be of those who had
the overseeing of the sacrifice, launcht into the middle of the sea, but Callisthenes went not farre from the shore, that he might not only see what company came, but also lest his ship being neare Tyre, after the fact was done, he should present∣ly be pursued and taken. As soone as hee came to Saraptas, a street of the Tyrians situate in the sea, there he provided those which should lye in ambush, and committed them to Zeno, that was the servants name who had the charge of stea∣ling her away. He was a man of a strong body, and had beene a pirate, who came to Tyre by chance, and meeting there with some fishermen which were pirates, fell into their company. There is a little Island neare Tyre called Orodo∣pes tombe, where the Tyrian ships harbour, there he set his pinnace. Wee made our selves ready in the night to doe sacrifice the next day, which was not unknowne to Zeno, wherefore when we set forth, he followed us. Now it was our chance to goe out in a very opportune time, for Zeno lift up a certaine ensigne, whereupon the pinnace made to shore: There were in it tenne men, and there were eight more lying in wait on the shore, dressed in womens apparell, and their beards shaven; all these had swords hidden un∣der their garments, and to avoid all suspicion,
attended on the sacrifice; insomuch that none could discerne them from women. After fire was ready to be put to the sacrifice, they put out their torches, and set upon us; whilst wee asto∣nisht, ranne, one this way, another that way: so with their swords drawne they carried away my sister Caligo, and going a ship board with her, flew away as fast as an Eagle with her prey; some of us ranne away, neither hearing nor sce∣ing this, others saw it and cried out, The pirats have borne away Caligo; by this time the pin∣nace had sailed halfe way over the sea, and drew neare to Sarapta, where Callisthenes, knowing the signe, met them, and taking the maid of them, fled. Our marriage being so fortunately and beyond all expectation broke off, I beganne to take courage, though it grieved me much that this mishap should befall my sister, and a few dayes after thus I began to say to Leucippe. Dunces in love, how long shall we Be poring on our A. B. C? For such are kisses, which torment Rather than give my soule content: Letters from which you scarce will prove, The wisest scholler can spell love. What though the lilly of your hand,
Or corall lip I may command? It is but like him up to th' chin, Whose mouth can touch, but take none in. Having often sung her this song, I prevailed so farre as to be admitted to her bed, being assisted by Clio, who had the charge thereof. There was a faire roome in our house, having in it two places for beds, one on the right hand, and two on the left; betwixt them was a narrow passage, through which you might come at them; at the entrance into this narrow passage, were two folding doores; on one side of the roome lay Leucippe and her mother, in the third bed lay Clio. And in the place where the fourth bed should be set, their provision. Now Leucip∣pe's mother accompanied her still to bed, and did not onely shut the doores on the one side, but gave out the keyes to one of her servants, through a crevise, to have them lockt on the o∣ther side; and tooke the keyes in againe. Then the next morning calling the same servant, and giving him the keys, she commanded him to un∣locke the doores againe. So Satyrus made some other keyes like them, and having tried them, and found them fit for his turne, he charged Clio not to hinder him in any thing that he did. But
there was a servant in the house, a busie prating medling fellow, whose name was Conops, a name very fit for him, he would still have an eye over us, but more especially at night times, for hee would sit watching at the chamber doore, so that it was impossible to escape him, wherefore Satyrus endeavouring to fall in league with him, would many times jest with him, and play upon his name, which is in English a gnat▪ he percei∣ving Satyrus cunning, made as if hee would jest too, yet bore a base malicious minde to us all the while. Goe to now, saith hee, because you jeere me so of my name, heare what a pretty tale I will tell you of the gnat. The Lion was wont to complaine much to Prometheus, seeing hee had made him such a comely great creature, and armed his mouth with teeth, his feet with clawes, and made him stronger than all other beasts, yet that he should stand in feare of a cocke; to whom Prometheus replyed, Why dost thou rashly accuse me? it is not my fault, but thine owne cowardlinesse▪ at which the Lion wept, and accusing himselfe had resolv'd to pine away for griefe, and dye; while he was in these dumps, he met with an elephant, whom after he had saluted, he fell in talke with, as they were discoursing, the Elephant would
still shake his eares, for there was a gnat hove∣ring about him; what is the matter, saith the Lion, you let not your eares be at rest? The E∣lephant replyed, This little beast which you see flying about mee, should hee but get into mine eares would kill me: when the Lion heard this, What a foole was I, said he, to resolve to die, see∣ing I am as much better than an Elephant, as a Cocke is better than a Gnat? You may see, saith Conops, how little strength there is in a gnat and yet how greatly the Elephant feares him. Satyrus perceiving his taile to bee a crafty one▪ and ful of deceit, smiled a little, and said, I thank you for your story of the elephant and the gnat. Now heare mine of the Lion and the Gnat, as it was told me by a Philosopher. Once upon a time the Gnat bespoke the Ly∣on thus, Surely thou art much deceived, O Ly∣on, if thou thinkest thou art King of me as well as of other beasts, seeing thou art neither fairer, stronger, nor better than mee, though in some kinde of strength thou exceed mee, thou tearest with thy talons, and bitest with thy teeth, what scolding woman cannot doe the like? what beauty, what greatnesse hast thou? no∣thing but a huge breast, and a broad paire of shoulders, and thy hinder partswhich thou canst
not see are farre uglier than these; my greatnesse is the whole aire, so much I meane as I can in∣compasse with my wings: my beauty the flow∣rishing colours of the meadows, which when I please I put on: nor laugh at mee if I style my selfe strong and valiant also, for I am nothing but an entire engine of war, never entring com∣bate without the sound of a trumpet, my mouth striking up the alarum & giving the blow both at once. I am also an arrow shooting my selfe through the aire, and when I am shot I wound, which wound he that receives cries out sudden∣ly, looking about him to see who hurt him, whilst I stand by him and straightway leape a∣way, and am here and there in a trice, skipping and laughing to see him tampe and fret; but why doe we parley so long, let us enter the lists, so immediatly hee fell on the Lyon, stinging him by the eyes, and all other parts where there grew no haire, the Lyon was inraged, and turn∣ing himselfe up and downe, beate the aire: the Gnat taking more pleasure to see him angry, flew at his lips: the Lyon turning himselfe to come at the place which smarted, fell downe; the Gnat like a nimble wrastler bending his bo∣dy, crept through his teeth, and againe sliding through his mouth, which was shut, got away:
wherefore his teeth failing of their prey, knockt one against another: at length the Lyon wea∣ried out with his bootlesse striving, and as it were, yeelding himselfe conquered, lay still: the Gnat flying about him, singing a triumphant song; at last puft up with▪ the greatnesse of his victory, and fetching a greater compasse than before, fell unawares into a cobweb, and was straight caught by the Spider; wherfore seeing no way to escape, and detesting his owne folly hee said, Foole that I was to provoke a Lyon, and am not able to shift from a Spider; which when Satyrus had said, hee bad Conops that hee should take heed of a Spiders cobweb. So a few dayes after, when hee saw this Conops very hungry, hee provided a sleepy potion and invi∣ted him to supper, hee suspecting something to be in the winde, denyed him; but being over∣come with the perswasions of his belly, (the best oratour) at length came, and in his grace cup had this potion administred to him; which as soone as hee had taken up, hee could scarce hold his eyes open▪ till hee went into his cham∣ber: presently Satyrus meeting with mee, told mee that Conops was laid fast, and bid mee like Vlysses bee of good cheare; at which words wee went both to Leucippes chamber, he stood at the
doore, I entred by the helpe of Clio, who con∣veighed mee in by stealth; at my entrance I trembled partly for joy, partly for feare, for my mind was perplexed with the suspition of some ensuing danger, and yet overjoyed, as it were, with the hope of successe, which hope qualifi∣ed the greatnesse of my fear: but to see the mis∣chiefe, ere I entred the chamber, her mother Panthia did dreame a terrible dreame, for shee thought shee saw a thiefe enter the chamber, with his sword drawne, which took her daugh∣ter out of the bed, and throwing her along ript up her bowels; wherefore affrighted with this dreame, shee leapt of her bed, and ran to Leu∣cippes (which was close adjoyning), before I was halfe in bed; so I hearing the noise, made what haste I could forth, knowing what a case I was like to be in if I were caught: Satyrus was at the doore ready to receive mee, trembling and halfe dead with feare; then both of us stea∣ling away through the darke, went each of us to his owne Chamber: her mother good woman fell straightway into a swoone; afterwards be∣ing recovered fell a beating of Clio, and tearing her own haire, and with many a sigh and groane uttered these words to Leucippe, Thou hast fond wench frustrate all our hopes. Thou good man,
Sostratus, wagest warre at Byzantium for others marriages, whilest here at home some body I know not whom hath seized on thy daughter, and defiled her. I little thought to have seene thee thus married, O Leucippe, I would thou hadst stayed at Byzantium, and that the fortune of the warre had cast this contumely on thee, or that some Thracian conquerour had deflowred thee, that so thou mightst have yet been chaste, for the violence vvhich had there been offered thee, vvould have taken avvay the disgrace of the fact, but novv thou art thy selfe the cause of it, and therefore must justly endure the infamy. My dreame vvas too true, better thou hadst bin ript up alive, then that this bloudy massacre should have beene committed upon thine ho∣nour: but that vvhich most troubles mee is, that I knovv not the author of this injury, nor my griefe: If it vvere some slave tell mee. But Leucippe being confident that I vvas gone farre enough out of sight, replyed, Mother, you vvrong mine honour much, thus to attach it of that vvhich it is not guilty, for vvhat I have done deserves not this harsh language from you; the party vvhich came so rudely into the chamber, vvhether hee vvere a heroe or a thiefe I knovv not, for I lay astonished and affrighted, not able
to cry out, being tongue-bound vvith feare, on∣ly this I knovv, that no violence vvas offered my virginity, in the meane time Panthia sighed, and fell dovvne vvith griefe; but vvee vvere all the vvhile plodding vvhat vve vvere best to do: and this we found at last to be our safest course, that before day (least Clio should bee rackt to a confession) vve should flye our Countrey. Ha∣ving resolved upon this course, vve got the Por∣ter to let us out, vvho supposed that vvee vvent forth to meete vvith a svveet-heart of ours: So vvee vvent streight to Clinias; it vvas then the dead of the night betvvixt tvvelve and one, so that vvee could not get in at his doore; but by good fortune Clinias lying in the forepart of the house, heard our tongues, and suddenly met us, straightvvay in comes Clio, for shee had inten∣ded to flye for it too: (Novv Clio knevv all our counsell and vve hers, and Clinias both) for the poore vvench knevv that shee must to the racke for all, if she stayed but till morning; wherefore she said shee would rather choose to die, than stand to the hazard of it. Then Clinias taking me by the hand drew me aside out of Clios hea∣ring, and told me that he had thought on a very good course to shift off Clio, and then to flye by our selves: for the old woman knew not whom
she caught, nor can she know unlesse it be revea∣led to her by Clio; now perhaps you may entice her to flye by her selfe, and upon these conditi∣ons he promised to accompany us in our jour∣ney. To this wee all agreed, concluding that Clio should be committed to one of the servants, who shipping her should hoist sailes and away with her, which wee perswaded her to, telling her that we intended to stay there and beare the brunt of the matter, come what would of it, so we stayed there some time to see this businesse dispatcht; the rest of the night we spent in sleep; betimes in the morning we returned home, not seeming to Panthia to know any thing that had past. Panthia commanded Clio to be call'd, that she might be questioned about it; she being not to be found, the old woman fell upon Leucippe, asking why shee would not tell her the truth of the matter, urging her also to bee privie to Clio's going away; then Leucippe being the more em∣boldened with that, answered, What would you have me to doe, mother? or what shall I say more? what arguments shall I use to perswade you? if you suspect the losse of my virginity, pray make triall of it. Thats a good one, quoth the old woman, we will have all the world to be witnesses of your shame, and with that she flung
out of the roome. Leucippe left all alone, and much perplexed with her mothers words, was almost distracted, she blusht that she was caught, grieved shee was that her mother had railed on her, and angry that shee could not be beleeved. Now shame, griefe, and anger are to the minde like three waves ready to overwhelme it, for shame get∣ting into the eye, deprives it of its liberty; griefe flowing into the heart abates its courage; anger snar∣ling and breaking in the breast, drownes reason in the flaming sea of madnesse: The tongue may be the cause of all these, for it is an arrow with three heads, name∣ly slander, a divulgation of the slander, and an expro∣bration of it; and the number of the wounds must needs bee proportionable, to wit, anger, griefe and shame: each of these wounds, though not bloudily, yet deeply, which cannot bee cured but by retorting them on him that smote with them, making your reply as sharpe as his onset; wherefore it is commonly seene how deepe an impression the words of a great man, or one in au∣thority doe make, because those that are provoked by them, dare not answere againe: For the greatest griefes unlesse they have a vent, prove the greatest burthens to themselves. This being Leucippes case, shee was halfe dead with sorrow: in the meane time I sent Satyrus to know of her whe∣ther shee would goe along with us, who pre∣venting
him in his message, said, I beseech you by all the gods carry mee whither you will out of my mothers sight▪ for if you leave me behind you, there is no way for mee but to lay violent hands on my selfe: which when Satyrus told mee, I received no small comfort at the relation of it; so staying two dayes (my father being from home) wee provided all things necessary for our journey, & the rest of the potion which Conops had left, we got Satyrus to give Panthia as hee waited on her at the table, which shee had no sooner drunke but shee hasted to her cham∣ber, and there fell asleep. The chamber maide (for there was a new one chosen in Clio's roome) and the Porter, hee laid fast with some of the same potion. While this was doing a coach was made ready, and Satyrus stayed at the doore for us; so when they were all in a dead sleepe wee stole away making no noise. Now Satyrus led Leucippe by the hand, for by great chance Conops who was wont to watch us, was gone forth a∣bout some businesse for his mistresse, who ope∣ning the doore, we took coach; six of us, name∣ly, my selfe, Leucippe, Satyrus, Clinias, and two of Clinias servants poasting towards Sidon, whither before the night was halfe spent wee came, but making no stay there, wee hasted to Byritum,
expecting to finde some ship ready to set forth, nor did our hopes faile us, for we found one in∣to which we conveighed all our goods before we knew whither it was bound; and a little be∣fore day wee went aboord our selves, then wee understood it was bound for Alexandria, one of the famousest Cities of Egypt: As soone as I saw the sea, I was not a little glad while I was yet in the haven, afterward I rejoyced more that the winde served us so well: there was such running up and downe in the ship with the ma∣riners, some drawing up the ropes, others the saile-yards, others spreading the saile; so pre∣sently taking in one another, we launched forth into the deepe, the earth seemed to saile as fast as our ship, for to our thinking it went back∣wards: great shoutings there were and prayers to the gods that wee might have a prosperous voyage; so immediatly wee had a fine gale of winde which made our sailes svvell and drove the ship apace. Now by chance there was a passenger in the ship, who because it was supper time and being by himselfe, desired us very courteously to take part of such as he had; whose courtesie I kindly entertained, and caused Satyrus to bring forth what hee had provided for our suppers, so put∣ting
them together wee supped all at one table, passing away the time in discourse; at length I demanded of the stranger what Countreyman he was, hee replyed an Egyptian, his name Me∣nelaus; which question also he asked mee, and I answered him, my name is Clitophon, this Cli∣nias, both of us Phaenicians; tell us the cause of your journey, and you shall know the cause of ours: then Menelaus began in this manner; I had a friend whom I tendred dear as my soule, he was but a very young man much addicted to hunting, from which neither I nor any could diswade him: on a certaine time I my selfe ac∣companied him to his sport, & being all moun∣ted, while as wee pursued the lesser beasts, wee prosper'd well enough in our game, but sudden∣ly a wilde Boare comming out of the wood, this desperate youth was so farre from being affrigh∣ted, that he voluntarily runne upon him, though I had reclaimed him, the Boare ranne fiercely at him, and hee at the Boare, which when I savv I was affrighted, & fearing lest the Boare slay∣ing his horse, should likewise teare him in pie∣ces, cast a dart, little dreaming it should light where it did, and it chanc't while my friend stept aside hee received the wound; in what a miserable perplexity I was then, who can judge?
but that vvhich grieved me most of all, vvas, that vvhilst the breath vvas yet in his body hee imbrac't me, and vvas so far from detesting me his murtherer, that til the last minute he held me by that hand which vvounded him. For this his parents endited me, to which I willingly agreed, and vvas so far from pleading not guilty, that I proclaimed my self vvorthy of death, but the Judges moved vvith pitty, spared my life; & ba∣nisht me for three yeers, so my time being expi∣red I am novv returning to my countrey. When Menelaus had told this story, Clinias could not forbear vveeping to think on Caricles: whereat Minelaus asked him whether for his sake he shed those tears, or vvhether the like unhappy acci∣ent had befell him: then Clinias vvith many a groane and sigh told him the story of Caricles & his horse, after which they had my story too; but seeing Menelaus weeping for his friend, & Clinias making moane for his Caricles, to put them out of their dumps, I began to tell love stories, and merry tales, at length to talke much in commen∣dation of women, but Menelaus who had alwayes been their enemie spake as much against them, so at last wee fel in a large discourse concerning the dignity of their sex, which I list not here to set downe. The end of the second Booke.
THE THIRD BOOKE. The Argument. Clitophon having beene two dayes on the sea, at last arises a tempest, wherein the ship was broken, and many of the passengers drowned; but he and Leu∣cippe swimming in a broken piece thereof, arrive safe at Pelusium, from whence once more they set forward for Alexandria, when suddenly they are taken by Pirates; Leucippe is carried before to their Captaine; Clitophon and the rest of the passengers being led after, another company of Pi∣rates set upon these, (their Captaines name was Charmides) now all the prisoners seeing those who tooke them captives, busie in fight, fled to the other company, whereof Charmides was Captain;
who seeing them bound, and therefore taking them to be prisoners, saved their lives; but Clitophon after he had told him his misfortunes, was recei∣ved into great favour, and for his chivalry is made use of in the warres. Meane time Leucip∣pe was led to be sacrific'd, but by a sleight of Saty∣rus & Menelaus, (who arriving there by chance, and acquainted with the Captain of those theeves, obtained the chiefe care of the sacrifice) shee is sa∣ved, and restored againe to Clitophon. THe third day the weather having beene very faire all the time be∣fore, it grew darke on a sudden, and the winde arose, beating the waves against the ship side, where∣at the Pilot commanded the saile-yard to bee turned, which the mariners assaying to do were hindered by the violence of the tempest, and forc'd to leave it in its owne place: immediate∣ly one part of the ship was driven downwards, the other upwards, that wee could scarce stand in our places, the winde growing stronger wee came all to the upper decke, partly to lighten the lower part which was full of water already, and partly to ballance her, equally distributing her burthen to every side, but this was to no
purpose, for while we strived to make her saile eaven, the winde would turne on a sudden, and beat on the other side of the ship, insomuch that we were all in great fear of drowning: at which there was a great shout in the ship, and we were all forc'd to run back to the place from whence we came: and this wee did six or seven times, carrying our luggage backward and forwards from place to place, expecting death every houre, which I thinke was not farre off, for in the afternoone the sunne was quite taken from us, that we could see one another no better than by moone-light: the lightning shone, the thun∣der ratled, and the aire was wholly distempered. The waves rising from the bottome of the sea, and beating one against another, made a hide∣ous noise: betwixt the heaven and the sea was heard a horrid and confused murmour, like the ratling sound of a trumpet: our ropes worne in two, and violently rent from our sailes, fell downe, and this we fear'd, lest the plankes being broken, and the nailes loosened, our ship should fall in pieces: all the deckes by this time were covered with water, so we lay in the bottome as if it had beene in a denne or cave, committing our selves wholly to that sentence which it should please fortune to passe upon us, all hope
of escaping being quite cast away; for the waves comming thicke against the fore part and hin∣der part of the ship, seemed to runne a tilt one at the other, some of them were like mountaines, other like whirlepooles, but they troubled us most which came obliquely against the ship for they overwhelmed it with water. Moreover, these kinde of waves being mounted almost as high as the clouds, did nevertheless seeme to be of a prodigious greatnesse; but falling down a∣gaine, that you might the more plainly discerne them, you would thinke one sufficient to drown a thousand such ships: As the billowes fought one with another, so the winde fought with them; in the meane time we were so tost up and downe, that wee could stand still in no place, though some of us held by the tackling, others by the side of the ship. A great confusion of out-cries there was, the water that grumbled, the winde that kept a roaring, the women they shreekt, the men they cryed out, the Mariners they shouted to cheare up one another at their worke; but all in vaine, for there was no place free from sorrow and weeping. Then the Ma∣ster of the ship commanded she should be eased of her burthen, which was straightway done; gold and silver being throwne out as well as the
baser commodities, the Merchants also them∣selves lent a hand to helpe to fling out their own goods; so that by that time there was almost nothing left in the ship, yet the tempest ceast not, insomuch that our Pilote forsooke his com∣passe, and would stirre our course no longer, but committed us all to the mercy of the sea, and made ready the cockboate, into which he him∣selfe first entred, and the rest of the Mariners af∣ter him. Now here arose a greater mischiefe than the other, for wee fell all together by the ears who should get first into the boat, for the Mariners had cut the rope by which shee was tyed to the ship; the passengers seeing this did what they could to get in, but the sailers would not let them, holding up swords and hatchets at them, threatning to strike them if they came in, which made the passengers snatch up what came next to hand to defend themselves, some a broken oare, others pieces of old plancks: violence was all the law they observed in this strange and un∣heard of sea-fight. For they which were in the boate (fearing least if there came too many in they should be all cast away) laid on them with swords and hatchets, so that some were slaine, others stepping short fell into the sea, and they
which were got in were fighting with the Ma∣riners: for there was not the least shame or scru∣ple of friendship left amongst them, every man providing for his owne safety, and not caring for anothers: This can the greatnesse of dan∣ger doe: straightway one of the passengers, a lusty stout fellow, caught hold of the rope, and drew the cockboat to him, whereat every man provided himself to leape in, as soone as it came within reach, which but few of them obtained, so cutting the rope with their hatchets, they let the boat goe where it would. Our ship all this while turned round, and at last dashing against a rocke, broke all to pieces: our maine mast be∣ing broken in one place and bowed in another. Those that were cast away at the breaking of our ship, I count were in better case then we that stayed, (For death prolong'd in a tempest kils a man ere he feele it, whilst his eyes being filld with the great∣nesse of the danger, make his feare as great) Some seeking to swimme away were dasht against the rocke, some getting upon old boards, looked like so many sea monsters, some halfe dead floa∣ting on the waters: But by good chance a pret∣ty bigge peice of the forepart of the ship fell to Leucippes share and mine, in which wee sat. Me∣nelaus and Satyrus and others, having lighted on
the maine mast, held fast by that; Clinias we saw not farre from us, bestriding the saile yard, who bid us have a care that wee let not goe our hold, which while he was speaking, there came a great wave and overwhelmed him, threatning us also; but as the fates would have it, it only raised the wood whereon we sate; so being lifted on high wee espyed Clinias againe: wherfore not with∣out tears I burst forth at length and cryed, Take pity on us god Neptune, and spare those reliques of our shipwracke, wee have died a thousand deaths, being in a continuall feare of death, but if thou wilt that wee perish, divide us not, but let one wave swallow us both; or if it bee thy pleasure to make us food for thy flocke, let one fish devoure us, so by that meanes we shall both lye in one sepulchre. After I had thus prayed, the winde ceast, and the waves were still, wheron you might see ma∣ny hundred carcases. Menelaus vvas cast on the shore of Aegypt, into a place inhabited by thieves and pirates, and about the evening it vvas our fortune to arrive at Pelusium; and ha∣ving set footing on the long vvisht for earth, vve gave many thanks to the gods for our safe deli∣very; aftervvards vve bemoaned Clinias and Sa∣tyrus vvhom vve supposed to be dead.
At Pelusium is the statue of Iupiter Cassius, pi∣ctured so young, that you would rather take him for Apollo than Iupiter; in his right hand he held a pomegranate, the reason whereof was ve∣ry mysterious: we entered the Temple to aske of this statue what was become of Clinias and Satyrus (for it gave answers to such as asked any questions of it) and in the inner part we saw two rare pieces of Evanthus the painters drawing, (whose picture also hung there) in the one wher∣of was Prometheus bound, in the other Andro∣meda, which was the reason I thinke the painter had joined them together, though in other parts and circumstances there was much analogy be∣twixt them; both of them had a rocke for their prison, both were manacled, each had his exe∣cutioner at hand, and each had a Grecian cham∣pion to deliver them, the one Perseus, and the o∣ther Hercules; the one whereof shot at the Eagle Iupiters bird on the ground, the other at the whale Neptunes fish in the aire; the rocke was hollowed no more than to containe the virgin, and so curiously done, that it seem'd not to bee artificiall but naturall, for the painter had made it cragged and uneaven, as the earth uses to pro∣duce it; in it sate the virgin of so comely an a∣spect, that would you onely looke on her beau∣ty,
the very picture were worthy your admira∣tion, but if on the chains wherwith she was boūd, and the whale ready to devoure her, you would count it an object scarce worth your sight, as re∣presenting you a rude and disorderly sepulchre. She was faire and yet pale withall, her beauty being plac'd chiefly in her eye, her palenesse in her cheeke which was not yet quite destitute of the red tincture wherewith before it had beene dyed; nor did her eyes so sparkle, but that you might discover in them (as in violets lately ga∣thered) a kinde of languishing and drooping, to expresse in her a modest feare of what shee was to suffer, her hands which being bound to the rocke were stretched out, the prominent veines whereof making them to incline to a purple blew colour, seemed to hang on her armes like grapes on a vine; thus was the face of her ex∣prest, which every minute expected death, shee was attired like a bride (as being about to bee married to Pluto) in a garment downe to her heeles, white as snow, and for the subtilty of the weaving like the spiders cobweb, not made of the sheepes fleece, but such feathers as the Indi∣an women kembe off the trees. Over against her appeared the whale, with his head onely above water, yet the shadow of his shoulders, the ranks
of his scales, the bending of his backe, and the wreathing of his tail might be discerned throgh the water: his nose was wrinkled like a snarling dogges, and his mouth being wide open reach∣ed to his shoulders; betwixt the virgin and this ugly beast came Perseus flying downe from hea∣ven naked, onely a scarfe over his shoulders, on his feet he had winged shooes, and a hat on his head like a helmet, in his left hand he held the Gorgons head, which served him for a buckler; it looked most grimly, with a gastly countenance, shaking its haire, and wreathing the serpents up and down, so that the very picture were enough to have affrighted you; in his right hand he had a certaine kinde of weapon which was made in the manner of a sword and a sickle; from the hilt to the middle it was like a sword, then it was di∣vided, and one part was crooked toward the point, the other straight, so that at the same blow hee would wound and draw to him; thus was the story of Andromeda set forth. Prometheus was tied to a rock with iron chains, by him stood Hercules with his bow and arrows in his hand, the Eagle preyed on Prometheus breast, still opening it wider and wider, digging in further with his beake to finde out more of his liver, a great part whereof the painter had
made appeare through the wound; upon one thigh stood the Eagle, whilst he shrinking up his side, and lifting it up, gave her talons the more hold; his other thigh was stretcht out, wherein you might discerne each sinew and veine; nor were these all the postures that might expresse the greatnesse of his torture, for he frowned, bit his lips, & gnasht with his teeth, all which were so lively done, that the very picture would have moved you to compassion. While he was in this distresse, Hercules was ready with his bow and arrow, who with all his might drew the string to his right dugge, and shot at the Eagle, which he did so speedily, that at the same instant hee drewe his arrow to the head, and discharg'd it at the marke. Prometheus himselfe full of feare and hope, cast his eyes one while on his wound, and another while on Her∣cules, on whom they would still have dwelt, had not his torment violently snatcht them away to the contemplation of it also. Now when we had stayed here a pretty while, and had refresht our selves after the misery wee had suffered by shipwracke, we hired an Aegyp∣tian pinnace (for we had some money left) and sailing on the river Nilus, steering our course toward Alexandria, intending there to live, ho∣ping
also to finde some of our friends, whom happely wee supposed the violence of the tem∣pest might have cast on those shores; but when we came to a certaine towne, wee heard a great noise, at which the mariners crying out, The shepheards are upon us, and making as if they would goe back, the bankes were filled present∣ly with a company of rude and salvage fellows, very tall, not quite so blacke as the Indians, nor tawny as the Aegyptians, but betwixt both, they were bareheaded, their feete were very little, their bodies great, & their language barbarous: where our Pilot affirming that we were all dead men, stayed our ship, for it had beene to no pur∣pose to have gone forward, the river being so narrow. So immediately there came foure of them aboard our ship, who carried away all the goods and moneyes that were in it, and went their wayes, leaving us bound in the custody of some other of their companions, that the next day we might be brought before their King (for so they stile the master of the theeves): Now he dwelt two dayes journey from that place, as we understood by some others who were taken captives vvith us; in the meane time the night drew on, and our keepers were asleep, by reason vvhereof I had a good opportunity to bevvaile
Leucippe's calamity, wherefore considering my selfe to be the chiefe cause, I sighed deeply, and not daring to utter my griefes aloud, spake soft∣ly thus. You gods (if there be any in this place) is our offence so great, that in so short a time you should afflict us thus? you have given us over into the hands of Aegyptian robbers, vvhose heartes are so obdurate that we may utterly despaire of fin∣ding any mercy from them: how many be there vvho have pacified the mercilesse fury of their inraged enemy vvith their prayers? (For the tongue pleading for the griefe of the minde is a strong motive to divert the fury of the adversary) but alas vvhat prayers shall vve poure forth, vvhat vows shall vve make, though our speeches vvere swee∣ter than the Syrens, or the musick of our tongues more harmonious than that of the spheres, it vvere so far from prevailing, that it vvould not be understood by these parricides. I must begge for mercy by a nod, or some other gesture of my body; oh misery beyond compare! but for mine ovvne misfortunes (though they be greater than can bee imagined) I grieve not so much as for thine, my deare Leucippe; vvith vvhat mouth shall I complaine? vvith vvhat eies shal I vveep? seeing thou hast proved so constant and so kind
to me thy most unhappy lover. See what state∣ly preparation here is for thy marriage, to wit, a dungeon for thy bride-chamber, the earth for coastly bedding; for thy chaines and bracelets ropes and cords; in stead of a bride-boy see thy jailour lies by thee. Wee were much to blame to thanke thee, O sea, seeing they whom thou swallowed'st up, are in better case than wee, which thou sparedst, thus to save us, what is it but more cruelly to slay us, envying as it were that we should fall by the hand of any but these theeves. This I uttered veru softly, but for teares (the fountaine whereof in greater griefes is dryed up) I shed none. For in lesser evils they flow apace, whiles begging favour, though they pre∣vaile not, yet doe lessen the griefe, as an ulcer, when it is broken brings ease to the patient; but in greater ils they flie backe and forsake the eyes, being stifled with sorrow, and compelled to returne with it, to the in∣most and retiredst corners of the heart. Afterwards turning my self to Leucippe, who all this while spake not a word, I said, Why art thou so silent my Leucippe? Shee answered, that it fared with her as it useth to doe with those that are sick unto death, who immediatly before their departure, usually are speechlesse. While wee talked the day drew on, when suddenly
there came in a strange fellow with long blacke lockes, riding upon an horse, with shagg'd hair, without either bridle or saddle, for so your thieves ride, hee, as it seemeth, was sent from their King, who told us if there were ever a Vir∣gin taken captive, shee should bee brought to him to bee made an expiatory sacrifice for their whole army; then the keepers cast their eyes on Leucippe, but shee taking mee about the middle, and holding fast by mee fell a weeping and cry∣ing out, whllst some of them drew her away, o∣thers beat me; so by violence they carried her thence, and some two houres afterwards they led us away: but by that time wee had gone half a mile or there about on our way, we heard a great shouting, also the noise of trumpets; and immediatly wee descryed an army of Souldiers comming towards us, which as soone as the thieves saw they put us in the midst of their company, least we should runne away, and pro∣vided to fight with them. Not long after there stepped me out fifty men armed cap a pe, some with targets which cove∣red their whole bodies, others with shorter▪ the thieves, which were more then the souldiers fell a flinging clods of earth at them, which in E∣gypt are so hardned with the sunne, that they are
as good as any weapon, for the unevener parts thereof being prominent, make not onely a wound but cause a swelling about it: but the souldiers warding off their blowes with their targets, cared not for them, but as soone as they saw them wearie with flinging, opened their army, so those which vvere but sleightly armed rusht out and threvv darts at them, aftervvards they joyned battell, and to fighting they vvent, blovves and vvounds there vvere given and ta∣ken on each sides, but the souldiers vvere too hard for the theeves, vvho though they vvere not so many in number, yet vvere better experi∣enc't in the vvarres. Meane time vvee that vvere captives perceiving the thieves to bee put to the vvorst, gathered our selves together in a troupe, and broke their rancks, and ran over to the ene∣mies side; vvho not knovving vvhat vve vvere vvould have killed us, but seeing vvee vvere bound, and therby guessing hovv the case stood vvith us, admitted us into their army, and plac't us in the reere, that so wee might bee free from all danger. In the meane time the horse-men came upon the theeves, and slew the greatest part of them, some of them lay dead upon the ground, others halfe dead fought as well as they could, the rest were taken prisoners.
Toward evening the Captaine of these soul∣diers, whose name was Charmides, examined e∣very particular man what he was, and how hee fell into the hands of these theeves, to whom e∣very one laid open his case, and I mine: when he had throughly sifted us, hee commanded us to follow him, promising also that wee should have weapons given us, for he had determined as soone as his munition and more men came (whom he expected every houre) to set upon the greatest receptacle of these theeves, wherein (as it was reported) was above ten thousand men. Now I having formerly had some skill in ri∣ding, desired a horse might be given me, which as soone as I had, I praunced about the rankes of souldiers, and shewed Charmides my horse∣manship, which he highly commended, injoyn∣ing me for that night to be his guest. While we were at supper hee desir'd me more particularly to relate what had happned to me, which when he heard he much commiserated my case. For so it happens oft time, that hee which heares of ano∣thers misery, doth almost suffer with him; now this compassion begets a good will towards him whom hee pitties, which good will is many times vented in a re∣all expression of some extraordinary favour. Thus it fared with mee, for I wrought so much upon
Charmides with my story, that hee did not onely weepe at the relation, but gave me an Aegyptian servant to wait upon me. The day after he provided to go forth to bat∣taile, and assayed to stoppe up the trench which was between us and the enemy, for on the other side he had discovered a great number of theeves up in armes, these theeves had built an altar of clay, and digged a sepulchre, two of them led a virgin bound toward the altar, whom because they were in armour I knew not, but the virgin I discerned to bee Leucippe; they poured oyle on her head, and omitted not any ceremo∣ny; while an Aegyptian Priest sung an hymne, for so I ghest by his making of faces and wry mouthes: immediately a watch-word was gi∣ven, and each man stood a pretty distance from the altar, then one of those which led her made her fast to a stake (like Marsyas whom the pot∣ters frame in clay bound to a tree) who stabbing her in the breast ript her downewards till hee came to the paunch, so that her entrailes started out, which they snatching up, speedily threw upon the altar, and when they had boiled them, cut them in peeces, and eate them up, dividing to each man a share. When the souldiers and Captaine saw this,
they could not chuse but cry out at the horrid∣nesse of the fact, but I was amazed and astonisht at it, for the unusuall greatnesse of the wicked∣nesse had quite bereft me of sense, which made me give more credit to that tale of Niobe, who conceiving some extraordinary griefe for the death of her children, gave occasion to the fa∣ble. After this part of the tragedy was acted (as it seemed to me to be) having laid her in the se∣pulchre, and covered her with earth, they pull'd downe the altar, and departed, never looking backe againe on the place. About the evening the trench betwixt them and us was filled up, so our souldiers went over and pight their tents on the other side, this be∣ing done we went to supper. Charmides percei∣ving mee much grieved in minde, sought by all meanes possible to comfort mee, but prevailed not, for about the first watch of the night, find∣ing them all asleep, I tooke my sword and went to the sepulchre, intending to slay my self ther∣on, which when I had drawne out, thus I spake: O wretched Leucippe, and the unhappiest of all women, I grieve not so much that thou diedst so farre from thine owne countrey a violent death, or that those salvage villaines made such a May-game of thy murther; but this it is aug∣ments
my misery, that thou shouldst bee made an expiation for such polluted slaves▪ that they should rippe thee up alive, that their unhallow∣ed hands should violate thy chaste wombe, that they should erect thee an altar, and digge thee a grave, wherein 'tis true, thy carcasse lyes, but where are thy bowels? had they beene consu∣med with fire, the calamity had beene the lesse, but when in stead of a sepulchre, they shall lye buried in those paunches of these lewd miscre∣ants, what patience is equall for so great a bur∣then of sorrow! a strange and unheard of ban∣quet was it, could the gods see it & not blush? But to pacifie thy ghost, O Leucippe, I will offer my self a sacrifice to the infernall gods: Having said thus, I set the sword to my breast, when suddenly I espied two poasting towards mee in all haste, (for the moone shone) wherfore think∣ing them to bee theeves, and therefore the more willing to bee slaine by them, I held my hand, when they came neare they shouted to me; now who doe you thinke these two men were but Satyrus and Menelaus? whom with all the rest of my friends I had given over for dead, yet though they came so unexpectedly, I was so far from imbracing them, that I tooke no comfort me thought at the sight of them, the bitternesse
of my griefe had so dejected me. They went to take my sword out of my hand; but I replyed, by all the gods you shall not: envy me not the glo∣ry of so rare a death, nor detaine from mee that which is the only medicine of all my sorrowes; though you should compell mee to live, I can∣not, Leucippe being dead; what though you take my sword from me by violence, yet there is a sting of griefe within mee which will tor∣ment me, would you have me still wounded and never die? If this bee all the cause why you would lay violent hands on your selfe (quoth Menelaus) I sweare by Hercules you may for∣beare; for Leucippe is still alive, and shall straightway appeare unto you: at that fixing mine eyes very wishfully upon him, Is it not e∣nough said I that I am in this distresse, but must I also bee derided and mocked? this is against the laws of all Hospitality: Then Menelaus bea∣ting on the sepulchre with his foote, bad Leu∣cippe testifie whether shee were alive or not, when hee had smote the urne two or three times, I heard a very still voice, whereat looking steadfastly on Menelaus, I supposed him to bee some Magician, but he uncovered the urne and straightway came Leucippe forth, a most gastly creature, for shee was unbowelled from top to
bottome, shee casting her selfe upon mee im∣brac't me, and I her also, at which sudden mee∣ting wee both swoun'd. I was scarce come to my selfe, but straight∣way I turn'd to Menelaus, and asked him why he would detaine the truth of this matter from me? is not shee which I hold by the hand, and heare speake, mine owne Leucippe? What did I then see yesterday, either this or that was a dreame, and yet me thinkes againe this is a true and live∣ly kisse, such a one as I use to have of my Leu∣cippe: what say you, quoth Menelaus, if I finde her bowels againe, and heale this great wound without leaving any scar behinde? cover your face, for I must invoke the aide of Proserpina to the effecting of it, (whereat beleeving that hee was able to performe what hee promised) I did so, and while he utter'd some strange bom∣bast words, hee tooke away that device which they had put before her breast to delude the theeves, and Leucippe was as whole as ever shee was; then hee bid mee looke backe, which I would scarce doe, fearing that Proserpina was there indeed, at length I turned about and un∣covered my face, and saw Leucippe sound: At which wondring more and more, I told Mene∣laus if hee were some god he should tell us, then
Leucippe intreated him that hee should hold mee no longer in suspence, but relate unto mee the whole carriage of the matter; so hee began. If you be remembred Clitophon at our first ac∣quaintance in the ship, I told you I was an Ae∣gyptian; now the greatest part of my possessions and lands lye neare to this Citie; the chief go∣vernours whereof are my friends: What time wee then suffered shipwracke, I was cast on the Aegyptain shore, where Satyrus and I were taken by the Pirats of this Citie, but some of them which knew me, led mee to their governour, by whom I was freed from my bonds, kindely in∣treated, and desired to bee an assistant to them in such enterprizes as they should undertake; finding so much favour at their hands I begged Satyrus freedome also, but they replyed unto me ere they granted mee that, I was to performe some noble exploite, wherein I might give suf∣ficient testimony of my valour. At that time they had a strict command from the Oracle to offer up a Virgin, as an expiation for the Citie which they inhabited, and that they should eat part of the liver of the sacrifice, then bury the body, af∣terwards depart; and all this was to keepe the enemie back from assaulting them, what follow∣ed I pray will you tell Satyrus. So thus hee con∣tinued
the story. When first I came to the Campe (Master) understanding vvhat vvas like to befall Leucippe, I vvept, and desired Menelaus to thinke on some meanes to free her; in vvhich businesse I knovv not vvhat god vvas propitious to us, for the very day before the sa∣crifice vvas to be don, vve vvere both by the sea side, very pensive, thinking upon some vvay to deliver her: vvhile vve vvere in these dumps, the thieves espying a ship, which not knowing those coasts, had lost its vvay, set upon it; they vvho vvere in it seeing they vvere assaulted by Pirats, indevour'd to flie, which course failing thē, they fought it out: In that ship vvas one vvho used to recite Homers Poems in the theatre, attir'd in the same māner as he used to be at recitation; he with the rest of his company gave thē a shrewd onset, but the theeves having a fresh supply of gallies, and other long boats, quickly slew all the men, and brake the ship; a piece whereof did swim toward us, and in it a little cabinet, which had escaped the hands of those which ransackt the ship: this Menelaus tooke up, and going aside opened it, wherein I thought there had beene no smal treasure, but in it we found nothing but a short cloake and a knife, the handle whereof was foure handfulls long, but the blade not a∣bove
three fingers; while Menelaus handled this knife, hee pulled unawares a great part of the blade out of the handle, wherein as in a sheath it was hid, so we straightway supposing that this was the weapon which that juggling fellow made people beleeve he stabd himselfe withall; wherefore turning me to Menelaus, I said, Now beat thy braines a little, and wee doubt not by the gods assistance but wee shall free the vir∣gin, and the theeves never discover our device: wee will sow a very thinne sheepskinne in the forme of a wallet, about the bignesse of a mans belly, and filling it with the bloud and entrailes of some beast, put it before her, so when she hath her long garment on, and is adorned with gar∣lands and flowers, our device cannot bee disco∣vered, in which matter wee are much furthered by the Oracle, which gave strict charge that she being cloathed in a long robe, should bee led to the altar, there to be cut up; besides, this knife is made so, that the beholders will thinke it runs into her body when it runnes into the handle; so there is but just enough to cut the counterfeit belly, which neverthelesse when it is drawne out, you would thinke had beene sheathed in her body; if we doe this, the theeves can never detect us, for the skin shall be covered, and the
entrailes at the first stroke shal start forth, which we presently snatching up wil fling on the altar▪ nor shall the standers by bee suffered to come neare the body, which we will prevent, by bu∣rying it. The meanes how wee shall come to have the chiefe care of the sacrifice is this: The King, if you be remembred, not long since en∣joyned you some exploit, ere you could obtaine my enfranchisement, wherefore goe straight to him, and tell him you are ready for this enter∣prise. Having thus said, I conjured him by Iuppiter the hospitable, and by our familiarity, and the shipwracke we suffered together. Meane while this good man Menelaus well weighing the mat∣ter, replyed, that it was a thing very difficult to bring to passe, yet he would not sticke to dye for a friend. But said I, for ought you know Clito∣phon is yet alive, for I askt Leucippe of him, and she told me she left him bound among the cap∣tives, and that it was reported to their captaine, that while they were in fight all the prisoners flew over to the enemies side, so that by this meanes you shall not onely deliver Leucippe, but by this courtesie further ingage Clitophon unto you; and this perswaded him: nor ever after was fortune adverse to us, but the care of provi∣ding
such things as were to use about it, was committed to my charge. Afterwards Menelaus meeting the King, and intending to motion the matter to him, was by him prevented in this manner: The lawes of my land (saith he) have provided that he which shall bee appointed overseer of any sacrifice, e∣specially when any man or woman is to bee sa∣crificed, shall slay them; wherefore see that you and your servant bee ready to morrow to per∣forme it: to which Menelaus replyed, that hee would willingly undertake it, and carefully per∣forme it: which was as we would have desired: So while we were attiring of Leucippe, wee put her in good comfort, and preacquainting her with the whole carriage of the businesse, after this to the altar shee was brought, the rest you saw your selfe. With this speech of Satyrus my minde was so distracted, that I knew not how to thinke on a requitall sufficient for Menelaus, onely as the common custome is, I embrac't him, & to speak truth did almost adore him as a deity. But after∣wards seeing that all went well with Leucippe, I demanded what became of Clinias? Menelaus told me that when he saw him last, hee was be∣striding the saile-yard: whereat (though in the
midst of all my joy) I could not chuse but la∣ment, (for it was the gods pleasure that such ex∣cesse of gladnesse should have some intermix∣ture of sorrow) that for my sake hee should bee lost, whom I tendered dearest next to Leucippe, and that the sea should exercise a cruelty on him above all the rest, whereby hee was not onely deprived of life, but also of a grave. O faith∣lesse Sea, thou enviedst that wee should enjoy the fruits of thy bounty entire. After this par∣ting we went to the campe together, where this was straightway divulged, and spent the rest of that night in my tent; as soone as it was day I brought Menelaus to Charmides, to whom I rela∣ted the whole story, wherewith he was so much delighted, that he tooke Menelaus into favour, which when he had done, he asked him concer∣ning the number of the theeves; Menelaus told him that in the next village there were neare a∣bout tenne thousand of them: though they be, said Charmides, yet five thousand of my souldi∣ers shall be too hard for them, but I daily expect two thousand more, who lye in garrison at the Isle of Delta. While Charmides was yet speaking, in came a boy who brought newes that there was a mes∣senger at the doore from the Isle of Delta, the
tenure of his message was this, That the theeves made no onset on the Island, yet the comming of his army was deferred five dayes longer; for as they were setting forth there met them a bird which brought with her the sepulchre of her mother, whose comming was the cause of their delay: but I desirous to know the meaning of what he said, asked what bird, or what sepulchre it was they owed so much reverence to? The name of the bird, replyed the messenger, is re∣ported to be Phaenix, and is bred among the Ae∣thiopians, about the bignesse and almost of the same colour as a Peacocke, but scarce so beauti∣full; her feathers are partly of a golden and part∣ly of a purple colour; she boasts her selfe to bee the bird of the Sun, which her head may seeme to testifie, for on it is a curiously composed crowne, which in figure resembles the picture of the Sun; her body is azure, her face the co∣lour of the rose, her aspect pleasant, and her fea∣thers shooting out like Sun beames; the Aethio∣pians enjoy her living, and the Aegyptians dead, for when she dies, which is not till after a great while, her young one carries her to the river Ni∣lus, and makes her this kinde of sepulchre: It takes a good quantity of the sweetest smelling myrrh, as much as will contain the carcasse, and
hollowes it with its beak, into which it puts the body, then flies towards the river Nilus, carry∣ing the sepulchre along, an innumerable com∣pany of birds attending on her, like so many no∣ble men guarding their prince when he goes in∣to a farre Countrey; nor doth it betake it selfe to any place but the city of the Sunne, and there getting upon the top of some high tower, ex∣pects the comming of the priest, who straight∣way comes out of an holy place with a booke in his hand, and comparing the bird with the de∣scription which is given of her, he judges whe∣ther it be a true Phaenix or no; and so curious he is (lest he should be mistaken himselfe) that hee makes anatomie of her as it were, and shewes each part to the standers by; after full triall, ad∣ding some short speech in commendation of her, he buries her; thus when shee lives the Ae∣thiopians have her, when shee is dead, the Ae∣gyptians. The end of the third Booke.
THE FOURTH BOOKE. The Argument. Charmides falleth in love with Leucippe, and sol∣licits Menelaus to win her to his will, but hee as a trusty friend relateth all to Cltiophon and her; who laying their heads together, shift off Charmi∣des from enjoying her; but meane while one Gor∣gias an Egyptian souldier, makes a phyltre, and hires Clitophons slave to give it Leucippe, wherewith shee runnes madde, the ingredients he made choice of being too strong. Charmides at first thinks this a tricke to delude him, but afterwards perceiving her to bee truly distracted, sends her his owne Physitian, who can doe no good on her; thus shee continues the whole time, during the battell betwixt Charmides and the theeves, this battell
ended wherein Charmides and this Gorgias were slaine: his servant who was privie to it, told one Chaereas, who more out of love to Leucippe then to Clitophon (as in the issue it appeared) relates unto him what Gorgias his servant had told him, and that this servant had a medicine which would disanull the force of the Philtre; it is applyed, wherewith Leucippe recovers; Gorgi∣as his servant is well rewarded for his paines, and Chaereas for his love admitted into familiarity with Clitophon and Menelaus, and accom∣panies them in their journey towards Alexan∣dria. AFter Charmides had been informed of the enemies strength, and the delay of his armies comming, he decreed to returne to the village from whence we came, and there to stay while his forces came, where was a bet∣ter lodging provided for mee and Leucippe than for Charmides himselfe. As soone as I entred the Chamber, I began to imbrace her, and would have done the office of a husband, but shee re∣fusing, I said, how long my dearest Leucippe shall wee live unmarried? seest thou not how many miseries unexpectedly befall us? wee have suf∣fered
shipwracke, fell into the hands of Pirats, and thou hadst been almost sacrificed: where∣fore let us while wee are in safety take hold of such faire opportunity, least by misfortune we bee againe separated: But Leucippe answered, This cannot yet bee done, for not long since as I was wailing my miseries, Diana appeared unto mee in a dreame, and spake to mee on this wise: Weepe not Leucippe for thou shalt not die, I my selfe will free thee, onely keepe thy selfe chaste, till I shall commend a husband to thee, who doubtlesse shall bee no other then thy Clitophon. For this ensuing joy I was not a litle glad, thogh this delay cut me to the heart: and hearing her make mention of her dreame, I thought on that which but the night before I had, mee thoughts I saw the temple of Venus with an image in it, hi∣ther when I went to offer up my devotion, the doores were shut against mee, whereat beeing much troubled, a woman appeared unto me, not much unlike the statue, which said, It was not yet lawfull for mee to come into the temple, but if I would stay a little, the time should come when I should not only bee permitted to enter but bee made a priest to the goddesse. These two dreames I still thought on, and would never af∣ter force her.
Afterwards Charmides having opportunity to see Leucippe, eyed her most immodestly, the op∣portunity was this: Leucippe and my selfe being present, some fellows had got a sea monster, not unworthy the sight, which the Egyptians call the horse of Nilus; and as they report of him hee is very like a horse both in his belly & in his feet, onely that his hoofes are cloven: for bignesse hee is equall to the fairest Oxe, his taile is short, being smooth and without haire, as the rest of his body; his head great and round, his cheek∣bones almost like a horses, his nostrils very broad, breathing out a smoake mixt with spar∣kles of fire: his chin is broad as his jawes, the compasse of his mouth so great, that it reaches to his temples; his teeth which you call dogge∣teeth, are crooked in forme, and are placed not much unlike horses, though they bee thrice as bigge: Charmides invited us to see this monster, but he himselfe looked more upon Leucippe than on it; for he was in love with her, and willing to feed his eyes the longer with her beauty, fra∣med a great many frivolous delayes to detaine her; first relating the nature of this monster, that it was a great devourer, and would eat up a whole field of standing corne; next the manner of taking him, that he could not bee caught but
by sleight, and that the hunters thereof obser∣ving the places which he most haunts, dig there a pit, putting a chest therein, whose lid is open that it comes as high as the side of the pit, this they cover with turves of earth and sedge, then they goe to some secret place adjoyning, where they stay and watch this horse, who as soone as hee treads upon the turves, fals into the chest; the huntsmen observing this, make what haste they can to shut the chest, and so they take him; if they did not use this sleight hee would never bee taken by violence, for as he is most strongly joynted, so is his skin impenetrable, insomuch that iron can scarce pierce it; so that wee may not unfitly call him the Aegyptian Elephant, for next to that Elephant of India, hee is the strongest creature in the world. Then Menelaus replyed, Have you ever (Sir) seene an Elephant? Yes, said Charmides, and and have heard of his strange birth by some who have narrowly searcht into the nature of it: But I replyed that wee had never seene any more then the picture among us; then Charmides promising that so rare a mystery in nature should no longer bee hid from us, began on this wise; The old one is tenne yeares conceiving, and that time expired brings forth nor her young
but old one: and this is the reason that they are all of so vast a body, undaunted strength, and so long liv'd that they outlive Hesiods crow; the jaw bone of him is as big as an oxe head, if you saw his mouth you would thinke that hee had two great hornes growing out of it, but they be not hornes, but teeth bending upwards, in the middle whereof growes his proboscis or snout, which they call his hand, in forme and bignesse like a trumpet, very usefull to him, for in that he receives his meat; and if it be such as is his usu∣all food, he conveyes it to his mouth; if not, he gives it to his master, an Aethiopian, who sits on his backe. To this Aethiopian he is very obedi∣ent, for he understands his language, hee fawnes on him, and yet stands in awe of him, and if hee offend, is by him in stead of a whip beaten with an iron barre. One strange thing I will tell you, whereof I my selfe was an eye-witnesse. I remember I saw a Grecian once (I have forgot his name) lye downe and lay his head to the Elephants head, who opening his mouth breathed on him; in which thing I much admi∣red the boldnesse of the man, and the clemency of the beast; but the Grecian afterward told me that he was faine to fee the Elephant, so having received his reward, hee blew on him a breah
more sweet than all the Indian spices, which cu∣red him of a paine in his head; and that the Ele∣phant knowing this (like a cunning lawyer) would not open his mouth gratis, or like a proud Physician, would be greaz'd in the fist ere hee vvould meddle vvith his patient: then said I, how comes it to passe that so ugly a beast should have so svveet a breath? His meate is the cause of it, saith Charmides, vvhich is a certaine kinde of leafe vvhich grovves in a City of India (a place vvhere the Sunne is first seene, and dis∣playes most heat) vvhich among them (concea∣ling its svveet savour) is of no account, either because it vvil not boast of its vvorth in its ovvn countrey, or that it envies that those inhabitants should injoy it; this leafe removed from thence and planted on some mountaine, discloses its hidden savour, and of a leafe becomes a flovver; this is that vvhich among the Indians they call a blacke Rose, on vvhich the Elephants feede a∣mong them as Oxen doe on grasse among us, to vvhich kinde of food they being continually u∣sed, their breath smels like the flower. After Charmides had done his tales, he let not much time slip, (for they which are wounded with love, are tost to and fro, scarce able to un∣dergoe the burthen of their griefe) but calling
Menelaus aside, tooke him by the hand, and said, I see Menelaus by what thou hast done for Clito∣phon, thou art a trusty friend, thou shalt find that my fidelity shall be answerable to thine, onely doe one courtesie for me, which is easie for thee to perform, and to me a matter of such moment, that thereby thou wilt preserve my life. Leucip∣pe hath almost slaine me, doe thou save me, shee has not yet paid thee for that life she owes thee, let her in loving me make thee requitall; thou shalt have for thy pains fifty pieces of gold, and Leucippe as many as shee will aske. Then Mene∣laus answered, Your money, Sir, keepe to your selfe, or at leastwise profer it to such as use to sell courtesies: for my part, seeing I am so deep∣ly ingaged in your favour, I shall endeavour to make it appeare to you, that you have not faste∣ned your affection on one void of all desert. Not long after he met with me, and told mee what had past betweene him and Charmides; which when I heard, I thought it was time to bestirre my selfe for avoiding this danger, at last we pitcht upon this resolution, to couzen Char∣mides: for then it was not safe to give a flat de∣niall, when he might by violence effect what he had intended; and flye we could not, by reason every place was fraught with theeves; besides,
he had many souldiers attending him continu∣ally who might have pursued us. Therefore Menelaus went confidently to Charmides, and told him that his businesse was dispatcht, and that the maide did at the first very obstinately deny his suit, but afterward upon much intreaty mention also being made of the reward propo∣sed, she yeelded; yet conditionally hee would grant her one favour before he enjoyed her, to stay till hee came to Alexandria, for the place where they then were was but a small village, and all would be knowne quickly to the inhabi∣tants. This good turne (quoth Charmides) will be long a comming, and in warre who can have patience to deferre his desire? no man goes in∣to the field who can assure himselfe of the con∣quest, seeing there be so many passages open to his death: do thou begge of Fortune that I may returne safe out of the battaile, and I will tarry. I goe now to fight with the shepherds, but have a greater fight within me; the souldier armed with bow and arrowes, fights against mee, and hath so far prevailed over me, that I am nothing but wounds; fetch me hither a Physician, some one, for my wounds rankle. I goe to fling fire a∣gainst the enemie, while Cupid flings torches a∣bout in my heart: doe thou Menelaus first put
out these torches; for it were a good omen mee thinkes first to fight Venus battaile, ere I enter into Mars his field. True, said Menelaus, but you see how hard a thing it is for her to conceale it from her husband, who is still conversant with her, and besides which loves her so dearely. I but, said Charmides, it is an easie matter to send him out of the way. Whereat Menelaus seeing him so eager upon the matter, and fearing much lest I should have some mischiefe done me, fai∣ned this excuse; would you needs know the truth of the matter Charmides, I wil tell you, she is sick. I will stay then, said hee, three or foure dayes, meane while let her come to me, and talke with me; I long to heare her voice, to take her by the hand, and to embrace her, this would bee some remedy for my love-sicke soule, sure shee may safely give me a kisse. When Menelaus was come backe, and told me this, I could not chuse but at his last words cry out, that no man but my selfe should enjoy a kisse (than which nothing is more sweet) from Leucippes mouth. For in the congresse questionlesse there is some measure and satiety, but kisses are end∣lesse, and alwayes fresh. The three best things which the mouth can boast of, are, the breath, the voice, and a kisse; yet thinke I not that there is any delight in the
mutuall touch of the lips, but the fountain of all plea∣sure is the heart. Trust me Menelaus, for in my distresse I will not bee ashamed to reveale any thing, I have hitherto obtained nothing my self at Leucippes hands but a kisse, she is yet a virgin, and made a woman by nothing else; this shall no man adulterate, and hee that shall seeke to robbe me of this treasure, will brand me with an infa∣mie which I will by no meanes beare. Where∣fore I thinke it best yet longer to milk his hopes; For a lover, so long as he hath any hopes of obtaining his desire, will brooke any delayes, but if hee lose his possibility, any obstacle which hinders him he will re∣move; especially if hee have power to doe it without controule; but if he see himselfe neglected, hee is the more enraged. While wee were thus consulting, in came a messenger, who brought newes that Leucippe as she was walking fell downe, and strucke out one of her eyes; with this we ranne straightway to the place, and found her lying on the ground, but comming nearer, and asking her what had befell, she looked upon me, rolling her bloudie eye, and smote her selfe on the cheek; and when Menelaus went to take her up, she beat him away with her foot; perceiving then that she was di∣stracted, wee strove to hold her by maine force,
but prevailed not. Charmides also (by reason of the tumult which was there made) hearing of this ranne thither speedily, who knowing what had past, thought she had dissembled, and cast∣ing his eie aside, lookt wishfully on Menelaus, su∣specting that this had beene done to put a gull on him; but finding out the truth, hee himselfe was much grieved at this accident. Meane while ropes are brought, and Leucippe is bound; which when I saw, turning my selfe to Menelaus (for all the rest were gone out) I said, Loose I pray you those bands for they will in∣jure her tender skinne, let her and I alone, my twining imbracements shall serve in stead of chaines, let her vent all her fury on mee, for my life is loathsome to mee, since I am in company with my Leucippe, and shee acknowledges mee not: I see her bound and dare not bee so merci∣full as to loose her. Did fortune therefore deli∣ver thee out of the hands of theeves, to make thee a laughing stocke? miserable wretches! we shunned what we feared at home, that we might suffer the violence of the sea, wee escaped ship∣wracke, and the hands of the robbers, because wee were doomed to madnesse; which though thou escape, yet it is much to bee feared, that fortune hath one more mischiefe to cast thee in∣to;
and what mischiefe indeed can paralell this of ours, which makes us fearfull even of good e∣vents? But let fortune doe her worst, so thou recover thy lost senses. While I spake this Menelaus put mee in good comfort, affirming that those diseases were not of any long continuance, but such as youth was often incident to, for that the young bloud boi∣ling in the veines, by evaporating up into the braine distempers it, and consequently bereaves the party of sense; upon this wee concluded that Physitians were to be sent for, and Physick speedily prescribed. So Menelaus hasted to Charmides, desiring him that the Physitian of his army might bee sent for, which hee easily condiscended to, as being glad of any opportunity to expresse his good will towards Leucippe. The Physitian comming in, told us that first he must cast her into a sleep, thereby to assuage the greatnesse of her paine; that being the only remedy of all ils, then that hee would proceed to the rest of the cure; so he left us a certaine medicine about the bignesse of a pease, which being dissolv'd in oyle, he com∣manded us to annoint her temples with, promi∣sing to send her a purge presently after: we did as hee prescribed us, and presently after the an∣nointing,
shee fell asleep, and slept till the next morning, all this while I sat by her, not taking one winke of sleep, but casting mine eyes on her bands, thus bemoned her, My deare Leucippe thou art bound sleeping, and canst not enjoy thy naturall rest freely, I wonder what kind of dreames thou hast, what Chimera's thy distem∣pered fancy represents unto thee. After shee awaked, shee uttered some abrupt and imperfect speeches, when suddenly the Physitian came and administred more phy∣sick. While Leucippe lay thus distracted, letters were brought to Charmides, from the governor of Aegypt, which it seemes will'd him to mu∣ster up his forces as soone as hee could; for up∣on the the receit of these letters, hee presently charged them to bee in armes, ready to go forth against the shepheards, so all his souldiers with what celerity they could, after the watchword was given, were ready with their javelings in their hands: the next day very early Charmides brought his army in sight of the enemy. The village is thus situated; the river Nilus descends from those places which are beyond the Aegyptian Thebes, and falls downe as farre as Memphis, sending out a little horne, or winding,
and where the greatest streame ends is this vil∣lage called Syrus; there the earth is parted a∣gaine, and of one River are made three, two whereof runne freely without any let, but the third divides the region which is called Delia; nor is there any of these streams which run into the sea, but one into one City, & another into a∣nother, the least whereof is bigger than any Ri∣ver in Greece: Nor doth Nilus by being thus di∣vided, loose a jot of its vertue, being they may saile on it, drinke of it, and where the water of it sometime ran, drive a plough; being to them both a river, a sea, a marsh, and arable land: which is worth admiration, that in the same place a ship should saile, and a spade should dig, an oare row, and a plough goe; that where the mariner hath his cabbine, the husband man should have his cottage, where the Oxes their stalls, the fishes their receptacles also; yet so it is that where the ship even now went, they sow corne, and not long after where the corne grew the ship sailes; the river being navigable for ma∣ny miles. The Egyptians know what time it will overflow the banks, nor doth the river deceive their expectation, for it is never tardy, but keepes constantly the set time, and flowes just so many dayes.
Then may you see a contention betwixt the water and the earth, this striving to drinke up so much water, that to overflow so much land: and to say truly the victory is equall; but in that regiō where the shepheards inhabite, there is stil much water; for the annuall inundation of Ni∣lus being past, many standing pooles are left full of water, which soone after is choaked up with mudde; through which place some passe on foot, others in litle boats no bigger than to carry one single man, for should they bee greater ha∣ving not water sufficient to beare them up, they would stick fast in the mudde, but being small and light, that little water suffices them, and if they chance to come to a place while they are rowing, where they have not water enough, then they take their boats on their shoulders, and passe over on foote till they finde some. In those marshes there bee many Ilands lye scattered; those which are not inhabited, are overgrowne with paper reeds, which grow so thicke, that betwixt every stemme there is but just roome enough to entertaine one man, and the leaves at the top touch one another; hither the shepheards betake themselves, consult toge∣ther, and lye in ambush, while the paper reeds serve them for City wals; some of these Ilands
are compassed about with bogges, and fenns, ha∣ving in them some small cottages which lying scattered here one and there one, look like some City built in haste; one of these Ilands being nearest to us, and more conspicuous by reason of the great number of cottages, was called as I remember Nichocis: to this City as to a most in∣vincible fort they repaired, relying much, partly on the number of their souldiers, partly on the situation of the place, for it had but one passage into it, and that over a narrow causeway, an hundred and twenty paces in length, and twelve in breadth. When they saw Charmides approaching, they devised this stratageme: having got all their old men, and attiring them like suppliants, putting branches of palme-trees in their hands, they commanded the valiantest of their youth, that they should follow them close at the heeles, e∣very one armed with his buckler and spear; that by this meanes the old men going before with these emblemes of peace, might shrewd the ar∣med men behind them, who partly hid by these boughs, and partly by dragging their weapo on the ground, could not be discovered; inten∣ding that if Charmides would grant the old men their requests, the young men should not fight at
all, but if hee would not, that they should lead Charmides into their Citie, under pretence of submitting themselves to what death he should please to inflict upon them, and when they had brought him to the Causeway, the old men up∣on a watchword given, should fling away their boughes and save themselves by flight, and they which were armed should rush upon them. Thus having ordered themselves, they met Charmides, beseeehing him that hee would have compassion on their old age, and that for their sakes, the whole City might fare the better; which peacefull conditions if hee would yeeld to, they promised to give him an hundred ta∣lents of silver, and as many men whom he might send as pledges to the Governour of Egypt; all which they seemed to have beene willing faith∣fully to have performed, had hee accepted of these conditions: but giving little eare to what they said, he seemed not willing to entertaine their profer, which the olde men perceiving broke foorth into this sad ermocination, O death, if our fate have so decreed wee shall pa∣tiently beare thee! Onely doe thou, O Charmi∣des, deigne us this favour, not to slay us without the Citie, or farre from it, but bring us into our
fathers ancient seats, and let that place where wee were borne, bee also our Sepulchree: wee will lead on to our deaths. Charmides hearing this, dismist the greatest part of those forces which hee had intended for the battell, bidding them without spoile or tu∣mult, quietly repaire to the army, all that had past was espied by some scouts whom the theeves had set to watch, and charged, that as soone as they saw the enemy approach, they should cut a passage through the banke of the ri∣ver, and let the water in upon them, which they usually damme up, but when they would water the plaines let it out: Behind this village was a great trench digged, the damme whereof im∣mediatly upon their reproach they broke down; the old men at that very instant fled, some one way, some another: the young men who had all this while drawed their weapons on the ground, after them, set fiercely on Charmides & his company, the water by this time (comming so fast upon them) had overflowed all the mari∣shes and the causeway, so that every place lookt like a sea. The Aegyptians slew first of all Charmides, and then those few men that were with him, who were so affrighted with this suddaine and
unexpected event, that in their countenances there was such varietie of changes, as it were impossible to tell how they looked when they were a dying, for some having not time either to defend the blow, or to resist the enemie, pe∣risht, not knowing what was the matter, ere they felt the stroke; some were slaine ere they could know any thing at all; others strucke with a sud∣daine feare stood still, expecting death; others there were who had their heeles tript up with the violence of the water; many striving to flie were drowned; for the water by this time was up to their navels which stood on the causeway, by which meanes the use of their bucklers was taken away, and their sides exposed to the dan∣ger of being wounded; but those which were in the Marish were up to the neckes, who still supposing themselves to bee on firme ground, went on till they were drowned: this the others seeing, fearing lest they should step aside, made but slow haste to flie, and were presently slaine by the enemie. Questionlesse this was a strange kind of ship∣wracke, no shippe being neare them, and which may exceed beleefe, there was shipwrack on the earth, and a land battaile fought in the water. The shepheards proud of their successe, boa∣sted
much of the victorie, thinking they had ob∣tained it by their valour, not fraud; for the na∣ture of the Aegyptian is this, that while he is in danger he is timorous, but when secure, coura∣gious; for either hee yeeldes most slavishly, or domineeres most proudly. By this time Leucippe had beene sicke eleven daies, nor was there any hope of recoverie left, had I not heard her in her sleepe utter these words, Thou O Gorgias art the cause of my mad∣nesse; which in the morning I told to Menelaus, asking him whether he knew one Gorgias which lived in that village: afterward going out of our tent we met a young fellow in the streete, who saluted me with this complement: You are fair∣ly met Sir by one that shall preserve both you and your wife: at which I being astonisht, as supposing him to bee a man sent from the gods, askt him whether his name were Gorgias, he an∣swered no, but my name is Chaereas, for Gorgias hath beene the cause of all this mischiefe: but more amazed at this, I askt him what mischiefe, or what Gorgias hee meant? for the gods that night revealed something to me concerning him in my dreame, which I desired him to expound. Then said he, this Gorgias was an Aegyptian soul∣dier, who was slaine in the battaile, hee was in
love with thy vvife, and being skilfull in the po∣wer of herbes, mingled a love potion, under∣mining your Aegyptian slave who attends on you to administer it; but vvhile hee unwisely made choice of too strong ingredients, the phyltre (turning to little better than poison) made her mad: all this Gorgias his servant told me yesterday, whom it seemes fortune preser∣ved alive in the midst of the battaile to doe you good; for he constantly affirmes to me that hee hath a medicine vvhich shall utterly disanull the force of the phyltre: for the cure he demands foure pieces of gold. For your love, Sir, said I, I am not unthankfull, and vvould you bring this man to me, I should acknowledge my selfe far∣ther ingag'd: so parting from him I went home, where meeting vvith my Aegyptian slave, I soundly bepummelled him on the face with my fist, and with threatning language compelled him to confesse all that Charmides had told mee, vvhich vvhen I had extorted, I cast him into gaole. By this time was Chaereas returned with Gor∣gias his servant, to whom I willingly disbursed the money, as a revvard due to them for their good tidings; but said I, heare my opinion con∣cerning this your medicine, a potion you know
vvas the cause of her sicknesse, wherefore, in my judgement, it vvere not fit that her bodie should be weakned by any more physicke, but goe to, mingle your ingredients here that wee may see what they are, which if you doe you shall have halfe your pay beforehand. You do well, quoth the servant, to feare the worst, yet such things as I shal give her I would have you know are com∣mon▪ and such as we usually eate, for the same quantity which I shall give her, I will first take my selfe: so immediately hee named every in∣gredient, and sent for them by a messenger, which vvhen they were brought hee pounded, and mingled before us, and dividing them into two parts, the one hee said hee would first take himselfe, the other hee vvould give the maide; which as soone as she had taken, she should rest well all that night, and in the morning not onely be freed from sleepe, but also from her disease; which he straightway did, and went to sleepe, having first had halfe his money, which I pro∣mised him he should have, before the cure, and the other halfe after, and left prescription how Leucippe should take the rest. The evening drawing on, for that was the time prescribed, when Leucippe should drink her potion, taking the cup in my hand thus I said; O
medicine, which sprangest from the goddesse Tellus, and wast bestowed on mankinde by Ae∣sculapius, may thy vertue bee greater than the large promises of this Physician; be propitious, and expell from her stomacke this salvage and barbarous poison, that I may againe enjoy my Leucippe. Having with these words compacted as it were with the physicke for her recovery, and kissing the cup againe and againe, I admini∣stred it, which she had no sooner received, but (as the Physician had before told us) shee fell a∣sleepe, then taking my place by her, I askt her these questions, as if she had beene awake, Wilt thou againe recover thy lost senses? wilt thou any more acknowledge me? shall I hear the me∣lodious harmony of thy voice? tell me, prophe∣sie in thy dreame, for so thou didst yesterday, when thou exclaimd'st against Gorgias, tell me I say, for now thou canst best, seeing thy dreames savour of wisedome, thy words and actions of folly and madnesse. While I thus spake, the long-lookt for day appeared, and Leucippe awakened, and called me by name; whereat I starting from my seat, ranne nearer to her, and askt her how she did; but she not knowing it seemes what had past, stood a great while wondering how shee came bound;
by this perceiving her to bee fully recovered, I speedily loosed her bonds, and related to her the whole story of her madnesse, which when she heard she blusht, thinking her selfe still to be mad; but I cheering her up, bid her be of good comfort, and discharged the expense of her sick∣nesse, for those moneyes which wee had tooke with us to fray the charges of our journey, Saty∣rus had kept safe in the midst of our shipwracke; nor did Menelaus or I after that take any thing from the theeves. The shepheards whom you heard even now had got the victory, were not long after by fresh supply of souldiers sent from the chiefe Citie, utterly overthrowne, and their Cities ransackt, whereby wee being freed from the feare of rob∣bing set forward once more for Alexandria, ta∣king Chereas along with us, whom for his extra∣ordinary love wee kindly intreated, & admitted into our familiarity; he was by profession a fish∣erman, of the Iland Phares, who in the sea fight against the shepheards, for his skill in Navigati∣on served as a souldier, and that ended was dis∣mist. So as before I told you the coasts being clear, and the feare of robbing (which for a long time had staved us off from our intended voyage) be∣ing past, we stroke saile.
Then the noise of the Mariners, the singing of the passengers, the pleasantnesse of the river, whose streams more smooth than the Marble, seeming as it were keepe holyday, gave us no small delight: at that time desiring to know the sweetnesse of the river Nilus, I dranke some of the water, not mixing any wine with it, least it should be an hindrance to mee in descrying the nature, or discerning the taste: so I fil'd a Chri∣stall glasse with the water, which seem'd to mee more cleare than the glasse; to the taste it was cold, yet sweet and pleasant withall, so that the Aegyptians having store of this water, feele no want of wine; nor doe they drinke it in cups as we doe, but in the hollow of their hands, for the mariners lying along fill their hands with it, and cast it into their mouth, which they were so ex∣pert at, that they spild not a drop. One thing I saw about the river worth the taking notice of, a creature farre fiercer than the horse of Nilus, the name of it is a Crocodile, in shape it resembles both a fish and a foure-footed beast; he is of a great length, but his breadth is no way proportionable to it; his skinne is rough with scales, his backe of a darke colour, like a rocke; his breast white, his foure legges bend outward as the legges of a land Tortoise; his
taile is thicke and long, not much unlike the rest of his body, which being part of his backe bone as it were, is hard, set with a row of teeth on the top like a saw; this in taking his prey he useth as a whip or scourge, striking such beasts as hee would devoure, and at one blow making many wounds, his necke is immediately joyned to his shoulders, that you can perceive no space be∣twixt them, Nature having conceal'd it; the rest of his body is of a horrible shape, especially when he opens his jawes, for you would thinke him then all mouth; and when he gapes not, he lookes as if he were all head; when he feeds, he moves only the upper jaw, which is observable in no other creature: his teeth are many, set like the teeth of a comb, which they that have num∣bred have found to be so many as there be daies in the yeare: how vast and strong hee is, if you saw him on the land (for he is of those kinde of beasts which we cal Amphibia) you would think almost incredible. The end of the fourth Booke.
THE FIFTH BOOKE. The Argument. Chereas being admitted to the familiarity of Cli∣tophon, sets Pirats to steal away Leucippe whom hee had privately before loved. Clitophon be∣wailes her losse, afterwards meets his old friend Clinias, who heard by one Diophantes of Tyre, of Clitophon's being in Alexandria: hee com∣forts him for the losse of his Leucippe, whom all men thought the Pirats had slaine, but better for∣tune reserved her alive; for Melite a rich widow, whose husband was reported to have dyed at sea, falling in love with Clitophon, and bringing him home to her house, Leucippe (whom the Pirats had sold to Melites steward for a slave, under the
name of Lacoena) makes her selfe knowne to Cli∣tophon by a letter: meane time Thersander hus∣band to Melite, supposed to bee dead, comming home, and seeing Clitophon somewhat familiar with his wife, beateth him, & fetters him; but Me∣lite conditionally that he would consent to her loe, promiseth to set him free, which after long intrea∣ty hee agrees to. AFter three dayes wee arived at A∣lexandria, entring at the gate which they call the gate of the Sunne, at my entrance my eyes were not a litle delighted to look on the beauty of the Citie, for from the gate of the Sunne to the gate of the Mooue, (so called for that they are the tuletar gods of them) stood a long row of pillars on either side: in the mid∣dle was a faire street, out of which you might go into divers lanes, insomuch that they which walked there might goe a long journey in their owne Citie. Departing from thence wee came to that place which tooke its name from Alex∣ander, and there I saw another City which was thus beautified: At the end you might discerne another rowe of pillars goe athwart them, so that mine eyes
gazing on them could not be satisfied with see∣ing, or fully comprehend all parts which were represented unto them: some I saw, others I was to see, some I wisht to see, other things which were not in themselves worthy the sight my curiosity would not let slip; and although that which I saw seemed at the present to satis∣fie my longing eye, yet would it still wonder to recreate it selfe with a new object yet unseen▪ but at length indeavouring by all means to take a full view of the Citie, I failed in my purpose, and was forc't to confesse my selfe glutted, ere satisfied; but one thing above all the rest see∣med strange, and almost incredible to mee, that the City was as big, as beautifull, and the num∣ber of the inhabitants answerable to both, so that it were hard to determine whether the spa∣ciousnesse or beautifulnesse of the buildings, whether the greatnesse of the Citie, or multi∣tude of the people had the preheminency; for hee which had seen so many inhabitants, would have much doubted whither the place would have contained them or no. At the time of my arivall at this place, were the festivals of that great god celebrated, whom the Grecians call Dis, the Egyptians SERAPIS, the Latines Iupiter, to whom the people sacrifi∣cing,
the fires shone in every part of the Citie; where I observed one thing worthy admirati∣on, that when the evening was come, and the sunne was set, no night ensued, but another sunne arose straightway divided into a great many little parts, then did I perceive the Citie to contend with the heavens almost in beautie. I saw also the statue of Iupiter Milichius, and that divine temple of his, to whom having perfor∣med a most obsequious worship, and prayed that at last he would put a period to our misfor∣tunes, wee entred into a house which Menelaus had hired: but as by the event it appeared, the god granted not our request, seeing fortune had one more danger wherein shee meant to try us, for Chereas loved Leucippe long before, and what hee did for her recovery when shee was sicke, was but a pretence of kindnesse, that by that meanes he might insinuate himselfe into our fa∣miliarity, and therey make a freer passage for his love to Leucippe, but seeing how hard it was to effect covertly, and underhand what hee had in∣tended, hee thought upon another way, to lay waite for Leucippe: so having called some Pi∣rates together, fellows which were well skilled in Navigation, as he himself was, he gave them their charge.
Not long after hee invited us to the Pharus, or watch tower in Egypt, telling us that it was his birth-day, which hee intended there to cele∣brate, but as wee went forth of doors there hap∣pened an evill omen to us, for a hawke pursuing a swallow smote Leucippe on the face with her wing, at which I was much troubled, and look∣ing up to heaven said; Shield mee Iupiter, what should this thing portend! if this bird were of thy sending, give mee some other omen, where∣by I may more clearly construe the meaning of this; not observing all this while the picture, for behinde mee was a painters shop, wherein was exprest the miserie of Progne, the violence of Tereus, the cutting out of Philomela's tongue, and the whole fable; in it was the sampler, wher∣in was wrought what Philomela had suffered, the sampler a servant unfolded, while Philomela pointed toward it with her finger, to shew her sister Progne what shee had undergone, Progne seemed to understand the meaning of it, where∣at shee contracted her brow; which the painter had done so lively that her very picture seem'd to be angry, to see the obscene postures of lasci∣vious Tereus forcing the chast Philomela; who having her haire pul'd about her ears, her girdle loos'd, her garment rent, discovered a great part
of her naked breast; her right hand she held be∣fore her eyes, seeming much offended at what Tereus did; her left hand gathered a part of her torne vesture, wherewith shee striv'd to cover her breast: But Tereus all this while most inmo∣destly for'cd her▪ this part of the story was pain∣ted as if it had been wrought on a sampler with a needle, in the other part of the picture some women did very orderly serve unto Tereus, the head and hands of his owne child in a dish; the women themselves smil'd, and yet trembled at the sight; but Tereus rising from his seat, drew his sword at them, and thrust away the table which seem'd to fall, but yet fell not. Menelaus having full viewed this picture, told us, that would wee take his counsell, he would perswade us to deferre our journey to Pharus till some other time, for (saith hee) have not two o∣minous things befell us in the way; first the flight of the hawke, next the threats of the pi∣cture; and beleeve it, those which interpret such things, bid us not sleight them as meere fa∣bles, but that we should compare these prodigies which happen to us while wee are in action, and observe whether they hold any analogie with the businesse in hand; now see you not this pi∣cture fraught with all the mischiefes which can
befall a woman? obscene and incestuous love, most shamelesse adultery, and indeed what not? But use you your pleasure, for mine owne part I would chuse rather to stay at home. Which words of Menelaus wrought so much upon mee, that I tooke my leave of Chereas for that time, who grieved much at it, and conjur'd me to go the next day with him: Hee being parted from us, Leucippe (as women desirous of fables) bid mee tell her the meaning of the birds, and wo∣men, and what they should doe in the company of that impudent fellow, so I began; Those birds thou seest were sometime men and women, the women were Progne and Philo∣mela, two sisters, borne at Athens, the one of them was turn'd into a Swallow, the other into a Nightingale. The man whose name was Te∣reus, was by birth a Thracian, husband to Progne, and as they say turn'd into a Lapwing; who (as the custome of such barbarous people is) could not bee content with one woman, especially when a faire opportunity of satisfying their ir∣regular affections is offered them: The oppor∣tunity he had was from the piety of Progne to∣ward her sister, by which hee tooke occasion to second his incontinence, for shee sent him to see her sister, who departed Prognes husband, but
returned Philomelas ravisher; thereby making her a second Progne; which thing he indeavou∣ring to conceale, in liew of her lost virginitie, cut out the maids tongue: but it was to no pur∣pose, for Philomela (though dumbe) devised a meanes to reveale what she had suffered; work∣ing with her needle on a sampler the whole sto∣ry; so by that meanes what she could not make her sister hear, shee made her see. Progne understanding thereby that violence had been offered to her sister, devised a revenge greater than can be imagined; nor could lesse be expected, for the anger of the one, and the malice of the other conspiring together, made a banquet farre more detestable than the injury offered unto Philomela; for they set before him the limbes of a childe, whom before she was in∣raged, Progne would not sticke to acknowledge her sonne, but afterward shee quite forgot the pangs she underwent in bringing it forth, so great was her fury, that she preferr'd the pleasure she tooke in revenge, before the paines of her travaile; and though what they did, grieved them, yet seeing that thereby they did fully wreeke their malice on him, who had so ince∣stuously violated the lawes of the nuptiall bed, the sweetnesse of the revenge recompenc'd the bitternesse of their griefe.
After Tereus had fed sufficiently on this hel∣lish banquet, the two sisters laughing and trem∣bling brought in the reliques of the childe, which when he saw, knowing then hee had de∣voured his owne sonne, at first hee wept, a little after enraged, hee pursued them with his naked sword, but they straightway turned into birds, flew up into the aire, with whom Tereus himself was also metamorphos'd, the memory of which fact seemes to survive in all birds of that kinde, for to this very day the lapwing pursues the nightingale; where the hatred still remaines, though in other bodies. By this meanes we escaped the treachery of Chaereas, which did but little advantage us, see∣ing our misery was thereby but rejourned a day the longer: for the very next day Chaereas came and invited us againe, who was so importunate with us, that we could not for shame deny him; so taking ship we went all to Pharus, except Me∣nelaus, who because he was sicke stayed at home. So Chaereas first brought us into the towre, and shewed us the foundation, which was strangely and almost incredibly built, for there was a mountaine in the midst of the sea which touch∣ed the clouds almost, on the top of this was a tower, wherein was fire continually to light ma∣riners
which sailed that way; having seene this we were brought to a house, which was in a part of the Island, bordering upon the sea; here Chae∣reas feigning some excuse to goe out, left us, when suddainly there was a great tumult at the doore, and an innumerable company of lusty fellowes, with their swords drawne, set upon Leucippe, and carried her away: but I seeing this, and taking it hainously, cast my selfe into the midst of their weapons, and received a grievous wound on my thigh, so that my legge doubled under me, and I fell downe; meane while the pirates put the maide a shipboard, receiving no affront from any man; but afterwards there be∣ing a great noise and tumult raised, as at the ar∣rival of any pirats there useth to be, the governor of the Island came speedily thither; he was not unknowne to me, for I had sometime served un∣der him in the warres, wherefore I shewed him the wound which I had received, and beseecht him that hee would with all speed pursue the rogues; so immediately hee tooke a ship out of the harbour, and furnishing it with those few souldiers he had then in readinesse, he followed after the theeves: I my selfe also caused my wound to be bound up, and got one to carry me aboard; the pirates so soone as they saw us to
draw neare to them, and that wee were provi∣ding to fight, tyed the maid with her hands be∣hinde her, to the fore part of the ship, whilst one of them crying with a loud voice, SEE THE PRIZE YOV SEEKE AFTER, cut off her head, which fell into the ship, but her car∣case they tumbled into the sea: Seeing this I spared neither tears nor sighes; nay the great∣nesse of my griefe was such, that had not some in the ship hindred mee, I had cast my self head∣long into the sea; but afterward I desired the Governour that hee would send some forth in the Cockboat, which should fetch the body in, that I might bury it; to which hee condescen∣ded, and the body was brought into the ship. Meane while the Pirats betooke themselves to flight as fast as they could, whom we no sooner had overtaken, but they presently spied another ship, and knowing who they were (for they were gatherers of purple, and Pirats as well as they) implored their aid; our Governour seeing that they had joyned forces, and were ready to set upon us, commaded the Pilot to turne back from pursuing them. After wee were come on shore, I imbraced the dead body of my Leucippe, and thus began to bemoan her; Thou hast died ah alas a double
death, one by land, and another by sea, and though these reliques of thy body remain with me, yet I have lost thee, for I reckon not that part which I shall commit to the earth, able to countervaile that which the sea retaines, seeing I have the greater part of the body, lesse of thee, but the sea more of thee, and lesse of thy body. Now though fortune envied mee the happi∣nesse of imprinting my last farewell on thy lips, yet maugre all her malice, I will kisse thy neck: After these words utter'd I buried her, then re∣turned to Alexandria; where having my wound cured, yet sore against my will god knowes, I lived in great torment: some nine moneths af∣terward, my paine was pretty well asswaged; for time is the only curer of all wounds, as well the minde as the body, suffering them, though ne∣ver so great but for a small while to molest the patient. Going on a time into the market place, there came one behind mee, who taking mee fast by the hand, turnd mee about and saluted mee, at first I knew not who it was▪ but afterwards see∣ing that his salutations tended toward mee, I eyed him a little more narrowly, and immediat∣ly shouting out for joy imbrac'd him, for it was my old friend Cinias: After much complemen∣ting
betwixt us, home I bring him, where hee relates to mee what befell him, and I to him what had happened to Leucippe: hee beganne thus; Thship being split I got to the sail-yard, which be being ful of men I could not handsomely be∣stride, and was forc't therefore to hang by one end of it: while we were thus tost up and down there came a wave and dasht the saile-yard a∣gainst a rock, which rebounding againe cast me off like a stone out of a sling, so that I was forc'd to spend the rest of that day in swimming, ha∣ving made shipwracke then of my hope also: at length weary and committing my selfe wholy into the hands of Fortune, I espied a ship com∣ming towards mee, and stretching forth my hands to them which were in it, humbly im∣plored their aid, the Saylours whether they were truly compassionate on me, or whether the vio∣lence of the winde drove them that way, made to mee, and one of them cast out a rope to me as the ship past along, which when I had taken hold of, they drew mee out of the jawes of death. This ship was bound for Sidon, wherein were some that knew mee, and tooke care of mee: Two dayes expired, wee arived at Sidon; but I desired some Sidonians which were in the ship, to
wit, Xenedamas the Merchant and his father in law Theophilus, that if they met any of Tyre, they should not tell that they had saved mee from downing, least happily they might conjecture that I fled with you, indeavouring by this means to conceale my flight, which I did easily, seeing I had beene but five dayes absent, and had left word with my servants that they should tell any man which enquired for mee, that I was gone into the countrey, and intended not to returne till after ten dayes; but to see the mischiefe, two dayes after we were gone, your father re∣turned home from Palestina, and found letters which were sent the day before from Leucippe's father, wherein he betrothed his daughter un∣to you; which when hee had read, and heard that you were gone, hee was exceedingly inra∣ged, partly that you should loose so rich a pro∣fer, and partly that in so small a time things should be brought to such a passe; none of which had happened had the letter come but a day sooner; yet he desired Leucippes mother to con∣ceale it, hoping that hee might heare tidings of you, not thinking it fit to acquaint Sostratus with this mischance, & perswading himself that whi∣thersoever you went it was to make up the match, which when you heard you should have free
leave to doe, you would returne home not asha∣med to tell the cause of your flight; wherefore his sole care was to enquire diligently whither you fled, and to come and seeke you out. Not long after, Diophantes of Tyre, who was newly returned out of Aegypt, told him that he saw you here; wthich comming to my eares I made no delay, but came straightway to tel thee of it, and have now beene eight daies in enqui∣ring thee out: thinke therefore again and againe what course you will take, for your father will be certainly here very shortly. Hearing these words, I bewailed much that Fortune should make such a May-game of mee. I am in a fine case sure, Sostratus hath betrothed me his daughter now she's dead, hee reckoned the dayes fairely, when his promise could not prevent our flight. O unseasonable happinesse! or rather, O till this day happy Clitophon! I must be wedded to a coarse forsooth, and while I am mourning for her death, sing her marriage song! a fine bride sure, a carcasse without a head. Cli∣nias hearing this, told mee that it was not a time to lament, but that I should settle upon some course or other, whether to returne home, or expect my father here: neither of them pleases me, said I, for how shall I looke him in the face,
out of whose house I fled so basely, and made him to falsifie his oath to his brother, treache∣rously robbing him of that which was commit∣ted to his custody? I thinke no way safer there∣fore, than to be gone ere he come. While Clinias and I were in talke, in came Menelaus and Satyrus, both of them having em∣brac'd Clinias, and fully understood my minde, Satyrus turned to me, and said thus: There is an opportunity not to bee contemned, offered to thee Clitophon, nor shall Clinias bee exempted from hearing it, whereby thou maist not onely repaire thy fortunes, but also cure thy inflamed desire; it is a happinesse which Venus her selfe prostitutes to thee, sleight not then her profer. There is a woman in Ephesus named Melite, which is deepely in love with thee, shee is very rich, and so faire, that when thou seest her thou wilt take her to be some goddesse; she hath late∣ly lost her husband at sea, and now desires thee not for a husband, but for a paramour, laying her selfe and all her fortunes at the feet of thy acceptance; for thy sake shee hath stayed here two moneths, wooing of thee to goe home with her; nor can I see any reason why thou shouldst bee backward in granting her suit, unlesse thou lookst that Leucippe should revive againe. Then
said Clinias, Satyrus in my minde counsels you well, for there needs no demurring, when beau∣ty, riches, and love, offer themselves so freely, whereby thou maist not onely enjoy thy plea∣sure, but purchase credit, and furnish thy selfe with all necessaries: besides you must know that the gods may punish you for your pride; no sin being more detestable to them than that: con∣tradict not therefore their will, and if I may counsell you, follow Satyrus advice. At this I sighed, saying, lead me whither you will, since Clinias approves of it, so this woman bee not so troublesome or hasty as to exact my love ere I come to Ephesus, for I have solemnly vowed not to marry any other in that place where I have lost my Leucippe. Satyrus hearing this, carried the newes to Melite, and not long after returned, telling us that at the relation of it the good woman was ready to swoun for joy, and that she had invited me to supper that night. So I went to her. She had no sooner seene mee, but she met me, entertaining mee with a thou∣sand kisses, and embraces, nor was shee any of the unhandsomest, for shee was of a most beau∣tifull aspect, such as might befit Venus her selfe: what comelinesse she had was genuine, for the colour in her face was not sophisticated with
Cerue or Fucus, but lookt like a mixture of bloud and milke; her haire was thicke and shined like gold; which rare perfection of hers made mee delight much to looke on her. Meane while a most sumptuous banquet was prepared, and downe wee sat, but Melite though shee would carve of divers dishes, eat no∣thing, but lookt upon me all the while. For no food is so pleasing to lovers palats, as the creature's eye they doat on; the soule being glutted with this makes the body pine, the pleasure of seeing being by a secret conveiance carried through the eyes into the heart, drawing along with it the thing seene, imprints and ingraves it there where it is as conspicuous as the face in a looking glasse. Observing this I askt her what was the reason shee had provided so much victuals, and eate so little, sitting as if not only the meat had beene painted, but shee her selfe had beene a statue. Shee answered mee that my very company was meat and drinke to her, averring also that there was more svveetnesse in my countenance than in all her banquet: after which words she kissed me, nor was I coy of such a favour then, as be∣fore I had beene: afterwards shee told me I was her joy and delight: this past betweene us at the banquet, and night approching she would have
detain'd mee, but telling her what I had vow'd to Satyrus, at the length, though very unwilling∣ly, she let me goe, but with this promise, that the next day I should meet her in the Temple of Isis, that there in the presence of the goddesse the conditions of our love might be determined of, establisht, and confirm'd. Which the next day I faithfully perform'd, vowing in the presence of Isis, Clinias, and Menelaus, to love her as my wife, and she me as her husband, freely surren∣dring into my hands not onely her selfe but her whole estate▪ this was confirm'd betwixt us, yet so as there should be no marriage till wee came to Ephesus, for there, as I had divers times before promised, Leucippe should give place to Melite. The contract ended, wee sate downe to supper, the table standing throng'd as it were with the most exquisite rarities which were to bee had: yet was it no marriage supper, seeing we had de∣ferred that: and this Melite seem'd to think on, when sitting at the table shee made mee laugh with this jest, the company call'd her mistresse bride, and wisht her much joy: to whom shee replyed, it fares with mee, friends, as with the bodies of some great men, which their friends finding not, commit an empty coffine to the earth, giving that the same solemnity which the
body should have had, could it have been found; so may I no more bee said to bee married, then they to bee buried, thus cunning∣ly shee jested. The day after the winde serving, and seeming as it were to invite us, wee loosed from Alexan∣dria, and Menelaus accompanied mee to the sea side, where saluting each other hee wisht mee a prosperous journey, and so departed. Hee was a young man, of so honest and sweet a nature that hee wept when hee tooke his leave of mee, which drew some teares from mine eyes also; but Clinias counting it an indignity to leave me, resolved to accompa∣ny mee to Ephesus, there to stay till I were fully settled. As wee were sailing, and night drew on ere our chamber could bee made ready to entertain us, Melite was so eager on the matter, that shee would have mee confirme what I had promised in the temple of Isis, saying; Now sure wee are out of Leucippes bounds, this is the appointed time, what need wee then stay till wee come to Ephesus? Know you not how uncertaine we are of our lives at sea, and how dangerous travelling it is on the land? I am on fire beleeve me Clito∣phon, I am on fire, and I would my modesty
could permit me to discover openly to thee how to great the flames are which cōsume me: I wold there were the same power in mee which is in fire, then might I have hopes to win thee with my imbraces; but the fire in my breast is of a cleane contrary nature, warming none but my self, a fire too modest and temperate, as not one inch to transgresse its owne limits; but while I speake wee loose time my Clitophon, why de∣ferre wee our sacrifice to Venus? Then I replyed, Suffer me not I pray thee to disturbe the dead, for as yet wee are not past the place where that poore wretch Leucippe was slaine, till wee come on shore. Hast thou not heard that shee dyed at sea? This water on which wee saile is her sepulchre, and for ought wee know her ghost wanders about this ship; for the common opinion is, that the soules of such as bee drowned, Charon Ferries not over to hell, till their bodies bee found and buried, till which time they walk about the waters; which may make us justly feare, while wee are embra∣cing, shee may appear in some terrible shape and affright us. But letting this passe, canst thou i∣magine the sea to bee a fit place to make a mar∣riage in, where our bed is tumbled and tossed up and downe? may wee not fear that this may be
ominous, and that it may portend instability in thy love, and inconstancy in mine? Then said Melite; Thou hast, beleeve mee, disputed very subtilly, yet say what thou wilt, I think a married couple need not be scrupulous in choice of their bed, for one is as good as an∣other, and that where true love is, no place can challenge any priviledge above another; yet if there bee any to bee claimed, the sea sure must have it, either that it is privie to many such love mysteries, or because Venus was borne here: Wherfore I make no doubt but it will be a deed most acceptable to her, if wee shall seeme to re∣verence her mother so much, as here to consum∣mate our marriage: there is nothing here but may seeme to animate us to it, the very seat the mariners sit on, the ropes which are tyed about the saileyard, represent our twining embrace∣ments▪ see also Neptune (who is married to Amphitrie) and the whole company of Merei∣des, shall dance at our wedding, while the gentle winds softly murmuring about the tackling of our ship, shal sing us a marriage song: Seest thou not that teeming saile, which mee thinks seems to foretell, that straightway I shall be a mother, thou a father? Seeing her so eager in pursuit of my love, I
said, Let us dispute the matter a little till wee come on shore, for I sweare to thee by the sea, and by the event of this our journey, that I love none but thee, yet grant thee thy request I can∣not, since it is against the lawes of Neptune; for I have often heard Mariners say that the passen∣gers must keepe themselves chast, and that any uncleane fact may hazard the Ship: either be∣cause it is a thing consecrated, or because it is offensive to the gods, that any one should lasci∣viously dally in the midst of so many dangers. Let us not therefore defile so chast a place, or while wee are in the jawes of death, dreame of marriage. When I had said this I made her con∣tent to part with a kisse, and the rest of the night wee slept. The fifth day after our departure we arived at Ephesus, where I saw Melite's house, which for the elegant structure, multitude of servants, and all variety of choice household stuffe, was the biggest and fairest in the whole citie: Here shee commanded a sumptuous banquet should bee provided for mee, and desired mee to ride along in her coach wi her, to a countrey farme of hers not above five hundred paces from her house, to passe away the time till the banquet was ready. There she led mee into a most plea∣sant
walke, where the trees were set by five and five. As wee were walking, there met us a wo∣man laden as it were with chaines, having her head shorne, her body looking sluttishly and na∣stily, her cloaths old and torne, and a spade in her hand, shee kneeling downe to Melite, begg'd on this manner▪ Take pity on me mistresse, for I am a woman, and may safely say sometimes I was a free woman, but now Fortune hath been pleased to make a slave of mee: And here shee held her peace. Then Melite said, Arise good woman, and tell mee first thy name, next thy Countrey, then who hath cast these chaines on thee, for mee thinkes though thy adverse fate hath so debased thee, I read something more than ordinary in thy looks. Then she answered, Your Steward, mistresse, hath done all this, be∣cause I would not prostitute my selfe to his impure lust. I am by birth a Thessalian, my name is Lacoena. This my wretched estate I live in, I commend to your consideration, desiring that you would set mee free, and beare with me but a little longer, and I will repay to you, mistresse, within a short space, the two thousand sesterces which Sosthenes your Steward payed for mee to the Pirats; but if you will not grant mee my request, I will serve you still; yet did you but
know how basely, and inhumanely hee hath dealt with mee, your heart would relent; then she shewed the impression of his scourge on her shoulders. Melite and I, seeing and hearing this, were both astonisht, but I especially, for mee thought shee favoured Leucippe somewhat. But Melite bid her be of good cheare, promising not only to set her free, but also to remit her rāsome. By and by (after shee had caused her fetters to be taken off) she sent for Sosthenes (whose breech made buttons) and called him salvage villaine, asking him when ever he knew one of the basest of her slaves serv'd so? afterwards bid him without dissimulation tell her what shee was? Hee replyed, hee knew nothing concerning her more then this, that hee bought her of one Cal∣listhenes a Merchant, & that she was free borne, and her name was Lacoena. But Melite turned So∣stratus out of his office, and committed Lacoena to the care of some maids who should wash her and put cleane linnen on her, and bring her to her house in the City. Then taking order for some businesse concerning the affairs of her Countrey farme, shee and I returned home in her coach to supper. While I was at supper Sa∣tyrus looked somewhat seriously on mee, inti∣mating as much as if he had something to say to
mee in private; whereupon feigning some ex∣cuse, I rose; when I was gone aside, Satyrus with∣out speaking a word to mee, gave mee a letter, which when I had opened, before I read a syl∣lable I was amazed, for I perceived it to be Leu∣cippes hand: The coppy of the letter was this: Leucippe to her maister Clitophon. FOr what other title can I have for him who hath married my Mistresse? though thou canst not bee ignorant what for thy sake I have suffered; yet at this time I thought good to put thee in mind of it. For thee it was I forsooke my mother and undertooke this long pilgrimage: For thy sake first I suffered shipwracke, next fell into the hands of Pirats: To expiate thy faults was I made a sacrifice, for thy sake was I sold, was I bound with chaines, did I carry a spade, digge the earth, and was beaten, to the intent, sure, that thou shouldest bee another womans husband, I another mans wife▪ but the gods forbid this. This cruell pro∣gresse have I made in my love, but thou remainest still untoucht, embracing in thy armes thy new married wife. All that I desire at this time (if for all this which I have suffer'd, I have deserved any favour at thy hands) is, that you would get your wife to set me free,
or passe your word for the money which Sosthenes bought mee for: and beeing wee are not farre from Byzantium, I will pay you again; but if you will not pay it on these conditions, then thinke that I shall think all the miseries which for thy sake I have suffe∣red in the paiment of this money to bee fully recom∣penc't: Fare thee well; and maist thou have much joy in thy new married wife. This I write to thee being yet a Virgin. When I read this, my minde was variously distracted, for one while I was enflamed with love, another while I waxed pale with fear; now I wondred, anon I would not beleeve that this could possibly be Leucippes hand: Such a con∣flict was there within me betwixt fear and hope, then turning my selfe about hastily to Satyrus, I said, didst thou bring this letter from the Elisi∣an fields, what meanes this which I here see and read? is Leucippe alive againe? Yes saith Saty∣rus, and the woman you saw yesterday was she, but by reason her haire was cut, shee was so dis∣figured, that neither of us knew her. Why dost thou ravish my ears so with this news (said I) and lettest not mine eyes share in the joy? fetch her that I may see her. Peace master, quoth Satyrus, seeme not to know so much as you doe, least
thereby you should undoe us all; stay therefore till wee have consulted further, what wee were best to doe, for you see how this woman loves you, and is almost mad for you, and should shee take the least spleene against us, wee are in the midst of her snares, destitute of all hope. How is it possible to containe my selfe (said I) since I am so excessively overjoyed? see but how shee reasons the case with me? Then ope∣ning the letter againe, I read it, and answered distinctly to every objection, as if she had been present her selfe to have heard mee. Thy com∣plaints are most just, my best Leucippe? thou hast truly for my sake undergone all this, I have been the sole authour of whatsoever mischance hath betaken thee: But when I came to that part of the letter which spake of the blowes inflicted on her by Sosthenes, I wept as really as if I had bin present when they were given. For the eye re∣flecting on any object, apprehends it not halfe so sensi∣bly as the minde doth a thing which one reads. And when she did twit me in the teeth with my mar∣riage, I blusht as much as if I had been caught in adultery. Then turning mee to Satyrus, I said, Alas Satyrus what apology shall I make? or which way shall I excuse my selfe? Leucippe knows us, and I feare mee her love is turned to
hatred. But now I would faine know how she escaped, & whose carcase that was which I bu∣ried: No doubt, saith Satyrus, but Leucippe at her leisure will tell thee all. What now is most requisite, is, that you send her an answer of her letter to satisfie her; which I have in part done already, telling her that thou marriedst Melite sore against thy will: Didst thou tell her that I was married? then thou hast quite undone me, for there is none in the whole Citie will say so much; I sweare to thee here by Hercules, and my present Fortunes, there is no such matter. Then Satyrus replyed, Good Sir, you would faine make me beleeve that; doth not all the world know that you have beene both in bed together? True, but yet (which may ex∣ceed beliefe) I never enjoyed her. But tell me, leaving this, what shall I write? for this strange event hath so much disturbed my fancy, that I cannot invent any thing: You know better than I, saith Satyrus, what to write; doe but begin and love will dictate the rest. Then I writ a letter on this manner: Clitophon to Leucippe. ALL health to my Leucippe. The same thing hath made mee both happy and unhappy, for I ac∣count
it a great felicity, that I can see thee in a letter, yet most unhappy am I that I cannot injoy thy pre∣sence. But setting these things aside, if thou wouldest heare the truth; then know that I have followed thy example, and (if our Sex may boast of any virginity) I am still a maid. But if thou hast censured mee, and condemned mee already, ere I could speake for my self, my humble suite is that thou revoke thy sentence: for I call all the gods to witnesse, that I have not offen∣ded in the least manner, which shortly shall appeare. Farewell, and let mee heare that my request is gran∣ted. When I had wrote this, and sealed it, I deli∣vered it to Satyrus, charging him to commend mee highly to Leucippe. Then full of pleasure, and yet grieved withall, I returned home to sup∣per, for it came into my head that Melite would not let mee goe that night, seeing our marriage was not perfected; and having found Leucippe, I would not so much as look upon any other wo∣man; wherefore I strived to alter my counte∣nance, so that Melite mought beleeve there was an alteration in my minde; but this way I could not dissemble handsomely, therefore as soone as I came in, I began to shiver, telling Melite that a chilling numnesse was got into all my bones;
though Melite knew this to be but an excuse, yet durst shee not publiquely condemne me for not performing my promise; though to cloake the matter better I went to bed that night supper∣lesse, but shee followed mee close at the heeles into my chamber; where I feigned that my dis∣ease was much augmented, she still wooed me: How long wilt thou serve me so? wilt thou put no period to thy contempt of my love? we are not now at sea, but arived at Ephesus, the place which was appointed: Shall we stay longer yet? or shall I passe my widownight like some devo∣ted virgin which attends on the altar of some god? Thou hast made my bed like Tantalus his table, shewing me a great deal of water, yet suf∣ferest me not to drink a drop? Shall I sit so long by the river side and not quench my thirst? Which when shee had spoke, shee laid her head in my bosome, and wept most lamentably, so that I was much moved at it; nor did I know how in any conscience to delude her any longer, see∣ing her complaint was so just. Yet this answer I gave her; I sweare by the gods my dearest Me∣lite, that I am as willing to grant thy request, as thou art willing to desire it, but somewhat ayles mee on a sudden, and I feare my health is much in danger, and thou knowest how great an ene∣my
sicknesse is to the marriage bed; while I was speaking this, I wip't the teares from her eyes, swearing most deeply to make her mistresse of her wish. By this meanes I easily allayed the fla∣ming desire of my widow. The day after, Melite having sent for her maids, to whose care shee had committed Leu∣cippe, shee first asked whether they had used her kindly, according to her injunction? And when they had answered her that she wanted for no∣thing which was fitting, shee commanded shee should bee brought to her: When she was come, shee began to her on this manner, How courte∣ously I have used thee, seeing thou knowest al∣ready, and I doubt not but thou wilt acknow∣ledge, were needlesse now to repeat; for requi∣tall of all my favours I request but one thing at thy hands, which is in thy power to grant mee, I have heard that your women of Thessaly are great enchantresses, and that they are able, by spells, and philtres, not onely to binde whom they love, from setting their affection on any o∣ther women, but also to enflame them with love towards them, themselves: in this Art if thou hast any skill, I desire thine aide. That lusty young gallant which thou sawest walking with me the other day, your husband do you mean?
said Leucippe, craftily pretending that shee had heard say so. What husband said Melite? I have no more to do with him, then with a stone, but there is one Leucippe, for so they call her name, which hath beene this long time dead, she is preferred before me, whom he still thinks on, eating, drinking, or sleeping: yet never ca∣red this much for what I ever did for him; I waited at Alexandria foure moneths for him, begging, beseeching, promising him, and omit∣ting no enticement which mought allure him: But hee like a blocke, a piece of iron, or some such senseles thing, neglects my praiers and en∣treaties, nay is so coy of his companie to mee, that he will scarce vouchsafe me time to look on him, I call Venus to witness that I have laine this five nights by him, and rise againe as if I had went to bed with some Eunuch. So that I began to mistrust, my follie is so great that I am in love with some statue, seeing I can enjoy him onely with mine eies. Wherefore as thou pleadedst yesterday, that one woman should pitie another, so plead I now to thee, and that thy helpe may bring down this haughtie spirit of his, and recall that portion of my soule, which for griefe is fled out of my body.
Leucippe knowing this, was not a little glad that Melite had mist her aime of mee, and pro∣mising her that shee would goe and seeke out some hearbs, shee went to the Countrey farme house: for had shee denyed her, shee might just∣lie have feared that Melite would have suspected her fidelitie, which was the reason I thinke shee promised her. Melite having such faire hopes of obtaining her desire, was a little pacified for the time. For not only the fuition of any thing, which we desire, but also the expectation is most delightfull. I being ignorant of all this, was much per∣plexed, how I should shift Melite that night, and meet Leucippe, for I fully perswaded my self, that her chiefe aime in going into the countrey, was, that I hearing of it mought follow her; but while a coach was making ready for her depar∣ture, and wee were scarce set downe to supper, wee heard a great tumult, and concurse of peo∣ple, about that part of the house where the men lay; when suddenly comes mee in a messenger, who had runne himselfe almost out of breath, and brings newes that Thersander, husband to Melite, and reported to have been dead long be∣fore by some of his owne servants, who suffer'd shipwracke with him, was yet alive, and ready
to enter the house, the servant had scarce utte∣red his message, but Thersander came in after him, and entred the roome where wee were at supper, for he made the more haste to catch me, because at his first arivall it had beene told him, how familiar I was with his wife▪ Melite to have dissembled the matter would faine have embra∣ced her husband, but hee thrust her from him with great violence, cast his eye on mee, and askt, Is this the adulterer? and being in a great fury ran upon mee violently, beating me on the face, then taking mee by the haire of the head hee dragg'd mee about the house, and wounded mee in divers places. But all the while, as if I had been in the tem∣ple at the offering of some sacrifice, where the Priest commands silence, I was as mute as a fish; not daring to ask him who hee was, or where∣fore hee beat mee? and still considering how the case stood with mee, durst not resist him though I mought have got the masterie over him: At last when hee was weary with beating mee, and I with reasoning the matter with my selfe, I began to aske him what hee was, and wherefore hee had so shamefully misused mee? but he the more enraged that I should dare to mutter a syllable against him, laid hands on me
againe, and called for a payre of fetters to put on my legs, and willed some of his servants to bind mee with coards, and cast me into a cham∣ber in the house, where I was close prisoner▪ While I was busling with him, Leucippes letter, which I had hid in my skirt, fell out, and I never perceived it, which Melite privately snatcht up, fearing that it was one of the letters which had past betwixt her selfe and mee; but not long af∣ter opening it and finding Leucippes name, shee discovered all, yet could scarce beleeve that La∣coena should bee shee, because shee had heard it out of twenty mens mouths, that Leucippe was dead: yet afterward viewing the contents of the letter more narrowly, shee was fully certifi∣ed of all which had past betwixt us, wherewith she was strangely distracted, partly with shame, partly with anger, partly with love, afraid shee was of her husband, angry shee was at the con∣tents of the letter, yet did her love to mee quali∣fie both. Wherefore when it was evening, and Ther∣sander having beaten me was gone to see a friend of his: Melite taking that servant aside to whose custody I was committed, apart from his fel∣lowes, commanded him secrecy and came into the chamber to mee, there finding mee on the
ground shee came neare; at her first approach I did read the discovery of my love to Leucippe in her very countenance. At last shee burst out in∣to this exclamation; Vnhappy mee! I would I had never seene thy face, to whom I have beene so long a suiter, yet have not got my request granted: mad woman that I am, how long shall I languish for the love of one which contemnes mee so? I am grieved, yet pitie him which is the author of my griefe; nor can I choose but love him which hates mee, O treacherous paire of creatures! the one here makes a laughing stock of mee, the other is gone to gather hearbs for mee; I have sought for helpe from my inve∣terate enemies. Melite having spoken these words, threw Leucippes letter to mee, whereat I was so afrigh∣ted and dejected, that I held downe my head as if I had been guilty of some notorious and hey∣nous crime: but shee went on in this manner; How many miseries am I encompast with? for thy sake I have lost my husband, yet can I not injoy thee, nay shortly I shall not so much as see thee, which is all the favour I have yet had from thee; but this were somewhat tolerable, did not my husband hate mee, and call mee adulteresse, by which meanes I undergoe the infamy of that
vice, yet never injoyed the pleasure; other wo∣men blush not for their faults, till they have committed them, but I must beare the ignomi∣ny of that whereof I am guiltlesse. O unfaith∣full, barbarous, and more cruell then any Pirate Clitophon! canst thou suffer a poore woman thus miserablie tormented, thus impotentlie doting on thee, to perish almost for thy love, seeing thou art also in love thy selfe? cannot the anger of a deity, Cupid I meane, affright thee? dost not feare his torches? cannot the teares which have most prodigally flowed from the fountaine of my eyes, & which would have made the heart of the most salvage theefe to have relented, move thee? nay my prayers have so little pre∣vailed with thee, that neither opportunity of time or place, could force from thee more then a kisse, or embrace, nay so coy thou art, that thou partest from me as modestly as a woman would doe: what is this but a meere mocke marriage? thou layest not with a barren, but with a young, nay and though I say it my selfe an handsome woman: Out thou Eunuch, thou no man, thou contemner of beautie. I pray the immortal gods that all things may happen contrarie to thy wish, that thereby thou mayst have triall of that in thy selfe, which thou makest experiment of
on mee. Melite having spoke this with weeping eyes, was for a little while silent; but afterward seeing I gave her no answer, and that I still fixed my eyes on the ground, her minde was altered on a sudden, and shee beganne to mee againe on this manner; What I have hitherto spoken (O sweet young man) griefe and anger suggested to mee; but now I speake in love; yet canst thou not blame me that I was angry, since I was all on fire with∣in. Alas, at length let mee have my wish, I aske not marriage of thee now, wherewith thou hast so long deluded mee, let these armes but once embrace thee; it is a small request, and a medi∣cine scarce proportionable to my disease; yet I desire no more. Goe to now, cast but one drop of water to the quenching of so great a flame, & if I have spoken any thing whereat thou wast of∣fended, I pray thee pardon mee, they were the words of a mad woman? For those which have ill successe in their loves, are commonly distracted. I know I am advocate in a bad cause, yet withall that it is no shame to speake what love dictates, and that I open my disease to one which very well knowes the state of my body, for who can better judge of anothers wound, then he which is wounded himselfe.
There is yet this one day left to performe thy promise. Thinke on what thou swarest in Isis Temple. Foole that thou art, wouldst thou bee true to me, thou shouldst not feare what a thou∣sand Thersanders could doe to thee, but since this cannot bee, Leucippe being yet alive, marry her with all my heart, for I utterly despaire of a∣ny favour from thy hands, since all things are so adverse to me, that the very dead are raised to crosse mee in my designes. O treacherous sea, that hast by saving one destroyed another! Cli∣tophon thou sett'st free, that hee might bee my ruine, and as if in him thou hadst not sufficiently tormented mee, thou hast freed Leucippe also: But fond woman as I am, why should I exclaime against her? may shee ever live to the joy and comfort of her Clitophon; but that which grieves mee most of all is, that the wicked Thersander should returne, that hee should smite those ten∣der cheeks of thine, nay that I should looke on, and yet could not rescue thee: see how that a∣miable face of thine is disfigur'd with the blows of that impious Thersander, sure hee was blinde when he did it. But to bee briefe, my master Cliophon (for so I must call thee, since my very soule is at thy ser∣vice) let mee croppe the first and last fruits of
thy love; this one day shall be as sweet to mee as if I had injoyed thee many yeers, so shalt thou injoy both Leucippe and my selfe: if no argu∣ment can perswade thee, yet consider that be∣sides many things wherein my love hath beene beneficiall to thee, in this one thing it hath been chiefely; that through my meanes thou hast found Leucippe; for had not I brought thee hi∣ther, thou hadst still thought thy Leucippe to have beene dead; thou shouldst for this make Fortune some requitall: I have heard of one who finding a treasure, honoured the place much, building there an Altar, offering sacri∣fice, and crowning the earth with Garlands; but thou, having found here such a magazen of love, art so farre from being thanke∣full, that thou contemnest her which brought thee to it. Thinke not that it is I which utter these words, but Cupid which is in mee. Grant mee Clitophon, which am thy captaine, and under whose banner thou fightest, that Me∣lite ere shee depart may have her will, it is I which have inflamed her heart with thy love; bee obedient therefore to me thy tutelar god, as thou expectest ever to prosper in thy love to Leucippe.
I will loose thee from thy bands, let Thersan∣der chafe his heart out, and thou shalt lye in mine owne brothers Chamber, where thou shalt have what attendance thou wilt desire, and to morrow morning very early expect Leucippe there: for shee promised mee to stay in the Countrey all night, that shee mought gather her hearbes, while the Moone was up; thus was I made a foole of, imploring her helpe as if shee had beene some Thessalian woman skilled in witchcraft: For what other refuge had I when I could not by lawfull meanes purchase my wishes? Now thou needst not feare Thersander, hee is gone out so opportunely, as if the gods would have had it so, to visite a friend; by which meanes thou maist safely accomplish my de∣sire. This eloquent Oration (for Cupid had taught her) Melite having uttered, shee loo∣sed my bonds, and taking my hands in hers, kissed them, and then put them on her breast, saying, Feelest thou not now my heart which full of feare and hope (I would I could say pleasure also) panteth out sighes to move thee to pity. Beeing set at libertie, and well weighing
with my selfe, that I was not to marrie her, but bee her Physitian as it were. I was a∣fraid that CUPID should bee offended with mee, and therfore consented. The end of the fifth Booke.
THE SIXTH BOOKE. The Argument. Melite to requite Clitophons love, sets him free, seeing the servant to whose custody hee was com∣mitted: and that hee might the better steale a∣way, shee attyres him in her owne apparell: But Sosthenes, whom Melite had turn'd out of his stewardship, hearing his master was come home, thinks to currie favour with him this way; first hee betrayes Clitophon, whom he had met in Me∣lites apparell to Thersander, next hee turnes bawde to procure Leucippe for him, who fals in love with her. Meane while Clitophon is more closely prisoned then before, and Melite strives to salve up the matter to Thersander, but
cannot. After this Sosthenes and Thersander seeke by all meanes both faire and foule to winne Leucippes love, but prevaile not. HAving cured Melite who had been so long love sick, I asked her how shee would provide for my free∣dome, and make good what shee promised mee concerning Leucip∣pe? Then shee answered, Feare not that I will bee worse then my word, for Leucippe thou maist make thy self as sure of her as if thou hadst her in thine armes; and for thine owne securitie put on my apparell, and cover thy face with my veile; Melantho shall accompany thee to the doore where your way lies, there shall a servant meet you whom I appointed to bring you to Sa∣tyrus, and Clinias; Leucippe shall follow you a while after. Then shee attyred mee as shee used to attyre her selfe, and kissing mee againe and againe said, Thou art farre more beautifull in my garments than in thy owne; and while I looke on thee, mee thinks I see the picture of Achilles disguised. But my soule Clitophon have a special care of thy selfe that thou bee not discovered: here take my gowne, and leave thy cloake in ex∣change, which as often as I put on I shall think
I embrace thee; then shee gave mee an hundred pieces of gold, and called Melantho to her, that was the trustiest of all her maids, to whose care shee committed the keeping of the doores; and giving her charge how to dispose of mee, that being finished she willed her to returne. Being thus accoutred, Melantho attending on mee as on her mistresse, the porter who took me for Melite, let me forth; when I was gone forth shee led me to a by doore in the house, where this young man, as Melite had appointed, met mee; hee was very courteous to mee, for in my journey to Ephesus hee accompanied mee in the ship; after Melantho was returned and found the keeper shutting the chamber doore whence I was gone, shee commanded him to open it a∣gaine, and told her mistresse that I was fled; Me∣lite sent for the keeper who struck with fear and admiration at the strangenesse of his departure, as being a thing unknowne to him, and after it was told him, incredible, was not able to speake one syllable: wherefore Melite began to him thus; I had resolved that Clitophon should bee set free, but I invented this plot to excuse thee to Thersander, for how can he justly taxe thee of being privy to his flight, since thou knewst not of it? stay but here a while and Clitophon shall
send thee ten pieces of gold, though I think thy safest course is to flie for it: Opasion (for that was the servants name) answered that hee thought no course so fit to resolve on as what his mistresse did approve of; at length it was her pleasure that hee should speedily betake himself to some retired place, whence he should not re∣turne till her husbands anger were over, and all these troubles and turmoiles were appeased. But in the meane time, Fortune dealing as treacherously with mee as before, laid a snare to entrap me in a new danger, for Thersander com∣ming from a friends house, where hee had been at supper, (and where very likely having told what reaks his wife had plaid in his absence, he had beene counselled not to bee long from her) met mee as hee was comming home. Ir was a∣bout that time when the feasts of Diana were celebrated, when halfe the Citie almost was drunk, and went reeling about the market place; which was a great hindrance to me in the clean∣ly conveiance of the matter: But I had past un∣discovered, had not Sosthenes beene my enemy, for he (as you heard before) being turned out of his stewardship for abusing Leucippe, hearing that his master was come home, ceased not to vex Leucippe further, but also to revenge himself
on Melite; wherefore first hee betrayed mee to Thersander, and next told him a great many lies of Leucippe, for being frustrate of all hopes of en∣joying her himselfe, hee began to bee a pandar to procure her for his master, telling him this story. In your absence, Sir, I bought a most beauti∣full virgin, fairer than you can imagine, the rare∣nesse of whose perfection is such, that it far ex∣ceeds my expression, her I reserved against your comming home, for I heard you were yet alive, with which news though I was most excessively delighted, yet would I not devulge it to any, to the end that comming home suddenly, and un∣expected, you might bee an eye witnesse of my mistresses basenesse; and that this impudent stranger, who hath adulterated your marriage bed, might bee deprehended in the heighth of his villany. This maid, Sir, Melite hath tooke out of my custody, intending to set her free; but Fortune I doubt not, Sir, hath reserved so rich a treasure of beauty for you, shee is now at your Countrey farme house; but the reason why shee was thither sent I cannot well ghesse: Now if you please, Sir, she shall, ere shee returne to Me∣lite who sent her, be lockt up close in some roome where you shall have accesse to her. Thersander
approving of this course very well, and giving strict charge that it should bee performed: Sost∣henes went to the farme house, comming to that cottage where shee was to lye that night, hee set a couple of husband men to call away those maids which were with her, under pretence that they had some busines with them whereof they were to conferre in private: The maids being thus circumvented, Leucippe was left alone, and Sosthenes with two more ran violently in, and stopping her mouth that shee should not screeke out, tooke her about the middle, and lockt her fast up in a close roome; saying thus to her, I bring thee this day, O Lacoena, as much good as any virgin could ever expect▪ but withall I must request thee that my prayers when thou shalt come to the fruition of it, may not passe unre∣warded: feare not that the violence I used in bringing thee hither was that thou shouldst un∣willingly part with the flower of thy virginitie, it was to initiat thee into the familiarity of my master Thersander. But Leucippe who was amazed at this suddain and unexpected calamitie, gave him no answer. Sosthenes meeting Thersander told him what hee had done, and withall commended Leucippe to the skies, insomuch that Thersander fancying her
to be none other than such a one as Sosthenes had described her to him, ere the sports were ended the countrey farme being not above foure score paces from his house, commanded Sosthenes to lead the way, and hee would downe immediat∣ly to see the wench. As they were going I like a foole met them full butte, cloathed in Melites attyre, whereat Sosthenes who straightway knew mee, cryed out, See, see, master the reeling lea∣cher in thy wives apparell: The youth which manned mee along having no time to counsell mee which way I should betake my selfe, shew∣ed me a fair paire of heeles, and shifted for him∣self, and poore peelegarlicke I was presently caught, and laid hands on. Thersander while hee was apprehending mee, exclaimed so hideously that in an instant I had a whole jury of Consta∣bles, and watchmen flockt about me; while hee laid the law against me, accusing mee of such hainous crimes as the whole City had scarce e∣ver beene guilty of▪ at length calling me thiefe, and adulterer, of both which crimes I was accu∣sed in publique Court, and cast into prison. But yet was not I a jot dismayed at all this, neither did the infamy of my accusation, or the ignominy of my imprisonment dishearten mee, for I was most confident that I should cleare
my selfe by most invincible arguments, from the crime whereof I was accused; seeing wee were both publiquely married: but this was it, which did most of all deject mee, namely that I had not yet come to enterchange discourse with Leucippe. Moreover, the minde doth com∣monly presage bad things, but not good. Even so it fared with me, at that instant I thought not of Leucippe, she was quite out of my minde, which was wholly taken up with feare, suspicion, and griefe. Thersander having put me in prison, returned with a merry heart to Leucippe, Sosthenes accom∣panying him: when he entred the house, hee saw her lying all along on the ground, & heard her recounting the words which Sosthenes had spake to her, when he last had beene with her; while with a look wherein you might have read the whole story of her griefe, shee betrayed her fearfulnesse; which makes mee thinke the pro∣verbe true, That the heart is as clearly represented in the face, as the face is in a looking glasse; for if griefe hath once seized on the inner parts, the very countenance will seeme to droope, and if the heart through joy be dilated, the aspect must needs be plea∣sant. Leucippe after they had opened the doore
(now there was a candle in the roome) would scarce looke on them, but cast her eyes on the ground. Thersander seeing that those sparkes of beauty which glistred in her eyes, were as pier∣cing as the flashes of lightning which result from the conflict of two clouds, was straight∣way on fire, and wounded with one glance, stayd still expecting when she would blesse him with another; but observing her still to looke stedfastly on the ground, How long, saith he, wilt thou debarre mee the fruition of thy sweet lookes? how long shall the sordid earth rob me of so much pleasure? rather bestow them on mee, than suffer them so vainely to perish. At which Leucippe shed many teares, which were so farre from being a blemish to her face, that they were an ornament: for teares make the eyes to swell, which tumor to a hard-favoured face is a deformity, but to a handsome one a grace: but if they bee blacke eyes and have a coronet of white about them, the moisture which they receive from teares, makes them farre more re∣splendent, which trickling downe to the breast, some of them resemble the Violet, others the Narcissus; but being contained within the eye∣lids, you may as well guesse them to bee the ef∣fects of joy as griefe: such were the teares of
Leucippe, which if she had let drop out of the ca∣binet of her eyes, they would straightway have beene gathered up for Amber. Thersander looking at the same time on her beauty, and her griefe, the one strucke him with admiration, the other with a kinde of angry sorrow▪ in so much that the teares trickled down his eyes, for it is usually seene that there is no stronger motive to compassion, than the mour∣ning of a woman, especially if shee have newly blasted the roses of her cheekes with brmish teares. But if her lover bee in presence, and a witnesse of it, his eyes will never bee at rest, till he have almost exhausted those fountaines. For sure there is in beauty (whose chiefest seat is the eye) a certaine kinde of fascinating power, whereby from the mistresse to the paramour are conveyed some certaine rayes, which by way of sympathy enforce him to be affected as she is, whether well or ill, it is equally delight∣full to him, seeing many times a lover will strive to replenish his eyes with teares, which he will there nourish and keepe in, fearing lest he should unawares let them flow, and his mistresse not see them: which hee the more carefully observes, as knowing that teares are the bloud which trickle from a heart wounded with love.
Thus stood the case with Thersander, he wept that he might curry favour with Leucippe, hope∣ing that she would guesse the cause of his grief to bee no other then her owne. Then he turned about to Sosthenes and said, Thou seest how this woman is dejected, doe what lyes in thy power to comfort her, perhaps my presence may bee troublesome to her, therefore I will bee gone though sore against my will: So hee departed, but ere hee went hee called Sosthenes aside, and bid him speake as much as hee could in his be∣halfe, and that hee should have a care after hee had dispatched the businesse to bee with him by break of day. Meane while Melite as soone as shee had par∣ted from mee, sent one to her countrey farme to cal back Leucippe, telling her that there was now no need of her charmes; the messenger com∣ming thither, saw the maids very busie in the search of Leucippe, who were much disturbed that shee could not bee founde: this newes hee straightway returned with it to his mistresse, but shee understanding not onely of Leucippes being lost, but also my imprisonment, was grievously perplexed; and though shee knew the certainty of the matter, yet shee much suspected Sosthenes to bee the authour of all this mischiefe; where∣fore
shee commanded that publique search should bee made for Leucippe; and to excuse her self to Thersander, shee cunningly invented this intricate tale, wherin 'tis true she told him all the truth, yet so aenigmatically involved in tropes, and circumlocutions, that hee should never fish it out; for when he came home, and with open mouth railed on her on this wise; Thou hast ta∣ken this whoremaster out of my house, thou hast loosed his fetters from off his legges, thou hast set him free, why dost not thou get thee out of my doores after him? what dost thou stay here for get? thee gone I say, and let thy adulterous armes embrace him, which I make no doubt but will be as painfull chaines to him as the former: Then Melite replyed, What whoremaster? what adulterer is that which you twit me in the teeth with? sure you are not in your right senses, would you but put your selfe out of this fretfull humour, and let mee have the use of your eares but a while, I should quickly unfold the whole truth to you; onely before I speake, I say, let mee but desire that all choler and malice being laid aside, that your passion may give place to reason, you judge impartially of what I shall say; This young man whom you have so often abused with the name of adulterer, or at least
suspect to bee my husband, is neither; but by birth a Phaenician, and as well descended, and for vertue, for ought I know qualified, as any citizen of Tyre: sailing by chance this way it was his fortune to bee shipwrackt, and loose the greatest part of his wares upon these shores: which when I heard of, I much commiserated his case, (as not knowing whether the case might stand so with you) and kindly entertained him, thin∣king thus with my selfe, that some good woman or other might at the same time take pitty on thee in the like manner, if thou wert yet alive; but if dead, that it was a most charitable office in mee for thy sake to let no man which had esca∣ped shipwracke passe unpitied, many hundreds of them did I refresh, many of their dead bodies if I but saw them floating on the water, did I most sumptuously interre; and could I but reco∣ver a piece of a broken planke, how did I weepe over it, saying thus with my selfe, perhaps this is a part of that ship wherein my Thersander say∣led: Now of all that have escaped the danger of the sea, and whom I have succoured, this onely man remaineth with mee, if I have shewed him more than ordinary respect, what was it but to expresse my officiousnesse to thee? hee went to sea, so didst thou, his calamity (wherein for
ought I knew was thine represented) did I pitie my dearest husband: Hitherto have I told you how hee came hither. Now when he was come hee bemoaned much the losse of a wife of his, which fame had falsely reported to have beene dead, but a little while after some one or other told him shee was alive, and was with one of my stewards they named Sosthenes; which proved to be true, for going to my country farme there we found the woman; this was the reason hee followed me; Sosthenes is now with you, the wo∣man in the countrey, enquire if all bee not as I have told you, and if you catch mee tripping in the least syllable, call me adulteresse, and what you will, spare me not. This Melite spake, dissembling all this while that she knew how Leucippe was stole away, and intending if Thersander were inquisitive to know the truth, to bring the maides who went along with Leucippe, and were to returne with her the next morning, to testifie that Leucippe could no where be found, and this was the plot why shee would have Leucippe sought for, that Thersander might give more credit to what she said; which though it was most appositely spoken, yet shee went on againe in this manner, Thinke not deare husband that what I tell you is false, for
remember but how chastly I lived with you be∣fore you went to sea, and you will say your selfe that thus to suspect me in your absence, you doe much wrong me; especially seeing that lying rumours of people, who knew not the reason of my familiarity, or why I should so much honour the young man, have beene the sole ground of your suspicion; alas fame is but a very weake intelligencer, should we beleeve all it sayes, we should beleeve that thou also wert shipwrackt· For fame and calumny are near of kindred, this being the daughter of that, the one being more sharpe than a sword, hotter than fire, and to perswade more pre∣valent than the voice of Syrens; the other being more fluid than the water, swifter than the winde, and quicker of flight than any winged fowle: wherefore the words of a detractor once let flye, passe swifter through the ayre than an arrow, not onely wounding the party injur'd, but deluding the parties present with a show of truth, incense them against him which is absent: the fame which issues from this wound is manifold, and is straightway spread abroad, driven by the winde of speech, and bore up on the wings of the tongue, is hurried this way and that way, buzzing in every mans eare it meets. These two plagues have conspired against me, and are the sole obstacle why I am so hardly beleeved.
Melite having spoken this, made profer to take Thersander by the hand to have kissed it, which he refused, yet was a little appeased with the likelyhood of her tale, and grew a little lesse suspicious, seeing that in her story of Leucippe she differ'd not much from Sosthenes; yet hee would not beleeve all that shee spake, for when once a man is incensed with a rumour, hee is not so soone pacified. But Thersander all this while hearing that the maid hee was so in love with, was my wife, be∣gan to bee much troubled; and tooke from this occasion to hate me worse then he had done be∣fore; yet with a resolution, further to enquire whether it were so or no, hee went to bed alone that night. Poore Melite all this while she grieved most excessively, that shee could not bee as good as her word, to performe what shee had promised; and Sosthenes he on the other side promised Ther∣sander great matters of Leucippe, and went to her again, & looking very merrily said thus to her, al things goe as well as wee could wish, my Lacoe∣na, Thersander is almost mad for thy love; nay which is more, perhaps hee will make thee his wife, yet thou must know that all this is done through my meanes, I have by extolling thy
beauty above measure, so rooted and engrafted thee into his favour, that nothing shall ever se∣parate you: cease to weepe therefore and be of good comfort, goe offer sacrifice to Venus as a thankfull acknowledgement of so great a favour as thou art made mistresse of. Then Leucippe an∣swered, The gods requite thee with as great a favour as this, and grant that thou never have more felicity in any thing then I have in the newes thou bringst mee: Sosthenes not thinking shee had abused him, but that she spoke serious∣ly, went on in this manner; Heare mee further Lacoena I will tell thee the state and condition of this Thersander, which shall not a little rejoyce thee: first know then that hee is husband to that rich woman Melite, and come of the chiefest family in Ionia, but his riches exceed his paren∣tage, and his vertues outballance his wealth; I need not here tell thee that he is young withall, and beautifull (thy owne eyes having beene witnesse of it) both which things women much desire. Here Leucippe could no longer endure this knave Sosthenes, but railed on him, How long thou beast wilt thou goe on to pollute my chast eares with thy obscene talk? what have I to doe with Thersander? if hee bee beautifull, it is for Melites sake; if rich, for his countrey sake; if
gentle, milde, or valiant, let him bee so to those which stand in need of his helpe; for let him be as rich as Croesus, or as poore as Codrus, it is no∣thing to mee: why dost thou commend him to mee so highly? when he shall cease to sollicit other mens wives, and be content with his own, then praise him to mee, and I will gladly heare thee. What you jest sweet? saith Sosthenes. No indeed said Leucippe this is neither time nor place to jest in: let me alone, let my Fortune have her full swing, and the thread of my destinie be spun out as farre as it will, for I see that I am in the hands of Pirats. Sosthenes replyed, Sure thou art mad beyond all cure: to have a rich husband, honour, beauty, pleasure, and all the delights that may bee, prostitute themselves unto thee, is this to fall into the hands of Pirats? nay to have such a husband whom the gods have after so pe∣culiar a manner indulged, as to recall from the very jawes of death: And here hee took occa∣sion to tell her the story of his shipwracke, ma∣king her beleeve that the gods took speciall no∣tice of this man at sea, above all the rest, sen∣ding a Dolphin to rescue him, (as the Poets feigne of Arion) and that by speciall providence hee was reserved in the midst of his shipwracke. Leucippe gave him no answer to this, so hee went
on; Consider but how much it may bee in thy way if thou consent, and have a care that thou answere not Thersander as thou hast answered mee, for by this means thou mayst turne his pa∣tience into fury, for as he is most milde while hee is pleased, so is he most impatient when hee is crossed. The meekest men if they light on a milde disposition are most affable, but if on an obstinate one, they are most implacable; nature having so provided, that hee which is ready meekly to second a good action, is as forward bitterly to revenge a bad. Thus much of Leucippe. Clinias and Satyrus understanding that I was in prison (for Melite had tolde them) came to mee by night, intending there to live to beare me company, but the Iailour forced them away quickly, not permitting them to stay. I desired of them before they went, that as soone as they heard that Leucippe was returned they should come to me againe; all this while remembring Melites promise, I was betwixt feare and hope, hope being annext to my feare, and feare to my hope. Afterwards when it was day Sosthenes retur∣ned to Thersander, and Satyrus to mee. Thersan∣der asked of Sosthenes how the case stood with Leucippe, whether she would yeeld to him: but
Sosthenes cunningly concealing the truth, inven∣ted this lye: She denies you Sir, yet so faintly, as I am perswaded it is not from her heart, and for ought I can gather by her, shee is willing e∣nough, but fearefull of the disgrace, and that when you have enjoyed her you will cast her off. For this matter, saith Thersander, let her not be afraid, for to confesse ingenuously, I am lin∣ked to her with such strong bands of affection, that nothing can separate me from her. Yet one thing I faine would know, whether she be wife to that young man, as Melite told me. Thus while they were talking one with ano∣ther, they came to the place where Leucippe was, and hearing her before they came neare the doore, bemoaning her miseries in a loud and la∣mentable tone, they stood a while and listned. Woe is me, O Clitophon, (that name was of∣ten in her mouth) thou knowest not where I am, nor can I tell where fortune hath bestowed thee, but both of us live ignorant one of the o∣thers miseries! has Thersander caught thee in his house? has hee exposed thee to publique shame? I have beene many times about to aske Sosthenes, but I could not safely doe it▪ for should I aske him concerning thee as my husband, I feare much lest it may worke thee some mis∣chief,
by incensing Thersander against thee; but if as a guest, or stranger, there is roome here also for suspition, for none will imagine that a wo∣man should bee so sollicitous and inquisitive af∣ter one to whom she hath no relation. But why doe I say so? for I have often assayed to speake yet could never bring my tongue handsomly in frame, but have beene forc'd to conceale my griefe, and talke thus to my selfe: O Clitophon, the husband onely of Leucippe, the faithfull and constant husband, whom the flattering intice∣ments of a woman could not allure; nay more, whom the very thought of Leucippe (which till now I did scarce beleeve) deterr'd from injoy∣ing her whom he lay with; how did I dwell on thy lippes when we met at the farme? how of∣ten did I kisse thee? but suppose Thersander should come in and aske mee some more questi∣ons, what answer shall I give him? shall I take off the vizard which all this while I have wore, and discover unto him the naked truth? thinke not me a base bond-slave, Thersander, know that I am the daughter of the chiefe Captaine of the Byzantians army, and wife to a young man of Tyre of no small repute, I am no woman of Thes∣saly, nor am I called Lacoena, this was the pirates covetousnesse to rob me of my name also: Cli∣tophon
is my husband, my country Byzantium, my father Sostratus, my mother Panthia: should I give thee this answer, I suppose thou wouldest scarce beleeve me, or if thou shouldest beleeve me, yet doe I feare that my husbands importu∣nitie for my liberty may be his ruine; I will once more put on my vizard, and be Lacoena againe. Thersander hearing this, turned about to So∣sthenes, and said, Didst thou hear what an incre∣dible story she told, yet full of love? how many things did she rip up? how mournfully did she complaine? why should shee accuse her selfe? but what doe I trouble my selfe to aske these questions? that adulterer is preferred before me, that theefe hath stole away her affection from me, I thinke the villaine is some witch or conjurer, Melite is mad for him, and Leucippe she dotes on him: 'fore Iove I could wish that I were Clitophon. To this Sosthenes replyed, I think it not fit master that wee should desist now wee have gone so farre; goe to her once more, let not the love she beares to that adulterous slave deterre thee, for shee makes use of him but for meere necessity, because perhaps she can get no body else, I make no question but when once you shall succeed him (for you are many degrees handsomer) she will quite forget him, and settle
her affection onely on you. For a new flame ex∣tinguishes the former, and the nature of that sexe is, that hee which is then in place winnes their hearts: they will be enamoured on one for the present, but hee being out of their sight, is as soone out of their mind. These words did somewhat cheere up Thersan∣ders drooping spirits▪ For nothing is more apt to gaine credit than a faire soothing promise, wherein there is but the least shadow of probability, to which beleefe wee are not onely drawne with the hope of ob∣taining what is promised, but compelled by the concu∣piscible part of our minde, earnestly to prosecute what we so eagerly coveted. After Thersander had overheard what Leucippe had spoke to her selfe, he staid a while lest shee should have suspected him, and endeavoring to frame his countenance, as if hee had hopes shee would now be more tractable, went in to her, whom as soone as he had beheld, he was all on fire, for shee seemed now farre more beautifull than before, the flame which with her last looks was kindled in his breast, being nourished by his long absence from her, and now kindled a∣fresh by this second visite, insomuch that hee could scarce forbeare adoring of her, but he re∣frained a little, and sitting downe by her began to talke idlely, for his words did not hang well
together, which is the custome of all lovers when they come in company with their mistres∣ses, something they will be prating, yet heed they not what they speak; for fixing their minds onely upon her whom they talke with, their tongues destitute of the guidance of reason, run at randome; and as he talked he put his arme a∣bout her necke as if hee would have embraced her, Leucippe perceiving this gave him not so much as a looke, but hid her face in her bosome; but he still persisted, & was very earnest to have had a kisse from her, shee all the while denyed him, and covered her face more, so both of them having strived sufficiently, whether hee obtain∣ed what he desired, or whether hee was weary with struggling, the strife was ended at last; and Thersander desirous to have her angry, and to chide with him a little, put his left hand under her chinne, and with his right hand tooke hold of the haire of her head, forcing her to look up; but Leucippe replyed to him upon this: Thou hast neither showne thy selfe free-borne, nor a gentleman; in this thou imitatest thy servant Sosthenes, who in my minde is a very fit man for such a master; wherefore desist I say, and let me alone, for thou hast no hopes of obtaining any thing from me, unlesse thou couldest out of
Thersander bee metamorphosed into Clitophon. Hee hearing this was scarce his owne man, he was so distracted with anger and love; which two passions are like torches to seare the minde, both of them having heat, yet contrary one to the other, though in their power they are equall; the one stirring us up to hatred, the other to good will: nor doe they dwell farre apart; this having the liver for its abode, that the heart; both of them having seized on a man, his minde which is as it were the ballance, weighes them, whilst the one strives to outpoise the other, but for the most part love gets the upper hand, having obtained what it desired; but if it sees that it is neglected, it straightway invokes the assistance of anger, who be∣ing neighbour to it is ready at hand to lend her helpe; both which like two flames joyning in one, conspiring, incense the minde: and if anger have once tooke pos∣session of loves habitation, it straightway turnes him out of doores, and is so farre from helping him to ob∣taine his wishes, that shee fetters him like a slave, not suffering him to worke any reconcilement, though hee much desire it; by which meanes it comes to passe that love is violently oppressed, and striving to regaine his lost power is repelled, being forced to hate those whom hee intended to have loved. But when this anger hath raged enough, and is as it were glutted with revenge, having taken its full swing, at last abates somewhat
of its fury; then by degrees love gathers strength, and mustering up affection, desire, and good will, deposes anger from her throne: and recounting with him∣selfe how injuriously he hath raged against those whom he had formerly loved, grieves much, labours to cleare himselfe, and makes suite to come in favour againe, affirming that where hee once tooke distaste hee now takes great delight. By which it appeares that as long as love can have what he desires, hee is milde and gentle, but if hee loose this, anger gets the upper hand, who though shee seemed to sleep is upon little warning awaked, and is ready to revenge the least affront, or contempt which hath beene offered to love. Wherefore Thersander as long as he had pos∣sibility of having his will on Leucippe, folly de∣voted himselfe to her service; but seeing his hopes to bee now quite frustrate, forgetting the former delight which he had taken in her beau∣ty, smote her on the face, uttering these words; Thou base libidinous bond-slave, I now finde that report hath not belyed thee to mee, mine eyes are witnesses of more wickednesse by thee than ever mine ears were; dost thou disdaine my company, scorne to talke with mee, and re∣fuse a kisse from thy master? But I rather think that all this is but thy dissimulation, feigning that thou detestest that which thou most of all de∣sirest:
For those lookes of thine which would faine make me beleeve that thou art in despaire, are but personated, and such as thou hast upon occasion beene used to put on, ever since thou hast first used the profession of a whore, and fol∣lowed this adulterer Clitophon. Well, seeing thou wilt not entertaine mee as a friend, thou shalt know ere long that thou shalt awe mee as a ma∣ster. Leucippe answered, You meane sure to play the tyrant with mee, but doe your worst, so I may keepe my selfe chast: And turning about to Sosthenes, shee said, I call even thee to witnesse how patiently I suffer all these reproaches, though I endured farre worse at thy hands. At which Sosthenes (who being palpably guilty of what shee accused him, could not choose but blush) said, It were very fit, master, that this idle baggage were well whipt with thongs to day, that to morrow shee might learne not to contemne her master. Doe as your servant bids you Thersander, (for he counsels you very well) command that all the tortures you can invent bee brought hither, you shall wreck all your ma∣lice on mee, whether you bee minded to break my limbes on the wheele, scourge me with whips, seare my flesh with hot irons, or runne mee through with swords: you shall see a fine
combate; for even I a poore silly woman will fight against all these, and get the victorie. Thou callest Clitophon an adulterer when thou art one thy selfe: But heare me, do'st not feare that the anger of that deity, whom in going to defile me, thou so highly offendest, should strike thee dead, Diana I mean, who is the tutelar goddesse of this Citie? why do thy arrowes sleep in thy quiver, O divinest goddesse! why lettest thou not one flie at this impudent villaine, who dares offer in thy presence, and in thy own City to deflowre a Virgin? Thou a Virgin, saith Thersander, which hast lyen all night with Pirats? thou shamelesse strumpet, what, is a theeves chamber turned into a philosophy schoole? or was there never a one amongst them who had his eies in his head? Aske of Sosthenes who first forc't me, and used me worse than any Pirate would have done, whether I am a maid or no, the Pirats were far more modest and civill than you have been, they never offered that to mee which you have done; I may better call your citie a recep∣tacle of theeves, seeing here I have found those who would have done that which they never attempted. But thou knowest not how farre thy basenesse will promote my honour; for shouldest thou at this instant kill mee, the world
would say thus of mee; Leucippe after shee had lived so long among Pirats, after shee had been stole away by Chereas, and escaped from the violence which Sosthenes would have offered her, yet at length was found to bee a maid▪ but this is but a small commendation for mee▪ this were farre greater; Leucippe after the violence of Thersander who was worse then all the pirats, in∣to whose hands shee fell before, chose rather to loose her life then her virginity: goe to there∣fore, bring hither quickly the wheele, the fire, the sword, the whips, let your partner Sosthenes instruct you: I a naked unarmed woman will hold up the buckler of my freedome against them all; this can neither scourging hurt, the sword cut, or the fire burne, this I will never loose, and though you should straightway cast mee into a furnace, the heat of it shall have no power over this. The end of the Sixth Booke.
THE SEVENTH BOOKE. The Argument. Thersander to bee revenged on Leucippe intends to poison Clitophon, but fearing the rigour of the law, he takes this course: hee casts one into the prison where Clitophon was, who should tell him that he chanced to be in company with one who was apprehended for murthering Leucippe, by the in∣stigation of Melite, and that the party himselfe which did the deed was fled, and hee was cast in prison upon suspicion that he was his confederate. Clitophon beleeves this, and in publique court (to revenge himselfe on Melite for the supposed killing of Leucippe) confesseth not onely that hee lay with Melite, but also that hee conspired with
her for the making away of Leucippe, both which crimes his friend Clinias, who was then in place, endeavoured to cleare him from, but both hee and Clitophon misse of their aymes, for sentence is given by the Iudges, that according to the lawes of the Land, Clitophon for accusing himselfe should suffer death, and Melite should have some lesser punishment inflicted on her: but as good for∣tune would have it, by reason of some solemnity whereof Sostratus Leucippes father was the chiefe author, Clitophons execution is deffered; Sostratus as hee had beene told the night before by Diana in a dreame, findes Clitophon, at whom he is much offended for the stealing away of his daughter Leucippe; but afterwards it is told him that Leucippe was in the Temple of Diana (whither she had fled as to an asylum, having ta∣ken opportunity to steale away when Sosthenes was absent) by which meanes he is not onely ap∣peased, but Clitophon is also freed from his owne accusation for the present: afterwards he walkes under bale of the chiefe Priest, till hee come to his second appearance, to be fully set at liberty.
THersander therefore seeing Leucippe so obstinate, was much distracted, for he grieved that his hopes were frustrate, and was angry that his faire profer should bee so negle∣cted and contemned; which made him like one wounded with love, study what he were best in this plight to doe; he spake not a word to Leu∣cippe, but in a rage runne speedily out of the roome: after that talking with Sosthenes that hee might put a period to his distracted thoughrs, he went to him which was keeper of the prison, and would have had him poisoned mee, which course upon better consideration hee disliking (for that the people were very severe against such delinquents, and had not long before that time caused one to be put to death for the same crime) obtained thus much of the keeper, that he might cast a man into the prison who was no malefactor, but privy to his designes: who should undermine me, and catch me tripping, if he could, in my discourse▪ this fellow had Ther∣sander cunningly instructed to make mention of Leucippe by some meanes or other, and to say that shee was slaine by the consent of Melite; which plot he invented, that though I had quit∣ted
my selfe of the crime which I was accused of, yet I would never make further search after her who was dead: And the reason why hee would have him say that Melite slew her, was lest Leucippe being slaine I should marry Melite, whom he meant to put away, (and this he might justly suspect, seeing it was plaine that I loved her) which if I had done he could not so safely have enjoyed Leucippe; wherefore thus hee thought with himselfe, that when I should hear that Melite had done mee this injury, I should hate and detest her for it, and (as having little heart to stay with such an enemy) in a rage leave the Citie. The fellow comming into the prison to mee began his tale, but first gave a great sigh, saying; What hope of life is there, or how shall a man be secure, seeing danger attends on him for wel∣doing, and that to live justly is a sufficient accu∣sation? Alas how was it possible I should ghesse what hee that travailed with mee had commit∣ted? to this purpose would he many times talke to himselfe in my hearing, to the end that I should aske him the meaning of what hee spake, but, alas, I was otherwise emploied, my griefs had so taken me up, that I had not leisure to enquire after anothers: But one which was bound with us
seeing him to weepe so excessively (for those which are in any distresse are desirous to know anothers misfortune as well as their owne, for that the communicating of their griefes each to other, is a kinde of easing their afflicted minds) said, What hath befallen thee, for it should seeme thou art attached for that whereof thou wast never guilty, which I gather from what hath happened to mee. Then hee began to tell mee the cause of his imprisonment, which I did not much listen to; afterwards he demanded of the other his story, to which hee began on this manner; Yesterday departing from this citie, and jour∣neying toward Smyrna, one met me, and deman∣ded of me whither I was travelling; when he had understood that I was going to Smyrna, he told mee that it was the very place hee was bound for too; together we went, and as the custome of travellers is, we eased the length of our jour∣ney with a great deal of good talke; but turning into an Inne to bait, foure men followed us, and making as if they came in to dine there, sate downe by us, and looked very hard upon us, nodding their heads one to the other, which made mee suspect that they talked of us, though I knew not the reason: The fellow that was
with me began straightway to waxe pale, stam∣mer in his speech, and tremble; which they perceiving, laid hold of us both, bound us with ropes, and smote my fellow traveller on the face; who as if he had beene already upon the racke, cryed out though no man examined him, I slew Leucippe, having of Melite, Thersanders wife, a hundred pieces of gold for my paines, for it was shee that hired mee to doe this villa∣ny; the money here I give you to a farthing, spare my life I beseech you, and defraud not your selves of so much treasure. I hearing Thersander and Melite named, began to prick up my eares, & to listen more attentive∣ly to what he said; then turning mee about to him, I asked of him, What is this Melite? Hee answered, one of the chiefest women in this Ci∣tie, who is in love with a young man here, (they say he is of Tyre) who having by some chance lost his sweet heart, and found her againe at home in Melites house, she out of a jealousie that the maid should draw his affection from her, committed her into the hands of him whom it was my hard fortune to accompany in my jour∣ney, to be slain; and he did the deed, but I poore wretch who was neither witting nor willing to it, or privy to the least word or deed which past
about it, am apprehended for it; but which is worst of all, after these foure men had gone a little from the Inne, they took the money of the fellow, and let him goe, but me they brought before the Iudge. Having heard this turbulent story, I could neither speake nor weepe, for my tongue was tyed, and my teares dried up, every joynt trem∣bled, my heart fainted, and my soule was well nigh fled out of my body; but after I had reco∣vered my selfe out of this drunkennesse of grief, I asked of him, how did this fellow which was hired kill her? where did he bestow her body? but he having once pricked me in this veine, and knowing that he had what he desired, was ever after so mute, that I could not extort a word more from him; for when I asked him any more questions, he told mee churlishly that sure I sus∣pected him to have a hand in it, whereof he was utterly guiltlesse. So that concerning the murderer, after my much inquiry, I could learne nothing of him, onely this, that the maid was slaine, but where, or how, he would not tell mee, which made the teares trickle downe my cheekes, and discover that portion of griefe which had lay hid all this while in my breast. For as in a body beaten with
rods, the impression they leave is not straight∣way seene; or as in one who hath beene newly bitten with a Bore, the wound appeares not sud∣dainly, being deep, but a while after there arises a white streake, from whence straightway the bloud flowing shewes where the wound is: so in a minde wounded with some bad newes, the print it makes is not seene, not doe any teares fall (which are the bloud issuing from such a wound) till griefe hath fully satisfied her hun∣gry appetite; then doth the wound gape, and the teares forcing a passage through the eyes, stream down like the water of some fruitfull spring: all this I found to be true in me, for being first struck with the news of Leucippes death, as with a dart, I could neither speake nor weepe, till my griefe having tooke time to breathe it selfe as it were, with many a teare and sigh I burst forth into these words. What divell was it which first tempted mee with this momentany joy? who did me the mis∣chiefe first to shew me Leucippe, on whom my eyes could scarce yet ever have their pleasure? for if I did chance to see her, yet could I never bee satisfied with seeing, but all the pleasure which I have yet had has beene like a dreame: alas my poore Leucippe, how often wilt thou re∣new
my griefe by thy often dying? I think for ever: seeing every day one death comes on the necke of another: but as yet fortune hath but mockt, and dallied with me, making me beleeve that thou wert dead; now therefore thou art dead in good earnest, and I feare thou art quite taken from mee: before from that personated death of thine I had some comfort, first by in∣terring thy whole body, next thy carcase with∣out a head; what profited it thee alas that thou twice escapedst the hands of theeves, and shoul∣dest bee slaine by Melite? that vile woman I whom though thy murderesse, I more vile have so often kissed and embraced, nay imparted more to, than ever I did to thee. While I thus reasoned with my selfe, Clinias came to see me, whom I told that I had decreed to dye; but he bid me be of good comfort, tel∣ling me that I knew not whether she might once more be alive againe, or no; hath she not beene divers times dead already, yet revived? if you have a minde therefore to kill your selfe, be ad∣vised, and stay till you are sure the newes you heare is true. Thou triflest, (said I) what further evidence wouldst thou have, or what better in∣telligence wouldst thou desire? I am resolved therefore to die, and I have thought upon such a
course, as that eyes sore of the gods Melite shall fall with mee: I had intended thou knowest to have cleared my selfe of the adultery whereof Thersander accused me, but now I have decreed the contrary; I will acknowledge the fault; and further confesse, that Melite and I being in love, conspired to the making away of Leucippe; by which meanes I shal be freed from this wretch∣ed life of mine, and the wicked Melite shall have her just reward. The gods forbid, will you by making your selfe guilty of so foule a fact as the death of your Leucippe, forfeit your life? I an∣swered him, that no fact was foule whereby a man might revenge himselfe on his enemy, and so the case stood with mee. Within a short while after my fellow priso∣ner, who had told mee of Leucippes death, was sent for (as I was told) to answere to the accusa∣tions which were laid against him before the Judge: The very day that this was done Clini∣as and Satyrus who still continued comforting mee, hired a house and thither went, that they might not bee discovered to bee in company with me, who was suspected to bee Melites bed∣fellow. The day after to the Court I was brought, where Thersander was ready with no small pre∣paration,
having entertained no lesse then ten advocates against me, and as sollicitous was Me∣lite in her owne defence as hee; after they had made a long invective to the Judge against mee, I being permitted to speak for my selfe, beganne thus▪ What either Melite or Thersanders advocats have hitherto said, are but toyes wherewith they have gulled the Court, will you but lend mee your eares a while, I shall as faithfully and carefully as I can, relate the whole matter. had sometime a sweet-heart, shee was by birth a Byzantian, her name was Leucippe, whom I sup∣posing to bee dead, (for the pirats had stole her away in Aegypt) fell by chance in league with Melite, whom I accompanied to this city▪ where I found Leucippe made a slave to Sosthenes her steward; but how he durst make a bond woman of a free, or what commerce there was betwixt him and the pirats, I leave you to decide. Melite understanding that I had found my old sweet-heart, fearing lest shee should share most of my love, tooke counsell to slay her; which counsell I my self did very well approve of, (for why should I deny what is truth?) and upon condition that shee should make mee lord of all shee had, I hired a fellow to kill Leucippe,
who having dispatched his businesse, and for his paines had of me an hundred pieces of gold, fled his countrey, and was never since seene: but love did presently revenge himselfe on me, for ever after that I was so prickt in conscience, that I could not forbeare weeping, nay and at this very instant, though shee bee dead I love her, nor have I accused my selfe for any other end then that I might be sent to my sweet-heart, whose murderer I have beene, and yet whose love I now am. When I had said thus, all that were present, but especially Melite, were astonished at the sud∣daine and unexpected issue of the businesse; while Thersander and his advocates shouted most plausibly: which made Melites advocates ask of her the meaning of what I spake, but she much troubled, denyed somethings flatly, others she confessed, yet so obscurely that they could not well know whether shee were guilty or no; ne∣verthelesse all I spake about Leucippe, onely her death excepted, she told them was true: where∣fore seeing the greatest part of my confession was true, they began thereupon much to suspect Melite, and were in a great streight how they should study a defence for her. But Clinias when there was a great hurly bur∣ly
in the Court steps mee forth, and saith. Give mee leave I pray to speake a little in my friends behalfe, seeing it is a matter concernes his life, which when hee had obtained, hee began with weeping eyes thus; You men of Ephesus, condemne not rashly this young man, who is so willing to die, seeing he rather desires death as a remedie of his mise∣rie, than the due punishment of any crime he is guilty of: he hath accused himselfe of anothers fault, that he might be rid of his life, which his unhappy fortune hath made so loathsome to him; what his misery is I shall briefly shew you. That he had sometimes a sweetheart is most true, and that she was stolne from him by Pirates and sold to Sosthenes, I deny not, for every tittle of what he said ere he came to tell how he was consenting to Leucippes death, I can safely justi∣fie; also that it is reported she is dead, but how, or by what meanes, whether she be slaine, or a∣gaine stole away by pirates, or whether shee bee yet alive, it is uncertaine: but that Sosthenes was in love with her, and not obtaining his will on her, did most severely use her, will appeare by witnesse: now Clitophon supposing he hath lost her utterly, is willing to dye, and therefore feignes himselfe her murderer, for by his owne
confession the sole cause which hath moved him to accuse himselfe, is the grief he conceives for her departure. Consider with your selves againe and againe, I beseech you, whether it bee probable, in any likelihood or reason, that a man should desire to dye with one which hee hath killed; or that any one should bee so lovingly malicious as to take pitty on the party hee hath slaine; such hatred is not so soone appeased. By all the gods beleeve not what he saith, and ad∣judge not one to execution, who should rather be an object of your pity, than your justice: if it be so that he hired one to doe the murder, let him produce the party, or shew the dead body; but if he can doe neither, why should you judge this to be murder? I loved Melite, saith he, and therefore I slew Leucippe; but then I would faine know why hee should call her name in question whom he so much loved? why hee should dye for Leucippes sake, whom he caused to be slaine? what doe you thinke any man so senslesse, that he would love whom he hates, and hate whom he loves? should one not rather thinke that a lo∣ving man would deny the fault, though he were convicted, that he might save her life whom he loves, lest the griefe for her death might cost him his life? it were worth the examination al∣so
why he should accuse Melite▪ if shee bee not guilty. But I beseech you againe and againe that you construe not my speech, as tending to the disgracing of this woman, but rather to the opening of the cause: Melite was in love with this young man, and before her husband, who had beene long at sea, returned, there was talke that they should have beene married; but this young man was so farre from consenting to her unchaste love, that he would by no meanes bee inticed to marry her: besides, having found his sweet-heart with Sosthenes, whom he supposed to have beene dead, hee began more and more to sleight Melite; who seeing the maid, but not knowing her to be Clitophons sweet heart, tooke pitty on her, loosed the chaines wherewith Sosthenes had bound her, and because she saw her lookes to be ingenuous, and speak her free-born, courteously entertained her, and afterwards sent her to her Country house, to oversee some gardens she had there: since which time shee was never seene. That what I now speake is truth, not only Melite, but the two maids which were sent along to accompany her can testifie: and that which makes the poore young man so desperate, is, he suspects that Melite hath caused Leucippe to be slaine, which suspicion of his hath
beene much augmented, and hath incensed him not onely against Melite, but himselfe, by this occasion: There was a fellow-prisoner of his yesterday, who bemoning himselfe and his for∣tunes, told him that as he travailed on the way, he chanced to fal in company with a cutter, who had beene hired to kill a maid, shee that hired him was Melite, shee that he slew was Leucippe; which story how true it is, is not yet knowne; it were good you would search it out: it is a mat∣ter of no great difficulty to finde out, especially having this prisoner in your gaole, who saith he was in company with this murderer; whom in my judgement it were very fit you examine; Sosthenes also may be summoned to appeare, and those maids may bee brought into the Court: of him you may enquire how hee came by Leu∣cippe, of these how she came to be made away: before all these witnesses are throughly exami∣ned, it is neither just nor right that you put him to death upon no other grounds than his madde speeches; for griefe hath quite distracted the man, and bereft him of his senses. So Melite caused the maids to be brought, and desired that Thersander might produce Sosthenes, whom Me∣lite thought the likelier of the two to kill Leu∣cippe, for those who pleaded Melite's cause put in that condition.
But Thersander fearing least all should come to light, sent one of his servants privately to Sost∣henes, that he should with what speed he could get him out of the way, before those who were sent out to apprehend him should come thither. The servant rides to him, tels him the danger, and withall, that he was likely to be strictly ex∣amined, if he suffered himself to be taken: Sosthe∣nes was then by chance with Leucippe, seeking by his smooth and flattering speeches to ease her afflicted minde: Wherefore after much knock∣ing and calling, out hee came at last, where un∣derstanding how the businesse went, full of fear, and supposing the apparitors to bee at his heels already, hee tooke horse, and went straightway to Smyrna; the messenger returned to Thersan∣der. But ere I goe further let mee tell you that the proverb is true, FEARE is the mother of for∣getfulnesse: For when Sosthenes was in this fright▪ hee forgot his businesse in hand, and did not so much as thinke upon shutting the doore where Leucippe was kept: for your slavish natures when they are in the least dangers are most timo∣rous. After this Thersander omitting the first con∣dition, mentioned by Melites advocates, be∣gan to plead on this manner; This young fel∣low
whosoever hee bee, hath plaid the lawyer wisely: But I wonder much at your stupidity, who seeing the murderer manifestly deprehen∣ded in the fact, though his owne confession bee a farre greater evidence against him, keep him in ward so long, and send him not to execution, but sit listning to this dissembling, jugling fel∣low, who hath as good a facultie in lying as in weeping: whom I begin to suspect to have had a hand in the murder himselfe: but I am unwise to make so many words, seeing the case is so cleare: what I feare is this, I shrowdly suspect that hee hath done another murder since this, for that Sosthenes whom they so call for, hath not beene seene in my house this three dayes, it is not unlikely that they have plotted to make him away too, because at my first comming home he told me of my wifes loose behaviour▪ therefore my adversaries knowing I cannot produce him, have cunningly put in this condition; well, I would Sosthenes were alive, that I might bring him as a witnesse: but goe to, let us now sup∣pose Sosthenes to bee here, all that you can aske him is this, whether hee bought the maid, and whether Melite tooke her out of his hands? all this I will confesse; it is granted that he bought her, Melite released her; is there any thing else
you would aske him? surely no; why then So∣sthenes is dismist. But now let mee turne my speech to Melite and Clitophon. What have you done with my servant you stole from me, for she was mine, and no mans else (this Thersander craftily put in by the way, that if Leucippe were yet alive shee should still continue in his service) he added this moreover: Clitophon saith he kild the maid, Me∣lite denies it; but her the maids testimonies con∣fute, for if it appeare, as it doth already, that Me∣lite gave them the charge of her, and they never restored her, what must be become of her? why she was sent out: sent out, to whom? that they tell you not: is it not therefore palpably mani∣fest, that she was delivered into some mans hand to be slaine? which it is likely was concealed from the maids, lest many being privy to it there would incurre a greater danger of having it di∣vulged: for they left her among a company of theeves, where it is very probable they durst not stay to see what would become of her. A∣gaine he tels you a flim flam tale of a fellow pri∣soner of his, who should make mention of this murder, but who should this bee which should tell him all, and the Iudges never a word? had he not denyed that he knew him, he might per∣haps
have beene bidden to produce him, and have beene caught in a lye. How long will your grave and judicious eares suffer themselves to be abused with such trifles and gewgawes, as these are? can you thinke that a man should ac∣cuse himselfe, were he not guilty, and did not the gods by speciall providence compell him to it? Here when Thersander had made an end of speaking, and had taken his oath that hee knew not what was become of Sosthenes, it seemed good therefore to the chiefe of the Iudges (hee was of the bloud royall, and sate still in capitall causes concerning life and death, though hee had some other of the elders of the Citie which did assist him in the administration of justice, and with whom he frequently consulted) it see∣med good to him I say, after he had imparted the matter to his colleagues, that I should suffer death, according to the law, which had provi∣ded, that in case a man did accuse himselfe of murder, without any other evidences, he should straightway bee put to death: some other pu∣nishment they intended for Melite, after they had examined her; and for Thersander, they in∣joyned that the oath hee had taken concerning Sosthenes should be registred; but for mee it was
decreed, that I should bee wrackt to confesse whether Melite were guilty of the murder or no; so my cloathes being taken off, I was moun∣ted upon an engine, where I hung, while some brought whips, some fire, another a wheele; Cli∣nias all this while stood by weeping; when sud∣denly the Priest of Diana was seene to come in∣to the market place, crowned with a laurell, which is a signe alwayes that there are some strangers come from forraigne parts to doe sa∣crifice to the goddesse Diana: this accident if it happen while any malefactor is about to be pu∣nished, causes his execution to bee deferr'd till the sacrifice is ended; therefore at that time I escaped. Now who doe you thinke was chiefe author of these solemnities, but Sostratus Leucippes fa∣ther? for when the Byzantians by the helpe of Diana had got the victory over the Thracians, with whom they waged warre, they thought fit by way of gratitude to the goddesse for her as∣sistance, to offer her some great sacrifice: be∣sides, Diana her selfe had privately appeared to Sostratus in a dreame, foretelling him that hee should at Ephesus finde his daughter and his ne∣phew. At the same time Leucippe perceiving the
doores open where shee was, and fearing lest Sosthenes whom she saw goe forth, should stand before the doore, shee was fearfull to steale a∣way; at last seeing he came not in againe, shee tooke heart of grace; for recounting with her selfe how many times before, and how unex∣pectedly she had been freed out of greater dan∣gers, and when she was almost past all hope, she decreed to take hold of this faire opportunity fortune offered her; for the temple of Diana be∣ing not farre distant from the place where shee then was, out she went, and thither betooke her selfe. This Temple heretofore durst no woman who was free borne enter, but to men and mai∣dens it was alway open, yet was it lawfull for such women servants as were accused by their masters for any crime, to flie thither as to an A∣sylum or place of refuge: then did the Iudges give sentence betweene the servant and her ma∣ner; for if it did appeare that the master had not wrong'd her, hee vvas injoyned by them to re∣ceive her againe into his service, and solemnly to sweare that hee vvould never any more so much as thinke of her running avvay; but if the maids complaint vvere just, then shee should continue there ever after, and attend the altar
of the goddesse. While Sostratus vvas leading the Priest (who had commanded the Court should breake up towards the temple,) Leucippe entred in and mist but a litle of meeting her fa∣ther. When the assembly was broke up, and that I was set free, a great multitude throng'd about mee, some of them pitied my case, others pray∣ed for me, others asked me questions: amongst whom Sostratus standing, as soone as he saw me knew me, for as I told you at the beginning of my story, hee was sometime at Tyre when the festivals of Hercules were celebrated, and there stayed a great while before our flight; by reason whereof hee might easily know mee; especially being told in a vision that hee should finde us both here. So comming nearer to mee hee said, Here truly is Clitophon, but where is my Leu∣cippe? Then I knowing him, cast my eyes on the ground; while those that stood about mee told him all that I had accused my selfe of, which he hearing, sighed deeply, and smiting himself on the head, flew in my face, and almost digged my eyes out; meane time I was so farre from resi∣sting him, that I held my face to him while hee strucke mee. But Clinias stepping forth held his hand, and asked him what he meant, so violent∣ly
to fall upon one who loved Leucippe far dea∣rer then he did himself, and profered to dye be∣cause shee was supposed to bee dead? Many o∣ther arguments he added also to appease his fu∣ry. But hee calling often on Diana, began thus to complaine; Didst thou, O goddesse, bid me come hither for this end? were these thy pre∣dictions? I did beleeve thy dreames till now to bee true, and was confident that I should have found my daughter here, and see in stead of her I finde her murderer. Clinias hearing him make mention of a dream, was not a little glad, and wisht Sostratus to be of good cheare, telling him that the goddesse would not falsifie her word, and if he would be∣the prophetique spirit which was in him, hee durst promise him that Leucippe without all que∣stion was yet alive, seeing Diana to make good her promise, had delivered Clitophon out of the the executioners hands. While they were yet talking, one of the keepers of the temple runne speedily thither, and brought newes to the Priest, that a Virgin which was a stranger was come to Diana for protection, and was at that time in the Temple. When I heard this, I be∣gan to looke more chearfully, and was almost revived againe. Clinias turning to Sostratus said,
My prophecies are true, you see. They asked afterwards of the Sexton whether she were faire or no: He told them that, Diana excepted, he never saw one fairer in his life. Then I leaping for joy asked whether her name were Leucippe; answere was made it was; and that shee said her Countrey was Byzantium, her father Sostratus: Clinias at this gave a shout for joy, but Sostratus good man swooned. I cut a caper as high almost as the clouds, and flew as if I had beene driven by some executioner to the temple, my keepers supposing I had beene fled from them, runne af∣ter mee, and cryed out stop the theefe; but had you seene how fast I runne, you would have said I had had Mercuries shooes on my feet: But as fast as I went some caught me, and fell a beating of mee, I began to take courage and strike them againe, but they went to haile me to prison: while wee were bustling the priest and Clinias were at hand; and Clinias asked them whither they would lead me, seeing I was acquitted of that whereof I had accused my selfe. But Sostra∣tus more punctually clearing mee, affirming that hee himself was father to her whom it was sup∣posed I had slaine, appealed them then, the stan∣ders by were so farre from hayling mee to pri∣son, that they were all most devoutly thankful to
Diana, that I had acquitted my self: The keep∣ers not daring to let me goe being a condemned man, and they having no commission to doe it, the Priest at Sostratus intreaty was bale for mee, that when ever I was summoned again, I should make my appearance. On these conditions my fetters were taken off, and Sostratus and I ranne joyfully to the Temple of Diana. But the old proverb I found true, That fame is swifter of foot than the speediest messenger, for though wee made such exrraordinary haste, yet was the newes there before us. Leucippe had intelligence of all, and specially of her fathers comming, which made her come out of the temple to meet him, whom though shee embraced, yet was her eyes all the while on mee: modesty and bashfulnesse made mee refraine embracing her at that time, yet did I looke earnestly on her, and this was all the salutation which passed between us at our meeting. The end of the seventh Booke.
THE EIGHTH BOOKE. The Argument. Thersander and Clitophon fall out in the Temple, which beginnes a new suit betweene them; to the Court they are both summon'd, where not onely theirs, but Leucippe and Melites cases are both stoutly pleaded by their advocates: at last it is de∣creed by the Iudges, that triall should bee made of Leucippes virginity, by making her goe downe into Pans cave, where by the sound of a pipe which hung there, they should know whether shee were a maid or no. Clitophon was to take his oath whe∣ther he had ever to doe with Melite, but shee her selfe was to enter the fountaine Styx, which would almost drowne any perjur'd woman: in all these
trials they come cleare off: and Thersander flies away with much disgrace, fearing he should bee stoned by the people. Leucippe after this tells how it came to bee thought that the pirates cut off her head; this one thing onely was wanting to the per∣fecting of the story: which afterward is shut up with the joyfull mariage of Clitophon and Leu∣cippe. BVT Thersander, while wee were a∣bout to sit downe and talke of what had past, came running speedily into the Temple, bring∣ing some witnesses with him, and turning him about to the Priest, with a loud voice said, I give thee to understand before al these which are present, that thou hast offended against the lawes of our City, in relea∣sing one who was condemned to dye, and in sheltring here that lascivious queane my maid, that insatiate whore, whom I would faine know upon what grounds thou shouldst detaine from me, she being my servant. I hearing Leucippes chastity to be questioned, and that he called her servant, answered, Thou art the slave, the mad man, the adulterer, Leucippe is free borne, and worthy the goddesses enter∣tainment.
Which when he heard, he said, Dare you sirrah which are a condemned man, and bound▪ talke so saucily? and with that fell upon me in a most violent manner, and strucke me on the face, that whole streames of bloud issued out of my nosthrills; but while he was beating mee on the mouth, he chanced unwisely to dash his fingers against my teeth; whereat fetching a deepe sigh he started backe, so my teeth, by wounding his right hand, revenged the injury my nose received, after he saw his fingers bleed, like an effeminate white-livered knave, hee fell a howling, and left off beating mee, and I on the other side making as if I had not seene his hurt, made all the Temple ring with my outcries and exclamations: Where shall wee bee safe from the outragious violence of such swashbucklers? What gods will take care of us, seeing Diana hath left us? we are beaten in the very Temple it selfe, and have many a sore stroke inflicted on us even before the altars of the gods, such out∣ragious facts as these are usually done in desart places, where there may be no witnesse: but thou snatchest the sword of justice out of the gods hands; and whereas this roofe is wont to be a refuge for the most notorious malefactors, I who am most innocent (poore wretch) while
the goddesse looked on, have received a wound; who can deny but that the blow was as well in∣tended unto her as me? but his drunken fury could not bee satisfied with this, hee must also wound me, and by shedding humane bloud as they doe in the warres, defile this blessed pave∣ment: did ever any one in Ephesus offer such a sacrifice to Diana? On the altars of the Scythi∣ans, and of the inhabitants of Taurica, for in∣cense they burne mans flesh to their gods, and offer up the bloud on the altar of Diana: where∣fore thou hast of Ephesus made Scythia. Why didst thou not draw a sword at mee? alas that needed not, seeing that bloudy hand of thine which hath often beene inured to murder, hath done as much as if it had beene armed. While I thus bemoaning my selfe, some which were in the Temple came flocking about me, the most part whereof exclaimed against him as much as I did. The Priest himselfe said, Now I see thy impudence, who durst commit this outrage in the Temple: which made mee boldly to say, You men of Ephesus, upon no o∣ther grounds than I was now beaten, was I of a freeman and a citizen of no meane place, made a slave, and brought in so great danger of my life, that had not the goddesse her selfe by dete∣cting
this mans false accusations freed me, I had utterly perished. But now it is fit I goe out of the Temple to wash my face, for it were a great impiety in mee if I should pollute these sacred waters with bloud, so unjustly shed. Meane while Thersander, while some thrust him out of the Temple, as he departed mutter'd these words: For your part sirrah, you are con∣demned already, and I will take order your exe∣cution shall not any longer be deferr'd; but for that punke which counterfeits her selfe a maid, the Pipe shall make triall of her. When hee was gone I washt my face, and when supper time was come we were kindly en∣tertained by the Priest; but while wee sate at meate I was so conscious of the injury I had done Sostratus, that I durst not looke him in the face, which he perceiving was ashamed to look on me; so that wee had but a melancholy ban∣quet of it: yet after two or three cups had gone round, and Bacchus who is the sole author of all liberty of speech, had made us leave blushing, the Priest first turning himselfe to Sostratus said, I pray guest will you tell mee the full story of this businesse, for it seemes to me to containe in it many delightfull passages, besides such talke as this doth very well suite with a banquet of
wine. Sostratus taking hold of this opportunity, told him that what he could say was onely this, His name was Sostratus, his Countrey Byzanti∣um, that he was uncle to mee, and father to Leu∣cippe: the rest he bid me not be afraid to tell, say∣ing whatsoever crosses I have had, I ascribe not unto thee, but make my adverse fortune author of them: besides, the remembrance of such dangers as wee have escaped, are so farre from grieving us, that they much delight us. Then I beganne to relate all that happened to mee since I left Tyre, every thing in order: first my sayling and my shipwracke, next my voyage into Aegypt, and how the shepheards dealt with us; after that, how Leucippe was stoln away, Menelaus plot to save her from being sa∣crificed, Charmides love, Chaereas potion, the Pi∣rates stealing away Leucippe, and the wound on my thigh, the scarre whereof I shewed them: But when I came to what past betwixt Melite and me, I made the best of it I could, first rela∣ting her extraordinary love, then my conti∣nence; how long she was a suiter to me, and how long I milked her hopes; all that she said, and all that past betwixt us, except one thing, and that was how when wee sayled from Alexandria to Ephesus we both lay in one bed. Last of all, the
respect and attendance I had at her house, the costly banquets shee made me, my false accusa∣tion, and every thing which happened till the very instant that Sostratus came to Ephesus, ex∣cepting onely what I did in the ship: and this I told them was all I could say of my selfe: what Leucippe had undergone was farre more: for she was made a slave, did dig and delve, was depri∣ved of the ornament of her head, her haire; eve∣ry thing which shee had suffered, I set out with such excellent language, that when I came to talke of Sosthenes and Thersander, I spoke more highly in her commendation than my owne, chiefly ayming by so extolling her, to make her father the more in love with her, telling him that all the mischiefe and crosses that were pos∣sible to be inflicted upon any poore wench shee suffered, one onely excepted, for she was to this very minute as pure and undefiled a virgin, as she was at her departure from Byzantium; which I would not have you thanke me for, who thogh I fled, never did that which was the end why I fled, but her, who kept her selfe chast amongst pirates, and withstood the violence of that im∣pudent and immodest slave Thersander, whose assaults were worse then any shee received from them.
Wee agreed both of us to flie, yet was it love compell'd us to it, so that our fault is the more excuseable; nay more, we have in our whole journey behaved our selves as brother and si∣ster each to other; and my virginity (if a man may be properly said to bee a maid) I have kept untouched, as well as Leucippe, who hath lately betaken her selfe to the temple of Diana. But, O Lady Venus, thinke not thy selfe ne∣glected, that wee have not yet sacrificed unto thee, he which should have made up the match was absent, but now is come, wherefore bee propitious to thy servants▪ while I was spea∣king this the Priest was amazed, but Sostratus all the while I related his daughters miseries wept. When I had done I told them that they had both our stories; now I would request the priest to tell mee one thing, what were the meaning of Thersanders last words when hee went angry out of the temple, and threatned Leucippe with a pipe? You do well to ask, saith he, and it were discourtesie in us who know it, if we should not tell you. Doe you not see you grove behind the temple? in it is a cave, into which none but maids can enter, a litle within the doore there hangs a pipe: which kinde of instrument if it bee in use amongst you at Byzantium, you well
understand my meaning, but if any of you be so unskilfull in musicke, as to bee ignorant of it, I will relate the whole story of Pan, as much I meane as belongs to the explaining of this. A Pipe consists of many reeds compacted in∣to one, which being joyned one to the side of a∣nother, give but one sound, it is on both sides alike, but one reed is longer then another, yet are they proportioned so that there is no in∣equality in their sounds, for the uppermost be∣ing biggest, gives the deeper sound, the lower∣most a more shrill, wherefore most necessary it is that there should bee one in the midst of an indifferent size, which qualifying the other two sounds might make the consent true. This Pipe when you first put it to your mouth, is not much unlike Pallas fife, onely that your mouth is the maine thing you use to that, and to this your fingers: hee that playes on this stops all the holes except one, out of which is breath goes: but hee that plaies on the fife, puts his mouth to that hole which hee would have sound, and so goes from one to another as hee hath occasion: Time was when this pipe was a most beautifull virgin: who flying from Pan which was in love with her, betooke her self in∣to a thicke wood, Pan following her laid hands
on her, and held her fast by the haire, supposing that shee was sure his owne, but immediatly hee found that his hand grasped nothing but a few flagges and reeds, which they say sprang up in the place where she vanished; these in a fury he presently cut up, as supposing that they had be∣reaved him of his love; but not finding the maid in the reeds where hee thought she was hid, he sighed greatly, as if hee had beene guilty of her death▪ then gathering the broken flagges toge∣ther which hee supposed to bee her members, he bganne to kisse them and embrace them: at length what with his kissing, and sighing, his breath got into them, and they began to make a most melodious noise, by which meanes the Pipe got that sound. This Pipe the god Pan himselfe hung up in yonder cave, and as it is commonly reported hee comes ever and anon to play a lesson on it: In succeeding times the inhabitants of this place thinking to curry fa∣vour with Diana, consecrated this Pipe to her, but upon condition, that none but maids should enter the plce where it hung: Wherfore when any maids chastity is suspected, the people ac∣company her to the doore. Now the manner of tryall is this; shee is attired in a long white robe, enters the cave, and hath the doores made
fast upon her: if she be chast those which stand without heare a most sweet and divine harmo∣ny of musick, whether the Echo the place gives be the cause of it, or whether Pan himselfe play the musitian, I cannot tell. Immediatly after the doores rush open of their owne accord, and the Virgin comes out crowned with a garland of pine leaves. But if shee which goes in bee unchast, you shall heare nothing but a lament∣able howling; at which, the people forsake the place, and the woman in the den: but three daies after, a Virgin who hath the overseeing of it, en∣ters in, finds the Pipe throwne on the ground, but shee which went in three dayes before is ne∣ver more seene. This tryall must you bee put to, thinke with your selves how sad the event is: if Leucippe be chast, (which from my heart I wish) goe joyful∣ly to work, stand to the tryall of it, and may the Pipe be ever propitious to you: but if shee bee not (for you eannot tell how many things shee hath suffered against her will, having fallen so often into the hands of theeves and rob∣bers). Here Leucippe tooke off the Priest ere he had done speaking, and said, Be not so sollicitous for me, Sir, let me alone, I will gladly enter the cave,
where this pipe is. It very well pleases me, saith the priest, for I wish thee all chastity and feli∣city. When evening drew neare, every one of us went to our lodging where the Priest appointed us: Clinias supt not with us that night, but at his Inne where he supt the day before, because wee would not be burdensome to our Host. Sostra¦tus hearing the story of the Pipe, beganne to suspect us both much, lest Leucippe should be no maid, yet for bashfulnesse we should be ashamed to confesse it to him; which made mee becken to her that shee should resolve her father of that doubt; she presently understood the reason why I made signes to her, for she well perceived that her father was loath to condescend that shee should enter the cave, which made her present∣ly invent some pretty arguments to perswade him; and taking her leave of him as she was go∣ing to bed▪ shee desired him to beleeve all was told him, for so Diana help her she told him no∣thing but truth. The day after all things necessary being in a readinesse, the Priest and Sostratus did sacrifice, where was present a great assembly, who with great shouts and acclamations gave thankes to the goddesse Diana. Thersander (for he was pre∣sent
too) having found out the judge, went to him and said, Sir, I desire our day of appearance may be deferred till to morrow, for him whom you yesterday condemned, hath some body or other set free, nor can Sosthenes any where bee found. So his suit was granted, and wee had more time to provide our selves against wee were to appeare. Which time when it was come, Thersander made this long Oration. What shall I say, or where shall I begin my speech? whom shall I first accuse, and whom last? alas I know not: for I am to speake of so many crimes, and so many men who have been interessed in them, which crimes are so great, and the evidences I have for what I speak grea∣ter, that I feare the little modell of this short ac∣cusation of mine will scarce containe them. What my minde conceives, I feare my tongue will never be able to utter, for ere I have spoken one thing, twenty new things are dictated to my fancy. If adulterers shall kill other mens servants, cutters defile other mens wives, pan∣dars release men condemned to die, harlots pro∣phane the most holy temples of the gods, ser∣vants be suffered to accuse their masters, who will thinke that either adultery, sacriledge, mur∣der, outrage, nay any villany is unlawfull? One
thing I pray you; you condemne some one to dye, give charge that he be kept close prisoner; this man in stead of suffering death is richly at∣tired, comes into the Court, sits cheeke by jole with the best free-man of us all, nay dares revile not onely me, but your grave fatherhoods, con∣temne your lawes, and sleight your decrees. READ WHAT the court hath decreed. You heare what sentence passed upon him whom I lately accused. Clitophons doom which he had from you is death, why doth not then the hangman draw him up to the wracke? why doth he not poison him, the day appointed for his execution is past, and in law he is a dead man already. And what forsooth can you say to this good master Priest? you that are so religious and pious a man, where doe you finde it lawfull I pray, to set one free, who by the decree of the chiefest Magistrates of our Citie, nay by the consent of so frequent an assembly was adjud∣ged to death? but perhaps you have more au∣thoritie than either President or Magistrate; if it be so, I pray good master President will you be pleased to descend from your seat, let the whole government of the Citie, and disposing of all lawes bee committed to this gentleman, seeing you have not so much authority left you
as to command a villaine to bee executed; this man quits whom he pleases: nay faith Sir, stand not any longer among us as a private man, I pray mount into master Presidents chaire, and doe us right, or if you will let law and justice goe hang, that you may be said in a more tyran∣nicall manner to reigne over us. I would not have you thinke your selfe a man any longer, but share honour with Diana, whose authoritie thou hast most arrogantly usurped; for it apper∣taines to her onely to shelter those whose causes the judges know not, and though shee her selfe never loosed any one out of prison, or violently snatcht an offender out of the hands of the exe∣cutioner (for the altars of the gods use to be a refuge for miserable, not wicked men) yet you forsooth, above all the rest, have freed the guilty from their bonds, and set condemned men at liberty; which in my minde is little better than to goe to outvie Diana. But further, thou hast turned a Temple into a gaole, by making that murde∣rer and that adulteresse Diana's guests. O horrid crime! the Temple of our chaste goddesse is polluted with an adulteresse! for I was an eye∣witnesse of the banquet and entertainment thou madest her there. But this I feare me is not all, I pray heaven send you turn'd it not into a
stewes, by lying with her, and that the actions of pandars and prostitutes in some venereous cell were not farre honester than yours in the Temple. And this I had to speake in the first place of these two, the one whereof I make no doubt but shall suffer severely for his rash impu∣dence; the other I beseech you that you com∣mand presently to be put to death. Now it is requisite that I speake of Melite, who is here accused of adultery, of whom I need not speake much, seeing it was determined lately by the Court that her two maids should be examined; wherefore my desire is they bee brought in, if they shall stiffely sweare, as for∣merly they did when they were wrackt to con∣fession, that during my absence, this condem∣ned person had nothing to doe with my wife, neither as an husband, nor as an adulterer, I see no reason but that I should acquit her: but if they shall recant what they have formerly spo∣ken, my wife is to loose her portion, and he by the law is to suffer death; who whether hee die for adulterie, or for murder, it is no great mat∣ter, for he is guiltie of both: nor can death bee a sufficient punishment for him, seeing when he hath suffered for one, hee is liable to suffer for the other.
It remaines now that I speake somewhat of this wench my servant, and this reverend gray∣beard which counterfeits himselfe her father, but ere I proceed I expect your censures on these. After this steps mee forth the priest, an ex∣cellent orator, and one very well verst in Aristo∣phanes; who most comically & wittily inveigh∣ed against the dissolute youth of Thersander, in this manner; That Thersander should so scurri∣lously raile upon honest men, not only in the presence of this judicious assembly, but Diana her selfe, is an argument that hee is a man of a very foule mouth; which were more tolerable, had this been the first time of his offending in this kinde, but hee hath beene trained up to it from his infancy, for when hee was but a boy hee kept most lewd company, by which meanes hee wanted no tutors; hee pretended love of learning in his minority, but what hee then did and suffered, I blush to speake; for leaving his fathers house, hee hired him a small cottage, where partly by singing in the market place, and partly by other dishonest and indirect means he lived, yet was not publiquely detected to the world: This and worse have we been eye wit∣nesses of. Thus lived he while hee was young,
when hee grew older whatsoever hee had for∣merly done in private, then hee did openly, for growing bigger, and his former means of living failing, hee had nothing to maintaine himselfe but that foule mouth of his, which he so abused, that out of it hee would vomit nothing but slan∣derous accusations, and scurrilous contumelies, on every one hee met, spitting out the venome with his tongue that hee had before nourisht in his heart: that what I now speake is truth, I re∣ferre my selfe to this assembly, who have heard how reproachfully hee hath reviled one, whom the citie have made choice of for their priest. Had I lived any where but in this Citie where you your selves have beene eye witnesses of my conversation, I know it were most expedient that I should take more paines in clearing my self, but you your selves being not ignorant how unlikely the greatest part of his accusation is to bee true, I shall quit my selfe only of some part of it. Thou hast set one at liberty (saith hee) who was condemned, and here he takes occasion to bee very angry with mee, calling me tyrant, and giving me many other most sarcasticall tearms, as if to save the innocent and uncondemned were tyranny, but to be a detractour were no vice.
But first Thersander let us know by what law thou didst cast this man into prison? which of the Judges censured him? or did the president give charge hee should be bound? but let him bee guilty of all which thou laist to his charge, yet is it the duty of the law, which hath authori∣ty both over thee and mee, to command a man to bee fettered; one man can have no further power over another then that shall please to af∣ford him. But if you will arrogate this to your selfe, then pray you shut up the door of the mar∣ket place, pull downe the court, turne the magistrates out of their places. What thou objectedst to mee even now, I may very well retort upon thee. Pray Master President will you come down from your seat, for you do but beare the name, hee bears the office. Hee doth not onely what you ought, but also more then you can doe: you doe nothing without the ge∣nerall consent of your counsell, you imprison no man in your house, or give sentence in hug∣germugger, but upon your seat here in publique. But this gentleman forsooth is President, coun∣sell, judge, people, and all himselfe; hee makes his house a Bridewell, where he passes sentence on men, commands them to bee bound; and hath no fitter time to choose for the doing of it
then the evening: a fine judge yfaith, and a wise man to cry out that I released one condem∣ned to dye: Well, let us examine the cause a lit∣tle further, tell mee first why hee was condem∣ned? you say because hee was guilty: guilty of what? why of murder: then sure hee killed some body? but sure you cannot tell who it was; for shee which hee is accused for murde∣ring, stands before thee, yet art not thou asha∣med to persist in so notorious a lye. Looke on her well, shee is no phantasme, nor hath Pluto sent a ghost hither to delude us: thou art rather worthy of a double death, who hast often times assayed to kill this young man, and hast killed the maid alreadie almost, by thy railing on her; nay thou wouldst have killed her indeed, for we heard what prankes you plai'd in the Coun∣trey with her, where she had utterly beene lost, had not Diana beene so propitious as to deliver her out of the hands of thee and Sosthenes, whom thou hast now shifted out of the way. Art thou not ashamed, not onely barely to accuse, but publiquely to demonstrate against these poore strangers? thus much I had to say for my selfe, the defence of these strangers causes I leave to these men. When a famous advocate was about to plead
for me and Melite, another of Thersanders advo∣cates whose name was Sopater, told my advo∣cate, whom they called Nicostratus, that it was his turne next to plead against those adulterers, for the whole scope of Thersanders speech was against the Priest, and did but glance at other matters: telling my advocate further, that as soon as he had finished his accusation, he should have time to put in his defence: so with a most impudent looke, and a tongue inured to lying, he began. You have heard the scurrilous and false tales which this babling priest hath invented of Ther∣sander, by retorting upon him what was more applicable to himselfe: all that Thersander laid to his charge was most true, for it is most evi∣dent that he set Clitophon free, that he entertain∣ed a strumpet and an adulterer in the Temple: but hee thinking to make Thersander odious in the eyes of this assembly, rippes up a rhapsodie of vices whereof Thersander was never guiltie, which mee thinkes is a thing very ill beseeming a man of his coat, for of all things a priest should carry a good tongue in his mouth, (that I may whip him with his owne rod.) But to come to the point: and passing over the former part of his speech, which would have better be fitted a
Theatre, than the Court, let us come I say to that part wherein hee so much complaines of us for committing one to prison whom we had mani∣festly deprehended in the very act of adulterie: wherein I wonder much that hee being a priest should take so much paines in the patronizing of this exolete couple; sure it is to be suspected that their lookes have bewitched him, and that the beautie of the wench hath ensnared him; I'faith say which of them dost thou love best, a man may without offence aske you the questi∣on, for you eate together, drinke together, and lie together, and what you then doe no bodie knowes; I feare you turne the Temple of Diana into the Temple of Venus. I hope we shall call your priesthood in question anon, and examine whether these premises rightly considered, you are a fit man for the place: for as touching Ther∣sanders conversation, how modestly, how incor∣ruptly he hath lived from his childhood, all the world knowes: when he was of yeares hee was legitimately married, though I must confesse he was much deceived in the choice of his wife; for relying too much on her nobilitie & wealth, he found she proved another gates woman than he tooke her for: for it is very probable that shee had to doe with a great many men, which
the good man her husband never knew of, but at length shee grew to such a height of impu∣dence, that she plaid the whore publiquely: and while her husband had occasion but to step a little out of the way, she taking this to be a very opportune time to satisfie her lust, entertained this lascivious youth, whom shee could not bee content to play the whore with in Alexandria, but must crosse the sea with him, and bring him hither to Ephesus; where she not onely lay with him, but even while the very Sailors stood and looked on most wantonly embraced him: O in∣satiate miscreants, who have defiled both sea and land, Aegypt and Ionia! I have heard of ma∣ny who have unawares slipt into this vice, yet would never againe runne voluntarily into it, as abhorring the bestiality of it; or if they did, yet have they concealed it: but this woman blows a trumpet, and sets a cryer to proclaime it; all Ephesus must take notice of this smooth-faced youth, whom shee without any shame brought from a farre countrey, and shewed about the Citie, being as proud of such a prize, as a Mer∣chant is of some costly wares which hee hath transported. But then shee answers that shee thought her husband had beene dead: thats wel answered, for were it so, then she were quite
free, seeing her husband being dead, the name of adulterie dies with him. Here Thersander interrupted Sopater in his speech, and said, What I formerly proposed needs no further examination: as touching Me∣lite, and her which is reported to be daughter to him who is chief author of this sacrifice (though she be truly my servant) I have these conditions drawne. REPEAT them. Thersander concerning Melite and Leucippe (for so they say this prostitute is called) proposes these conditions: First for Melite, that since she constantly affirmes that she never had to do either with this stranger, or any man else in his absence, that first she sweare it, next for further triall goe downe into the fountaine of Styx; where if it shall appeare that she is not forsworn, I will willingly yeeld that shee shall bee dismist. Next for Leucippe, if it appeare she be a woman, she shall serve out her time to me, but if shee say she be a maid, shee shall be lockt into the Cave where Pans pipe hangs. To these conditions we gladly agreed, as be∣ing confident of Leucippes virginitie: and on the other side Melite was sure that during the time Thersander was from home, nothing had past be∣tweene her and me but discourse, which made
her say thus to her husband: The conditions I will gladly embrace, nay more, will sweare that when thou wast from home neither citizen nor stranger had to doe with mee: but if it shall ap∣peare that thou hast wrongfully accused mee, what punishment wilt thou be content to suffer? Thersander answered, whatsoever the judges shall please to inflict on mee. After this the as∣sembly was dismist, and it was concluded on, that the next day triall should bee made of each particular contained in the conditions. The story of the fountaine of Styx was this. There was sometime a very beautifull virgin called Rhodope, who delighted much in hunting, for swiftnesse of foot, and skill in casting a dart most exquisite; her attire used to be a robe rea∣ching downe to her knees, and girt about with a girdle, her haire short, with a coronet on her head. Diana on a time seeing her, tooke a liking to her, and led her a hunting, where what they tooke was equally divided between them; Rho∣dope for the favour she received at Dianas hands, made a vow to keepe her virginitie, and never to come in the company of man: which when Venus perceived, she was inraged, and determi∣ned with her selfe to revenge the arrogancy of this maid, who seemed thus to sleight her: for
it fortuned that there was a youth of Ephesus, as handsome a man as shee was a woman, whose name was Euthynicus, delighted as much with hunting as Rhodope was, and as much detesting the companie of women, as she of men; as they went forth one day both a hunting, Venus cun∣ningly stole into the wood, and brought the two wilde beasts, which they hunted in severall parts of the wood, together: by and by Diana being gone, she meets with her sonne, to whom she sayes thus: Seest thou not (strippling) our two enemies yonder, nay the wench hath beene so malapert that shee hath taken a solemne oath against us; thou seest them following their prey, doe thou play the huntsman too, and first worke thy revenge on that saucie wench; shee is about to shoot the Deere, doe thou shoot her; I make no doubt but thou wilt come nearer the marke than she; so both of them shot together, the maid at the Deere, and wounded her on the shoulder; Cupid at the maid, & wounded her on the heart, the force whereof was so great, that shee was straightway in love with Euthynicus, and not long after Cupid let flie an arrow at him, and hee was as much in love with her; after which they beganne to looke one upon the other: but in a short time in stead of their wounds, which they
made a shift to cure, they had nothing left but scarres; for love conducted them into the cave in which this fountain is where they both broke their oathes. Diana knowing what had past, and seeing Venus smile, turned the maid into a fountaine, which sprang up in the same place where she lost her virginitie. Whence it comes to passe that when any one is accused of uncha∣stitie, she is made goe downe into that fountain, the water wherof reaches but up to the anckles. The triall of her chastitie is thus: Shee which is accused wrongfully, takes her oath that her ac∣cusation is false, and having her oath written in a little scrowle, it is tied about her necke, with which she descends into the fountaine; if shee have sworne truly, the water remaines unmo∣ved; but if falsely, it swells on a sudden up as high as her necke, and covers the scrowle. While we were yet in talke evening grew on, and each of us parted to our lodging: the day after all the whole citie was assembled, amongst whom Thersander was the chiefest, and a busie spectator. So Leucippe being attired in a holy robe, woven of the finest silk, and girt about her, also having her head bound up with purple rib∣bonds, and bare footed, entred the cave most maiden like. Which when I saw I began to say
to my selfe, without all question Leucippe thou art a virgin; yet when I thinke with my selfe what a perilous thing this love is, I am compeld to be afraid lest thou also shouldst be turned in∣to a pipe. She did flie from Pan, and had roome enough, but should Pan have a minde to follow thee, hee may easily catch thee: but O god Pan be propitious unto us, nor violate the lawes of this place, which wee so religiously have obser∣ved; restore Leucippe as safe and sound as shee went in, for that was rhe compact betwixt thee and Diana. Presently after this was a most delicate soft sound heard, so sweet, that none of the standers by had ever heard the like: not long after the doores of the cave opened of their own accord, and Leucippe came forth, at which the whole multitude applauded her much, and railed on Thersander: but how glad I was no tongue can expresse. Having got this first and greatest vi∣ctorie, on we went to the fountaine of Styx, to make triall of the other part of the condition; the people were there to look on, and all things were in a readinesse, so Melite tied the scrowle about her necke, and went very couragiously into the fountaine; the water moved not a jot, nor rose any higher than her anckles; where∣fore
the time appointed for her to stay in being expired, the President led the woman out by the hand. Thersander seeing he had beene foiled in two combats, having little hopes of conquering in the third, and fearing lest hee should bee stoned by the people, ranne home with what speed hee could, and the next night fled out of the Citie; for hearing how Melite had sent out two of her servants to seeke Sosthenes, and that Sosthenes was found, he thought it not safe to come any more to examination, lest Sosthenes confessing all, his knaverie should out. Meane while Sosthenes was committed to prison. We after all these perple∣xities were with great commendations set free. The day after Sosthenes being led by the Ser∣jeants before the Iudge, when he saw he was like to be wrackt, of his owne accord confessed all that hee had suggested to Thersander, and all which Thersander attempted to doe; nay every word which had past betweene them concer∣ning Leucippe, after which he was sent backe to gaole. Thersander though absent was perpetu∣ally banisht. We were entertained as before we had been by the Priest, where we went on with those stories we had before omitted, but espe∣cially Leucippe, not standng in feare of her fa∣ther,
seeing she was proved to bee a maid, told all which had happened to her, with a great deale of delight; when she was come to the sto∣rie of Pharus and the pirates, I bid her she should untie the riddle of cutting off her head, & tell us what sleight the pirates used to delude us; for there was this onely knot to bee loosed. Then she told us, These pirates having got a whore into the Ship, by promising her that she should be married to one of the mariners, she poore wretch little dreaming to what end shee was brought thither, willingly accepted their pro∣fer; after they had stole me away, they spyed a∣nother Ship making haste after them; with that they attired her in my apparell, and set her in the fore part of the Shippe, that those who pur∣sued them might see her the better, at length they cut off the poore wenches head as you saw and tumbled her body into the sea; her head they kept a while in the Shippe, but when they saw no bodie pursued after them, they cast that after the bodie: whether this were the reason, or whether they thought to make more money of me than of her, I cannot tell: this I am sure of, that she poore wretch was killed in stead of me, to delude those which pursued after them; but Chereas who was the chiefe man to intice her in,
and then to slay her, was justly punished; for when the rest of the pirates were unwilling that he should have mee, because a little before hee had one which hee had made a great deale of money of, and denied them to have share with him, the like hee would have done by mee, to which end hee pleaded the matter stoutly with them, affirming that I was meat for him onely, and that he hired them to steale me away, that I might be onely his; these things while hee con∣fidently urged, and none of them would consent unto, one which was by cut off his head, which mee thinkes was a punishment very justly infli∣cted on him for the wrong which hee had done to me. Two dayes after, the pirates being cast on a strange shore, sold mee to one Sosthenes a merchant. Leucippe having ended her story, Sostratus said, Goe to now, seeing you have told all your for∣tunes, give mee leave to tell you what hath pas∣sed betweene Clligo and Callisthenes. I hearing my sister named, told him I would very gladly listen, if she were yet alive. Then hee began to tell of the Oracle, the sacrifice, the pinnace, and all which I before told you; adding this also, that when Callisthenes afterwards perceived his mistake, and that Calligo was my sister, though
hee were thus frustrated of his expectation, yet did hee most intirely love her, and kneeling downe to her, said, Thinke me not, mistresse, a theefe or pirate any longer, for I am a gentle∣man borne, and my countrey is Byzantium, I confesse I laid wait for thee, yet was it love com∣pelled me to it, in recompence whereof I here wholly devote my selfe to thee, and will for e∣ver be thy bondman; nor shall onely my selfe, but also my fortunes, which are farre greater than ever thy father could give thee, bee at thy service; but which is more, thou shalt keepe thy virginitie unspotted as long as thou pleasest: with these faire speeches (for he was a man not only strong to perswade, but withall very com∣ly, and above measure eloquent) hee obtained his desire. After he came to Byzantium he gave her a great deale of money, and attired her most richly with gold and precious stones, and as hee found her a maid, so hee restored her. Hee was quite changed from what hee had formerly beene, for he beganne to be most elegant, tem∣perate, modest in all his actions, nay he had lear∣ned to give respect to his betters, to salute every one he met; and as he had formerly beene most profuse in his expences, hee turned his prodiga∣litie into liberality, releeving those which were
in want, that all the world wondred how on a sudden he became so good a husband; but mee above all the rest he respected: nor was my love to him wanting, and I beganne to see that that which in him I had formerly thought to bee lu∣xury, was but a kinde of free spirit; which made mee thinke on that which was reported of The∣mistocles, how in his youth hee was most disso∣lute, but when he came to riper yeares, for pru∣dence and valour hee outstript all the Athenians. This made me sorry that I had formerly denied him my daughter; for he did not a little respect me, calling me nothing but father. Nor was he meanly skilled in chivalry, for at the jousts and turnaments hee behaved himselfe most coura∣geously, having beene alwaies used to riding, though formerly for pleasure, yet now for va∣lour he did it: hee likewise augmented the pub∣lique treasury much by many large donations of his owne, in recompence whereof hee was made Captaine of the host with me, in which place he shewed himselfe not onely respective, but observant to me. After wee had got the vi∣ctorie he was sent to Tyre to sacrifice to Hercules, and I hither to Diana; but ere we parted, he took me by the hand, and said, what I did formerly intend against Calligo, I desire father you would
not remember, seeing it was nothing in me but rashnesse of youth; but thinke on what upon more mature judgement I have done: how I have preserved her virginity, nay and in time of warre, when many mens lips would have water∣ed at so faire a prize; how I have further decreed to carry her to Tyre to her father, where accor∣ding to the custome of our land, my desire is to marry her; which if he deny me, let him keepe his daughter, for I have left her as I found her; though perhaps shee may have many a worse match than I am, and I will reade you the letters which I wrote in Callisthenes behalfe to my bro∣ther, wherein I did set forth his generositie, his skill in military affaires, and his whole worth to the full. If it be so that the Counsell shall judge the cause on our side, wee will first saile to By∣zantium, next to Tyre. Here when he had made an end of speaking, wee parted each of us to the same lodging wee lay in the day before. The day after Clinias came and told us that Thersander was shifted out of the way, that he might shift off the day of his triall; we having expected him three dayes, for the day of appearance was rejourned no longer; meeting the President, who cleared us by law, took shipping, and having a gentle gale of wind,
arrived at Byzantium, after this to Tyre wee went, where we consummated our long desired marriage: here having stayed two dayes, wee met Callisthenes, and found our father sacrificing for his daughters marriage, in vvhich vvee assi∣sted him, and prayed the gods that they vvould prosper all our joyfull marriages, intending that having vvintered there, vve vvould aftervvards returne to Byzantium. The end of the Loves of Clitophon and Leucippe.
