A1033A 12881690 94949
A full and true Account, of the Behaviours, Confessions, and last Dying Speeches of the Condemn'd Criminals, that were Executed at Tyburn, on Friday the 24th of May, 1700. JOHN Shirly, alias Davis, 22 Years old, Condemn'd for Firing the House of Dr. Sloan; being examin'd said, that he was Descended of a good Family, that his Pa∣rents, who tenderly loved him, Educated him at School a considerable time, but growing Head∣strong, he ran away from them, and Listed himself a Soldier, for several Years he served abroad in that Station, and at last, having got Acquaintance with the Surgeon of a Regiment, he pretended to practice that Art, which brought him in no small Profit; but being Viciously in∣clin'd, liv'd at such a rate, that his Incomes could not answer his unnecessary and exorbi∣tant Expences, which caus'd him to rack his In∣vention, how to support his profuse way of Living; this made him listen to bad Advice, and to turn a deaf Ear to that wholsome Coun∣sel, which they who knew his Parents frequent∣ly gave him. The great Enemy of Mankind provided some Accomplices for him, who hav∣ing consum'd their Substance with riotous Li∣ving, were willing to undertake any wicked Action that might support their craving Cir∣cumstances: To this Gang he willingly asso∣ciated himself, and committed several Robberies and Burglaries, more than he could remember: At length they resolv'd to break open this House in Bloomsbury-Square, which they attempted in several Places, but could not effect; then they resolv'd to burn it; and accordingly one of them struck a Light, and cut a little Door into Splin∣ters, then breaking the Glass and part of the Wood in the Window, set a Candle to it, which caus'd the Window to blaze: Their Design as he said, was to throw Stones at the upper Win∣dows, to awaken the Family when the Fire had got a Head, and so under Pretence of help∣ing them to carry away their best Goods, and Rob them of all that was valuable. I prest him very often to discover whether he was concern'd in that great Fire in Red-lion Fields, putting him in mind, that there is no denying or lessening his Sins before God, who was privy to all his Thoughts and Designs, and knows all his Acti∣ons, tho' never so secretly committed, and no human Eye saw him. But he still denyed that he was any ways concern'd in it, only that he was present when it was burning, and got a silver Candlestick, a Case of Pistols, and some other things. He did not seem at first so well affected with his Condition as could be wished; but afterwards he returned to a better Mind, and wisht that he had a longer space to live, that so he might testifie his Sincerity, by leading a bet∣ter Life for the future. Philip Wake, Convicted for the same, confest his Crime, and gave an account of it much after the same manner, only with this Adition, that Davis was the Projector of it, and encou∣raged them to do it, when they resolv'd to de∣sist. He added, that he was an old Offender, had made several Resolutions, to forsake his evil Courses, but as often broke them: His Indispo∣sition did not permit him to speak much, but he seem'd very attentive to good Advice. James Walters, Condemn'd for several Felo∣nies: Was an Apprentice to a Merchant, but leading a dissolute debaucht Life, his Master turn'd him away; then he went to his old Com∣panions, who prevail'd with him to go abroad with them, where he committed a great many base, notorious Actions. He complain'd of the tedious Confinement he underwent, and how troublesome it was to him, who was always a busie stirring Person: But he was put in mind that he shou'd by no means once fancy, that he must lie in that doleful Place, shut out from all Business, and condemn'd as it were to a state of Idleness; but that he should set himself with all his might, to mind the one thing necessary, the great Work of Repentance, and making his Peace with Almighty God; for this would cut out work enough for him, and of more Comfort and Pro∣fit to his Soul, than any other Employment which he had formerly been used to. He was also told, that he stood now upon the very brink of Eternity, and must shortly appear before the Tribunal of God, which is infinitely more terri∣ble than that of any earthly Judge can be; there∣fore it became him, with all the seriousness that is possible, to prepare himself for so dreadful an Appearance; to which he reply'd, that he had a good Education, and understood these matters very well. John Titt, 24 Years old, Convicted for Bur∣glary. He serv'd his Master (who was a Water∣man) very Faithfully, but being made free, he unfortunately met with some Acquaintance which entic'd him to Drink to excess, and so neglecting his lawful Calling, being reduc'd to want, was the more easily prevail'd with to com∣mit this Fact, the only one of that Nature, (as he said) he ever was Guilty of. His Life of late was very irregular, addicted to Swearing, Lewd∣ness, and Debauchery, for which he said he was exceeding sorrowful, and that his Vices were now as detestable in his sight, as before they seem'd pleasant. John Hatchman, aged 15 Years, Convicted for the same, confest his Crime, and said that Titt meeting him in Southwark, made him Drunk, and then brought him along with them to break open the House. He denyed he ever was concern'd with such Persons any more, and Promises if he be Transported, to lead a better Life for the future. John Cooper, Condemn'd for the same. He was seiz'd with the Jayl-Distemper, which is a violent Feaver, attended with a delirious Light-headed∣ness, and so was not in a capacity to give any Account of himself. Joseph Fisher, 48 Years old, Born in Cornwal, Condemn'd for Burglary, was a Seaman, and serv'd aboard in the Royal-Navy, and as he said, did once
