B1679A 11713445 48298
AN ALARUM TO LONDON: OR, The Famous LONDON's blowing up by LONDONERS. SOUNDED, Not to Fire their Buildings, but to Quench their Burnings. IN A Letter to MAjOR GENERALL BROWNE. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, next doore to the gilded Lyon in Aldersgate Street, 1650.
An Allarum to LONDON, Not to fire their Buildings, but to quench their Burnings. In a Letter To Major Generall BROWNE. SIR, I Am bound by the duty I owe to old Israel, to make inquiry af∣ter Josephs portion; The Birthright of the COMMON-WEALTH OF ENGLAND. Religion and Liberty, and good Laws, and Reformation, were the blessed Inheritance bequeathed and promi∣sed to England and London; and you, Sir, were one of the Feoffees left in trust, to take care that Simeon and Levi (brothers in blood and cru∣elty) might not murder him: The knife (Sir) was lately at Josephs throat, and you were then, a Reubenite, to bestride him from the intended cruelty of Treacherous men, at the first assault, and TREATY OF THE BROTHERS. Joseph (Sir) is newly taken out of the Pit, and your selfe (with some others of the DIVISION OF REƲBEN) standing at the pits brink, discontented that Joseph is raised. It hath pleased the Divine Power to secure the young man in that deep and dark place, and hath already begun to exalt Joseph against the unkinde desires of Israelites and Aeyptians: Sir, you may beleeve it, that the same good hand will lead on the COMMON-WEALTH OF ENGLAND (as much hated and shot at, as ever Joseph was) through the deep red Sea (of Englands blood) and through she Wildernesse, and through Di∣visions, and through Contradictions, and through Murmurings. This (Sir) is the present estate of Englands afflicted Joseph; and this (Sir) will be done with an out-stretched arme, and England shall have passage from the red Sea, and Aegypt, and the Wildernesse, and arive safely in the Land of Canaan, and rest; and shall have powerfull Victories over
all Gods, and their Enemies. Of this and other Nations, and all peo∣ple, good and bad, farr and neer, shall gaze and stand amazed, to see and heare the rare and unheard-of executions, yet unfinished. Be pleased to read the Record underneath; being the Will and Testament of good and great Men, great Prophets, and consider of it, and doe unto Joseph what right you can, without more violence, and perswade your Friends so to doe; for your owne sake, and for your Friends sake, and for the Cities sake, and for Josephs sake (Joseph advanced to a Common-wealth) for the Com∣mon-wealth of Englands sake; and shun all prejudice in the reading of it, for Benn's sake; whereby you fully gratifie his desires, and good will to Joseph, your selfe, and this great City. Yours, for the sake of Joseph, BENJAMIN. The hand of old Jacob upon the head of young Joseph, THE COMMON-WEALTH OF ENGLAND. Gen. 49. 22, 23, &c. ENGLAND is a fruitfull bough, even a fruitfull bough by a Well, whose branches run over the Wall. The Archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him and bated him: But his Bow abode in strength, and the armes of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. Even by the God of thy Father who shall helpe thee, and by the Almighty who shall blesse thee with the blessings of Heaven above, blessings of the deepe, that lyeth under, blessings of the breast and of the wombe. The blessings of thy Father have prevailed above the blessings of my Progenitors; unto the utmost bound of the everlasting Hils, they shall be on the head of ENGLAND, and upon the crowne of the head of him that is SE∣PARATE FROM HIS BRETHREN. The Rod of Moses, and the red Sea (the red Sea of English blood) divided, for the safe returne of afflicted England out of Aegypt, now sojourning in a Wildernesse of wild Beasts, and stinging Ser∣pents. Deut. 23. 13, &c. Blessed of the Lord be his Land for the precious things of Heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath. And for the precious fruits brought forth by the Sun, and for the precious things brought forth by the Moon, and for the chiefe things of the ancient Mountaines; and for the precious things of the lasting Hills.
And for the precious things of the Earth, and the fulnesse thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush: Let the blessing come upon the head of England, and upon the top of the head of him that was SE∣PARATED FROM HIS BRETHREN. The glory of ENGLAND is like the Hornes of Ʋnicornes, and with them he shall push the PEOPLE. The Waters of Jordan divided; And ENGLAND upon his advance to Canaan. Joshua 10. Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moone, in the Valley of Ajalou, and there was no day like that. And Joshua sayd, Bring out those five Kings unto me, and he sayd unto the Captaines of the men of Warr which went with him, Come neer and put your feet upon the neck of these Kings. Feare not, nor be dismay'd, for thus shall the Lord doe to all your Enemies a∣gainst whom you fight. For my Honoured Friend, Major Generall BROWNE. SIR, LIberty of all enjoyments is neer to life, and as much as that amounts unto, I doe acknowledge that to be the just summ of my Obligation to you; for I beare you witnesse, you were that vigilant Governour of Abingdon, that did (by Exchange of me for another Prisoner) give me my freedome from a harsh Imprisonment at Wallingford, when a little longer stay there, would have made me as miserable, as the ma∣lice of an enraged Enemy could make me. Sir, The Obligation (where∣in I stand bound) is double; you were faithfull then to the Publique, you were freindly then to me; I have therefore endeavoured to make my sutable addresse unto you; the one was private, to thank you, the other is publique, to acknowledge you. Sir, It is emminently known unto you, what a great turne of Providence there is visible amongst us, since that time; and how strange and ama∣zing
it hath been (and yet is) to the Inhabitants of this Island, as if there had been a totall and perpetuall Eclypse of the Sun of Englands glo∣ry; you know also, how it hath pleased the wisedome of God, to suffer the judgements of good people, to vary about this matter; and how dangerously their opinions have diversified them into very unkinde speeches and behaviours one towards another, and I hope neither of them will forget what fat advantages were given thereby to the Enemy, yet how rawny and leane they grow still upon the variety and full mouthfulls of them, they could never thrive, but were so cursed upon the top of them all, that it was usuall to observe, they could never come off without the losse of a head, the breaking of a neck, or the battering of the bones; some mischiefe or other did still post after them, from place to place, Kent, Essex, the North, &c. Where ever they went, they could never keep off the Gentleman upon the pale Horse, but vengeance would over the Wall, and pull them out by head and shoulders. Sir, It is acknowledged, you did manifest much wisedome and courage in the first part of your Actings for this Nation, but it is also sayd that in the latter part of your adventures, the more you excelled in boldnesse and abilities to speake, the more of danger it did portend: I did never yet know any that did suspect (much lesse impeach) your INTEN∣TIONS as retrograde (for the maine of them) or declining from the first integrity of them, but there doth lye a BLAME upon you, that you did not so soon or seasonably submit unto the wisedome of God, that hath, it seemes, against your declared will, made better provision for you and us too, then it was possible for you to make for your selves, or for us, by all the wisedome you could put forth. Sir, Let us extoll and speak well of that wisedome, that doth restraine the dangerons results of our Counsells, and of that Providence that cures our improvidence; the good God (we may see) is so much the more care∣full of us, by how much he espyeth our weaknesse and shallownesse to be the more in dealing for our selves with a subtill Enemy, and in providing for our owne safety. Sir, The wisedome of God, hath wonderfully (next to a Miracle) determined, that Englands Joseph could not come home safe by a Treaty, nor yet be ever restored to his Father with Life and Honour, before his cruell and treacherous Brethren were brought upon their faces, put in ward, and made to acknowledge their great trespasse; Wee are verily guilty concerning our Brother. Sir, It is manifest, that the Patriarchs were (almost all of them) very ill affected to Joseph. Steven notes as much in his Confession▪ Acts
7. 9. and there files up their Malignity upon Record. And the Patriarchs (moved with envy) sold Joseph, &c. There was but one amongst ten, but voted against Joseph, but voted him a bondman in Aegypt, and you well know that Israels Joseph was a type of Englands Joseph, sure there is an English Israel, and doubtlesse there is an English Joseph too, and the paralell that runnes along in all the veynes of the troubles, and preservation of them both goes as free from halting, as any I have read of. Indeed there is some disproportion betweene the number and the virulen∣cy, of the haters of the one and of the other, Israels Joseph had but nine a∣gainst one that hated him, but Englands Joseph, can make their Ʋnits, tens, their Tens, hundreds, their Hundreds, Thousands, and these within us too, besides those many without us, and these Patriarchs too, English Patri∣archs, and for the implacability of their Envyings, ours observe no mea∣sure or limitation of time or condition but are beyond compare. Those in Dothan did weepe and take on in Aegypt (now that they saw their young∣er Brother was preferred) that they dealt so ill with him in Dothan; ours in England weepe Milstones, nay when stones weepe, they be dry, Joseph in anguish, they rejoyce, Joseph advanced, they Maligne still, and doe reach after him; and though he be advanced above the Sun, yet doe bark, (though in vayne) as Doggs that will wawle against the Moon. Sir, I would begin with Israels Joseph, and with the Archers that shot at him first, you doe remember the sacred History, had the Patriarchs any cause to hate Joseph, yet did they not resolve his death? and did they not cunningly contrive his ruine? indeed Reuben is honourably re∣corded for his willingnesse to save him, and to restore him to his Father, but alas! the man is more to be commended for his affection, then his dis∣cretion. True, Reuben doth bestride the Child, and very manfully deli∣vers him at the pit, and pleads, O doe not kill him, shed no blood, lay no hand upon him, Here's a pit, throw him there. Honest man! Joseph is more be∣holding to thee for thy good wish, then thy great wit▪ What? throw him into a pit, Reuben? Is that all the liberty thou canst obtaine for Joseph by a Treaty? what dost thinke thy Brothers be Children? or be they babes? and will they so soone be pleased? and can they forget the dreame? or are they strangers in Dothan? or doe they not know the way to the pit where Joseph is? Alas Good man! Thou knowest is not, thy Brothers are too revengefull, and too deep for thee to deale with, for life and li∣berty by a Treaty, what cares Simeon and Levi for conditions and promi∣ses, when they resolve to be Treacherous? have they not Swords by their Sides? what doe they care for a Treaty; Treaty them no Treaties, hatred and revenge for Josephs Vision are setled upon the Lies; what if the Ma∣lignant
Tribes returne when thou art gone, and kill Joseph in the pit, when no man sees it to tell the old Man? hath not thy wisdome provided well for thy young Brother, to make a Grave for him? and to save the Tribes the labour of digging one? and to save Old Jacob Funerall expences for his Beloved Joseph, what have thy Brothers more to doe now, but a knock, and a Shovell of Earth, and Joseph is not. Ah Reuben, Reuben, I love thy pitty, but I feare the Pit, there is but little good like to be of this Treaty, however Joseph thanks thee for thy good meaning. And Judah (Sir) would be thought a friend to Joseph too, but it is easy to prove him an Arch Malignant, indeed his enmity glides along in smooth Language, and runs away in a still Channell, without noyse, which argues the depth thereof: we have nothing but his owne words, and his owne Declaration, that speakes him a freind, and these neyther speake him any other but a Comparative freind, he would not be thought lesse then an Enemy to Joseph, but onely not to be so bloody, as the rest were, or would have beene. Then all his deeds be Acts of Hostility▪ Oh it is Jo∣seph! our Brother, our flesh and blood, yet let us sell him, save his blood, bit sell his body, save his body in Doth in, but damne his soul (if possible) in Aegypt; if this be all thy kindnesse (Judah) thou wilt kill thy Brother with kindnesse. Judah, Sir, was a dangerous Enemy to the budding Common-wealth of Israel, I am more then halfe perswaded, that it was hee which gave his Brothers Commission of Array, to doe what they did, indeed we could not finde his Packet of Letters, but we finde him in the head of the bloody Crew, and the Orator upon all occasions. He was that Noble Tribe, that had many Kings in his loynes. He was a declared Royalist, and it fell to him by Eldership, to be their Generall upon this designe: Reuben (the Eldest) was too honest for their purpose, and had declared his good affection to Jo∣seph, at the first Assembly of the Brothers. His vote went that Joseph should goe home, he should goe home and be a comfort to old Israel. Simeon and Levi (next in yeares) had carryed the Generall-ship from Judah, but that they had before discovered their incapacity to mannage such a Command, by their rash and treacherous dealing with the Sichemites, after they had yeilded unto certaine Articles in a Treaty with them, they had made themselves and the Old man to stinck before the Inhabitants of the Land, and therefore are now by the others judged unfit; Judah is the man that must direct them in their Counsells, and lead them on, A man of incomparable parts and Majesty. He was one that knew how to play his game well, it is he that animates against Joseph, in the Cabinet Whisperings, it is he that pleads for Joseph in a more open Councell.
What ever they do with Joseph, home hee shall not goe, that he re∣solves against Reuben, and for the downe right killing of him, hee will not yeeld to that neither, that hee urgeth against Simeon and Levi. He rsiwades rather to a Treaty and gives the Ground and Reasons of such an Accommodation. He is our brother, and what profit in his blood? rather save his life and sell the young man. Hee hath not the spirit of a Souldier, but of a Butcher that delights in blood. It is confest Judah's pleading for Joseph was very patheticall and seaso∣nable to save present execution, but withall, there was much crueltie and selfishnesse in the bowels of those bowels. What profit in his blood? The blood of Joseph might have stucke upon their sheepheards coates in Dothan, there was danger in that, what profit? It seemes gaine and other selfe-ends might have prevailed very farre upon Judahs good nature to make him forget Joseph was any kift or kinne to him. Those sacred Records leaves a staine upon his very kind∣nesse. But to speake truth, what could Judah doe or say lesse? How could hee doe so little for him? A stone could not retaine its hardnesse to see such anguish as was upon Josephs soule, they doe confesse afterwards in the Ward, that they did see much of it but were hardened, and that they confesse was their sinne, surely none but such as had quite blown out the glimmering light of nature, and had forgotten they were men, but would have melted long before, with that aboundance of teares that ran down Jesephs cheeks, but would have bin moved with all those moving pleadings that Joseph had to poure forth. They confesse them to be very peircing and visible to be seen, but themselves hard and impenitrable. Josephs Plea for his Life. ANd shall I never see my dear Father againe? But must I lose my Life? or (that which is as neare) my Liberty? And will bro∣thers be my Executioners? Will Israelites be bloody? O! Brother Ju∣dah helpe! why brother Levi, brother Zebulon; It is the day of Josephs trou∣ble: hath Joseph no brother, will not Nepthali, will not Gad, will not Asher know or pitty him? why, I am the son of your Father, I am Jo∣seph, I came in duty and kindnesse to see you, and shall I be killed for my kindnesse? Am I not worthy to live for my love? Let me know my fault that I may be sorry, that I may repent before I dye. Is it because I did tell you my Dream? Truly (brothers) it was a reall vision, and no
idle fancy; Is it because your sheafe was lower then Mine? It is not pos∣sible that your sheafe should be the lower for Josephes sheafe; Is it be∣cause the Sun and Moon did obeysance to me? why? what ill can that presage to you? can those HONOURED LUMINARIES be ecclip∣sed by Josephes Glory? or can your native Luster and brightnesse be les∣sened by any Splender of his? And alas what profit will arise unto you out of a Dead carcase, and a little coate? will not a loud Conscience for the blood of an Innocent, sting more than that can heale. Besides, What if Josephs Dreame proves a Ʋision indeed? and your brother become such a Prince as may require such bendings? as may de∣serve such honour, from a Family so illustrious and honourable as is the fa∣mily of Jacob? what if you my Lord Judah and the rest of my brothers should see cause to bow before me? would Joseph be stiffe while you bend? And could his eyes be dry, while yours be wet? doe you thinke Joseph so unnaturall, and undutifull both? I beseech your Excellency to consider, you may rather weaken then strengthen the family of Jacob, by the ruine of Joseph, Besides the errand I come about deserves not such entertainment; I come to enquire after your WELFARE. Ah let mee go home againe, that I may do my errand to the old man, our Father, that I may tell him I did escape the wild beasts, and did see my loving bro∣thers in safety upon the Plaines of Dothan. And now sir, could a Generall say lesse? or could a Noble-man doe so little for Joseph, as Iudah did for him? a man that had so much elegancy in his lines, and of excellency in his loines, could he use lesse courtesie in his behaviour? What was it for him to say, Simeon hold, Levi be not rash, Ioseph is our brother indeed, and his blood will doe us but little good, a childs coat will be but little booty, no such plunder here, as you had of the Sichemites when you put them to the sword in Shalem: Sir, this is one of the best of all those cursed resolves amongst the worst of ene∣mies. No profit in the Carcase of a Common-wealth. It is a principle that swaies with the most moderate of the Degenerate Kinde of Cataline, yet rather then faile in their Design of mischeife and violence, let Ioseph, the joy and comfort of Old Israel bee sold to Pharaoh, nay, let him goe to the devill (so farre as they can doom him) they'le doe their best to send him thither, so they may have Iosephs portion of honour and estate; his portion of honour in Iacobs family; and his portion of estate in Ia∣cobs flockes: they regard neither the Life nor Liberties of young Ioseph, nor old Israel, if they may have but Coyne by making their Coffins,
Sir, I have now my purpose, now that I have minded you of those anci∣ent Treaties, and Treacheries; and prayings, and pleadings; and stirrings, and strivings; and good meanings too (a few of them) touching Israels Ioseph: that I have minded you of the little number of Iosephs friends. It is one of the least of numbers, if you reckon him at home, and him a∣broad at the Treaty too, that I have given you a review of the multitude of Iosephs enemies, even amongst Patriarks, and how cunningly they did worke against Ioseph; To let you see that neither cunning nor cruelty could ever prevaile upon innoceney first and last too, but Truth hath al∣wayes had the day after hard Skirmishes, that you might observe how honest hearts may be undermined, and prevented in their intentions to pre∣serve Ioseph. It was Reubens Case, he had by Treaty, provided a Pit which (though dry) was safe neither for himselfe nor Ioseph, How excellently Enemies act according to their Principles. Iudah doth far exceed Reuben in Abi∣lities to treate, Iosephs bondage is Iudahs aime, and a dark Dungeon is Iosephs fate. It is not so with Reuben, a plot could not succeed worse to Reuben then this did, for he tare his haire. In the interim, sir, there is an old catching for Ioseph, the Tribes will kill him, but Reuben catcheth him, The Tribes doe sell him, but God doth send him: And now sir, here we find a third party as wel in Israel then, as in Eng∣land now, a party sir (and a gallant one too) that was no more dreamed of by the old Patriarkes (but only what Joseph saw in his vision) then was of late thought on by the young Patriarks of England: Good and bad men with us (all of them) miscarry alike in their Councells concerning Ioseph, Reuben (with us too) beats off Simeon and saves Ioseph, Iudah he cousens Reuben, and sells Ioseph, GOD befooles them all and sends the man in a dis∣patch of his own to Aegypt, there to provide food for Israel. And thus the wisdome of God Deludes crafty Iudah, and secludes king Reuben (though he was for the cause) from his wiser Councells. Nay it pleased PRO∣VIDENCE to cage them up both in Ward together in Aegypt, with their Parti-coloured counsels, as if they had been both alike enemies to his Great statelinesse, and as being equally destructive in their judgments, and purposes, to his own sanctity and Israels safety. Sir, I thought to be more short, but the way I tooke to follow Ioseph, I finde to be rough and intricate, and the way I finde, is longer too, from Dothan to Egypt, and from thence backs againe to England, then I could imagine, I was forced to goe somewhat about, because I discovered a
variety of Engagements, and Holds, and Garrisons. I saw, sir, pits and petitions, and treaties and treacheries, and cryes and counsells, and cla∣mors, and accusations; and dungeons, and dangers by the way, and so I could not wait upon Ioseph through all these, and returne to you so soon as you might expect, however my presumption is your candour, and I though you wou'd not take offence that I tarried so long, for that the occasion of this wearisome length of lines was not only in loy∣alty to Ioseph, but in love to you, sir, and if I fail something in method and memory, you will remember I went through a thicket, and forrest of wild beasts, and will soone excuse my failings, while onely love and thankefull∣nesse to your selfe and Ioseph doth guide the pen. Sir, It hath been the good will of him that dwelt in the bush to go as well before Englands Ioseph as Israels, and hath led him on through a wildernes of pits, a Dothan of dangers, & a Dungeon of Difficulties, hath so cleared the pits of water, the Dungeons of darkenesse, the Wildernesse of Serpents: Serpents of their stings, hath so taken out the malignity of every wild beast in the way from Dothan to Egypt and from thence to England, knocking out great teeth, breaking jaw bones, chopping off HEADS, so that Englands Ioseph as well as Israels, is now beyond the reach of his cruell brothers, preserved in the midst of Israelities and Egyptians, Malignants are either in ward, or else have learned to pronounce our English shibboleth without faultring, they begin to say my Lord Ioseph and make low Congies and humble addresses To the SUPREAME AUTHORITY OF THE NATION; TO THE COƲNCEL OF STATE, TO THE KEE∣PERS OF THE LIBERTIES OF ENGLAND, The Lords Com∣missioners, and to all these, RIGHT HONOƲRABLE. Those greater LUMINARIES that would not doe obeysance to our Ioseph, are uterly darkened, the Sun of this lower Orbe, is gon quite Retrograde more degrees then that in the Diall of Ahaz, 2 King, 20. And the other of our darke worlds greater LUMINARIES the MOON (the very em∣blem of mutability and change, being most full of spots in her greatest ful∣nesse) for her ILL WILL TO JOSEPH, is Commanded sistence, and standing still in the VALLEY OF AJALON; in a Country of vallies, and there amazingly made to behold and gaze upon the rare and unheard of execusions of the GREAT JEHOVAH, done by his despised Ioshua's, and the most glittering starres that will not bend shall fall downe, and whatever bee their Luster or largenesse, the fall of Lucifer shall bee their fate, it is manifest to all beholders, that a Divine hand hath set a Crowne of
Glory upon the HEAD of Englands Ioseph, and that Sunne or Starre that shall dare reach after Iosephs Crowne, now in his Glory. Be∣leeve it, Sir, the despised Saints, will but triumph at their Treason, and they will doe no other but utter a Song of praise to God for their plagues amongst men; BABYLON is falne, is, fallen; How art thou falen, LƲ∣CIFER, Sun of the morning? This, this will be the song of Saints (Ho∣noured Sir) so long as the Sun hath a course to give, or England an Age to live. I will not stand to run the parallel, I humbly crave that to be the fruit of your Meditations. It is now vacation with you there, though it be Terme time with us here: Indeed, Sir, they are most happy that have least to do with a deceitfull world, that are most vacant from the businesses of an un∣certaine Age, unlesse they have their eyes the better, and are of a more quick sight, to see their WORKE before them. But now Sir, who ever maligne that the COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND begins to be Illustrious, surely no English heart, no Reube∣nites should doe it; yet there are great thoughts of heart for the divisions of Reuben; for the discontents of Reuben, the contradictions & murmurings of this friendly Tribe; It is not Irelands Rabsheka, but it is Englands Joseph that is honored; He is not an English man, but an Irish man, that hates the young LAD. Beleeve it Sir, (or suppose it possible) The wild Irish, the savage Or∣cades will goe neare to turne Round in halfe an Age, will ingage to submit to the Commonwealth of England, if our Joseph will protect them; And what a base dishonour will it be to our English Cavalry; (and to some of the division of Reuben too, it will be no credit: That they will be younger brothers to Pagans and Papists, and to the Moores, and to the worshippers of Mahomet, in their duty of submitting to Englands Joseph; will it not be a blushing shame to such as are not quite brased against it, to thinke that the barbarous Irish should be sooner disarmed of their blood-thirstinesse, then our wretched Cavalry can be brought in by kind∣nesse and freedome: O how soon will the succeeding Age that is al∣ready treading upon the heels of this, befool, and (pittyingly) beheast the pride, and ignorance and wretchednesse, and stubbornnesse of this present Generation. I said indeed there were some that could already frame themselves to say, My Lord Joseph; but it is as sure that many of these (I would I had not cause to suspect them all) I say most of the s, do but poure out their old malignity into new bottles, have, and will act against young Ru∣benites
upon old principles of hatred and revenge, because Reuben delive∣red Ioseph at the pit. I do very well know the men that now lye in the pit upon that very account. But Sir, my purpose is to minde you that what ever their hopes may be, they doe sumbmit in point of Act unto Ioseph, they dare not for their lives take up Arms again, unlesse they be men of base and broken fortunes, and are desperate, because Ioseph is a Prince, a Potentate: He is the Com∣monwealth of England. And because the LORD OF HOSTS hath made him a Father to Pharaoh, not to Pharaoh mysticall, Ioseph will be a ruine to his Kingdome, but Pharaob naturall, to black and swarthy complexioned peo∣ple; I am perswaded our Ioseph will soon enlighten and interpret their Dreams, that those darke people in the darker places of the world, may not for ever perish in the yeares of death and darknesse, for want of Interpre∣ters, for want of such an Interpreter as Ioseph will be; When Magicians are silent, Ioseph will such an Interpreter as Ioseph will be; When Magicians are silent, Ioseph will speak truth and Prophesie. He will be an Enemy to no Nation. He will be a friendly Neighbour to the (late oppressed, now the) High and Mighty States of the Low Countries, and Lords of the Ʋnited Provinces. He will be an Enemy to none, but to the lowest Country of all, the Principality of blacknesse and darknesse for ever. Ioseph will be a scourge to all the Loousts that come out of that bottomlesse pit: The Legats alatere of that infernall Hierarchy; these darken the Christian world; Their Generall Vicar, the Pope. The FLYING FIERY SER∣PENT Copp, and that wretched Ly-monger the Man in the Moon; These be the Pests of the Commonwealth of England; these came in the smoak, Rev. 9. 2. Ioseph will be a Friend to Enemies, much more a Friend to Friends, now that he hath power; but then Friends must be Friends, and signe the Ingagement; and Enemies must give a pledge too, that they are not Spyes while Ioseph doth nourish them; Iudah must take the Ingagement, as well as Reuben, and Simeon too, as well as Iudah, and confesse their tres∣passe too (such as are faulty) before they can bee trusted in a place where there is such variety of good food, and abundance of great treasure. Israels Ioseph would nourish no Spies, no more will Englands Ioseph, if an Ingagement can tye them from Treachery. I doe see there is one pro∣vided, that must either bow them or break them; will either mend them, or end them. But now Sir, There are great thoughts of heart, for, and in the divisions of Reuben; Deborah and Baraak, are pensive at this sad conceit, in that
stately Song of their Triumph: It is now Reubens case to be put in ward, by the command of that Ioseph, whose life he was a means to preserve at the first onset of Englands Cavalry. I do wish much tendernesse of heart may be shewed to those that are of tender consciences, that are not yet as∣sured of Iosephs safety; if they be of Reubens division, and not Simeonites. And will Ioseph require his friends thus? It were no pity to see Simeon and Levi tyed neck and heels together, and to put Iudah in a fright; but for Reuben to be clapped up in ward, and for him to be ranked with ranke Malignants, seems strange. Malignants rejoyce at that, and Reubenites mourne for that, and all be divided, and offended at that; yet Sir, you see, Providence will have it so; I pray submit to it. Sir, I would the consideration hereof, might serve for a helmet, and a breastplate both, to keep you intire, and unwounded in those two principles of life, the head and the heart; Beleeve it Sir, Saints themselves are shot in the mouth, and do speak boldly, and I fear bloodily. I have sent you therfore a larger peece of Iosephs party coloured Coat, & have used the more expressions that it might be unto you as so many quiltings to make you shot-free, and to keep you from the Malignity of these revolting times. That though (it seems) you have fainted somewhat in the conflict, yet you may not utterly fall in the Exit. And will Simeon take the Ingagement, and not Reuben? will Reuben teare his haire? what will he doe it now? now that Ioseph is safe? Hee might have done it at the Pit, but will he take on like a mad man at the Court? It had been a sutable deportment for wretched Simeon and Levi so to doe; for Cop, the Pope, and the Man in the Moon so to do; but men wonder to see Reubenites divided about the matter of Iosephs glory. O how do wicked men hisse? How doe most Taverns and Ale∣houses, and how doe all Stews and Brothel-houses, laugh and dance at this evill report? I could herein exceed, but in my exceeding, I should fall abundantly short of what you, and all the world, know to bee, but too true. I beleeve you would give me leave to conclude, but shall I be bold to come nearer to you? would you know the mystery? It is this, God is gone by you (and others too of Reuben's division) unseen, and hath taken Joseph along with him in all the haste: There hath been much snatching amongst us, in the Parliament, in the Army, in the City, Coun∣try. This hath made great noise every where. And shall not the Wis∣dome, and Power of God have one snatch amongst us. He will have some∣thing
as well as we, He hath catched what hee could get, and was worth the taking, and this hee hath done without much noise, wisdome is deepe, the more Divine, the more deepe; Mans wisdome is shallow, and from hence proceed the great stirres, and the clutter that is amongst us. Sir, Ioseph was taken from you, and from your counsells in the night, and went in wayes untrodden with a good guide. Quick sighted men could no more see him in his march to Pharaohs Court then blind men. Hence all our discontents, feares, dispaires. Hence it is, that Iosephs good friends that was kinde to him on his bed of sicknesse, doe now draw the curtaines upon him as if he were dead Religion, and Lawes and all good order, Lear∣ning, Trading (all) utterly defunct, friends, and enemies too agree together about this. It is so, it must needs be so, Ioseph is not, Iacob is bereaved, some evill beast hath eaten up the child. This was old Israels feare, though his internall eyes were very good, and by the helpe of a prophetical prospective could see so many Generations after him, yet he could not tel what was become of his son. Hee was so subtily, and secretly convaied away to Court that neither he, nor Reu∣ben, not little Benjamin could tell, or beleeve any other but that hee was dead. No hold, but the old man and Reuben would go after him, one to the pit, the other to the grave, and there will never want malig∣nant Tribes to settle the conceit of Iesephs death fast upon Israelites and Reubenites, for say the old ones, see his Coat if it be not so, a bloody, torn, party coloured Coate, look on it. The New Tribes are, as if they were spit out of the old ones mouthes. O what a bloody, party-coloured Coat, doe they hold forth, and show to the world. The wild beasts did doe it, but who were those wild beasts? They poore harmelsse creatures, did not teare nor besmeare the coat with blood, no not they. See thy sonnes Coat, it should seeme Ioseph was Iacobs sonne, but not their brother, I pray note how wicked men will shift off their sins with their relation to Ioseph. The coat was Iosephs (Thy sonnes Coat) the par∣ty-coloured Coate was Iosephs, the bloody coate was Iosephs. Ioseph was Iacobs sonne, but now hee shall bee none of their brother, they had made a match, and were sworre brothers to the wild beasts; they could not then be Iosephs brethren too untill the ward and some feares and frights, had purged them of some grosse malignity. O how impudent∣ly doe the ill affected Tribes of this age shift off their GREAT TRES∣PASSE from themselves, what blood they poure upon Iosephs coat? How
boldly doe they hold it forth and tell it? how shamelessely doe they object the Party-colourednesse of it, and the sadde hap thereof to Iacob and Io∣seph: The Parliament and the Common-wealth of England. Crnelty, and In∣justice, and errors and irreligion, and Blasphemy and Prophanesse, and Di∣visions, and sects, (all that is bad) that is theirs See thy sonnes coate. Sir, Snatchings you know are the sudden catching away of things unex∣pectedly. Men thinke themselves wronged when they bee thus dealt with. Such a snatcher is Providence, onely it can alwayes justifie what it doth in that kind, which we can doe but seldome. We are offended that things are thus snatched away from us. Sir, In these sadde Conflicts amongst Reubenites, I find and have obser∣ved a threefold Provision made by the wisdome of God. First for it selfe, next for Ioseph, then for the friends of Ioseph. 1 For it selfe, The Wisdome of God will provide that Instruments shall have their due (Truth and justice call for it) but men must waite the dayes of payment. Neither Men, nor Angells, nor Devills shall take a∣way that which is Gods, namely his Honour and Reputation in the world, That's one Provision. If Reuben had beene the only instrument to deliver backe young Ioseph to old Iacob, O what a man Reuben had beene! How Great for Courage? how wise for Counsell? That hand which is most seene, carries away all the Honour. Saul hath slaine his Thousands, and David his Ten thousands, but (it should seem) God stood by and did nothing. O what Gallant men had Browne, and Waller, and Essex and o∣thers beene cryed up to bee, if they had done all the worke? what had they done at Abbington! what at Newbury! what at Winchester! what at Glocester! what in the West! What great feates they had done every where, this had beene the talke, Sir, (Whither you will or no,) people will argue thus. And mans way of reasoning is very destructive to the Glory and wayes of God. If Instruments stand in the peoples light so that they cannot behold his exceeding great Glory, let the men bee never so precious, they shall bee laid aside for a time. God himselfe will bury Moses with his owne hand, rather then the people shall set the man up in his place. Moses was honoured with the conduct of Gods people through the red sea, as farre as the Wildernesse, and there hee is put out of Commission, and shall goe no further. Ioshua shall bee their Captaine Generall in their March to Canaan. You your selfe and other worthy Commanders were honored to go before English Israel from Egypt, through a red sea, as far as the Wildernesse, and are you offended that the Wisdome of God hath taken a∣way your Commission, and buried your honour for a little time? Sir, It was
come to this passe, that your Honour must be buried or Gods, your Wise dome or his, your Treaties or his Counsells? and would you have his fall and yours stand? his go down, and yours go up. Downs with that spirit I pray you, or else it will sinke you as low as any place God hath to put you in. Are you Angry that hee makes no further use of you, when all men know you have been so? and so? so for Courage, and so for trust, &c. Why, thats the reason that Providence takes you off, It is policy to take men off when they begin to be so popular. When ment are great, God is little. London is populous, and popularity is a great temptation to bi asse men; it is infinitely against the height of his spirit to overcome a world by a world, or by many in the world. God is upon a designe that people will not beleeve. With 2 or 3 hee wil turne the world upside∣downe. Hee hath done so, and he will doe so. Thats the first Provision. And then, next, Provision must be made for Ioseph too; Our of Egypt have I called my Son; The Truth of God is ingaged to bring Joseph out of Egypt, He shall not for ever dwell among Egyptians, Ioseph shall be advanced to a Commonwealth; Sineon shall not kill him; Judah shall not sell him, God will ceize upon his goods where ever he finde them; and it shall goe freely from him againe, for the nourishment, and preservation of Israelites; and for Interpretation to the Egyptians too. And now Sir, to come as near as I am able unto you, can it be, do you think, that the good Providence should make no provision for the friends of Joseph? What? not for Reuben? not for friendly Reuben? not for the Elder brother? not for the best brother? what, not for valiant Reuben, that with∣stood nine, for the cause of Joseph? Yes, Sir, care is taken for Reuben, by crossing Reuben; and there is made for him too, a gracious provision of good, by a carefull prevision of evill; Sir, it is a work of Providence, ad∣mire it, and stoop to it. Ah Reuben, (Englands true hearted Reuben) It is well for thee, and for all of thy division, that the Treaty at the Pit tooke not! It was well that Joseph was taken out, though to thy discontent. Deare Reuben, It would have grieved thee to have found thy brothers carcasse in the Pit, and they selfe thrown there to beare him company for a Round-head; Were not thy brothers in Commission of Array against Joseph? and against all the friends of Ioseph? Sir, Treaties neare a Pit, (where men be divided, and doe mistake one another, as in a place of darknesse) are dangerous, especially such Treaties as are managed with such disadvantages; of nine against one, of nine against
one, did I say? of ninety against one, I dare say, if you take in all the Confederacy, and such as wish well to our il. Treaties of cunning men against well minded men; of united men in evill, against divided men, about that which is good; of bloody men against peaceable men: Reuben, Reuben, I tell thee againe, I do love thy pity, but I did fear the Pit. Sir, I am more then onely perswaded, that by this time, you, and we too, had known sorrow, if those Counsels had took. Your wit had gra∣tified our Enemies, more then their courage could ever have done; yet this I know too, men are observed to be Mutineers against present Pro∣vidence alwayes, either it is too hot, or too cold; either too wet, or too dry for them; but I hope you will prove a better student of Providence, and that you will submit unto it, and that you will ingage for it, a∣gainst such as will make but little distinction (lesse then men will imagine) between Presbyterians and Independents, and against such as have already resolved how to levell all our new Names, into one heap of Rubbish. To conclude, Sir, It is against such as, you may be confident, will come with such a powder of wrath against your persons, and of hunger to your estates: (for can they ever forget how much you beat them, and how Penny your Marshall used them;) that they will give no other but the same quarter to the City of London, as that mercilesse Powder did unto those Families near the Tower of London. Sir, they will easily take (or else take the pains to dig out) your Treasure, I speake to more then to your self, and will kindly help you to make good (for them∣selves) so much of that known Proverb; Lincoln was, London (yet) is, and Montrosse shall be, &c. I cannot part with so many friends without one word more of remembrance, because my designe is to awake sleepers. O London, London! How many sighs have you made? how many groans have you uttered? how many precious tears have ye shed? That the keeper of Israel, would keep you? and your God with you? and your Religion with you? and your Liberties with you? and your Wives with you? and your Children with you? and your Friends with you? and the Glory of Englands Ioseph with you? And now that he casts a good eye up∣on you, now that he hath told you of so many Treasons to prevent them; Of so many designes to blast them; Of so many Combinations and Devises to scatter them, them that would soon have scattered you; Are you offended at this Providence? Doe you repine at this Provision? Will the Irish, or the uncertaine Scots, or the Orcades, or France, or Spaine, or Barbary; Will any of these doe you thinke, give you content, if a wise God cannot do it?
I pray, Sirs, think and bethinke your selves, and walke a∣bout the City, the Island, tell the Towres,: Marke well her Bulwarks: And in your ROƲNDS, peep under the foundations, search the Vaults, not with darke Lantherns; Guide Faux and Traytors did so, they doe, and have done so, that would blow you up: Londoners! English∣men! Take the benefit of the Sun by day, and of a Torch by night. Pray be not so unkinde as to send up such annoying, such choaking∣smoake, to offend the pure and clear eye that England and London seem to have Monopolized to it selfe for the safety of both, and for the pre∣servation of all that any of us doe enjoy. Video, Rideo, doe ye understand and remember the old Powder Treason; it was the very Mother of this; that was the Mother, and this the Daughter. Sir, it is a Child begotten of the same Black Father, a child begotten after his own likenesse, as black and dark as himself, Oh how many barrels of powder, be laid! and how many Billets, and Logges, and great bars of Iron too, be laid over those barrels! Those unhappy ones in Towerstreet, were but as a boyes Squib in comparison of these Vanlts and Barrels, yet how many sweet families were blowne up by that Squib? and those barrells? and that improvidence? I doe melt into a brine of saltish teares at the very writing of it, but you will melt into teares of red blood at the feeling of it, if better provision bee not made for you by your Guardians, and by him that guides your Guardians. Those barrells were laid, (whither in a Seller or Shop, or Warehouse, I know not) under some weake timber-houses in a streete of London, these are laid under the very foundations of the strong Tower of London, the City of London, the Towns and Cities of England, and the very weale of all the Commons of England. Here all enslaved-Nations do contribute to give a sound blon indeed, The work will be the more easie if many hands be put to it. Beleeve it (honoured sir) the Pope hath barrels, and billets, and fag∣gots, and Oneale hath barrels, and the Scots have barrels, & the Danes have barrels, and they say some Londoners have barrels too, I feare if you helpe them not with powder, yet you put fire enough at the Touch hole: but shall these blow up England? No I trust, nor yet London neither. Better provision is made for both. I hope Providence will snatch London from those barrels or those barrels from London, and take away the knife least the child hurt himself, and prove a grief to Father and Mother: Deare Londoners, engage against all powder plots, your Solitary Ben: doth give you an Alarum; And it is an Alarum of Love to London. Not to fire their Buildings, BUT, To quench their Burnings. FINIS.
