B2641 11712884 48294
A PARAPHRASE ON THE Book of JOB: As likewise on the SONGS of MOSES, DEBORAH, DAVID: On Four Select PSALMS: SOME Chapters of ISAIAH, AND THE Third Chapter of HABAKKUK. By Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE, Kt. M. D. One of His Majesty's Physicians in Ordinary, and Fellow of the College of Physicians in London. Vt si occupati profuimus aliquid civibus nostris, prosimus etiam, si possumus, otiosi. Cic. Tuscul. Quaest. LONDON, Printed for Awnsham and Iohn Churchill, at the Black Swan in Pater-Noster-Row. 1700.
THE PREFACE. THE great Mischiefs which we already feel, and the far greater yet, we justly fear from the Vniversal Depravation of our Manners, and horrible Contempt of Sacred and Divine Things, have with good reason alarm'd all the Wiser part of the Nation, who have a due Concern for the Interests of Religion, or the Good of their Country. Considering Men in all places express their Melancholy Apprehensions, that if Vice and Prophaness should without controul spread their Infection much farther, the Consequences would be fatal; and that notwith∣standing we have by His Majesty's unrivall'd Cou∣rage, and most prudent Conduct, surmounted our fears of Foreign Enemies, the Nation is still in greater Danger from our Vices and Immoralities, our more formidable ones at Home. His Majesty therefore, to put a stop to the progress of this dreadful Evil, and after he has sav'd us from our Enemies, to de∣liver us from our Selves, (his last and hardest Task) has been pleas'd to recommend from the Throne the Suppressing of Vice and Irreligion; and our Honourable Representatives, in nothing more honourable than in this, have express'd a ready and becoming Zeal for the accomplishing this Great and Good Design. To think of extirpating Vice would be indeed a vain Imagination; to suppress its growth, and reduce its
Power and Interest, is not impossible. And tho' it must be granted, that even this is hard to be effected, yet when a Work is necessary, the Difficulty should only whet the Courage, and provoke the Zeal of the Vnderta∣kers. And when our Government shall endeavour to stop the various Sources of this Mischief, when it shall attack with vigour the many monstrous Heads of this Hydra, that terrible one that poisons the Stage, and from thence conveys a deadly Contagion through the Kingdom, may, perhaps, receive a mor∣tifying stroke. It must be confess'd, but not to the Honour of a Christian Nation, that Poetry was never in the worst of Times, or among the worst of Men, employ'd to more detestable urposes than it has been by the Writers of this Age. This Weapon which might have been manag'd with great advantage against Vice and Prophaness, they have made an Instrument of Destruction, and plung'd it into the Bowels of their Native Country. I will not ay that the worst of our Poets, no not he who in the late loose Reigns introduc'd and establish'd that pernicious way of Writing, which corrupted the Stage, and de∣prav'd our Manners, had this effect in view, and re∣ally design'd the fatal Consequences that attended their performances. 'Tis hard to imagine that any Men should be so intellectually Wicked, as to promote Im∣morality and Irreligion, meerly for the sake of doing so; but this has been, and is still my complaint, that it is eventually true, that the Loose and Prophane Wri∣tings of our Poets, whatever they design'd, have greatly contributed to that decay of Vertue, and corruption of Manners, which threaten the Nation with such dan∣gerous Consequences.
The Regard I have for the Interests of Religi∣on, and my Zeal for the Safety and Happiness of my Country, have extorted these Complaints from me: And though I know 'tis impossible to escape the Reproaches of those who will think themselves ei∣ther unjustly, or too severely censured in this Matter; yet that is no discouragement to me. If I can escape the Defamation of their Panegyricks, I think my self very safe. I have no Personal Quarrel with any of the Writers I have censur'd; and if they think fit to expose my Name for asserting the Cause of Vertue and Religion, I have no reason to be displeased with them for doing me so great an Ho∣nour. If it be not possible to regulate this Grie∣vance, and reform this evil Manner of Writing, at least I am willing that Posterity should know, if my Writings should continue so long, that the In∣terests of Religion and Vertue, I mean as far as Poetry s concerned in them, were not given up without Opposition, or any Protestations enter'd against it. One of the most Famous Poets of the Stage has at last expresly own'd, that the Charge brought a∣gainst him is too just. He has done it in two Lines; the two best he ever writ, and by which, in my Opi∣nion, he has acquir'd more true Honour than by all the Volumes he has publish'd. The two Lines are these: What I have loosely, or prophanely writ, Let them to Fires, (their due Desert) commit. Verses before Beauty in Distress. Though particular Persons endeavour to vindicate themselves, yet in the general 'tis allow'd that the
Stage requires a Reformation. The chief things that are said in the defence of our Modern Plays, are these; that they are an agreeable Diversion, and that they mightily polish and improve our Language. But of what Persons must that Audi∣ence he compos'd, who shall call that an agreeable Diversion, where Prophaness and Immorality are kindly treated and encouraged, and Vertue and Wisdom exposed and put out of Countenance? Was it not an Argument of the great Degeneracy of the Romans, when they became delighted with the bloody ntertainments of the Amphitheatre, where the Gladitos mangled and killed one another for the Sport and Pastime of the cruel Spectators? But 'tis infinitely more pardonable to be thus diver∣ted, than to make Sport with the Tragical Per∣formances of the English Theatre. 'Tis sad in∣deed that Humane Nature should at any time be so ar divested of all tender Passions, as that it should be deighted with the Torments and dying Ago∣nies tho' of condemn'd Criminals; but for any People to make it a Diversion to see their Religion inulted, hurt, and wounded, to see Vertue it self re∣ceive such cuts and deep gashes, is a certain mark of the most deplorable Corruption. As to what is said of the Improvement of our anguage by the Writers for the Stage, I believe is in part true; though it must be own'd at the same time that our most famous Masters, and most correct Writers of English, are either of the Clergy, or else are Gentlemen whose Stile seems to have nothing of the Air of the Theatre in it. But suppose it were indeed true, that we owe all the Refinements of our Lan∣guage
to the Stage, will that make amends for the Mischiefs which are universally laid to its Charge? Does the Honour and Happiness of a People depend upon the Politeness of their Language, or the Pu∣rity of their Manners? let these Gentlemen re∣store the old English Vertue, but so far as 'tis im∣pair'd by them, and we'll be contented to take our old Language in the Condition they found it. There is a degree of Vertue necessary to the sup∣port of every Civil Society, without which the wi∣sest Laws, and the most prudent Provisions will be in vain. Not many Princes have Vertue enough for themselves, but none, no not the Best, not our Great King himself, who has enough for many Kings, has enough for himself, and his People too. For if the Corruption of any Nation should encrease to that degree, that there should not be Men of Vertue let to put the Laws in Execution; if the Numbers and Confidence of the Criminals become so great, that they stand upon their defence, despise the Authority, and defy the Power of the Magistrate; that Nation for want of Vertue, let the Magistrate and Laws be never so good, must be certainly undone. Whoever therefore, as the Poets of the Stage have done, shall by any means sink the Vertue, and corrupt the Manners of the People, do effectually undermine the Foundations, and subvert the Pillars of the Go∣vernment; for a profligate and flagitious People will destroy themselves in spite of the best Laws and the wisest Ministers in the World. This is the ground of my Controversie with the Stage. If a Foreign Enemy should invade the Na∣tion, every English-man should take the alarm, al∣though
he has receiv'd from them no personal Provo∣cation. The same Reason will justifie the Opposi∣tion I have made to those Poets I have at any time condemn'd, and will plainly show that I did not do it unprovok'd. Whoever undermines the Goverment, provokes every Man that loves It, to resist him. 'Tis a great damage also to the Nation, that so much of its finest Spirit is thus wasted, or employed to very bad Ends. 'Tis plain that many of a Poeti∣cal Genius are likewise fit for the greatest and high∣est Employments both in Church and State; and there are but very few, that are such meer Poets, as only to be capable of being Turners of Verses. If there∣fore our Youth who are Poetically inclin'd, would consider the Matter, and thereupon apply themselves to Business, or severer Studies, many of them might arise to eminent Stations, and at the same time ad∣vance themselves, and become very serviceable to their Country; and by this means they would acquire greater Honour and Reputation, than ever they will do by their Rhimes and Plays: For if they would reflect, they would soon be convinc'd, that tho' Poetry is indeed an Ornament to those that have more noble and more useful Qualities, yet when it becomes a Pro∣fession, 'tis one of the meanest and lowest sort: 'Tis like Dancing and Musick which we value in a Gen∣tleman, when a Musician or a Dancing-Master make no considerable Figure: So greatly different are the degrees of Esteem, which all Men pay, and not without good reason, to the same Attainment, when 'tis in one an Accomplishment, in another, a Trade.
And that I may not only censure the Performan∣ces of others, but likewise give a fresh Example of a Writing that may both entertain and instruct the Reader, I have made a third, which I intend as my last Attempt in Poetry. It has been observed by great Judges,Parrhasia. and I find Mr. Le Clerk of the same Opinion, that the Moderns have wholly form'd themselves on the Models of the Ancients, and that we have scarce any thing but the Greek and Latin Poetry in the World. We have no Originals, but all Copiers and Transcribers of Homer, Pindar, and Theocritus, Virgil, Horace, and Ovid. Their Design, their Phrase, their Manner, and even their Heathen Theology, appear in all the Poems that have since their Time been published to the World, especially in the Learned Languages. 'Tis therefore to be wish'd that some good Genius, qualify'd for such an Undertaking, would break the Ice, assert the Liberty of Poetry, and set up for an Original in Writing in a way accommodated to the Religion, Manners, and other Circumstances we are now under. But however we write, I think 'tis high time to leave out our Allusions to the Pa∣gan Divinity; for how beautiful soever they might be in in the Pagan Authors, who wrote to a People that believ'd in those Deities, 'tis the most ridicu∣lous and senseless thing in the World for a Christian Poet to bring in upon all Occasions the Rabble and Riffraffe of Heathenish Gods; and yet if we re∣flect on our Modern Poems one would think we were all Pagans to this day. What have we to do with Jupiter and Juno, Mars and Venus, and the rest?
We know they are a Iest, and yet they are brought into all our most grave and chastest Poems. Solemn Prayers are made to them by Christian Writers, than which there cannot be a more intollerable Absur∣dity. I know 'tis said, as I have elsewhere oberv'd, that the Christian Scheme of Religion is not so well accommodated to Petical Writings, and there∣fore our Poets are oblig'd to embelish their Works with the Pagan Theology: A wretched Apolo∣gy! Are our Poets then so dry and barren, have they so little Learning, and so poor a stock of Ima∣ges, that they are not able to furnish themselves with proper Allusions, surprizing Metaphors, and beau∣tiful Similes, without reviving the old exploded Ido∣latry of the Heathens? As in this Book of Job, they will find a Poem that is indeed an Original, and not beholding to the Greek and Latin Springs; so they will find, if it be not depress'd by the Para∣phrase, a sublime Stile, elevated Thoughts, magnificent Expressions where the Subject re∣quires them, and great richness and abundance throughout the whole, without the Aids of the Pagan System of Divinity. It has been generally allow'd that almost all the Book of Job is writ in Metre; though a very lear∣ned Person, famous for his Skill in these Matters, has assured me that this is a mistake: However that be, 'tis universally agreed that the Subject of it is treated in a Poetical manner; that is, the Narra∣tion, the Allusions, the Similes, and the Diction, are such as are proper only to Poems. But 'tis a Con∣troversie among learned Men what kind of Poem it is: Some are of Opinion that there never was any such
Man in Being as Job, but that the Person is feign∣ed, and all the Sacred Story concerning him is made up of Allegories and Fables, composed for the In∣struction of Mankind, like the Parabolical Relations in the New Testament; and of this Opinion were many of the Ancient Jews. Others believe that this Book contains a relation of nothing but real Facts, without feigned Incidents or Episodes; and that therefore it is an Historical Poem, like that of Lu∣can, which contains the Narration of a Series of real Actions in a poetical way without interposing any feign'd Stories. Most of the Commentators and Criticks that have writ on this Book, if not all, are of one of these two Opinions. But I have in Conversation met with learned Men that are of a mid∣dle Opinion; that is, that this is a Poem foun∣ded on a true History, as those of Homer probably were: But then they say the Conduct, the Me∣thod, the Machines, the Incidents, and the Epi∣sodes, which make up a great part of the Poem, were form'd in the Poet's Imagination, and that therefore this Poem is of the Epick kind. As to the first Opinion, I think the Scriptures fully con∣fute it, by asserting the Person and Patience of Job so plainly, that it leaves no room for any tolerable Evasion. As to the two last, many things of Weight and Importance may be urg'd on either side; and there∣fore I shall not undertake to decide the Controversie, but content my self in giving the Reasons that I have read or heard offer'd to support each Assertion. Those of the last Opinion in the defence of it alledge, that the Frame of the whole Book shews it to be the Work of Imagination and Contrivance,
and not a relation of a Series of real Actions. No Body can believe, say they, that Satan did really ap∣pear before God, and that the Discourse recited in the Book was indeed held between them in the Pre∣sence of the Holy Angels: 'Tis not credible that the Messengers that brought an account to Job of so many Sufferings that befel him, did really come upon the heels of one another so fast, and in such a manner as is there related. They think 'tis improbable that Job should sit so long upon a Dunghil, and that his Acquaintance should wait seven days and nights to∣gether without speaking a word to their sorrowful Friend. They look on this to be a Poetical way of representing the vast Distress that overwhelmed the patient Sufferer. They say, 'tis incredible that all those prolix Discourses should be actually held be∣tween Job and his Friends: and that a Man in such sad Circumstances, as Job is supposed to be, should speak so very long, and use so many Poetical Similes, Metaphors, and beautiful Descriptions as are found in his several Speeches. They urge also that it has an Air of Contrivance to sink a Man so suddenly from the most prosperous Condition, and to lay him under such grievous Sufferings, and the ve∣ry extremity of Misery, and then by a no less sud∣den and surprizing Revolution, in so short a space of time, to make him again the most happy Man in the World. They urge that in the Catastrophe, when this patient Man is rewarded for his inflexi∣ble Perseverance, the allotting him just the same number of Children as he had lost, and just a double quantity of Riches as he enjoyed before, seems too nice to be a real Fact. The Men of this Opinion
do not dispute the reality of the Person of Job: They allow there was a Person of that Name, emi∣nent for his Righteousness, and famous for his Pa∣tience; for this the Scriptures expresly affirm; and they suppose some great Poet, under the Guidance and Assistance of Divine Inspiration, did for the In∣struction of Mankind chuse this Subject, and con∣trive the Poem upon it of which we are now discour∣sing. They affirm that this Poem of Job is of the Epick kind, here being found all the essential parts requir'd in the Constitution of such a Poem. They add farther as a confirmation of their Opinion, that though Machines, that is, the introducing of Invisible Superiour Beings, and the interesting of them in the Business of the Poem, are not necessary to an Epick Poem; yet as it does greatly heighten and embelish the Narration, they can't but take notice that this Conduct is observed here; for the chief Apostate Angel, and even the Divine Being him∣self, are both introduced in the most proper manner that can be; and as this perhaps is the Original of that sort of Writing, so it does thereby discover a great Air of the Allegorial Epick Poetry. Those on the other side argue thus: As according to a settled Maxim of Interpreting the Scriptures, we should not without apparent Necessity quit the plain and literal Sense, and embrace a foreign, more strain'd and less obvious Meaning: so without the same necessity we should not turn the Relation of any Fact into Invention and Allegory. And to make it appear that there is no such reason in this Case, they alledge that there is nothing related in this Book, but what may well be suppos'd to have actually happened;
that though many things appear improbable and hard∣ly credible to the Reader, this is no convincing proof that they were not real Facts. For all Men that are are verst in History will meet with many wonderful and improbable Occurrences, which not∣withstanding upon sufficient Evidence they are forc'd to believe; and they say that for that reason, because the Facts were so extraordinary and surprizing, they were recorded in this Book for our Ad∣miration and Instruction. They had rather give their Assent to some things that sound only harsh and improbable, for many such Relations are undoubted∣ly true, than by departing from the literal Sense en∣courage and embolden uncautious and wanton Wits to break in upon the Scriptures, and turn the Histo∣ry of the Bible into Parables and Allegories; for the Consequence of such a licentious way of inter∣preting the Scriptures they look on as very mischie∣vous. They think that the unnecessary Concessions of some Divines in these Points tend mightily to un∣settle Men in the Principles of their Religion, and weaken their Reverence of Divine Revelation. They do indeed alow the appearance of Satan be∣fore the Throne of God, and the Discourse on that Occasion to be an Allegory, for there are cogent Reasons for it; but for the rest of the relations in the Book they see no necessity of making them Alle∣gorical also. There is the like Allegory us'd in the History of Ahab, where 'tis said a Spirit appear'd before the Throne of God, and offer'd to be a ly∣ing Spirit in the Mouths of Ahab's Prophets to perswade their Master to go down to War to Ra∣math Gilead, and he had leave given him to do so:
But though this be an Allegory, yet without doubt all the rest of the Story about this Expedition of Ahab against the King of Syria was real. And to be more particular, that Almighty God should per∣mit the great Enemy of Mankind to afflict and persecute a great and a good Man for the proof of his Constancy and Uprightness; and to make his Vertues more conspicuous and exemplary, that he should leave him for a time under this sharp and se∣vere Trial, and at last deliver the patient Sufferer, and restore him to his former flourishing Condi∣tion: This has nothing in it but what is very agreea∣ble to the Course of Divine Providence; and if there be any Facts in the Book, that seem improbable, 'tis owing to the Poetical manner of representing them, in which perhaps the Time, Order, Place, and other Circumstances, are not so nicely observed. But whether this be an Epick, or barely an Histo∣rical Poem, which I leave undecided, the Character of Job may in my Opinion be every way proper for the first. The Hero is indeed a passive one, and this perhaps will be made a great Objection against this Assertion; because Homer's and Virgil's Heroes are very active ersons. For the Criticks forming their Model of an Heroick Poem intirely upon the Ex∣ample of these two famous Writers, make great and illustrious Actions necessary to the Hero of the Poem, which conorming my self to their Precepts, I have formerly asserted. But upon what Authority is this imposed on the World? What Commission had these two Poets to settle the limits and extent of Epick Poetry, or who can prove they ever inten∣ded to do so? They wrote according to their own No∣tions
and Measures; and must all future Ages be bound up to follow their Examples, without producing any other Reason? Yet this Opinion, how groundless and absurd soever it appears, some imagine, has been the great obstruction to the Improvement of Poe∣try among the Moderns. But it may be urged that the Book of Job was written before Homer and Virgil, and the World has as much reason to be go∣verned by this Example, as by that of the Pagan Writers. And if we look into the Reason of the Matter, and reflect on the End and Design of an Epick oem, which is to instruct the World in some important Moral Truth, by the Narration of some great and illustrious Subject-Matter, there is no question but the relation of the Sufferings, as well as the Actions of great Persons, are very conducive to that end; and indeed what else is the Subject of the Odysses? 'Tis true, the Iliad is all active, and a very fighting Poem; but if the Odysses be consi∣der'd, 'tis of another nature, there is more a great deal of the Heroes Sufferings not evaded by Arms, but by little Tricks and Subtilties, than there is of Action; and yet Mr. Rapin accounts this the more perfect Poem. In short, 'tis hard to offer any Rea∣son why the Hero of the Poem may not be as well active as passive. If it be said, the Authority of Homer is against it (for as for Virgil he is but a Copier of Homer's Model) the answer is, that the Authority of the Book of Job is for it; and more∣over that Homer is of this Opinion in his second, th against it in his first Poem. If it be said that Reason is against it, let that Reason be produc'd; let it be shown that the Sufferings of a great Man
manag'd with equal Skill, will not equally serve the Ends of Epick Poetry. As for what the Criticks say on this Point, 'tis plain that Homer has been the great Lawgiver to those Men; they have done little but turn'd his Examples into Precepts; and bring∣ing no Reasons to support what they assert, they are of no weight in this Matter. Job then is a Hero proper for an Epick Poem, an Illustrious Person fit to support the Dignity of that Character: He is by the Instigation of Satan brought into miserable Streights and unparalell'd Sufferings, to try his Con∣stancy and Integrity. He appears brave in Di∣stress, and valiant in Affliction, maintains his Ver∣tue, and with that his Character, under the most powerful Temptations, and exasperating Provoca∣tions that the Malice of Hell could invent, and thereby gives a most noble Example of passive Forti∣tude, a Character no way inferiour to that of the active Hero. When the various Efforts to break this mighty Man's Invincible Constancy prov'd ineffe∣ctual, he is at the latter end of the Poem acquitted by God Himself, and rewarded highly for his Patience and Perseverance; whereby the Justice of Divine Providence is asserted, and Mankind encouraged to be stedfast in their Religion and Integrity, upon a sure Belief that Vertue will not always be neglected, but will at last receive a suitable Reward. Whatever others assert, in my Judgment the He∣ro of the Poem ought not to be drawn without some defects; for as the representing of a perfect Idea of Vertue, which is never to be found in any meer Man, offends against the Establish'd Rule in Epick Writings, which excludes all things improbable, so
instead of promoting, it rather obstructs the End of that Poetry: For a perfect Idea of Vertue and Ex∣cellency may amaze and dazle us; but when pro∣pounded for our Imitation, it will rather discourage, than excite us: But when the Examples of Vertue that are set before us, are discern'd to have a mixture of Imperfection, we are provok'd and embolden'd to form our selves according to such a Pattern, where there appears no Impossibility, as there does in the other, f becoming like it. This Poem seems to me to abound in all kinds of Beauties, which are admir'd in Poetical Writings. What noble strains of Eloquence occurr in every place where they ought to appear, especially in the latter part of this Book? How tender and moving are the Thoughts in the Passionate, how proper, just and instructive in the Moral, how sublime, admira∣ble and majestick in the other Parts? What Varie∣ty is there of elegant Expression, beautiful Simili∣tudes, bold and surprizing Metaphors, natural, strong, and lively Images and Descriptions through∣out the whole? In many of these it exceeds, and in all of them it equals the most Celebrated Writings of the Greeks and Romans. And if it should here∣after happen, that Homer or Virgil should be well Translated into the English Language, I am very confident that this Book, were it Translated or Para∣phrased with equal Skill, would outshine them in all sorts of Perfection. But as to the chief End and Design of an Epick Poem, the giving a noble and true Idea of the Divine Being, the Justification of his Providence, the Instruction of Mankind in Moral Duties, and animating the Reader from pro∣per
Motives to imitate the Illustrious Examples of Piety and Vertue set before them, in this respect, which is infinitely the most considerable, this of Job put all the Poems of the Heathen World out of Countenance. How will Homer's wretched Tribe of Gods and Goddesses, introduc'd with all the Follies and Vices too of corrupt Mankind appear to the World as now instructed and inlighten'd with the Christian Revelation? And tho' Virgil is in that, as in other things, more judicious and cautious than the Greek Poet, yet his Theology must be very o∣dious to a Christian Reader; and if the Machines of these Poets in which so much of the Beauty of their Poems consists are so contemptible and ridiculous, a great part of their Excellency is gone. There are indeed some few Moral Sentences in∣terspers'd in these Poets; but as they seem inserted only as Embellishments of the Writing, so the Body of the Poem carries little Instruction in it. For my part, when I consider these Poems, I am of Mr. L Clerk's Opinion, that the Authors had no∣thing else in their view than to entertain and please the Reader,Ubi supra. and that all the Materials and Contrivance were accommodated to that End. 'Tis true, Criticks in after-Ages, a sort of Men who are very apt to discover in Writings many notable things that never enter'd into the Author's Thoughts, have found out wise and instructive Morals in the Poems before-mention'd; yet this seems an Inven∣tion of their own. For as the Learned Man be∣fore-mentioned observes, 'tis scarce possible to relate any wonderful Action of a Great Person, or any con∣siderable Occurrence, but 'twill be very easie to draw
some Moral Inference from it, tho' the Writer ne∣ver had it in his Imagination. And the very same Person has with as great grounds of Probability drawn from the Iliad and the Aencis, Morals very different from those that are commonly mention'd, and has offer'd sufficient Reasons to make us doubtful whether the Morals attributed to these Poems were ever intended by the Authors. And if this be true of these two famous Writers, that only the pleasing and amusing, not the instructing of Mankind was their Design, 'tis more apparently true of the greatest part of the Moderns, especially the Dramatick Poets. Since this Book of Job, and other Poetical parts of the Scripture, some of which I have likewise under∣taken to paraphrase, does at least equal the chief Beauties of the Heathens, and by their Vsefulness in their excellent Instructions infinitely excel them, 'tis a Matter of Admiration that the Christian Po∣ets should be so far enamour'd with the Pagan Wri∣tings, as to form themselves entirely by their Patterns, to be taken up with the Study of them to the total neglect of these inspir'd Writings. What pains and labour have our Men been at, how great a part of their short Lives have they spent, what a multi∣tude of Volumes have they publish'd to illustrate the Meaning and discover the Excellencies of Greek and Latin Poets, and to translate them into their own Languages? If this were the Work of Gentlemen, that had nothing else to employ themselves about, and had no other Capacity of being useful to Mankind, it might perhaps pass for an inoffensive Amusement, and a pardonable ort of Idleness. But 'tis indeed
wonderful that to give a new Sense to an Expression in an ancient Poet, to slop a Period more exactly, to rectifie a Word, to give a truer Spelling to a Man's Name, or to restore a corrupt Sentence, should be look'd on as such a Perfection, as sets a Man in the first Rank of Learned Men; and that a kind of Knowledge which does not make Mankind any ways wiser or better, should procure a mighty Reputation, and dignifie the Owners of it with the honourable Titles of great Criticks, and Masters of polite Learning. I would not derogate from the true value of Classical Knowledge. The Greek and Latin Po∣ets should be study'd, that we may understand those Languages of which there is such a manifest Neces∣sity: But 'tis most evident, that for the Sense, for the noble and sublime Thoughts, and what is more than all other Considerations, for the forming a Man's Mind according to the justest Ideas of Ver∣tue and true Wisdom, and thereby promoting his Honour and his Happiness, the Poetical parts of the Scripture have, as before suggested, an infinite ad∣vantage above all others put together, and therefore one would think should not be less worthy of a Christi∣an's Study and Application, than Homer and his Followers. The Language in which this Book was written is Hebrew; and considering the very great difference there is between the Stil or manner of Expression in the Eastern and Western part of the World, their E∣loquence, as well as their Customs and Habits, be∣ing of another kind than ours, 'tis very strange that a literal Translation of this Book as 'tis now found in
the Bible, especially considering how long time since it was written, how little the Language is understood, and how much the Idiom of it is lost, should not sound much more harsh, and be less capable of being under∣stood than it is. I am confident that if several of the Greek Poets should be verbally translated, they would be more obscure, if not altogether unintelligi∣ble. And if in a literal Translation the Book of Job written in an Eastern Language does so much affect us, and raises in our Minds such an Admira∣tion of its Beauty and Majesty, what a wonderful and inimitable kind of Eloquence must be suppos'd in the Original, when we can't translate verbatim a good Poem from one Modern Language into a∣nother, tho' it be done by the nearest Neighbours, without a mighty diminution of its Excellence? As to the Time when Job liv'd, it is highly proba∣ble that he was Moses's Predecessor, or at least his Contemporary; and that for these Reasons. This righteous and devout Man was allow'd to offer Sa∣crifices to God, which only the Priests under the Mo∣saical Dispensation had Authority to do, and that only before the Tabernacle or Temple. This de∣vout Person seems intirely ignorant of the Modes of the Jewish Religion, and of their manner of ask∣ing Counsel of God either by Urim and Thummim, or by the Prophets; and therefore 'tis evident the Mosaical Scheme of Religion was not yet institu∣ted. In the whole Book of Job there is no mention made of the Law and the Prophets, nor of the many Miracles wrought either in Egypt, or in the Passage of the Children of Israel to Canaan, though nothing could have been more pertinent and sutable to the
Design of the Author of this Book, had Job liv'd after that wonderful Deliverance; and there is scarce any Writer that follow'd that Time, that does not mention or allude to that famous History. And this is yet farther confirm'd by the long Life of Job, which was protracted to two hundred Years, which agrees to the Times of the Old Patriarchs. As to the Land of Utz, the Country in which this great Man liv'd, there are different Opinions, occasi∣on'd chiefly by the uncertainty which Utz it was (for three are mention'd) from whom it receiv'd its Name. The first Utz the Son of Aram is mention'd, Gen. 10. 23. who is reported to be the Founder of Damascus and Trachonitis; and many Writers, for this reason, conclude the Seat of Job to have been in the Plain of Jordan in the Region of Trachonitis, where the Tomb of Job is shown to Strangers at this day: O∣thers place it in the Famous Valley of Damascus. A second Utz, the Son of Nachor is mention'd, Gen. 22. 21. from him the Country where he liv'd is call'd Usitis or Ausitis, which by Ptolemy is plac'd near Euphrates, and the City Babylon; and there∣fore many Authors believe Job had his Habitation in that part of Arabia. A third Utz, who, as Spanhmius observes, was a Horite of the Posterity of Sehir, and not as common∣ly accounted of the Race of Esau, is mention'd, Gen. 36. 28. the Horites being driven out by the Edomites, their Country was after that call'd Idumea, which has for its bounds Arabia, Canaan, and the Red Sea, and in this Country many believe was the Ha∣bitation of Job. But if a Man could remove the Obstructions of great Learning and Critical Remarks, methinks it
should be a very easie matter to settle this controver∣ted Point. `Tis allow'd by all, that Utz the Country of Job was expos'd to the Incursions and Depredations of the Chaldeans; and 'tis allowed likewise that Chal∣dea was Eastward of Arabia. Now suppose that in our English History there had been mention'd a great Man, that had in ancient Times been plunder'd by a Band of Scotch-men; and the Habitation or Country of this unfortunate Man being mention'd by an obscure or obsolete Word, a Controversie should arise in what part of England this Man lived; would not any Man that was derivered from the encumbrance of great Read∣ing and learned Observations, presently conclude, that he lived in the North part of England not far from the Borders of Scotland? And must it not have been a Critick of extraordinary Sagacity that should have found out his Seat in Middlesex, or at the Land's End? And yet those that place the Country of Job in Idumea, or near Damascus, remove it farther from Chaldea than those two Places before-named are from Scotland. 'Tis not therefore to be doubted but that the Country of Job was in the Eastern part of Ara∣bia, and 'tis probable 'twas near the River Euphrates, and that he was of the Posterity of Nachor. The▪ Stories therefore of Job's Well near Jerusalem, of his Scpulchre in the Plain of Jordan, and of the Regi∣on in the North of Syria, which the Inhabitants shew to Travellers for the Seat of Job, are all Modern Fables, and not to be regarded. But much more ridi∣culous is the rror of those Commentatrs, who make Constantinople to have been the Seat of Job: The Scpulchre of Job in Armenia that favours this Opinion, 'tis very probable according to the Conjecture of several learned Men, was erected in honour of some Captain of the Turks of that Name.
As to the Time when the Author of this Book liv'▪ there are many different Opinions. Some believe this Book was wrote in the Time when the Israelites were under the Aegyptian Bondage, and that it was compos'd to encourage them to a patient suffering of their Afflictions, and to confirm them in their depen∣dance upon God for Deliverance. And those of this Opinion believe, that either Moses himself was the Au∣thor, or at least the Translator of it; and that this was a Tradition among the ancient Jews several Authors testifie. Others are of Opinion, that the Writing was of much later date, and give these Reasons for it. They alledge that there are many Syriack and Arabick Words, and Forms of Expression that were not in use among the ancient Hebrew Writers, the Interpreta∣tion of which must be fetch'd from the Rabbins; that there are many Elegancies relating to the Constellati∣ons, and several Fish and Birds which shew it to be of a Modern Date, and from hence they conclude that it was then wrote when these Foreign words and manners of Expression were introduc'd into the Hebrew Lan∣guage. They believe therefore that the Author liv'd after David and Solomon, and before Ezekiel, because he is mention'd by that Prophet. Some believe that Isaiah himself was the Author, the time when he lived being very sutable to this Conje∣cture, besides the Majesty and Sublimity of his Stile, his singular Erudition, the similitude of Character, and ma∣ny Words, and Forms of speaking common to them both. Grotius imagines the Author to be an Hebrew, be∣cause after the Custom of that Nation, he calls Arabia the East, tho' others suppose he was an Idumean, be∣cause he abounds with Syriack and Arabick Words: Whether he was the one or the other, 'tis plain the Au∣thor
was well vers'd in the Hebrew Language and those of the Neighbouring Countries: And that in the Writing of this Book he was under the direction and guidance of Divine Inspiration, has been universally acknowledged by the Jews and Christians in all Ages. But one single Reflexion prevails with me to believe that the Author was of the oldest date; and that is, that I cannot imagine that if he had lived after the De∣liverance of the Children of Israel from their Aegyp∣tian Bondage, and after the Institution of the Mo∣saical Scheme of Religion, he could have been so per∣fectly silent as to both. 'Tis hardly to be imagin'd that if he had liv'd after Moses he should ever have design'd to be so accurate and nice in relation to Time, as not to say any thing in the whole Book but what might be well suppos'd to have been said by one who liv'd before Moses. This exact Care seems not agreeable to the Writers of that Age. And if it should be suppos'd, that an Author, that many years after took this Subject of Job to write upon, should resolve to say nothing but what might be fit to be said in that time when Job liv'd; yet 'tis a great difficulty to believe that he should be so successful, as not in any one Place, or in any one Expression, to drop any thing that should men∣tion or allude to some Matters of Fact that happen'd after; especially such famous ones, as the Miracles wrought when the Israelites were brought out of Ae∣gypt, their Settlement in the Land of Canaan, and the Rites of the Mosaical Religion. The same Rea∣sons therefore that convince me that Job himself liv'd before, or in the Time of Moses, perswade me to think the Author of this Poem, whoever he was, did so too; and therefore 'tis very probable that this of Job is the oldest Book in the World.
The Argument of the Poem is this: Job, a Prince in his Country, of distinguish'd Piety and eminent Ju∣stice, at the Entrance of the Narration, is represented as happy as the favour of Heaven, and the affluence of all Earthly Possessions can make him. From this pre∣sent State of Prosperity he is all on a sudden, by the permission of Providence, for the trial of his Integri∣ty, depriv'd of his Estate, his Children, his Friends and Health, and reduc'd to a Condition as perfectly mi∣serable, as his former had been happy. After this sur∣prizing change of his Fortune, to exasperate the bit∣terness and anguish of his Soul, his Wife, in a most profane manner, provokes and tempts him to quit all his Pretensions to Piety, and desperately to renounce all his dependence upon God, and all expectations of Deliverance from him. In this, she is imitated by the Aegyptians and old Grecians, as well as other Idolatrous Countries, who us'd under any great Ca∣lamities to rail bitterly at their Gods, to pull down their Images, and drag them about the Streets, to be re∣veng'd on them for not preventing their misfortunes. After this three Persons, eminent for their Birth, Vertue and Wisdom, Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar (perhaps Elihu was with Job before) went to comfort their distress'd Friend. Their Design was good, and they considering that Wickedness was the meritorious Cause of Suffering, and that Divine Justice was not to be clear'd, if proffligate and impious Men should go unpunish'd; and having themselves often seen as well as heard by Tradition from their Forefathers, that wicked Nations and Families had frequently, by the just Judgment of God, been utterly destroy'd, concluded that, Job notwithstanding the outward Figure he made of a very upright and religious Person, must needs be
guilty of some great, tho' secret Crimes: Otherwise they could not conceive how it was consistent with Di∣vine Justice and Mercy to suffer him to be so very mi∣serable. Their Opinion was, that a good Man, such as Job was suppos'd to be, could never be so far forsa∣ken of God, and abandon'd to such prodigious Suffe∣rings. This is the Point they labour to prove. They press this very hard on their afflicted Friend, hoping thereby to bring him to a Confession of his Sins, and a sutable Repentance, upon which they believ'd, as they often assur'd him, God would withdraw his af∣flicting hand, ease his Complaints, and restore him to his former Prosperity. On the other hand, Job, who was sure he was no Hypocrite, but that he was in good earnest a Lover of God and of his Neighbour, and was not conscious of any such conceal'd and secret Guilt, as his Friends reproach'd him with, asserts in his defence, that his Friends proceeded in their De∣bates on erroneous grounds: That they mistook his Case, and the Methods of relieving him. He affirms that neither their Notions, nor their Observations were true. For tho' they asserted the contrary, he was fully assur'd that God did often afflict even with the greatest Severity many just and upright Men, and suffer'd in the mean time the Enemies of God and Man to live in the most flourishing Condition; and that therefore there could be no Argument drawnfrom Mans Sufferings that he was a wicked and un∣righteous Person. In some of his Debates on this Head, he is so far transported as to censure rashly the Divine Administration, as if God had too little re∣gard to the Piety and Righteousness of good Men, whom he punish'd with so severe a hand, whilst he fa∣vour'd the Wicked, and prosper'd their Vndertakings;
or at least that he made not that distinction between them that the Iustice of Righteous Government requires. But as to himself his Anguish and Impatience rose to such a degree, as vented themselves in many Ex∣pressions relating to God's Severity to him, unbecoming an humble and patient Sufferer, which made a lear∣ned Critick say, that Job who had a good Cause, discomposed by his Impatience manag'd it ill, as his Friends had a bad one, but manag'd it well. Their Debates being ended, Elihu a wise young Man that had heard the Arguments on either side, undertakes as Moderator to compose the Controversie, and set them both right. He agrees with Eliphaz, and his two Com∣panions, that God was a Hater of Wickedness and Irreligion, and that he often punished those that were guilty of them; but then he will not allow that Job may from thence be justly condemn'd as a wicked Man, because a good Man may often be afflicted by God for great and wise Ends. On the other side, tho' he does not censure Job for his Hypocrisie, or any concealed or secret Guilt, yet he condemns him for the Impati∣ence he express'd in his Sufferings, and for his bold and rash Expressions that seem'd to charge God with Injustice. After this God himself condescends to speak and put an end to their long Debate. He condemns Eliphaz, and his two Friends, for their unjust Cen∣sures of Job, and Job for his unjust Censures of Di∣vine Providence; but on the comparison declares that Job had the better Cause, and had spoken better of him than his Friends had done; perhaps that Expressi∣on of Job's is alluded to, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Then he delivers him from his great Afflictions and restores him to his former happy Condition.
'Tis evident that the Design of the Book is to show that the Providence of God does not only guide and over-rule the highest and most important Affairs, The Enterprizes of aspiring Princes, and the Rise and Fall of States and Empires, but that it intersts and mingles it self with all the Concerns of Humane Life, and thereby prepares the Mind of the Reader to acknowledge him as the great Moderator of the World, the Director of all our Actions, and Disposer of all the Events that happen to Mankind. By which Impression he is dispos'd to submit himself and all his Concernments with humble Resignation to the Al∣mighty's Righteous and Unerring Conduct. And more particularly, the Design is to justifie the Divine Providence in suffering impious and flagi∣tious Men to live in the undisturbed Enjoyment of all the Power and Plenty their Hearts can desire, while good and upright Men are often overwhelmed with Poverty and Distress, and expos'd to the scorn and outrage of their insulting Enemies. The solving of this difficulty, which has so often puzled the Under∣standing, and discomposed the Temper of the Wisest and Best of Men, seems to be chiefly aim'd at in this Writing. And 'tis observable that in the Debates be∣tween Job and his Friends, when they are prest with any difficulty concerning the Divine Administration of Affairs, and are at a loss how to reconcile Occurren∣ces with their own Notions of Iustice and Goodness, they fly to God's Infinite Greatness, and seem to re∣solve the Controversie into his absolute Sovereignty, and uncontroulable Power, which occasions many wonderful Descriptions of God's Majesty and Om∣niptence. They seem to think that when we are puzled and confounded, and after all our Attempts can by no
means account for the Proceedings of Divine Provi∣dence, that directly thwart our Opinions of Wisdom and Justice, we should enter upon the Contemplation of the Glorious Attributes of God, and consider they so far transcend all the low created Perfections in Man, that ours are by no means to be a measure of his. They may and do assist us in many Instances, as faint Representations of the Divine Excellency; but whenever we see any Conduct of Divine Providence that we can't reduce to our ways of Reasoning, we should humbly adore and not dispute. We should fetch a Solution from the Sovereignty and boundless Perfe∣ctions in God, who is always Good, and Iust, and Wise, e∣ven when in his Administration he seems to be most the contrary. And 'tis very plain that when God be∣speaks them in the latter end of the Book, he insists on no other Justification of his Proceedings with Men, than his Dominion and Property, his absolute Sove∣reignty, and transcendent Greatness, that render him unaccountable able to his Creatures for all his Actions. And therefore in the sharpest and severest Trials, when Providence seems vigilant and industrious, as Job expresses it, to find occasions of afflicting, when it runs counter to all our Desires, defeats our Hopes, and disappoints all our Designs; in such a hard Case we are to moderate our Passions, submit our Wills and our Reason too, and acquiesce in this Belief, that nothing is more certain than that God can do his Creature no wrong, and that in all his Dispensations he has both wise and gracious Designs, tho' our shallow and in∣competent Reason is not able to discern them. 'Tis probable that one Reason why we are apt to censure God's Proceedings is, that we take his Idea too nicely from our selves. For tho' we must form our
Idea of him from the Contemplation of our selves, yet this must not be too strict, nor extended too far. For 'tis plain that God's Knowledge is another thing from ours; he knows by one single Act of Intuition, we know by Reasoning, that is by deducing one Proposition from two others, and by forming in a tedious way, a long depending Chain of Consequences, which are for that reason apt to create a distrust. Now as our inferiour kind of Knowledge is by no means a measure of that most perfect kind in the Divine Understanding, so the Iustice, Mercy and Goodness, which are the Perfe∣ctions of a Creature's, may be of a lower kind, and therefore an unfit measure of those Perfections in the Divine Will. 'Tis probable that for this reason the Disputants in this Poem, for the clearing of God's Justice and Goodness, betake themselves so often to the transcendent Greatness and Excellency of the Divine Nature, whereby they plainly intimate that we are by no means competent Judges of his Actions. Another means to quiet Men's Minds concerning the Wisdom and Justice of God's Dispensations in those Instances that are the arshest and most unaccountable to us, is to reflect on the narrow and broken, as well as obscure Prospect which we have of the wide Sphere of his Providence. Did we clearly and fully understand how we are related to all the Parts of Mankind, both to our Contemporaries, and to those who have liv'd in the past, or shall live in the future Ages of the World; had we besides a clear Knowledge of our relation to o∣ther Reasonable, but Superior Creatures, I mean the Angels that inhabit the Immense and Glorious Regions above us, and to those that ill the Stars and Planets; (for 'tis improbable this Ball of Earth, the Dregs and Sediment of the World should be so full of
Reasonable Beings, and the nobler Parts of the Crea∣tion should not be peopled with sutable Inhabitants) Had we a perfect and comprehensive View of the whole Scheme of the Divine Oeconomy in relation to all these Parts of his Government, and how in his Ad∣ministration in the different Parts of it he promoted the great and glorious Design of the whole, we should have quite another Apprehension of God's Wisdom and Iustice. He that contemplates a Leg or an Arm with its relation to a Humane Body, of which they are Parts, has a very different Notion of them from him, who considers them divided, without any dependance on, or connexion with the Whole. It is not in our Power to make any but partial and very lame Observations of God's Government of his Creatures, and upon such imperfect Views, 'tis no wonder if our Constructions and Conclusions are often erroneous, and this, it may be, is another Reason why these Wise Men that ma∣nage the Debate about Providence in this Book, lead us so often to contemplate the Works of God's Creation, of which our selves are so small a Part. Besides this Principal and most Conspicuous Design, other Vseful and Excellent Ends are pursu'd in this Poem: One of which is to enlarge and raise our Con∣ceptions of the Divine Being, to give us worthy and honourable Thoughts of his Infinite Perfections, and form in our Minds a sutable Idea of his Great∣ness. The Representations of God's Transcendent Excellencies, of his Independent, Sovereign and Ir∣resistible Power, as well as of his Purity, Wisdom, Ju∣stice and Beneficence, are in many Parts of this Book so noble, so lively and admirable, that they are very capa∣ble of leaving in our Thoughts very deep and lasting Impressions: And to give us right and just Conce∣ptions
of the Divine Nature, on which our Notions of Religion, the Conduct of our Lives, our Ho∣nour and our Happiness depend, is to do one of the greatest Services that can be done to Mankind. Another great End is to set before us for our Imi∣tation an Illustrious Example of Piety, and all kinds of Vertue, in the most contrary Circumstances of Life that can be, the most Flourishing, and the most Miserable. And this is done in the Character of Job: While he possess'd a greater Substance than any Man in the Country where he liv'd, and was blest with a compleat Collection of all those Enjoyments, that are suppos'd to make a Man happy in this World, he maintain'd his Religion and Integrity inviolable, he was no less eminent for his Piety, than for his Pow∣er and Abundance. He strictly preserv'd his Mo∣deration and Humility, his Temperance and Ju∣stice, his Continence, his Compassion, and his great Love to Mankind; as appears by the first, and Thirty first Chapters of this Book. And when by a strange and surprizing Revolution the Scene was chang'd, and this Righteous Person being depriv'd of his Children and Possessions, and afflicted with grie∣vous Pain and Sickness, became the most wretched and unhappy Man that can be imagin'd, he then by the Exercise of other rare Vertues, maintains as great a Character in his Sufferings: He shows an admirable Instance of Patience and Resignation, of Constan∣cy and Perseverance, holds fast his Religion, and still expresses his unalterable Dependence on his God. In short, his Mind was neither elated, nor soften'd by the greatest Prosperity, nor sowr'd or broken by the greatest Adversity. 'Tis true indeed that he vented several passionate, rash, and unbecoming Expressions;
but when we consider the Anguish of his Soul under such prodigious Sufferings, the profane Provoca∣tions of his Wife, the exasperating Reproaches of his mistaken Friends, who after all his heavy Losses would have robb'd him too of his Integrity, it will not be hard to excuse those Expressions: And no more can be concluded from them than this, that tho' he was an Excellent, he was not a Faultless Man. Moses, who was honour'd with the Character of the meekest Man on Earth, did on some provoking Occasions lose his Temper; and Job may be allow'd to be the most pa∣tient Person in the World, tho' in such Streights and Distress, and urg'd with such Provocations, some im∣patient Speeches might be extorted from him. I cannot but observe in this place, that Job a Person of such Piety, and so many rare and admirable Ver∣tues, had no Advantages from the Divine Revelati∣ons made to Moses and the Jewish Prophets. He was a Stranger to their Law and their System of Reli∣gion. The Light that directed him must be only that of Natural Reason and Conscience, assisted by some Oral Traditions from Adam and Noah, and by what God was pleas'd sometimes to communicate by Dreams and Visions in those darker Ages of the World. By this it appears, that great Advances may be made in Vertue by a diligent attendance to the Dictates of our Natu∣ral Light. Would Men but improve their Reason, re∣verence their Consciences, and stand in awe of themselves, they would become Worshippers of God, as well as Sober and Righteous in an eminent degree. I re∣fer this to the Consideration of those Gentlemen that do not acknowledge the Divine Authority, either of the Mosaick, or of the Christian Institution. Another nd, and a very useful one too, is by the
Example of Job to conince the Reader of the Insta∣bility of a prosperous Condition, and the great Vicissitude of Humane Affairs, whereby his Mind may be dispos'd to Moderation, Humility, Tem∣perance, Compassion and Charity, and preserved from that Pride and Contempt of others, from that ar∣rogant, cruel and haughty Temper, which great Riches and high Stations are too apt to produce, especially in Men of a mean and low Spirit. I have not attempted a close Translation of this Sacred Book, but a Paraphrase. For the Origi∣nal being written in an Eastern Language, their Manner and Turns of Expression are, as before-men∣tion'd, so very different from ours, that I thought a Paraphrase more proper and advantageous for a Mo∣dern European Language. But as I judg'd it would not bear a strict Translation, so on the other hand I have endeavour'd, that the Paraphrase should not be too loose and wide, but that the Reader may all along carry with him the Sense of the Original. I have often diffus'd the Sense in other Expression. I have amplify'd the Text in many Places that appear'd more Poetical, and from General Heads I have descended sometimes to Particulars, the Enumeration of which, I believ'd, would illustrate and enliven the Original. I have avoided the immediate Repetition of the same Thought in Words little different from the first, which is so very common in this Book, as well as in that of the Psalms, and other Poetical Places of the Scripture. For tho' this was no doubt accounted in the Eastern Countries at that time a great Beauty and Ornament to the Writing, yet we have quite a∣nother Taste of Eloquence, and therefore I have thought it best to accommodate that Matter to the
Modern way of Writing. The Method of Wri∣ting in the Eastern Countries is what the Europeans think irregular; the same Matter treated on before frequently recurs, and the Connexion is sometimes bro∣ken, and often obscure. The Transitions are some∣times neglected, and a new Subject enter'd upon with∣out the preparation for it which we expect should be made. We censure these Modes and Customs in Writings as defects, and no doubt they would censure ours as much. I would not peremptorily condemn their Taste, for the Opinion of Beauty and Ornament seems not to be capable of being determin'd by any fixt and unalterable Rule. Truth and good Sense are setled upon Eternal and unchangeable Grounds and Reasons; but the manner of Expression, and the method of con∣veying them, and what concerns the Dress, the Pomp and Ornament of them, these are perhaps indifferent Ceremonies, and every Nation may have Authority to establish which they please. 'Tis plain the Eastern World have not the same Apprehensions of Beau∣ty and Ornament that we have: They believe there is a great Beauty in the neglect of what we call Or∣der and Regularity, as is evident in their Gardens and Buildings. What we censure as careless, wild and extravagant, strikes them with more Admiration, and gives them greater Pleasure, than all our elabo∣rate and orderly Contrivances. All that can be said is, that our Tasts are different, and if they are barba∣rous to us, we are so to them, some of which especially the Chinese are, or at least have been very Wise and Polite Nations. We in this part of the World are all so full of Homer and Virgil, and are so bigotted to the Greek and Latin Sects, that we are ready to account all
Authors Heretical that are without the Pale of the Classicks. This seems to me to be a narrow Sectarian Spirit, that prompts Men to impose their Fancies and Opinions on all the World besides. Whatever high Opinion we have of our own Attainments, we should have that Temper and Moderation, that might pre∣serve a due regard for the Wisdom and Judgment of other Nations; and not with the haughty Air of a Supercilious Critick, censure and condemn every thing that deviates from the Examples of the Greek and Latin Authors. I have therefore in this Paraphrase proceeded all along from Chapter to Chapter, and Verse to Verse, in the Order they are set down, excepting some very few inconsiderable Transpositions: So that I have by no means alter'd the Method and Order of the Narration, or any way chang'd the Model. And 'twill be hard to give a Reason why the Author of this Book has not as great a Right to be made the Standard where∣by to try Homer and Virgil, as those two Authors have to bring this to their Tribunal. If the Know∣ledge of the Hebrew Language had been look'd on in Europe to have been as necessary as the Greek and Latin; had it been as great an Honour and Accom∣plishment for a Man to understand the first as the last; and had there been as great a variety of Authors of all sorts of Learning left in the Language, that there might have been an equal Inducement to have study'd and taught it universally in the Schools, I say had this been, the Grammarians and Criticks might perhaps have ixt on this as the best Model of Poeti∣cal Writings, and have drawn their Rules and Re∣marks from the Example they found here: For 'tis plain all their Precepts are founded on Examples,
and on those Examples with which they were most conversant, and in such Languages as were most in vogue, and which most of them were oblig'd to profess and teach. I have indeed supply'd in some Places the Transi∣tions and other Connexions, which according to their manner of Writing are omitted in the Original, that the Reader of the Paraphrase, who is unaccustomed to that way, may not be embarrass'd or interrupted. There are many hard and obscure Places, about the mean∣ing of which I have consulted the ablest and most fa∣mous Writers, and have taken that Sense which I look'd on as most natural, and supported by the best Reasons: And in this I have chiefly been obliged to the Excellent Paraphrase of the Learned Bishop of Ely, and the Collection of the Critici. I have added a Paraphrase upon several other Poe∣tical Parts of the Bible; which, in my Opinion, are nobler Examples of the true sublime Stile, than any can be sound in the Pagan Writers. The Images are so strong, the Thoughts so great, the Expressi∣ons so divine, and the Figures so admirable, bold and moving, that the wonderful manner of these Writers is quite inimitable. One thing I must advertise the Rea∣der of, that in the Prophets 'tis common with them, that they may represent the Certainty of their Predi∣ctions with the greater Advantage, to use the past for the future Tense, that is, to speak of Things to come, as already done; so that their Prophecies often seem Historical Narrations of Matters already trans∣acted: Therefore the Reader is not to be surpriz'd, when in the second Song of Moses he finds that great Prophet speaking of what befel the Children of Israel in Canaan, as things past in his own Time, which did
not happen till long after his Death. I am of Mr. Cow∣ley's Judgment, who in his Preface declares that there are no more noble Subjects of Poetry to be found than those the Scriptures furnish us withal, and therefore I have made this Attempt. 'Tis true, Mr. Sandys, a Gentleman of great Merit, has done this before; but that I did not know till after I had begun this Work, and made some Progress in it; and when I had perus'd part of his Paraphrase, I thought I might be able to supply some Defects, espe∣cially in relation to Perspicuity and Coherence. As to the Leviathan and Behemoth, mention'd in the latter Part of this Book, I have appropriated the Character of the first to the Crocodile, and of the last to the Elephant. I believe the Marks enumera∣ted by the Learned Bochart, do justly determine the Description of the Leviathan to the Crocodile; but I can't see any necessity from what he urges, to conclude Behemoth to be the Hippopotamus, or River-Horse. The Character given in Job is, in my Opinion, more sutable to the Elephant. The Rea∣sons alledg'd on both sides may be seen in the Critici before-cited; and whether the one or the other be true, is not a Matter of that Importance as should oblige me to transcribe the Arguments in this Place. Per∣swaded by the Reasons of some Learned Commen∣tators, I have taken the Unicorn for the Uri or wild Bull, and not the Oryx, or wild Goat, according to Boshart, or the Rhinoceros, according to others. I impose not my Opinion on others: These are Mat∣ters of small Moment, and every Man is at liberty to think as he pleases.
A PARAPHRASE UPON THE Book of JOB. CHAP. I. IN ancient Times, e'er Moses Wonders wrought, And murmuring Israel back from Egypt brought, A Prince of great Renown, and wide Command, Whose name was Iob, dwelt in Arabia's Land. He in the Heav'nly Paths of Virtue trod, And fear'd to Sin, because he fear'd his God. Sev'n goodly Sons that Admiration bred, And Three Fair Daughters crown'd his Nuptial Bed With gracious Heav'n's peculiar Favour blest, The prosp'rous Man unmeasur'd Wealth possest. His Fleecy Flocks o'er all the Hills were spred, And in his Stalls a Thousand Oxen fed. When he decamp'd to find a new Abode, Three Thousand Camels bore along the Road His precious Goods, and groan'd beneath the Load. No Lord was found thro' all the Spicy East, Whose Herds and Stores so vastly were increast. His Sons to Feast each other did prepare By turns, rich Liquors and delicious Fare.
And to their Treats their Sisters they invite, To pass the lowing hours in soft delight; While Charming Music, Dances, Sports and Play, Gave swifter Wings to Time to fly away, Beguil'd the Night, and hurried on the Day. Conscious that Sin does oft such Mirth attend, The Father fear'd his Sons might Heav'n offend. For he with mournful Eyes had often spy'd, Scatter'd on Pleasure's smooth, but treach'rous Tyde. The Spoils of Virtue over-power'd by Sense, And floating Wrecks of ruin'd Innocence. He therefore for his Sos to Heav'n convey'd His Supplications, and Atonement made; And while they Feasted, he devoutly pray'd. There was a Time when all the Sons of God Came to th' Allmighty's bright and blest Abode, To pay their Adoration at his Throne, Which high on Adamantine Pillars shone. Around in Throngs the prostrate Seraphs lay Absorpt in Glory, and Excess of Day. 'Midst the bright Cherubs haughty Lucifer, By marks of Guilt distinguish'd, did appear. To whom th' Eternal thus. Apostate, whence Com'st thou to these blest Seats of Innocence. Th' Apostate said. I Lands and Seas have crost, And past from Clime to Clime, from Coast to Coast, Till I the Tour of yon low World had made, And all its Empires and its States survey'd.
My Course compleated to these Seats of Light, Mounting th' Aerial Void I wing'd my Flight. Th' Allmighty then demanded. In thy Way And toilsome Course, Ambitious Spirit, say, Hast thou observ'd good Iob, my Servant, one In Righteousness and Piety, by none Thro' all the wide Terrestrial World out-done? Whose perfect Virtue Admiration draws From Men on Earth, and finds in Heav'n Applause. I've long observ'd, reply'd false Lucifer, Thy Favourite, and watch'd his Steps with Care. Without, the Saint is in Perfection seen, But is the Saint without, a Saint within? He serves his God, but does he serve for nought? Does he thy Glory, or his own promote? Does he Religion for it's Self regard; And Virtue Court, not Virtue's bright Reward? Is it his Honour to Revere his God, Who has his Smiles, but never feels his Rod? Hast thou not crown'd the Labour of his Hand, Increas'd his Stores, extended his Command? He can't complain unless with Wealth opprest, With Favours over-laden, over-blest. Entrench'd within th' impenetrable Fence, Within the Works and Lines of Providence, He can defy the most impetuous Shock; And all th' Assaults of Hostile Forces mock.
With such Abundance blest, with Honour Crown'd, The Weakest Virtue may maintain its ground. But let this Prosp'rous, Wealthy Saint be try'd; Let this pretended Gold the Test abide; Change but the Scene, and let thy Frowning Brow, The marks of Anger and Displeasure show; Extend thy Hand, and touch his tender Part; Thou'lt find his Power and Substance next his Heart: Despoil'd of these, he'll Curse thee to thy Face, And naked Virtue will no more embrace. Th' Eternal to th' Apostate thus reply'd, Let him Affliction's sharpest Edge abide. The Fence I rais'd around him I remove: Go, let thy Malice try his Truth and Love. Let Righteous Iob thy fiery Tests endure, But let his Person be from Pain secure. He said. Th' Apostate from his Presence went, And on his fierce, malicious purpose bent, He on Arabia made a swift Descent. Mean time it happen'd at a splendid Feast, Iob's Eldest Son in turn receiv'd the rest. The Sisters with their Brothers Drank and Eat, All the delightful kinds of Wine and Meat. When at Iob's House a Courier did arrive, Sweating with Speed, Panting, and scarce alive. Horror and Wildness in his Aspect, bred Just Fears of dismal News, and thus he said.
Invading Robbers from Sabea, warm'd With hopes of Booty, and with Lances arm'd, An Inroad made; and first the Men destroy'd Who kept thy Herds, and then the Spoil enjoy'd. I am alone by favourable Fate Escap'd, th' unwelcome Tydings to relate. While he was speaking, with as swift a pace Another came, and with as sad a Face: And thus he said: O Iob, a suddain Storm, And lowring Clouds did all the Sky deform. The bellowing Engines did all Nature scare, Spouting their ruddy Vomit thro' the Air. Tempests of Fire, like that which burns in Hell, And blew Cascades of flaming Sulphur fell, Dreadful to Sight, and deadly to the Smell. The rav'ning Flames were on the Mountains pour'd, And all thy Shepherds, with their Flocks, devour'd. I only am escap'd, to let thee know Thy heavy Loss, and this sad Scene of Woe. Scarce had he ended, when another came, His Horror was alike, his haste the same. And thus he said: The fierce Chaldeans made Three chosen Bands, thy Camels to invade: Thy Servants by surprize they've overcome; And with their Spoil they march'd in Triumph home. Mean time another enter'd, who in Speed And Consternation, did the rest exceed.
And thus he spake. Iob, At a splendid Treat Thy Sons and Daughters were together met, Within their Eldest Brother's pleasant Seat: When rising from the Salvage Wilderness, A howling, hollow Wind, with such a Stress Bore on the House, that the high Roof and Wall Disjoynted crack'd, and fell; and with the Fall Crush'd, and interr'd at once th' assembled Youth. I only scap'd to tell so sad a Truth. Then Iob his Garment rent, and shav'd his Head, And on the Ground adoring fell, and said: Naked at first I left my Mother's Womb, And shall return as Naked to my Tomb. The Lord has giv'n, and taken back again: Because he takes his Own, shall I complain? Tho' now he Frowns, I'll praise th' Allmighty's Name, And bless the Spring whence past Enjoyments came. CHAP. II. The glorious Sons of God, a second time Adoring stood, around his Throne sublime. A second time ambitious Lucifer, Amidst the happy Seraphs did appear. To whom th' Eternal thus. Apostate, whence Com'st thou to these blest Seats of Innocence? Th' Apostate said. I Lands and Seas have crost, And past from Clime to Clime, from Coast to Coast,
Till the Tour of yon low World had made, And all its Empires, and its States survey'd. And now am hither come. In all thy way, Th' Allmighty said, Ambitious Spirit, say, Hast thou observ'd good Iob, my Servant, one In Righteousness and Piety, by none Thro' all the wide Terrestrial World out-done? How 'midst his Suff'rings he asserts my Cause, Defends my Justice, and Obeys my Laws. He perseveres unchang'd, and still holds fast Th' Integrity which he has long embrac't. Thou mov'st me to afflict his Soul in vain, He still his generous Virtue does retain. Shock'd with this Storm, he still takes deeper root, Nor is he less adorn'd with Noble Fruit. The Constancy th' unshaken Man has shew'd, Does thy malicious Policy Elude. Still against Sin he makes a brave defence, Despoil'd of all things, but his Innocence. Th' Apostate then reply'd. Mankind, 'tis known, Will give their Childrens Skins, to save their own. To save their Lives, their Treasures they produce; Rather than Death, a naked Being chuse. But now extend thy Hand, and let the smart Of some Disease, afflict him to the Heart; And thou wilt find my Accusation true, That he with Curses will his God pursue.
Then said th' Allmighty, Iob is in thy power, Afflict his Flesh, but be his Life secure. In haste th' Apostate on this Errand went, Pleas'd with a Power to vex the Innocent. He soon collected thro' the Atmosphere, Crude Exhalations, and corrupted Air. He fetch'd raw Vapours, and unwholsom Damps From standing Lakes, low Caves, and marshy Swamps. Then finding Iob, he secretly convey'd Thro' all his winding Veins, th' infectious Seed. The poyson'd Blood with Pestilential Boyls, From Head to Foot the guiltless Man defiles. In Ashes humbly silent, down he sate; With Groans bewailing his unhappy Fate. To clean his Skin, he with a Potsherd took The Filth away, that from his Ulcers broke. Then thus his Wife the Constant Man addrest. How much thy pious dullness I detest! Dost thou not see that thy Devotion's vain; What have thy Pray'rs procur'd but Woe and Pain? To suff'ring Virtue wilt thou still adhere, And harden'd in Religion persevere? Wilt thou retain thy Praying, Whining Cant? And bless thy God; for what? for Plagues and Want? Hast thou not yet thy Int'rest understood, Perversly Righteous, and absurdly Good?
These painful Sores, and all thy Losses show, How Heav'n regards the foolish Saint below. Incorrigibly Pious, can't thy God Reform thy stupid Virtue with his Rod? Since only Woe attends thy Piety, Be Wise and Brave for once, Curse God, and Dye. Provoke th' Allmighty thus to be thy Friend, To take thy Life, and so thy Suff'rings end. Then Iob reply'd. Thou speakest as the Weak, As the Prophane, Flagitious Women speak. What! shall a Man, a Worm with God contend? Dispute his Will, his Rule of Justice mend? He once enrich'd, and made us to abound, Fill'd us with Goodness, and our Wishes crown'd: Shall we receive his Blessings, but complain When his afflicting Hand Creates our Pain? We should our Patience in our Suff'rings shew; Blessings are not, but Suff'rings are our Due. When Bildad, Zophar, and Wise Eliphaz, Rever'd for Knowledge, and their Noble Race, All three to Iob by Friendship long endear'd, The News of his Calamitys had heard; They left their Seats, and meeting on the Day And Place of Rendezvous, they took their way To Mourn with Iob, to share his mighty Grief, And by their Councels to afford Relief. His Pain in part, by Kindness to remove, And sooth his Anguish by condoling Love.
Then from afar they lifted up their Eyes, Directed by his Moans, and wofull Crys, And spy'd th' afflicted Iob upon the Sand, In Ashes laid, his Potsherd in his Hand. Consummate Sorrow in his Eyes appear'd, And Tears and Dust his meagre Cheeks besmear'd. Deform'd he lay, Disfigur'd, Cover'd o'er With running Boyls, and undigested Gore. They sought him in himself, and scarce did know Their ancient Friend, disguis'd with so much Woe. At last convinc'd, they whisper'd, sure 'tis he; But, O, how chang'd with Pain and Poverty? What wondrous Turn of Providence is this, And how precarious is Terrestrial Bliss? Amazing Change! how soon, O Righteous God, Man's Glory sades beneath thy blasting Rod? To see a Righteous Friend so much distrest, Awaken'd various Passions in their Breast: Grief, Pity, Wonder in their Bosoms pent; Prest with like force, and strove at once for Vent. They tore their Vests, like Men in deep Despair, And scatter'd Clouds of Ashes thro' the Air; Which thence descending, on their Heads did rest, Their inward Grief and Trouble to attest. Not to molest a Sorrow so profound, Sev'n Nights and Days they Silent sate around. So long a Time they held their Peace, to show A Rev'rence due to such prodigious Woe.
CHAP. III. And then afflicted Iob first Silence broke. His Friends attentive sate, while thus he spoke. Curst be the fatal Day that cheer'd my Sight, With the first Beam of Inauspicious Light. Curst be the luckless Night, be Curst the Morn, When first they said an Infant Man was born. Perish that Day, let it no more appear, Cut off from all Connexion with the Year. O'ercharg'd with Sorrow, let it move so slow, That all Times swift-Wing'd Race may still out-go That lagging Day, still let it pant behind, And never more its Place and Order find. May it be banish'd from its Month, and may No ill-designing Mortal ever Pray, To see again this Abdicated Day. May it its Course and Turn for ever miss, Ingulph'd, absorpt, and lost in Time's Abyss. As for the Night, let Darkness to be felt, Impenetrable Darkness, such as dwelt On the Dun Visage of Primeval Night, Shut every Starbeam out from Mortals Sight, And close up every Pass and Road of Light. Let not the cheerful Face of Joy appear; Let no harmonious Sound delight the Ear. O let no other Accents fill the Air, But strains of raging Grief, and Yellings of Despair▪
Ye Mourners, all ye wretched Sons of Woe, Who on your Birth-day dreadful Curses throw, Some Execrations on this Night bestow. Ye Stars withdraw your Light, let not a Ray Be suffer'd o'er the gloomy Air to stray, Let Men in vain expect the dawning Day. Because it did not shut the Womb, and keep Me from my Sorrows in Eternal Sleep. Why did a false Conception not elude My Parents hopes, and Life from me exclude? Why was I shap'd and fashion'd as a Man? Why Life not stifled when it first began? O, that a quick Abortion had supprest The vital Flame, when first it warm'd my Breast. Why did I not continue still too weak, And destitute of Force enough to break The Bands which first did me an Embryo hold, And in the Womb my tender Limbs enfold. Why did the Womb give me a passage forth? Or why did I survive th' unhappy Birth? Why did my Mother's Knee and Nurse's Breast, Preserve my Being, and prevent my Rest? Had they in Mercy suffer'd me to lye Without their help, and kindly let me dye; I then had early met as good a Fate, As Princes, Kings, and Councellors of State, Who lye in Stately Sepulchers Interr'd, Which by themselves at vast Expence were reer'd:
Who once with Gold and Silver did abound, But now as Poor as Common Men are found. I had like Infants stifled in the Womb, Slept undisturb'd, laid in the quiet Tomb. The Wicked there no more the Just molest, And there the weary are dissolv'd in Rest. There near th' Oppressor lyes th' Opprest in Peace, And there the Pris'ners Crys for ever cease. Levell'd by Death the Conquerour and the Slave, The Wise and Foolish, Cowards and the Brave, Lye mixt, and undistinguish'd in the Grave. Why is that Peaceful Place, that soft repose Deny'd to vast unsufferable Woes? Why does the Man that drags in Sweat and Pain, His Chain of Life demand to dye in vain? Why is he not allow'd to yield his Breath, T' enjoy the cool, refreshing Shades of Death? Why does the courted Blessing still elude His eager Arms, and fly him when pursu'd? Relentless Death! Inexorable Grave! Why will you not your wretched Vot'rys Save? Who to enjoy you more desire and strive, Than e'er two happy Lovers did to Live? Why strikes not Death the Man who meets her Dart With an expanded Breast and leaping Heart? Why can't he taste her blest Ambrosial Bowl, To ease the bitter Anguish of his Soul? When a poor Wretch consum'd with raving Grief, And sunk in deep Despair, to find relief
Shall dig with eager Labour to explore Death's Leaden Vein, as if 'twas Silver Oar: Why does he not so cheap a Treasure find? By envious Life why is he countermin'd? Why must he live, who begs and prays to dye, 'Tis Cruelty this Refuge to deny To one who knows not whither else to fly? This is my Case. For when I sit to Eat, Tears are my Wine, and Trouble is my Meat. My Grief Tempestuous, and unruly grows, And as a roaring Flood my raging Sorrow flows. For now I groan beneath those ills opprest, Which my ill-boding Mind did still suggest. When I possest the softest hours of Ease, My ill presaging Thoughts disturb'd my Peace. My anxious Fears did my Enjoyments Awe, And now I feel what from afar I saw. CHAP. IV. Then Eliphaz reply'd. To mourn thy Fate, And with soft Words thy Sorrow to abate We came, but such Impatience thou hast shown, And hast on Heav'n such bold Reproaches thrown, That now instead of yielding kind Relief, My Language may exasperate thy Grief. Such is thy Wound, Balm will be us'd in vain; And if I Lance it, I increase the Pain. Yet who can hold from speaking to defend Justice Divine, and guide an Erring Friend?
Oft have thy Words and Wise Instructions made The Feeble Strong, and giv'n th' Afflicted Aid. Th' Unfortunate and Wretched taught by Thee, Reviving, have forgot their Misery. The Mourners and the Comfortless have found Thy Words like healing Balsom, ease their Wound. The most perverse, inexorable Woe, And sullen Grief thy charming Voice did know. Drooping Despondency, and deep Despair Listen'd to Thee, and would thy Councels hear. But since it is thy Turn to undergo The Suff'rers Part, ungovern'd Passions show, How much a lighter Task it is to give Councel and wise Advice, than to receive. How easy 'tis to praise, how hard to bear Th' afflicting Rod, thy wild Complaints declare. Impatience under Pain the Spring betrays Of thy Devotion and Religious Ways. Affliction has detected thee, and shown Thou didst not seek Heav'n's Int'rest, but thy own; For with thy Wealth, thy Piety is gone. None whose Religion's Pure, and Mind Sincere, Did e'er such Marks of Heav'n's Displeasure bear. Heav'n will not let the Righteous sink so low, In such a vast profound Abyss of Woe. They are by adverse Providence annoy'd, Kindly Corrected oft, but not destroy'd. They bear the Frowns, but not the Wrath of God, Nor Feel his Vengeance, tho' they do his Rod.
A ruin'd Upright Man was never known, Never as thou art, perfectly Undone. He that delights to sow Iniquity, Shall a sad Harvest of Destruction see. The Breath of God, like Pestilential Air Shall blast, and leave him with'ring in Despair. So a fierce Lyon long inur'd to Spoil, Shall roar entangled in the Hunter's Toil: Or else the Bloody Ravager o'erpowr'd When Old, by Famine's Teeth shall be devour'd. His rav'ning Whelps shall o'er the Mountains stray, And perish on the Sands for want of Prey. I should be impious, vain and arrogant, Should I of Heav'nly Correspondence vaunt: Yet to convince thee of thy Error, hear The Language of a Heav'nly Messenger. When Night in Sable Clouds had Nature drest, And weary Lab'rers sought refreshing Rest; I had a Vision, which a Sacred Dread And Reverential Horror in me bred. The awful Object cloath'd in glorious Air, Struck thro' my trembling Joynts resistless Fear. A Heav'nly Spirit pass'd before my Sight; My Hair with Terror stiffen'd, stood Upright. Approaching me, the bright Appearance stood, And I a plain Corporeal Glory view'd: But in so great Confusion, so much Awe, That I no Form or Shape distinctly saw.
Then thus th' immortal Stranger silence broke, And with a still Celestial Accent spoke. Shall mortal Man than God more Righteous be? Shall Man's out-do his Maker's Purity? Full Confidence ev'n in the Godlike Race Of Seraphims th' Almighty cannot place. He does Arch-Angels for their Folly blame, Who bow their conscious Heads, and blush for shame. And shall a Man his Innocence defend? With his great Maker shall a Man contend? A worthless Wight that triumphs for a Day, Wh Habitation is a House of Clay. Fort of Life is founded in the Dust Which quickly falls, and disappoints his Trust, Tho' but a gnawing Worm the Work assails, Or but a silly Moth the Fabrick scales. Each hour the sap'd Foundation feels decay, And Life ev'n in its blooming fades away, Made to its own devouring Flame a Prey. So fast Men perish, that the common sight No more does wonder, or regard excite. On Power and Wealth in vain for aid they cry, For as they liv'd, they in their Folly dye. Therefore, O Iob, thy rash Discourse correct, No more, poor Mortal, on thy God reflect. CHAP. V. Perhaps the Foolish may thy Conduct praise And against Heav'n may bold Objections raise.
But try the Wise and Upright, call and see Which Saint of all the sacred Hierarchy Will thy rash Words applaud, thy Cause maintain, And with audacious Charges Heav'n arraign? Why dost thou, Iob, thy Discontent express That wicked Men do Power and Wealth possess? That Power and Wealth they will not long enjoy, For wrath Divine will the vile Race destroy. I have with wonder seen the Wicked shoot Deep in a fertile soil his thriving Root: But soon assaulted with a suddain storm, His hastly Ruin did the Ground deform. His imbs and Leaves and wither'd Fruit were spred Round his dismember'd Trunk, and blasted head. His hated Sons impleaded by the Poor, Their Wealth by Rapine gotten did restore. Inextricable Troubles, vast Distress Did this accurs't, despairing Race oppress. The Hungry did their thorny Fences leap, Enjoy their Labour, and their Harvest reap. Robbers did Inroades make in furious Bands, Their Houses risle, and lay wast their Lands. What means these Cries? why this Impatience shown? Is Trouble rare? are Woes uncommon grown? 'Tis true, Affliction springs not from the Earth, Nor to the Ground owes a spontaneous Birth; Yet Men to Woe as to their Center tend, As Streams to Seas, and Flames to Heav'n ascend.
This is the sad Inheritance convey'd From Man to Man since Adam disobey'd. This is the Lot which God does Man assign; Wherefore, O Iob, were thy Affliction mine, I would to Heav'n's dread Majesty submit; All my own Ways Arraign, but his Acquit. I would his Justice and his Truth adore, Revere his Greatness, but my self abhor. By humble Resignation I would ly Beneath his Feet, and for his Mercy cry. His Deeds are great, unsearchable his Ways, Which in observing Minds Amazement raise. His Providence when least 'tis understood, Is always Just, and Merciful and Good. The Wonders of this dark, unfathom'd Deep, Our Thoughts in endless Admiration keep. He hangs his Clouds, amazing to behold, And shapes his Rain-drops in an unknown Mould. Then he his Waters on the Mountains pours, And on the Vallys his Prolific Showers. He sets the Servant in the Master's place, And wipes the Tears off from the Mourner's Face. The crafty he Entangles, Countermines The Councellor, and blasts his Wise designs. He turns against himself the Statesman's Art, And does the Politician's Hopes subvert. By interposing Mists, the clearest Sight He oft obstructs, and intercepts the Light.
Involv'd in thicken'd Shades they lose their way, Believe 'tis Night, and seek at Noon the Day. He from th' Oppressor does Protect the Poor, And from his Mighty Foe the Weak secure: So to the Poor he gives reviving Hopes, And the black Mouth of proud Injustice stops. Thrice happy is the Man, who feels the smart Which kindly God's correcting Strokes impart. When chasten'd, think, thou art with Favours crown'd; Let no desponding Thoughts thy Hopes confound, The Hand that made, will likewise heal thy Wound. He'll from thy various Troubles set thee free, And change to Joy this Scene of Misery. His powerful Word shall call the smiling Light From this wild Chaos, and this sullen Night. He shall protect thee with a tender Care From the fierce Jaws of Famine and of War. The poisonous Arrows of the Sland'ring Tongue, Shall neither gall thy Fame, or Honour wrong. When grim Destruction with her horrid Train And dire Attendants, Anguish, Woe and Pain Advances, shaking her tremendous Spear, Her Threats shall move thy Laughter, not thy Fear. All Nature reconcil'd shall give thee Peace, If thy just Ways the Lord of Nature please. The Stones and all the Elements with thee, Shall ratify a strict Confed'racy. Wild Beasts their salvage Nature shall forget, And for a firm Allyance with thee treat.
The Finny Tyrants of the spacious Seas, Shall send a Scaly Embassy for Peace. His plighted Faith the Crocodile shall keep, And seeing thee, for Joy sincerely Weep. Dragons shall thee with friendly Hissings greet, And wanton Serpents roll, and lick thy Feet. The fawning Lyon shall thy Friendship Court, And gentle Tygers shall around thee sport. These awkard Sycophants shall thee address, And unaccustom'd Flattery express. Thy Habitation shall be ever blest With undisturb'd Tranquility and Rest. Thy House in Numbers shall surpass the Sand, And as the Rocks around, unshaken stand. When watchful Death shall on her Harvest look, And see thee ripe with Age invite the Hook, She'll gently cut thy bending Stalk, and thee Lay kindly in the Grave her Granary. Weigh these undoubted Truths, and thou wilt find Great Consolation to thy wounded Mind. CHAP. VI. He ceas'd, and Iob in Pain and Anguish said, O, that my Grief was in a Ballance laid, And all my Suff'rings were against it weigh'd! Then let an equal Judge decide my Case, Whether my Grief my Suff'rings does surpass. My massy Burden and my pondrous Woe, In weight the Sand around the Sea out-do.
Unutterable Groans my Soul oppress, Nor have I words to shew my deep Distress. Th' Allmighty's Arrows stick within my Heart, And every fest'ring Wound gives deadly smart. Arrows whose heads, like pointed Lightning, shine, Steep'd in the strongest Lees of Wrath Divine. Their raging Poison spreds without controul, Drinks up my Life, and Eats my very Soul. Th' Allmighty's Terrors drawn out in Array Surround me, and invade me every Way. You that can triumph free from Care and Pain In Peace and Plenty, never need Complain; Is the Wild Ass in grassy Fields diseas'd? Or o'er his Fodder lows the Oxe displeas'd. But did you my Affliction undergo, Your groans with mine would some proportion show, And to as high a Tyde your swelling Sorrows grow. Who in unsavory Meats can take delight? What Taste is in an Egg's insipid White? Then noxious Food, such as my Sorrows are, 'Tis madness to commend, as wholsom Fare. I'm now compell'd, my Poverty is such, To feed on Meats which I abhorr'd to touch. My Troubles rise to such amazing height, Such is my Grief's unsufferable Weight; My Soul to such extremity is driv'n, That I must still implore the God of Heav'n That I may find the Blessing I require, That he would grant my passionate desire;
That he my Life in Mercy would destroy, And let me Death, for which I long, enjoy. That he would bowels of Compassion show, And loose his Hand to give the fatal blow. To welcome Death I would my Arms extend, Embrace and hug my Dear, tho' ghastly Friend. Did I but see the kind Deliverer near, Did from the Grave some dawning hope appear, This Anodyne my Anguish would appease, That with my Life my Grief would quickly cease. I'd then a firm, unshaken Courage show, Harden'd in Grief, and strengthen'd by my Woe. I hate to live, of Death I'm not affraid, Conscious that Heav'n I strictly have obey'd. What is my Strength? how weak, and how absurd Is it to hope it er'e shall be restor'd? What is my End? where is my Period set When I no more shall my sad moans repeat? Wasted and worn I linger and complain, And by prolonging Life prolong my Pain. I from your Love and Council hop'd Relief, Thought your Discourses would abate my Grief; But your perverse, unskilful ways confess You know not how to treat your Friend's distress. Mistaking my Distemper you enrage The sharp Disease, but not the Pain asswage. Am I a Marble Rock that cannot feel? Are all my Muscles Brass, my Sinews Steel?
That I this mighty Load of Grief must bear, While Death which I invoke neglects my Pray'r, And at a distance keeps, deriding my Despair. O lipaz, was I desponding left, Of help without, and sense within bereft, Yet still a Friend Compassion should express To one in such Affliction, and Distress. As when with burning heat a Trav'ller ry'd Finds out the Brook, but sees the Channel dry'd, Where he expected cooling Streams should flow, Sin 'twas in Winter fill'd with Ice and Snow; But when the Waters felt a warmer heat, They rose in Vapours, and forsook their Seat: Won by the Summer's importuning Ray, Th' eloping Flood did from its Channel stray, And with enticing Sun-beams stole away: The Trav'ller casting down a troubled look, Sighs and upbraids the false deceitful Brook. Fair Sheba's Convoys and the thirsty Troops Of Tema mourn their disappointed Hopes. Conounded they express their Grief and Shame, To find the Banks without th' expected Stream. No less am I amaz'd, no less I grieve That you my bosom Friends my hopes deceive. You are unable to afford me Aid, Seeing my Grief you start and are affraid. Do my prodigious Woes my Friends amaze? Why do you wildly stare, and at a distance gaze?
Has my Disease this Consternation bred? D'ye fear my Ulcers will Infection spred? D'ye fear your Friend now Poor, will craving grow, And beg Supplies of you to ease his Woe? Did I e'er importune my Friends to grant Part of their Substance to relieve my want? Did ever Iob at your Expence demand To be deliver'd from th' Oppressor's hand? If your Instructions can my Ways correct, Thankfull I'll hold my Peace, and not reject The Heav'nly Light, that will my Crime detect. Right Reason's Beams a quick admission find, And breaking all Obstructions force the Mind: But whom can your Weak Arguments confute? Short, or beside the Mark you ever shoot. Will you your Ignominious Slanders throw, And tho' I am your Friend, insult my Woe? Almost bereft of sense yet I can find Your Words are vain and empty, as the Wind. Your Indiscretion far from your Intent, With cruel Comforts does my Grief augment. You sink me down too low before deprest, And in your subtile Snares your Friend Arrest. And now if you my Troubles would survey, And with deliberate Thoughts my Sorrow weigh, You would pronounce I justly did Complain, Acquit my Speeches, and your own Arraign. Return I pray, to Reason's Paths return, You'll then assert my Cause, my Suff'rings mourn.
You will deend my Righteousness, and all Your rash and unconsider'd Words recall. I do not find my Reason so debas'd, Nor yet so undistinguishing my Taste, But I can see your words are misapply'd; They cannot Truth's Impartial Test abide. CHAP. VII. The Life of Man has a determin'd date Fix'd by Divine, Irrevocable Fate. His Days will at a certain time expire, As his, who lets his Labour out for Hire. The Weary Slave does for the Evening pray, Knowing his Labour ceases with the Day. Then why should I with toilsom Life opprest, Not be allow'd to pray for Death and Rest? Th' uneasy Day in ling'ring Pain I spend, And think the tedious Night will never end. By Night when Men their anxious Thoughts disband, And gently strok'd by Slumber's downy hand; Reluctant Cares at last from raging cease, And Sleep till Morn, to give the Wretched Peace. Ev'n then my restless Thoughts to vex my Soul, In everlasting Agitations roll. My salvage Grief let loose, like Beasts of Prey, By Night grows more outragious, than by Day. My swelling Sorrows never will subside, But higher rise in their Nocturnal Tyde. A thousand times I turn, but turn in vain, I change my Side, but always keep my Pain.
With longing Eyes I seek the dawning Light, But Woe succeeds, as Day succeeds the Night. My Ulcerated Flesh is cloath'd with Worms, And Putrefaction every Limb deforms. My Days in quick Succession go and come, As the swift Shuttle traverses the Loom. Lord, in Compassion to me, call to mind, That swift-wing'd Life out-flys the fleetest Wind. No grateful Object more shall please my Sight, No more Harmonious Sounds my Ear delight. I must for ever my Abode forsake, For ever of my Friends my Farewell take. Shouldst thou displeas'd give me a frowning Look, I sink, I dy, as if with Light'ning struck. As ruin'd Clouds dissolve, and flow in Air, And ne'er their lost Connexion can repair: So he that once descends into the Tomb, Before the great and Universal Doom, No more his Form and Vigor will resume. He'll never break the Leaden Chains of Death, Nor more by turns exclude and draw his Breath. He shall no more enjoy his former home, Nor from the Grave to his dear Neighbours come. Since Life by Common Fate must quickly cease, And griping Death will ne'er her Prey release; I'll not refrain, but for Compassion Cry, For some repose and Ease, or else to Dye. I'll speak, for Grief is bold and eloquent, My Prayers and Crys shall give my Sorrow vent.
Expostulations and Complaints shall ease My tortur'd Soul, and the sharp Pain appease. Am I a vast, a wild, Impetuous Deep, That thou art forc'd to set thy Watch, and keep Me thus in Bounds? Can I e'er dangerous grow, E'er pass my Banks, and o'er the Region flow? Am I a furious Monster of the Main, That thou in Fetters dost my Rage restrain? No. I extended lye upon my Bed, And on my Couch repose my restless Head: But then if Sleep around me nodding flyes With flaggy Wings, and lights upon my Eyes; Visions and Dreams compos'd of frightful Air, The drowsy Stranger from my Eye-lids scare. Therefore my Soul does quick Deliv'rance ask From tedious Life's unsufferable Task: Life I abhor; let me alone to Dye; Why should I still in ling'ring Torments lye? Why does Coy Death from my Embraces fly? Why should I Live? Was I from Pain releast, Life's but a vain and empty Name at best. O, what is Man? What is the Hope and Trust Of a poor piece of ill-cemented Dust? What is the Wight, that God should condescend To try his Strength, and with him should contend? Wilt thou such Honour on a Wretch bestow, Is he or worth thy Notice, or thy Blow? Wilt thou thy Power against a Worm engage, Is Man a proper Object of thy Rage?
But if thou scourgest with a kind Intent, And thy sharp Strokes are for Correction meant To make the Suff'rer thy just Laws obey, And to reduce the Wand'rer to his way, Still what is Man, that every Day his God Should both Chastise, and Guide him with his Rod? That he should Wound his Flesh to heal his Mind, Beneficent in Wrath, and in Displeasure Kind? Lord, spare a Wretch that has not long to live, Some easie Minutes, some short respite give. I own my Guilt, and my Offences blame, Delug'd in Tears, and overwhelm'd with Shame. What shall I do thy Favour to regain? Can I implore th' Allmighty's Aid in vain, Whose gracious Power does all Mankind sustain? In deeds of Kindness thou dost most rejoyce, Chast'ning is forc'd, but Mercy is thy choice. Why hast thou set me as a Mark, to stand Against the Darts of thy resistless Hand, Which so much gaul my fest'ring Flesh, that I Would lay my Life, my Burden down, and dye? Forgive of all my Guilt the mighty Debt, Remember Mercy, and my Sin forget. CHAP. VIII. Then Bildad: How long wilt thou the Bounds of Patience break? And thus absurdly and perversly speak? How long shall thy Reproaches Heav'n Arraign? Does the least Spot Eternal Justice stain?
Why does thy Passion's Tyde its Bank o'erflow? Why dothy Words, like Winds, Tempestuous grow? Does God Deceit to Sacred Truth prefer? Rather than Iob, must God be thought to err? I thy Rebellious Children did provoke Th' Allmighty's Wrath, and felt his Vengeful stroke, I thou his Perfect Justice would'st adore, I thou his Mercy humbly would'st implore; And to thy Pray'r joyn Purity of Heart, For thy Support he would his Power exert. His Blessings yet would Crown thy righteous Ways, And thou in Peace might'st pass thy prosp'rous Days. Tho' thou art Poor and despicably low, Thy Substance should increase and vastly grow, And Wealth around thee would profusely low. Consult thy Fathers, look on Ages back, Turn o'er the Rolls of Time, and strict enquiry make. We are of no Experience, no regard When with our long-liv'd Ancestors compar'd: Those Venerable Heads will give thee Light In this Debate, and set thy Judgment right. They'll from repeated Observation shew, That all the Maxims we advance, are true. Ev'n as a Rush that in a Wat'ry Mead With hasty growth reers its presumptuous Head; In its chief Verdure withering away, Prevents the Mower by a swift decay. The Plants that once with Envy on him gaz'd, Stand at this unexpected Change amaz'd.
So shall the Beauty of the Wicked fade, Who to endure has no Foundation laid. His swelling Hopes in their high Tyde shall ebb; His Trust is weaker than a Spider's Web. He on his House shall lean, a fruitless Prop, His House will sink, and disappoint his Hope. Will he on Servants and his Wealth depend, Servants and Wealth their Lord shall not defend. Tho' he to Heav'n should raise his shady head, And his thick Branches o'er the Garden spread; Should he beneath the Summer's burning Ray Continue Green, which makes the Rush decay; Should all his interweaving Roots around, Embrace the Stones in firm and solid ground; Could he deride the Winds that him invade, And Tempests with their Impotence upbraid; Did he thus stand secure from Storms and Heat, Proud of the Strength and Beauty of his Seat; He shall his suddain Extirpation Mourn, Fell'd by the Axe, or else by Thunder torn. Compleat Destruction shall all marks efface, And all Remains, that might confess his place. The ground shall no discov'ring Footsteps shew, Nor neighb'ring Trees remember, where he grew. No other milder Fate or happier End, Shall all his Pomp and prosp'rous Pride attend. He shall be rooted up, and in his Ground No fruitful Plant shall be hereafter found, But neighb'ring Trees shall thrive, that stand around.
His God will ne'er the Perfect Man reject, Nor may the Wicked e'er his Aid expect. Hence, Iob, thy want of Virtue does appear, That God abandons thee to thy Despair. But this is certain, if thou wilt not mourn Offences past, and to thy God return, Utter Destruction shall thy Ways attend; But if convinc'd thou wilt thy Errors mend, He shall thy former Joy and Power restore, Encrease thy Friends, and multiply thy Store; Till Songs and Shouts thy great Delight attest, And mighty Joy extends thy lab'ring Breast. Those who revil'd thee, and thy Dwelling curst, Shall blush with Shame, with Indignation burst; When they shall see thy Happy Days restor'd, And greater Wealth and Honour on thee pour'd. Mean time resistless Ruin shall efface The Wicked Man, and all his impious Race. CHAP. IX. Then answer'd Iob. This Sacred Truth I own, That God has still unblemish'd Justice shown. Nor can a Man his Innocence defend, If with him God should in Debate contend. What Reasonings e'er he offers in dispute, Man of a thousand could not one Confute. He's Wife in Heart, and guides all Nature's Ways, And at a View the Universe surveys.
The Heart he searches with his piercing Eye, And bubbling Thoughts does in their Spring descry▪ Unfinish'd Notions in the Mind he sees, And the rude Lines of half-drawn Images. He views the Spark that first our Bosom fires, And the first struggling of unborn Desires. He from the Hills of Time looks down, to see The boundless Vale of dark Futurity. He sees all Ages from Duration's Deep Come rolling on, and how they Order keep. All things he sees in Time's Capacious Womb, And turns the Annals o'er of Years to come. He sees each Chance, and every future Turn, And reads the Lives of Monarchs yet unborn. He views Events that in their Causes lye, And sees Effects in Nature's Energy. He minds our Ways, and to his clearer Sight Those Paths are crooked, which we thought were right. His Strength proportion with his Wisdom shows, Fit to Protect his Friends, and Crush his Foes; Who with Success did e'er his Arm oppose? Hills with their Woods, when his fierce Anger burns, He from their Seat amidst the Vally spurns. He turns up Mountains Roots against the Sky, And from his Wrath the Rocks find Wings to fly. He makes the Earth with strong Convulsions shake, Her Pillars start, and their old Base forsake. Vast, gaping Chasms, amazing to the Sight, Mingle the Day with Subterranean Night.
Th' inclining Poles as wrench'd aside appear, And diving Isles conceal themselves for fear. At his Command the rising Sun will stay, And from the World keep back the ling'ring Day. His marshal'd Clouds to intercept the Light, Seal up the Stars the twinkling Eyes of Night. The spreading Heav'n's he as a Curtain draws, Treads down aspiring Waves, and gives the Ocean Laws. With Orbs of Light he inlays all the Sphears, And studs the Sable Night with Silver Stars. He all the Constellations hangs on high, And bids the Planets wander thro' the Sky. Stormy Areturus round the Northern Pole By his direction does unweary'd roll. Orion and the Pleiades dispence, At his Command, their Rays and Influence. His skillful hand on Airy Pillars reers The Vaulted Chambers of the Southern Spheres. The long Succession of his Mighty Deeds, Our everlasting Admiration feeds. Behind a black impenetrable Screen Of Pitchy Clouds, th' Allmighty walks unseen. He that to follow in his Steps essays, Thro' all his craggy, dark, perplexing Ways, Scar'd by the sacred Horrors of the Place, Will own, the Maze Divine he cannot trace, Nor the black Gulph, and trackless Mountains pass. He'll stand astonish'd, and bereft of Sense, Lost in the awful Wilds of Providence.
If he his settled Purpose has exprest, A Man of Wealth and Honour to divest, What hardy Mortal will his Power withstand, Or dares a reason why 'tis done, demand? Till God withdraws the heavy, galling Yoke, And reconcil'd, forbears th' afflicting Stroke: Those who would rescue, may their Pride express, But by their fall their weakness shall confess. Since none a Match in Power with God contends, And none his Ways and Counsels comprehends, Can I pretend to speak, my Case to state, And grapple with th' Allmighty in debate? Can I his Ear with chosen Language charm, And God of all his Arguments disarm? Tho' I believ'd my Cause most Right and Just, I would my doubtful Innocence distrust. I would not plead with God, but only pray That Justice he with Mercy would allay. Tho' he should kindly grant me my Request, Yet I so much despond, am so Distrest, That I th' amazing Truth should ne'er believe, But, as a gawdy Dream the joyful News receive. Both sharp and lasting Suff'rings I have born, With Wrath Divine, as with a Tempest torn; He perseveres and multiplies his Strokes, Tho' no uncommon Guilt his Wrath provokes. So fast his fierce, redoubled Blows descend, That I can scarce to all my Wounds attend.
No breathing Time is giv'n, no short Relief From exquisite and never-ceasing Grief. Should I his Throne with all my force Assail, Against Allmighty Strength can I prevail? If I Appeal to Judges and to Laws, What higher Court can Sit to hear my Cause? If I my Righteousness before him plead, Will not my Words to my Conviction lead? Will he not thence my Condemnation draw, And in my purest Virtue find a flaw? Should God pronounce me just, yet I'd refuse Uneasy Life, and Death's Embraces chuse. To all things you advance, to represent God's Power and Justice fully, I assent. But then you err, when you assert that God Exempts the Righteous from his scourging Rod. No Fav'rite Son is from his Frown secure, But in his Turn does his sharp Stripes endure. The Foolish from the Wise you cannot know By the false marks of Happiness, or Woe. 'Twixt Good and Bad there's no distinction made, Unless more frequent Darts the Good invade. Against the Just th' Allmighty's Arrows fly, For he delights the Innocent to try. To show their Constant and their God-like Mind, Not by Afflictions broken, but refin'd. He to the Wicked gives the Earth away, And raises Monsters to Imperial Sway.
He makes them Peace and Plenty to possess, And crowns their Undertakings with Success. While Men for Empire fit, and Publique Trust, Quick in discerning, in deciding Just, Worthy of Thrones, Men of unblemish'd Fame, Are oft expos'd to Misery and Shame. This is th' Allmighty's Deed, if not, declare Its genuine Authors, who, and where they are. My Life consumes in never-ceasing Woe, My rolling Days uninterrupted flow, To disembogue their Flood within the Deep, Where all the Streams of Time collected Sleep. No eager Couriers in their greatest haste, Nor Ship before the Wind advance so fast. The Eagle from the Mountains Airy top, To strike his Prey, does ne'er so swiftly stoop. If I resolve my Sorrow to forget, That I'll no more my rash Complaints repeat, That my unbridled Passion I'll restrain; This humble Resignation is in vain. For God will never my Distress relieve, He'll punish on, and tempt Men to believe. That Iob by some unusual, black Offence, Has Heav'n provok'd such Judgments to dispence. In vain I strive my Innocence to clear, Since I must still these grievous Suff'rings bear, Still the sad marks of Heav'n's displeasure wear. If by my Vindication I should grow As clean and spotless, as the Fleecy Snow,
When God replies, my Stains before conceal'd To my Confusion would be all reveal'd. My Foulness he'll detect, that I no more Should boast my Cleanness, but my self abhor. He's not a Man, my equal in dispute, That I should hope his Reasons to refute. Can I in Courts of Judgment take my place, And plead against th' Allmighty Face to Face? In this Debate what Umpire shall preside, Hear all our Arguings, and the Cause decide? Let him his Terrors, and his Rod withdraw, And let his Mercy mitigate his Law; For humane Frailty due Allowance make, And I with Courage will my Tryal take. I then will boldly speak, and free from fear I'll quickly make my Innocence appear. But this request th' Allmighty does refuse; He does the Rigour of his Justice use. His awful Terrors which my Soul surround, Drink up my Spirits, and my Hope confound. As I have done, I therefore will complain, This only way is left to sooth my Pain. CHAP. X. My constant Woes, such constant Groans create, That Life's a black, uncomfortable State. My Soul abhors this loathsom Lump of Clay, Longs to be free, to wing to Heav'n its way. I'll make my moan to give its Sorrow vent, Else will my Breast be with its Tempest rent.
I cannot smother such Gigantick Woe, Nor on my raging Grief a Muzzle throw. I can't forbear, to God I'll thus complain, As one that's Wicked, do not me Arraign. Why dost thou let me thus in torment lye, And thus in vain for Heav'n's Compassion Cry? Do not thy Servant by uncommon Woes, To Publique Censure and Reproach expose. Mankind will Me Condemn, and cry, we know His Crime's enormous, since his Pain is so. Can God Complacence in Oppression take, And vex his Creatures for the Pleasure's sake? O, can a God of Mercy cruel grow, No Pity feel, no tender Passion show? Can God my Father e'er Unnatural prove, Shut up his Bowels, and forget to love? Will he with hostile Force his Sons invade, Pleas'd to destroy the Works his hands have made? While he mean time with more auspicious Rays Shines on the Wicked, and approves their Ways? Has God an Eye of Flesh, that needs the Light? Has he, like Man, a Weak imperfect Sight, That he's so curious in his search, and makes Such strict enquiry after my Mistakes? Or are th' Allmighty's days like those of Man, That in extension scarce exceed a Span? That he makes haste to punish, on pretence That Death may interpose for my Defence.
By blacker Crimes than others, thou dost know I'm not distinguish'd, tho I am by Woe. Thou know'st that none thy Vengeance can withstand, Or rescue me from thy Afflicting Hand. Should'st thou deny me Aid, I am bereft Of all Assistance, and am hopeless left. Thy hands have wrought and fashion'd every Part Of thi weak Fabrick with amazing Art: And now, as if thou didst thy Labour blame, Wilt thou in pieces dash the curious Frame? O let but God remember how at first He form'd my Limbs, and rais'd me out of Dust. How with stupendous Skill he did convey My Flame of Life thro' crooked Tubes of Clay. What need he crush me then with mighty Pain, When of my self I turn to Dust again? To him my Parent, I my Being owe, The Fountain whence precarious Beings flow. He the prolific Principles infus'd, From whence the crude Conception was produc'd. He form'd me when an Embryo in the Womb, And made my Limbs their proper Shape assume. He warm'd the heaving Mass with Vital Heat, Hung in the Breast my Heart, and bid it beat. He of connected Bones a Bullwark made, Against the Ills which every way invade. About the Bones he the strong Sinews wound, And fenc'd the tender Plant of Life around.
He taught my breathing Lungs to draw the Air, Which might the Vital Flame within repair. He made the Veins o'er all the Body stray, Which Purple Life in winding Streams convey. He spun the various threads with Art Divine, Wherewith he weav'd my Flesh, and curious Skin. He did not only make me Life possess, But did my Life with sweet Enjoyments bless. I was with Peace, and with abundance cloy'd, And long a true Terrestrial Heav'n enjoy'd. At first he kindled, and he still maintains The Flame of Life which wanders thro' my Veins. Sure God remembers, how he has been kind, And treasures up these Favours in his Mind. And on his former Love can he reflect, And me at last, tho' unprovok'd, reject? If I am Wicked I thy Vengeance bear, And if I'm Righteous, still thy Frowns I fear. Confusion and Despair my Soul Oppress, Lord, see my Woe, and pity my Distress. My sad Complaints increase, my Suff'rings grow, And every Moment propagates my Woe. As a fierce Lyon o'er the grassy Lawn, With Hunger urg'd, pursues the flying Fawn; So dost thou hunt me down by Night and Day, So dost thou seize, and tear the trembling Prey. Thou dost my Spirits and my Strength devour, And mark me out to Celebrate thy Power.
Thou dost thy Judgments and thy Strokes renew, And my vext Soul with hotter Wrath pursue. Thou still reviv'st the War, and dost employ All Arts and Arms thy Creature to annoy. Did I for this amidst the Living come? Didst thou for this release me from the Womb? Oh! that from thence I ne'er had broke away, Or had expir'd, when first I saw the Day! For then had I been carried from the Womb, And laid to Sleep within the silent Tomb. My Minutes fly, my Days roll on apace, And hasty Life will soon compleat its Race. Some Comfort therefore, some short respite give, And spare a Wretch that soon must cease to Live. Some hours of Rest, some Intervals bestow, And for a Moment interrupt my Woe; Before I'm carried to the Grave beneath, The Land of Darkness and the Shades of Death: A Region undiscover'd to the Light, Th' Imperial Seat of unmolested Night: A Place secur'd with such a gloomy Mound, So fenc'd with Walls of solid Darkness round, That not a streak of Light, no wand'ring Ray E'er came to view it, or explor'd the Way To introduce the Foreign Power of Day. Then Zophar did his Speech to Iob direct: Thou dost Prolix Discourses much affect.
Thy Words abound, and roll in Floods along With mighty noise, but are they therefore Strong? Shall thy loud Deluge sober Reason drown, And bear thy Friends, thy kind Instructers down? Shall thy Devices make us hold our Peace? Must we not answer, lest we should displease? Shalt thou with such unsufferable Pride, Despise thy Brethren, and thy God deride, And yet, must no Man undertake to blame Thy faulty Conduct, and expose thy Shame? For thou hast said, that in th' Allmighty's Sight Thy Hands are clean, and thy Opinions right. Would God would interpose, and undertake This Argument for thy Conviction's sake! His All-discerning Eye would quickly find Stains in thy hands; and Errors in thy mind. If he would Wisdom's hidden Stores expose, Its awful Depths and Wonders would disclose. Wonders and Depths of Wisdom yet conceal'd, Surpassing all which he has e'er reveal'd. Thou would'st adore his methods, and declare How much above thy reach his Councels are. Thou wouldst no more thy rash expressions use, No more th' Allmighty's Providence accuse. For of thy Sin he has forgiven part, Exacting less by far than thy desert. Why does thy peevish Folly God Arraign? Why wouldst thou fix on Providence a Stain?
Can humane Reason such wide Arms extend, As shall th' Allmighty's Wisdom comprehend? Let down thy Understanding, try to sound And search a Deep so vast, and so profound. Canst thou the Reasons of his Conduct find, And view the secret Councel of his Mind? It is as Heav'n insuperably Steep, Wide as the boundless Ocean, and as deep; What canst thou do but awful distance keep? If God from off the Earth a Nation cuts, If wretched Captives he in Prison shuts; If he shall give a harrass'd Kingdom ease, And from his Chains the squallid Slave release, Who can against him such Objections raise, As shall detect Injustice in his Ways? Tho' Man so little knows, is so unft In Judgment on his Maker's Ways to sit; Yet God our Folly and our Rashness knows, And can our secret Wickedness expose. He can discover all our guilty Thoughts, And tho' we hide them, will reveal our Faults. Tho' thou dost vaunt that thou art free from Sin, He may discern Hypocrisy within. Nor stands he unconcern'd, but will chastise The Wickedness, which he in Man descrys. And yet this vain, this despicable Wight, This foolish Creature Man, takes great delight In being thought divinely Wise, and fit Th' Allmighty's Deeds to censure or acquit:
Tho' as to things Divine, which most advance Man's Happy State, he does in Ignorance, In Headiness and Dullness far surpass The stupid Offsrping of the wildest Ass. If Penitential Groans prepare thy way, And thou shalt humbly to th' Allmighty pray; If thou his Lands and Treasure dost restore (If thou detainest any) to the Poor; If thou the Cause of Sin wilt not espouse, But chase it from thy Heart, and from thy House; Thou shalt to Heav'n thy chearful Face erect, To Heav'n that does the Innocent Protect. On strong Foundations stedfast thou shalt stand, Danger deride, and all thy Fears disband. As Summer Floods which o'er the Meadows flow With equal Speed back to their Channel go: So thy subsiding Sorrows shall retreat, And thou shalt all thy Misery forget. Thou shalt dispel with thy prevailing Light, The Shades and gloomy Horrors of the Night. Thou shalt emerge from Woe and deep Despair, Bright as Noon-day, and as the Morning fair. Thou shalt in Peace thy Fields and Herds survey, Secure as well from Beasts, as Men of Prey. Surrounding Bulwarks shall thy Dwelling fence, Against all hostile Rage and Violence. When thou shalt lay thy weary Limbs to rest, No suddain Dangers shall thy Sleep molest.
To thee thy Neighbours shall in Throngs resort To see thy Splendor, and thy Friendship Court, And from thy Power shall humbly ask Support. But mighty Woes the Wicked shall Assail, In looking after Help their Eyes shall fail: Their Hope shall vanish as a blast of Air; How shall they scape, 'tis God denounces War? CHAP. XII. Then Iob reply'd. No doubt but you are Wise, And may the barb'rous, sensless World despise. You've all the Wisdom of Mankind engrost, Can more than Humane Understanding boast. If you should dye, the Grave and endless Night Would overwhelm all Intellectual Light. Blind Ignorance would unmolested reign, And Folly Universal Empire gain. But know, since you your Friend so hardly press, As well as you, some Reason I possess, Nor is its Light more dim, or Vigour less. Yet you and I in this debate must own, We've no great Flights of Wit, or Depths of Wisdom shown. That God is Wise, and still does Right decree, All other Nations grant, as well as we. But you perversly manage the Debate, And the true Question never justly State. You ought to prove, that some enormous fault Has on my Head this sore Affliction brought. You should my close Hypocrisy detect, Which makes th' Allmighty my Complaint reject.
Instead of this you with unnatural Pride Your suff'ring Friend insultingly deride. Because th' Allmighty does his Ear incline To hear your Pray'r, while he is deaf to mine; Because your Days are prosp'rous, you despise And mock your Neighbour that in Torment lies. Contempt th' afflicted Righteous Man attends, And Scorn, instead of Pity, from his Friends. A Man reduc'd to Misery and Want, Who once could Honour and Abundance vaunt, In his successful, thriving Neighbour's Sight, Tho' like a Lamp esteem'd when fresh and bright, Is scorn'd, when glimm'ring with expiring Light. Yet of the Just this is the Common Fate, While Wicked Men enjoy a prosp'rous State. Robbers and Spoilers see their Wealth endure, And those, who God provoke, live most secure. With lavish hand he does his Favours throw, And undeserv'd Rewards on these bestow. Ask of the Beasts, the Beasts will strait return, That they the same sad Circumstances mourn. They'll cry, the tawny Tyrants that possess The lawless Empire of the Wilderness, The strip'd and spotted Monsters of the Wood, The Bears and Wolves inur'd to Spoil and Blood, These fat with Rapine, Peace and Power enjoy, Yet persevere to ravage and destroy:
Mean time the harmless Flock and useful Herd, By the Destroyer's Hand are never spar'd. They fall, unhappy Creatures! either way, To Men their Friends, or Beasts their Foes a Prey. Ask all the Feather'd Nations of the Air, They'll all with one Confed'rate Voice declare, That the voracious Vulture and the Kite, The Hawk and Eagle that in Blood delight, With all the long-wing'd Rovers of the Skies, Which Cruize among the Clouds to ken a Prize, They'll say this rav'ning Race is most secure, Whilst the meek Dove, and harmless Fowls endure A thousand Mischiefs from th' Invader's Power. Then on the Ocean's oazy Margin stand, And of the sinn'd Inhabitants demand How 'tis with them; they'll all, as one, complain The same unequal Fate attends the Main. They'll cry the vast Leviathan that moves The Deep around, and Seas before him Shoves, With all the Spoilers, and the murth'ring Race Of scaly Ravagers that vex the Place; In Peace possess the Empire of the Flood, And undisturb'd, regale themselves with Blood. Unweildy with their Fat, without controul, The lazy Tyrants on the Billows roll: Pamper'd with Spoil, the wanton Monsters Sleep Along the Shore, or Sport within the Deep. While their Luxurious Bellies to supply Whole Shoals of inoffensive Fishes Dy.
But whoe'er entertain'd a doubtful Thought If God this State of Things ordain'd, or not? Who by his Power all Beings did produce, And by his Wisdom fix'd their end and use: He may, his Creatures lives at Pleasure take, They are his own, who can Objections make? God's Soveraign Right of Empire I respect, But this Concession can't my Cause affect. Can you some monstrous Guilt or Error show, Commensurate to my stupendous Woe? Have Patience then, with an attentive Ear My just Defence and Allegations hear. Use a Judicious and Impartial taste, And you'll no more unjust Reproaches cast. You'll see with what Integrity I act, And all your Censures rashly made, retract. Bildad the Cause between us would refer To antient Fathers, as less apt to err. Wisdom I grant in Hoary Heads appears, And Understanding is matur'd by Years; Rarely a Beardless Oracle we know, Judgment by Age does to Perfection grow. But when we most our Ancestors commend, Their greatest Wisdom can't with God's contend. Antiquity's Traditions can't decide Against a Rule Divine, our certain Guide. We can't in any but th' Eternal Mind, Councel and Knowledge in Perfection find.
God is a Mind all Intellectual Light, Clear without Mist, without a Blemish bright. From him the Spring those streams of Wisdom flow, That feed the thinking, reasning World below. The Wise on Earth who most deserve our Praise, Shine but with dim and delegated Rays. We should with equal Reverence adore The Wonders of his Wisdom and his Power. He levels with the Dust the proudest Town, O'erthrows her Forts, and breaks her Bullwarks down. Her gilded Palaces he overturns, And her high Towers amidst the Rubbish spurns. Her Rooms of State, and Roofs of Cedar meet, Huddled in Ruin in th' embarrast Street. Tho' all bewail her miserable Fall, None dares attempt to build again her Wall. If wretched Slaves in Prison he restrains, Who shall release them from their pond'rous Chains? He tyes the Clouds the Bottles of the Skies, And to the Earth his Heav'nly Dew denies. Then cleaving Drought the Sunburnt Mountains chap, And for the Rain the thirsty Meadows gape. Anon the Rivers swell at his Command, O'erflow their Banks, and kindly drown the Land. Wisdom and Strength are his, 'tis he imparts To all the Crafty their successful Arts. He shows them how to lay a wise Design, How to Attack, and how to Countermine.
Mean time their Neighbours he of Sense bereaves, Whom he a Prey to the Deceiver leaves. He puzzles famous Sages in Debate, And leads in Triumph Councellors of State. From learned Judges Wisdom he withdraws, And they are left, as Fools without Applause. He haughty Monarchs Bonds and tort'ring Racks, And all their Engines of Destruction breaks. He Rifles all their Stores of Death and Pain, And binds the Tyrant with the Captive's Chain. He over-turns the Mighty in their Pride, And makes Men, those they dreaded once, deride. Warriours with spreading Laurels often crown'd, Part of th' Almighty's Triumph shall be found, Drag'd at his Chariot Wheels a Captive Throng Of Monarch's choak'd with Dust shall pant along. Tyrants despoil'd shall rave at their defeat, And mixt with vulgar Slaves shall Curse and Sweat: Princes in Chains shall in his Train appear, And weary Kings come lagging in the Rear. He takes their Understanding from the Wise, And makes their Friends their Oracles despise. He pours Contempt on Princes of the Land, And wrests their awful Scepter from their Hand. He sinks the mighty Warriour's Martial Fame, And covers his once glorious Head with Shame. Th' Almighty's bright all-penetrating Eye, Does Councels deep and dark as Hell descry: He sees their secret Works, and Countermines Mysterious Statesmen's most profound Designs.
Plots wrap'd in Clouds, and Death like Shades of Night, To him lye all expos'd, as Noon-day Light. He gives a City wide Imperial Sway, And does her Yoke on vanquish'd Nations lay. She on the Necks of Captive Princes treads, When he her Armys forth to Conquest leads; She does with unexhausted Wealth abound, And as a Mistress awes the World around. Then on a suddain he corrects her Pride, And to her Banks drives back her ebbing Tyde. He breaks her Yoke, and rescues from her hand The Realms he subject made to her Command. He thro' her Streets does Desolation spread, And casts down from the Clouds her tow'ring Head. Great Chiefs, when he rebukes them, Cowards grow, And all the marks of Consternation show; His Terrors pierce their Breasts, like poison'd Darts, Enfeeble and dismay the proudest Hearts. For Hills and Mountains they'll forsake their Home, And thro' the trackless Woods despairing Roam: They'll seek the lonesom, salvage Wilderness, There to conceal their vagabond Distress. They and the Beasts each other shall affright, At distance gaze, then fly each other's sight. They ne'er shall see a Beam of dawning Hope, But for their way involv'd in Darkness grope. With Wrath Divine intoxicated they, Like Drunken Men, shall Reel and lose their way.
CHAP. XIII. Since you are pleas'd oft to enumerate God's Wise and mighty Works in this debate, I the same Method have observ'd, to shew That I his Wonders know, no less than you. I do not then your long Discourses want, To prove those Truths Divine, I freely grant. I to th' Almighty my Defence would make, And not to you, who still my Case mistake. He does my Heart, and pure Intention know, And would some Mercy, some Compassion show, Which my relentless Friends will never do. Perversly in the Wrong you persevere, And to erroneous Doctrines still adhere. You still your Thoughts with Confidence express, That mighty Suff'rings mighty Guilt confess. That great Afflictions and uncommon Woe, Are marks the Wicked from the Just to know. But you unskilful vain Physitians are, Who know not how your Med'cine to prepare. If the Disease by Chance be understood, Ill Drugs you give, or misapply the Good. Your Silence would your Wisdom best have shown, That still had kept your Ignorance unknown. Will you for God sophistically plead? Does he deceitful ways of arguing need? Will you pretend to manage his Defence, By false Constructions of his Providence?
Will he in this your forward Zeal applaud? And with Rewards approve your pious Fraud? Will you the Person Try, and not the Cause, And like corrupted Judges wrest the Laws? Will you believe your Arguments are strong, Because you hang upon a Cause so long? Will your contentious Wrangling never end? Will peevish Cavils at your injur'd Friend, You to th' Almighty's Favour recommend? Would it your Honour or your Peace promote, If God your Speeches try'd, who knows your Thought? Why will you Mock your Maker? can't his Eye Your Pride and want of Charity descry, Tho' cover'd with affected Piety? If you will Right pervert and Judgment wrest, Tho' this your Guilt lies hid within your Breast, God will expose your Crime, and in the end His vengeful Blow shall on your Heads descend. His high Perfections should in you have bred, A sacred Awe and Reverential Dread: Should not his Power, and Truth that cannot err, From rash Determinations you deter? I all your Councels vain and fruitless find, Like Dust, that flies before the driving Wind. Your high Discourses weak and tott'ring stand, Like heaps of Clay, or uncemented Sand. Hold then your Peace, and let your Friend alone To ease his Grief, and freely make his moan.
I will my Bosom of its Burden free By sad Complaints, whate'er the Issue be. Will God pronounce my Failing mortal Sin, When he discerns an upright Heart within? For Liberty of Speech so much I long, To vent my Woe, my Passion is so strong; That if deny'd, I must in deep Despair, Despise my Life, my Flesh in pieces tear. Tho' God yet hotter Anger should express, And with redoubled strokes my Pains increase; Tho' he advances with his glitt'ring Dart, And o'er me stands to strike me to the Heart; I on his Truth and Justice would rely, And with strong Faith would to his Mercy fly. Th' Almighty knows my Virtue is sincere, I'm not flagitious, tho' I often err. The Faithful God the Faithful will protect, Scourge them he may, but can't the Just reject. I'll undertake with humble Confidence, Before his Bar to manage my Defence. Whatever Blots my Conversation stain, I still can my Integrity maintain. I'm sure the God whose Mercy I implore, My Peace and Comforts will at last restore: By Methods and by Ways which please him best, My Burden he'll remove, and give me rest. My Declaration with Attention hear, My Words shall make my Righteousness appear.
The Method I have fix'd for my Defence, I do not doubt will clear my Innocence. Who'll with me plead? Oh! that it was my Fate That God would please to manage this debate. For if in such a strait I should not speak, My Heart distended with my Grief would break. My Friends Reproaches, and th' Almighty's Hand Which lies so heavy, my Complaints demand. Let but th' Almighty grant my double Pray'r, And I'll with Courage stand before his Bar: Let him withdraw his Hand, my Pains suspend, And give me ease my Tryal to attend; In Power and Glory let him not appear, But my Defence with gracious Meekness hear; Then let th' Almighty me arraign at large, And I'll defend my self against the Charge▪ Or I will argue, and let him declare The reason why his Hand is thus severe. I'm not so vain and wicked to pretend, That I th' Almighty's Laws did ne'er offend; But that my Crimes are of so deep a dy, As you my Friends suggest, I must deny. Detect these Crimes that are to me unknown, And I'll the Guilt with Shame and Sorrow own. Why in Displeasure dost thou shun my Sight, And of thy gracious Eyes withdraw the Light? Why hangs this Cloud upon thy frowning Brow? Why treatest thou thy Servant, as thy Foe?
Wilt thou to crush me needless Power engage, Lavish of Vengeance, and profuse of Rage? Wilt thou thy keen Immortal Arms employ, A poor and helpless Mortal to destroy? Wilt thou involv'd in rolling Clouds descend, And arm'd with Thunder with a Worm contend? Should Storms arise a sapless Leaf to tear The sport of every Wind and blast of Air? Must Tempests rage, and pointed Light'ning fly, And dreadful War infest the troubled Sky, Only to chase the empty Straw away, To every Spark of Fire an easie Prey? Me, as a Malefactor God indicts, And terrible Decrees against me writes. Stern Justice gripes me in her rigid Arms, And youthful Guilt afresh my Soul alarms. Thou dost my fetter'd Limbs in Prison lay, And then with Care dost all my Paths survey; Dost closely at my very Heels pursue, And with a searching Eye my Footsteps view. To mark some great Transgression of thy Laws, And for my Condemnation find a Cause: Then Putrefaction executes the Doom, And does my Flesh, as Moths a Vest, consume. CHAP. XIV. Unhappy Man as soon as Born decays, He numbers few, and those uneasy Days. As in a verdant Mead a blowing Flower, The suddain Offspring of a Summer Shower,
Unfolds its Beauty to the Morning Ray, But is e'er Evening Cut, or fades away: So Man a while displays his gawdy Bloom, But Death her crooked Scyth does soon assume, Mows down, and bears her Harvest to the Tomb. He, as a Shadow, or a Shape of Air, Does suddainly dissolve and disappear. The Flame of Life does, as a Lambent ire, Or Evening Meteor Shine, and strait expire. And wilt thou Man regard, and condescend With such a Wretch in Judgment to contend? I am deriv'd from Man's infected Race, A piece extracted from the tainted Mass. Man propagates th' Hereditary Crime, Nor does the Stain wear out by length of time. From a base Stock can Noble Branches grow, Or Crystal Streams from muddy Fountains flow? I therefore can't a faultless Life protest, I own Offences common to the best; Unclean I am, but not above the Rest. This is the thing I humbly would demand, Why I am singled out, and made to stand The chiefest Mark of God's avenging hand. Since thou dost know Man's Days, and canst relate Their number written in the Rolls of Fate, And hast determin'd Lifes laborious Race, And set the Bounds o'er which it cannot pass; Since his few fleeting Hours are quickly spent, And painful Life is its own Punishment;
Let this suice, and do not on him throw A crushing weight of superadded Woe. Grant him the Rest his Torments make him ask; And let him finish Life's appointed Task. For if a Swain with mercenary toil Cuts down a Tree, and draws away the Spoil; Still there is hope that Tree again may sprout, And from its Stock thrust tender-Branches out. For tho' the Root defrauded of Supply, Appears to Wither in the Ground, and Dy; Yet when it feels the fresh prolific Flood, It will again with youthful Vigour bud. But when a dying Man resigns his Breath, He ne'er returns from the dark Shades of Death. The Sea may suffer by deserting Waves That steal thro' secret subterranean Caves, Or by the lighter Steams which fly away, Drawn by the Sun's attenuating Ray; But Heav'n and Earth in Rivers and in Rain Restore their Spoils, and reimburse the Main. A flowing River, or a standing Lake, May their dry Banks and naked Shores forsake; Their Waters may exhale, and upwards move, Their Channel leave to roll in Clouds above; But the returning Winter will restore, What in the Summer they had lost before: The Snow and Rain, and Torrents, will repay What the warm Sun stole with his plund'ring Ray, And by his Summer Inroads bore away.
But if, O Man, thy vital Streams desert Their Purple Channels, and defraud the Heart, With fresh Recruits they ne'er will be supply'd, Nor feel their leaping Life's returning Tyde. When once the breathless Man has clos'd his Eyes, And in the silent Grave extended lies; In Death's close Prison he shall still remain, He n'er shall break from the rough Tyrant's Chain. When the last stroke of Fate is once receiv'd, This mortal Life can never be retriev'd. Would God would hide me in some hollow Cave, Some place as safe, and silent, as the Grave; Till these black Storms of Wrath which overcast, The low'ring Heav'n's around my Head are past. As he has done to Life, so let him set Bounds to my Grief, and not those Bounds forget. Since none who enter once the darksome Tomb, This mortal Life can afterwards resume; 'Tis best for me with patient Hope to wait, Till God is pleas'd to change this mournful State. Till he is pleas'd his Blessings to restore, Those sweet Enjoyments I possess'd before. Then shall he call, and with a gracious Ear He'll my Defence and Supplications hear. Then to his Creature he will Kindness show, Revive my Comforts, and remove my Woe. But oh! how different is my present Fate; For now th' Allmighty loves to lye in wait
To take me halting, what a watchful Eye Does he employ my Errors to descry? This search he makes, as if he Pleasure took, To find fresh Reasons to repeat his Stroke. He in a strong and secret place has stor'd My Sins; as wealthy Men their Treasures hoard. He Seals up my Transgressions, not a fault Is e'er left out, not an ill Word or Thought; Nor is th' impending Punishment forgot. As a high Hill with stormy Weather worn, With inbred Tempests, or with Thunder torn, Does with its Ruins all the Vally spread, But can no more erect his lofty Head: Moulder'd to Dust, it hopes no more to break The Clouds long Order with its snowy Peak. As a vast Rock by Earthquakes once remov'd, And from its Base amidst the Ocean shov'd; It's shatter'd Pillars never after reers, Nor thrusts his tow'ring Top amidst the Stars. As Stones which ever-flowing Waters wear, When once dissolv'd, their Ruins ne'er repair. As sweeping Inundations oft convey Towns, Herds, and Forrests floating to the Sea, Whence to return they never find a way. So when thy fatal Darts a Man destroy, The World's Delights he shall no more enjoy. He never from the Sepulcher shall rise, No more revive to see the lightsome Skies. He leaves his Honour and his Wealth behind, And quite another Face of things will find.
He's unconcern'd at what's transacted here; For if his Sons shine in a noble Sphere, He'll not rejoyce, nor will he e'er complain If they are crush'd, and drag the Pris'ners Chain. Hard Fate of Man, who either, if he dies Hopeless of e'er reviving, mould'ring lies; Or if he lives, must still expect to find Pain in his Flesh, and Anguish in his Mind. CHAP. XV. Then Eliphaz. Should a Wise Man, and such thou wouldst appear, Make us such fruitless, frothy Language hear? Much less with Tempests should we be addrest, Words fierce and stormy, as the Wind at East. Of Idle Words why this Eternal Flood? Can these vain Speeches e'er promote thy Good? True Piety, which should thy Mind adorn, Thou  xpos'd to universal scorn. All Reverence to pure Religion due, Will soon be lost, if thy Assertion's true. If God's afflicting Strokes Mankind invade, Without distinguishing the Good and Bad, Who at his Throne will Adoration pay? Who will to Heav'n their Songs of Praise convey? Thy Irreligious Maxims will restrain All future Pray'r, for Pray'r will be in vain. Thy bold irreverent Speeches have exprest Th' Impiety which has thy Mind possest.
The Poison which thy Lips discharge, is part Of the malignant Treasure in thy Heart. Yet thou, unwary Judges to escape, Beneath Divine Religion's lovely shape, Hast all thy black Hypocrisy conceal'd, Which thy uncautious Tongue has now reveal'd. Thou by thy own Defence art clearly cast, And thy own Mouth has Sentence on thee past. Art thou the Man that God did first Create? And has thy Birth with Time an equal date? What didst thou live before th' imprison'd Light, At God's Command sprang from the Womb of Night? Before aspiring Hills the Plains survey'd, Or verdant Meads their flowry Laps display'd; Before the Rocks their Craggy Ridges reer'd, Or bounding Billows in the Deep appear'd; That by unnumber'd Observations made, Thou hast a perfect Scheme of Knowledge laid? Dost thou the long, uninterrupted Chain Of Causes and Effects so well retain, That thou canst reason right, and clearly see From what is past, what shall hereafter be? Have thy Enquiries and Experience, run Thro' all the years roll'd up, since Time begun, That thou art full of Science, richer far In wise Remarks, than we thy Brethren are? Dost thou with God in secret Council sit? To his Debates does he wise Iob admit?
Does Wisdom with her Fav'rite Iob abide, Despising all the foolish Race beside? On what new Worlds of Light hast thou been thrown? What Mines of Knowledge found, to us unknown? If years, of Wisdom were a certain sign, Our years are not inferiour found to thine. With us is seen th' experienc'd, hoary Head, Who does in Age thy Father far exceed. Why as a worthless thing dost thou regard The Joy, the Comfort, and the blest Reward Which we have offer'd thee with Heav'n's assent, If of thy wicked Deeds thou shalt Repent? Hast thou (we ask thee) some peculiar ground, Some secret way of Consolation found? Should'st thou to such Discov'rys make pretence, Thou wouldst expose thy wondrous Impudence: And yet without uncommon grounds of Hope, Nothing but stubborn Pride can underprop Thy Confidence, and our Proposals stop. Wilt thou dishonour with unworthy Speech Thy Maker, and his Providence impeach? What does this Conduct mean? with what intent Against thy God are thy Reproaches sent? What is the mark at which thou takest aim, When thou dost boldly War with Heav'n proclaim? From such a War what benefit can flow? What canst thou gain by Force from such a Foe? Ah! what is wretched Man, that he should seem All pure, and guiltless in his own esteem?
Blest Seraphs can't his piercing Eye endure; Before him bright Arch-Angels are impure. Those Heav'nly Orders who were clean esteem'd, And all refin'd and spotless Glory seem'd, When they appear within th' Almighty's sight, O'erwhelm'd with splendor, and all-searching Light, They blush to see their secret Stains reveal'd, And Specks and Flaws which lay before conceal'd. Then what an odious, loathsome, monstrous Thing Must Man appear before th' Eternal King? Who by impure Traduction is unclean, And does to Vice with a strong Byass lean. Who with vast Draughts of Sin himself extends, And with Hydropic Thirst for more contends. To my Discourse attentively advert, I'll only what my Eyes have seen assert: That is, that wicked Men, and those alone Beneath such great, uncommon Suff'rings groan. Wise Men this Observation made of Old, Their Fathers them, and they their Children told. Thus has Tradition down from Ages past Convey'd this Truth, which is by us embrac't. Iob has affirm'd, that God the Earth bestows On the vile Race of his invet'rate Foes: But to our Fathers Judgment have respect, And they this groundless Error will detect. Wealth and Dominion was on them confer'd, Their Piety and Virtue to reward.
They did in Peace command the Towns around, And undisturb'd with Inroads, till'd the ground. No arm'd Chaldeans did their Herds invade, Or to a Land remote their Wealth convey'd. While they obey'd his Laws, th' Almighty's Hand Was still extended to protect their Land. To Leagues of Peace their Neighbours did agree, And to maintain them, God was Guarantee. On th' other hand, 'tis by experience plain, That wicked Men consume their Days in pain. Th' Oppressor still is grip'd with inward Fears, Nor shall compleat the number of his years. When no invading Foe appears in Arms, His secret Guilt the trembling Wretch alarms. He in his prosp'rous State is unsecure, Nor can his guilty Triumphs long endure. When in his Sphere he shines serenely bright, And not a Cloud disturbs his beaming Light, Then shall a Tempest of Affliction rise, And with a suddain Darkness spread the Skies. Neighbours to Rapine bred shall from afar, As late on thee, advance destructive War. The bloody Spoilers shall his Servants slay, Ravage his Lands, and make his Herds a Prey. Like Iob in trouble, they'll despairing ly, And Consolation from their Friends deny. They can't believe these Clouds will disappear, Great Ills they suffer, and they greater fear.
Despair attended with her ghastly Train Anguish, Confusion, Sorrow, howling Pain Shall at her hideous Army's Head advance, And shake against his Breast her bloody Lance. She'll draw her Troops of Terrors in array, Muster her Griefs, and horrid War display. As Kings for Fight their Warlike Ranks dispose, So shall she range her thick, embattled Woes. The Victor thus the Wicked shall assail, And o'er the proud Oppressor's Hopes prevail. This is his End, for that with Hellish Rage, Th' acious Wretch would against Heav'n engage. Almighty's Host he takes the Field, And runs upon his Spear and dreadful Shield. He does deance of his God express, Deride his fiery Darts, and on his Thunder press. Pamper'd with Spoil of ruin'd Neighbours round, Sleek with his Fat, and with Dominion crown'd; Luxurious, Haughty, and Presumptuous grown, He spurns at Heav'n, and mocks th' Almighty's Throne. His Cruelty has laid his Country wast, And Cities full of Men and Wealth defac'd. Those who survive in secret Corners weep, Or thro' the grassy Streets desponding creep. The empty Dwellings mossy Heaps appear, And all the Signs of suddain Ruin wear. But God will soon despoil him of his Power, Nor shall his Wealth and Greatness long endure. Black Seas of stagnant Darkness round him spread, And Night Eternal shall involve his Head.
Th' Almighty's Lightnings shall destroy his Fruit, Blast his green Leaves, and kill his spreading Root. His angry Breath shall as a Tempest tare His Branches off, and drive them thro' the Air. Let therefore none on Power and Wealth depend, These from approaching Evils can't defend, Their Promises are vain, and vanity their end. Whoe'er in these deceitful Friends conside, Untimely Ruin shall correct their Pride. Suddain Destruction shall their Heads invade, And all their Fruit and verdant Pomp shall fade. As when a rough East Wind, or Storm of Hail The fruitful Olive, or the Vine assail, Their flowry Pride the Olive Branches shed, And unripe Grapes shook off, the Vineyard spred: So shall th' Oppressors gawdy Pomp decay, So his fair Limbs and Beauty fade away. His Sons and Friends shall meet as sad a Doom, And vengeful Fire their Dwellings shall consume. His lab'ring Brain dire Mischief does contrive, And black Deceit his teeming Heart conceive. But he shall bring his own Destruction forth, As Vipers dye to give their Offspring Birth. CHAP. XVI. Then Iob reply'd, Oft has my suff'ring Ear, Such vain Discourses been compell'd to hear. You, cruel Comforters! enrage my Woe, You neither Skill, nor yet Compassion show.
With tedious Repetitions you abound, Keep your old Track, and argue in a Round. But will your empty Speeches never end, Disarm'd and vanquish'd, will you still contend? What has embolden'd thee, O Eliphaz, Still to reply, tho' never to my Case? Were my Afflictions yours, with how much ease Could I such Language find, such Words as these? Uncharitably Pious I could grow, Like pointed Arrows sharp Reproaches throw, And with as good a Grace deride your Woe. But my Compassion would my Lips restrain From galling Words, that might increase your Pain. I to support you would extend my Arms, And sooth your Anguish with the softest Charms. My tender Accents should your Fate condole, And balmy Language ease your tortur'd Soul. Why should not you with equal Zeal engage Your utmost Skill, my Anguish to asswage? How sad a Fate is mine, if I complain To God or Man, I make my Moan in vain. If by forbearing I expect Relief, And stop the stream of my complaining Grief, Its Flood increases when forbid to flow, And the rough Waves more formidable grow. In higher Seas collected Sorrows roll, And whelm their Deluge o'er my sinking Soul. Opprest beneath the pond'rous load I lye, Weary of living, yet deny'd to dye.
My Sons, my Servants, and my Substance gone, I am deserted, desolate, undone. Tho' you produce my Sores and wrinkled Skin As Witnesses of some enormous Sin, Yet they can only testify the weight Of those vast Woes, which my Complaints create. God, as a fierce, relentless Foe appears, And in his Fury me in pieces tears. He grinds his raging Teeth, and from his Eyes A Flame against me keen, as Light'ning flies. My Friends elated with prodigious Pride, Stand gaping on me, and my Grief deride. From distant parts they come, not to asswage My Anguish, but my Suff'rings to enrage. God has expos'd me likewise to the Bands Of fierce invaders from the neighb'ring Lands, And giv'n me up a Prey to impious hands. My Dwelling flourish'd, and I liv'd at ease, With Plenty blest, and the soft Joys of Peace; When God denounc'd his unexpected War, And with his Darts did me asunder tare. Me in his griping Arms th' Almighty took, And with such mighty force my body shook, That all my Members were in pieces broke. He sets me as a mark on rising ground, And his fierce Archers compass me around. In Showers of singing Death their Arrows fly, And in my tortur'd Entrails buried ly.
My Gall, so deep, so mortal is the Wound, As well as Blood, flows out and stains the Ground. Black throngs of Woes invade my frighted Soul, As crowding Billows on each other roll. Th' Almighty runs upon me in his rage, As a fierce Gyant eager to engage. Sackcloth I wear, of Ornaments despoil'd, And in the Dust my Glory lies defil'd. My Cheeks with Everlasting Weeping fade, And on my Eye-lids hangs a dismal shade. Yet no Injustice does in Iob appear, As you my Friends unkindly would infer, Pure is my Prayer, my Heart within sincere. If e'er a Man by my flagitious hand Vext and Opprest, has perish'd from the Land, Let not thy Womb, O Earth, his Blood conceal, But to the Light my black Offence reveal; That publique Shame and Pains may be my Fate, Which on the heinous Malefactor wait. Let God and Man their Bowels shut, when I In deadly Torment for Compassion cry. Conscience alone, my awful Judge within, Does not acquit me of enormous Sin, But God and all his sacred Angels, bear Witness to this, and will my Justice clear. From you my Friends, who my Distress deride, I turn to Heav'n, let Heav'n my Cause decide. If God his just Tribunal would ascend, To hear how you accuse, and I defend;
If he, as Arbitrator, would preside, And weigh the Reasons urg'd on either side; From your Indictment he would me release, And I, my Virtue clear'd, should dye in Peace. And, O, that God would soon my Tryal hear, And Judgment give before I disappear. For when a few more fleeting days are past, I in the Arms of Death shall lye embrac't. CH. XVII. Corruption my consuming Flesh devours, And Time has almost paid my number'd hours. The opening Grave invites me to her Womb, And in the Dust prepares to give me Room. But clear, before I dye, just God, my Fame, And cover my perfidious Friends with Shame: For do not pious Scoffers here abide, Who mock for God, and all my Groans deride? Their sharp Reproaches vex my Soul by Day, And chase by Night my wish'd-for Sleep away. Would God on high would suffer me to state My Case aright, and hear the whole Debate. For these my Friends against th' Assaults of Sense Have rais'd a strong impenetrable Fence. Such Gates of Darkness ne'er to be unbarr'd, Such Forts of gloomy Shades the Passes guard, That Reason's strongest Forces they repel, Entrench'd in Errors inaccessible. But sure the Righteous God will ne'er permit, That Men so blinded should to Judge me sit.
Those, who to flatter Heav'n their Neighbour wrong, Shall not their Power and prosp'rous days prolong. Destructive Suff'rings shall their Sons assail, Whose Eyes in looking after Aid shall fail. I was the People's Darling and Delight In former times; for when I came in sight, Thro' crowded Streets loud Acclamations rung, They to the Tabret my loud Praises sung; And on my Chariot Wheels transported hung. A waving Sea of Heads was round me spred, And still fresh Streams the gazing Deluge fed. As I advanc'd, the eager, wond'ring Throng Their Eye-balls strain'd, to see me pass along; They feasted on me with their greedy Eyes, And with Applauses fill'd th' ecchoing Skies. Now, for as sad an Object I am shown; My wondrous Troubles are Proverbial grown. The Men who curse their Foes with deadly spite, Wish Iob's Affliction on their heads may light. My Neighbours cry, when they my Suff'rings see, Is Iob thus chang'd? Good Heav'n's! it cannot be. My Eyes with Sorrow sunk within my Head, Of Light defrauded, seem already dead. So much my Flesh and Vigour I have lost, I seem an empty Shade, or groaning Ghost. But the Good Man will pity, not arraign Afflicted Iob, to aggravate his Pain.
He will revere this Providential Turn, Not judge my Person, but my Suff'rings mourn. Tho' he with wonder shall observe the Just, Are by th' Almighty trodden in the Dust, Yet he with sacred Indignation prest, Shall shun the Wicked, and his way detest. He for afflicted Virtue shall declare, And Innocence to prosp'rous Sin prefer. He shall the Heav'nly Path of Justice keep, However rough, embarast, dark and steep. Let him by bloody Out-laws be opprest, And Robbers, who the Way to Heav'n infest; Let Persecution's blackest Storm arise, And with a dismal Night deform the Skies; Let stern Affliction muster in the Air Her fiercest Troops, to drive him to despair; Let bitter Tongues their sharp Reproaches spend, And impious Scoffers galling Arrows send; The God-like Trav'ller shall his Path pursue, Whose very Suff'rings shall his Hopes renew. He'll with undaunted Courage make his way; Danger his Heart shall strengthen, not dismay. But you my Friends, to my Discourse attend, And weigh my Words your Errors to amend. For hitherto I can't among you find, One of a clear, judicious, equal Mind. You would in vain my Expectations raise, (If I Repent) of future prosp'rous Days.
For my appointed Hours are almost past, My Hopes and Projects Death will quickly blast. The Lamp of Life burns dimly in my Breast, Soon from its beating toil my weary Heart will rest. If for a happy Change you lay a Scheme, You but amuse me with an empty Dream, Terrestrial Joys are but an idle Theme. With my Designs and anxious Thoughts I part, Farewel ye Cares, that once possest my Heart. I to my Sorrows only can attend, In groans the Day, in groans the Night I spend. If Grief and Woe denominate the Night, I ne'er enjoy the Day, or see the Light. The gloomy Terrors that my Soul surround, Efface its marks, and Day with Night confound. Alass 'tis madness to expect that Rest And Restoration, which my Friends suggest; For by a fixt, irrevocable Doom, My Grave's prepar'd, my everlasting Home: Where friendly Death has laid my easy Bed, With Dust beneath, around with Darkness spread. I to the Grave have said, O Parent Grave, Me of thy Dust, a wretched Offspring save. To take me in, thy gloomy Arms extend, Thou art my Father, O be now my Friend; And me from hostile Life and Light defend. I to the Worm have said, my Brother Worm, From whom I differ but in Shape and Form;
Submitted to thy Power, I soon must lay This loathsome Heap of putrifying Clay. Where's then the Hope which you pretend to give, That I may yet in Peace and Pleasure live, If I Repent, to see it you must go Down to the Grave, and the Cold Shades below. There you may see how all my Hopes and I, In the same Grave together buried lye. CH. XVIII. Then Bilad thus: When wilt thou finish thy prolix Discourse, Sounding indeed enough, but void of Force? Consider what shall be alledg'd, and then To thy Objections we'll reply agen. What does thy wondrous Arrogance create? What self-sufficient Fulness thee elate? What secret Stores of Wisdom hast thou found, And what new Lights have thy Enquiries crown'd? That we such vile and sensless Creatures seem, And are but stupid Beasts in thy esteem? Impatience and ungovernable Rage, Thy furious Hands against thy Self engage. Thy wild Discourses from Distraction flow, And not Repentance, but Rebellion show. What to appease thy peevish Discontent, Shall God new Forms of Government invent? Shall Providence new ways and measures take, And steddy Nature her old Course forsake?
Shall Rocks and Mountains from their Pillars leap, Sink down, and humble their aspiring Heap? Shall Floods and rapid Rivers sullen grow, Bind up their Waters, and refuse to flow? Shall God his Truth and Justice disregard, Neglect the Righteous, and th' unjust reward? Shall he subvert all Order, with intent Thy vain Complaints and Clamours to prevent? O Iob, in spite of thy Objections, take This Rule as sure, that God will ever make A due distinction of the Good and Bad, And sparing those, his Wrath shall these invade. The Splendor of the Wicked shall decay, And rising Fogs shall choak his glorious Day. His brightest Beams, like short-liv'd Sparks of Fire, Or Flashing Light'ning shine, and strait expire. Thick Darkness equal to the Shades of Hell, Shall on his dismal Habitation dwell. Ne'er from without shall one kind Ray of Light, Or chearful Lamp within dispel the Night. He in his wisest steps shall unawares, Be fetter'd with inextricable Snares; He'll live in Trouble and perplexing Cares. By his Projections and his deep Designs, He his own Peace and Safety undermines. Into the Net himself has spread he'll run, Wisely destroy'd, and prudently undone. His Feet shall be entangled in the toil, And shouting Hunters seize him as their spoil.
Let him o'er Plains, or Hills, or Forrests stray, Inevitable Gins obstruct his way, Which shall entrap this roaming Beast of Prey. Invading Terrors shall his Soul affright, The Wretch shall fly, but perish in his Flight. His Bones the Pillars of his Fabrick crack, His Joynts grow feeble, and his Sinews slack. Fierce rav'ning Woes his Flesh and Strength consume, And Desolation in his heavy Doom. Death and Destruction o're his head impend; All his soft Pleasures shall in Torment end. The Pillars which his Cofidence did prop, Shall let the high presumptuous Structure drop, And in the Ruins bury all his Hope. The King of Terrors with his bloody Dart, Shall strike the pale Oppressor to the Heart; Then at his gloomy Wheels shall drag the Slave, In triumph to his subterranean Cave. Torments, destructive Plagues, and raging Pain, Shall horrid Inmates in his House remain. Triumphant Woe with hideous Terrors crown'd, Anguish with all her Agonies around, Wild Consternation with erected Hair, Yellings, Distress, and sullen mute Despair, Th' Apartments of his Dwelling shall divide, And dire Companions with him shall reside. Because his rich Possessions and Abode, By Violence were gotten, or by Fraud. When falling Floods of Fire, and Sulphur Showers, O'erturn'd high Sodom's and Gomorrah's Towers,
The flaming Inundation from the place, Swept off their Dwellings, and the impious Race. So shall the proud Oppressor be devour'd, Such Fire and Brimstone on his Palace pour'd; Which shall all Marks and Monuments destroy, Of the vile Wretch, that did the Seat enjoy. His Roots grown dry, shall perish in the ground, His Head and Limbs cut off shall lye around. In after-times he'll be unknown to Fame, Or mention'd only with Reproach and Shame. From off the Earth God's vengeful Darts shall chase The wicked Man, and all his hateful Race. No Offspring in his Dwelling shall remain, His Family and Honour to sustain. Ages to come with Horror shall relate His suddain Ruin, and his dismal Fate; As that he liv'd in, was amaz'd to see So strange a Turn, such Woe and Misery. So shall the Hopes of all the wicked end, Such Desolation does their House attend. CH. XIX. Then Iob reply'd: How long will you my righteous Cause perplex? How long my Ears with idle Speeches vex? Must Answers void of Sense and Argument, And grave Impertinence my Soul torment? You wound me with your contumelious words, And slanders sharper than the keenest Swords.
Iob in Affliction you refuse to know, And a shy Stranger's unconcernness show. Grant I have sinn'd, yet in my Flesh I bear Strokes of vindictive Justice so severe, That I with Reason might from Friends expect Commiseration, not such proud neglect. If you with such censorious Arrogance, And haughty words against me will advance; If you will still such black Indictments read, If you will still my Innocence implead, Consider coolly my afflicted State; Should your imperious scorn new Grief create, And to th' unequal load add greater weight? I by th' Almighty's Arm am overthrown, And prest beneath his heavy Vengeance groan. Inevitable Snares his hand has set, And drawn around me his destructive Net. To Heav'n with fruitless Accents I complain Of this hard measure, this excess of Pain, And Cry to be redress'd, but Cry in vain. By Heav'n forsaken, I am left a Prey To Woes, that me encompass every way. Inexorably Deaf th' Almighty stands, Rejects my Prayer, and minds not my Demands. He in my Paths has such Obstructions laid, And fenc'd me in with such a close Blockade; That I must ever lye without Relief In this dark Prison, this Strong-hold of Grief.
No golden thread of Light the way will show, And let me thro' this Labyrinth of Woe. Of all my Glory I am stript, the Crown From my dishonour'd Head is fallen down; I've lost my Power, my Children, my Renown. I'm perfectly destroy'd, I'm lost, undone And never to return, my Hope is gone. A miserable Object here I lye, A Wretch that would not live, and cannot dye. His Fury kindles of its own accord, And unprovok'd, he waves his glitt'ring Sword; Against me as his Foe, he throws his Dart, And yet he knows my Zeal, and upright Heart. Black Troops of Suffrings, Regimented Woes In Battle drawn, their swarming Throngs disclose; On me they come, and marking out the Ground, Th' Infernal Legions lye encamp'd around. Brethren and Kindred treat me as unknown, Break Nature's Bonds, and their own Blood disown. Familiar Friends, who kindly me embrac't, Forget me now, and all our Friendship past. Those of my Houshold in Rebellion rise, Mock me their Lord, and my Commands despise. I to my Servant for Assistance cry, He minds me not, but Scoffing passes by, And lets me helpless and neglected lye. My sore Disease does from my Presence fright My Wife, and makes her to abhor my sight.
Tho' I my earnest Supplication make, And beg and pray for our dear Childrens sake, Those tender Pledges of our mutual Love, Yet no entreaties her Compassion move. She will not stay to help me in distress, And by condoling words her Love express. Disdainful Youth and Children me despise, Tho' to salute them, from my Seat I rise. My bosom Friends, whom chiefly I before Esteem'd and lov'd, now chiefly me abhor. My Skin and Flesh are perish'd from the Bone, The Boils have spar'd my Mouth and Lips alone, To let me make my lamentable moan. Some Pity, O my Friends, some Pity take On my distress, for antient Friendship's sake. I am abandon'd, and despairing left, Of Riches, Honour, Children, Friends bereft. Remark the grievous Wounds my sore Disease Has made thro' all my Flesh, but what are these Compar'd with those, which in my Soul I feel, Inflicted by th' Almighty's fatal Steel? O, then in soft Compassion's Arms relent, Retract your Speeches, and my Fate lament. Will you assume the Priviledge of God, And when you please, afflict me with your Rod? Inhumane Friends! say, does it not suffice, That all consum'd with pain my Body lies; But you my Soul with ill Discourses wound, Empty of Sense, tho' they with Gall abound.
O, that my Speech was written, that my Words Were Register'd, and kept in safe Records! O, that an Iron Pen's repeated stroke, Would grave deep Furrows in the Marble Rock! Let Letters fill them up of inlaid Lead, That all to come may my Profession read. I solemnly pronounce, that I believe That my Redeemer does for ever live. When future Ages shall their Circuit end, And Bankrupt Time shall its last Minute spend, Then he from Heav'n in Triumph shall descend. He on the Surface of the Earth shall stand, And from the Grave his Captive Saints demand. The slumb'ring Dead shall waken at his Call, And from their Limbs their Leaden Chains shall fall. Victorious Life at his Command shall flee To vanquish Death, and set her Pris'ners free. It shall new warmth and vital Vigour spread, Thro' all the cold Apartments of the Dead. It shall in Triumph march thro' Shades beneath, Thro' all the dusty Galleries of Death. Th' invading Conquerour shall Sack the Grave, Force every Tomb, and rescue ev'ry Slave. Destruction's Empire shall no longer last, Death from her sad Dominions shall be chas't, And Desolation laid for ever wast. From opening Tombs th' enliven'd Dead shall rise, And to enjoy the Light lift up their wond'ring eyes.
Tho' Worms and Putrefaction shall consume This mortal Body in the silent Tomb, I shall revive, and from the Grave arise, And see my God with these corporeal Eyes. I for my Self shall see the blessed sight, For my own Profit, for my vast Delight. He shall my Virtue from your Slanders clear, Assert my Cause, and Iob pronounce sincere. This is th' unshaken Pillar of my Hope, This does my Soul opprest with Sorrow prop; That tho', as I have said, the rav'ning Worm Shall eat my Flesh, and break this mortal Form, My reunited Parts I shall assume, When my Redeemer does to Judgment come, For ever to be clear'd by an impartial Doom. But you my Friends, no doubt will still aver, That Persecuting me you do not err. You'll say, that in my Conduct may be found, For your Censorious words abundant ground. But of th' Almighty's Justice be afraid, His dreadful Vengeance will your Heads invade. He will from Heav'n consuming Wrath reveal, Against all fierce, uncharitable Zeal. The Day is coming, when the Judge supream Will your rash Words and Cruelty condemn. CH. XX. He said, and Zophar thus in heat reply'd: Such is thy Obstinacy, such thy Pride;
With such disdain thou dost our Reasons slight, And art so careful to exclude the Light; All thy own Words so full and weighty seem To thee, sufficient in thy own esteem: That I no farther Argument design'd, To Cure a Man so obstinately Blind. But since transported to a wild excess, Thou dost against thy Friends such Threats express; Since thou dost Heav'n with thy Complaints alarm, And mark us out for God's vindictive Arm; I must my setled Resolution break; For thus provok'd, who can forbear to speak? Thou dost upbraid us, as of Sense bereft, Without Compassion, without Justice left. That we Contempt and Shame would on thee pour, And like outrageous Beasts thy Life devour. But I that fully know thy gross mistake, Can't silent sit, but must an Answer make. Hast thou, who mak'st to Wisdom such pretence, Not yet remark'd the Course of Providence? How since the Earth's Foundations first were laid, Thro' all the Revolutions Time has made, The Triumphs of th' unjust have quickly past, And his vain Joys did but a moment last. Tho' his bright Head above the Clouds he reers, And mingles Lustre with contiguous Stars, O'erturn'd and ruin'd he deserts the Skies, And in the Dust dispers'd in Fragments lies.
Th' unrighteous perish with a swift decay, Like his own Ordure cast with Scorn away. Those who before his Glory did admire, Now seiz'd with Wonder, for his Place enquire. Astonish'd, they these questions oft repeat, Where can we find him now? where is his Seat? His Fame and short-liv'd Glory disappear, Like thin Illusions form'd of gawdy Air. Like wanton Dreams that in the Fancy play, Or empty Phantomes that by Twilight stray. The Eye that saw him ne'er shall see him more, Ne'er shall his House again unfold to him her Door. His Children strive t' appease the Poor in vain, These of their Suff'rings publiquely complain; Those to restore their Substance are compell'd, Which from the Poor their griping Father held. With Vice decrepit, he perceives within, The sad effects of his past youthful Sin. His wasted Flesh and putrifying Bones, Force him to utter never-ceasing moans. As he to Sin did with Affection cleave, So Sin too faithful him shall never leave. The guilty marks of his unbridled Lust, Are still his sad Companions in the Dust. Tho' Vice is by him greedily embrac't, And proves most sweet and grateful to his taste; Tho' the delicious Morsel, with his Tongue He rolls about, the Pleasure to prolong; Yet the sweet Meat he swallow'd down so slow, Does in his Bowels Gall and Wormwood grow.
It does like Poison, rage along his Veins, And gripes and racks him with tormenting pains. What if th' Oppressor Riches has devour'd, And down his Throat unmeasur'd Treasure pour'd? He cannot long th' unrighteous Load retain, His loathing Stomach with regret and pain, Shall cast the precious Surfeit up again. God shall his Belly of its Prey beguil, And from his Bowels wrest the wealthy Spoil. The profitable and delightful Sin, Which he has suck'd with so much pleasure in, Shall like a Viper gnaw and tare his Heart, And wound his Entrails, like a poison'd Dart. The Streams of Joy, and Rivers of Delight, Which he believ'd, would all his toil requite, Shall disappoint his hope, and in their stead, Amazing Floods of Sorrow shall succeed. For that his Neighbours wrongs may be redrest, Which he by Fraud or Violence opprest, He shall refund his wicked Wealth, and more Shall give what justly was his own before. Tho' he may Riches gorge, the painful Spoil, In massy Vomit quickly will recoil. The time it stays the bloated Glutton lies Distended to a vast Hydropic Size; But he no Strength or Nourishment shall reap From the crude Mass, and undigested heap.
Because the Poor despairing he has left, Whom he by Rapine of his Goods bereft. Because by open, or by secret Guilt, The Dwelling he has seiz'd another built. Therefore his inward Gripes and conscious Fear, With self-revenging Pains his heart shall tare. Convulsive Throws, and raging Agonies, Shall rack his Soul, and on his Bowels seize. The Riches he so eagerly did crave, With all his watchful Care he shall not save. His Heir, what Treasure he has left behind Shall ne'er enquire, for none he'll hope to find. When he shall most with Power and Wealth abound, With Guards encompass'd, and with Empire crown'd, Then suddain Mischiefs shall his Seat surround. Fierce Bands of Spoilers shall his Lands invade, And far away his Wealth shall be convey'd. When he designs his Riches to enjoy, And all his Senses with Delights to cloy, A dismal storm of Wrath Divine shall rise, And gath'ring Vengeance shall disturb the Skies. While he is feasting, free from Fear or Care, The Heav'n's shall hurl down unexpected War. God on his Head shall such a Tempest pour, As did thy Children in their Mirth devour. His Consternation and distracting Fear, Shall make him fly to scape the Sword and Spear; But a swift Arrow from an Iron Bow Shall overtake, and strike the Rebel thro'.
Officious Friends to heal his wounded Veins, Shall draw the bloody Weapon from his Reins, Whose glitt'ring point distain'd with issuing Gall, Shows certain Death attends his suddain fall. He shall in raging Pangs and Horror lye, Hopeless of Life, and yet afraid to dye. Against him God shall Storms and Plagues provide, And stores of Wrath in secret places hide. He his dark Caves and Magazines shall stow, With chosen Vengeance and collected Woe. From cleaving Clouds a fiery Tempest pour'd, Like that which on the Hills thy Flocks devour'd, Shall on his Substance and his House descend, And to destroy the Wretch its Fury spend. His Progeny, if any shall remain, Shall pass their dismal Days in Grief and Pain. Thus Heav'n by dreadful Judgments shall reveal, The Wickedness he did with Care conceal. The Earth shall all her Elements unite, Muster her Armies, and against him Fight. The Substance he has gain'd shall flow away, Like rapid Torrents, in that dreadful Day, When God provok'd by all his Crimes, shall come In Storms of Wrath th' Oppressor to consume. God to th' unjust this Portion shall divide, This sad Inheritance is on him ty'd; He's the right Heir, with him it shall abide.
CH. XXI. And then afflicted Iob reply'd: Forbear To interrupt me thus, with Patience hear And weigh my Arguments, while I proceed In my Defence; this I'll accept instead Of all the Consolation which from you Is to a Friend in such Affliction due. Sedately hear my Reasons out, and then Reproach and mock your suff'ring Friend agen. When I in bitter Anguish make my moan, Do I complain of cruel Man alone? I oft with Reason do, and must declare, That God's vindictive Arm is too severe. That I the mark of all his Weapons stand, While Men more guilty scape his vengeful Hand. But what if I of Man alone complain? Is my Complaint unjust, because 'tis vain? Have I not reason to indulge my Grief, When neither Man nor God afford Relief? Consider well my sad afflicted State, My unexampled Suff'rings will create Astonishment, and make you hold your Peace, And from reproaching me for ever cease. When I reflect, that Providence Divine Does on the Wicked, as on Fav'rites shine, That vile and irreligious Wretches cloy Their pamper'd Senses with Delight and Joy; Whose Skins grow smooth, and sleek with Fat and Rest, And no Invaders Arms their Peace molest:
While the mean time the Just and Godlike Kind, From Heav'n and Earth alike hard measure find; Are mark'd and singled out to undergo Th' Almighty's Anger, and th' Oppressors blow; Puzzled, confounded and amaz'd I stand, And can't forbear a Reason to demand Of this unequal Distribution, why The Impious thrive, the Just despairing lye. Here I from Heav'n Instruction would implore How to defend the Justice I adore. Why do the Wicked unmolested thrive, Flow in Abundance, and in Pleasure live? In Mirth and Ease they pass their Days away, Healthful in Riot, and in Age not Gray. In Triumph they the Regal Throne ascend, And far around their Empire they extend. With Health and Vigour blest, they live to see A flourishing and numerous Progeny. Protected from Assaults they dwell secure, And ne'er th' Almighty's scourging Rod endure. Their fruitful Flocks engender on the Hill, And with their Young their Herds the Vally fill. Their verdant Meadows pour such Riches forth, Strong Mowers groan to heave th' unweildy Birth. Their unexhausted, never-failing Field, Does a rich Harvest to the Reaper yield. Their Gardens flourish, and the Golden Fruit Bend down the laden Boughs, and kiss the Parent Root.
Their Children from their House in Flocks advance, Sport in the Streets, and o'er the Meadows dance. To highten yet the Pleasure of the Day, They take the Harp, and on the Timbrel play. They're ravish'd with the Singer's charming Voice, And at the Organ's chearful Sound rejoyce. In Ease and Wealth they spend their golden Days, And wearing by insensible decays, With years, and not with pains their Shoulders bend, And ripe with Age, they to the Grave descend. Therefore elated with prodigious Pride, Th' Almighty's Power and Precepts they deride. Religion's Heav'nly Graces they contemn, And God-like Saints, as cheated Fools, condemn. Th' obdurate Rebels arrogantly say, What is th' Almighty? why should we obey? What shall we get, if we in Praises spend Our Breath, and Prayers to Heav'n devoutly send? But as 'tis impious, so 'tis foolish too, Such Pride, and such Contempt of Heav'n to shew: This Man's own hand his Riches can't defend, On God whom he provokes, he must depend. Let him be rich, I can't his Conduct praise, Nor shall I imitate the Sinner's ways. For tho' 'tis certain that you grosly err, When you with so much Confidence aver, That the good Man God's favour still enjoys, But that his Fury all th' unjust destroys;
Yet by experience taught I must avow, That tho' not always, yet 'tis often so. I grant, destruction oft th' unjust invades, That oft the glory of the Wicked fades. Their impious Deeds th' Almighty oft incense, Who does his Judgments on their Heads dispence. He with his driving Wrath does often chase From off the Earth, this irreligious Race. They, as the Chaff, before the Tempest fly, Or Stubble born by Whirlwinds thro' the Sky. Their Guilt th' Almighty treasures up with care, And stores of Wrath does for their Sons prepare. Their Progeny shall suffer for their Crime, And they shall live to see that dismal time. Their Lips shall drink of God's embitter'd Bowl, And their dim Eyes shall in Destruction rowl. What Comfort, what Delight shall they derive From all their Offspring, who shall them survive; When an untimely Violence has shut Their Eye-lids, and their Days in sunder cut? Thus that the wicked suffer I assert, But 'tis not all, nor yet the greatest part. I grant, the Just too sometimes prosp'rous are, But they more often Pain and Trouble bear. Yet who shall to th' Almighty's ways object? Who shall to guide the World, his Hand direct? Must always God flagitious Men consume, And ne'er the Righteous to Affliction doom?
Must this distinction always be exprest, Because you fancy this becomes him best? Does not th' All-searching God exactly know, And judge blest Saints above, and mighty Kings below? Who then to teach him, Knowledge will pretend, And show him how his Government to mend? One in his Vigour, and his Strength full grown, To whom enfeebling Aches are unknown, Whose Breasts and Sides congested Fat distends, And thro' whose Bones a Marrow Flood descends, Shall lye extended in the Grave beneath, Lopt by an unexpected stroke of Death: Another wretched Suff'rer who has spent His mournful days in Grief and Discontent, In tort'ring Pains and bitter Anguish lies, Nor till he's worn with ling'ring Sickness, dies. The friendly Grave does both alike embrace, And all Distinction's former marks efface: The Worm alike does on their Bodies feast, And mingling Dust, the Dead together rest. Thus Troubles Men promiscuously invade, And Death alike befalls the Good and Bad. These Dispensations no regard express To this Man's Crimes, or that Man's Righteousness. Nor does the Love or Wrath of God appear By what he gives, or makes us suffer here. I know my Friends, by what you have exprest, Th' imaginations lodg'd within your Breast.
Your inward thoughts your suff'ring Friend abuse, And tho' the wicked only you accuse In gen'ral Speeches, yet I plainly see What you assert of them, you aim at me. For often you disdainfully demand, Where does the wicked Prince's Palace stand? Who does the Dwelling where he flourish'd know? Who its Remains and Monuments can show? But can't the meanest Man that passes by, To this demand convincingly reply? Ask of the next you meet, and he will tell, Where now the wicked unmolested dwell. He'll point, and show the Towers where they abide, The marks and tokens of their prosp'rous Pride. 'Tis plain, they often flourish, tho' 'tis true, That Vengeance sometimes does their Crimes pursue. From present Troubles some are kept with care, For greater Shame, and Judgments more severe. God shall in solemn Triumph lead them forth, To suffer publique, ignominious Wrath. They Fat for Ruin, and for Slaughter fed, With Garlands crown'd, and Crouds around them spred, Are to Destruction's bloody Altar led. Oft on the Wicked dreadful Judgments wait, But Power and Plenty is their usual Fate. Aw'd by their Wealth and Greatness, Men forbear To tell them what their Crimes and Dangers are. Elated, and impatient of Reproof, They at the wisest Admonitions scoff.
They're Great above the fear of Punishment, Too wise to own their Errors, and repent. The proud Oppressor's Death will often vye With his past Life, and great prosperity; For, as he liv'd in Pride and State, he'll dye. His mourning Friends with sad magnificence, With honourable Pomp, and vast expence, Shall in the Dust th' ungodly heap inter, And paint and carve his stately Sepulcher. The Corps embalm'd with wondrous Cost and Art, Shall rest entire, and ound in every part, That 'twill a living Watchman posted there To guard the Dead, not a Dead Corps appear. He in the Grave shall find a sweet repose, From Cares deliver'd, and from threatning Foes. The Men who live, or who are yet unborn, Shall follow him, and all File off in turn. He is not more unhappy than the rest, His Fate is common to the worst and best. Why then do you pretend, that prosp'rous days I yet might see, would I amend my ways? Experience your Assertion contradicts, And shows, that Heav'n the Righteous oft afflicts: That the best Men prodigious Suff'rings bear, While God is pleas'd great Wickedness to spare. CH XXII. Then Eliphaz: If undefil'd thou dost thy Virtue keep, Is God oblig'd? does he the Profit reap?
Were all thy Days in pure Religion spent, Would that th' Almighty's Happiness augment? When he does strictly Righteousness enjoyn, Does he his own Advancement seek, or Thine? If thou art Good the Profit is thy own, God needs thee not, he on his Heav'nly Throne Crown'd with Essential Bliss, in Triumph its, Unmeasur'd Bliss which no increase admits. Does he in Wrath attempt thy overthrow, Fearing in time thou shouldst too Potent grow? I grant thy Suff'rings great and numerous are, But with thy Guilt they just Proportion bear. Justice Divine its Banks ne'er overflows, All monstrous Suff'rings, monstrous Crimes suppose. Either thy Neighbour's Pledge thou hast detain'd, And by Extortion hast his Substance drain'd: Or of his Garment thou hast stript the Poor, And sent him Naked from thy cruel Door. Or to the Man with burning Sunbeams fry'd, At his last Gasp thou hast thy Spring deny'd. Or thou hast seen thy hungry Neighbour dye For want of Bread, which thou wouldst not supply. Or else unjustly to the Rich and Great, Thou hast decreed another's Land and Seat. While thou the mournful Widow didst oppress, And crush without Remorse the needy Fatherless. For some such Crime tho' secret and unknown, Thou dost beneath this heavy Vengeance groan.
For this, with Snares thou art encompass'd round, And suddain Fears thy trembling Soul confound. Thick Shades and Darkness o'er thy Dwelling spread, And dismal Floods of Grief whelm o'er thy Head. Does not th' Almighty sit enthron'd on high, On the steep Convex of th' Empyreal Sky, Whence with a quick and easy Prospect he Can all his Works and Worlds around him see? Yet thou dost act, as if thou didst believe, Thou couldst th' Almighty's searching Eye deceive: As if thou saidst, how can th' Almighty know, How can he mind and judge of things below? Vast is the Gulph of Air that lies between, And from his sight thick Clouds the Sinner skreen. He walks the happy Circuit of the Sky, Nor casts on this low dirty Ball an Eye. Uninterrupted Pleasure him employs, While he alone his Blissful Self enjoys. Our Good or Evil Deeds, our Joys or Pains, Unworthy of his Notice, he disdains. Lo, from thy Lips whate'er expressions break, This is the Language which thy Actions speak. Didst thou with due Attention ne'er behold, The Paths in which the Wicked trod of Old; Who from the Earth for their enormous Crime, Were hurried off by Death before their time; Who to th' gen'ral Flood became a Prey, And with their Sons and Wealth were swept away.
These did th' Almighty's sacred Laws deride, Contemn'd his Favour, and his Threats defy'd. They cry'd, if we Religion's Rule regard, Who will our Pains, and pious Zeal reward? Yet God their Houses with Abundance blest, Enlarg'd their Empire, and their Stores increast. But who was by their Wealth to Envy mov'd, Or who their impious Words or Ways approv'd? For tho' like thee, they Peace a while enjoy'd, Yet they at last were from the Earth destroy'd. But Righteous Men have still the Joy to see, Justice Divine rebuke Impiety. Th' Almighty they'll exalt in Songs of Praise, Who does his Glory by such Judgments raise. They shall th' Oppressor's Pomp and Power deride, When Heav'n's just Vengeance thus corrects their Pride. The wicked perish, while the pious Race Of Patriarchs, whence our Descent we trace, Favour'd by Heav'n, possest their ancient place. They never were to Desolation doom'd, Never by such prodigious Fire consum'd, As raining down from Heav'n in flaming Showers, Destroy'd proud Sodom's and Gomorrah's Towers. Wherefore, O Iob, to God with speed return, With deep Contrition thy Offences mourn; O'erwhelm'd with Shame and Sorrow, prostrate lye Before his Feet, and for Compassion cry. Let humble Prayer and penitential Tears, Appease Heav'n's Wrath, and thus remove thy Fears.
When God is pleas'd, all Nature will express A forward Zeal t' advance thy Happiness. God's gracious Aspect, with its Heav'nly Light, Will dissipate this dark tempestuous Night. Joy will arise, and with its cheerful Ray, Chase all these sullen Clouds of Grief away. Will Iob prophane and impious Maxims learn From stupid Heathens, who from all concern From Things below th' Almighty's Care exempt, And thus expose Religion to Contempt? No, let the Law which God of old reveal'd To humane Kind, which yet is unrepeal'd; Or which should written in thy Heart abide, Be made thy Rule of Life, and sacred Guide. Within thy Breast with pious Care record His blest Instructions, and his Heav'nly Word. If thou sincerely wilt thy Life devote To virtuous Deeds, and wilt with Zeal promote Th' Almighty's Honour and Religions Cause, By strict observance of his Righteous Laws; He all thy dismal Ruins will repair, And all thy reunited Fragments rear. He'll raise thy Head now buried in the Dust, And make thee midst the Clouds thy glitt'ring Turrets thrust. He'll fix thy Pillars deeper in the ground, And stronger Bulwarks shall thy House surround. He shall thy Plenty and thy Peace restore, And give thee Empire wider than before.
Thou shalt no more of Vengeance be afraid, No Terrors more shall thy safe Tents invade. Thy Neighbours shall with Wonder thee behold, With Cedar blest, adorn'd with Gems and Gold. Thou such prodigious Treasures shalt command, Thou shalt, like Dust, collect thy Golden Sand. Thy rich, but disregarded Ophir Oar, Shall lye like Stones on every River's Shore. Wedges of Silver from the purest Mine Pil'd high in Heaps, shall round thy Dwelling shine. Against thy Foes th' Almighty will contend, Protect thy Plenty, and thy Life defend. Thou with his Favour shalt be ever blest, A vast Reward exceeding all the rest. Thou shalt derive from him thy chief Delight, The Thoughts of whom does now thy Soul affright. Up thou shalt look with Courage, and employ Thy Thoughts on Heav'n with Confidence and Joy. Thou to th' Almighty shalt have free Access, And to his Throne prevailing Prayers address. When thou art heard, thy Vows in Trouble made, Shall with a glad and thankful Heart be paid. All thy designs th' Almighty shall approve, And thy decrees will ratify above. Before thee he shall Heav'nly Light display▪ To solace, and to guide thee in thy way. He shall protect thy Paths, thy Counsels bless, And crown thy Undertakings with Success. When wicked Men shall be around destroy'd, Stript of the Power and Wealth they once enjoy'd:
Thou shalt not feel th' Almighty's wrathful hand, But undisturb'd enjoy thy fruitful Land. For God the humble Person will regard, And with his Blessing will his Love reward. Nor shall thy Prayer sent to th' Almighty's Throne Obtain his Favours for thy self alone; If thou shalt Supplication for them make, Thy Neighbours round shall prosper for thy sake. CH. XXIII. But Iob reply'd: From you I find my hopes of Ease are vain, Your Consolations aggravate my Pain. I after all your Applications find The bitter Anguish raging in my Mind. The sharp redoubled Strokes by which I bleed, Do all my Cries and loudest Groans exceed. You give me prudent Counsel to acquaint My self with God, but this is my Complaint, That from my Sight he does with Care retreat; O, that I knew where I might find his Seat. I would before him justify my Cause, And shew I'm no Contemner of his Laws. I would convincing Arguments prepare, And all my Reasons orderly declare, To prove my angry Judge is over-strict, And does too rig'rous Punishments inflict. I long to know what Charge he would produce, Of what black Crimes he would my ways accuse.
Let him detect those Crimes to me unknown, And I'll the Guilt with Shame and Sorrow own. I will with Patience my Affliction bear, And ne'er complain his Strokes are too severe. If I an equal Hearing could procure, Would he controul me with his Soveraign Power, And not a calm and fair Debate endure? No, he would give me Strength and Confidence, And favourably hear my just Defence. Then I might state my righteous Case at large, And God would clear me from your groundless Charge. I fain would know where I my God might find, For still he's just, and long I found him kind, Tho' grown of late estrang'd he has my search declin'd. If I go forward to the Eastern Coast To seek him out, I mourn my labour lost. If I turn backward to the Western Seats To find him there, he still my Hope defeats. I roam thro' populous Northern Kingdoms, where His mighty Works and Wonders most appear, Yet is my strict Enquiry fruitless there. I try if Southern Climates will reveal His Seat, but still he does himself conceal. But tho' the Righteous God will not appear In Judgment now, my Innocence to clear; This is my Comfort, that his searching Eye Does all my Thoughts, my Heart and Ways descry: When he my Virtue tries, which I desire, I shall, like Gold, come purer from the Fire.
I with unerring Feet have always trod, In Virtue's Paths, and kept the Heav'nly Road. I ne'er the rough and steepy Way declin'd, But to th' Almighty's Will, my own resign'd. Thro' threat'ning Dangers I my passage made, Of no low Gulph, or sharp Ascent afraid. Heav'n's sacred Precepts still I did obey, And always shunn'd the smooth, but crooked Way, In which lost Sinners from their Maker stray. I have preserv'd th' Almighty's sacred Word, As wealthy Men their choicest Treasures Hoard. To save the precious Store, I ever shew'd As much Concern, as for my daily Food. But tho' th' Eternal Mind did always see These pregnant Proofs of my Integrity, Inflexibly resolv'd he'll ne'er relent, Nor of his harsh proceeding e'er repent. Confirm'd in Wrath he will not change his Mind, Never for me a tender Passion find. My Suff'rings to accomplish he'll proceed, And execute the Wrath he has decreed. The Righteous by him often are opprest, For secret Reasons lodg'd within his Breast. This is his Pleasure, who shall dare dispute His Soveraign Will, and Empire Absolute? Me to his Throne of Grace would he admit, His Clemency my Virtue would acquit: But on he comes his Creature to devour, Arm'd with resistless, Arbitrary Power.
Therefore when I my great Creator see Cloath'd with August, Imperial Majesty, I at his awful Presence shake with fear, Nor can the Sight of Soveraign Glory bear. When on his Terrors I reflect, I feel An inward Dread, and struck with Horror reel. My sinking Heart dissolves within my Breast And bitter Sorrows interrupt my rest; Because he did not cut me off, before These dismal Shades and Troubles whelm'd me o'er: Because he ne're would let the friendly Grave From so much Woe his wretched Creature save. CH. XXIV. Why do my Friends Erroneous Doctrines teach That certain Sufferings here the Wicked reach? God does conceal the Times and Seasons when His Vengeance shall destroy flagitious Men. Ev'n those who most his righteous Laws obey, And mark with care his Providential way, Are unacquainted with his Judgment Day. They know of no determin'd, certain Times, When he will visit Mens provoking Crimes. Some Men remove with their perfidious Hands, The Marks that bound appropriated Lands. They take their Neighbours Goats from off the Rocks, And from the Airy Downs their Woolly Flocks. With wicked Spoils they feast their Luxury, And gorg'd with Rapine on their Couches lye.
They the poor Widow of her Ox defraud, They rob the Orphan, and the Deed applaud. These Robbers scare the Helpless from their way, Who leave the Road, and o'er the Forrest stray. Th' affrighted Trav'llers to the Mountains fly, And to escape their Rage in Cavers lye. Other vile Men frequented Towns forsake, And their Abode in desart Places make. Where Wild and Salvage grown, at Dawn of Day They leave their secret Dens to hunt their Prey. These Men by Plunder and by Rapine thrive And in a Wilderness in Plenty live. They suddain Inroads on their Neighbours make, And from their Fields by Force their Harvest take. They from another's Vine the Clusters tear And the rich Spoil to their own Presses bear. To their Strong-Holds their Booty they convey; They strip the Lab'rers, make them naked stray, Expos'd to Cold by Night, to Heat by Day. The Wretches when they hear a Tempest rise, And see the gath'ring Clouds o'erspred the Skies, To neighb'ring Rocks their Flight for Refuge bend; Their craggy Arms the friendly Rocks extend; Embrace, and hide them in their Clefts, and show Less hardness than the cruel Robbers do. Besides their Substance, which they make their Prey, By Force they take the Owners too away:
For from their Coverts they Incursions make Into the Country round, and Captives take Poor Herdsmen, Trav'llers, lab'ring Swains, and wrest The struggling Infant from the Nurse's Breast. They lead them stript and starving to their Caves, And treat the helpless Creatures, as their Slaves. Tho' their ill-gotten Substance be immense, Yet they despoil with salvage Violence Their hungry Captives of that little Fruit Which they had glean'd their Vigour to recruit. They make them labour in their Olive-yard, But with redoubled Stripes their toil reward. They ne'er permit them who their Vineyards dress, And tread the swelling Clusters in the Press, To take, tho' faint, a Grape from off the Vine, Or tast, tho' fry'd with Heat, one drop of Wine. These desp'rate Outlaws distant Towns invade, Their cruel Yoke is on whole Cities laid. In whose sad Streets the suff'ring People groan, And make, like wounded Men, a dismal Moan. There is, besides this more audacious Race, Whose open Crimes the Noon-day Sun out-face; A sort of secret Sinners, who require Darkness to hide them, and from Light retire. For instance, at th' uncertain Dawn of Day, The lurking Murd'rer does his Neighbour slay. Then full of Fear away th' Assassin flies, And all the Day in some close Covert lies.
Then turning Thief, by Night he comes abroad, And with stoll'n Substance does his Shoulders load. His guilty Joys th' Adulterer delays, And for the Evening's doubtful Twilight stays. To pass unseen he muffles up his Head, And steals in secret to the Harlot's Bed. Hot with unbridled Flames, he in the Dark Breaks Houses up, on which he set his mark The Day before, where to asswage his Lust; But he can only to the Darkness trust: Before the Morn returns, he takes his Flight, He hates the Day, and courts the welcome Night. For if discover'd, all the marks of Fear And Consternation, in his Looks appear. To this vile Crew you may the Pyrate add, Who puts to Sea the Merchant to invade, And reaps the Profit of another's Trade. He sculks behind some Rock, or swiftly flies From Creek to Creek, rich Vessels to surprize. By this ungodly Course the Robber gains, And lays up so much Wealth, that he disdains And mocks the poor, unprofitable toil Of those, who plant the Vine, or till the Soil. Others as Vile, deflower a Virgin first, And then destroy the Offspring of their Lust Within the Mother's Womb, to hide their Shame, And scape Reproaches that would blast their Fame.
The poor and helpless Widow they abuse, And Reparation cruelly refuse. Their Power and Threats the timorous Judges awe, And to their side the Great and Mighty draw. For if the Villains, on pretence of Wrong, Assail the mighty, be they ne'er so strong, Can they against Assassins make Defence? Whose Life is safe from secret Violence? Tho' by repeated Vows they should declare, That their Intentions inoffensive are; And make such solemn Promises, that you May think you're safe, because you think them true; Yet they will wait, and all occasions watch, The mischief they design'd you, to dispatch. These in their wicked Courses, free from fear, Because they live unpunish'd, persevere. 'Tis true, th' Almighty sees their Insolence, But unconcern'd, no Vengeance does dispence. The troubled Skies with Lightning grows not red, Nor does his Thunder strike Oppressors dead. Th' Eternal pours no dreadful Viols forth, On Rebels worthy of exalted Wrath. Among 'em no strange Plagues are sent abroad, No Tempests Vengeance on their heads unload. In Peace and Plenty they securely live, And from Impunity their Pride derive. All things to make them happy here comply, And, as they liv'd, they unmolested Dye.
They to the Grave a quiet, easy Bed In Peace, as much as others, are convey'd, Part of the long Procession of the Dead. With grievous Sickness they are ne'er distrest, Nor dye with long tormenting Pains opprest. Gently cut down by Fate, like Ears of Corn When fully ripe, they to the Tomb are born. By slow degrees they sink and wear away, Their Death's a kind, insensible decay. Their Streams of Life, like peaceful Rivers flow, And when they dye, they gently melt, as Snow. God no such marks of Wrath does on them set, But that the Mothers may their Sons forget. Their Bodys hang not by the publick way, To Men a Terror, and to Beasts a Prey. But Men in Pomp their Carcasses inter, To be a Feast for Worms, as others are. There they enjoy profound Tranquility, And buried with them their Oppressions lye. When they are Dead, the Age that next succeeds, As quickly will forget their wicked Deeds, As a lost Tree by Time to Atomes worn, Or by a riving Storm to Shivers torn. I these remarks deliberately have weigh'd, And know no strong Objections can be made. I on the Truth of this Discourse rely, And all Opposers Arguments defy.
CH. XXV. Then Bildad answer'd, Why does Iob delight Thus to reflect on Wisdom Infinite? Wilt thou th' Almighty's Providence correct, And charge him with Injustice, or Neglect? As if he ne'er did Righteousness regard, And did the Impious, not the Just reward? Or else as if he ne'er did interpose, But doubtful Chance did all Events dispose. Should not his awful Majesty deter Thy Arrogance, and make thee shake with fear? His Creatures never should debating stand, But strait obey his absolute Command. This low Terrestrial World does not alone, His Soveraign Rule and Jurisdiction own; His Empire is of unconfin'd extent, O'er all the wide Etherial Continent; O'er all the liquid Regions of the Air, And all the shining Islands floating there. He Peace preserves in the bright Realms above, And makes the Spheres in beauteous order move. All the Seraphic, glorious Hierarchy, The Pure and God-like People of the Sky, Adore the depths of Providence Divine, And to th' Almighty's Will, their Wills resign. And yet shall discontented Iob debate His Case with God, and quarrel with his Fate? His Empire to protect, and to controul Uproar and Strife, what Troops can he enroll?
What mighty Armys can th' Almighty head? What numerous Brigades to Battel lead? Myriads of Angels lye encampt on high, His Houshold Squadrons that defend the Sky: Sabres of Flame th' Immortal Warriors weild, And now in iery Chariots take the Field; Now high in Air the Wing'd Battalions rise; And glorious War hangs hovering in the Skies. Along th' inferiour Air at his Command, His must'ring Meteors Regimented stand. Tempests of Thunder, Whirlwinds, Rain and Fire To fight th' Almighty's Battels will conspire. All Nature at his beck, if Rebels rage, Strait take up Arms, and on his Part engage. Of such Extent is his Imperial Power; With so much Ease he can his Foes devour. Yet is his Goodness equal to his Might; The Sun his unexhausted Sea of Light, Lavish of Glory, does to all dispence His chearing Beams, and fruitful Influence. Wide as the World, God has his Table spred, At his Expence are all his Creatures fed. Who of his Regal Bounty does not tast? Whose Stores, if not supply'd by him, can last? If on his Power and Goodness we depend, And can to nothing as a Debt pretend; We murmur and complain without a Cause, When he his Blessings, not our Right, withdraws.
Besides our various Crimes which Heav'n provoke, Justly expose us to his wrathful stroke. Who can before his high Tribunal stand, Plead Innocence, and his Discharge demand? Can Man be Clean, born of degenerate Race, And scape the Leaven that infects the Mass? Never a wholsom, unpolluted Stream, From an impure, infected Fountain came. Can a wild Vine a generous Vintage bring? From a base Stock, can noble Branches spring? The Constellations that adorn the Sky, Reveal their Spots to God's All-searching Eye, Then what foul Stains will he in Man descry? In Man, a worthless Worm, who turns to Dust And Putrefaction, whence he sprang at first. CH. XXVI. Then pious Iob did Bildad thus bespeak: To chear the Mourner, and to help the weak Thou hast a happy, masterly Address, A charming way, that ne'er can miss Success. How pertinent, how clear is thy discourse, No sullen Sorrow can resist its force. Thy blest Instructions, and thy grave Advice, Can teach the Blind, and make the stupid Wise. Display'd by thy Divine Discourse I find A Heav'nly Day irradiates my Mind. Thou hast thy point by solid Reason prov'd, And like an Oracle, all doubts remov'd.
What knowing Spirit has thy Bosom fir'd, For thou hast argu'd, as a Man inspir'd? But say to whom dost thou address thy Speech? Am I so weak, and of so short a reach, That I must still be taught the Common Theme Of God's Imperial Sway, and Power supreme? I could th' Almighty's wondrous Works with ease Like you recite, as for example these. He all the wanton Monsters form'd that play, And bound above the Bosom of the Sea; Wild Water-Gyants, hideous Forms that reign Lords of the vast, inhospitable Main: A salvage Race that range the liquid Fields, And fill with Rapine all the wavy Wilds. All the mute Nations of the deep Abyss, And Finny People of the Floods are his. To hide from God its sad Inhabitants, And dusky Realms, Hell thicker Darkness wants. Compacted Shadows, and substantial Night Elude the Sun's, but not th' Almighty's Sight. Death does in vain her sable Covering spread, And in her secret Vaults lok up the Dead: Th' Almighty's Eye does all her Spoils survey, And no distinction knows of Night or Day. He o'er the empty Space displays on high The blue Expansion of the Northern Sky. He hangs the pond'rous Earth in liquid Air, And his Command and Providential Care, Are the sole Pillars that support it there.
He bids the loose and fluid Clouds sustain Imprison'd Tempests, and suspend the Rain. Distended with the Waters in 'em pent, Their Wombs hang low in Air, but are not rent. But then at his Command, successive Drops Distill from Heav'n, and crown the Farmer's Hopes. Lest his high Throne above expression bright, With deadly Glory should oppress our sight, To break the dazling Force, he draws a Skreen Of sable Shades, and spreads his Clouds between. He raises rocky Bounds around the Deep, And does the raging Waves in Prison keep. That, whilst as order'd by Alternate sway, The Sun and Moon shall rule the Night and Day; The Foaming Surges rolling o'er the Strand, Might not a Deluge spread, and drown the Land. The Hills and Mountains whose aspiring tops Appear the Pillars, and unshaken props Reer'd to sustain the Heav'n's expanded Roof, Tremble with Fear, and shake at his Reproof. He with his mighty Power the Sea divides, And ploughs deep Furrows in its wounded Sides. At his Command the threatning Billows rise, Mix Waters with the Clouds, and lave with foam the Skies. But in a moment he corrects their Pride, And bids the Sea repel her swelling Tide. Uproar is husht, the Ocean at his Frown Shrinks in, and calls it's tow'ring Surges down. The trembling Waves creep softly to the Shore, And Tempests over-aw'd no longer roar.
The Heav'nly Spheres around in Order turn'd, With clust'ring Constellations he adorn'd. He the great Serpent form'd, and bid him rowl His Starry Volumes round the Northern Pole. These of his Works are part, but still I own To us his Wonders are but little known. To such extent who can his Reason stretch, As his vast Power and Providence can reach? His boundless Wisdom who can comprehend? Who will to search the dark Abyss descend? Who can his Wonders number, who declare Of Energy divine the utmost Sphere? CH. XXVII. The Pious Iob here paus'd a while, and stay'd For their reply; but no reply was made. Then he his grave and wise Discourse revives, And said, as God my great Creator lives, Who has to hear and judge my Cause deny'd, And my vext Soul with sharp Affliction try'd, While the warm blood dilates my winding Veins, And in my Nostrils while my Breath remains; That Breath th' Almighty did himself inspire, Gently to fan and feed the vital Fire; No Falshood will I mix in this debate, Nor with perfidious Lips express Deceit. Under the Censure of my Friends I lye Charg'd with Offences of the deepest Dye, Oppression, Fraud, and deep Hypocrisy.
Shall I acquit their rash Censorious Tongue, Confess th' Indictment, and my Virtue wrong? Forbid, O Heav'n, that I should ever own So black a Charge of Crimes to me unknown. I till I Dye will stedfastly assert The pure Intention of my upright Heart; From this Profession will I ne'er depart. Conscience, whose Court of Justice is within, Can ne'er accuse me of delib'rate Sin. The wicked and their ways I so detest, That might I feed Revenge within my Breast, And might I have permission to bestow The greatest Curse, upon my greatest Foe, I would desire that Foe might all his days Delight in vicious Men, and vicious Ways. What if the Sinner's Magazines are stor'd With the rich Spoils that Ophir's Mines afford? What if he spends his happy Days and Nights, In softest Joys and undisturb'd Delights? Where is his Hope at last, when God shall wrest His trembling Soul from his reluctant Breast? Must he not then Heav'n's Vengeance undergo, Condemn'd to Chains, and Everlasting Woe? This is his Fate; but often here below, Justice o'ertakes him, tho' it marches slow. And when the Day of Vengeance does appear, The Wretch will cry, but will th' Almighty hear? If bath'd in Tears Compassion he invokes, The unrelenting Judge will multiply his Strokes.
His vain Complaints, and unregarded Prayer, Will drive the raving Rebel to despair. Or will he e'er with Confidence apply Himself to God, and on his Aid rely? Will he not rather cease in his distress, His Prayers to Heav'n hereafter to address? Do not disdain to learn, and I'll reveal, How the just God does with the Wicked deal. To you some secret Methods I'll detect, By which he's pleas'd his Conduct to direct. All you your selves have by Experience found, For my Assertions there's abundant ground. I grant that some, not all the wicked Band, As you assert, feel God's vindictive Hand. And this should make the proud Oppressor dread, Lest Vengeance should assail his guilty Head. Children he multiplies to be devour'd By ling'ring Famine, or the raging Sword. Untimely Death his Offspring shall consume, And sink them deep in black Oblivion's Womb. His Wives well pleas'd to see the Tyrant's Fate, Shall joyful Mourners on his Funeral wait. Tho' he does Gold in lofty Mountains heap, And as the dust, has Silver Treasure cheap, Tho' Robes of State wrought with Sidonian Skill, And rich embroider'd Vests his Wardrobe fill; Yet shall the Just and Upright Man divide His precious Treasures, and his Purple Pride.
The Judge's righteous Sentence shall restore The Wealth he wrested from the injur'd Poor. His Dwelling, like the Moths, shall soon decay, Which settles in a Garment for a Day; But suddainly is crush'd, and swept away. Or like the Lodge, a Keeper does erect, His Garden Fruit or Vintage to protect; Which, when the Swain has gather'd in his Store, Is pull'd as quickly down, as reer'd before. When Heav'n th' Oppressor shall of Life bereave, The Wretch no Funeral Honours shall receive. His cursed Corps expos'd to open Day, Shall lye to ravening Beasts and Birds a Prey. While one with open Eyes can look around, Heav'n shall the Man, his Race, and Name confound. A dreadful Inundation of Distress, And Woes like thronging Waves, his Soul shall press. An unexpected Storm of Wrath shall rise, And in the Night, the careless Man surprise. An Eastern Whirlwind shall his Palace tear, Catch up, and with its rapid Eddy bear Th' Oppressor far away thro' Wilds of Air. God shall his fatal Darts against him throw, Nor will he spare him, when involv'd in Woe. The miserable Man for Mercy crys, In vain he weeps, and prays, in vain he flys. His Neighbours round shall his just fall deride, Applauding Heav'n, that thus corrects his Pride.
I always thought the righteous God, at last Would on the wicked sure Destruction cast; Nay, some his Wrath does in their blooming blast: But taught by observation, I assert, That he is pleas'd to let the greater part, In Peace and Splendour pass their happy years, And long their day of Punishment defers. Whilst oft the Just that serve and love their God, Bewail their Wounds inflicted by his Rod. This puzzling Conduct, these mysterious ways Create my Trouble, and my Wonder raise. But you, because your Reason can't unty The hard perplexing Knot, the Fact deny. As if you thought your narrow Wit and Sense, Could reach th' unathom'd Depths of Providence. In things below your Wisdom may appear, But these are Heights that far surmount your Sphere. CH. XXVIII Advent'rous Man may with successful pains, Dissect the Ground, trace all the shining Veins Of Silver Oar, and wrest with labour forth Its golden Entrails from th' embowel'd Earth. The sweaty Smelter finds a proper place, Where from the Dross to purge the precious Mass. Men dig out pondrous Iron from the Mine, And Molten Copper in the Flames refine. The Miner earches all the Seats beneath, Gloomy and lonesome, as the Shades of Death.
Where Nature far withdrawn from humane sight, To mould and shape her Min'rals does delight. To fashion precious Stones with curious Art, And hardness due to Metals does impart. They all the Earth's dark Bowels open lay, And make the Central Shades acquainted with the Day. But often subterranean Floods invade The Miner's Caves, thro' which he cannot wade. With wondrous Toil the Men their Works maintain, And from the Mine the flowing Deluge drain. While fruitful Trees and bending Ears of Corn Laden with Bread, the Earth above adorn; With sparkling Gems its inward Parts are stor'd, And fatty Minerals full of Fire afford. Here beauteous Saphirs far remote from Day, Do a blue Heav'n midst common Stones display. Here Nature scatters with a lavish hand, And with the Rubbish mingles golden Sand. No Fowl of Heav'n, no not the Vulture's Eye Fam'd for quick Sight, did e'er these Seats descry. Those Sons of Pride the Lyons never found These Caves, and dark Recesses under ground. To Beasts and Birds these Regions are unknown, By Men discover'd, and by Men alone: By Men who cut thro' hardest Rocks their way, Dig thro' the Hills, and Mountains level lay; That the Metallic Wealth may be reveal'd, Which in their massy Bowels lies conceal'd.
If rising Springs o'erflow the precious Vein, Men fashion Channels in the Rocks to drain, Th' invading Flood, till they their Treasure gain. Thus into Nature's Secrets Men descend, And may to Knowledge in her Works pretend; But who can Heav'n's deep Counsels comprehend? Who can inform th' Enquirer, who can tell Where Skill Divine, and Heav'nly Wisdom dwell? For sensless Man its value does not know, 'Tis never found midst Mortals here below. The Land exclaims aloud, I am not blest To be th' abode of this Celestial Guest. The Sea and all its noisy Waves, declare, In vain you seek the sacred Stranger here. Th' Infernal Deep cries with a hollow Sound, Here's no Apartment for her under ground. Th' unvaluable Blessing can't be bought, With all the golden Wealth from Ophir brought. He that has Wisdom Rubies will despise, And Pearl, if tender'd as an equal Price. Saphires and Diamonds, with vast labour sought, The Topaz fetch'd from Countries far remote; Which worn by mighty Kings, attract regard, Are worthless Toys, with this bright Gem compar'd. Who can instruct us then whence Wisdom flows? And who the place of Understanding knows: Since after strict enquiry we despair To find it in the Land, the Sea, or Air?
Death and Destruction cry, midst all our Slaves We ne'r saw Wisdom; to our secret Caves We the Celestial Stranger ne'er convey'd, Nor hid her in our solitary Shade. We only are acquainted with her Name, Have only heard of her Immortal Fame. Only the Great All-penetrating God Knows his own Offspring, Wisdom's blest abode. For he surveys from Heav'n's bright Crystal brow, The vast expanded Universe below; The spacious liquid Vales of Sky and Air, And all his Worlds, that hang in order there. The Bounds of Nature, Chaos, and old Night, Limit the Sun's, but not its Maker's Sight: He has in Prospect this Terrestrial Isle, And sees th' extreamest Bound'rys of its Soil. He forms the various Meteors which appear Thro' the low Regions of the Atmosphere. He deals out to the Winds their proper weight, Gives them their Wings, and then directs their Flight▪ He measures out the drops with wondrous Skill, Which the black Clouds his floating Bottles fill. When he decreed the manner of the Rain, And did the Lightning's crooked Path ordain; When he appointed Nature's course and way, And gave command that thence she should not stray; Then Wisdom he beheld, he search'd with care His own All-seeing Mind, and found it there.
He oft reflected on the sacred Guest, Which had her sixt abode within his Breast, And in his Works her God-like Form exprest. But then to Man, to whom he had deny'd The perfect Knowledge of his Ways, he cry'd, The Fear of God is Wisdom, to depart From Evil, this is Science, this is Art. Attempt to know no more than God reveals, Search not the Secrets which his Breast conceals. In this Abyss trust not thy vent'rous Oar, Wouldst thou be safe, then keep upon the Shore, And from afar this awful Deep adore. Thy Happiness in being Righteous lies, Be Good, and in Perfection thou art wise. Justly thou mayst despise the boastful Schools, And learned Cant of grave, disputing Fools. CH. XXIX. Moreover Iob continued thus, and said: O that the happy Days might be restor'd, When gracious Aid th' Almighty did afford. When his Celestial Lamp shone o'er my Head, And with its Light directed me to tread In lonesome Paths, with horrid Darkness spread. When secret Blessings did my Youth attend, And Guardian Providence my House defend. When all my Children round me stood, and God Did with his Presence bless my safe abode. With Teats distended with their milky store, Such numerous lowing Herds before my door
Their painful Burden to unload, did meet, That we with Butter might have wash'd our Feet. Besides the Harvest of my richer Soil, Ev'n Rocks themselves pour'd Rivers out of Oyl. When thro' the Streets I march'd in Princely State, To fit in Judgment in the City Gate; The younger Men, soon as my Face they saw, Drew back thro' Fear, or reverential Awe. The Aged Fathers as I past along, Stood up, and bow'd amidst the gazing throng. Princes and Lords, of ancient noble Blood, To shew Regard, before me silent stood. The Ear that heard me did the Speaker bless, The Eye that saw me, did its Joy confess. Because th' Oppressor's Rage I did withstand, And wrested Suff'rers from his griping hand. The Poor and Helpless when almost devour'd, Rescu'd by me, on me their Blessings pour'd. A Father's Place to Orphans I supply'd, And made the Widow joyful, as a Bride. With Righteousness and Mercy cloath'd I ate, Awful, as drest in splendid Robes of State. And spotless Justice won me more esteem, Then a great Monarch's Guards or Diadem. Refresh'd by me, the Naked, Blind and Lame, Thro' ringing Streets my Bounty did proclaim. I with Paternal Bowels fed the Poor, No needy Wretch went Hungry from my Door.
Those Frauds and Injurys, of which th' Opprest Durst not complain, I sought out and redrest. My righteous Hand broke fierce Oppressor's Jaws, And of their Spoil disseiz'd their bloody Paws. I now have built, said I, my lofty Nest Where I'll repose, and feed on endless Rest. My Days shall all be prosp'rous, and increase, Till they exceed the Sands around the Seas. With neighb'ring Streams below my Root was fed, And from above kind Heav'n by Night did spread Refreshing Dews o'er all my branching Head. I then was strong, as in my youthful Bloom, And with new Vigour did my Bow assume. Th' attentive Throng while I in Judgment sate Profoundly Silent, did around me wait. Like clust'ring Bees upon my Lips they hung, And suck'd the Words, like Honey from my Tongue. To my Discourses no reply was made, My Dictates were, as Oracles obey'd. My Speech upon them drop'd like Summer Rai, That falls from Heav'n upon the thirsty Plain. If I my solemn Air put off, if e'er I kind and condescending did appear, The People scarcely could believe me so, Nor did they rude, or too Familiar grow▪ They no ill use of those my Favours made, But still a due Respect and Rev'rence paid. What way to follow I th' Enquirer told, And all Mens doubtful Questions did unfold.
I sate as Chief, while they around did stand, My Looks and Language did their Minds command. When I appear'd, they did such Joy express, As shouting Armys do, when in distress They see their General come, whose Presence gives Their Breasts new Courage, and their Hopes revives. CH. XXX Now Providence Divine has chang'd my State, Such are my Wants, and such my Woes of late, That those young Men my Poverty deride, To whose intreating Fathers I deny'd The Priviledge my numerous Herds to keep, Or with my Dogs to sit and guard my Sheep. For they were grown, their Manly Vigour spent With Vice and Age, so Weak and Impotent; They were no more for useful Labour fit, But wander'd Hoary Beggars thro' the Street: Opprest with Want and Famine, till at last, They were, like Thieves, from every City chas'd. Trembling with fear, to shun their Neighbour's sight, To solitary Woods they took their Flight, Roam'd o'er the Plains by Day, and skulk'd in Hills by Night. In thorny Dens and rocky Caves they lay, To Lyons Hunger, or their own, a Prey. Of Juniper they Eat the bitter Root, Unsavory Herbs, and wild, unwholsome Fruit. To ease their Hunger with Supplys of Food, They made the Mountains bare, and stript the Wood. Brambles and Thorny Branches they devour, Beneath whose shelter they had lodg'd before.
A Stock so Vile, a Progeny so base, Ne'er brought on Humane Nature more disgrace, Ne'er was a Kingdom curst with such a Race. Yet to their Sons I am a standing Jest; So low is Iob, so Poor, and so Opprest. What Contumelious Insults have I born From these vile Men, what unexampled Scorn? With bitter Scoffs they suff'ring Iob revile, And pass me by with a disdainful Smile. They have me in Contempt, abhor my sight, And as from one Infected, take their Flight. They dare affront, and mock me to my Face, Since God is pleas'd on Iob to bring disgrace, And to afflict me does his Power engage, They too unbridle all their savage Rage. Young Striplings, poor afflicted Iob despise, And to obstruct my way, against me rise. No Methods, no Devices they neglect, Which likely seem my Ruin to effect. My Righteous Actions they perversly wrest, And by their Taunts my Anguish is increast. Still to invent new Slaunders they proceed, And are so fruitful, they no Helper need. On me they come, as conquering Soldiers rush Into a Town, or as a mighty Flush Of rapid Waters, which have broken down Th' opposing Banks, and then the Vally drown. Like pressing Waves their Terrors on me roll, And as a Storm my Foes pursue my Soul.
My Joy and Peace dissolve and melt away, As morning Mists before the rising Day. And now my Soul is griev'd, my Flesh diseas'd, And dismal Woes have me their Pris'ner seiz'd. All Night I lye extended on a Rack, My Bones are tortur'd, and my Sinews crack. The Putrefaction from my running Boils, In loathsome manner all my Vest defiles: Close to my Sores it sticks, as to my Throat, The narrow Collar of my seamless Coat. Me deep in Mire God has in Anger spurn'd, Ev'n while alive, I seem to Ashes turn'd. I cry unto thee, but am never heard, I make my Moan, but does the Lord regard? The gracious God is grown to me severe, Quite chang'd his very Nature does appear. His mighty Hand, from which I hop'd Relief, Is now extended to augment my Grief. Like Chaff I'm caught up by the Wind, and tost, And this and that way driv'n, till I have lost My Flesh and Substance, which I once could boast. I find the Tomb must quickly me receive, The general Rendezvous of all that live. His Hand th' Almighty will not stretch to save A Wretch, that seems already in the Grave. Not all the Crys that by my Friends are sent To Heav'n, my sure Destruction shall prevent.
Did not my Soul for Men in Trouble mourn, Did not my moving Bowels in me turn, And o'er the Poor touch'd with Compassion yern? Yet (fatal Disappointment!) fore Distress Came, when I most expected Joy and Peace. While I was waiting for the chearful Light, Darkness o'erspread me, and a dismal Night. My Soul in restless Agonys of Grief Tormented lay, and hopeless of Relief. So unawares was my Affliction sent, The suddain Stroke did quick-ey'd Fear prevent. To solitary Seats I love to creep, And dark Recesses, where I groan and weep. To antient, lonesome Ruins I repair, And mossy Heaps, in damp, unwholsome Air; A Desolation wild, as my Despair. There I so long have cry'd, and made my moan, That to the salvage Beasts my Story's known. Well pleas'd, with Owls and Ravens I converse, And the sad Series of my Woes rehearse. They Scriech and Croak, and from ill-boding Throats, To my sad Grief return becoming Notes. By Night midst Wolves I well acquainted sit, Howling Companions, for my Sorrow fit. Serpents my hissing Friends, with me abide, And with my Brother Dragons I reside. I am with Horror now familiar grown, To all the Terrors of the Desart known, And friendly Satyrs take me for their own.
My Bones quite dry'd by scorching Heat within, Start out, and break my black and wither'd Skin. I now no more my tuneful Harp employ, Sad Tears and Crys succeed my banish'd Joy. No longer to the Organ I rejoyce, I've for the Mourner's chang'd the Singer's Voice. CH. XXXI. Yet tho' my Wants and Pains are so extream, None can my Life of heinous Sin condemn. So far from that, I have with care supprest Sin's first Conception strugling in my Breast. I did the Spark, as soon as kindled, tame, Before it blaz'd, and spread resistless Flame. I with my Eyes, whose Objects oft inspire The Heart with wild, unquenchable Desire, A sacred League did make, that they should ne'er Look on forbidden Fruit, tho' wondrous fair. That they on Beauty should not gazing stay, Nor on th' enchanting Brink of Ruin play. Besides my inward Thoughts I did restrain, They ne'er did wanton Objects entertain. My modest Fancy ne'er had leave to rove, To fetch in Fuel for unlawful Love. I knew what Portion did th' Unclean attend, What Vengeance on them would from Heav'n descend, And of their sweet Delights I saw the bitter End. Distress and Ruin on the Wicked wait, This is their sad, inevitable Fate. Does not th' Almighty with his watchful Eye Mark all my Steps, and all my Paths descry?
If I unrighteous ways did e'er applaud, If I grew rich by Violence or Fraud, Let Heav'n my Head with heavy Vengeance load. Me in a Ballance weight, that God may see Convincing Proof of my Integrity. If my unrighteous Feet did from the way Of sacred Truth and Justice ever stray; If ever tempted by a greedy Eye In all the Walks of Life I trod awry; Or if Clandestine Bribes, or sordid gain My avaricious Hand did ever stain; Then let Invaders o'er my Fences leap, And when I sow, let them the Harvest reap. Let the rich Offspring which my Fields produce, By Force be taken for another's use. If any Woman's Charms did ever move My Heart to entertain Adulterous Love; If e'er I skulk'd before my Neighbour's Gate, Or for unchast Embraces lay in wait: Then make my Wife a Captive, or by Night Let a proud Stranger rob me of my Right. For of Adult'ry I will e'er assert, Death is the due Commensurate desert. It is a secret and consuming Fire, That would devour the Substance I acquire. Of all my numerous Servants none complain'd That I opprest them, or their Right detain'd. I ever gave them, when I heard their Cause, Against my self, th' advantage of the Laws.
Else if I stood before the Throne on high Of God my Heav'nly Master, what reply, To justify my Conduct, could I make? To scape his Wrath, what method could I take? Did not his Hand me and my Servant Frame? Is not the Clay alike, the Work the same? We both alike Divine Impressions bear, And both alike our Maker's Image wear. If then, not for his own, yet I should take Compassion on him, for his Maker's sake. If Poor Mens Crys did not with me prevail, If e'er I caus'd the Widows Hopes to fail; If I alone devour'd Luxurious Meat, And did not make the hungry Orphans eat; Poor Orphans, who ev'n as my Children, were Up from my Infancy my tender care. If e'er I saw poor Wretches naked lye, And did for want of Cloathing, let them dye; If their lean Loyns warm'd with my woolly Fleece, Did not my Bounty and Compassion bless; If I against an Orphan rais'd my hand, When I had power the Judges to command; Then let my Arm (for Punishment I call) Rot from the Joynt, and from my Shoulder fall. For I the sure and swift Destruction fear'd, Which the great Judge for Rebels has prepar'd; His awful Power and Glory me deter'd. I never plac'd the Strength of my Abode In high-rais'd Works, or made my Gold my God.
Ne'er my increasing Wealth and prosp'rous Fate, Did Pride, or unbecoming Joy create. When I beheld the glorious Sun arise, And saw the Moon's full Face adorn the Skies; My yielding Heart was ne'er entic'd away, Nor did I kiss my hand, and sacred Worship pay. If I had once the Creature thus ador'd, Abjur'd my Faith, renounc'd my Soveraign Lord, I should have justly felt the Judge's Sword. I was so little to Revenge inclin'd, I wish'd my Foe no mischief in my Mind. No secret Pleasure felt, or inward Joy, When God was pleas'd the Rebel to destroy. I ne'er design'd him Harm, ne'er curst his Name, Nor e'er insulted, when his Ruin came. Tho' he express'd such Cruelty and Spite, And so provok'd me in my Servants sight; That they enrag'd, did all demand his Blood, And would have Eat his very Flesh for Food. I to my House the Stranger did invite, Who in the Streets must else have past the Night. The weary Trav'ller was my welcom Guest; I cheer'd his Heart with Wine, his Limbs with Oyl and Rest▪ I ne'er with anxious care supprest my Sin, Nor, as the Hypocrite, conceal'd my fault within. I small concern for Man's Displeasure shew'd, Nor swerv'd from Truth to court the Multitude. In a just Cause I boldly did appear, My Silence ne'er betray'd my secret Fear.
O, that the strictest Scrutiny were made, That all my Scenes of Life were open laid. Let my Accusers my Indictment draw, And prosecute their Charge by course of Law: Then by th' Almighty let my Cause be heard, And let me be condemn'd, if I have err'd. My written Process would my Pride create, As much as Royal Crowns, or Robes of State. I would as boldly to my Tryal go, As Valiant Gen'rals march to meet the Foe. If ever my unpurchas'd Lands complain'd, That I by Force or Fraud Possession gain'd: If ever I another's Acres till'd, Ever my House with his Harvest fill'd, Or to possess his Goods my Neighbour kill'd: Let Thistles fill my Fields, instead of Wheat, And all my Labour and my Hopes defeat. Instead of Barley, let my Land produce Cockle of none, or Weeds of noxious use. CH. XXXII. When the three Men who pious Iob arraign'd, And their high Charge in long replys maintain'd, Perceiv'd him firmly fixt in his Defence, And resolute to clear his Innocence; They hopeless of Success from this debate, Let fall the Argument, and silent sate. Then a young Man, who as a faithful Friend, When the three Sages came, did Iob attend,
And who attention gave, and duly weigh'd What for their Cause on either side was said, Only in years inferiour to the rest, Felt a just Anger kindled in his Breast. His Name was Elibu, in Blood ally'd To faithful Abram by the Brother's side. Against good Iob did his Displeasure rise, Because in all his long and sharp replies He had less warmth, and less Concernment shown For his great Maker's Honour, than his own: Nor did the wise young Man less Passion feel Against the rash, uncharitable Zeal Of Iob's Accusers, who could not defend Their groundless Charge against their suff'ring Friend. Yet did he long discreetly moderate His struggling Passion, and attentive wait Till the grave Men had finish'd their Debate. But when he saw they had their Treasures spent, And none resum'd their baffl'd Argument; Unable to forbear, he Silence broke, And Iob's severe Accusers thus bespoke. Your Wisdom which profoundly I rever'd, From giving my Opinion me deterr'd. Aw'd by your Fame, and Age, and Eloquence, I never yet have interpos'd my Sence. For one so young, I judg'd it rather meet To sit a modest Learner at the Feet Of Men of such Experience, than to rise To dictate to the Grave, and teach the Wise.
But now, convinc'd of my Mistake, I find That Man, tho' grey with years, continues blind, Unless Celestial Light irradiates his Mind. Wisdom Divine is ne'er to be acquir'd, Unless the Man be from above inspir'd. 'Tis not the sure possession of the Great, Nor does it still adorn the Teacher's Seat. Many are in acquiring Knowledge slow, Nor by experience will they Wiser grow. Therefore Attention give, and I'll declare What in this great Affair, my Notions are. Let none condemn me, that I speak at last, I've interrupted no Discourses past. Your Arguments I've weigh'd, which you pretend, Prove your Indictment brought against your Friend▪ But after all, if I may freely speak, To gain your Cause, your Reasons are too weak. You never could in this prolix Dispute, Make good your Charge, or Iob's Defence confute. In vain you say, that you will silent stand, And leave him wholly to th' Allmighty's Hand; Hoping his Terrors will your Friend subdue, Which your weak Arguments can never do. Weapons so feeble I disdain to weild, When to dispute with Iob I take the Field. To me he ne'er did his Discourse direct, Nor will I use your Words his Error to correct. To all around I justly may complain, That for Instruction I have staid in vain.
You are exhausted, and confounded left, Silent you stand, as if of Speech bereft. Therefore, as I have told you, I will give My Judgment, and this great Debate revive. While I my Lips by Violence restrain, My fullness gives unsufferable Pain. My struggling Thoughts which in my Bosom pent, Like new press'd Wines within the Vate, ferment, Will make me burst, unless they find a Vent. To ease my self I am compell'd to speak, Full, working Vessels, if not open'd, break. While I attempt your Errors to correct, I will not Persons, but the Cause respect. Quite uninstructed in the Fatterer's ways, I cannot sooth you with excessive Praise. I cannot awn, and your Admirer seem, To gain your Approbation and Esteem. Should I such vile unworthy Arts employ, Me my Creator would in Wrath destroy. CH. XXXIII And sure, O Iob, this Preface I have made, Suffices thy Attention to perswade. To my discourse afford a patient Ear, I am prepar'd to speak, if thou art so to hear. And be assur'd whatever I impart, Shall be the inward Language of my Heart. Such plain and clear Instruction I will give, That thou with Ease my meaning shalt receive. And first consider well, our Structure came From the same Model, and our Clay's the same.
With Breath th' Almighty did my Breast inspire, And kindled in my Veins the Vital Fire. Therefore, if thou thy Cause wilt now defend, Thou only with thy Equal shalt contend. To plead with God thou rashly didst demand, First answer me, I in his Place will stand. Thou needest not thy Brother-Creature fear, I can't in dreadful Majesty appear. I bring no Terrors with me to affright; No Force, but Reason's clear, convincing Light. I'll not accuse thee, as thy Friends have done, Of secret Errors, and of Crimes unknown. None but th' Almighty's all-observing Eye, The Heart his proper Empire can descry. I shall assault thee with no other Force, Then what I borrow from thy own Discourse. Have I not heard thee oft in thy Defence, Boldly assert thy spotless Innocence. Hast thou not said, thy Justice to maintain, "My Heart is pure, my Hands are free from stain. He, who I hop'd, would mitigate my Woe, On slight pretences is become my Foe. He seeks occasions to repeat his Strokes, And every slight Offence his Wrath provokes. In Prison me his Captive he detains, And loads my fetter'd Feet with pond'rous Chains. And yet his watchful Guards around me stay, Lest I should loose my Bonds, and break away."
By such absurd and wild Complaints as these, Impatient of thy Grief thou seekest Ease. Now tho' thy inward Faults I can't detect, Nor like thy Friends uncertain Crimes object. Yet here, O Iob, thy rashness does appear, Here thy presumptuous Arrogance is clear. For can a Man, a Worm, a silly Wight, Remov'd from God at distance infinite; Can such a worthless, wretched Creature dare, Himself, with him that gave him Breath, compare? Why dost thou then engage in this dispute, Audacious Man, wouldst thou thy God confute? Will he his secret Counsels open lay, And his mysterious Providence display? Will he be summon'd to his Creature's Bar, The grounds of his Transactions to declare? Will e'er th' Almighty Soveraign condescend, The Conduct of his Empire to defend, A peevish Creature's Error to amend? Will he, because he does our Censure fear, Set forth his Justice, and his Prudence clear, And let the hidden Springs of Government appear? Th' Almighty's Works, thou shouldst have understood, Because they're his, are therefore Just and Good. Where shallow Reason can't the grounds discern Of Providence, it should submission learn. Not that our Knowledge of his Works and Ways, Does e'er our kind Creator's Envy raise; For he by various ways does Knowledge give, And more than Man is willing to receive.
Sometimes in Dreams and Visions of the Night, He to our Minds conveys instructive Light. When a deep Sleep does from our Breasts exclude The Cares and Business which by Day intrude: Or when a short Repose we seek to take, And slumbring lye half sleeping, half awake; With a still Voice he whispers to the Ear, Or to the Eye, in Scenes distinct and clear, He makes an Airy Imagery appear. Thus he reveals his Will, and leaves behind, Divine Instructions printed on the Mind. But the Celestial Teacher does not show, The Reasons of his Conduct here below. This Heav'nly Converse is not with intent, T' expose the Secrets of his Government. God by his gracious Revelations tries, Rather to make his Creature Good, than Wise: From evil Paths to turn his erring Feet, And make him humbly to his God submit. Who thus preserves the Man, if he obeys God's Admonitions, from pernicious Ways: And from those Judgments does his Life defend, Which on his Head were ready to descend. Ot does th' Almighty to the Mind convey, Divine Instruction by a sharper way. Sickness and Pain at his Command assail The strongest Man, and in th' Assault prevail.
Ev'n he who prospers in his youthful Pride, And feels within a vig'rous, vital Tyde; When e'er the Infection thro' his Veins is spred, Shall groaning lye extended on his Bed. The secret Poison will his Beauty blast, Unbrace his Sinews, and his Vigour wast. He'll languish, and abhor th' offensive sight Of those rich Meats, that were his great delight. He who before had such a beauteous Air, And pamper'd with his Ease, seem'd plump and fair, Does all his Friends (amazing Change!) surprise With pale, lean Cheeks, and ghastly, hollow Eyes. His Bones, a horrid Sight! start thro' his Skin, Which lay before in Flesh and Fat unseen. His throbbing Heart in Pain and Labour beats, And Life pursu'd thro' every Vein, retreats. His Friends believe each gasp will end his Toil, And Death stands ready to possess her Spoil. If then a Man, who does the rest out-shine In sacred Knowledge, and in Gifts Divine, Some rare and God-like Messenger be sent To teach the Sick, and bring him to repent; If by his Words the dying Person's Mind Is form'd to Virtue, and to Heav'n inclin'd; Then he with due Compassion touch'd, shall pray That God his Mercy would extend, and say, In Pity, Lord, to spare his Life consent, Chastise, but not destroy a Penitent. Let it suffice, that thou didst him Correct, And that thy Rod has wrought its due effect.
Then presently th' Almighty shall restore The Health and Ease, which he enjoy'd before. He in his Blood reviving Heat shall find, Renew'd as well in Body, as in Mind. Again shall all his Bones be cloath'd with Flesh, That like a Child's looks beautifully fresh. He shall as bold and vigorous become, As when he flourish'd in his youthful Bloom: When he, his Veins swoln with a noble Tyde, Did in the fullness of his Strength confide. His humble Prayer shall be to Heav'n addrest, And God well-pleas'd, shall grant him his request. He shall the House of God approach with Joy, And his glad Lips in Songs of Praise employ. Th' Almighty reconcil'd, shall then Acquit, And to his Favour this Poor Man admit. Then to his Neighbours round him he'll confess His Errors past, and thus himself express. Against th' Almighty I have sinn'd, and he For my Offence has justly punish'd me. To my desert he suited a Reward, But has my Life in great Compassion spar'd. He kindly interpos'd his Hand, to save A helpless Creature, sinking to the Grave. And more, is pleas'd reviving Hopes to give, That I again in Wealth and Joy shall live. Therefore, let all his wondrous Goodness praise▪ That finds t' admonish Man so many ways. To turn him from the evil Paths, that led His Feet so near the Chambers of the Dead.
To raise him from the Grave to live in Peace, And see his Riches and his Friends increase. Mark well, O Iob, for this is thy concern, And I'll instruct thee on, if I discern Thou art dispos'd attentively to learn. Or if what I advance thou canst deny, And to the Reasons I have urg'd reply; A speedy Answer to my Reasons give, Before th' important Subject I revive. For 'tis my ardent Wish thou shouldst appear From every Crime, and every Error, clear. But if thou think'st my Words have weight and force, Continue to attend to my Discourse. CH. XXXIV After a pause, Iob making no reply, The wise young Man proceeded thus: Should I Presume to judge alone in such a Cause, I should receive Contempt, and not Applause: Wherefore to you who Knowledge have acquir'd, Who are as Men of mighty Reach admir'd: To all the Wise among you I appeal; For Truth to you her Secrets will reveal. As by the Palate various Meats are try'd, So does the Mind what's true or false decide. Let us a strict Examination make, That we in judging may right Measures take. Let us the matter carefully debate, Let us the weighty Subject justly state.
For Iob asserts his Innocence, and says, "My Heart is pure, and Righteous are my Ways. Yet God in my Affliction takes Delight, And tho I pray, denys to do me Right. Evasions I'll not use in my Defence, Nor shall a Lye support my Innocence. I must assert, I have not Justice found, Mine, tho' a fatal, is a causless Wound." A Man, like Iob, say, have you ever known So Arrogant, and so Licentious grown? One, who instead of honouring his God, And humbly suff'ring his Chastising Rod, Justice Divine presumptuously arralgns, And of his Wrongs receiv'd from Heav'n, complains? Who boldly does contemptuous Language vent Against th' Almighty, and his Government. Who joyns himself with th' Irreligious Crew, And speaks of God, just as the Wicked do. He seems this impious Doctrine to defend, That tho' a Man should all his Days contend To please his God, yet should he nothing gain; And therefore all Religion is in vain. Ye Wise, to whom I first my self addrest, At this, what Passions rise within your Breast? Say, do not you such impious thoughts detest? Can God the sacred Rules of Right transgress, God who does all things in himself possess? He by his full and rich Sufficiency, Is from Temptation to Injustice free.
He on his Independent Throne secure, No favour courts, and dreads no greater Power. Th' Almighty so much weakness ne'er betrays, But deals with Man according to his Ways. Ne'er is the bold obdurate Sinner spar'd, Nor does the Righteous miss a just Reward. Sure none can censure me when I assert, Our great Creator cannot Right pervert. Who shall of Fraud or Violence condemn Nature's Despotic Lord, and Judge supream? Is there a Being of superiour Sway, Whose Laws oblige th' Almighty to obey? For which of all his Kingdoms does he Homage pay? With his great Power what Prince does him entrust, Whose Frowns should him incline to be unjust? He that with all Perfections does abound, He must with perfect Justice too be crown'd. His Mind without a Stain shines pure and bright, No Spot appears in uncreated Light. He who is Lord of all can injure none, Whate'er he takes, he but resumes his own. All Beings are the Creatures of his Power, And only while he pleases, they endure. Should he recall the Breath and Vital Fire, With which at first he did our Breasts inspire, Mankind would perish, and to Common Dust Would strait return, from whence they came at first. If thou art Wise these Observations mind, And well attend to what is yet behind.
The God from whom that Truth and Justice flow, Which we observe in Kings that Rule below; He who with Power does Potentates entrust Only for Good, can he be thought unjust? Should we Terrestrial Kings as Tyrants blame, Their Wrath would show how they abhor the Name. If to inferiour Rulers we object That they in judging Law and Right neglect; Would they th' opprobrious Language tamely bear? When thus provok'd, would they the Offender spare? How impious then is that envenom'd Tongue, That dares th' Almighty charge with doing wrong? By him great Conqu'rors are esteem'd no more Than Captives, nor the Wealthy than the Poor. All Men before him stand on equal ground; There Kings and Slaves are undistinguish'd found. On all alike he executes his Laws, And Judges not the Person, but the Cause. The High and Low, the Rich and Needy are Alike his Creatures, and alike his Care. Can he be overaw'd? will he to make Unjust Decrees, a Bribe in secret take? Will he the Power of mighty Monarchs dread? His Arm can in a moment strike 'em dead. He can affright whole Nations, and destroy Great Empires, when they setled Peace enjoy. When a proud Prince is ripe for Vengeance grown, Tho' God by humane means oft pulls him down, Yet he without them can his Foe dethrone.
For Powers unseen descending thro' the Air, Shall far away the trembling Tyrant bear. His vast and wide Creation God surveys, Views all his Subjects, and remarks their ways. He sees our Thoughts first rising in the Mind, Knows what we do, and how we are inclin'd. Therefore th' Almighty cannot thro' mistake, Or ignorance, a wrong Decision make. A Judge that cannot err, unbiass'd, free From Hopes and Fears, can't make an ill Decree. Evasive Arts in vain the Wicked use, Their Crimes in vain they labour to excuse. No Mist before th' Almighty's Eye can dwell, Whose piercing Beams will blackest Shades dispel, Shades from the dark and deepest Caves of Hell. Therefore as God will ne'er our Guilt enlarge, Nor on us Crimes we ne'er committed charge; So when for Judgment he appoints a day, He'll the Judicial Sentence not delay, To hear what Man, for his excuse can say. He calls no Witness, no Enquiry needs, But strait to Condemnation he proceeds. He breaks the Mighty, pulls the Tyrant down, And raises others to the vacant Throne. These wrathful Strokes inflicted justly, show. He does th' Offences and th' Offender know. On these he doubles his avenging blows, And marks them out as Heav'n's notorious Foes.
The Wretches are expos'd to publick sight, Objects of Vengeance others to affright. Because they hated Virtue's Heav'nly way, And would not God's most equal Laws obey: But crush'd the Needy with Tyrannic Pride, Whilst humbly they to Heav'n for Justice cry'd. And when such poor, afflicted Creatures cry, The God of Mercy will not help deny. At last th' Almighty will proud Kings dethrone, Beneath whose Yoke the ruin'd People groan. Tho' they would Pious seem, and Zeal pretend For Publick Good, Destruction is their end. Lest their Examples which Contagious are, Should by degrees the Peoples Minds ensnare. Therefore let all in Misery and Pain Suspect themselves, and not of God complain. Let them to God such words as these address, "Just are my Suff'rings, freely I confess. Nor will I now commit a fresh Offence By pleading at thy Bar my Innocence. Teach me thy Will, my Ignorance instruct, And thro' the Paths of Life my Feet conduct. Before my Eyes thy Heav'nly Light display, Which may both cheer, and guide me in my way. Forgive my Sin, my inward Peace restore, Have I offended, I'll offend no more." Say, Iob, didst thou in such an humble way, E'er due Submission to th' Almighty pay?
If thou this wholesome Counsel dost despise, Be sure thy stubborn Folly he'll chastise. Iob may the method I propose refuse, Which I, were I in his Distress, would chuse. Tell therefore, Iob, what thy Opinions are, Or let Judicious Men their Sense declare, For I such Judges ask in this Affair. To me, as impious Iob's Discourses sound, And with egregious Errors they abound. He argues on a Capital mistake, That does the Pillars of Religion shake. Therefore that he may yet be farther try'd, I wish his sharp Affliction may abide; Till he retract his Words, which God arraign, Till he no more of Providence complain. Else to the past he'll fresh Rebellion add, And justify what he has rashly said. He will applaud his Wisdom, and relate, That he the Conquest won in this Debate. Harden'd in Folly he'll his Crimes repeat, And Heav'n with more indecent Language treat. CH. XXXV. He paus'd: and Iob not answering, Elihu Did thus th' important Argument pursue. To th' uncorrupted Judge within thy Breast Thy Conscience I appeal▪ will that attest That thou believ'st what thou hast boldly said, That Iob does God in Righteousness exceed?
To any other meaning who can wrest These Irreligious Words by thee exprest? "Does ever God the least concernment show Whether I'm Just and Innocent, or no? What Profit shall I reap by being so?" I will a short, but a full answer give To thee, and those that thus of God believe. Then up to Heav'n cast thy admiring Eyes, View the bright Orbs, and Clouds, and distant Skies. High as they are, they're by th' Almighty's Throne In height, as much as thou by them, outdone. Therefore, O Iob, the most atrocious Crime Thou dar'st commit, can never injure him. Nor can his perfect Happiness be less, Should thou grown bold, and hard in Wickedness, By multiply'd Affronts thy Hate of God express. Nor can he e'er the least advantage reap, Shouldst thou revere him, and his Precepts keep. But do not thence this false Conclusion draw, 'Tis therfore fruitless to obey his Law. Thee and thy Sons thy Goodness will avail, And Heav'nly Blessings on thy House entail. And thy Injustice and Impiety, Tho' not to God, will hurtful be to thee. Nor does the Mischief thee alone respect, The Crimes of mighty Men Mankind affect. When Men of Wealth and Power Oppressors turn, They always make their Suff'ring Neighbours mourn.
The lamentable Crys of Realms opprest, What Evils wild Injustice brings, attest. Crush'd, and insulted by Tyrannic Might, To the Just God they cry aloud for Right: Who tho' unhurt himself, touch'd with the sense Of their sharp Suff'rings, will be their Defence. Tho' 'tis a true, but sad Remark, that none Of these poor Wretches who their Fate bemoan; Do ever with a serious Mind enquire, After the God who did their Breath inspire: Who cannot therefore only Ease bestow, And Comforts give to moderate their Woe. But midst their greatest Sorrows can employ Their Mouths in Songs; and fill their Breasts with joy. 'Tis strange, that Man has so far lost his Sight; Has not th' Almighty giv'n to guide him right, Reason, a Portion of Etherial Light? By which he is enabled to collect, That he who does with tender care protect Brute Beasts and Birds, will never Man neglect: If we not only by complaining shew Our Wants, as those unreasoning Creatures do; But of our past Offences do repent, And of his Goodness humbly confident, Our Supplications to our God present. He'll not, 'tis true, extend his Arm to save All that Compassion and Protection crave. For many to their God in Trouble cry, From sense of Suff'ring, not of Piety.
To Pity he's inclin'd, but will not save Th' Impenitent, tho' they his Pity crave. Those who his Worship and his Laws tdespise, In vain repeat their Prayers, and graceless crys. And therefore tho' of God thou dost complain, That thou hast waited for his Aid in vain; Yet do not thence infer, that he's unjust; But go and humbly prostrate in the Dust, Condemn thy Self, and for his Mercy wait, To rescue thee from thy afflicted State. For 'tis because th' Almighty cannot find These pious Inclinations in thy Mind, That he this weight of Trouble on thee lays, And disregards thy former prosp'rous Days. Hereafter thy complaining Speeches spare, Which fruitless and unreasonable are; And which, besides thy other Wants and Woes, Thy want of Sense and Piety expose▪ CH. XXXVI To this Discourse Iob gave attentive heed, Which made the young Instructer thus proceed: I now more fully will impart my Sense, And urge fresh Arguments in God's defence. His spotless Justice I will vindicate, Decide with clearness this perplex'd Debate. Nor will I labour to entangle thee With artful words, and cheating Sophistry.
I the sublimest Principles will use; Sincere and plain, and solid Reasons chuse, Fit to convince the Mind, not to amuse. Know then, that God whose Throne surmounts the Skys, Will ne'er the meanest, lowest Man despise. Th' Almighty is too Good, too Wise, too Great, His Creature e'er injuriously to treat. When Men grow ripe in Wickedness, the Day Of their Destruction God will not delay. The Wretches he'll extirpate, and restore To Slaves their Ease, their Substance to the Poor. What Suff'rings e'er the Good and Righteous bear, They never cease to be th' Almighty's Care. And sometimes he exalts them from the Dust, To Posts of highest Dignity and Trust. They round the Thrones of Kings as Fav'rites stand, And next to them in Power, the World command. They rest secure above the reach of all Who hate their Virtue, and design their Fall. Or if by adverse Fate they are distrest, And by Affliction's Iron Rod opprest, This is to make them on their Faults reflect, Which God is pleas'd in Kindness to correct▪ Sin's growing Power and Greatness to restrain, Let in their Hearts it should Victorious reign. Men are hereby inlighten'd, and the Mind To hear Divine Instruction is inclin'd. They for their Faults their Sorrow will declare, Resolv'd from Virtue's Rule no more to err.
And if their Pains produce this blest effect, If thus their Faults and Follys they correct, If they a Zeal for Piety maintain, They shall their Splendour and their Power regain. And blest by gracious Heav'n in all their ways, Shall pass in unmolested Peace their Days. But if they persevere to disobey, God shall the unrelenting Rebels slay. Enrag'd against them he shall take the Field, And Darts of Fire, and Bolts of Thunder weild. Then shall his Sword with horrid Sway descend, To cut off those, his Rod could ne'er amend. False Hpocrites, to Vengeance destin'd, lay Wrath up in Stores, against the wrathful Day. Suddain Destruction on their Heads shall fall, Before the Wretches can for Mercy call. Their Life's short Course ends at the middle Stage, Crush'd in the Vigour of their Manly Age. Unthought of Ruin shall their Seats surprise, Like that which Rain'd on Sodom from the Skies. But God is touch'd with Pity to the Poor, And saves the humble, who his Aid implore. He is to these, ev'n in his Anger, kind, Afflicts the Body, to instruct the Mind. His Strokes are sharp, but strike out heav'nly Light, Whereby th' afflicted learn to judge aright; Their Eyes are open'd to discern their Sin, And Night without, dispels the Night within
Hadst thou thy humble Will to God's resign'd, And born Correction with a patient Mind, When with his Rod he had thy Virtue prov'd, He would have all thy grievous Pains remov'd. Thy hideous train of Woes he had discharg'd, And thee from all thy pinching Straits enlarg'd. He would have made thy Table to abound, And thee with lasting Peace and Honour crown'd. But since thy impious, rash Discourses shew, Iob thinks of Heav'n as Unbelievers do; God will assert the Honour of his Laws, And Judgment give according to thy Cause. Since then thou findst th' Almighty is displeas'd, Fear, lest his Fury should be yet increas'd. Let not thy Crimes afresh his Wrath provoke, To cut thee off with his avenging Stroke. Dost thou believe he does thy Wealth regard, Or can thy Power thy Punishment retard? No, tho' a Soveraign Lord thou wert, possest Of all the Strength and Treasure of the East. That Power or Wealth can serve thee, do not dream, Please not thy self with such an idle Scheme. Never thy self with such vain Hopes delight, Not ev'n in musing on thy Bed by Night. For God whole Nations who soft Peace enjoy'd, Sometimes with suddain Vengeance has destroy'd. But let thy Suff'rings teach thee so much Sense, Offended Justice never to incense. Too much of this thou hast already done, Too much thy Sin, too much thy Folly shown:
While thou didst rather Providence accuse, Then patiently to bear Affliction, chuse. Consider, Iob, God's vast and boundless Power, He does debase at pleasure, and restore. What Statesman shall invite him to his School, To teach th' Almighty how he ought to Rule? Who can the Master that directs him, name? What Visitor does his Proceedings blame? Where is the Censor that presumes to say Here thou hast err'd, here thou hast kept thy way? Against thy God no more Objections raise, But let the Contemplation of his Ways Excite thy Admiration and thy Praise. The wonders of his Providence adore, As much as Men admire the marks of Power, Of Wisdom, and of masterly Design, Which in the World's amazing Fabrick shine. All must the Maker's Skill Divine proclaim, Who view the Parts of this stupendous Frame. None are so stupid, none so dull of Thought, Ev'n in the Barbarous Regions far remote, But, if their Eyes they open, must descry The bright Impressions of his Majesty. They'l own their Reasoning at its utmost stretch, His boundless Power and Wisdom cannot reach. They may their Arms from Pole to Pole extend, And sooner grasp the Spheres, then comprehend Th' immense Eternal Mind; for who can show The number of his Days, that no Beginning know?
Our Thoughts their way in such Enquirys miss, O'erwhelm'd, and swallow'd in the vast Abyss. When we approach him, his too glorious Light Quite dazles, and confounds our feeble Sight. He does in Air the fluid Clouds sustain, Which he dissolves and melts to Dew or Rain. Which falling down in small refreshing drops, Dispose the Earth to bring forth fruitful Crops. Thus to the Earth its Vapours he restores, And makes the Clouds distil such frequent Showers, As lookers on with Admiration fill Of this Contrivance, this surprising Skill. And who has Understanding to declare How he extends his Clouds, and makes the Air The pondrous Burden of the Water bear? Who can account for that tremendous Noise, Those awful Murmurs, and Majestic Voice Which issue thence, and terribly declare, That God has fixt his high Pavilion there. Observe too how he spreds upon the Streams, And on the Deep, the Sun's diffusive Beams. Where for the Clouds they levy fresh Supplys, And raise Recruits of Vapours which arise, Drawn from the Sea to muster in the Skys: Which he for different purpose does employ; Some serve in Storms the Wicked to destroy. Others refresh the Earth with genial Rains, And make his Fields reward the Farmer's Pains.
Sometimes he draws his hovering Mists between The Heav'ns and Earth, and makes his Clouds a Screen To intercept the Light, and so defeat The Fruits and Flowers of their expected Heat. Brute Beasts themselves, by Nature's instinct Wise, When they observe the gath'ring Clouds arise, Can tell, if Storms and Tempests are design'd, Or if sweet Showers will to the Soil be kind. C. XXXVII. When Clouds with murm'ring Thunder laden roll, The dreadful Noise affrights my trembling Soul. A noise, at which pale Atheists are distrest, And feel a shiv'ring Horror in their Breast. A noise which makes the Righteous Man revere, Th' Almighty's Judgments with a pious Fear. Attend, I pray, to this Tempestuous sound, Which breaking from the Clouds, does all around Diffuse and propagate its Force, and you Will the like Terror and Confusion shew. This dreadful Voice which Heav'n's high Arches shakes, Thro' all the Airy Realms its progress makes. Th' Almighty to the World's remotest Ends, His Red-wing'd Lightning always with it sends. First from the Clouds the flashing Flames appear, Then fearful Claps of Thunder strike the Ear. The noise augments, till Storms of Rain or Hail Descending thro' the Air, the Earth assail. He that his Thunder with such Force projects, Produces other wonderful Effects;
By which the greatest Wits confounded, own Their Reason and Philosophy outdone. He moulds, and whitens in the Air the Snow, And with its Fleeces spreads the Earth below. He bids the Rain descend in gentle Showers, Or from the Clouds vast Spouts of Water pours. Which interrupt the Labour of the Day, And drives th' unwilling Husbandman away From all his rural toyl, and makes him know, That God the Seasons governs here below. The Beasts themselves these stormy Seasons chase From the wide Desart, to their lurking Place. They slumb'ring in their Dens are forc'd to stay, And in their Sleep pursue, and tear their Prey. Mark from the Southern Regions of the Sky, The Winds that blow, are turbulent and high. These on their Wings do Foreign Tempests bear, And charg'd with Seeds of Storms, and Stores of War, Unload conflicting Meteors in the Air. Then in the Northern quarter of the Skys, By his Direction adverse Winds arise, Which to remove the former are employ'd, To purify and clear th' Aerial Void. He by the blasts of this restringent Wind, Does the Cold Globe in Crystal Fetters bind. To Glass they turn the Lakes on which they blow, Benumb the Floods, and teach them not to flow.
He spends in Dew the Evening Mists, that stay And lag below, drawn by a fainter Ray, Spent with th' exhaling labour of the Day. Sometimes the Lord of Nature in the Air Hangs evening Clouds, his Sable Canvas, where His Pencil dipt in Heav'nly Colours, made Of intercepted Sunbeams mixt with Shade, Of temper'd Ether, and refracted Light, Paints his fair Rainbow, charming to the Sight. These Meteors are directed by his Hand, And move, and take their Course by his Command. So do the rest that this low Region fill; And on the Earth they execute his Will. Sometimes a sinful Nation to destroy: He Pestilential Vapours does employ. Which their Clandestine poison'd Darts prepare, And with Corruption arm th' infected Air. O'er all the Land their Forces they diffuse, And panting Thirst, and purple Plagues produce. But if he's pleas'd his Bounty to express, And will with Plenty pious Nations bless: Then fruitful Dews descend at his Command, And healthful Seasons make a happy Land. O Iob, Attention give, no more object, To God, no more on Providence reflect. Rather his Counsels and his Rule adore, Admire his Works, and Reverence his Power. Canst thou declare what Orders from above Will come, by which these Meteors are to move?
Canst thou by all thy Skill so much as know, When in the Clouds he'll draw his beauteous Bow? Canst thou, presumptuous Man, the way declare, How pondrous Clouds hang ballanc'd in the Air? Canst thou expose such Secrets to the Light, The wondrous Works of Wisdom Infinite? Whence come the soultry Gleams and scorching Heat, When we beneath our lightest Garments sweat? Why should the Southern Breezes calm the Floods, Make soft the Air, and dress in Green the Woods? How should they breath thro' all the heaving Soil Prolific Warmth, to bless the Labourer's toil, When from the South such furious Whirlwinds rise, And stormy Clouds pollute and vex the Skys. But now, O Iob, proceed, and raise thy thought To Objects nobler, higher, more remote. Wert thou in Council with th' Almighty joyn'd, When he the Model of the Heav'n's design'd? To fashion them didst thou Assistance give? What Ornament, what Strength didst thou contrive? When he extended o'er the empty Space His high Pavilion, where was then thy Place? Didst thou one end of the wide Curtain hold, And help the Bales of Ether to unfold; Tell which Cerulean Pile was by thy hands unroll'd? Tho' this transparent, Starry Firmament Is so sublime, and of such vast Extent, That it confounds our weak and feeble Sight, Yet is it firm, as well as clear and bright.
If thou hast Skill, instruct us what to say Of Power Divine, and we'll Attention pay. We own, when e'er our Minds attempt to climb To Objects so unequal, so sublime; Our baffled Thoughts can no Discovery boast, But are Confounded, and in Wonder lost. What words that suit the Case can I express? Or what to God, worthy of God, address? He that of God would a Description give, Will with a Task insuperable strive. Let him his Reason stretch, he'll quickly find, The mighty Object will distract his Mind. The steddiest Head will turn at such a height, Who can undazled, gaze at uncreated Light? The hardy Men that make the bold Essay, Immensity of Being to survey, Are lost in that unsearchable Abyss, In Boundless Power, and vast, unmeasur'd Bliss. Giddy with Splendour, and excess of Day, They in a Maze of Glory miss their way. For Men alass, their Eyes so feeble are, Cannot the Sun's Meridian Lustre bear, When Northern Winds have swept and clear'd the Air. Then sure with Terror seiz'd, they should decline The awful Sight of Majesty Divine. That Majesty from which we should retire, And at a distance humbly should admire. And not too far into its Nature pry, Or gaze upon it with a curious Eye.
For after all th' Attempts we make, we find Our Reason cannot grasp th' Eternal Mind. So Boundless, so Transcendent is his Might, So Wise his Conduct, his Decrees so right, That no Man should debate th' Almighty's Deeds, Or ask a Reason why he thus proceeds. If any do, God who does all surmount As Soveraign Lord, need give them no account. And this should humble Admiration draw From mortal Man, and make him stand in Awe. This should their peevish Arguments confute, And teach them to Adore, and not dispute. For God regards the Meek, but does despise The proud conceited Man, and in his Eyes All Men are Fools, who in their own are Wise. C. XXXVIII Then did th' Almighty quit his high Abode, And on the Winds his swift-wing'd Coursers rode. Involv'd in Darkness, down the Skys he came, Whirlwinds before him flew, and Storms of ruddy Flame. The trembling Poles their Terror did express, And flying Hills their dreadful Fright confess. All Nature felt a Reverential Shock; The Sea amaz'd, stood still to see the Mountains rock. Approaching near the place th' Eternal spoke, And from an opening Cloud these awful Accents broke. Where art thou Iob, who by thy gross mistake, Dost false Constructions of my Actions make?
Gird up thy Loyns, O Man, prepare to stand Before a Judge, that comes at thy demand. I will thy Wisdom and thy Knowledge try, And to my Questions, if thou canst, reply. Say, what wert thou, who could thy Station find, When by the Model in my Breast, design'd Before all Ages, I was pleas'd to reer The Frame of this capacious Theater? Tell, if thou canst this pitch of Knowledge reach, Whence for my World did I Materials fetch? Hast thou the unexhausted Mines explor'd In Chaos Bowels, which supplys afford? Know'st thou the Strength and Skill that I employ'd, To dig out Matter from an empty void? Know'st thou how walking o'er the lonesome Plains, Of antient Night, I found the wealthy Veins Of Stones and Metals, which her Womb contains. Canst thou declare by what stupendous Art, I squar'd, and shap'd, and fitted every Part? How for the World I mark'd a proper place, And with what Compass, circumscrib'd the Space? How from the barren Wast I took in Ground, Enclos'd it for a World, and fenc'd it round? On what think'st thou are its Foundations plac't? What Cement binds and knits the Fabrick fast? When I to work upon the World begun, And of the Building laid the Corner Stone, Know'st thou how soon the World's high Case was reer'd? How soon the wide expanded Roof appear'd?
When all the Seraphs, whose Celestial Race, The Morning Star in Lustre, far surpass; The first-born Sons of God, my Praises sung, While the glad Heav'n's with Acclamations rung. Who plac'd the rocky Doors before the Deep? And did in sandy Chains the Billows keep? When the disruption of the upper Earth Open'd its Womb, to give the Ocean birth? Which I with Clouds as with a Garment wrap'd, And misty Mantles o'er its Bosom lap'd. Did I not form a Deep within the Land? Did not the watry Troops at my Command, March to their Station with obsequious hast, And find my rocky Bolts, had bar'd their Prison fast? Then said I to the Sea diffus'd around, Behold the Frontiers which thy Empire bound; Hither thou may'st, but may'st no further roll, These Bars shall thy impetuous Waves controul. By Iob's appointment does the Sun display His Morning Beams, and bless the World with Day? By thy discretion does the springing Light To lengthen or contract, the Day or Night; Early or later, in the East appear, Dividing thus the Seasons of the year? Dost thou with Wings equip the dawning Ray, Thro' the vast Gulph of Air to make its way? Ev'n in a moment to compleat its flight, And gild the Earth's remotest Bounds with Light?
Whose Heav'nly Rays the Shapes of Things reveal, And shew them fair as printed with a Seal: Nature that lay before with Shades opprest, Is now with Light, as with a Garment, drest. Light, by the Guiltless peaceably enjoy'd, But which obnoxious Criminals avoid; For if detected by its beams, they know They must the Death they Merit undergo. Say, hast thou e'er descended to survey The secret Springs, that feed the spacious Sea? Hast thou the Ocean search'd, and wander'd o'er The watry Walks, their Wonders to explore? Did Death e'er meet thee at her Palace Gate? Lead thee thro' all her Guards, and on thee wait To see her gloomy Throne, and horrid Rooms of State? Did she her Arms and bloody Trophys shew, And draw her Armys forth for thy review? Did ever Hell its Realms to thee disclose, To thee its mournful Subjects e'er expose? Did it to thee its various Scenes explain, Of perfect Grief, and everlasting Pain? Hast thou thy Compass ever drawn around The spacious Globe, and its Dimensions found? Say, dost thou know th' Etherial Mines on high, Which the refulgent Oar of Light supply? Is the Celestial Furnace to thee known, In which I melt that Golden Metal down?
Know'st thou the Magazines, in which I lay My Stores, and bright Materials for the Day? Treasures, from whence I deal out Light as fast As all my Stars, and lavish Sun can wast. Can'st thou describe the silent Desart, where Imperial Night does her black Standard reer, To which her fable Troops, and must'ring Shades repair. Whence she her gloomy Partys sends abroad, To beat in chase of Day, th' Aerial Road. Didst thou divide the Empire of the Air, And give to Light and Shade an equal share? Canst thou to favour this alternate sway, By turns extinguish, and restore the Day? Hast thou in all the Airy Regions been; The Houses where I work my Meteors seen? In which the Exhalations, which arise Born on rebounding Sunbeams thro' the Skys, Are thicken'd, wrought, and whiten'd till they grow A Heav'nly Fleece, and softly drop in Snow. Hast thou discover'd how ascending Steams, Thinn'd by the Sun's insinuating Beams, Are wrought and temper'd and become so hard, That they to fall in Hail-stones are prepar'd? Hast thou survey'd the Magazines on high, Where I repose my loud Artillery? Where I my Arms and Ammunition lay, To be employ'd upon the dreadful Day, When I against a sinful Land, declare Destructive Vengeance, and resistless War.
When I my keen Etherial Weapons weild, And to discharge my Fury take the Field. How does the Light (I ask again) display Its radiant Wings and spred the dawning Day? Who the rich Metal beats, and then with care Unfolds the Golden leaves to gild the Fields of Air? Canst thou declare which way the Architect, His Cloudy Forges did aloft erect? How the Metalic Mass was thither brought From which the ruddy Thunderbolts are wrought? At whose command do Winds whole Tempests blow; That in those Forges make the Metal glow? How in the Air are Trains of Sulphur found, Which, when with watry Clouds encompass'd round, Take Fire, and give imprison'd Lightning birth, Which tears the Air, and terrifys the Earth? How are the Heav'nly Aqueducts contriv'd, Whence fruitful Floods are to the Earth deriv'd? With which refresh'd the sandy Wilderness, Do's in its chearful looks its joy express; When like a healing Balm distilling Rains, Cement their Wounds, and cure the gaping Plains. With all their Fibrous Mouths the Plants and Trees Drink the sweet Juices and their Thirst appease. The rising Sap thrusts forth the tender Bud, And crowns with verdant Honours all the Wood. If thou art Master of the secret, shew How drops of Rain are form'd, and how the Dew.
How is the Dew arrested in its flight, Congeal'd, and whiten'd in the Air by Night? How do's it spred its Frostwork o'er the Meads, Oppress the Trees, and bend their hoary Heads? What is the nature of the Icy chain Which do's the fluid Element restrain, Which oft compels a rolling Flood to stand, Hardens the Stream, and makes the Water Land? Grown stiff with Cold the Billows roll no more, But with their Crystal Arms embrace the rocky Shore. Pavements of Glass conceal the Oceans Face, And Armour like his spacious back encase. Canst thou keep back the Spring? close opening Flow'rs, And sprouting Plants restrain, when kindly Show'rs From Heav'n descend, caus'd by the Influence And Lustre which the Pleiads dispence? Canst thou in Winter break the Frosty Chains, With which Orion binds the slipp'ry Plains? And then to fit it for the Farmer's use, Thro' all the heaving Soil prolific heat diffuse? Canst thou with Constellations fill the Skies, And in his turn make Mazzaroth arise? Canst thou Arcturus guide around the Pole, And bid his shining Sons in Order roll? Know'st thou th' eternal Rules decreed above By which the Sphears in fluid Ether move? What to his Crooked Path the Sun confines Between the Northern and the Southern Lines? Who gave him strength to run so swift a pace, And set the Stages of his daily Race?
Do Planets chuse untrodden Roads, and stray By thy Appointment from the common way? Dost thou on Stars their Influence bestow, And give them Empire o'er the World below? Manag'd by thee will they their Power diffuse, To make such Seasons here as thou shalt chuse? Will Clouds to Orders giv'n by thee attend? And if thou call'st for Rain, will Rain descend? At thy Command will ready Lightnings fly, And Peals of Thunder ring around the Sky? Who GodlikeWisdom did to Man impart? And who with Understanding fill'd his Heart? Didst thou inspire him with this Ray divine? Was it thy Bounty Iob, or was it mine? Who can the number of the Clouds enroll, Which spred the Atmosphere from Pole to Pole? Canst thou the Liquor which they hold restrain, Or on the Earth pour down the Bottled Rain? When from above sufficient Showers have bound The dusty Glebe, and clos'd the cleaving Ground, Canst thou the Sluces fix, the Waters stop, And in their floating Cisterns shut them up? Are Forrest Beasts by thee with Food supply'd, For hungry Lyons do's thy Care provide? If an old Lyon, that can now no more (His vigor wasted) range the Desart o'er, Couch'd in his Den shall watch to seize his Prey, Thither dost thou th' uncautious Fawn betray?
Or do's the Raven on thy Care depend? Dost thou their Portion to his Young Ones send? Dost thou thus far thy Providence extend? C. XXXIX. Know'st thou the Time when the wild Goats bring forth, And to the flinty Rock commit their Birth? Know'st thou the Months which pregnant Hinds compleat, And when to Calve they to the Brakes retreat? In Pangs they bow themselves, and in the Wood At once their Sorrows and their Birth exclude. The Calves not only all their pains survive, But as with Corn supply'd, grow fat and thrive. To seek their Meat they range the Forrest o'er, And to the Mother-Hind return no more. Who did, O Iob, to the wild Asse's Heart A noble Sense of Liberty impart? Bravely impatient of the Bit and Rein, The Beast with gen'rous Pride, a Master do's disdain. He do's the Crib and proffer'd Corn refuse, And Thistles joyn'd with native Freedom chuse. From pop'lous Towns, he do's to Mountains flee, Oft Hunger feels, but never Slavery, Whatever are his wants, the noble Beast is free. No Ignominious Burdens will he bear, His Flesh no Driver's Whips, or Rider's tear. He never pants upon the Sandy Road, Choak'd with the Dust, and groaning with his Load. The Hills and Forrests Pasturage afford, There he can range, and there command as Lord.
With Freedom blest he'll not the Desart quit, But mocks th' ignoble Ass, that tamely does submit. Will the wild Bull, be willing to obey, And a tame Lab'rer with thy Oxen stay? Will he receive the Yoke, submit to toyl, And plough up Furrows in thy fertile Soil? Will he of any Master stand in Aw, And the sharp Harrow o'er the Vally draw? Because his Strength is great, wilt thou presume To let him bring thy gather'd Harvest home? With curious Colours who the Peacock dy'd? Whence has his sweeping Train its painted Pride? Say, who the Honour to himself assumes, Of forming by his skill, the noble Plumes, And spacious Wings which the vast Ostrich wears; Which by her Bulk a feather'd Beast appears? She does her Eggs to the wild Desart trust, And leaves her unform'd Offspring in the Dust; Mean time forgets how soon it may be prest And crusht by Trav'lers, or a roaming Beast. The careless Bird do's from her Young retreat, Expecting that the Sand's prolific Heat, Her huge Conceptions, should at last compleat. When she exalts her Neck amidst the Skys, She does the Horse and Rider's Arms despise. Hast thou, O Iob, giv'n to the gen'rous Horse, His Confidence, his Spirit and his Force?
The deep thick Mane that cloaths the noble Beast, The graceful Terror of his lofty Crest, Is it thy work? canst thou his Courage shake? And make him like a wretched Insect quake? With native Fire his dreadful Nostrils glow, And smoke and flame amidst the Battle blow. Proud with Excess of Life he paws the ground, Tears up the Turf, and spurns the Sand around. He pricks his Ears when the shrill Trumpet sounds, And to the Music Capers, leaps, and bounds. When from afar he hears the Foe's alarms, He forward springs to meet the Warriour's Arms. Fearless he runs on Swords, the Files invades, And makes his Passage thro' the thick Brigades. He mocks the Weapons which the Horsemen weild, The ratling Quiver, and the blazing Shield. In his fierce Rage he beats and bites the Ground, Nor does the start at the loud Trumpet's sound: Pleas'd with the Martial noise he snuffs the Air, And smells the dusty Battle from afar, Neighs to the Captain's Thunder, and the shouts of War. Didst thou instruct the Hawk to rove abroad A murth'ring Robber on th' Aerial Road? By thee enabled does he wing his Flight, Thro' the thin Gulph, swift as a Ray of Light? What Feather'd Trav'ller beats the Plains of Air, That with the Eagle's can his Strength compare; Midst cloudy Meteors that can soar so high, Or with such swiftness cut the liquid Sky?
Gav'st thou the noble Bird her mighty Force, And proper Wings to make her rapid Course? Didst thou direct her where to build her Nest, Where no Invader might her Peace molest? She as a For tress, does her dwelling keep Midst craggy Cliffs, insuperably steep. Tow'ring upon the Rock's impending Brow, She sees with decent Pride th' ignoble Birds below. She with a glance does all the Vale survey, And like a Bolt of Thunder, makes her way Down thro' the yeilding Heav'ns, to truss her prey. Then to her Young, her crooked Pounces bear The bloody Banquet swiftly thro' the Air. CH. XL Th' Almighty paus'd, Iob (speechless struck) supprest, All his Complaints and Anguish in his Breast. Th' Almighty thus proceeded, tell me why To my Demands, thou makest no reply? Have not the Allegations I have brought, Inlighten'd thee, and full Conviction wrought? He that desires the Argument to State, And would with God his Providence debate, To those Objections must Solutions find; And more, must answer Questions yet behind. Then humbly Iob return'd: thy heav'nly Light Shews me a wretched miserable Wight. Confounded and amaz'd, I can't withstand Thy Arguments, nor answer one demand.
The Words which I have spoken, tho' but few, Too many are, and high presumption shew. Prostrate before thy Footstool, I'll adore Henceforth thy Greatness, but will speak no more. Then did th' Almighty, from the hov'ring Cloud In which involv'd, he did his Glory shroud, Bespeak the pious Patriarch, and said, Thou who desir'dst so much with me to plead: Thou who so much thy Innocence didst boast, Hast thou thy Courage and Assurance lost? Gird up thy Loyns as for another task, And answer Questions which I now shall ask. Since I, O Iob, did ever condescend To all my lowest Creatures to extend My Providential Care, canst thou suspect, That I'll Mankind, my nobler Work neglect? What cannot Iob his Innocence maintain, Unless unjustly he does God arraign? Must I then be reproach'd to clear thy Fame? To make thee guiltless, must I bear the shame? To make thy Cause appear to others right, Wilt thou, audacious Man! thy God indict? Dost thou thy kind Creator thus requite? Canst thou like God, thy mighty Arm extend, To crush the Proud, the Humble to defend? Canst thou the Heav'ns astonish with thy Voice, And imitate the Thunder's dreadful noise?
Canst thou swift Lightnings on thy Errand send, And will the Meteors thy Commands attend? In massy Robes of State thy Limbs'array, Thy Triumph and Majestic Pomp display. Thy dazling Crown and costly Purple wear, And on thy Throne Magnificent appear. Let Throngs of humble Princes on thee wait, And numerous Guards express thy Royal State; That by unrival'd Glorys, thou mayst draw Men's admiration, and excite their Awe. Around thee Storms of vengeful Fury throw, Let thy destructive Rage oppress thy Foe; On all the Haughty in Displeasure frown, And make them hang their troubled Faces down. Again I say, let proud Oppressors struck With Terror, tremble at thy angry look. With thy fierce Rage oppress the wicked Race, Who in their Wealth and Power their safety place: Do these great things, and I my self will grant, That independant Iob does no Assistance want. But now to humble and amaze thee more, To make thee in the Dust thy self abhor; Remark thy fellow Creature Behemoth, A Beast so strong, of such prodigious growth, That if on Flesh he feasted, what supplys For such a mighty Hunger would suffice? His vast capacious Belly would consume Whole Flocks at once, and numerous Herds entomb.
Such Desolation to prevent, and spare The living World, it was the Maker's care, That pleas'd with Herbs he should incline his Head, And like the Ox, should graze along the Mead. O Man, contemplate with a serious thought, How firm and strong his Muscles all are wrought: Not only of his Back and Loyns, but those Which his prodigious Belly do enclose. His wondrous Trunk he like a Cedar moves, Or a tall Pine, that in the Mountain Groves, Are by the Fury of a stormy Wind, With mighty sway from side to side inclin'd. The vig'rous Sinews of his Thighs, are bound Like complicated Cords, all wrap'd and wound, And knit so fast, that to the gen'rous Beast They give such Strength, as ne'er can be opprest. Bones firm as Brass sustain the pond'rous frame, Or Bars of Iron, temper'd in the Flame. Tho' midst the various salvage Brotherhoods, That range the Mountains, and infest the Woods, Are many Creatures that in Force excel, Vast for their Bulk, for fierceness terrible; Yet this chief work of mine, this mighty Beast, Exceeds in Strength and Structure all the rest. To wound his Foe, and guard himself from harms, His wondrous active Trunk, his native Arms, To this prodigious Beast his Maker gave, Which he on high does as a Fauchion wave. For Pasture he frequents the verdant Plains, And grassy Hills, where he a Monarch reigns;
To which the Forrest Beasts in Troops resort, And by the Huntsmen unmolested sport. Thence to the Groves he does for Rest retreat, Or to the Covert of a Reedy Seat. He lies extended in the shady Wood, Or by the Willows that adorn the Flood. When to the Stream he does his Mouth apply, To quench his Thirst, he drinks the River dry. When faint with toil, and panting with his drought, He hastens to the Banks, he makes no doubt But he can from its Channel Iordan draw Down his wide Throat, to the deep Gulph his Maw. What hardy Mortal can approach his Sight? Who dares attempt a fair and open Fight? By Violence whoever undertook, To fasten in his Nose the servile Hook? CH. XLI. Canst thou stand Angling on the Banks of Nile, And with thy Bait Leviathan beguile? Then strike the bearded Iron thro' his Jaw, And thro' the Flood the flouncing Monster draw? Hast thou a Line to hold him? canst thou guide, And play him with thy Rod along the Tyde? Till spent and tir'd, thou canst his Strength command, And on the Flaggy Bank the gasping Captive Land? Will he, like Men o'erwhelm'd in sore distress, To thee soft Words, and humble Prayers address? Will he with tender Accents thee entreat, Thy pity to excite his moan repeat?
Him as a menial Servant wilt thou take? Wilt thou a solemn Contract with him make? Will he his Empire o'er the Waters quit? Will he to serve a Master e'er submit? Will he a tame Domestic with thee stay, Fawn on thy Sons, and with thy Daughters play? Shall the glad Fishermen divide the Spoil, To recompence their hazard and their toil? Shall each his Portion to the Market bear, And to the Merchant sell for Gold his Share? Canst thou his Head with bearded Spears divide, Or pierce the scaly Armour of his side? Suppose that thou hast Courage to assail The furious Beast, would Spears or Darts prevail? Shouldst thou with Life escape, his dreadful Rage Thou wouldst remember, and no more engage. The Hopes the bravest Warriours entertain, Of Conq'ring him, presumptuous are and vain. Would not the boldest Mortal, in despight Of all his Courage, at the dreadful sight Of such a Creature, pale with terror stand; And drop his Weapons from his trembling hand? Is there a Man so fierce and fearless found, That dares tho' clad in Steel, approach the ground Where midst the Reeds the Monster lies at ease, And will adventure to disturb his Peace? Is there a Man, that does not Courage lack, To touch the scaly Coat that cloaths his Back? The most intrepid Chief, that dares advance Against the brandish'd Sword, and threat'ning Lance,
With Consternation seiz'd, in haste withdraws, Far from the reach of his expanded Jaws. Then canst thou Iob, of me be not afraid, Who the vast Beast, and all his Terrors made? Whoe'er on me did Obligations lay, Which by my favours I did ne'er repay? To clear the Debt can't I Rewards bestow, Lord of the Worlds above, and this below? But let us more distinctly yet explore The Frame, the comely Parts and wondrous pow'r Of my stupendous Creature, nam'd before. He that his Mouth dares open, would disclose The bloody Throne of Death, long murth'ring Rows Of Spearlike Teeth, which fixt on either hand, Along his Jaws in dreadful order stand. Impenetrable Scales, like Plates of Brass; In beauteous Figures set, his Sides encase. Clad in this Coat of Mail, his Martial Pride, He does the Spear and glitt'ring Dart deride. They're all so firmly fixt, so closely joyn'd, That Air it self can no admission find. In strict embraces they together grow, Embraces that can ne'er Division know. Whene'er he Sneezes, from his Nostrils flies A flash, like Lightning darting thro' the Skys. The lustre of his Eyes the Meads adorn, Bright as the Saffron Eye-lids of the Morn. His reeking Breath breaks from his hollow Throat, As from a Forge or Caldron, boiling hot.
If hardy Swains his fury dare provoke, His raging Nostrils belch out Clouds of Smoke. From his wide Mouth, mingled with choaking steams, Impetuous Sparks fly out, and fiery Streams. His Neck, tho' not of formidable length, Is the Imperial Throne and Seat of Strength. Triumphant Terror, with its dreadful Reer, Amazement, Sorrow, Woe and shiv'ring Fear, Marching before, his hideous Pomp compose, And seize on all around him where he goes. The solid Strings of his hard Flesh, are wound So fast together, and so firmly bound, That Men can scarce by Violence or Art, Th' adhering Muscles, and strong Sinews part. His unrelenting Heart as Marble hard, Did ne'er Compassion's tender Moan regard. Mercy's soft Fire did never melt his Breast, Which never Fear, or Pity yet exprest. Try all thy Arts, thy Prayers and Tears repeat, Thou't find thou only dost a Rock entreat, All thy recoiling Strokes will but an Anvil beat. But if amidst the Waves he reers his Head, The most undaunted Hearts his Presence dread. Such is their Consternation, such their Fright, They know not whither to direct their Flight; They can't escape, nor yet abide his sight. Let them with Sword in hand the Beast attack, The Steel will break in pieces on his Back.
In vain the Spear and Dart th' Assailant weilds, His Scales are all impenetrable Shields; His harden'd Skin ne'er to the Jav'lin yields. Weapons of Iron made of every kind, Which the destructive Wit of Man can find; He values as the Bullrush by the Flood, And those of Brass, as Spears of rotten Wood. Thick Showers of Arrows singing thro' the Sky, His Courage cannot shake, and make him fly. He counts vast Stones, with Skill and Fury slung, And Darts as Stubble, by th' Invader flung. Against him when the clam'rous Troops advance, He smiles at Spears, and mocks the threatning Lance. The sharpest Weapons from his Back recoil, And with their Shivers spred the miry Soil. When thro' the Deep he rolls from side to side, And tumbles in the Bottom of the Tyde; He shakes the Banks, and troubles all the Waves, Like Tempests loos'd from Subterranean Caves. His motion works, and beats the Oazy Mud, And with its Slime incorporates the Flood; That all th' encumber'd, thick, fermenting Stream, Does one vast Pot of boiling Oyntment seem. Whene'er he Swims, he leaves along the Lake, Such frothy Furrows, such a foamy Track, That all the Waters of the Deep appear Hoary with Age, or Grey with suddain fear. On Earth, in Strength his Equal is not found, For tho' he's low and creeps along the ground,
Yet he the loftiest, proudest Beast disdains, And o'er the fruitful Vally Monarch reigns. The strongest Creatures his dread Presence fear, Whom he in pastime can in pieces tear. CH. XLII. These awful words, in which so brightly shine Wisdom and Power, and Majesty Divine; Did Iob awaken, and his Grief renew, Setting his Errors fully in his View: Who now a just and free Confession made, Humbly submitted to his God, and said: Thy Wisdom all thy Creatures reach transcends, Far as thy Will thy Power its Sphear extends. All thy Designs thou wilt at last compleat, No Force or Art can thy Wise Ends defeat. As thou art pleas'd to crush me, thou hast Power, If thou wert pleas'd, my Substance to restore. Convinc'd by thy Reproofs, I freely own, That I have rash, audacious Folly shown; Vent'ring with Reason's short and treach'rous Line, To sound the Depths of Providence Divine. Searching the secret Counsels of thy Breast, I have presumptuous Forwardness exprest. My rash and unconsider'd Words, and all My Censures of thy Conduct I recall. My stupid Arrogance I now condemn, That made me speak on so sublime a Theme. Such Wonders all Created Wit exceed, And should our silent Admiration feed.
Awful, Mysterious Things to be ador'd, But not by vain and curious Heads explor'd. O, let thy Anger be appeas'd, and hear My humble Questions with a gracious Ear. I will no more to Knowledge make pretence, Or of thy Power, or of thy Providence. Do thou instruct me, let thy Heav'nly Light Dispel the hov'ring Shades that cloud my Sight. Let Truth Divine its glorious Beams display, Remove the Night, and bless my Mind with Day. Something I own I understood before, Both of thy Wisdom, and thy mighty Power, But since thy dreadful Glory I beheld, Those Attributes more clearly are reveal'd. Wherefore a Sting does in my Bosom stick, And self-displeasure wounds me to the quick; When I reflect on my Behaviour past, My bold Aspersions on th' Almighty cast. That I thy Strokes did with Reluctance bear, And wish'd for Death so oft in my Despair, As if the Righteous Man no longer were thy Care. My arrogant Discourses I repent, My Charges brought against thy Government; Now drown'd in Tears my Errors I lament. I grieve that grown impatient of thy Rod, I justify'd my self against my God. So much th' Almighty this Confession pleas'd, That against Iob his Anger was appeas'd.
Then turning, thus to Eliphaz he spoke, But thou, and these thy Friends my Wrath provoke. For you have all perverse Constructions made, Of those Afflictions I on Iob have laid. Who, notwithstanding all his Faults, I own, Has spoken better far than you have done. Sev'n Bullocks then, and Rams as many take, And go to Iob, he shall Atonement make, Which I'll accept, for his my Servant's sake. He shall to me his Supplications send, And I to you my Mercy will extend. Let this be done, lest on your guilty Head My Vengeance fall, because as I have said, My ways you wrested to an evil sense, And represented ill my Providence, And would not hear my Servant Iob's defence. These three wise Friends, of Wrath Divine afraid, Their due Submission to th' Almighty made, And Iob to be their Intercessour pray'd. His humble Prayer th' Almighty did receive, And these Offenders for his sake forgive. While Iob this Duty for his Friends discharg'd, God from his Straights the Patient Man enlarg'd. He now began that Vigour to restore, And all the Blessings he enjoy'd before. Nor did he cease his Bounty to repeat, Till he had made him twice as rich and great. Then all his Friends and Kindred, who as Foes Had Iob deserted in his Straits and Woes,
Of his Deliv'rance when they heard the Fame, To show their Joy, in Throngs around him came. And when they first his Losses had condol'd, And for his Suff'rings past their Sorrow told; They their Congratulations did express, For this his unexpected Happiness. Each in his Hand did for a Present bear, Or Coyn, or golden Pendant for the Ear. Thus God chastis'd him with a kind intent, And made him Poor, his Riches to augment. The Herds and Woolly Flocks he once possest, Now to a double number were increast. His fruitful Wife his Offspring to restore, Sev'n goodly Sons, and three fair Daughters bore. One was Iemima, one Kesia nam'd, The third was Kerenhappuch, Virgins fam'd For charming Beauty, which the Sisters blest Beyond the fairest Daughters of the East. Iob did not, as the Custom was to do, These with small Portions of his Goods endow. But being with his Sons Coheirs declar'd, With them his vast Inheritance they shar'd. God after this so happy turn of Fate, Encreast his Years, as much as his Estate. Of Years an Hundred, and twice Twenty more, To those were added, which he liv'd before. So the Good Man his numerous Progeny, Did to the fourth Succession live to see. Then ripe with Hoary Age, and fully pleas'd, He dyed, or rather, he from Living ceas'd.
THE SONGS of Moses, Deborah, &c. WITH SOME Select Psalms and Chapters of Isaiah, AND THE Third Chapter of Habakkuk, PARAPHRAS'D. By Sir Richard Blackmore, Kt. M. D.
THE Song of MOSES PARAPHRAS'D. EXODUS, Chap. XV. YOur Shouts to Heav'n, ye Sons of Iacob raise, And celebrate in Songs of Praise The glorious Triumphs of Iehovah's Pow'r, Applaud th' Almighty Conquerour. Let all the wide stretcht Mouths of Fame, From Pole to Pole his wondrous Work proclaim, To make Men tremble, and adore his Name. Let it to all the Realms around be known, How he his Foes has overthrown: How he disclos'd the Water's hideous Womb, And did in Crystal Graves their Troops entomb. They sunk and perish'd in the Tyde, Where now triumphant Waves o'er Horse and Horsemen ride. He is our Bulwark and Defence, Shielded by his Omnipotence We all the Heathen World defy: This mighty Warriour, this our great Ally, With his Etherial Shield and Arms Divine, Does at the head of our Battalions shine.
Griping his bright Immortal Lance He does before our Host to charge the Foe advance. Israel by strength deriv'd from him is strong, And as he is our Strength, he shall be too our Song. He to discharge us from our Bondage, broke Th' inexorable Tyrant's Yoke. He from our heavy Chains our Feet releas'd, And our gall'd Shoulders of their Burdens eas'd. He brought us from th' inhospitable Land, And rescu'd us from Pharoah's salvage hand. He terribly chastis'd these Pagan Pow'rs; And as this Lord of Hosts was ours, He was our Fathers All-sufficient God; We therefore will prepare him an Abode: We will an Altar and a Temple reer, A sacred Place of Praise and Pray'r, There we'll adore our great Deliverer. Th' Eternal does in Arms excel; What Pow'r can his projected Darts repel? Who can against his Thunder stand, Or who elude his never-erring Hand? Let him but weild his dreadful Blade Of malleable Light'ning made, Let him advance into the Field, And lift on high his Adamantine Shield, Whose brighter Lustre drowns the waining Sun, As much as that the sick'ning Moon;
Let him with his Celestial Equipage March on as ready to engage; And where's th' undaunted Man that would not fly, Or if he stay'd, would not with Terror dye. He sharply has rebuk'd th' Egyptian's Pride, Who his Almighty Arm defy'd. Against their mighty Host he did prepare An unexpected Watry War. He on the Deep his Terrors did display, And drew his rolling Legions in Array: He bad the Waves in Martial Order flow, And made his fluid Squadrons charge the Foe. Th' amaz'd Egyptians fled for fear, While roaring Surges hung upon their Rear: The foaming Files o'ertook them in the Chase, And overwhelm'd the cruel Race. Bows, Banners, Spears, an unexampled Wreck, Lay floating on the Ocean's back. While Chariots, Horse and Horsemen kill'd, The Seas inferiour Chambers fill'd. The mighty Host the Caves beneath opprest, And the low horrors of the Deep increast. Of such a wealthy Spoil the Sea before Ne'er rob'd the Land, while pent within the Shore. While no Detachment of its Waves it made, The Frontier Regions to invade, No Watry Partys sent abroad To sweep the neighb'ring Fields, and plunder Mns Abode.
High heaps of Swords and Bucklers stood Like Rocks of polish'd Iron in the Flood. The Fish made hast to seize their Prey, But when they saw the shining Shields display Thro' the dark Realm a monstrous unknown Day, And how the Dead in Armour shone With scaly Sides far brighter than their own; Away th' affrighted Spoilers fled, And thus their Arms that could not give Protection to th' Egyptians when alive, Protected them when Dead. Like Stones they sank beneath the Flood, And the Red Sea appeas'd their Thirst of Blood. Glorious in Pow'r, great Lord of Hosts, Is thy right hand which such Atchievments boasts, Which has defeated Pharoah's Troops, And sunk to Hell the proud Egyptian's Hopes. In the low Prisons of the Deep Thou dost thy Captive Rebels keep, Mountains of liquid Crystal on 'em cast, Secure the Doors, and bar the Dungeons fast. Array'd with fearful Glory, girt with Might, Thou didst thy Peoples Battels fight. Thou hast o'erthrown the impious Foes, Who against thee and Israel rose; They were in Storms of Fury on them pour'd, As Stubble is by raging Flames devour'd.
Commanded by thy Breath th' obsequious Main Stood still, and gather'd up its flowing Train. Th' Almighty did the Sea divide, And as he rends the Hills, he split the cleaving Tyde. Benumb'd with fear the Waves erected stood, O'erlooking all the distant Flood. Mountains of Craggy Billows did arise, And Rocks of stiffen'd Water reach'd the Skys. Remoter Waves came crowding on to see This strange Transforming Mystery, But they approaching near Where the high Crystal Ridges did appear, Felt the Divine Contagion's Force, Mov'd slothfully a while, and then quite stopt their course. Upon their March they insolently cry'd, Let us pursue the flying Slaves, We'll overtake them, and the Spoil divide, Where is the God that Israel saves? We'll our Revenge, and Lust of Slaughter cloy, Without relenting we'll destroy, We'll weild the Spear, and draw the Sword, And root this Nation out by all abhor'd. We'll bath the Desart with a Purple Flood, And heal its gaping Wounds with Hebrew Blood! While one vile Wretch alive is found, The Trumpet no retreat shall sound. In dreadful Language we'll declare, Th' Egyptians still their Masters are.
Tho' their Rebellion they should mourn, And ask to Egypt's Brick-kilns to return, We would not spare the hateful Race, We would all marks of Iacob's House efface. Let 'em to Moses cry they are opprest, While we in Vengeance reign, and on Destruction feast. As thus the Gulph the proud Egyptians crost, And with loud threats pursu'd our trembling Host, Thou with thy powerful Wind didst blow, And strait the thawing Heaps began to flow. The Waves that stood as Bullwarks were dissolv'd, And Pharoah's Chariots and his Troops involv'd. They from the roaring Deluge would have fled, But to the bottom sank as Lead. Among the Gods of all the Nations round, Equal to thee is any found? Any that can with Rival Glory shine, And shew as perfect Holiness as thine? When we thy various Triumphs sing, And great Atchievments which exalt thy Name, To us thy Praises Joy and Comfort bring, But to thy Foes Confusion, Fear and Shame. Thou art a wonder-working God, thy Might Does all thy trembling Enemys affright, But grateful Admiration in our Breasts excite. When thou extendest o'er the Tyde Thy hand, that does all Nature guide,
The conscious Waves the high Command obey'd, Like melting heaps of Snow they flow'd apace, Marching with fury on, they disarray'd, Then swallow'd up the impious Race. In great Compassion thou hast broke Th' Oppressor's hard unsufferable Yoke; For Iacob's Sons in Person thou hast fought, Amazing Miracles hast wrought, And Israel back from Egypt brought. To sacred Canaan's promis'd Land, Thou with thy mighty outstretcht hand Shalt rescu'd Israel guide, Where with thy favour blest they shall in Peace abide. Fame shall together with these Tydings spread Thro' all the Nations Universal dread; Wild looks and gestures shall declare, How great their Fears and Sorrows are. Th' Inhabitants of Palestina's Land Shall trembling and astonish'd stand, Edom's proud Potentates shall be afraid, And Moab's mighty Men dismay'd. The dreadful News shall make pale Tyrants start, And melt within his Breast the stoutest Warriour's Heart. The Lords of Canaan shall their fears express, And all their People their distress. The Terrors of thy Conqu'ring Arm, These of their Strength and Courage shall disarm.
Thy Wonders will their Captains so amaze, That they will still and Speechless stand and gaze; While Iacob's Sons by thee from Bondage brought, The People thou hast bought, And for the Purchase newly made, Such mighty Sums of Miracles hast paid, To Canaans happy Land shall safely be convey'd. Thither thou'lt lead the favour'd Race, And give them safe Possession of the Place; Thou wilt fulfil thy great design, By planting there these Colonys Divine, Their happy Dwellings shall be spread, Around Moriah's lofty head, On which thy sacred Dome shall stand, Diffusing pious Awe thro' all the Land. The Lord shall rule with Power and Glory crown'd, No Time or Space shall e'er his Empire bound. Immortal Pillars his sixt Throne sustain, And as himself, Eternal is his Reign. Not like proud Pharoah's, who his Army led To chase our Youth, who from his Fury fled. Who enter'd with his Troops the opening Sea, And hop'd to pass the dreadful Defile; But God who had his way beset, Drew o'er the Host his watry Net; To finish this miraculous Campaign, He loos'd the Bonds that did the Waves restrain;
Strait the congested Billows tumbled down, And liquid Ruins did the Tyrant drown: His Chariots and his Horse were swept away, Ingulph'd, and swallow'd by th' o'erwhelming Sea. But the firm Waters did erected stand, On either hand, And left dry ground between till Israel gain'd the Land.
THE Song of DEBORAH PARAPHRAS'D. JUDGES, Chap. V. LET the Victorious Tribes of Israel sing, Let their loud Shouts thro' Heav'ns wide Chambers ring. Let them applaud with one united Voice, Their God, the glorious Author of their Joys. Let them Triumphant Acclamations raise, And spend the Breath he gives them, in his Praise. He has our Swords with Conquest crown'd, And spread the fear of Israel's Name around. He to avenge us on our Foes, Has crush'd the haughty Pow'rs that did our Arms oppose. Our Troops from Heav'n with noble Zeal inspir'd, The glorious Hazards of the Field desir'd. God fir'd their Veins with Military Rage, And made 'em long for Arms, and eager to engage. Ye Potentates and Princes hear, Ye Kings and Rulers of the Earth give Ear. I Deb'rah I, will in a lofty strain Sing the great King, by whom you live and reign.
When God in Person did our Tribes command, And led 'em with a mighty Hand From wild Arabia's Rocks to Canaan's Land: As soon as he had pass'd the Field, By th' Idumean Farmer till'd, What marks of Greatness did his March attend? What Pow'r in Miracles did he expend? What Terrors did he send before to fright The Lords of Canaan and the Amorite? What Pomp and Majesty did he display? Floods of impetuous Glory delug'd all his way. From his refulgent Sword, and radiant Shield, Flushes of rapid Splendor spread the Field. The trembling Heathen fled for fear, For who could such a stress of Lustre bear? At every step th' Almighty Leader took, Th' astonish'd Earth down to its Center shook. Contending Tempests bellow'd under ground, And strong Convulsions did with horrid sound The low Apartments break, and all the Vaults confound. The Earth with dreadful Gripes was sore opprest, Which did its twisted Bowels wrest. From their low Channels, Subterranean Waves Were thrown on Sulphur Mines, and fiery Caves. The Chasms of gaping Plains and Mountains rent, Did yield to struggling Vapours vent, And suffocated Nature to relieve, To ambient Air admission give.
Heav'ns Crystal Battlements to pieces dash'd, In Storms of Hail were downward hurl'd; Loud Thunder roar'd, red Lightning flash'd, And universal Uproar fill'd the World. Torrents of Water, Floods of Flame From Heav'n in fighting Ruins came. At once the Hills that to the Clouds aspire, Were wash'd with Rain, and scorcht with Fire. The Waters down the Mountains Sides were pour'd, And o'er the Vale th' unbridled Deluge roar'd. Canaan's proud Hills with this affright Shook to their Base, and well they might; For Sinai rock'd and quak'd, when God Made on its Brow his terrible Abode. In Shamgar's and in Iael's days, Robbers and Thieves infested all the ways. These Sons of Violence pursu'd their Prey On publick Roads in open day. Poor Trav'llers to escape the cruel hands Of these Licentious, lawless Bands, They pass'd thro' Ways and Paths unknown, Yet still in fear, from Town to Town. The trembling People by these Spoilers scar'd, To Towns of Strength in Troops repair'd. They left their old Abodes to be possest By Owls and Bats, and every rav'ning Beast: Until their fruitful Land at last, Became a wild Inhospitable Wast.
O Israel, these were thy sad Wants and Woes, These thy Oppressions when I Deb'rah rose; When I arose a Mother to restore Thy former Peace, and Wealth, and Pow'r. Till then thy blind Apostate Sons forsook Theirs, and their Father's God, and took New fangled Gods, of old unknown, Gods lately into Reputation grown, Gods carv'd in Wood, or cut in Stone. Heav'n thus provok'd, excited Foes, Who full of rage against our Citys rose. Confed'rate Kingdoms War with Israel wag'd, And horrid Slaughter in our Bowels rag'd: And well it might, for we were so disarm'd, That when the Foe our Gates alarm'd, Did there a single Shield or Spear, Midst forty Thousand Israelites appear? O Israel then, I rose to rescue thee From thy vile Chains to set thee free. Nor can my Song too much exalt the Fame Of those great Chiefs, who freely came To give me Aid, and to subdue our Foes, Did gen'rously their Lives expose. Give them their due Applause, but chiefly bless The God, who gave them Courage and Success.
Ye Lords in Courts of Judgment who preside, And thro' the Streets in awful State, With num'rous Trains attended ride, Th' Almighty's wondrous Work relate. Ye People who can leave your safe Abodes, And travel now secure in Publick Roads; You that do now in Joy and Peace, Your Fig-trees and your Vines possess; You who no more the noise of Archers hear, But unmolested to your Springs repair; Do you rehearse God's righteous Deeds, Whence this your unexpected Peace proceeds. Awake, awake, O Deborah, awake, Quickly thy Harp and Timbrel take. A Song of Triumph and of Joy rehearse, In lofty Strains, and noble Verse. A Song that may just Honour pay To the great Deeds of this illustrious Day. O Barak rise, arise thou valiant Chief, Whose Conqu'ring Arms have brought relief To Israel in our vast distress, And made our haughty Foes their Impotence confess. Thou mighty Man advance, and lead along Thy Spoils and Trophys thro' the cleaving Throng, Thy Captives lead in clanking Chains, All their vast Army's small Rematns.
Thou who the dreadful Battel didst display On that decisive, glorious Day, Now draw thy Pomp and Triumph in Array. Iacob's Remains by Heav'n with Empire crown'd Have laid their Yoke on Canaan's Kings around. Ev'n me the Lord has rais'd to Regal Sway, And made the Mighty my Commands obey. Thy Sons did first the War embrace, Forward in Arms, O Benjamin; And next to thee a few of Ephraim's Race Advanc'd, and joyn'd their Troops with thine. Rulers and Nobles from Manasses came, Whose brave example did the rest inflame. The Scribes of Zebulun, and learned Men, To weild the Sword laid down the Pen. The Princes and the Lords of Issachar? Despising Danger, undertook the War. With Zeal they follow'd me their Head, And Barak to the Field their valiant Squadrons led. Ah Reuben, how were we dismay'd, To be defrauded of thy Aid! Ah, why didst thou desert thy Country's Cause? Why did not Reuben share this day's applause? Say when thy Breth'ren arm'd with Sword and Shield, For Liberty advanc'd into the Field, Why didst thou sullen in thy Tents abide, As if in Blood and Int'rest not Ally'd?
Couldst thou to Arms thy Shepherd's Crook prefer, And rather chuse thy bleating Sheep to hear, Than the loud Thunder of a noble War? Oh, how much Trouble to our State, Did this ignoble Deed of thine create? Gilead beyond the Flood of Iopran stay'd, And of the haughty Foe afraid, Refus'd to give his Brethren Aid. Dan on his Wealth and Shipping too intent, No Succours to our Army sent. Asher with like inglorious Negligence, Trusting to Rocks and Caves as his defence, Stay'd on the Shore, and no Assistance gave, Our Worship, or our Liberty to save. But oh! what wondrous Deeds were done By Napthali and Zebulun! With what an ardour, what a warlike rage Did those brave Men in Fight engage? Methinks I see those Warriours make Their bold and irresistible Attack. Greedy and fond of Danger, they The Squadrons cleft, and cut the way To the chief Places of the Field, Which did the chiefest choice of ruin yield, Which were with plenty of Destruction stor'd, And all the horrid shapes of danger did afford: Where Death triumphant in the Battel stood, Besmear'd with Brains, and Dust, and Blood.
Great Potentates of formidable Fame, Captains and Kings against us came; Their confluent Troops from every Coast, Compos'd a vast o'erlowing Host. We saw th' advancing Deluge from afar, And all the must'ring Tydes of complicated War. They stopt, and in Battalia stood, Upon the Banks of Kishon's Flood; Thither our eager Squadrons flew, There did we fight, and there proud Iabin's Troops subdue. The radiant Host of Stars above Drew out, and did in warlike order move. They did their Darts from Heav'n's high Turrets throw, And charg'd with fatal influence the Foe. They to our Aid their glitt'ring Forces brought And against Sisera in their Courses fought. O Kishon, then thy troubled Tyde Was choak'd with Carcasses, with Crimson dy'd. Swords, Helmets, Shields roll'd all beneath, And of the lighter Instruments of Death Spears, Arrows, Darts, a floating Wood O'erspread the surface of thy Flood. Thy current swept their Troops away, And with their mighty Spoils enrich'd the wondring Sea. Thy banks, and all the Vale about, Were spread with marks of ignominious rout.
Chariots o'erturn'd, and scatter'd Shields, And broken Hoofs deform'd the Fields: Hoofs torn, and on the stony places cast, O'er which the flying Horsemen past. Accurst th' Almighty's Angel cry'd, Accurst be Meroz who her help deny'd. Vengeance and Plagues on her vile People light, Who would not for their God and Country fight. But let us Iael's Courage sing, Let loud Applauses thro' our Citys ring Of Heber's Wife, above the rest Of Womankind may she be blest. Great Sis'ra choak'd with heat and dust; Demanded Water from the Spring; She to allay the Gen'ral's thirst, Did Milk and Cream in costly Vessels bring. She to the Nail the left apply'd, And with her right hand did the Hammer guid. And as the mighty Sisera Stretcht on the Pavement leeping lay, Th' undaunted Woman with a noble blow, Drove in the Nail, and pierc'd his Temples thro. Amaz'd, not waken'd with the Wound, He sprung, and bounded from the ground: The brave Virago did her blow repeat, And laid him prostrate at her feet. He bow'd and fell, and gasping lay, Quiver'd and groan'd his Life away.
She drew his Sword, and with a Manly stroke, The Warriours Head from off his Shoulders took. His Mother looking thro' her Window said, Why is his Triumph thus delay'd? Why does his lingring Chariot stay? Why roll his Wheels so slowly on the way? Her Maids, nay, she her self reply'd, The Conqu'rors stay their Booty to divide. The distribution made, each Chief can shew A Damsel for his share, or two. But Sis'ra's Prey outshines the rest, His is a party-colour'd Vest Which Gems and rich Embroidery adorn, Fit by the greatest Princes to be worn. These boastful words she spoke, while Sisera Dead in the Tent of Iael lay. Lord let his Fate attend thine Enemys, So let them perish who against thee rise. But let the Men who Wickedness abhor, Who love thee, and thy Name adore, Be like the Sun, Who when refresh'd, does in his Vigour rise, Eager to run All the blew Stages of the spacious Skys.
David's Lamentation, Occasion'd by the Death of Saul and Ionathan. 1 SAMUEL, Chap. I. WHen Ionathan and Saul expiring lay, On the curst Hills of Gilba, (Ah black, inglorious, fatal Day!) 'Twas then, unhappy Israel, Thy Beauty, Strength and Glory fell. How were thy mighty Warriours slain? What a red Deluge bath'd the reeking Plain? How were thy Sons to Conquest long inur'd, How were thy Valiant Chiefs devour'd By the Philistine's unrelenting Sword? How terrible, how sudden was their Fate? These Pillars fal'n that prop'd thy State, Who shall support thy sinking Empire's weight? Let Fame be struck with horror dumb, That to our Foes the News may never come. Let our dishonour be to Gath unknown, Proclaim it not in Askelon; Lest if their Daughters come to know Our loss, and unexampled Woe,
They in their Feasts and Dances should express, Insultingly their Joy at our distress; And impiously 'devout, should raise Their carv'd and graven Gods, in wicked Songs of P Ye Hills of Gilba, the fatal place, O'er which the Foe did Israel chase, Ye luckless Hills, Spred with your Monarch's Ignominious Spoils, May you the marks of Heav'n's displeasure bear; Be you no more the Farmer's care: Let no kind Cloud hereafter, pour On your parch'd Heads one fruitful Shower: May the relentless, harden'd Sky, No Rain by Day, or Dew by Night supply To ease your Thirt, and gaping clefts cement; With Fire be blasted, and with Thunder rent. Let not a blade of Grass or Corn, Nor one green Tree your Heads adorn. By Heav'n accurst, to future Ages stand Uncultivated Heaps of barren Sand. For vanquish'd Israel o'er these Mountains fled, There with ignoble Rout the Fields were spred, There lay our Weapons mingled with our Dead▪ There scatter'd Bucklers lay, Which routed Israel cast away. There may the Shield of Saul▪ be found, Midst common Bucklers on the ground. Thy Body too, unhappy Monarch, there Lys mixt with vulgar Corps, expos'd in open Air.
O Saul, O Ionathan, ye mighty Dead, You ne'er before in Battel fled. The Arrows from the Son's unerring Bow, Have pierc'd ten thousand valiant Warriours thro'. The Father's unresisted Sword, Like raging Fires around devour'd: By no Opposer e'er withstood, The crimson Conq'ror reek'd in Hostile Blood. Till now, you ever us'd to come. Laden with Spoils and Trophys home. Your Chariots thro' the confluent, gazing Throng, Us'd in slow State to roll along: While crowds of Captive Princes chain'd, Wiping their Brows with dust and sweat distain'd, Did panting in the Pomp appear, Part of the long Procession of the Rear. Our Daughters, both in Mind and Habit gay, With Songs and Dances on the way, Met, and increast the Triumph of the Day. Thus Vict'ry us'd to crown The mighty Father, and the valiant Son. Now vanquish'd, o'er the Hills they fly From the pursuing Enemy. Surprising change of Providence, Those who resistless were, can now make no defence! So courteous were the Royal Pair, So condescending, mild and Debonnair, That they became to all the Nation dear.
No more their kindness fail'd to move The People's universal Love, Than their fam'd Courage did their Neighbours fear. They liv'd in strongest bonds of Love combin'd, And as they liv'd, so they together dy'd; So close was their Affection joyn'd, That Death it self could not the knot divide. For tho' they fell opprest with Pagan Power, Their Love still triumph'd o'er the Conquerour. And yet their Clemency did ne'er abate Their Courage, and their Martial heat. For they, as swift as hungry Eagles, flew, Or to attack, or to pursue: And when they were in fight engag'd, Like Lyons when provok'd, they thro' the Battel rag'd. O Daughters of Ierusalem express, A Sorrow worthy of our vast distress. Unite your Groans and mournful Crys, Unite your Tears and Agonys. Apply your selves to weeping day and night, Raptures of Grief be your Delight. Thro' every Street lamenting go, Strains of unruly Anguish show, And howling Tempsts raise of wild despairing Woe. too exquisite Affliction can't be shown, Since Saul is fal'n from his Imperial Throne. Saul lys upon the Mountains dead, Who with abundance Israel fed:
Who gave you Garments glorious to behold, Scarlet adorn'd with Needle-work and Gold. Who hung rich Bracelets on your Arms, And with bright Gems increas'd your native Charms. Whose Arms enrich'd your Towns with precious Spoil, And fill'd with Foreign Wealth Iudea's happy Soil. How did the mighty Prince, and all His valiant Chiefs in Battel fall! How are the Hills with Slaughter spred! How are our Captive Sons in Triumph led! Captives who drag th' inglorious Chain, Captives less happy than the Slain! Horror and Shame! hark, how the shouting Foe, How proud Philistia mocks our Woe! Thro' all their Streets what Acclamations ring? Hear how their Daughters sing, See how they dance, While their victorious Troops with Israel's Spoils advance▪ O Israel, where is now thy warlike Fame? How will thy once much dreaded Name, By Foes so often vanquish'd, be despis'd By all the Nations of th' Uncircumcis'd? Oh Ionathan, how dear wert thou to me? How dear must be thy Memory? No Time can from my Breast remove Thy Image, or thy wondrous love:
A Love, like which we none recorded find, A Love surpassing that of Womankind. Their Love was ne'er so tender, pure and strong, And never lasted in excess so long. What gen'rous Friendship hast thou shown, What dreadful Dangers undergone, To raise thy Rival to thy Father's Throne? Kindest of Brothers, my afflicted Soul, Does thy unhappy Fall condole. Thy suddain, thy disast'rous Fate, Does Agonies of Grief create. As in a Storm, my rolling Bowels move With strong Convulsive Throws of sad, distracted Love. I would the highest marks express Of uncontroul'd, unmerciful distress: For if my Grief does not outrageous grow, 'Tis unbecoming my unmeasur'd Woe, Nothing's enough that's less than all that Love can show.
THE Second PSALM PARAPHRAS'D. WHat means this mighty Uproar? whence arise This great Commotion, these tumultuous Crys? What has alarm'd the Nations? what offence Does all the jealous States around incense? What does the Heathen Fire with so much Rage? What Iacob's Sons in such Designs engage As they can ne'er effect, or if they do, They'll miss the end they furiously pursue? Infatuated Men! you'll sure repent Your rash Attempts, too late the sad event Will show your Projects vain, your Malice impotent. Confed'rate Princes wicked Friendship make, And in their Anger desp'rate Councels take Against their great Creator and his Son, And hope the Lord's Anointed to dethrone. Let us, say they, assert our Liberty, And keep our Kingdoms from Oppression free. We'll ne'er agree to vindicate the Cause Of this new King, nor e'er obey his Laws.
Th' Almighty sets his Fav'rite up in vain, We'll ne'er consent to this Usurper's Reign. We his proud Yoke will never tamely bear, But will his servile Chains asunder tear. But the great God who sits enthron'd on high, Above the Starry Convex of the Sky, Insultingly will mock their foolish Pride, Laugh at their Threats, and their vain Plots deride. In fiery Indignation, he shall pass A dreadful Sentence on this impious Race. The marks of high Displeasure he shall show, And pour Destruction on th' audacious Foe. Thus from his Throne sublime th' Eternal spoke, And with his awful Voice the Frame of Nature shook, In spite of all the Princes that combine, Or to retard, or frustrate my design; On Sion's Hill my Fav'rite I'll enthrone, And fix upon his Head th' Imperial Crown. Submissive States his Empire shall obey, And at his Footstool Kings their Scepters lay. He shall Tyrannic Cruelty correct, And tenderly his Subject's Rights protect. He shall assert Divine Religion's Cause, Heav'n's sacred Int'rests manage with Applause, And rule the World with just and equal Laws. To execute his high important Charge, My Viceroy I invest with Pow'r at large:
Vast Pow'r I give him, but I give him none, But what is mixt with Mercy like my own. No other Pow'r, but what is understood To be intended for his Subjects good. His just and gentle Conduct shall confess, He seeks his Glory in their Happiness. I to the World will publish thy Decree, That raises me to Regal Dignity. Thus said the Lord, let it this Day be known, That thou art my begotten only Son, Thy high Descent let all the Nations own. Thou art intitul'd by thy Royal Birth, To all the Realms and Nations of the Earth: Make thy demand, and by my Grant divine, The Pagan States and Kingdoms shall be thine. I'll subject all the spacious tracks of Land, From Pole to Pole to thy supream command▪ Thou shalt of all the Regions be possest, From the Sun's rising to the adverse West. Only the limits which the World surround, Thy Universal Monarchy shall bound. Arm'd with a Rod of Iron thou shalt reign O'er proud Oppressors, and their Rage restrain. Thou shalt in pieces dash, like Potters Clay, Thy stubborn Foes, who insolently say, We'll ne'er his Title own, nor his Commands obey. Ye foolish Kings and Potentates be wise, And be instructed where your Safety lies.
The Son of God with Acclamations meet, And prostrate lye adoring at his feet. Bow down your Necks to take his gentle Yoke, Lest your neglect his Fury should provoke. If you refuse this Monarch to obey, Be sure you'll perish in your wicked way. For if his Wrath so dreadful does appear, When scarcely kindled, what have you to fear Who by your desp'rate Provocations raise The Spark to Flames, and make his Fury blaze? No longer your Subjection then delay, The safe and happy Men are only they Who as their Refuge and secure Defence, Repose in him their Trust and Confidence.
THE CIVth PSALM PARAPHRAS'D. MY grateful Soul th' Almighty's Name adore; Great is his Being, great his Works of Pow'r Immortal Honours, Majesty, Renown, And Dignity Divine his Temples crown. His Robe of State is wrought with Light rein'd; An endless Train of Lustre flows behind. His Throne's of massy, burnish'd Glory made, With Heav'nly Pearl, and Gems Divine inlaid: Whence Floods of Joy, and Seas of Splendour flow, On all th' Angelic gazing Throng below: Who drink in Pleasures by their ravish'd Sight, Delug'd in vast ineffable Delight. He as a Tent the Heav'n's expansion reers, And as a Curtain stretches out the Sphears. He makes the Mists his Pillars to sustain His airy Rooms, and lays their Beams in Rain. The Clouds th' Almighty's rolling Chariots bear Their Lord thro' all the spacious Fields of Air. He harnasses the manag' Winds, and flys On their swift Wings to visit all the Skys.
The various Meteors of the Air above Wait his Commands, and by his Order move. Tempests and Windy Vapours, rais'd on high To do his Will, like Menial Servants fly. Lightnings, and all his wildest Works of Fire, His Ministers, to serve their Lord conspire. These sensless Creatures such Obedience shew To their great Master, as his Angels do. To him her Father, Nature owes her Birth, He laid the deep Foundations of the Earth. He hung the pondrous heap in fluid Air, And made its weight its own Supporter there. Then he the Waters o'er its Bosom roll'd; And liquid Garments did the Earth enfold. The Rocks and Hills conceal'd in Billows stood, And o'er the Mountains tops the Deluge rais'd its Flood. God's great Command chastis'd the Water's Pride, He bad the Flood call down its tow'ring Tide, And strait the ebbing Deluge did subside. Th' Almighty form'd a vast capacious Deep, Where he his Watry Regiments might keep: The waves file off, and thither make their way, To form the mighty Body of the Sea. Where they encamp, and in their Stations stand, Entrench'd in Works of Rock and Lines of Sand. Yet some Deserters still the Sea forsake, And from their Posts by stealth Excursions make.
The Sun to some lets down his helping Ray, They climb the golden Line, and thus convey Themselves in Vapours high amidst the Air, And to the Hills aspiring heads repair. Others by secret Channels from the Deep Pass undiscern'd, and up the Mountains creep: Whence gushing out in Springs they downward flow. And thro' the flowry Vales back to the Ocean go. While God in Prison holds the mighty Deep, And does in rocky Chains the raging Monster keep, That it may ne'er surmount the ambient Shore, And with its Flood may drown the Earth no more, He to refresh, and cloath the Meads with Grass, Bids all his Rivers thro' the Vallys pass. Kindly their course th' indented Banks restrain, Kindly the Hills retard their gliding train. For thus the ling'ring Streams at leisure flow, And greater Riches on the Fields bestow. Beasts tame and salvage to the River's brink, Come from the Fields and Wilderness to drink. Thither the feather'd Singers of the Air, To quench their thirst and prune their Wings, repair. Then midst the Willows that adorn the Flood, Or on the Branches in some neighb'ring Wood, The painted Heralds in melodious Lays, Proclaim their gracious Benefactor's Praise. He from his high Aerial Chambers, where Th' Almighty Chymist does his Works prepare,
Digests his Lightnings, and distills his Rain, Pours down his Waters on the thirsty Plain. He sends refreshing Showers to cheer the Hills, And with his Bounty all the Vally fills; The Earth made fruitful with his Heav'nly drops, With a rich Harvest crowns the Farmer's Hopes. He does the Fields his open Table spred, Where all the Beasts with grassy Meat are fed. He Plants, for Food and Physic does produce Thro' all the Earth, for Man his Viceroys use. He pours from Heav'n his Rain upon the Vine, And thus converts the Water into Wine. Which does revive Man's Heart, his Cares relieve, And to his Face a better Lustre give, Than when with Oyl it does anointed shine, With Oyl, another noble Gift Divine. He fills the teeming Glebe with Crops of Corn, Which cloath the Vallys, and the Hills adorn. The Staff of Humane Life at his Command, Springs from the Furrows of the fruitful Land. He from the Clouds does the sweet Liquor squeeze, Which cheers the Forests and the Garden Trees, With the rich Juice he feeds their thirsty root, Which fills their Limbs with Sap, their Heads with Fruit. To this the Cedars that adorn the Brow Of Lebanon, their Height and Beauty owe. The Firs too thrive by drops from Heav'n distill'd, In which the Storks their Airy Houses build.
The Mountains reer'd their Heads at his Command, And Pillars to his Praise erected stand: In these, and in the Rocks, the salvage Kind, From the pursuer's Arms safe Refuge find. He form'd the Moon the Seasons to divide, And gave it Empire o'er the Ocean's tide. The Sun he burnish'd, till its Orb became A Spring of Light, and undecaying Flame. Which knows the Stages of its heav'nly way, And does by turns roll up, by turns display The wide and bright expansion of the Day. 'Tis God who made the Day, that makes the Night, He in the Air to suffocate the Light, Does from his open'd Stores of Darkness let A gloomy Deluge out of liquid Jet. He wipes the Colours off from Nature's Face, And lays on Night's deep Shadows in their place. Now the wild Beasts by Hunger bit awake, And from their drowsy Eyes their Slumber shake. From out their Dens the Spoilers yawning come, The Forests Range, and o'er the Mountains roam. Young rav'ning Lyons from the Woods retreat, Roar out to Heav'n, and beg from God their Meat. They on his Providential Care rely, Who does his Creatures various Wants supply. But when with his reviving Morning Ray The rising Sun regenerates the Day, They to their Dens retire with Toil opprest, Stretch out their weary Limbs, and take their rest.
But Man goes forth to labour in the Morn, When the tir'd Lyon does from his return. God's Works of Pow'r our Wonder, and his Praise Thro' all the World his Works of Goodness raise. To form the Sea he drew his Compass round, And with the mark it left describ'd the ground: Then dug th' unfathom'd Hollow, which the Main And all the Floods and Rivers might contain. So populous these watry Regions are, That Nations numberless inhabit there. Mute Nations that are here supply'd with Food, Whose Finny Wings divide the crystal Flood. Here 'tis the Ships along the yielding Tide, Before the Wind upon their Bellys glide. The Whale, the Soveraign that the Sea controlls, Here takes his Pleasure, and in Pastime rolls. He plays, and tumbles in his Watry Court, And troubles all the Ocean with his Sport. He makes his Spouts for his Diversion play, And toss against the Clouds th' uplifted Sea. Projected Billows from his Nostrils rise, And mix the Ocean with th' astonish'd Skys. This mighty Monster who does Monarch reign, And all the Nations that possess the Main; All creeping Creatures, Herds and harmless Flocks, All Beasts that range the Woods, or hide in Rocks, All Passengers that beat th' Etherial Road With feather'd Wings, wait for their Meat from God.
At his expence they eat, by various ways He for his numerous Family purveys. His open'd Hand dispences fresh supplys, That more than all his Creatures Wants suffice. To substitute Successors in the place Of those that perish, and to save the Race And Kind of every living Creature, God Does his prolific Spirit send abroad; Which thro' the Earth does quick'ning Pow'r diffuse, And Heat, which fresh Productions there produce. Since on the Earth th' Almighty does dispence Th' unnumber'd Blessings of his Providence, And with his Favours has all Nature crown'd, Let all the World with Songs of Joy resound. Let Men for ever bless his glorious Name, Recite his Wonders, and his Praise proclaim. If stupid Man this Tribute should neglect, His God th' ungrateful Wretch can soon correct. If on the Earth he does in Anger look, It trembles at the terrible Rebuke. It from its strong Foundations starts for fear, And twisting Gripes its working Entrails tear. The Mountains shiver, and their Heads incline At the reproof of Majesty Divine. The Hills forget they're fixt, and in their fright Of all their weight they strip themselves for flight. The Rocks from off their Marble Pillars break, And which they us'd to give, a Refuge seek.
The Woods with Terror wing'd outstrip the Wind, And leave the heavy, panting Hills behind. All Nature troubled and in deep distress, Of God's Displeasure does her Fear express. But I, whatever others do, will sing The due Applauses of th' Eternal King. With pleasure I'll contemplate, all my days His wondrous Works, and wondrous Goodness praise. And let obdate Sinners, who refuse To give him Glory, and his Gifts abuse, Be from the Earth, as they deserve, destroy'd, While, thou my Soul, art in his Praise employ'd.
THE CXIVth PSALM PARAPHRAS'D. WHen God a thousand Miracles had wrought, The fav'rite Tribes Deliv'rance to promote, And marching on in Triumph at their head, Their Host to promis'd Canaan led; Then, Iacob, was thy rescu'd Race, Distinguish'd by peculiar marks of Grace. Their Happiness and Honour to advance, He chose them for his own Inheritance. With whom alone their gracious God Would make his Residence, and blest abode. They were from Heav'n instructed to adore Their God, and with Celestial Light, Canaan was blest, as Goshen was before, While all their Neighbours lay involv'd in Night. God the Foundations of their Empire laid, The Model of their Constitution made: He on their Throne their King in Person sate, And rul'd with equal Laws the Sacred State. For this blest purpose Iacob's Seed Was from Egyptian Bondage freed,
When God to do this wondrous work was pleas'd, Great Consternation Nature seiz'd. The restif Floods refus'd to flow, Panting with Fear the Winds could find no Breath to blow. Th' astonish'd Sea did motionless become, Horror its Waters did benumb. The briny Waves that reer'd themselves to see Th' Almighty's Judgments, and his Majesty, With Terror crystaliz'd began to halt, Then Pillars grew, and Rocks of Salt. Iordan as soon as this great Deed it saw, Struck with a reverential Aw Started, and with Precipitation fled, In hast the thronging Waves ran backward to their Head. Vast Hills were mov'd from out their place, Terror the Mountains did constrain To lift themselves from off their Base, And on their rocky Roots to dance about the Plain. The little Hills astonish'd at the Sight, Flew to the Mother Mountains in a fright, And did about them skip, as Lambs Run to, and bleat around their trembling Dams. What ail'd thee, O thou troubled Sea, That thou with all thy watry Troops didst flee? What ail'd thee, Iordan? tell the cause That made thy Flood break Nature's Laws:
Thy Course thou didst not only stop, And roll thy liquid Volumes up, But didst ev'n backward flow, to hide, Within thy Fountain's Head thy refluent Tyde. What did the lofty Mountains ail? What Pangs of Fear did all the Hills assail That they their Station could not keep, But scar'd with danger run, like tim'rous scatter'd Sheep? But why do I demand a Cause Of your Amazement, which deserves Applause? Yours was a just becoming Fear, For when th' Almighty does appear, Not only you, but the whole Earth should quake, And out of Rev'rence should its place forsake. For he is Nature's Sov'raign Lord, Who by his great commanding Word, Can make the Floods to solid Crystal grow, Or melt the Rocks, and make their Marble flow.
THE CXLVIII PSALM PARAPHRAS'D. YE bright, Immortal Colonys, That People all the Regions of the Skys, That in your blissful Seats above Inhabit Glory, dwell in Light and Love: Ye mighty Gen'rals, who command Th' Almighty's Host, ye Ministers that stand In his blest Presence to receive What Orders he is pleas'd to give: Ye Guards and Houshold Servants who resort To pay attendance at his Court: Ye Saints and Seraphs who astonish'd see His Greatness, and essential Majesty: Tune your Celestial Harps, and sing The Triumphs of th' Eternal King. All ye his Heav'nly Hosts applaud In long continu'd Shouts your wonder-working God. Ye Sun and Moon and Stars, that grace the Night, Praise him the unexhausted Spring of Light, Whence your dependent Influence streams, Whence you derive your delegated Beams.
Exalt his Name, and spread his Praise As far as you diffuse your Rays. Let all the glorious Worlds above agree In this Celestial Harmony: And let the dancing, ecchoing Sphears around Reverberate the Joy, and propagate the sound. Ye thin transparent Regions of the Air, And all ye flying Nations there With one melodious Voice th' Eternals Praise declare. Let Tempests with their stormy Noise, And Thunder with its roaring Voice, God's own Artillery, proclaim Thro' all the list'ning World th' Eternal's Fame. From ev'ry Quarter all ye Winds arise, On whose swift Wings th' Almighty flys, When he his Progress makes into th' inferiour Skys. Blow all your Blasts, and all your Breath employ In loud Applauses, and in Songs of Joy. Ye Vapours that by God's Command arise, To fill Heav'n's Magazines with fresh Supplys, And for the Meteors new Materials bring, As you ascend to Heav'n, th' Eternal's Praises sing. Ye Clouds that by pursuing Winds are driv'n, Pour with your Rain your Praises forth, Let these ascend, as high as Heav'n, As that descends to bless the Earth.
Praise the Divine Artificer, Ye Lightnings, which his Hands prepare, And all ye curious Fireworks of the Air. Praise him ye other Meteors of the Sky, Ye Hailstones, Mists and Woolly Snow, The Manufactures which he works on high, For Nature's Service here below. Let Nature's mighty Sov'raign Lord, Be by the Deep, and all the Floods ador'd. In Consort let the Billows roar, And make his Praise rebound from Shore to Shore. Let the scaly People dance Before 'em let their Lords, the mighty Whales advance: And high amidst the Air on this great Day Let all the Waterworks from their vast Nostrils play. And while the Deep, the Air and Sky, Vocal become th' Almighty's Name to raise, Let not the Earth stand silent by, But joyn to celebrate his Praise. Ye Dragons, Wolves, and all ye salvage Kind On ecchoing Hills in Consort joyn'd, To him your Adoration pay, Whose Bounty in the Desart finds you Prey. Do you your Gratitude express, And make his Praises ring thro' all the Wilderness. Ye Pines and Cedars tune your selves to play Th' Almighty's Praises on this solemn Day.
And sing ye Mountains, Hills, and Floods, To th' Instrumental Music of the Woods. Ye Kings, the King of Kings adore, And at his Feet your borrow'd Scepters lay, Applaud the Spring of all Imperial Pow'r, You 're here but Subjects, and should Homage pay. Let Songs of Praise the Gratitude attest Of Aged Men, long by his Favours blest. Let rapt'rous Zeal Young Men and Maids inflame, To celebrate their Maker's Fame, Let lisping Infants at his Praises aim. Let all th' Eternal's Works conspire To execute this blest design, To praise him let them all combine, And make the World one Universal Quire.
THE Song of MOSES PARAPHRAS'D. DEUT. Chap. 32. ATtend, O Heav'ns, and you Empyreal Sphears Did you possess as many list'ning Ears, As Starry Eyes, all, as you roll along, Should be employ'd to hear my following Song. To my important words a while attend, And back my Notes in tuneful Ecchoes send. Peace, ye tumultuous Waters of the Deep, A while ye yelling Monsters silence keep, And let the Billows roll, and rock themselves asleep. Be still, ye Earthquakes, in the Caves beneath, Ye Winds be husht, and stop your stormy Breath. Thunders, your bellowing, deaf'ning Noise forbear, Tempests be gone, and leave in Peace the Air; That so the quiet Earth, and Air, and Sea, Without disturbance may attention pay, Whilst I th' Almighty's wondrous Deeds display. And let not my Divine Discourse be vain, Let it distill as Dew, and drop as Rain,
That in their grassy Garments cloaths the Hills, And with rich Fruits the smiling Vally fills. Whilst I to all the World aloud proclaim His Majesty, his great and awful Name, Whilst I his Triumphs sing, ye Tribes, do you To God ascribe the Pow'r and Glory due. God is a Rock unchang'd by Ages past, And by the future shall unshaken last. Perfect are all his Works, and all his Ways; From Truth's Eternal Rule he never strays. Upright and Equal all his Acts appear, He's just, when kind, and gracious, when severe. Therefore, ye Sons of Iacob, be it known On your own heads you've pull'd Destruction down. Your black Offences have incens'd your God, And forc'd his hand to take his vengeful Rod. Say not that yours, the Faults of Children are, Which a kind Father is induc'd to spare: Your Crimson Spots, your foul and loathsome stains Tell the rank Poison that infects your Veins. Your unexampled Contumacy shows You are not Children, but invet'rate Foes. Th' Almighty's Goodness do you thus despise, Ah foolish Generation and unwise! Your Great Deliverer do you thus requite? His Pow'r and Mercy thus perversly slight? You by a vast expence of Wonders bought, He from your Bondage back from Egypt brought.
He then advanc'd you to Imperial Sway, And made the Pagan Kings your Laws obey. From all Mankind he chose you for his own, And did your Sons with Pow'r and Plenty crown. Consult our antient Fathers, to the source Of our recorded Story have recourse: You'll find when God did with a lib'ral hand Among the Nations give the parted Land, He Canaan's happy Region did divide, Where Iacob's Offspring should at last reside. He from the Pagan did his People bound, And for himself fenc'd this Inclosure round, And blest with his Abode the sacred Ground. To Wealth and Pow'r he Israel did advance, And with his Gifts enrich'd his own Inheritance. To seek out Iacob he the Desart past, And found him in a lonesome yelling Wast, With pain and want, and servile Chains opprest, A Prey to every fierce Egyptian Beast. God with Compassion mov'd to such distress, Led the lost Stranger thro' the Wilderness. He shielded him with his resistless Might, And to direct him to proceed aright, He on his Mind diffus'd his Heav'nly Light. He did his Wants and Pleasures too supply, And kept him as the Apple of his Eye. See as an Eagle o'er her young ones flys, Spreads out her Wings, and flutters in the Skys.
How from their Nest she does her Offspring bear, Their Courage to provoke, and make 'em dare To try their Wings, and trust themselves in Air: So did th' Almighty Iacob's Sons excite, From Egypt's Prisons to attempt their flight: Which he assisted with a Father's Care, And did their way thro' parting Waves prepare. He thro' the pathless Desart was their guide, And when the Tribes for Egypt's Onions cry'd, He in the Wilderness his Table spread, And in his Airy Ovens bak'd the Bread, With which th' ungrateful Murmurers were fed. Then marching onward with a mighty hand, He led them to possess a fertile Land. There they the vanquish'd Heathen Lords pursu'd, Reduc'd their Towns, and their strong Forts subdu'd, That they the fruitful Region might enjoy, And with delights their ravish'd Senses cloy. A Soil which Nature's choicest Favours crown, With Floods of Milk and Hony overflown: Hony, that runs in yellow, fragrant Seas, From out the holes of Rocks and hollow Trees. Bath'd in their Oyl their chearful Faces shone, And with the Grape's rich blood they warm'd their own. And yet the Tribes by gracious Heav'n carest, Rever'd abroad, at home with Plenty blest, Grew fat and vicious, like a pamper'd Beast. They all the Bounds of grateful Duty broke, Spurn'd at their Lord, and kick'd against his Yoke.
Strange Gods inveigled their perfidious Heart The Worship of th' Almighty to desert; Tho' he had unexampled Kindness shown, And had espous'd their Int'rests, as his own. Then in his Breast fierce Jealousy began, The Rage of God, as well as 'tis of Man. They impious Adoration prostrate pay, And Sacrifices in their Temples slay To foul Infernal Fiends, that there abide, And in the Mock-Divinitys reside. The Fools, the Gods they serve, themselves create, All upstart Deitys of modern Date. Gods the productions of fantastic Fear, Not Gods above, but manufactur'd here. But their Celestial Father they forgot, Who their unthankful Tribes from Egypt brought. Who as a Rock did them in danger hide, Remove their Fears, and for their Wants provide. Who gave them Riches with a bounteous Hand, Rais'd them to Honour, and to wide Command. Such their Perversness and Offences were, That God his People, once his tender Care, In his fierce Indignation did disclaim, And threw his Children off, his Children but in Name. Henceforth, he said, I will conceal my Face, And hide my self from this unfaithful Race. Then they, and all the Nations round shall see The sad Event of their Apostacy.
From my Protection and my Favour cast, Which they have long abus'd, they shall at last, The dreadful fruits of their Rebellions tast. Since the perverse and stubborn Tribes agree, To fire my Soul with Rage and Jealousy, Imaginary Gods while they adore, And to their Fictions give Almighty Pow'r; In like designs against them I'll engage, And will their Sons with Jealousy enrage. The Time will come when I'll no more confine My Favours and Regard to Iacob's Line, To grieve their Sons, my Blessing I'll dispence Among a salvage People void of Sense. I'll, like my Sun, spread my inlightning Grace On every Nation sprung from Adam's Race. On thee, O Iacob, I thy angry God, Vast heaps of heavy Mischief will unload. For kindled by my Wrath a Fire shall burn The Forrests down, and Hills to Cinders turn. It thro' the Bowels of the Earth shall spread, And scorch the cold Apartments of the Dead. All Nature's Frame shall my fierce Anger feel, And surfeited with Wrath, the drunken Earth shall reel. I all my Stores and Arsenals will drain, To pour Destruction down, and deadly Pain. I'll from my Quiver all my Arrows send, And Israel to destroy will all my Vengeance spend.
Some shall by ling'ring Famine wasted ly, And shall not, till 'tis late, have leave to dy. Their Air shall be infected, and the Breath That fed their Life, shall now give certain Death. Fevers in livid, poisonous Steams convey'd, And burning Plagues their Dwellings shall invade, If any shou'd these foremost Plagues outlive, I'll to the Forrest Beasts Commissions give, And to the Serpents that in Caves abide, Or in the Dust their speckled Terrors hide, Th' Apostate Sons of Iacob to devour, That slight my Favours, and defy my Pow'r. If these Domestic Mischiefs can't destroy This stubborn Nation, I'll the Sword employ. I'll bring in sure Destruction from afar, And all the Terrors of resistless War. Their Innocence in vain the Virgins plead, Young Men their Youth, the Old their Hoary Head. Pierc'd with the Sword the sucking Infant crys, And in th' expiring Mother's Bosom dys. I from the Earth would these Apostates drive, And leave no Soul of Iacob's Line alive; Did not I fear the Heathen would blaspheme, Reproach my Conduct, and my Wrath condemn. That they would vaunt, and say their mighty hand Israel subdu'd, and chas'd him from his Land. For Iacob's void of Sense, and does reject Th' Advice by which he should his ways direct.
O that these unconsidering Tribes were wise! O that they knew wherein their Int'rest lyes! That they to wholesome Counsels would attend, Think on their Ways, and on their later End! That they would thus reflect, God's vengeful Blow Is sure and fatal, be it ne'er so slow. The Debt of Vengeance does by his delay Augment the Sum, which he at last will pay. How should a Man a Thousand chase, and two Ten Thousand flying Enemys pursue, Had not their God in Wrath withdrawn his Aid And their high Fences flat and open laid; Had he not shut them up in Holes and Caves, Or sold 'em to th' insulting Foe for Slaves? For, let our Foes be Judges, they'll declare That to our God, their own inferiour are. This by th' Suffrings which they undergo, Their conquer'd Towns and routed Armys know. Had he been pleas'd among us to abide, Conquest had still attended Israel's side. 'Tis from our selves alone our Suff'rings spring, For Sin at last will sure Destruction bring. I planted Iacob as a noble Vine, Expecting thence a rich and gen'rous Wine, But 'tis degenerate, and a sourer Juice The Vines in Sodom's Fields did ne'er produce. No base Stock did in Gomorrah grow; Wormwood and Gall from its prest Clusters flow.
No ranker Poison wild Arabia yields Than this, that grows in Palestina's Fields. Their Wine outdoes the Venom Asps afford, Or that, with which the Serpent's Teeth are stor'd. But tho' I suffer long they grosly err, That thence shall their Impunity infer. Their Wickedness exactly I record, Their Crimes are safely with my Treasure stor'd, Next to the Caves where I my Vengeance hoard. To me belongs to punish and reward, The Debt is ne'er forgotten, tho' deferr'd. Vengeance digests, and strengthens as it lies, And will at last to full Perfection rise. Sin and Destruction still together go, Vengeance is ripe, whenever Sin is so. The black and dismal Day approaches near, When Justice in its Terrors will appear. A Day of greater Sorrow and Distress Than Fear can apprehend, or Words express. Then suff'ring Israel will in Anguish say, I did not pardon, tho' I did delay. Yet God at last will from his Wrath depart, Plead for his People, and their Cause assert. His tender Nature will at last relent, And if his People do, he'll soon repent. Commiseration will possess his Breast, When he shall see his Israel sore opprest. When he shall find the Plagues that he employ'd, Has almost Iacob's guilty Race destroy'd.
He'll thus the stupid Criminals upbraid, Where are the Gods to whom you bow'd and pray'd? Now for Protection to your Idols flee, The Gods you chose, when you rejected me. You did your Adoration to them pay; Your Sacrifices at their Altars slay, And rich Oblations there profusely lay. To these Abominations, Israel, cry, In thy distress their Power and Goodness try. With loud repeated Pray'rs thy Gods invoke, To bring thee Aid and break thy heavy Yoke. Now by your sad experience learn and see, That I the Lord, ev'n I alone am he, That can subdue your Foes and set your Captives free. I at my Pleasure Kill and make alive, I wound and heal, I health and sickness give. Where is the Arm that can my Pow'r withstand, And tear a Pris'ner from my griping Hand? I lift my hand, most solemnly I swear, And, as I live for ever, I declare That when I once begin to take the Field, To whet my glitt'ring Sword, and raise my Shield, When I my deadly Instruments prepare, And arm my self to undertake the War; My Fury shall my Enemys devour, And on their Land I'll Storms of Vengeance pour. I'll give my hungry Sword their Flesh for Food, And make my thirsty Arrows drunk with Blood.
Their Voices let the Gentile World employ, And joyn with Iacob's Sons in Songs of Joy: For on their Foes God will avenge the blood Of those who stedfast in his Service stood. To Israel he his Mercy will extend, And Heav'nly Light and Truth amidst their Dwellings send.
A PARAPHRASE On part of the xivth Cha. of Isaiah. Beginning at the 4th, and ending at the 24th Verse. THE Nations round amaz'd and overjoy'd, Shall crowd to see proud Babylon destroy'd. They'll spred their Hands to Heav'n, and say, O blest, O long expected Day! How from his Throne is the great Tyrant cast, The Ravager that all our Towns defac't, Ruin'd Mankind, and laid all Nature wast! How is th' Imperial, Purple Plague that reign'd, And rag'd so long at last restrain'd? Where are the Guards who us'd to wait Before th' Oppressor's Palace Gate? Where are the awful Ensigns of his State? Where is the fawning flatt'ring Throng, That to his Court did once belong? Who did the Monster as a God adore, And bless the rav'ning Jaws that did Mankind devour. The haughty City which the World controul'd, Magnificent with Cedar, and with Gold,
Which tow'ring stood amidst the Skys, See where her Head in heaps of Rubbish lys. Is this the City will Spectators say, That all the World her Empire did survey? That made the Nations tremble with her Frowns, And gave to Kings their Tributary Crowns? How great a Change! good Heav'ns, how soon Is all her Pride and Glory gone! God by a great illustrious Stroke Of Justice, has her Monarch's Scepter broke, And freed the groaning Nations from his Yoke. He has destroy'd the Tow'rs of Babylon, And rent the Pillars that upheld her Throne. He has her cruel Pow'r withstood, And on her Head aveng'd the Nation's Blood. She that the Faces of the Poor did grind, That ne'er to Mercy was inclin'd, Shall no Compassion from the Conq'rour find. The People by her Yoke opprest, By Heav'n deliver'd from their Bondage rest. Kingdoms enslav'd their Liberty regain, And Captives from their Feet shake off the servile Chain. Loud Triumphs, universal Joy, And Songs of Praise shall all the Earth employ. The Pines and Fir-trees on the Hills rejoyce, And with a grateful Voice The Cedars that in stately Order grow On Lebanon's high Airy Brow,
Cry, we of this Deliv'rance too partake, Let us as well as Men our thankful Off'ring make. We Liberty, as well as they, enjoy; No more shall Babylon employ, Her Ravagers our quiet to annoy. Our Spoils shall yield no more supply To the proud City's Luxury. No more the Feller shall our Forest wound, No more the Axe shall thro' the Hills resound, Nor shall our mangl'd Limbs o'erspred th' encumber'd ground The Grave shall for th' Assyrian Monarch's sake Disturb the Peaceful Dead, and make Her drousy Lodgers rise, Shake from their Feet their Chains, and Slumber from their Eyes. Princes and Kings who underground Only with Worms and Dust are crown'd, She from their Beds of Darkness shall release, The only Thrones they now possess: To meet Assyria's Tyrant on his way, The Grave this Royal Embassy shall send; And, as instructed, they shall say, O King, does thus thy Pomp and Empire end? Feeble as we art thou become? Must we conduct thee to a narrow Tomb, For whom the World before had scarce sufficient room? Art thou whose Scepter had so vast a sway, Whose Will ev'n Kings themselves did once obey, Stript of thy Pow'r and Majesty, Art thou as Naked, Poor and Weak as we?
Could not thy Conq'ring Armys save Their mighty Monarch from the Grave? Must thou too in a dark and dusty Bed Lay thy Imperial awful Head, And be with Worms instead of Scarlet spread? And must the Ear That us'd to hear The Viol's, or the Harp's melodious Noise, Or the Flatterer's softer Voice, Be now with us the Dead entomb'd, To everlasting Silence doom'd? How art thou fal'n from Heav'n, O Lucifer, Son of the Morn, How does thy Glory disappear, Which once thy Temples did adorn? Grown mad with Pride, by Flatt'ry fed, Thou in thy Heart has oft blaspheming said, I into Heav'n, will, as a God, arise, And shine above the Stars amidst the Skys. Worship Divine will me befit, I base Mortality disown, And therefore will on Zion fix my Throne, And there to be ador'd in Majesty will sit. Above the Clouds of Heav'n will I ascend, And my Dominion o'er the World extend. My Greatness Men shall like to God's adore, And uncontroul'd, like his, shall be my Sov'raign Pow'r.
Yet, Tyrant, thou shalt sink as low as Hell, And of thy State divested dwell In the gloomy Shades beneath, In the dusty Courts of Death. Where thy Arrival will the Dead amaze, On thee the pale Inhabitants will gaze, And cry, is this the late pretended God That govern'd Millions with his Nod, And on the Necks of Captive Princes trod? Is this th' Immortal Man that never cloy'd With Blood and Rapine all the Earth destroy'd? That Princes of their Thrones did disposses Did wasted Nations with his Yoke oppress, And made the empty World a howling Wilderness? Who Tow'rs demolish'd, goodly Buildings burn'd And Cities into Rubbish turn'd; Who never gave his People rest, Nor once his Pris'ners from their Chains releast. When other Sov'raign Princes die, They lie in pompous Sepulchres, prepar'd To Lodge their Royal Family, And as they liv'd they are in State inter'd. But none thy Body in the Tomb shall lay, They'll cast it as a rotten Branch away. No Funeral Honours shall thy Herse adorn, But as the bloody Raiment of the Slain Whom the next Pit or Quarries entertain,
Thy more polluted Carcass shall with scorn Be trodden under foot, and into pieces torn. Thou shalt not from thy Palace be convey'd As other Monarchs use to be, Nor in a stately Tomb be laid With costly Rites and sad Solemnity. Because thy Salvage Hand Has slain thy People and destroy'd thy Land. God shall all Marks and Monuments efface Of this ungodly, cruel Race. His Hand that rais'd them up shall pull 'em down, And strip them of their Glory and Renown. Resistless Ruin he will on 'em send, Their House and Empire shall together end. Let it ye Medes and Persians be you Care Destruction for their Children to prepare. No tenderness to Age or Sex express, But on the Sons avenge the Father's Wickedness. That this curst House may never more Regain their Splendor and their former Pow'r. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, OBabilon, Thou 'rt fully ripe for Ruin grown: In Storms of Vengeance I'll against thee rise Which shall thy careless Sons surprise. Thy lofty Tow'rs I'll level lay, And sweep thy vile Inhabitants away.
Thee like to Sodom I will make, And turn thee to a mighty Lake. The lonesome Bittern shall possess This Fenny Seat, this Reedy Wilderness. The Waves shall thro' thy Cedar Chambers rowl, And on thy Shore shall Water-Monsters howl. The Palaces where cruel Kings did reign, In time to come shall entertain The mute Oppressors of the Main. So Babylon shall always be The Seat of Blood and Tyranny. A scaly Garrison shall dwell In every Fort and Cittadel. The swift Assassins of the Flood shall sport Within thy Monarch's weedy Court; Thither shall Fish of every Kind resort. There thy Luxurious Sons they shall devour, And feed on those; who fed on them before.
THE xxxivth Cha. of Isaiah. PARAPHRAS'D. YE various Nations who disperse Your Dwellings thro' the spacious Universe, Inhabitants of every distant Soil, Of every Continent and every Isle, At Heav'n's dread Summons all appear; Let all the World collected throng to hear Things that will melt their trembling Hearts with fear. Against the Nations God's fierce Anger burns, Against them he his pointed Vengeance turns. He brings his oldest Stores of Fury forth, Hidden Reserves of Rage, and high fermented Wrath. He will the swiftest Kinds of Death employ The Heathen Nations to destroy; Who mixing Arms advance from far Against our Land Confed'rate War. Their Bodies shall unburied lie, a Feast To every rav'ning Forrest Beast. Vultures and all the Rovers of the Air, To the red Fields of Slaughter shall repair; Where they great Chiefs and Potentates shall eat, And royal Banquets shall their Hunger treat.
From heaps of putrifying Dead, Amidst the Skies A noisome Scent shall rise, And thro' the tainted Air Malignant Vapours spread. Down from the Hills on which their Armys stood Torrents shall run of reeking Blood, And rocky Fragments roll along th' impetous Flood. The Plains shall lie, and all the Vales around Beneath the Purple Inundation drown'd. Nature shall groan, and during this attack Her universal Frame shall with Convulsions shake. The Sun and Moon amaz'd to see Nature's convulsive Agony Shall spring, and start from out their Sphears; And all the glitt'ring Host of Stars Seiz'd with no less affright, Shall fly away from Mortals sight, And in the Bosom hide of antient Night. The vast Expansion drawn around the World, Shall like a useless Sail be furl'd. All the blew Volumes of the Sky shall roll Themselves together, as a Parchment Scrole. Celestial Orbs that round us shine Falling from Heav'n the World shall see As Leaves in Autumn from the Vine, Or Figgs when ripe, fall from the shaken Tree.
Th' Almighty's Sword, so 'tis in Heav'n decreed, Shall bath it self in Blood, and on Destruction feed. The radiant Spoiler down the Sky Shall like projected Lightning fly. On Edom's Fields he'll make his swift descent To execute his dire Intent. The reeking Ravager will march in hast To slay the Men, and lay the Country wast. Where e'er his Course the Conq'rour bends, Ruin in all its frightful Forms attends. Death and Destruction keep an equal pace, And Desolation shews her ghastly, wastful Face. The glitt'ring Glutton shall be gorg'd with Food Made fat with Spoil and drunk with Blood. Not with the Blood of Goats and Lambs, Nor fatted with the Flesh of Rams, But with the Blood of Israel's Foes, And with their Flesh who Israel's God oppose. Princes and Lords with these combin'd Against us, in Destruction too are joyn'd. Princes and Lords who arm'd with Pow'r The People, as their Prey devour: Who lawless sway like Unicorns possess, Or the wild Bulls that range the Wilderness. God has a mighty Sacrifice in hand In Bozrah, and at his command Vast slaughter will be made in Edom's Land.
A Slaughter and a Sacrifice Where harmless Beasts are sav'd, and Man th' Offender dies. So great a Slaughter shall be made, That all the Land shall under Blood be laid. The Carcasses of Idumeans slain Shall cover every Hill and Plain. For this is that tremendous Day Which God appoints, wherein to pay The mighty Sums of Fury in arrear, And his vast Debt of Vengeance clear; His long contracted Debt of Vengeance due To Nations, that his People's fall pursue. Their Floods to lazy Streams of Pitch shall turn, And kindled Brimstone shall their Cities burn. The Clouds shall spouts of Flame on Edom pour, Such as Gomorrah did devour; Whence everlasting Smoke shall rise, As from a burning Mount amidst the Skies. No People more shall e'er possess This ruin'd Land, this burning Wilderness. No Trav'ller ever more shall pass Thro' this accurs'd, inhospitable Place. Ne'er shall be seen the footsteps of a Man, But the hoarce Bittern, and the Pelican, The Owl and Raven shall inhabit there With all th' illboding Monsters of the Air. God to accomplish his design, O'er Edom shall extend his measuring Line:
Shall draw his Compass round about, And for Destruction mark the People out. No Idumean Prince or Lord Shall scape the Conq'ring Sword. Thistles and thorny Trees Shall flourish in their Princes Palaces. Nettles shall sping around their Monarch's Throne; Their Forts with  shall be overgrown, And mossy Turf shall cover every Stone. Their gilded Roofs shall lodge the Bat and Owl, And in their lofty Rooms of State Where cringing Sycophants did wait, Dragons shall hiss, and hungry Wolves shall howl. In Courts before by mighty Lords possest, The Serpent shall erect his speckled Crest, Or fold his circling Spires to rest. The long-neck'd Gyant of the feather'd Kind The Ostrich, there a sandy Nest shall find. Leopards and all the rav'ning Brotherhoods That range the Plains, or lurk in Woods, Each other shall invite to come And make this wilder Place their home. Fierce Beasts of every frightful shape and size, Shall setle here their bloody Colonys. Satyrs shall to their Fellows cry, advance, Let us to Edom's Land make hast, 'Tis a silent, lonesome Wast, There let us dwell, there let us sport and dance.
The Screech-Owl thither shall direct her flight, With all the Hooping Horrors of the Night: There they shall build their Nests and breed; Their Eggs they'll unmolested lay, There o'er their Young their Wings display And there the gaping Callow Monsters feed. The Vultures there and all the Eagle Kind Shall rendezvous o'erjoy'd to find A perfect desolation to their Mind.
THE xlth Chap. of Isaiah. PARAPHRAS'D. YE Prophets who divine Credentials bear Distinguish'd by your Sacred Character, Envoys and Agents, who by my Command Reside in Palestina's Land; To whom Commission I have giv'n To manage there the Interests of Heav'n; Ye holy Heralds who proclaim Or War or Peace in mine your Master's Name, Let my desponding People know, That I their God will mitigate their Woe, Tell them Compassion melts my Heart That I of punishing Repent, And that their bleeding Wounds and Smart Which my own hand inflicted, I Lament. Comfort Ierusalem, and cry The time of her Deliverance is nigh. Say her Offences I'll forget, Nor more my scourging Strokes repeat. Her Suffrings and her Servitude shall cease, And from Oppression I'll her Sons release. Th' Allarms of War she shall no longer hear, No more Assyrian Armys fear.
She shall enjoy uninterrupted Ease, Gather'd beneath the downy Wings of Peace. The Suff'rings she has undergone Abundantly my Wrath for all her Sins atone. Hark! What a loud Majestic sound What awful Accents from the Hills rebound! Listen with Rev'rence, Hark! the noise Grows more distinct; 'tis the commanding Voice Of one that in the Desart crys, Let all the Nations round arise: Ye Pioneers of Heav'n prepare a Road Thro' the pathless Wilderness, Make it plain and strait and broad, And let your Shouts your Joy express. Th' obstructing Groves and Forrests level lay, And for th' Almighty make a way; For he in Person will his People head And out from Babylon his rescu'd Captives lead. He will from Heav'n descend to free The Nations from Infernal Slavery. He'll bring them out by Miracles of Might From Pagan Darkness to Celestial Light. Sink every Mountain, every Hill, And with their Ruins every vally fill. Smooth every rugged, rocky place, And every narrow Deile enlarge, For God this way in Triumph means to pass, As he from Babylon conducts his Charge.
Make an open, easy way, Where God his Glory may display; For the Divine Deliverer Will on his March in Majesty appear. His high Perfections he'll reveal, and shew Th' astonish'd World what Wonders he can do. That he'll effect this mighty Work, the Lord Has giv'n his never-failing Word. Th' Almighty bid his Prophet say, All Men are subject to decay, And wither, like the Grass, away. To every Storm or Blast they yield, And fade, like Flowers, that paint the Field; But the Almighty's Word shall stand secure, And like himself for ever shall endure. O Zion! whose impending, airy Brow Surveys the Hills, as well as Vales below. The joyful Tydings thou hast got, impart To raise my People's drooping Heart. Lift up thy Voice and let the Ecchoing sound From Wood to Wood, from Hill to Hill rebound, And ring thro' all the Vales and all the Towns around. Cry with a loud and fearless Voice, Let▪ all thy Cities, Palestine, rejoyce. Your sinking Heads ye Towns of Iudah reer Behold your God your great Deliverer In Person to your Aid advances near.
See where th' Almighty Conq'rour takes the Field; In his strong Hand what Terrors does he wield? How dreadful are his Steps? how bright his Sword and Shield? See how the Forrests at his Presence bow How silently the Rivers flow. How do the Plains, thro' which he marches, smoke! How do the troubled Mountains rock! He needs the Aid of no Confed'rate Pow'r, His single Arms will Victory ensure. He brings to crown the Just a bright Reward, And for the Wicked Vengeance has prepar'd. He as a faithful Shepherd, will attend His Flock with tender Care, and condescend To carry in his Arms the Feeble Lambs, And gently lead the pregnant Dams. His People in his Word may rest secure, For Boundless, as his Mercy, is his Pow'r. In the wide hollow of his Hand may sleep All the collected Waters of the Deep: Let all the Rivers too be thither roll'd, The vast Abyss will yet more Seas and Rivers hold. His Span across the widest Heav'ns can stretch, And the vast Void beyond 'em over-reach. The Rocks and Hills he in a Ballance lays And high amid'st the Air th' uplifted Mountains weighs. This Globe when held in his Capacious Hand, Seems a small Atome, or a single Sand.
When God the Draughts of Heav'n and Earth design'd, And form'd the noble Platform in his Mind, Did any skilful Architect Help him his wondrous Model to correct? When he the World's Foundations laid And rais'd the lofty Pillars with his Hand, To give him or Advice or Aid Did any Wise Surveyor by him stand? Did he from any, Counsel need How in Creation to proceed? When by a thousand Wonders wrought His vast Design was to perfection brought, What Councellour of State did him instruct The World his Creature to conduct? Who taught him how the Universe to sway, And form the Maxims of his Government, To settle Nature in a stedy Way, And all destructive Uproar to prevent? How, where ten thousand Creatures disagree, To make their Motions end in perfect Harmony? How with unerring Methods to pursue The glorious Ends he had at first in view? God does the Nations of the World regard As a small drop with the vast Deep compar'd; Or Dust that in the Ballance gives no Weight To press the Scale and change its equal State. God by their rocky Roots takes up the Hills, And from their Oazy Beds the Isles.
He hurls them from their former Seat, As things of neither Bulk, nor Weight. O Lebanon whose spacious Head Is with aspiring Cedars spread, With Wood sufficient is thy Forrest stor'd, Or can it Beasts enough afford For a Burnt off'ring for all Nature's Lord? Against him should the Nations rise He would neglect their weak alarms, This wretched Host of Worms he would despise, And laugh at empty Vanity in Arms. If God the Spring of Life and Pow'r By whose supplys his various Worlds endure, Held back his Streams, Mankind would soon expire, Dissolve, and into nothing strait retire. Since his Perfections so transcendent are, What Image can his Being represent? What can you with Almighty Strength compare? What Figure of Infinity invent? The senseless Heathens to the Artist run Who deals in Deities of Wood and Stone; The Fools bespeak an Antick lacker'd God To Guard their Persons, and Abode. The melted Metal in the Furnace flows Then in the Mould the stiff'ning Idol glows: And when their God grows Hard and Cold, The Workman makes him fine, and daubs him o'er with Gold.
The Crowd their gaudy Deity admire Th' effect of Art, the Creature of the Fire. Then least their Feeble God should fall With Silver Chains they fix him to the Wall. A likely Guardian this, to save The Men, that his Protection crave. The Man that's grown so Indigent and Poor He can't an Off'ring for his God procure, To Idols he's so much inclind, Will ways to get Materials find, And to engage the chiefest Artist's Care A Graven Image to prepare. Tho' after all his Cost and Pains The worthless Piece fixt in his Place remains. It can't advance a Step, or move a Hand In his Defence that does his help demand. Ye Pagan Realms that cover'd lie With the thick Darkness of Idolatry, How can a Truth to all reveal'd, As clear as Day, be still from you conceal'd? That is, that God's the only God, to whom You should with humble Adoration come. The Starry Heav'ns which he has made, The Earth whose deep Foundations he has laid, His Being and his Majesty declare, And shew how boundless his Perfection are:
Above the Circle of the Earth, on high He sits enthro'd amidst th' Emperial Sky; Whence when he casts his Eyes around, And views the Earth hung low in Air, As little Insects creeping on the Ground, Contemptible Mankind appear. The Heav'nly Sphears as Curtains he expands, With Orbs of Light Magnificent, His fine transparent Ether with his Hands, He spreads to form his Royal Tent. He at his Pleasure can destroy The Kings that greatest Pow'r and Wealth enjoy. He can their royal Heads uncrown And from their Thrones can cast them headlong down. Deep Root they shall not take nor spread Amidst the Clouds their shady Head. Blasted, and with th' Almighty's Breath opprest, As with a furious Tempest from the East, Their ruin'd Branches shall decay, And fade, like with'ring Plants, away. Where then, says God, can Men my Equal see? What Object can resemble me? Lift up, O Man, on high thy wond'ring Eyes, Regard the Palace of the Holy One, View the bright Constellations of the Skies Where he has ixt his Adamantine Throne. Did not th' Eternal from th' Abyss of Night Call forth those Heav'ns, and all those Orbs of Light?
Do they not run their Courses and dispence At his Command their Light and Influence? He their great Gen'ral Day by Day Draws out his glitt'ring Armys in Array. In constant Musters on th' Etherial Plains The Squadrons he reviews, and all their Posts ordains. As Master of his Starry Family, He calls his shining Servants out by Name, Gives them their Tasks to which they all agree, Whereby his Pow'r and Greatness they proclaim. Why dost thou say, O Iacob, I complain, And make to God my moan in Vain. He to my Sorrow no Compassion shows, Neglects my Tears, and disregards my Woes. The proud Oppressors cruel Yoke Does not his vengeful Wrath provoke. I am no more th' Almighty's Care, Else he would hear my mournful Pray'r, And not desert me in my deep Despair. He'll be no more my Advocate, My Cause to manage in debate. He will no more my Injuries redress, No more condemn my Foes, who me oppress. He's pleas'd so long his People to disown, That now our Case is desp'rate grown. Now, if he would, he can't assistance give, We're ruin'd, and undone, past all retrieve.
O, dost thou not unthoughtful Iacob, know Who made the Heav'ns above and Earth below? Did not thy God, th' Eternal Lord Create them with his great commanding Word? He rules the World he made, with equal Laws, Will such a God desert his Peoples Cause? Will he that all things wisely does direct, His People's Interests neglect, Will he their Suff'rings slight, and earnest Pray'rs reject? He grows not faint, nor does his Vigour wast With Age, or with his Labour past. His undeclining Strength feels no decay, Still can he punish those who disobey. He can as strong an arm as e'er extend To crush his Foes, his People to defend. Nor dos he with a less attentive Ear The Crys of guiltless Suff'rers hear: But then the Seasons of Deliv'rance rest As Secrets in th' Almighty's Breast. The Depths of Providence are fathomless, Nor will its Heights admit access, And therefore in his Pleasure Man must Acquiesce. He to his People still Deliv'rance sends When it promotes their Good, and serves his glorious Ends. His Counsels, which so far exceed our reach, Sould Patience and Submission teach.
He gives supplies of Pow'r to those that want, Strengthens the Feeble and revives the Faint. The Youngest Men in whose distended Veins, And brawny Nerves Athletic Vigor reigns, If they on God should not rely, Would quickly languish, sink and die. But those who humbly on his Strength depend, Their stock of Vigor ne'er shall spend. He'll reinforce them with recruits of Pow'r, And their decaying Strength restore. They shall on Wings like Eagles mount on high▪ And with like force and swiftness cut the Sky. They shall or Walk or Run, still forward press, And ne'er complain of Weariness. God daily shall their Strength encrease, That they their Burdens may sustain with Ease, Till he shall chuse his time his Captives to release.
Part of the LII And the whole LIII Chap. of Isaiah, PARAPHRAS'D. MY Servant shall acquire divine Renown, And regal Honours shall his Temples crown. Kings at his Feet their Diadems shall lay, And all the willing World his Empire shall obey. His Godlike Government and righteous Laws From Men and Angels shall receive applause. He shall his own and Subjects Rights maintain, Protect his Friends, Oppressors rage restrain, And everlasting Peace shall bless his glorious Reign. As Men at his Affliction were amaz'd And on his wondrous Woe with Horror gaz'd, (Whose Face was so deform'd, his Flesh so worn With all the Toyl and Torments he had born, No Eye e'er saw, no Tongue can e'er express Such perfect Grief such infinite distress.) So shall he be exalted and his height, Shall bear proportion to his humble state. His Heav'nly Doctrines on the Nations round Shall fall as dropping Rain upon the Ground.
Attentive Monarchs with a greedy Ear Shall all his wise Divine Instructions hear. They'll with profound Humility receive The Oracles and Counsels he shall give. No more their impious Tongues shall him condemn, No more Religion or its God blaspheme. His Godlike Wisdom they shall all adore, And joyful Tydings hear they never heard before. Tydings that new and wondrous Things assert, That God the Nations will at length convert And of his Kingdom make the Heathen World a part. CH. LIII. When the Messiah by his Love inclin'd And tender Mercy mov'd to lost Mankind, From his Immortal Throne on high descends To compass all his great and glorious Ends, Who in the blest Redeemer will believe? Who'll the Divine Commissioner receive, Or to his Heav'nly Message Credit give? He'll not advance in Pomp and regal State, No shouting Crowds shall on his Chariot wait. No Harbengers or Heralds shall proclaim His coming down, and spread abroad his Fame. He shall no Guards, no long Retinue take Like earthly Kings that Publick Entrys make. He'll not as Lords and mighty Conq'rours do, Vast Armys head the Nations to subdue, And found an Empire for th' ambitious Jew.
Mean and obscure shall be my Servants Birth, As that of Plants in dry and barren Earth. Expecting some great Gen'ral should arise The Jews his Poor Extraction shall despise. They will his Sacred Person too condemn, And the great Pow'r and Word of God blaspheme. As his Condition and his Birth are low, Mean and despis'd, his Person too is so. They'll in his Face no Air of Greatness see, Nor in his Men the marks of Majesty. He'll by uncommon Beauty ne'er be known Distinguish'd by Calamity alone. His Presence will not cause or Love, or Aw, But great Contempt from all Spectators draw. Hence Men will my Commissioner neglect, And all his gracious Overtures reject. His Life shall be but one continu'd Chain Of Labour, Sorrow, and consuming Pain. He dayly shall converse with Grief and Woe, And with Affliction shall familiar grow. Unmeasured Suff'rings, exquisite Distress, And pondrous Trouble shall his Soul oppress. These sad Companions shall around him stay, Consume his Flesh and on his Vitals prey. Th' obdurate Jews my Servant will defame, And of his low Estate express their Shame. The guiltless, just and wondrous Man shall bear Such heavy Grief and Torments so severe
Th' Almighty's high displeasure to atone For other Mens Transgressions, not his own. He shall the whole Collected Guilt assume Of lost Mankind, and suffer in their room; Yet will the spiteful Jew blaspheme, and say That God did all this Vengeance on him lay To punish his enormous Crimes, who ne'er Was known from Virtue's strictest Rule to err. No, our Offences all his Pains procure, For our Transgressions he'll his Wounds endure. By his most free and merciful Consent He'll undergo the mighty Punishment Due to the Sins of Men, and so remove Th' Almighty's Wrath, and make our Peace above. He on his Guiltless self our Guilt shall take, And by his Suff'rings full attonement make. By his sharp Stripes he'll Ease to us procure, And by his Death Eternal Life ensure. Since Adam fell, all his degenerate Kind The Heav'nly Paths of Virtue have declin'd: Fond of their own pernicious, sinful way They're lost like straggling Sheep and gone astray. All-gracious God has on his Servant laid The Sins of all, for all have disobey'd. All the black Streams of Guilt do hither flow As all the Rivers to the Ocean go. He that so vast a load would not decline, Must sure be conscious of a Strength Divine.
Justice incens'd did Punishment demand, Exacting Payment at th' offenders Hand: And since we could not pay so great a Sum, The blest Messiah Surety did become. He did himself the mighty Debt discharge Due to offended Heav'n and Man enlarge. When God's Right-Hand with Vengeance arm'd, design'd To execute his Wrath on Humane Kind, He interposing, on his Guiltless Head Receiv'd the Blow, and suffer'd in our Stead. For as the harmless Sheep beneath the Shears Is Dumb, and all his Suff'rings meekly bears, Dos ev'n without Resistance, Noise or Strife When to the Slaughter led, lay down his Life: With like Submission does the Lamb of God, Bear furious Persecution's Iron Rod. In prosecution of his blest design His Pains he'll undergo, his Life resign Serene as Heav'n, and mild as Love Divine. 'Tis true, at last he shall surmount his Woes, Break all the Pow'rs, that his high Aims oppose, And Triumph o'er the Malice of his Foes. He'll from the Iron Prisons of the Dead, And from the Dust raise his Victorious Head▪ He shall with brighter Glory to the Skys After a red and bloody Seting rise. The Conq'rour shall ascend in Royal State, And Death it self in Chains shall on him wait▪
When thus Exalted he shall live to see A numberless believing Progeny. Of his Adopted Sons the Godlike Race Exceed the Stars that Heav'n's high Arches grace. A willing Victim he resign'd his Breath In all the Tortures of a ling'ring Death. To suffer as a Criminal convey'd. The Grave his Bed he with the Wicked made. Tho' so much Pain and Shame he underwent, Yet was he Righteous, Pure and Innocent. He all his Ignominious Torments bore, Man to his Maker's Favour to restore. To raise laps'd Adam's Race from Death and Hell To the most happy State from whence they fell. Tho' he was just and spotless, yet his God Was pleas'd to bruise and wound him with his Rod. When that a Ransom may for Man be paid He of his Life an Off'ring shall have made, He from the Grave shall as a Conq'rour come, And next his Father's Throne his former Seat resume. Where he shall dwell secure from Death and Pain, And endless, as his Life, shall be his Reign. A numerous Seed a pure and Godlike Line Breathing Repentance, and Belief Divine, Quicken'd by his Prolifi Death shall crown His Suff'rings past, and him their Father own. His work compleated he'll with great content Review the Torments which he underwent.
He shall enjoy the Travel of his Soul; Pleas'd to have drank th' Almighty's wrathful Bowl. The Glory of his Father he'll regard And Man's Redemption as a ful reward. For by his Knowledge and Celestial Grace many save of Adam's sinful Race. He of their Guilt shall the vast Burden bear, Shall all their Debt by Sin contracted clear, And at th' Almighty's Bar their Advocate appear. Therefore th' Eternal said, above the Skys My righteous Servant shall in Triumph rise. He with the Mighty and the Great shall share Renown, Applauses, and the Spoils of War. Wide as the World shall be his regal Sway, And subject Monarchs shall his Laws obey. He all triumphant Conq'rours shall excel, Rich with the spoils of Death, the Grave and Hell. His Chariot-Wheels shall drag along the ground Destruction ruin'd with a deadly Wound. Captivity expos'd to publick scorn, A fetter'd Slave his triumph shall adorn. These Honours on my Servant I'll confer, Because he chose the Pains of Death to bear, From Man impending Vengeance to avert, And of the ruin'd Race a chosen part To save from Death and Hell, their due desert.
THE III Ch. of Habakkuk. PARAPHRAS'D. AS God advanc'd from lofty Teman's Head, And o'er the Plains of Paran came, The Heav'ns around were with his glory spread, And Wonders on the Earth his Presence did proclaim. He did the Marks of Majesty display, And fearful Ensigns of Omnipotence, Ten thousand Prodigys prepar'd his way, Such Power th' Almighty did dispence. Torrents of Glory dazling bright, Too fierce and keen for Humane Sight Broke from th' immense Abyss of uncreated Light. Ev'n from his Hands a bright Eruption came, A pointed Efflux of Immortal Flame. Transcendant Splendor did th' Almighty shroud; No less than did the thick surrounding Cloud. His Being thus lay hidden either way, In too much Darkness, or in too much Day. Of thirsty, panting Plagues a fiery Train, Pale Pestilence and yelling Pain,
His dreadful Equipage, before him ran, And of his Terrors led the Van. While Famine, Desolation and Despair, Wringing their Hands and tearing off their Hair, A formidable Troop, came howling in the Reer. Th' Almighty on the Frontiers made a stand To measure out the promis'd Land. He did distinctly circumscribe Th' Inheritance of every Tribe. That done the Nations he asunder drove, And march'd the Lords of Canaan to remove. His swift-wing'd Whirlwinds onward flew, And o'er the Hills his Chariot drew; Whose awful Wheels roll'd on in Clouds and Smoke, Whence Flakes of Fire and flashing Lightnings broke. Such Bolts were cast, such Thunder claps did roar, As shook the Rocks which never shook before. The shudd'ring Hills exprest their dread And everlasting Mountains bow'd their aged Head. When Isr'el march'd o'er dry Arabia's Sand, By Moses led to Canaan's Land, How were the States on either side At their approach alarm'd and terrify'd? How did the Tents of Cushan shake? How did the Kings of Midian quake? How did they dread the Fame of Isr'el's God, And his great Gen'ral's wonder-working Rod?
That Rod which turn'd to Crystal Walls the Flood, Its Virtue still retains, And in the trembling Heathens Veins Chills and congeals their Vital Streams of Blood▪ Did e'er the Rivers God displease? Or did his Anger rise against the Seas, That he their Waters did divide, And roll'd them up on Heaps on either side, When he prepar'd his warlike Equipage His Chariots and his Horse King Pharoah to engage? No, those amazing Miracles were shown To make his kindness to his People known. His Chariots and his Horsemen brought Salvation to the Tribes, for whom he fought. He did his fatal Bow prepare, And all his dreadful Instruments of War, Which put the Pagan Lords to flight And from their Country chas'd the Cananite. Thus to his Promise God was true Which to the Tribes he did so oft renew. As Israel's Host advanc'd to Canaan's Land, Opprest with drought amidst the Sand. Refreshing Streams were in the Desart found, And bubbling Springs broke from the thirsty Ground. Instead of Fire th' Almighty struck Fresh Water from the Flinty Rock.
When God in Triumph did appear, The lofty Mountains shook for fear. Iordan held back his cleaving Flood And high in Craggy Heaps the Crystal Waters stood. Bare and defrauded of its Tyde, The sandy Chanel lay from side to side; This Passage for the Tribes th' Almighty did provide. Th' obsequious Deep did raise its roaring Voice And split asunder with prodigious noise It shew'd as if by lifting up the Hand It's Readiness t' obey the high Command. At God's command the restless Sun That as a Gyant loves his Course to run, Did in his full Carreer his Chariot stay On Heav'ns Descent, and stopt the falling Day. Progressive Time was at a stand, His drooping Wings unable to expand. The Constellations, and th' astonish'd Moon, Halted to gaze upon the standing Sun. So long its ling'ring Orb its Light did lend As Ioshuah's Troops had Spears to spend; As long as they had Darts to cast away, Or there remain'd a Foe to slay. In Indignation God thro' Canaan past, And with his terrible alarms And Conq'ring Arms He chas'd the Kings, and laid the Nations wast.
Isr'els Salvation to compleat He onward march'd the Heathen to defeat. To save his People and to crown Great Iosua's Arms with Triumph and Renown, To Canaan's Kings he gave a deadly Wound And did their Friends and Familys confound. He overthrew their Palaces Th' Imperial Seats of Pride and Wickedness. He broke the Pillars that sustain'd their weight, And raz'd the strong Foundations of their State. God did by Isr'el's Arms subdue Their Towns and all their Villages o'erthrew. Tho' at the first the Nations round arose And like a Tempest did our March oppose, They onward came with Shouts of Joy As sure the Tribes they should destroy: They did our Army so much slight They thought they came to Plunder, not to fight. O Israel, in despight of these alarms, In spite of all their Plots and Arms: Thou with thy Conq'ring Sword didst make thy way, From Iordan's Flood to the great Western Sea. Thus for the Tribes th' Almighty did appear, Once to their God his People were so dear. But now he threatens to employ Assyrian Arms his People to destroy. For this my Blood hangs curdled in my Veins, And strong Convulsions rend my tortur'd Reins
My Bones all rattle in their rocking Frame, And in my Heart Fear damps the Vital Flame. Horror my Spirits does possess, Nor can my quiv'ring Lips one perfect word express. I Tremble now, and Weep and Mourn, That when the sad amazing Turn Shall happen, and the gloomy Day Of Vengeance all its Terrors shall display; Safe from the Tempest I may find, Peace in my House, and Comfort in my Mind. I'll to th' Almighty's Mercy fly And on his faithful Providence rely, When Babylon's insulting King Shall all his fierce and numerous Armys bring, Armys to Blood and Rapine bred, To pull down Isr'el's lofty Head, And dreadful Desolation o'er our Citys spread And then tho' Famine should invade, Tho' Plants and Flow'rs and Fruits should fade; Tho' on the Vine no Clusters should appear, And tho' the Fig-tree should no Blossoms bear; Tho' th' Olive yields not to the Dresser Oyl, And barren Fields defeat the Farmer's toyl; Tho' the high Folds no bleating Flocks surround, And in the Stalls no lowing Heards are found; Yet I'll rejoyce in God my sure defence, And in his Strength repose my Confidence.
Still will I trust him still I will believe, That he will Isr'el's Captive State retrieve: That to our Country he'll our Sons restore, And rescue them from Babylonish Pow'r. FINIS.
