B3156 12096339 53992
The Souldiers MARCH TO SALVATION: Wherein is shewn the lawfulnesse of Souldiery in a necessitated Warre, the lawfulnesse of voluntary Serving upon the assured knowledge of a just Cause. How far it is lawfull and necessary for prest Souldiers to obey Authority in case of doubting. What innocency ought to be in Souldiers, wherein is contained a plea against Plundering; in what cases and with what Cautions it is lawfull to Kill, imprison, or spoil an enemy; With what courtesie enemies submitting are to bee received, and with what fidelity to be protected, with other things profitable to all men as well as Souldiers. By Francis Bland, Minister. Printed at Yorke, Anno Dom. 1647.
The souldiers March to salvation Luke. 13. 14. And he sayed unto them, Doe violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be con∣tent with your wages. THese words containe Iohn Bap∣stis answer to the souldiers search for salvation, or que∣stion, what they might doe to be saved; From whence may be collected some things ge∣nerallyobserveable for all men, some things more pecular to military men: for the generalls we may first note the fidelity of Iohn inMores taxat & jubet assueta emendare vitia. Art. stella. taxing the faults of these souldiers, and enjoyning them to amend and reforme their lives, if they would eschew the vengeance of God; as
Observation. he did also the extortion of the Publicanes, and the incest of Herod: whence we learne, what fidelity and boldnesse ought to be in Pastors andIsa. 58. 1. Preachers in reprehending sinnes, and calling forMatth. 5. 13. reformation. The Prophet must cry aloud, and and lift up his voice like a trumpet; the Apostles must be salt because ofHaec doctrina exigit mortificati∣onem carnis. Mar. Eccles. 12. 11. their doctrine, which requires mortification of the flesh, faith and re∣pentance, which are not pleasant to a Carnall man. And the wordes of the wise are as goadesJunius & glos▪ Inter lin. in loc. which sharply prickes the slow, and awakes the sleepy, that thereby the wicked may be called from their wayes, and the godly roused from their naturall sluggishnesse to follow their duty with greater diligence. The necessity of thisEzek. 33. 7. fidelity in all pastors and preachers may be learn∣ed from the duty of watchmen, as the Prophet Ezekiel is taught by God himselfe. Application. 2 Tim. 4. 2. This first teaches us our duty as S. Paul did Timothy, that we must reprove, rebuke, and exhort; Our Sermons must be rather ad planetum then ad placitum, to call men to bewaile their sinnes then to please them in their sinnes, according to the saying of an ancient father (teaching one the right way of preaching)Docente te in Ecclesia non cla∣mor populi, sed gemitus suscitet. when thou teachest in the Church let not the shouts, but the sighes of the people be stirred up: let the teares of the hearers be thy commendations. Hence also arise a just reprehension of such as seeme by silence to approve and by flatteries to encourage wicked men in their evill wayes,
calling evill good, and casting vailes over mens faces, and sowing pillowes under their elbowes, and heale the wound deceitfully, crying peace peace when there is no peace; and this is either through avarice and hope of gaine, or cowardice for feare of harme, if they should speake what they think, then which as S. Ambrose sayd to the Emperour Theodosius,Nihil in sacer∣dote tam pe∣riculosum apud Deum, tam turpe apud homines, quod sentiat non libere denunciare Epist. 5. 29. There is nothing be∣fore God more dangerous, and before man more base. Againe, it serves to teach you that are hearers humility in hearing the word of exhortation and reprehension, count not our plain-dealing malice, nor our selves your enemies because we tell you the truth; call us not the troublers of Israel for reprehending the vices of the times, scise us not our Sermons what we should preach as those that sayed to the Seers, see not, and to the Pro∣phets prophecie not us right things, speake unto us smooth things, prophesie deceits; desire us not to say unto you in your bad wayes as Ahabs Chaplaines, Go up, and prosper, least your ends be like his; for theAdulantium linguae alligant animas in pecca∣tis. Prosper. tit. Epigram. 86. Acts 10. 33. 1 Sam. 3. 17. tongues of flatterers binde mens soules in their sinnes which prepares them to chaines of utter darkenesse; you should ra∣ther say as Cornelius to Peter, we are all here in the presence of God to heare all things which are Commanded thee of God: or as Eli did Samuel, charge them to conceale nothing of all that the Lord hath sayed unto them. We may further from this speech of Iohn Baptist to these souldiers,
bidding leave their former practise and amend their wayes, by doing violence to no man, &c. observe, That in repentance to salvation there must be a forsaking of sin, and amendment of your lives; to this the Prophers and Apostles beare witnesse, Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, cease to do evill, learn to do well, (thusIs. 1. 16. Isaiah) and then he promiseth forgivenesse, that though our sinnes were red like Scarlet or Crim∣son, yet theyshould be as white as Wooll ar Snow:Isa. 55. 7. and againe, let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and return unto the Lord. Repent and turn you from all your transgres∣sions,Ezek. 18. 36. Acts 4. faith Ezekiel. And the Apostles doctrine is, repent and be converted; and to the sameUbi emenda∣tio nulla, poenit∣tia necessariò est vana, quia caret fructu cui Deus eam sevit. Terull. Vera poenitentia sic plangit com∣misla ut non committit plan∣genda. Bern. medi▪ Application. pur∣pose are the suffrages of the fathers, Where there is no amendment, there repentance is surely vaine, because it wants the fruit whereunto God hath appointed it: thus one: and another sayth, that true repentance doth so lament the faults committed, that it doth not committ the faults which are to be lamented; he is but a mocker, and not a true penitent that still doth the things which he lamenterh. Let every one of us that desires repentance un∣to life, apply this unto his soul, with a saying of S. Bernard:Si vis verus poenitens esse cessa à peccato, & noli amplius pec∣care. Ʋbi supr. John 5. 14. & 8. 11 If thou wilt be a true penitent, cease from sin, and sin no more: and let every one of us think that saying of our Saviour first spoken to him that was diseased thirty and eight years, and after to the woman taken in adultery, to be
spoken to himselfe, Sin no more. Secondly, let us beware of flattering our selves in our knowne sinnes, thinking with simple miserees, saying, God be mercifull to me, without sincere endeavours of reformation, to escape the damnation of hell; and let none of us speake to himselfe in the language of the drunkard, I shallDeut. 19. 19. have peace though I goe on to add sin to wicked∣nesse, and wickednesse to sin; as drunkensse to thirst, and thirst to drunkenesse; for the anger of the Lord and his jealousie shall smoake against such an one: let us therefore bewaile and tremble at the word of the Lord, by the Prophet, Shall IMicah 6. 11. count them righteous with wicked ballances and the bag of deceitfull weights? which is as much as if it should be said, Shall I justifie him that stills keeps his sin?Non, sed con∣demnabo cum, sim justiciae regu∣la. Gloss. int. in loc. no, but I will condemne him, seeing I am the rule of justice: and no lesse dangerous then this is recidivation, falling back to the mire and vomitt of our former filthinesse, or finnes once forsaken, against which let us note well the saying of the son of Syrack; He that washeth himself after the touching of a dead body, what availeth his washing if he touch it a∣gaine?Ecclus. 34. 26. so it is with a man that fasteth for his sinnes, and goeth againe, and doth the same. There is a lawfull use of warre. Non jubet arma abjicere, Sacra∣mento suo renun∣ciare. Calv. apud Marlorat. From these generall observations, let us de∣scend to some particulars, more nearly concern∣ing the questioners, and men of the same order of life. And first, whereas Iohn Baptist doth not bid them lay downe their Armes, nor renounce their
troth which they plighted; nor (as wee say) flye away from their colours. Hence is rightly col∣lectedChemnit. Harmon. Brent. P. M. utyr. Austin. apud Grat. caus. 23. Aquin. 22. 9.40. Art. 1. Si Christiana dis∣ciplina omnia bella culparet, hoc potiùs con∣cilium Baptista dedisset; ut arma abjicerint, seque militiae omnia subtraherent. Matth 8. Act. 10. by learned Authors in their expositions upon the place, and tractates upon this subject of warre, an Approbation of souldiery or warfare, and that there is a lawfull use of Armes, and warre, and that even unto Christians; for, If Christians discipline did disallow all warres, the Baptist would rather have given them this Advice, that they should throw away their Armes, and withdraw themselves from all manner of warfare; which he did not: nor yet did our Saviour for∣bid the Centurion, in whom was found greater faith then in Israel, to continue in his Office; Nor the Apostle S. Peter teach any such lesson unto the devoute Captaine Cornelius his family and friends, that were gathered together to heare all things that were commanded him of God;Ecclus. 2. 8. And Solomon tels us, that there is a time of warre, as well as a time of peace. Besides all these, we have the examples of worthy and godly men, serving God in military Affaires; Some of which are spoken of by the Apostle, as of Gideon, ofHeb. 3. 2. Barak, of Jephthah, of Sampson, of David, and others who through faith subdued Kingdomes, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weaknesse were made strong, waxed valiant in Battell, and turn'd to flight the Armies of Aliens; And we finde what good service Claudius Lysias who commanded in chiefe the Garrisons and forces in Hierusalem, did unto the Church of God, by sending Paul away from
Hierusalem to Caesarea, with a guard of two hun∣dred Souldiers, threescore and ten Horsemen, and spear men two hundred; by which he safe es∣caped the conspitacy of the Jews, that had boundActs 2. 23. themselves with an oath to kill him; And of Constantine the great, it is recorded what helpe heEuseb. de vit. Con∣stan. did make to the Christian's, by armes against the tyrannie of Lycinius, and other persecutors. Againe, as we have the concession of the Spirit of God for the lawfulnesse of warre, in not forbiding it, and the examples of worthy men serving God in it, so have we the wisdome of the Spirit, in giving rules and lawes for mili∣taryDeut. 20. orders to be observed in the pursuit of warre; which is another strong Argument forAlioqui de hâc re non ferret Leges Spititus Sanctus. Gualier. the lawfull use of Armes in needfull cases: other∣wise the Spirit of God would not have given rules on this matter; And withall advising not to at∣tempt any thing in this kinde, but with matureProver. 20. 18. & 24. 6. deliberation; Thus Solomon teaches, With good Advice make warre, for that is the way to safety. Warre necessary in some cases. Further, that the use of the sword is not only lawfull, but in some cases necessary, may be truely collected from the saying of the Apostle, that theRom. 13. 4. Magistrate or higher power beareth not the sword in vaine; there being two ▪endes of the Magistracy, the one the good and defence of those that doe good, the other the punishment of those that doe evil: unto which ends the use of the sword is very necessary, for hereby the Magistrate is enabled to defend himselfe and his Subjects;
himselfe, in his just power, and his subjects in their rightfull proprieties, whereunto (without the use of the sword) he should sometime be un∣able, by an over-powring strength of a forreigne enemie, and others: sometimes by the conspiring and conbining together of intestine foes, and sedi∣tions persons, raising routs and rebellions to the oppression of the people, subversion of States, ruines and alterations of Kingdoms and govern∣ments, and other like mischiefes incident to hu∣manOmninò enim cùm tanta it ma∣lorum turba, ut sunt necessariae lege, ica & ma∣gistratus: atque etiam qui his sub∣sunt milites. Sa∣cer. in locum apud Marlorat. 2 Sam. 18. & 20. Affaires; for the prevention of which, lawes, Magistrates and Armes are equally ne∣cessary; Vndoubdtedly therefore seeing that there are such a multitude of wicked men, as lawes are necessary, so also Magistrates, and likewise souldiers which are under them; And wee find this prac∣tised by David, not only against the sorraigne foes of himself, and his people, the Philistines and Ammonites: but also against the usurpation of Ishbosheth, as likewise against the rebellion of Absolom, and Shebah, and their adherents. Application. From hence we may inferre consolations and encouragments to those Princes and Magistrates, whom open hostility of forreigne enemies (as Jehoshaphat assaulted by the Moabites, and Am∣monites.) or the intestine disobedience of unna∣turall Traitours and Rebells (as David by the2 Chr. 20. rebellions of Absolom, or Shebah) or the exigencie and distresse of friends, (as Lots captivity did Abraham) or allies and confedrates (as the Gibe∣onites being in feare of the five Kings did Jo∣shuah)
doe necessitate and compell to draw the sword, and make warre (for we do alwayes think that, warre ought to be of necessity) and do pro∣poundBellum debeat ess necessitatis. unto themselves just ends, as defence of themselves and subjects, their friends and confe∣derates, in their just powers, rights, proprieties and priviledges from wrongs; Reparation of injuries, for which no reparation can be had by peace, restraint of violence or confusion, arising by tu∣multuous and factious men, restitution of peace and publique Tranquiltie where it is violated or broken, and conservation of it where it is assaul∣ted; for warre is waged, that peace may be obtain∣ed;Bellum geritur ut pax quoeratur. These ends I say, and not sinister and pri∣vate Aimes propounded, as enslaving free Sub∣jects, oppression of weaker states, invasions and conquests of others dominions, enlarging private territories and treasures, and such like; which ends doe render a warre lawfull. And together with these ends, doe not prosecute their warres with a purpose to hurt, cruelly thirsting after re∣venge with implacable malice, brutish rebellion, and desire of dominearinge; with such other like Affections, of which it is said, that in warresNocendi cupidi∣tas, irascendi crudelitas, feritas rebellandi, libido dominandi; & si qua sunt similia, haec sunt quae in bellis jute cul∣pantur. they are justly condemnable, but being on the other side peaceably affected, only seeking and demanding reparation of injuries, offering con∣ditions of peace and agreement, and having a mind prepared to embrace peace, when it shall be of∣fered; and purposeth nothing more then to re∣duce those whom they shall subdue unto peace
Esto ergò bel∣lando pacificus, ut quas expugnas, ad pacis unita∣tem perducs. Gratian. caus. 23. and unity, according to this direction; be a peace∣maker by warring, that those whom thou conquerest, thou maist reduce unto the unity of peace; These I say herein may bee comforted and encouraged, their service herein is no lesse acceptable to God, though it be done by the sword, then that which they performe in the Administration of justice by the Scepter in times of peace and greatest Tranquility. 2. Consolation to Souldiers. Vir justus, si fortè etiam sub Rege homine sacrilego militet, rectè po∣test illo jubente bellare, si vice pa∣cis, ordinem ser∣vans, quod sibi ju∣betur, vel non esse contra praecep∣tum Dei certum est, vel utrùm sit▪ certum non est; ita ut fotasse re∣um reddat regem iniquitas impe∣randi, inocentem autem militem ostendat ordo serviendi. August. apud Gratian. ubi supra. Secondly, this consolation and encouragement extends unto all souldiers, that are called to armes by just Authoritie, and doe serve under their Princes in the Lords Battels; The workes of a just warre duely managed, are no more by∣wayes to true happinesse, then the workes of their ordinary vocations in times of peace; yea, so it may bee, that just and godly souldiers may serve under a wicked King or Prince, and yet may be free from sinne▪ A just man if happily he serve under a King that is a sacrilegious man, may rightly warre vnder his Command, if instead of peace, keeping the order of warre, he be assured that the thing which is commanded him be not contrary to the commandement of God, or bee vncertaine whe∣ther it be so or not: and thus the unjust command may make the King an offendex, but the order of serving may shew the souldier to be innocent. Unto the question which is sometime made, See∣ing Princes do sometimes raise warres from bad Af∣fections, and for wicked ends and purposes, hom should the consciences of the Subjects be satified?
Answer. It is answered thus, or to this purpose; The Subjects either know the cause wherein the King commands their service to bee just or wicked, or else they are ignorant or doubtfull whether it be so or not; in case of sure knowledge, there is no difficulty in answering, but they ought to obey, the cause being just, and to refuse obedience, the cause▪ being apparantly unjust; and any thing commanded repugnant to justice, godlinesse and Religion, and are rather to suffer his displeasure, then fullfill his will contrary to a good con∣science, remembring God is to be obeyed before man; but if they be doubtfull, or ignorant, then the Subject ought to be perswaded that the cause and intended ends of such warre are just, and that it is not undertaken contary to the word of God; and because subjects cannot alwayes understand the councels of their Princes, here in the caseTeneertū, relin∣que incertum. Buha. Magist. quast. 50 of doubting, the Rule must be followed, hold that which is certaine, and leave the vncertainty; but the certaine is that Princes and Powers are to be obeyed, which command nothing contrary to the word; and in so doing, as a Sanctuary or Refuge was appointed by the Lawe to him that killed his Neighbour not wilfully, or of set purpose, so the subjects are worthily excused, whilest in a doubtfull cause they obey their Prince. 3. Consolation to Vo∣lunteers. Thirdly, this consolation and encouragement extends not only to Princes and souldiers prest and compelled to Armes by their Authority, but even unto voluntiers, such as upon the knowledge
and perswasion of a just cause, for love to uplhold the honour of God, and the King his vicegerent, and for the safety of their country, Church, Laws, liberties, and Religion, or for the defence and vin∣dication of their friends, Allies and confederates, do of their owne free will and meer motion be∣take themselves to Armes; so as not being moved with mercenary ends, respecting pay and hire, which are the Attractives of mercenary souldiers, A sort of men condemned not only of divine butCauponantes Bellum. Tull. Oic. lib. 1. 18. even humane Authors. As of the noble Pyrrus it is said, that he would not have Hucksters of warre; That would sell their strength and kill for mony. And a Poet Satyrically thus declames againstNulla sides pie∣tasque viris qui castra sequuntur, Venalesque ma∣nus: ibi fas ubi maxima merces; re mernt parvo Luca. lib. 10. 406. them. Faith and devotion are of one account, To men that Campe and mexcenary warre Frequent▪ there's right where greatest pay doth mount, For little hire they serve, that's all they care. But not being drawne by this consideration of pay, or intent together wealth by pillage and booty, respecting neither the cause for which they fight, nor person, whether Turke, Tyrant or Tray∣tour underNon enim mili∣tare dilctum ost, sed propter prae∣dam militav p∣catum est De verb. Dom. Serm. 19. whom they serve, which doth render the warre unlawfnll▪ according to the saying of S. Austen; to warre it is not a sin, but to make warre or serve in warre for the prey or booty, is a sin. but those (I say) whose candid spirits are free from such sinister and base intendements, their
voluntary and valourous endeavours, and adven∣turing their lives, and what is precious unto them, (like those noble Voluntiers the governours ofJudg. 4. 9. Israel that offered themselves willingly among the people) as their Act is worthy of unfading honor, so may they receive infallible comfort and in∣couragement, and know themselves as well asNon esse Homi∣cidas, sed mini∣stros legis, nec ultores injuria∣rum suarum, sed salutis publicae defensores Aquin. Caetenâ areâ in locum. others, Not to be murderers, but ministers of the Law; not Revengers of their owne priviate wrongs, but defenders of the publike safety; As tis noted that Iohn Baptist did account these souldiers in our Text. I will stretch this line no further, least I seem to flatter, only I crave leave to adde this pithy exhortation, which I have borrowed from an Author, not unlearned; and here inserted it, being very profitable for all souldiers to ob∣serve;A profitable exhor∣tation to all souldi∣ers. Let the Christian souldier therefore be ever doing something, let him be couragious,Semper itaque agat miles Chri∣stianus a liquid, sit strenuus, fidelis, laboriosus; cen∣turionibus obse∣quens, &c. Bullin. de Cad. 2. Ser. 9. faithfull, laborious, and obedient to his Com∣manders; Let him not slip any occasion, but be excercised in military discipline, let him not be cowardly, but valiant; not cruell and bloudy, but yet severe and withall gentle, and courteous, as times shall require; Let him spoile nothing that he can preserve, and before all things, let him not neglect his dayly and constant prayers unto God, as well in safety, as in midst of danger: let him begin all things with God, and, without God, at∣tempt nought at all; if hee taste Adversity, let him not cast downe his heart, and if he enjoy prosperity let him not be proud, but ever thank∣full,
and alwayes use the victory with clemencie and mercy; let him totally depend upon God, and desire nothing more then the defence of the Common-wealth, lawes, Religion, Justice and the innocent; and thus fighting the good fight, he shall at last obtaine the crowne of righteousnesse; and if the Lord of hosts (which is the Generall of all Armies, and other Generalls but his Of∣ficers) at his comming shall finde him thus doing, he shall be no lesse happy, then if he were found imployed in the workes of his ordinary vocation;Fuit ejus vitae so∣cia virtus, gloria mortis comes. Epitaph. Freder, D. Bavariae cogno. vi∣victorios. apud Ph. Camerar. oper. sub∣sesivarum, Tr. 3. c. 22. or at his prayers and exercise of his most pious and sacred devotions, and upon his Monument may worthily be inscribed this Epitaph, Valour was the Associate of his life and the Comerade of his death was glory. Having seen the lawfulnesse of souldiery, let us now come to see what is unlawfull in souldiers, taught us by these words of John Baptist, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any salsely, and be content with your wages; wherein are obser∣vable, these things. First, that they must hurt no mans person, op∣pressing the poore which cannot defend them∣selves, wounding their Bodies, unduly affrighting them, or other wayes injuring them under pre∣tence of their office; for it usually happens, that those Armes which the Prince commands to be taken up for the defence of the publike orders, and honesty, are turned to the dammage and ruine of the inhabitants of city and country
For oftentimes the souldiers do plunder and burne houses, drive away the inhabitants, ravish the women, breake open the doores, and commic such like outrages; all which they think lawfull for them being souldiers. Secondly, they must not accuse any man fals∣ly, or lay some capitall crime to his charge, as some did, accusing the innocent, and making in∣formation against them to the Generall, or other chiefe Commanders, that they might thereby lick money out of the rich men, which they could not otherwayes extort out of them, and at the last some part of the goods that were confiscated, might accrew to the Informer, for their labour, and for the hire of such information. Thirdly, they must be content with their wages, such pay as was allowed unto them by the Em∣peror for their labor & pains taken in war for the defence of the commonwealth, or with such pro∣portion of victualls as was appointed them, for in times past souldiers had not their pay in mony, but in victualls▪ and with this Iohn teacheth them to be content, and not to extort mens goods from them, or to grate giftes out of them, or to borrow any thing, or buy it of them, and pay them either slowly, little, or nought at all; ThusAet. Chemnit. Gorram Stell. in o. the words are expounded by divers Authors of great learning and famous in the Church; from all which we learne, how innocent souldiers oughtObservation. to be, and to offend or wrong no man in body, name or goods, Not in body, They must do vio∣lene
Vivel fraude fiat injuria. Tull. Off. l. 1. ubi agr. de bel∣licis Officiis. to no man, not in name, They must not accuse any falsely, nor in goods by force or fraud; for in∣juries may be done either by open force or cun∣ning subtility: but they must be content with their wages. Eccles. 12. 11. That I may drive this nayle (as Solomon cals the words of the wise) to the head, give me leave to beate it home with some reasons or Argu∣ment;I. Christianitie re∣quires it. Matth. 10. 16. And first, because I speak unto Christians, this may be learned from Christ, who commands us to be innocent or harmlesse as Doves. This we are taught to be the foundation of our spiri∣tuall building up in a Christian practice and up∣rightAedificanti itaque tibi spiritualem domum, non su∣per levitatem are∣nae, sed super so∣liditatem petrae, innocentiae inpri∣mis fundamen∣tum ponatur, su∣per quod possis ar∣duum justitiae culmen erigere, maximam enim partem justitiae impevi▪  Hieron. Epist. ad Celan. Novissimunquod dabitur tali viro, est pax. Munster. living, by an Ancient Father thus speaking; Whilst thou art building thy spirituall house, let the foundation be first layd not upon light sand, but upon the solid Rock, upon which thou malest more easely reare up the high top of Righteousnesse; for he ful∣filleth the greatest part of righteousnesse, that hurts no body; and he which shall lay the foundation of innocencie, and proceed on the high topp of Righteousnesse, howsoever he shall be tossed in tumultuous warres and troubles for a short while in this life, yet shall hee be sure to find rest and peace at the last; if not in his life, yet at least in his death; as we learne from Davids words; Keep innocency and take heed unto the thing that is right, for that shall bring a man peace at the last; or as the other Translation reades it, Marke the perfect man and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace; or as another reade, the last thing that
shall be given to such a man is peace. ▪7. . II. The nature and property of a godly war requires it. A second Argument to induce souldiers to in∣nocencie, shall be the same that Abigail used to restraine David from plundring and destroying Nabal, as he had resolved, in revenge of a discour∣tesie, in Nabals refusing to send him some small provision, which he requested of him in his great necessity; My Lord (said shee) fighteth the Lords1 Sam. 25. 28. Si bella Jehovae Dominus meus gerat, & malum non inveniatur in te. Junius. Cùm praelia Do∣mini Domin t praeliari, malitia ergò non invenia∣tur in e. Vulgar. battels, and evill hath not been found in thee all thy dayes; it is thus read by a learned Translatour; If my Lord fight the Lords battels, and evil should not be sound in thee; And another thus, Seeing thou my Lord wagest the Lords warres, therefore let not iniquity bee found in thee: Teaching us, that those that fight the Lords battels, (as all those doe who fight under a just Authority in a good and just cause) should be carefull to be free from violence and iniquity. It is a disgrace to an honest man to have wicked persons lodge in his house, and to a School-master to have Rakehells under his tuition, and to a Generall to harbour vil∣lains under his command; but most of all it is a dishonour to the Majesty of the Lord of hosts, that wickednesse and villany should march under his colours, and take up quarters in his leaguers and garrisons. III. Innocency preseres from grief of heart, and torture of conscience. A third reason may be collected also from other words of Abigail in the pursuit of her busi∣nesse unto David, This shall be no griefe unto thee, nor offence of heart to my Lord (saith shee) either that thou hast shed blood causelesse▪ or that my
Verse 31. Lord hath avenged himselfe; if her former argu∣ment will not move, her latter surely will prove effectuall; though a man respect not the glory of God, yet surely he will (even of selfe-love) have respect to his owne comfort, and freedom from a tormenting conscience, which by innocencie is conserved; and know all men assuredly, that those who now lay siege to Townes and Castles, shall one day either in warre or peace, in bed or battel be besieged with the memory of their sinnes;Hic murus ahe∣neus erit, Nil conscire sibi, nullâ pallelcere culpâ. Horat. Ep. 1. and then, This unto him shall be a Brazen Wall, His Conscience to fear no sinn at all. A strong Fort (I say) it shall be, and im∣pregnable to all the Hellish Furies, to have a Conscience void of offence before God and man, when innocent and causlesse blood, plunderedExugentes san∣guinem Elephan∣torum eos occi∣dunt, & ipsi vi∣cissim incbriati opprimuntur & commoriuntur. Plin. Hist. nat. l. 8. cap. 8. Violence in Souldi∣ers makes the expe∣dition unsuccesfull. Goods, and unjust Booty, shall be unto the Actors thereof, as the Elephants blood unto the Dra∣gons, that sucking the blood of the Elephants, do kill them, and they themselves, being drunk & therewith, oppressed, not able to digest it, die also: So those that by violence, rapine and injustice have kil∣led and undone others, shall by such deeds be ut∣terly and eternally undone themselves. A fourth reason recalling souldiers from vio∣lence, may be taken from the malignant effect or consequence hereof, that it makes the expedition unsuccessefull, and prepares discomsiture to the
whole Army, and that by these particulars. Exercitus quem injuria & audacia antecedit plerum∣que cladem & interitum omi∣naturi. Isa. 1. 51. I. Their priyers are hindred. First, hereby the accesse of their prayers unto God, & his acceptance of them is hindered, accor∣ding to the menace of the Prophet Isaiah, VVhen you spread out your hands I will hide mine eyes, yea when you make many prayers I will not hear; your hands are full of blood. The necessity of innocent hands to be presented to God in prayer, rhose that had onely naturall Theologie well percei∣ved, and therefore the Persians arriving at Del∣phos with a Navy of a thousand Ships, did pre∣sentReligiosas potiùs quàm rapaces manus. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1, 2 Chron. 20. in Apolloes Temple rather religious then ra∣picious hands. And for the practice and efficacy of prayers in Armies, we have the examples of Jehoshaphat assaulted by the Moabites and Am∣monites, and of the Christian Emperours Con∣stantine, who appointed prayers unto his souldi∣ers, and taught them to ascribe th Victories unto God, and to crave his blessing and assistance for the time to come; and Theodosius, who count∣edEuseb. de vit. Con∣stant. lib. 4. c. 20. his prayers his best and accustomed Forces: Besides, our own Chronicles relate the effect of prayer in the Army of King William the Con∣querour, who the night and morning before theRuffin. lib. 2. c. 1. 33. Battell with Harold, did give themselves to ac∣knowledgeStow. their sins, prayer, and communica∣ting the Lords Body; whilest Harold and his Forces spent the whole night in drinking, singing and dancing. II. Memory of former violence makes men Cowards. 2. The conscience, wherin remains the memory of former violence & injustice, makes men Cow∣ards,
and afraid to grapple with death, which they must encounter together with their ene∣miesMerces malae con∣scienciae est time∣re eos, quibus ter∣roi esse iuit. In praelio cervi, in pace Leones. Beza in Annotat. Mar. 11. 32. apud Jun. in Bibl. Majo. in the field; and so afraid of their ene∣mies, as Deaths messengers: The reward of an evill Conscience is to fear those unto whom a man might be a terrour; and this makes them to be as swift as Harts in time of warre, that are as stout as Lyons in time of peace; whereas a candid and clear conscience that is not terrified with the me∣mory of by-past sins, makes them that expedite a good cause as bold as Lyons. It was a noble saying of one Dercyllidas a Senatour of Lacedemo∣nia,Siquidem Deus est qui minatur, non timeamus, nihil enim injustè agimus; sin homo, norit quod viris minetur. Stob. de fortitud. cap. 7. Occidere possunt, laedere non pos∣sunt. hearing that Pyrrhus lead a great Army a∣gainst them, and threatned sore, If he be a God that threatens us, let us not fear, for we do nothing amisse; but if he be a man, let him know that he threatens men. This (I say) is the fruit of a guilt∣lesse conscience, which may encourage the pos∣sessor to say of his enemies, Kill me they may, hurt me they cannot. But the evill conscience, fear∣ing death, not onely as the dissolution of Na∣ture, but as Gods Provost-Marshall, to arrest him, binde him hand and foot, neck and heels, and so cast him into utter darknesse and eternall tor∣ments; no wonder it is if it beget a cowardize the heart of Souldiers, and so they become eitherIV. Violence and inju∣stice causeth God to withdraw his help from the whole army Propter impios & sceleratos ho∣mines, caeteri Di∣vinâ ope destituti ab hostibus cae∣duntur. Joshua 7. Non ex infirmita∣te corporis, sed ex peccato vince∣bantur. Chrysost. Hom. 14. ad popu∣lum Tom. 4. Postquàm in pec∣catum cecidêrunt omnibus facti sunt expugnabi∣les, & quos arma & equi, & mili∣tes, & tot machi∣namenta capere non potuerunt, hos peccati na∣tura vinctos ho∣stibus tradidit. Sed quales oro fructus metimus hodiè ex hujus∣modi semente? vincimur à Tur∣cis, ludibrium sumus omnibus gentibus, pareūt, & Mahometismo subduntu regna; & inexplicabili∣bus indiem malis involvimur. Bul∣lin. Decad. 2. ser. 9. Runawayes from their Colours, or in hot ser∣vice to hang back, which giveth advantage to the enemie, discourageth their fellows, disorders the Army, and hazzards all. Thirdly, violence, rapine and injustice in some
Souldiers causeth God to withdraw himself from the whole Army, and so for wicked and impious men the rest are destitute of the help of God, and bea∣ten of their enemies; yea, although they other∣wise prosecute a good Cause, as is apparent in the case of Achan, whereunto I referr you; and of the Jewes affairs in their warrs, it is observed by Chrysostome, that they were conquered not of the weaknesse of Body, but of their wickednesse and further notes, how the Midianites under∣standing that the Israelites could not be vanqui∣shed by the sword, cunningly sought to bring them into sin, by sending their daughters to com∣mit whoredome with them, and then after they fell into sin they became easie to be subdued of all▪ and those whom Arms, and Horses, and Souldiers and so many enemies could not take, the nature of sin betrayed them bound unto their enemies. And not unlike to this observation of this Ancient Fa∣ther is the observation and sad complaint of the impiety and wickednesse of some souldiers by a learned Author of latter times, what fruit I pray you reap we from such seed? we are conquered of the Turks, we are a scorn to all Nations; Kingdoms perish and are subdued to Mahometisme, and wee are daily involved in inexplicable miseries. Thus by violence, rapine and other sinns in souldiers, whilest their prayers are rejected, their courage abated, and Gods favour and help alienated, are whole Armies routed and discomfited, and there∣by Kingdoms overthrown and ruinated.
IV. Violence and inju∣stice are unfruitfull in the end. A fourth reason, and that a very forcible one to disswade souldiers, and indeed all manner of men from violence, rapine and injustice, may be taken from the unfruitfulnesse of such Acts, and consideration of what benefit is gotten by such deeds; suppose a man could get into his hands all the wealth of the world, and bring the King∣doms under his dominion, when he shall thinke to sing a Requiem to his soule and to take his ease, having goods laid up for many years, at last hee must heare or feele what is spoken to theLuke 12.20. Richman, Thou fool th is night shall they fetch away thy soule from thee, then whose shall those things be that thou hast gotten? Those King∣doms which thou hast subdued, those Lands and Houses which thou now possessest, having expel∣led the old inhabitants, those clothes and jewells wherewith thou now arrayest and adornest thy selfe, whilest the ancient owners goe fortorne and distitute, whose shall they be? thine they shall not be, for thy soule shall be fetched away from thee▪ and for thy body, naked camest thou out of thy mothers wombe, and naked shalt thou returne thither; All thy high Trophies and rich prizes and booties left behind thee▪ nd thou, if thy desires were as boundlesse asUs Pellaeo ju∣veni non suicit Orbis. Juvenal. Satyr. 10. Sarcophago con∣tentus oris. Alexanders of whom it was said, that, One world doth not the Pellaean youth suffice. Yet, Then with a Cophine thou must be content.
But if thy Ashes after thy death shall have the honour of a Statue, or a rich Monument, yet time will consume it, or malice breake it downe. As Scipio Africanus his Statue was broken downe, and removed from the place where it was first set, and the brazen urne wherein his ashes were put, with an Epitaph inscribed, of which these verses were a part, Whom neither Europe could resist,Cui non Europa, non obstitit Afri∣ca quondam, Respice res ho∣minum quàm brevis urna tenet Epitom. Plutarch. per Darium Tiber∣tum. nor Afrique in times past, See mens Affayres, how him doth hold a little rn at last. But might they so part with on even hands their acts of violence, plundering and injustice, happy were they; but then comes their mis∣chiefe, that  S. Austen sayth, This is the unhap∣pinesseIpsa est infelici∣tas hominum proprer quod pec∣cant morientes hic dimittunt, a peccata ipsa se∣cum portant. of men, that the thing for which they sin when they die, they leave here behind them, But their sinnes themselves they cary along with them; and an heavy burthen will such a carriage be unto their soules. Ahans heape of stones, which were cast upon him, were heavier sure then the Baby∣lonishHom. 2. garments, and all the Gold and Silver that he had plundered at Hiericho: But if thoseJoshua 7. 26. stones were poysed, they would be found lighter by much then the guilt of those sinnes, which by violence, plundering, rapine, and other Acts of injustice, men doe contract unto their soules, o heavy is it, as they are not able to beare it, and
yet so adhering that they were not able to shake it of. Oh who is able to expresse with what unwillingnesse the soul at death doth undertake its necessitated departure, being loath to leave the things that were precious to it, and appear be∣fore God with a conscience blotted with inno∣cent blood, and other acts of cruelty and injustice, which if it might, it would now cast away with as much disdaine and anguish of spirit, as Iudas did the thirty peeces of silver gotten for betraying Christ; and through the terrour of an accusing conscience, despairing, cry out, I have sinned in shedding the blood, cheating, extorting, and plun∣dering the goods, and in slandering and defaming the credits and causes of just and innocent per∣sons. There is an excellent passage in S. Bernard, which we will borrow, being very profitable to the pursuance of this Argument; When the soulCùm magno me∣u, magis dolori∣bus anima separa∣tur à corpore, &c. Meditat. Devot. cap. 2. with great feare and mighty griefes is separated from the body, then do the Angels command, arrest it, and bring it before the Throne of the dreadfull Judge, and then the silly soule remem∣bring all the evil, yea the worst deeds, which day or night it wrought, shal tremble & crave sparing, or (as wee say) cry quarter, saying, give me leave & spaning, if it be but for an hours space; but then his sinnes (as it were) speaking, shall say unto him, Thou hast wrought us, we are thy deeds, wee will not leave thee, but we will be alwayes with thee, and goe with thee to judgement; Then his vices shall accuse his soule with many and
sdry crimes, and shall find many false witnesses against it, though the true ones are enough to its condemnation; The divels also with a terrible countenance and horrible aspect, shall affright it, and with a great fury persecute it, and catch at it, desiring to keep and possesse it, except there be some to deliver it: then the soule findes the eyes and mouth and other senses shut up, by which it was wont to goe out and solace it selfe in out∣ward things, shall turne back into it selfe, and see∣ing it selfe all alone and naked, shall (thorow despaire) faile in it selfe, and fall under its owne selfe; And because for the love of the world and pleasure of the flesh it hath forsaken th love of God, it shall be forsaken of God in the houre of so great necessity, and be delivered to the di∣vels in Hell to be tormented. Thus farre S. Ber∣nard, whose Meditation, (were it well thought upon and seriously beleeved) would worke un∣doubtedly a great restraint in men from many acts of violence and injustice, which now without scruple of conscience they commit. But supposing all that hath been said to be spoken Quet. of friends, what may be done to enemies? sure it is lawfull to se all violence against them; Hereunto I answer; First we are to consider Answ. enemies as men opponent to peace and justice, and to these they are by warrs to be reduced; And no other ends in the pursuite of enemies by sword and hostile Acts are to be sought for; Ac∣cording to the saying of Tully, For this end are
Ut in pace cum Justitiâ vivatur. Offic. lib. 1. Gratian. ubi supra. Pax quaesita. Aust. wars undertaken: that men may live in peace with justice. And S. Austen calls a just warre, peace sought, or a seeking of peace: These Authors from Nature and Divinity, teaching us, that whatso∣ever is done in warre ought to aime at these ends of peace and justice: As first, to offer con∣ditions of peace, as was commanded by God untoDeut. 20. 10. the people of Israel, and if they should be accep∣ted, then their enemies were to be preserved in safety; upon the performance of tribute or con∣ditions agreed on. Secondly, if such conditions of peace should beIbid. 12. 13 refused, then were the enemies to be prosecuted in hostile manner, as killing the men and spoyling their goods; But here the Lord, though he gave the Israelites liberty against their ene∣mies, yet he gave them two rules of restrainte; First, the sword should nor touch the innocent, as women and children. Secondly, regard was to be had of such things as were necessary to the preservation of life, as fruit-trees, of which respect was to be had, that they were not to be cut downe for any service inDeut 20. 19. warre or in a siege of a City; because the Tree of the field is mans life: The like we may under∣stand of corne-fields and Meadowes, Gardens, and Orchards; by the fruit and strength whereof mans life is preserved; and surely the conserva∣tion of these, both in Leaguers and Marches, ought very heedfully to be provided, whether they be∣long to friends or foes; If they belong friends,
it is inhumane to spoyl or waste them; if they belong to enemies, it is great pollicy to pre∣serve them, that the Army may be supplied with necessaries; and here if I could doe it without seeming to digresse, I would gladly plead for the safety and immunity of the fruits of the ground from spoyle and devastation in warrs, and make suite for a protection for the husbandman and his labours, together with things belonging unto husbandry, that they might be safe from violence, the necessity of Agriculture or husbandry being of such consequence, that by it onely both in warres and peace the life of Kings and King∣doms is conserved; for this cause there was anCamerar. Meditat, Hst. Tom. 1. cap. 5. Tom. 2. cap. 22. Imperiall Lawe, that husbandmen and such as were occupied in country businesses, whilst they were resident in villages and country-Townes, should be secure in any part of the Empire, so as none should be found that dare presume to invade, take or violently carry away their per∣sons, Oxen, instruments of Husbandry, or what∣soever belonged unto the country-work; and ifConcil. Lateranens. any man should dare through rash boldnesse to violate and breake this Statute, he should restore what he had taken fourefold, should incurre in∣famie by the Law, and be further punished at the Generals or Emperours discretion: And as the the commonwealth, so the Church according to its power did provide for the priviledge and safety of husbandmen among others, that, ThoseIn agriculturâ ex∣isttes & animalia quibus arant, & Semina portant ad agrum, con∣gruâ securitate laetentur. who were employed in Husbandry, and their cattell
wherewith they tilled the ground, and carried seed to the field, should enjoy convenient security: And of Cyrus the great it is registred, that when he went to warrs, he caused proclamation to be made, that husbandmen should be spared, and that the conquest should be so ordered, that they might still remaine in their possessions; and of Xerxes King of Persia in his expedition against the Graecians, that he gave charge for the in∣demnityArmatis viris non pastoribus bellum inferamus of Country men, saying unto one Artabanus, Let us fight with armed men, and soul∣dirs, and not with shepherds; And of the anci∣ent Indians it was counted a wrong in warres, either to take the husbandmen, or to spoyle their fields; and such was their care for husbandry, that at one and the same time and place some did meet and joyn battle with their enemies; when others did plow and digge, and that with∣out any danger. This course was taken by Charles the fifth, in his warres with Francis King of France, in Piedmount; so as they kept either of them a numerous Army, for certaine years, otherwise provision would quickly have been wanting to their Forces. But to return from whence we digressed; women, and children being spared, the ftuits of the earth conserved, and husbandmen kept indemnified, those, who by force and Armes oppose peace and justice, to such armed powers as seeke to esta∣blish them, to kill and slay, none will deny to be Acts of Justice: or to take them alive, and im∣prison
or enslave them, and to appropriate their Goods, Riches, and Possessions as a lawfull prize unto the conquerors; And yet herein much caution is to be had, whereunto it shall not be unprofit∣ableI. How to kill an ene∣my in warre. to observe these Rules. First, in killing, slaying and taking away the life of the enemy, is much regard to be had with what mind, intentions, and affections it is done. S. Bernard hath a distinction very profitable to thisSi praevales, & vo∣luntate superandi vel vindicandi, fortè occidis hominem vivis▪ homicida. Bern. ad milit. Templ. purpose. First, If thou prevailest, and perhaps killest a man out of desire of conquest and revenge, then thou livest a Murtherer; which name who is he that would not be loath to carry among men, or that his soule should appeare in the presence of God with so grievous a sin upon the conscience, as the murther of a man: that creature whereon God hath set the glorious character of his own Image. Secondly, There is neverthelesse some whichEst tamen qui non ulciscendi zelo, nec vincen∣di typho, sed tan∣tùm evadendi re∣medio interficit hominem. neither out of zeal, to revenge, nor desire of vistory, kils a man, but only for remedies sake, of avoyd∣ing or eschewing some ill; as to suppresse Re∣bellion, to resist invasions, oppessions and the like; In which cases to kill an enemie is undoub∣tedly lawfull. And yet herein it shall much be∣hove the killer, (though necessity compell him to destroy the body of his enemie) to wish well unto him that falleth under his hand, and toge∣ther with the wounds of death which hee giveth him, to pray unto God to save his soule, and to grant him repentance, faith, and every grace that
is needfull to everlasting life. II. Clemency to be shewn to subdued and conquered enemies. Againe, not only in taking away the life of the enemy, but also in imprisoning or enslaving his person, and taking his goods, appropriating them to the Conquerours themselves, is much moderation and gentle clemency to be used. And that for these Reasons; 1. Humanity re∣quires it. First humanitie requires it, the conquerours and conquered being both of one Nature, and deriving their originals both from one Roote, and that these warres as other oppositions, are the consequents of mans fall, wherein the Conque∣rours, and conquered had equall share, being in the loyns of Adam, which should move the Con∣querours to pity those who by hostile Acts, whe∣ther force or feats of warre, are subdued; And1 King. 20. 32. to say of them as Ahab King of Israel, said of Benhadab King of Syria, subdued by his Forces, and making suit for quarter, Hee is my Brother; and the conquerours should behold neither the mortall wounds, nor the living miseries of their subdued enemies, but with compassion. Thus of Aneas it is said, when he saw the blood and fall ofIngenuit misa∣rans, Virgil Aeucid Lib. 10. Pictatis imago. Lausus his enemie, slaine by his owne hand, He la∣mented him pitifully; and therefore is called, The image of piety (I may say, of pitie▪) And of Mar∣ollas, which having conquered Siilie, which had stood out very obstinately against him, and stan∣ding upon a high place that he might behold the condition of that Citie, which of late was most rich and flourishing, but now most miserable, hee
could not abstaine from weeping, so as if someQuia  inco∣lumi stare fas non erat, leviter sub tam mansucto victore occidisti. Humanitatis dul∣cedo etiam ineffo∣rata barbarorum ingenia penetrat; orbosque & truces mollit hostium oculos, ac victo∣riae insolentissi∣mos spiritus fle∣ctit, vincit iram; prosternit odium, hostilemque san∣guinem hostilibus lachrymis per∣miscer. Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. Cùm bella quae inter Christianos geruntur, cùm sint ejusdem reli∣gionis, etiamsi justa fuerint, plus∣quàm civilia sint; nostri magistratus (nisi obsteterint justae rationes)  animos debent habere propensio∣res ad misericor∣diam victis impe∣trandā. Pet. Mart. in qu. occid. an serv. captiv. loc. 17. cla. 4▪ man had seen him, and not known how the case had been, he would have thought the victory to have been anothers; which made one say to dis∣tressed Sicilie, This may be some gratulation or mi∣tigation of thy griese, Because seeing thou mightest not stand in safety, thou fallest so easily under so gentle a Conquerour, Omitting other examples, these shew us, that The sweetnesse of humanity pier∣ceth the brutish dispositions of Barbarians, molli∣fieth the hard and cruell eyes of enemies, and bendeth those spirits that are most proud and insolent of their victory, it conquereth Anger, scals hatred, and mixeth the blood of an enemie with his enemies teares. Againe, as humanity, so Christianity teacheth us to be propense and ready to clemency and mercy unto conquered enemies; Seeing those warrs which are waged amongst Christians, when they are of one Religion, are more then civill warrs, yea though they be just, our Magistrates (except their be just reasons that withstand it) ought to car∣ry minds so much more ready to shew mercy unto those that are conquered; And not only Magis∣trates and Commanders, but all souldiers and mi∣litary men, even for Christianities sake, (if so be they be Christians) ought to be ready to shew mercy and gentlenesse to those that are subdued, or brought under their power: Excellent and imitable is the example of the valiant and vic∣torious first Christian Emperour Constantine,
who in his warres, during the battell, gave charge,Nè multorum fie∣ret caedes, unde non magis, suo∣rum, quàm hosti∣um saluti pro∣spexie. Euseb. de vitâ Constant. lib. 2. c. 13. Ut captivorum misereantur, & cùm homines es∣sent, humanae na∣turae nequaquàm os caperet oblivio That there should not be a slaughter of many, whereby he tooke no more care for the safety of his owne, then of his enemies; and when victory was gotten, his charge was, That they should have mercy on the pri∣soners, and seeing they more men, the oblivion or for∣getfulnesse of humane nature should never overtake them; And if at any time he saw the minds of his Souldiers to be very fierce, he would refraine them with gifts; and further gave order, that if any could take an enemy alive, he should be re∣warded; by which means the wisdome of the Emperour found out an alluring way for the conservation of men, so as infinite numbers, even of very Barbarians, escaped safe; OfO clementiam nostrâ aetate inso∣lentem. Grynae Annot. in loc. Euseb. this rare goodnesse and mercy of the Emperour, one (as it were sighing) thus speaks, Alas for this clemency and gentlenesse that it is out of fashion in this our Age! III. A motive to cle∣mency will be to con∣sider what may be∣fall to the Conqueror Further it would much induce the victors or conquerours to shew clemency and be kind to the conquered and subdued, if they should reflect upon themselves, and seriously bethink what clemencie or kindnesse they would desire if they were in the same case, and therewith rememberMath. 7. 12. the speech of our Saviour, whatsoever yee would that men should do unto you, doe yee even so untoLuke 6. 38. them; and that with the the same measure that ee meete to others, it shall be measured to you againe, And surely such considerations may well at some time take hold of them, as Iulius Caesar, hearing
this sentence, it may befall to every one, that befall to any one;Cuivis continge∣re potest, quod cuiquam contigire Pompeï casum deploro, & meam fortunam metuo▪ to any one; he fell a weeping and being demand∣ed the cause of such teares, he answered, I lament the fall of Pompey, and am affraid of mine ow  fortune: And it is a very frequent, that the same quarter men give to others, they receive backe a∣gaine from others, as in the case of AdonibezekJudges 17. 1 Sam. 15. 33. 1 King. 2. 33. and Agag, Generall Ioa and others, may be seen. To be short, a warning peece unto all men may be that severe threat of the Lord by the prophet Isaiah, we unto theo that spoylest (or as we say plunderest▪) and thou wast not spoyled, and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherouslyIsa. 3. 1. with thee: for when thou shalt cease to spoile, thou shall be spoiled. In which wordes the prophet seemes to threaten the King of Assyria, or the land, or Ninivelh, the chiefe city of Assyria, which did oppresse, spoile and plunder the Na∣tions about them, that they should be spoiled af∣terward; As if it should be said, Woe unto thee that spoilest and plunderest the Nations aboutNunc tibi grassari licet, nullae vir relistunt, sed erunt aliquando qui vos vicissim praeden∣tur. Calv. in loc. Sic mortalium negotia Divina (fortuna) Pro∣videntia ver∣sat. Val. Maxim. cap. i. de Pomp. thee; Now thou maist spoile and plunder at thy pleasure, there is no strength to resist thee; but there will be some, one time or other, that will plun∣der thee againe; which came to passe when the Caldeans did come and destroyed Niniveh▪ so the Assyrians did plunder the Jews, and the Chaldees did plunder the Assyrians; wee will conclude with a sentence of an Heathen Author, a little refined, Thus doth the providence of God change the affaires and businesse of men.
IIII. Courteous usage   to the conquered, draws others to voluntary submission. Unto these Arguments we may add this one, that gentle and courteous usage of those that are sub∣dued, helpeth to drew others unto a voluntary submission, to lay down Armes, and embrace peace and justice; as Benbadab King of Syria his servants moved their Master, that with sack∣cloth upon their loyns, and Roaps about their neckes they might grave pardon for him, and ob∣taine2 King. 20. 31. a pacification at the King of Israels hands (whom he had unjustly by warre provoked) be∣cause they had heard that the Kings of the house of Israel were mercifull Kings; And of Tygrane King of Armenin his willing submission (as anPltarch. Authour reportes) to Pompey, is ascribed to his assurance of Pompeys clemency; whereas on the other part, if there be not a certain expectation of gentle and kind usage upon submission it makes enemies that they will fight it out to the last man, and rather chuse to die in battell, then to submit, yea perchance being death upon thems Maccab. 14. 41. selves, as Rhass, of whom in the history of the Maccabes it is reported, That he first fell upon his own sword, then leaped downe from, awall a∣mongst his enemies, and at last pulled out his owne gutts, and threw them among them; chu∣sing rather such a death, then to fall into the hands of the wicked, and be abused otherwise then beseemed him: or if captives be discour∣teously used, it will drive them to worke some feate to bring destruction upon their Victors or Conquerours, yea though it be purchased with
their owne ruine also; As Sampson pulling theJudg. 16. house upon himselfe, and the Philistines, triumph∣ing over him, so he became revenged for the great indignitie which he suffered and at his death he flew more then he had done in his life. The sum of all these arguments is, that Humani∣ti, Christianitie, consideration of like future condition, and the motive to induce others op∣ponents and enemies to voluntary submission, and pacification, may plead for, and obtaine clemency and courteous dealing with enemies subdued and conquered. Something would yet be spoken of dealingV. Humanitie and kindenesse to be shewn to enemies after their death. 2 Sam. 2. 4. humanely and courteously with a enemie, and that even after his death which in a word is to com∣mend his body to due burials; There was a law among the Hebrewes that they should not suffer the dead bodies of their enemies to lie unburied; and we find how David did take in good part the action of the men of Jabesh-Gilead that bu∣ryed▪ Saul, who had been his enemie, and slaine by anothers hand; And of the worthy Judas Maccubaeus, that he used to burie the bodies of2 Mac. 12. 39. his slaine enemies; yea, we have the heroique Heathens, performing thus much, as Caesar to his enemie Pompey, whose head being cut off and lying long unburied, (forgetting that he had been an enemie) he caused to have an honourableOblitns hostis. funerall fire perfumed with many precious and sweet spices; And Marcus. Antonius gave the body of Marcus Brutus his late enemie, unto one
that had been Brutus his servant, that it might be buried; and to the end it might have the more honourable rites, he gave him his owneJacentem non hostem, sed civem deposito existi∣mans odio. Roabes to cover his Corps in the funerall: His hatred being laid aside, counting him, being dead, not as an enemie, but a Citizen; And Hannibat would not suffer the bodies of his enemies Aemylius Paulus, Tiberius Gracchus, and Marcus, Marcellus to lie unburied, but caused them to beAliquantò ei plùs gloriae Pau∣lus Gracchus, & Marcellus se∣pulti, quàm op∣pressi attulerunt. interred, saying, that Taulus Gracchus and Marcellus brought him somewhat greater honour being buried, then being subdued by him. These examples from holy and humane Stories, are enough to convince the inhumanitie of those who rifle and strippe the bodies of their slaine enemies, and so leave them naked to be a prey to ravenous Birdes and Beasts: I wish it might not be sometime said of such, The dead Bodies of thy servants have theyPsalmes. given to be meat unto the fowls of the Ayre, and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the land. VI. How to deal with enemies submit∣ting and accepting peace offered unto them. There are yet another sort of Enemies, which upon the offer of conditions of peace, (which, as we have shewed asore out of Deut. 20. 10, 11. were to be made at the beginning of Warre) shall ac∣cept of such conditions, and submit, or shall de∣sire to be received into protection, upon conditi∣ons to be agreed upon; these upon the perfor∣mance of such conditions, may challenge a greater measure of kindnesse and gentle dealing, then any of which it is yet spoken, they are not one∣ly to be suffered, but to be saved and kept harm∣lesse;
Thus Joshah did not onely spare the Gi∣beonites,2 Sam. 2. that they should not suffer by any under his command, but did also protect them against the Kings of the Amorites which came against them: And when Saul out of his zeal to the2 Sam. 27. 28. Children of Israel, would have broken the League, and destroyed the Gibeonites, God punished his attempt with three yeers Famine, and at last by hanging up seven of Sauls Sons. And David was much offended, and cursed the act of oab  who was Generall of his Forces against Ishbo∣sheth) treacherously murthering Abner, who had been in open & actuall Rebellion against him, and Generall of Ishbosheth his Forces, after he had granted him pardon. And of the noble and victo∣rious Emperour Constantine it is recorded, thatEuseb. de vit. Con∣stant. lib. cap. 10. if those that were of the contrary part, finding themselves to weak to resist his power, would come and lay down Armes, and falling down at his feet, crave quarter and pardon, he would re∣ceiveUpote ex homi∣nibus conservan∣dis capies vo∣luptatem. Plutarch. Valer. Max. them all, and keep them safe; As taking delight in saving of men. It would be too long to relate all examples of this sort, as of Pompey, who having conquered Tygranes King of Armenia, would not suffer him to bee long craving his fa∣vour, but with good words comforted him, and restored him his Crown, which he had cast down at Pompey his feet, and restored him to his former estate; Judging it alike honourable to create Kings,Aequè  esse judicans,  vincere Reges & facere. as to conquer them. And the famous act of Lucius Paulus, who hearing that Perses, (who of a King
in a short time was made a captive) was brought to him, he went out to meete him, in his Imper∣tiall Roabes, and when the captivated King would have fallen on his knees before Lucius Paulus, he would not suffer him, but lifted him up, bad him be of good comfort, brought him into his Tent, made him sit beside him in his counsell, vouch∣safed him the honour of his Table, with other courteous Respects; In which Spectacle of Perse subjected, and Lucius Paulus so humanely and kindely dealing with him, it may appeare, that if it bee a famous Act to subdue an enemie, itNon minùs lau∣dabile infelices seire misereri. is No lesse praise worth to know how to take pitie upon the affllicted and him that is in misery. Thus from sacred and humane Authoritie may be lear∣ned, with what gentle and courteous Respect to entertaine, and fidelitie to protect enemies upon conditious of peace, and submission. The Application of this which hath beenApplycation. I. To souldiers. spoken will be of singular use to all souldiers, and all men whosoever are employed in militarieCum graviter peccant, hâe so∣lent a peatis suis primâ voe se excusare, quòd militant. In verb, Dom. ser. 19.  de coro Militis. Affaires, to prevent that excuse which S. Austen notes to have been common among souldiers, and other officers of publicke businesses; when: they greatly offend they excuse themselves at first with this saying, that they are souldiers; as if then it were lawfull for them to doe any thing. Tertul∣lian speaking of souldiers, that are Christians, requires two things of them: the one; That they commit nothing against God., the other, That they be ready to suffer for God▪ For warre ∣miseth
neither impunity, nor freedom from punish∣mentNec enim deli∣ctorum impuni∣tatem, & Marty∣riorum immuni∣tatem militia promittit. of sin, nor immunitie or priviledge from Mar∣tyrdome: But some will say, because they are souldiers, they must needs do so; but our Author will tell us, There is no necessity to sin layed upon them, uponw hom lyeth the only necessity not to sin atNulla est necessi∣tas delinquendi, quibus est una necessitas non de∣linquendi. all; In that which hath been said, we have seen the necessity of not sinning, by violence and false ac∣cusations against any man, and how souldiers should carry themselves to friends and enemies, rather to be helpfull to both, then by injustice hurtfull to either; To hurt a friend is villai∣nous, to help an enemie (so it redound not to our owne wrong) or to abstaine from harming him, is a token of a minde truly noble and valourous: such I wish were billeted in all souldiers breasts, and that there could not be found any (among Christians especially) which neither respect friend nor foe, so as their owne pleasure or pro∣fitUt praedarentur quicquid possint, five essent bona amicorum, five inimicorum, ut enim res pessimè caderet, cogeren∣tur ad restituen∣dum; sed interim aliquam praedae portionem resi∣dere apud rapto∣em. Erasin. in an∣notat. super locum. may be promoted; such a one Erasmus saith he once met with, and heard him (being a Cap∣taine) thus advice his souldiers: They should plunder what they could, whether the goods of their friends or foes; for howsoever the matter should fall, at the worst they could but be compelled to re∣stitution: and at the least some part of the pillage would remaine with the plunderer; But leaving such to the Judgement of the Lord of Hosts; it shal bring more honour to Souldiers in their life, and more comfort and hope at their death, if they shall observe this counsell which Aurelianus
Si vis Tribunus esse, imò si vis vi∣vere, manus mili∣tum contine, ne∣mo pullum alie∣num rapiat, ovem nemo contingat, vam nullus au∣ferat, segetem non deterat, oleum, sal, lignum nemo exigat, Annonâ suâ quisque con∣tentus sit, de prae∣dâ hostis, non de achrymis pro∣vincialium habe∣t. Citatur à Buca∣no loc. de Magistra. quast. 50. Philip Camerar. Meditat. Histor. Tom. 1. cap. 5. the Emperour gave to his Tribune, or Sergeant∣major; If thou wilst be a Tribune, yea if thou in∣tendest to live, restraine the hands of the souldiers, let no man steal another mans chicken, let no man touch another mans sheep, let no man pluck another mans grape, let none thrash out another mans corne, let every one be content with his owne victualls, and let him have what hee gets out of the spoyle of his enemies, and not out of the teares of such as are un∣der our charge, whom wee should protect: And the Admirable discipline of the Turkes is worth learning (and I wish it rise not up in Judgement against Christians) of which it is said. That no souldier dare take any thing injustly, if he doe, he is punished without pitie: and that there are ap∣pointed Officers to looke to those things which are in way that the souldiers march, so as bread, eggs, Fruites, Oates, and such like things are carried by Boyes of eight or tenn years old, and nothing touched; and Orchards full of fruit by the way∣side, yet none dare pluck an Apple without the owners consent; if he doe, his head is lost for it. Let Christian-souldiers thinke it a shame that Heathens and Turkes should outgoe them in just and innocent Actions and demeanours; And let them study so to carry themselvs, both in marches and quarters, that they may say as Samuel, whose Ox have I taken, or whose Asse have I taken?1 Sam. 12. 3. who have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribes? And when they enter into Armes, take unto them the brave
resolution which Abraham carried in his noble breast, when he came to the assistance of the King of Sodome, against Chedorlaomer, and to relieve his friend Lot, who was taken prisoner, that he would not take from a threed even to a shoo∣latchet: Let them walk in the steps of their father Abraham, and they shall march unto sal∣vation, and rest in Abrahams bosome; And as their Fame shall be honourable, so shall their harmlesse spirits, holding a true faith in Jesus Christ, the Captaine of our salvation, when they shall sigh them out upon their bedds, or dropp them out at their wounds, with their blood up∣on the field, so encourage them, that they may say,Nec pudet vivre, nc piget most. II. I neither shame to live, nor do I shrinke or am affraid to die. Secondly, if such innocency be required inWhat innocency is required of men in times and places of place. souldiers, what is required of men imployed in places and vocations of peace, and tranquility in the Commonwealth, how innocent ought they to bee, to Life and Person, Name and Credite, Goods and Estates of their Neighbours, not to wrong them, but according to their abilitie, to labour and endeavour to preserve them, and neg∣lectDuobus modis pecatur in homi∣nem, uno modo si laedatur; alio mo∣do fi cùm potest, non aduveur. A. stn de meribus eclesie. no meanes that may doe them good; For by these two wayes it is offended against our Neighbour, either by commission of injuries, or omission of kindnesses, according to the saying of S. Austen, By two wayes wee offend against a man, one way if he bo hurt of us; the other is, if when it is in our power, he be not holpen of us; And another
Non suflicit ab∣stinre à malo, nisi fiat quod bo∣num est, & parum est nemini noce∣re, nisi studias multis prodesse, Prosper. titul. Epigr. 77. teacheth us, that It is not sufficient to abstaine from doing ill, except that be done which is good; and it small avails to hurt no man, except thou studiest to help and profit many. And it is obser∣ved by S. Ambrose, that of these precepts, which Iohn gave to his hearers, some were peculiar to particular men, but the precept of mercy is a common precept, Mercy is necessary to all offices;Omnibus Officiis, omibus aetatibus, necessaria, & ab omnibus defe∣renda misericor∣dia; non Publica∣nus, non miles excipitur, non agricola, vel ur∣banus, dives & pauper, &c. Ambros. in locum. Luke 16. and is of all men to be shewn or performed, there is neither Publican nor souldier excepted, nor country∣man, nor citizen, nor rich, nor poore, none is exempted: all men in generall are admonished that they helpe him, that hath not of his owne to helpe himselfe; The omission of this was the condemnation of the Richman that gave no foode nor Raiment to hungrie and naked Lazarus, wee finde no men∣tion of any that he had oppressed, and yet is he found to bee in Hell in torments; and if it thus besell the neglect of mercy, what shall be∣fall to acts of crueltie? If the fruitlesse figtree be accursed, what shall become of thornes and briars, such as murderers, fighters, quarellers, slanderers base informers, and such others, and all, who (nor content with that portion that God hath given them) do by cheating, oppression and extortion, or any injust way advance and enrich themselves with the damage, defamation and un∣doing of others? If at the last doome for the omission of mercy, it shall be said, Goe ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Divell and his Angels; For I was an hungry, and yee gave me no
meate, I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, I was a stranger, and ye took mee not in, naked, and yee cloathed me not, sick, and in prison, and yee visited mee not; With what confusion shall it be heard, if Christ shall say: Goe yee cursed Tyrants, oppressours, and persecutours into everlasting fire; for the meane food which God had given mee, yee tooke it from mee; from the poore and homely habitation which I enjoyed, yee expelled and banished mee; of the Rayment and Cloathes, wherewith my nakednesse was covered from the eyes of men, and my weaknesse shielded from the violence of the weather, yee have stripped mee; of my health, wherein I cheare∣fully walked with God, and served my Neighbour in love and charitie, yee have bereaved mee, of my libortie, yee have restrain∣ed mee, and in close prisons and dungeons shut mee up; and all this though yee have not done to mee in the members of my naturall body, yet have yee done it to these little ones, the members of my misticall Bodie; who
are as precious to mee as mine owne life; For their sakes I tooke upon mee the forme of a Servant▪ I gave my spotlesse blood, and en∣dured the bitter paines of death and Hell for their Redemption. Surely to hear this will much amaze and con∣found, for if he were speechlesse (upon the check) who wanted the Wedding garment, needs must he be dumb and without excuse whose garments are rolled in blood, and as red as Scarlet and Crimson, Dyed in the blood and sufferings of the Innocent. One short Observation more would I desirous∣ly commend to your Christian piety, and there∣with take leave, it being consolatory that I may be free, as in mine own intentions, so in others estimation, from suspition of having spoken or written any thing which hath not proceeded from unsaigned Charity, the proper fountain of all Christian Action▪ Whereas these Souldiers who had been addicted to violence, rapine and other vices, and were men accounted the worst alive (as afore from sundry Authors is observed) now comming to Iohn, confessing and sorrow full for their fins, and desiring directions which they might oberve in seeking salvaion, are not reje∣cted of John as men without hope, but are rather
received and instructed what to do, and how to demean themselves for the future, with an inti∣mation of safety upon the performance of that which is prescribed; We collect, That great sin∣nersObservation, Great senners repen∣ting may obtin salvation. repenting and reforming themselves, may obtain salvation; If there had not been time of repen∣tance and hope of salvation upon repentance and amendment, he would not have exhorted these souldiers to amendment. S. Hierome hath a col∣lectionHierom. in Epist. adversi . Revel. 2. 3. not unlike hereunto upon the Epistles of Jesus Christ to some of the Churches: First, the Church of Ephesus had left her first love; the Church of Pergamus also was not free from all offence, for she had in her some which did hold the doctrine of Balaam, which taught to eat things offered to Idols, and to commit For∣nication; and such as held the doctrine of the the Nicolaitans; and the Church of Thyatira did suffer the false Prophetesse Jezabel, which se∣ducedEttamen hos omns Domi∣nus hortatur ad poenitenti∣am, sub commi∣natione quoque futurae poenae, ni∣si convertantur; non autem coge∣ret poenitere, fi non eset poeni∣tentibus veniam concessurus. men to commit Fornication, and to eate things offered to Idols; Yet all these the Lord exhorts to repentance, and that under a threat of a punishment to come upon them, except they did re∣pent; but he would not have pressed to repentance except he would grant pardon to them that repented. And another ancient Author observes as much of other Churches mentioned in those Sacred E∣pistles; In the Church of Sardis the imperfecti∣on of workes; in the Laodiceans confidence in
Et tamen ad poe∣nitentiam com∣monet, sub com∣minationibus quidem; non comminaretur autem non poeni∣tenti, si non ig∣nosceret poeni∣tenti. Tertul de poenitent. Exod. 34. 6, 7. Ezek. 18. 32. riches is reprehended; And yet these he admonish∣eth to repent, and that under threatnings, except they repented; But he would not threaten him that repents not, except he would pardon him that doth repent. This ariseth from the goodnesse of the nature of God, as may be seen in the Procla∣mation, which past before his manifestation to Moses, The Lord mercifull and gracious, long-suf∣fering and abundant in goodnesse and truth, keep∣ing mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and sinne. And the Prophet will tell us from GOD, that he hath no pleasure in the death of him that dieth. For this end Jesus Christ the Son of God came into the world, that he might seek and save that which was lost, and that hee might call the sinners to Repentance, yea, even such sinners as in the eye of man none could exceede, even them that put him to death, for whom hee prayed,Luke 23. 34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they doe; Of whom we finde some afterward (hearing their sin in crucifying and murdering the Lord of life, taxed by Peter) pricked in conscience, and crying out (like the souldiers in the Text) WhatActs 2. 37. shall wee doe? &c. and by Peter directed to this medicine of Repentance and Baptisme, with a promise of forgivenesse of sins, and receiving theAust. Tract. 38. in in Evng. secundum Joem. Holy Ghost. Of these we may say, and inferre with S. Austen; This people it was of whom
Christ was crucified, of whom he was hanged on a Tree, of whom, hanging there, he was de∣rided, of whom he was thurst thorow with a Speare, of whom was given unto him Vine∣ger mingled with Gall to drink: yet for these he prayes, Father forgive them, for they knoweQuid autem con∣verso non ignos∣citur, si fusus Christ inguis ignoscitur. Application. I. not what they doe, And what is there that is not to be forgiven to him that is converted, when the blood of Christ being shed, was thus forgiven? The application hereof shall be comprised in two words; First, seeing great sinners repenting and re∣formingIt cals sinners to repentanoe. Ezekiel 18. themselves, may be forgiven, it calls us to repentance, as the prophet Ezekiel, first pro∣pounding and promising pardon, upon repentance and amendment, calls them to reformation, and casting away their transgressions; and this he doth as it were by an expostulation, or reasoning the matter, For why will ye die O house of Israel? As if hee should say, If yee will not repent and  and are guiltie of your own destruction, and that not only by  committed, but also by the remedie of Repen∣tance neglected; And this also is confirmed of God by n oath, As I live saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure, in the death of a sinner; but that the wicked should turne from his way, and live; Turne yee, turne yee from your evill wayes, for why will ye die O house of Israel! Hereon is thus
Ergò poenitentia vita est, cùm prae∣ponitur morti; cam tu peccator ita invade, ita amplectere, ut naufragus alicu∣us tabu fidem; haec te pccato∣ru fluctibu mersum proleva∣bit, & in portum Divinae clemen∣tlae protelabit. Terul. depoenit. 2. much noted; Repentance therefore is life, when it is perserred before death: Thou therefore O sinner, so seaze upon it, and so imbrace it, as a ship∣wrackt man doth some trusty piece of a plank broken out of the shipp, this shall lift thee up being sunk under the waves of thy sins; and draw thee into the haven of Gods mercy. Secondly, it comforts those that are truely pe∣nitent for their sinnes, wherein they have long lived; or are of great guilt and offence in the eyes of God, as Murder, Whordome, oppression, and such like, upon their repentance and amend∣ment they are pardonable, if they will wash and make themselves cleane, then though their sinnesConsolation to true penitents. were as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow, if they be redde like Crimson, they shall bee asEsai. 1. 18. Wooll: Can any blood or sin whatsoever die a deeper colour then the sacred blood of the Sonn of God? and yet wee see that forgiven to the Jewes repenting and embracing the faith; For de ec∣cati sui remissio∣nedesperet, quando illi veni∣am meruerunt, qui occidêrunt  Aust. in Tract. 31. in Evang▪ secund. Jonm. when they (wounded in conscience) they are directed to this remedie with hope of cure and safety, Which may teach us, That▪no man should dispaire of the forgivenesse of his sinne, when they obtained pardon that killed Christ, as saith Saint Austen; wee will end with a saying of the same Father, which may serve unto us, both as a Cordiall against despaire, and a caveat against presumption; No man therefore
(although hee bee loadn with an huge burden of sin)Nemo gitur (quamvis ingen∣ti pondere pcca∣torum prematur) de boniate divi∣nae piearis de∣sperare debeat. Ibidem S r n de temp 53. Ideò non propt er spem vniae per∣seve aner peca∣re debemus. Utroque periculo evitato, & à malo dclinemus, & de pietate De eni∣am speremus. ought to despaire of the goodnesse of Gods mercy, but out of hope of that assured mercy, with dayly teares to begge their pardons; which they may rightly ex∣pect, if they shall cease from acting their evill workes. And on the otherside avoyd presumption▪ Wee ought not therefore to sinne, or constantly persevere in sinne, because of the hope of for∣givenesse, but keeping our selves in the golden mean and swimming in the clear streame of the living Waters, that shall flow out of the belly of him that beleeveth on Christ; Both dangers being avoyd∣ed, let us flye and decline that which is evill, and hope for pardon from the mercy of God. Amen. Laus Deo. FINIS.
