B6013A 99825265 29643
A Message Proclaimed. BY DIVINE AUTHORITY, From the chosen Assembly of the redeemed peo∣ple in England, To the Pope (chief Bishop) of Rome, and to his Cardinals, Jesuits, and Priests, and all other the Officers of the Ro∣mish Church, where it shall meet with them through the world: That they may appear, and come forth to triall, and shew if they have the same Faith, Power, Spirit, and Authoritie, and Government, as had the Apostles and true Churches, before the Apostacie: And this is a full Invitation and Challenge to the whole Church of Rome, and the beginning of con∣troversie with her, for the perfect manifestation of the long hidden Truth; betwixt them that are in the Truth it self, and such as have the form, but not the power; that all things may be brought to light and true judgement. Written by an Embassador for the true and living God, E. B. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth neer Aldersgate.
This to be delivered to the Chief Bishop of Rome, or to his Secretary.
From the Elect and gathered Assembly of the chosen people in the Nation of England, called in derision, and known amongst all false Sects by the name of QUAKERS; and by a Servant of the great God of Hea∣ven and Earth, and a Member of that people, this is written. To the Pope (Chief Bishop) and his Cardidals at Rome, and to his Bishops, Iesuits, and Priests there, and else-where, thorough the Dominions of the Romish Church, scattered abread in the Nations. WHereas we a poor, despised, and rejected peo∣ple, among the Nations of the earth, yet dreadful and mightie, because the Majestie and Presence of the Lord God is with us, who hath called us, and chosen us, and gathered us, and re∣deemed us from among men, out of kindreds, and mul∣titudes, and peoples, into one body, and one spirit, out of all the Sects upon the earth; and we are of one mind, and one soul, having fellowship with the Son, and with the Father, being come through great tribulations, and many fierie trials, and are refined, and purified, and made clean and white in the bloud of the Lamb, being fully recovered out of the great deluge of darknesse, and Apostacie, which hath overflown and drowned the whole world, and all nations, since the daies of the true Churches, and holy Apostles: And know ye, that we are none of all the many Sects, nor of the divers waies, and formal worshippers, that are but in the imitations fain∣ed, of what the Saints of old spoke and performed, in the Power and Spirit of God, which hath been spoken and practised by all the divers Sects and false Churches, with∣out
the Spirit, Power, and Life, that was in the Apostles; so that all Religion hath been, and the profession and practise thereof, for many Ages, but as the floating of a broken vessel upon the waters, driven with the several winds, wanting Anchor, and skilful Mariners, which hath not carried to perfect Rest, the hope of Eternal life: But know ye, that now at last, through our long and wearied travels, and after all our tedious seekings, and our zealous practises and profession in Christianitie per∣formed by us, while darkness covered us, and the earth; hath the Lord set us safe upon the Rock Christ Jesus, up∣on whom the Church of Christ firmly standeth, and the gates of hell cannot prevail against; and he hath made our habitation sure upon the Mountain of his house, which is established upon the top of all mountains, where∣unto we now are gathered, and rest in a certain hope and tried confidence, and doth view the whole world, and the state of all mankind, and measureth the times and seasons thoroughout Generations; and the state of the Church we perfectly know, by the inspiration of the Almightie, her estate before the Apostles daies, and in the Apostles daies, and since the Apostles daies, and her in∣crease, and decrease, and estate, since the beginning of the world till now, and at this present time, to us is cer∣tainlie known, by the Spirit of Jesus, and the light of the Lamb, which now is risen upon our Mountain, and shines in our habitations: And first we certifie you, as for the many false Sects and Churches (so called) and many of the divers worshippers, and separated forms of Churches, risen up since the Apostles daies, from the least of them to the greatest, we have searched and examined, and are not fully satisfied (but rather the contrarie) that they are perfectly sound in the Faith, but rather degenerated, from the Power, Spirit, and Life that was in the Apostles, and among the true Churches before the Apostacie; and we have sought out their first original and root, and we find they fall short of the true Church and the Apostles; first in respect of time, many Generations; and also in
respect of life, and power, and puritie, and they want the spirit, and dominion, and government, that the true Churches and Apostles possessed; and we certainly be∣lieve, they are many of them come up, and risen in a dark night, long since the daies of the Apostles, while the Sun was yet unrisen, and while the mountains of ignorance, blindnesse, and wickedness covered the face of the earth, and the clouds of darknesse remained upon the face of the whole heavens: and while yet the man-child re∣mains in God, being caught up to him, and the woman lodged in the desolate wildernesse, being thither fled be∣cause of the great red Dragon: And we believe not, that any of them are the Lambs Wife, lawfully joyned to him, neither are they the Virgin, in which there is no spot; nor the Spouse, truly in election to Christ the Bride∣groom; for we have had controversie with them this di∣vers years, and weighed them, and measured them in the ballance of equitie, and they appear to us, not to be of a true descent from that Vine, into which the true Church was planted; but their original may be of a latter race: And to say no more of them, we certainly know they are foully spotted, and hath not the favour, nor parts, nor garments of a Virgin; and Christ the Bridegroom they have deeply wronged, for many false Sects have risen out of the great Whore, the mother of Harlots, who hath been in open and secret fornication, every since the daies of the Apostles, and such are her off-spring, and not of the true Seed, elect, which is heir by right, of the inheri∣tance of life eternal, the Kingdom which hath no end. And for as much as the Church of Rome hath openly pleaded, as we have heard, and some of your Members also to our faces, that she is indeed the true Church, and she alone, and none besides, and that you can fetch your original by line truly from the Apostles, and Church of the Saints, and are not degenerated in any particular of Faith, Doctrine, nor Practise, from the Life, and Power, and Government, and Spirit which was among the true Church, and in the Apostles: These things, with others
the like, have we heard of you, and concerning you, by many: And now, because the Lord hath put it into our hearts, to have controversie with you, and to seek out perfectly your original, and to justifie you, or condemn you accordingly; and having the certain infallible Spi∣rit of the Lord God to try all things, we are purposed in the Lord to visit you, and to examine to the foundation your rise; and first beginning from whence you come by descent, and what you truly are in your present e∣state, and whether you be indeed the true Church, and have the true Spirit, or whether you are otherwise, that all the world may be satisfied, and more perfectly know the full truth concerning the Church of Rome; and your seed and root we will examine, and your birth and o∣riginal we will search out, and your faith, and worship, and whole Religion we will lay to the line of true judge∣ment, to justifie you, or condemn you eternally; for the Saints shall judge the world, and your garments shall be stripped off, and your secrets discovered, and your whole body and members made fully manifest, that the very truth of all things may appear, and be imbraced, and the whoredomes of all the earth may be laid open, that the Just and the Innocent, that hath long laid groaning in great captivity, may be delivered from under all bonds of oppressions, whoredoms, and iniquities; and this will the eternal God by us speedily bring to passse amongst you. Wherefore thou Pope, greatly admired, and highly exalted, and to all thy Cardinals, Friers, Jesuits, and Priests, and all other Officers under thee, I am moved of the Lord God of heaven and earth, (who is the only Holiness, and highest of all) by this Message to visit you, requiring you, and charging you, in the Name and Au∣thoritie of the Dreadful and Mightie God, before whom all men and Nations are as nothing in comparison, but may be turned at his pleasure, & dashed to pieces by his mightie hand, and unto whom all the sons of Adam in all the world, must render an account; & as you will answer it to him in his dreadful day of judgement & vengeance,
and as you love and will obey your God and Christ, whom you professe and serve; and as you would honour your God, and bring people to your way, and worship, and religion, upon these ingagements, and by the autho∣ritie of the Almightie, I lay it upon you to answer, and to return your knowledge and opinions to the particu∣lars following, which I am moved to querie and demand of you, that your doctrines, practises, and worships, and whole religion, in every part thereof, may be veiwed, and examined, and measured, according to the Saints and Apostles writings, and may thereby be cleared, or otherwise reproved and condemned: And if your pro∣fession and practises in religion be sprung from the true grounds, and true Spirit and your Church be indeed the true Church, that can prove her pedigree truly descend∣ed from the Church of Christ, before the Apostacie, and clear her felf from all degeneration in every degree, and that she is perfect in the faith, and worship, and practises of the holy Church and Apostles of old; then shall all that love God, and fear him, and hopes for life eternal, separate themselves from all Sects, and Apostates, sepa∣rated from you, and come in, and return again to you, as to a faithful Mother, and joyn with you in all things; and adde themselves to your church only, and renounce and denie all the contrarie, that is not of you; and so shall your names and honour be increased through all the earth. But and if after lawful trial, and just exa∣mination, and searching out the matter, it be proved against you, that our are degenerated from what the true Church and Apostles were, and are not builded up∣on Christ the true Rock and foundation, but diverted from the Power, Life, and Spirit, and true Religion which the Apostles were in; and that your church is not the true church, but a false Sect, and your original can∣not be fetch'd from the Apostles, but is of a latter and more corrupted race; then shall you denie all your re∣ligion, and church, and renounce your profession and practises, and come to them, and joyn with them, that
can prove their church to be the true Church, and can fetch their original from the Spirit of the Apostles, and that is builded upon Christ the everlasting foundation (whoever this shall be proved to be) wherefore appear and come forth to trial, upon this condition, joyn issue with us, and answer these things in plainnesse, and let us know your Judgements, that a return you may receive. First, Whether you are indeed the only true Church of Christ, his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, called, and gathered, and united by the eternal Spirit of Jesus, perfect in the Faith of Christ, perfect in Doctrine, and perfect in Worship, as were the Churches of Christ in the daies of the Apostles? and whether the eternal Spi∣rit dwell in every particular member of your church, and do lead each one of you into all truth, insomuch that you need now no man to teach any one of you, but as that same spirit that dwels in you? answer me plain∣ly, yea, or nay. 2. Whether are you not in any particular of your faith, doctrines, practises, and worships, in any degree de∣generated, nor deviated from what the faith, doctrine, practise & worship were that the true Church were in in the daies of the Apostles? and whether will you admit of trial in all things you profess and practise, by the Scrip∣tures, the writings of the Saints, yea, or nay? 3. Whether your church of Rome do receive the pour∣ing down of the Spirit upon sons and daughters imme∣diately, and every member receive the holy Ghost, and is filled therewith, and baptized therewith, as in the true church? Acts 2. and whether you have received the holy Ghost, and everlasting Comforter immediately, as did the true church in the daies of the Apostles? Answer me these things in the truth of your hearts, that you may be owned or denied. 4. Whether the faith you profess have perfectly puri∣fied your hearts from all sin, and hath given you victorie over the world, that now the body of sin is put off, and you are free from sin, and doth not commit sin? but are
every member of you without spot, and wrinkle, and cleansed from all unrighteousness, being the servants of righteousness, and not of sin? and whether you believe this condition to be attainable in this life upon earth, and to be injoyed and waited for, yea or nay? 5. What is your ground of sprinkling Infants with water, and whether he that first instituted it had the gift of the eternal Spirit, and was led thereby? for we know it was first ordained at Rome in your church, and all the Protestants received it from you, who are not able to give us a sufficient reason thereof; but we are not satisfied therein, therefore tell us, whether are people thereby made members of the bodie of Christ, and baptized into his true Church? and is it a perfect seal and sign of the new birth, and regeneration, as is professed? and doth that give all children that are sprinkled a right to the Kingdom of God, and to be members of the Church of Christ? and satisfie us plainly, is the sprinkling of an Infant (never having heard of Gospel, but while uncon∣verted and unchanged in nature) the true baptism into the true Faith of Christ, as it is professed? Answer me plainly, yea or nay. 6. Whether the bodie and bloud of Christ, that is meat indeed, and drink indeed, be carnal and visible things, to be seen, felt, and known visiblie and carnallie? and whether bread and wine, (that is mortall, and will corrupt,) be the very body and the very bloud of Christ Jesus? and whether Christ hath any other bodie and bloud, to be known in any other way or manner then what is professed to be visiblie and carnallie known by you? and is that bread after consecration the verie ex∣presse Image of the Father, and was with the Father be∣fore the world began? else it is not the bodie of Christ, answer me plainlie. 7. Again, we are not satisfied concerning your burn∣ing, and torturing, and imprisoning, in cruel Iquisitions, and Goals, such as dissenteth from you, and cannot be∣lieve in your church, which ye call hereticks; whether is
not this done by your church, or any member thereof? and do you justisie the doing of it by the authoritie of your church? and we demand of you to give us example for such practises in Scripture, ever practised by the A∣postles or true Church, or any member thereof, to burn, or kill, or imprison such as would not own them, and were hereticks? otherwise we must condemn it, and judge you eternally for it; and whether such practises done at Rome and in her dominions, be not murder, and cru∣eltie, and tyrannie, and shedding of innocent bloud, and of the devil the wicked one? answer me plainly, and sa∣tisfie us herein, that we may know how to deal with you in controversie. 8. Again, we are not satisfied concerning the abun∣dance of Images of the Saints, set up, and bowed to a∣mong you, and your praying before them, and to the Saints, and by beads, and in set forms, such things you practise; and also your keeping and setting apart the Saints daies, and your holy daies, and eating with re∣spect to daies, denying of flesh such and such daies, and observing of daies, and meats, and drinks, and fasting in your own wils, and your Nunneries, and keeping men and women one from another in secret houses; whether are these things commanded and required of the Lord from you? and we charge you to give us some example, that ever the true Church practised such things? other∣wise if you do not, nor cannot prove these your practises from the Scriptures, and example of the Apostles before you, we must deny you, and condemn your practises for ever, and cannot believe, that your church is the true church, nor you lawful successors of the holy Apostles. 9. What you believe concerning the reign and go∣vernment of Christ and his coming? is he, his reign and government visible, and of this world, or invisible, and from heaven? and whether liars, whoremongers, adul∣terers, drunkards, man-slayers, and contentious men, or any that lives in any sin or transgression, in the first na∣ture, be of the kingdome and government of Jesus, or
hath any part or portion therein in time to come for e∣ver? and how may such ever have part therein, and give us your knowledge in these things; and also what you hold and profess concerning Election and Reprobation, that we may know whether your knowledge and faith be sound and perfect in these things, and to be imbra∣ced, or condemned and denied. 10. What is the Man-child that hath been caught up to God? and what is the reason of his being caught up? and what is the Woman that fled into the wildernesse? and what is the cause of her so flying? and when is the the time (is it come, or to come, that the Man-child hath been caught up, & the woman fled, & that the man-child shall come down again, & the Woman again return? and what is that Beast the first and the second, and is his king∣dom come, or yet to come, who reigned over the Kings of the earth, and caused all both small and great to wor∣ship him, and killed the Saints, and overcome them, that would not worship him, and made war against the Lamb, and persecuted the Womans seed? and when is it that the world wondered after the Beast, is it come, or to come? answer these things in plainness, we demand of you. 11. What and who is that great Whore that sits upon many waters, with whom the Kings of the earth commits fornications, and who hath made Nations drunk with the wine of her fornications, and who hath reigned over the Kings and dominions of the earth? and is that Whore come, or yet to come? and whether is your church every whit free from the fornications of that Whore? and will you admit of lawful trial by your fruits and works, and suffer judgement accordinglie? and whether the whole church of Rome, or any part of her dominions, be the multitudes, peoples, and nations, and tongues, the wa∣ters, or which the Whore sits? and whether your church be whollie free from that Woman, which have drunk the bloud of Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus? and shew us plainlie who that Whore is, if you can, and what is her flesh, and the fire that must burn it?
12. Whether are the false prophets and deceivers come, or to come, which Christ said should come? if you say, they are come, when did they come? and who are they? and how may they be known? and what was their first original? and out of what doth all false prophets and false prophecies come? is the church of Rome clear of all the false prophets? and whether is your ministrie in the verie same power, spirit, and authoritie which the Apo∣stles were in? is its call and ordination the verie same? is its maintenance and practice the verie same? and its fruits, effects, and end the verie same, or some other? let us know from you, that we may lay you to the line of true judgement, for all people and nations to behold. And come friends, let us reason a little with you fur∣ther; we are not satisfied, that the Bishop of Rome is true and lawful successor of the Apostle Peter; had Peter a tri∣ple crown, and did Kings bow and kneel to him? and had Peter such large revenues and money out of the Nations as the Pope Hath? did Peter sell pardons for money, or did any buy religion of him? and did Peter at all rule over mens consciences? and was Peter named holinesse? we demand of you to prove rightlie and trulie, that the Pope doth succeed Peter in the same Spirit, in the same power, and in the same conversation: and that his call to oversee the church be justlie the same as Peters was, and that he execute it perfectlie as Peter did: Also answer us plainlie, what is the seed of the Woman, and what is the head of the Serpent? and is his head bruised yea or nay? and what is the Devil, and what is his beginning, and what is the kingdom that he is Ruler of? and how is his kingdom to be destroyed? and what is the flesh of Christ, and his bloud, which was before Abraham? and how is Christ made under the Law? answer me these things: And what is the death that hath reigned over all? and what is the power thereof and what is the fruits of that death? and when must that death be destroyed? and is it destroyed among you? and what was man in his creation of the dust of the ground? and what was he that was the
verie Image of God male and female, before Adam was formed of the dust of the ground, or Eve taken out of him? declare these things plainlie if you can and what is the first transgression & the curse? & whether any can be made free from the curse upon the earth, yea or nay? and what is the Kingdom of heaven that is like a little leaven, and that is like a net cast into the sea? and what is that which must be leavened? and what is that good fish that must be gathered into vessels, & that bad that must be cast away? & how doth the Kingdom of heaven bring the bad out of the waters to the shore? and why is it, and wherefore, and what is the reason, that none can en∣ter the Kingdom of God, nor see it, but such as are born again? and how is a man born again? and what is that mothers womb, that Iob & all mankind came out of na∣ked, and that must return thither again naked? and what are the the fig-leaves that hath covered in transgression? and what is the covering of the Spirit? and what must be covered, and what not? and why is it, and how comes it to passe, that one and the same thing is sin, & wickedness acted by one and the same thing, good and just acted by another? These things answer to us plainlie, & also prove all your practises and profession by plain Scripture, and give us example from Peter and the true Churches, that he and they practised the same things which the Pope and you do, if you would have any to own you, other∣wise if you do not, or cannot satisfie all people in these particulars by the Scriptures, then forsake your Religi∣on, and renounce your Church, and confess your selves to be deceivers of the world, and to be deceived, for God will tear your garments, and marre your beautie, and stain your crowns, and uncover your nakedness, and subdue your power, and slay your strength, and pull down your strong holds, and the dread of the Almightie will come over you. And come friends, answer me, is the light by which you walk everlasting? and is the day dawned, and the Sun risen, that never goeth down? and have you seen the signs of the coming of the Son of man and what are the
signs of his coming? and what is that Sun that must be turned into darkness? and what is that Moon that must be turned into bloud? and what are the keepers of the house that must tremble; and do you own quaking and trembling at the Word of the Lord? and did you ever quake and tremble, or is there such a thing in your church? and what is that part in man that must tremble? is it not that part in man that the devil enters into? answer these things: and what is that mother of har∣lots? and where is she that hath been drunk with the bloud of the Saints? and what is the mysterie of her, de∣clare it if you can? and what is her garments? and who are her children? and of what nature are they? and how may they be known? and come friends answer us, have you seen God face to face, as did Iacob and Abraham? and have you seen his Shape perfectlie? give us a description of him if you have: and doth not all those that be of the seed of Abraham hear Gods voice, and see his shape? and are any of Abraham, but who are come out of the world, and have denied it, and bares the daily crosse of Christ, which mortifies to the world? and doth your wooden crosses, and stone crosses, in your towns, & high∣waies, & in your houses, & crucifixes in your breasts, cru∣cifie you to the world, and mortifie you? or are you not such as have the form of a crosse of Christ, but wants the power? and what is the difference between all your Ima∣ges and the Images the Prophets declared against? and what life is there in the Image of Christ or Mary, painted or graven in wood or stone? are your soules refreshed thereby? and is not that all the unitie you have with Christ? and is that unitie and fellowship you have with Christ, the same that they had; that had unitie and fel∣lowship with the Father, and with the Son? and have you unitie with the Son, and with the Father, as the true Church had? tell us plainlie; and what is Antichrist? and where is his reigning at this day? and what is his marks and signs? and what is the marks of the Beast, that every one received in their foreheads, and in their hands? and what is his power, by which he causeth every one to wor∣ship
him? and is the church of Rome whollie free from that, from causing and compelling people to be of your Religion, and come to your worship by your fire and fag∣gots, and inquisitions? make it us plain that this is not the beasts power, for we have a jealousie, at least, it is not the power of God, that was among the Apostles; and why do you kill creatures? did Christ or the Apostles kill creatures that were not of their Religion? doth not this shew that you want the Power and Spirit of God among you, and the spiritual weapon that beats down the strong holds? we cannot believe that you have the spiritual wea∣pons, which the Apostles had, except you make it appear to us; and can any be converted to the true Church, but by the immediate work and Spirit of God? and they that have that, need not be ashamed; but then why are some of your ministers creeping up and down the Nati∣ons in holes, and dare not be seen, but lies many years together undiscovered, not daring to preach their Go∣spel, and discover their minds? did ever the Apostles thus? and is not this a sign that they have not the power of God to carry them through, but runs into holes and corners for fear of their lives? is this the way of the true Ministers of Christ? and what is the Lambs Wife? and what is her adorning, and her beautie? and are you the Lambs Wife, and are married to him for ever? hath every member of your church the witness thereof? and answer us, doth natural learning make a Minister of Christ, or was the Apostles made Ministers thereby? and can a man learn the Ministrie naturally, as he learns a trade? and is the preaching of the Gospel a trade? or is it not the gift of God? and can it be bought and sold? and what is eter∣nal life? and how is it received? and hath any that hope but them whose hearts are purified? and must not everie ones heart be purified before they see God, who is pure? and how comes man to be a Reprobate? and how comes man to be a Son of God again? and what is the way and meanes of life eternal? is it carnal and visible things, and Ordinances? is it the doing and performing of something
by the creature, or by the revelation of something in the creature? and must not Christ be revealed in every par∣ticular? and is not that the true bread of life? and is there any other bread that is eternal, but Christ, which the mortal eye cannot see? and we are very doubtful, that bread and wine after consecration, is not the very bodie and bloud of Christ; and except you can prove to us by plain Scripture, and give us sound reasons to demonstrate things, we must judge you, and shew your folly to the whole world: and why do you pray for the dead, is that available? shall not they receive according to their works that they have done? give us example, that ever the Apo∣stles did so, or else we will say, you are blind and in the dark: and tell us plainly, what error is, and what schism is? and what is the eye that the god of the world hath blinded? and what is the eye that sees God, is it mortal or eternal? Answer us these things in plainnesse, that we may know how to return in controversie with you, for the Lord God is risen, that will break in pieces and confound all the world. And come friends, give us your answer, are you of A¦brahams seed, that was the friend of God, that had not a foot of ground, but forsook his place and kindred? are you of that birth that hath no father upon earth? and are you heirs of Gods promise? and have you made your calling and election sure? aud is the seed come out of Egypts bonds? and is all Egypts bonds broken yet? and what is the bondage of Egypt? and was not transgression the reason of it? and what is Pharaoh, out of what root did he spring, and whose seed is he? and is not the hard heart of Pharaoh killers and murderers? are not such of Pharaoh? and tell us plainly, are you redeemed from Pharaoh? or you are such as oppresseth the seed as Pharaoh did? and tell us, who was the inventer of all your Images, and who was the former of all your graven Images? are not they all invented and come up since the Apostles daies, which ye have set up? and what is Purgatorie? and from what had it its rise and original? and what ground have you
out of Scripture for such a doctrine? and what is the rule of faith? and what is faith? and what doth it give victorie over? and what doth it overcome? and what is the vail that hath been spread over all Nations? and what is the Mountain of the house of God? and what are those mountains the wicked shall seek to cover themselves un∣der? and what are those mountains that people expect salvation from in vain? and did not Iohn come to throw down the mountains? and what are the mountains that he came to throw down? and what is the valley he came to raise up? answer us, and what is the sword of the Spirit? and whether have ye the sword of the Spirit, and the spi∣ritual Armor? and what, is your church defended and up∣held by spiritual weapons, or carnal? is not your goals carnal weapons, and your inquisitions, and your killing people about Religion, are not all these carnal weapons? and had ever the Church of Christ such weapons? an∣swer me plainlie; and do you not expect the Lord will suddenlie plead with you? and are not ye them that put off the day of the Lord, and causeth the seat of violence to come neer? and are not ye them that have eyes but see not, ears and hear not, hearts and understand not? and is not your eye blind, that should see Gods presence, and your ears stopped that should hear his voyce? and have you heard his voice, and seen his shape? if you have, what is he like? answer us; and what is his Word, and where doth it dwell in your hearts, or is it without you? and can any thing without you purifie you, and take away sin out of your hearts? and must not Christ be within? and what is the fruits, and signs, and marks of a Saint? and why do you go pilgrims to visit dead bones, what is the reason of it, and who was the first that instituted it? and what is the meaning of your holy water? give us Scripture for all these practises, or else the power of the Lord will tear you to pieces, and lay open your founda∣tion, and none that love God can joyn unto you; and can any of you pardon sin trulie, that it shall never more be remembred? and is not your sins remembred with the
light in your consciences some time? and is there not a light in your consciences that doth convince you? tell me plainlie; and whether do you own that Christ hath lightened everie one that comes into the world? and what is the light? and do you know Christ as he was be∣fore Abraham? and have you seen his day as Abraham did? and what is the day of Christ, doth the carnal eye see it? give us your knowledge and your judgement in all these things, and lay down your principles at full, and prove by the Scriptures what you hold and profess, if you would have any to turn to your Religion, otherwise re∣nounce your church, and come out of Babylon: what is Babylon, and the Mother of Harlots? and what is spiritual Egypt and Sodom where Christ is crucified? and what is the Whore? and what is her flesh, that hath stained the earth? and what is the fire that must consume her flesh? manie are jealous concerning you, that you are not the true Church, but that you have drunken of the Whores cup, who hath made all Nations drunk: and if that time be come, that she have made all Nations drunk, then how can you clear your selves, being nations and multitudes of people? To all these things I expect your speedie an∣swer: and what is the death that hath raigned over all? and how is man recovered out of it, and when? and what is the gates of hell? and what is the Rock that they cannot prevail against? and whether your church may never be prevailed against? and whether it be not your inquisitions, stakes, and faggots, and killing people, that doth principally defend your church? and if you should cease your inquisitions, and killing those you call Heri∣ticks, whether would not you be prevailed against by many other Sects? lay away your persecution of people that you call Heriticks, and do not deal with them after the manner which you have done, by inquisitions and such like, and onlie by sound arguments, and the power of the Spirit, defend your religion. And dare you suffer a certain number of us to come among you and preach what we hold, and a certain number of you shall freelie
come among us, and freelie preach what you hold, with∣out persecution or anie violence, as we would expect and have the same from you, engage man for man with us, and do no otherwise deal with ours, then we deal with yours; and take the free libertie to deal with our men as we deal with your men, but no otherwise, and let each of the messengers preach and hold forth what they would have, and what they reallie hold and be∣lieve, and convert the most either of them can to their own Religion, and then let all the world see which hath the Power and Spirit of God with them, and whether your Ministers or our Ministers do turn the more people from you to us, or from us to you; and send your answer, whether you will agree to the premises: and if you do, send your Messengers when you please, and we will en∣gage in the Lord, their persons shall not be harmed; but if they were, then take man for man, life for life, of our men sent to you, and let that God be the true God, that appears in most power and authoritie; and let him be worshipped for ever, whose power converts the most to the knowledge of him out of wickedness, and let that Church be the true Church, which cannot be overcome; and as you are willing to be made manifest, join issue with us in this business, and propound your own time when the men shall return, whether the continuance of the matter be for daies, months, or years, and let each of the men return without harm of person; and this will be a way trulie to trie and make manifest all things, to all the world, and whether you or we be in the right way, & of the right Church; & use you no weapon against us, but the soundest arguments you can, by words accord∣ing to the Scriptures, and the same weapons we will use against you, and no other, but the authoritie of the Spi∣rit of God, and arguments thereby, which shall be ac∣cording to the Scriptures, the Apostles writings, and the testimonie of the true Church; and hereby in the sight of the whole world, let your church, and faith, and prin∣ciples, and practises, and worships be tried, and our
church, faith, doctrines, and worships, and practises, and whether it be yours or ours that do overcome, or are o∣vercome, let that deside the controversie; and whether it be you or we that are soonest overcome, and that pre∣vail the one against the other in this trial, and in these proceedings; and that which is overcome and prevail∣ed against, is not the true Church, against which nothing can prevail, no not the gates of hell; and whether your Church or ours cannot be prevailed against by the other, let that be the true Church, for that which is prevailed against is not the true Church, and whether it be your or we that are elected, and of the election, which cannot be deceived; if we be not elected, and you deceivers, then it is possible you may deceive us, but if we prove that we be in the election, then you cannot deceive us; and if we be in the truth, and of the true Church, then it will be happiness for you to be converted and turned to us; come to the trial as soon as you will, and if you be in the election you need not be afraid to be deceived by any, for the elect cannot be deceived, whoever that be, whe∣ther your Church or our Church be the true Church, and in the election; and if your Ministers among us do preach the same things, and by the same spirit, and hold forth the verie same faith, principles, worship, and pra∣ctises, which we do, and are of, and it be proved they are of the same spirit and principles we are of, agreeing in all things, then we will own them to be Christs Mini∣sters; and if our Ministers among you do hold forth that true faith, and principles, and practises, and worship, and by the same spirit as Christ and his Apostles did, and prove what they say by the Scriptures, then shall you re∣ceive them as the Ministers of Christ, and renounce all that you hold and profess, contrarie to what they hold and preach among you, and hereby things may come to a fair triall, and the naked truth may be made manifest, whether your Church or our Church be the true Church of Christ, trulie descended from the Church of the Saints of old, and whether your Ministers or our Mini∣sters,
be the lawful successors of the Apostles; and we would willinglie come to deal with you upon these termes, that it may be manifest who it is that are of the true seed, and who it is that are of the election that cannot be deceived; and we have manie more things to write unto you, and to querie of you, and to demand, when we receive your answer, and if you give us ground to accuse you in your return, we will thresh you, and lay it to your charge, by the authoritie and spirit of the Lord, and if you answer us plainlie, we shall more per∣fectlie know what to do. To the Pope. THou mountain, hear the Word of the Lord God; thus saith the Lord God unto thee, I will lay thee low, I will break thee down, I will stain the glorie of all flesh, my sword shall enter into the heart of my enemies, I will slay the wicked, and I will crush the head of the ungodlie, and I will grind the hard hearts unto pieces, I will come in a day unexpected, I am at the door, behold me, and I will take vengeance without pitie upon all my enemies, my hand shall not spare, my eye shall not pitie, but I will tear and rend, and give unto thee, and unto all mankind, the fruit of your own doings: Innocent bloud cries unto me, that hath been unjustlie shed, and the righ∣teous soul groans under the Altar unto me, and now I am risen, and I am begun to work in the earth, and I will goe through nations, and tread them down, under my power; I have raised a seed which shall thresh the moun∣tains, and my word is gone forth out of my mouth, which shall beat them to dust; and my power shall knock at thy gates, and break down thy strength, and it shall pre∣vail against thee: Oh thou mountain, whose seat is high, and whose power is great, and who hath been able to make war with thee? thou hast swallowed up the poor and needie, and thou hast eaten up the innocent as the exe eateth up grasse, thou hast continued for ages, and
thou accounts thy self the most ancient, and thou hath been without fear of any man, and thou hast not regar∣ded the honour of my name, but exalted thy self altoge∣ther: But now, saith the Lord, the dread of the Almigh∣tie shall come upon thee, and the Majestie of the Lord of hosts shall appear terrible unto thee, and thou shalt know there is a God that can do whatsoever he will, and he will wound the mightie men, and none shall heal them; and he will vex all his enemies in his displeasure, and he will break them, and none shall bind them up; thy glorie, and the glorie of the whole earth, is as grass before the mower, and as the flower of the field that is soon wither∣ed; and thy treasure, and the treasure of all Nations, is of no respect unto him, and strength of the whole earth is weakness before him, and the crowns of Princes he accounteth as the dust, he treads over it all, and his ever∣lasting arme reacheth beyond it all, and he is awakened, that will strike thorough kingdoms, and that will stain the glorie of the whole earth; and thou must know his power, and the cup of his wrath is full, of which all nati∣ons shall drink, and none shall escape it; prepare thy self, for the anger of the Lord is gone forth, & the Almightie is greived because of the abominations of the earth, and he will cast into the fire, and purge, and purifie, and new mold, and correct, Rulers, Kings, and Peoples, for he hath long been greived, and born the miquitie of the Nations, but his long suffering is well-nigh finished, for the nati∣ons have provoked him to anger, and turned his long-suffering into furie, and he hath put on the garment of vengeance, and the time is at hand, that sorrow shall take hold upon the stout-hearted, when he appears, who hath been pierced; and anguish and pain shall come upon thee, and the world, and the day of trouble, and great distress, ye shall not escape: the rod of his wrath shall smite you, the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it: And although thou art exalted as a God, yet thou shalt be a man and not a God in his hand, that shall slay thee, and although thy seat hath been high▪ yet it shall be laid low as the
ground, and thy honour shall be laid in the dust, for thou art dust and ashes before the Lord, and thou shalt be no more admired, when destruction shall come upon thee; the Lord hath viewed thy way and path, and they have not been upright before him; he hath entred into the secrets of thine heart, and thine intent hath not been hid from him, and that which hath been done in secret shall now be laid open, and all secret things shall now be brought to light, and all the Churches shall know that he searches the heart, and trieth the reines, who is a God great and mightie, and giveth unto all creatures life and breath, and he will change at his pleasure all the children of men, and bring them to an account before his Judge∣ment-seat; wherefore let all flesh tremble before him, and let all the earth bow before his presence, who chan∣geth, and subdueth, and over-turneth at his pleasure, and brings men to destruction, who hath rebelled against him: Wherefore thou Pope, chief Bishop at Rome, this is unto thee from the mouth of the Lord; come down, come down, lay down thy crown, subject thy self, and tremble before the Lord God of vengeance, least he come upon thee and crush thee to pieces, and thou shalt know that this hath the Lord spoken, in the day when the fierie flaming sword, which is alreadie drawn, enters into thy bosome, and smites thy honour and renown: Behold, I have heard the voice of howling and bitter la∣mentation; I have heard the voice of war and not of peace; I have seen, I have seen, the strong become weak, and the mightie become miserable, and the proud and honorable brought into contempt; yea, I have seen her that hath sat as a Queen, that hath said, she shall never see sorrow; I have seen the losse of children, and wid∣dowhood come upon her, even in one day; I have seen her beautie turned into bitterness; I have seen her ho∣nour brought into contempt; I have seen the Whore that hath made all Nations drunk with her fornicati∣ons, that hath had the golden cup in her hand; I have seen the cup of indignation prepared for her to drink;
I have seen her cast upon the bed of never ceasing tor∣ments; I have seen the Citie that was full of people, that was the glorie of Kingdoms, that made all Nations rich with her traffick and merchandise; I have seen that Citie laid desolate, and disinhabited, and made the sor∣row of the whole earth; and I have seen the smoak of her burning ascend for ever; and this is, and must short∣ly come to passe; and if thou hast an ear to hear thou mayest hear; and these things are true, and faithful, and they shall not fail, but the wicked shall know the Majestie, Dread, and Terror, the Vengeance and in∣dignation of the Almightie. This is assented to by many, and written and subscri∣bed by one that hath a Name not seen nor known of the world, but known among men by name of EDWARD BURROUGH. Return your answer to me, or any of the People called Quakers, for me, in London from whence this is sent, being written the four and twentieth day of the eighth moneth, 1658. THE END.
