B897 11839335 49784
A JUST DEFENCE OF THE Royal Martyr K. Charles I. From the many false and malici∣ous Aspersions in Ludlow's Me∣moirs, and some other virulent Libels of that Kind. Plal. 35. 11, 12. False witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew not. They rewarded me evil for good, to the great dis∣comfort of my Soul. Cicero ad Herenn. Lib. 4. Bené majores nostri hoc comparaverunt, ut nemi∣nem Regem, quem armis cepissent, vita privarent. Virgil. Georg. Lib. 4. —Rege incolumi, mens omnibus una est: Amisso, rupere fidem, &c. LONDON, Printed for A. Roper at the Black-Boy, and R Basset, both in Fleet-Street, and for W. Turner at Lincoln's-Inn back Gate. 1699.
THE PREFACE. I Shall presume to address the Reader in the Words of the Apostle,Phil. 3. 1. To write the same things to you, to me in∣deed is not grievous: but for you it is safe; and doubt not but all such as are truly Candid will discharge me from any thing of Levity or Profaneness in the Ap∣plication, we being under the same Circum∣stances as to Temporals, those he wrote to were in Spirituals, and upon that Account stand in need of as frequent Admonitions, To beware of Dogs, and such evil Workers, as come in on purpose to spy out the Liberty wherein we are truly Free, that they might again intangle us with the Yoke of Bondage. For what I intimated at first by way of Suspicion only, became abundantly confirm'd in my further Progress, that 'tis altogether a Design of the Commonwealth Party, which of late have Perted up very much, and in order to the reviving their former Mischiefs, fall on afresh to asperse the Memory of our Royal
Martyr, with the very same Lyes and De∣famations, their Predecessors did his Per∣son and Government; for this being, as it were a New Generation, not one in a thou∣sand, perhaps ten, who saw or felt the sad effects of our then divided State, is withall so loose, easy, and unthinking, as to be care∣lessly driven upon those very Rocks, which still bear the Marks of their Fore-fathers Shipwrack. And as the Design of these following Sheets is to awaken, indeed Allarm this stupid Humor into a Sense of Danger, that the Folly will be as unaccountable, as the Mis∣chiefs insupportable, if that hot-headed Crew be once more suffer'd to get the Steerage; So in the Prosecution thereof, they multiply'd upon my Hands to double the Number first intended, for the charge which these , these false Accusers bring, being either of such things as never had being, no not Intention∣ally, in the very Thoughts of their abused Sovereign; or otherwise really design'd by him, and highly advantageous to the Ho∣nor and Interest of the Nation; yet withall so villanously perverted by their Maligning Spirits, as the infatuated People suspected Poyson in what their true, their best Physi∣cian prescrib'd, and on the other side took it willingly down from the several State Moun∣tebanks, without any Sense of Danger, till
absolutely past Redress or Cure: I say, as all their Calumnies are rais'd from one of these two Topicks; either telling what was Wrong, or perverting what was Right, so are they deliver'd down with a Commonwealth Confidence, where Posi∣tiveness supplies the place of Truth, and is no otherwise to be refell'd, than by looking back, and representing the whole History of that particular Matter of Fact, or Surmise, (for many times they can go no further) which these Sons of Slander so basely misre∣present; and this sets every thing in its true Light, equally represents those just Grounds upon which a wise and good Prince proceed∣ed, and those false Glosses, which a most perverse sort of Men continually spread A∣broad, to have every good he design'd evil spoken of; and therefore Time is ve∣ry properly said to be the Mother of Truth, which generally hath a very hard Birth, with much Difficulty breaks through those thick and dark Clouds of Obloquy, and Detraction, whereby the Prince of the Air and his many Agents endeavour to smother it; but having in the End forc'd a Passage, like the Sun, it shines with a Meridian Lustre, so fully Dissipates that main Body of Darkness, as for the future it can only fly up and down in some scatter'd Vapours, but never more Unite, gain so much Strength or Reputati∣on,
as to Act the like Mischiefs, or be cre∣dited in their Untruths. And some such Scatterings as these, I take to be the within mention'd Attacks of Roger Coke, Ludlow, &c. upon our Roy∣al Martyr, with an impartial Account of whatever particular Charge they bring a∣gainst him, blows quite off, as I hope the Reader will find to his Satisfaction. And this, I doubt not but that bold Wri∣ter of Milton's Life will likewise find, though he blusters mightily at present, and perhaps may think by that means to get off, yet the World is come to a very odd pass if he can so escape, who dares to recommend an Author, that once occasion'd several hours Debate in the House of Commons, whe∣ther he should not be Hang'd, and had some of his now admired Books order'd, and actu∣ally Burnt by the Hands of the Common Hangman. I say it must be a blessed Turn of Times we are now got into, that this Fellow's Works should be all Reprinted, and for fear of too little Mischief that way, have an Abridgment of the most poisonous Passa∣ges put all together in an Account of his Life, with many high Elogiums of his Per∣sonal Qualities, which so far as true, might as well have been said of the Devil, for so they equally abus'd, according to their seve∣ral Capacities, Great Parts, Extraordina∣ry
Endowments, to the Dishonor of that God which gave them, and the Destructi∣on of Mankind. Herein however the Author of this Life acts like a Plain-dealer, confirms what we but suspected before, and expresly declares there must be a thorough Reform of the whole Government, which I presume this new Club is to undertake, according to some old Draughts of Milton, and his Fel∣low Projectors in 59. For though somewhat of the Dutch way is recommended, yet the main Composition of this new Eutopia is Harrington's Oceana. I have within ob∣serv'd, that when the Rump, and Com∣mittee of Safty, that is, the Army, were tearing one another, and the whole Nation in pieces; amongst other Projects, that Maggot of the Rota was set up, and a great Pudder it made, till with many others it was silenc'd by the Restauration; when the Author Harrington, as a dangerous Per∣son, was for some time secur'd in the Tower, and elsewhere; at length he obtain'd his Li∣berty to Travel, and being in Italy talk'd so much of Models, Commonwealths, and Governments, as that sober Nation reput∣ed him no better than a Whimsical crack-braind Person; and that he was so in the end, this is an abundant Confirmation, for returning home, and at Liberty to enjoy both
his Friends and Notions at Pleasure;Ath Oxon. vol. 2. p. 439. more than a Twelvemonth before his Death, he was possest with a continu'd Fancy, that all his Perspiration turn'd into Flies, and sometimes Bees, or Flies as big; and 'tis very probable several of these Insects after many Rambles have fix'd in, and Fly-blown this young Author's Head, whence the whole Nation must be incessantly buss'd with his reviv'd Impertinences. Some like∣wise are prone to suspect there may be a little Discontent in the Case, (and nothing sooner breeds Maggots in the Brain) that hav∣ing fail'd of his Advance in the Irish Chan∣cery, he designs the Revenge of promoting an English Commonwealth, where Mil∣ton's Place must certainly be his Lot, and doubtless with as many uncertain Revoluti∣ons, and as much danger of an Halter in the End. But whencesoever it proceeds, this is cer∣tain, that amongst the several kinds of Pe∣stilent People, our Nation from time to time hath been plagu'd with all, there are none more Troublesome and Pernicious than our Government Menders, who will have it continually upon the Anvil, and be al∣ways Hammering without the least Pro∣spect of finishing their Work, or giving it over to more Skillful Hands, whereby every Man of Temper and Prudence cannot but ob∣serve,
that this Itch of Alteration proceeds more from a hot Head, than sober Judg∣ment, and if such Pragmatical Intermed∣lers should be gratify'd in every Whim, their pregnant Brains abound with, the whole Body-politick will by degrees become so Monstrous as to have an Hanc populus affix'd. It would therefore argue much more Consideration to reflect, that as there are not two Governments in all Europe, nor any where else, exactly the same, but generally very different from each other; so we may justly presume such long continu'd Customs as they have always liv'd under, were ori∣ginally adapted to the Temper of the Peo∣ple, with other Circumstances of Situation, Converse, Traffick, &c. and whatever is superinduc'd de novo must have some af∣finity to those original Establishments, or will sit very uneasy, and give occasion both of continu'd Complaints, and frequent Al∣terations. All good Patriots amongst us, who truly Study the Interest of the Nation, and make an impartial Iudgment of things, do heartily wish the Choice of our Represen∣tatives might be regulated, as well in re∣gard to the Many which make it, as the Management of that Many in order thereto; they think likewise that the Disproportion of Beggerly Burroughs in the several Parts of the Kingdom, is not a little hard in the
Disproportion of Taxes, with not a few o∣ther Inconveniences, which, as wise Men, they rather think of, than attempt to alter, lest it should prove Tinkers Work, as the Proverb speaks, Essaying to mend one, cause more and worse Defects; for though the Dutch very cunningly got rid of all Tumul∣tuary Elections, and perhaps thereto, more especially on their easy Administration ever since, yet I fancy our Grough English Tem∣pers would not be so easily wheedled, and which is worse, scarce find enough that will be Faith∣ful in so great a Trust: To be sure when the Rump took upon them somewhat like that way of Managment, what Rogues did they prove? and how like Rogues did the Peo∣ple use them in the End? Here therefore I would turn the Tables with this bold Assumer, and be gladly satis∣fied how such vigorous Asserters of the Peo∣ple's Liberty, as he and his Republican Fraternity are earnest to be thought, come so highly to recommend the Dutch Model? For that is a perfect Oligarchy, where the People pay as many Taxes as either in France or Turky, and have as little to do in rais∣ing them, or Enacting any other Laws for their mutual Defence, and Welfare; And really I could wish this Rota Club were ad∣journ'd for some Months into those Provin∣ces, that we might see whether they would be
so hardy as to Attack that Government with as much Boldness as they do this, abuse the Liberty of the Press, by telling the Peo∣ple they are Bubled in thinking themselves a Free Commonwealth, whereas there is no such thing amongst them, both their Lives and Fortunes are at the disposal of a few Men, who Cabal together, Elect one another, and do what they please; I say should any of them dare to Prate or Print at this rate, as those in Power would soon hear thereof, so instead of sending them a pair of Shooes to trot out of their Territories, (which Report saith is done in some Cases) care would be forthwith taken to have them die in their own, a modest Expression some use for a Man's being Hang'd; and this, would we take notice of what is Solid and Useful, is the most Remarkable thing a∣mongst them, that they are exact Justicia∣ries, will not permit their Laws to be vio∣lated, and Magistracy arraign'd by every Pragmatical Pretender, without such due Resentments as are absolutely requisite to support the Sovereign Power, and pre∣serve the Publick Peace. But as amongst some other English Fol∣lies, that of admiring Foreign Fashions, in their Vanities, rather than Virtues, hath been too justly charg'd upon us; so the Dutch Fashion for Government, hath had the
Vogue more than 60 Years, with our many Republican Innovators, when not one in 60 thousand of them understand any thing more of it, than to take Patterns from thence, for most Exorbitant Taxes, which our Madness alone, their Necessities, when once engag'd, made absolutely Requisite. Yes, the Licentiousness of the Press is another Branch of Dutch Liberty, for Knaves and Fools to abuse all Honest Men, at Plea∣sure: I say in these two things alone we are become their sordid Imitators, without any thing of that Caution, and Terror, their vigorous Execution of Laws enforce; whereas the same just Severity would secure our Old Constitutions, at a much cheaper Rate than any Foreign Freaks, which the more we attempt, the more we shall fail in, for to me it seems impossible; yet if we could be suppos'd to make so Extravagant an Ex∣periment, it would sit no better than a Boor's Suit, on a Courtiers Back, and be as disagreeing to the Temper, the genius of the Nation, as their Stockfish to our Sto∣machs. But to prove by some other Authority than my own, that these assuming Repub∣licans, are not the Men they would be thought, have neither Bottom, nor Bal∣last proportionable to the Sail they bear; see no further into the Milstone than others,
perhaps as Superficially as any; I shall produce a Person who knew them thoroughly, had the most to do with them, and confirm'd to Matter of Fact the Account already given. Our Author Ludlow relates several Discourses between Cromwel and himself, with some brisk Repar∣tees which pass'd, wherein as he tells his own Story the other seems constantly to have brought him by the Lee, that is, gain'd his Point: What I shall at present relate to, is in Pag. 241, where Cromwel whilst he was cajoling, and betraying the King, gave great Enjealousments to his Fel∣low Rebels, that he would make his own Peace, and leave them to their just Fate; but having accomplish'd that Hellish Treachery, got his Majesty into their Isle of Wight Toils; then as Ludlow tells us, he began to Complement the Commonwealth-Party, inviting some of them to confer with him at his Chamber; with which acquainting me the next time he came to the House, I took the Freedom to tell him, that he knew how to cajole and give them good Words when he had occa∣sion to make use of them; whereat breaking out into a Rage, he said, they were a proud sort of People, and only considerable in their own Conceits: Whether he spake this in a Rage is of little Concern, to be sure, as seldom as he spake Truth, this was a certain Truth he spake, and effectually confirm'd, in the many Contrasts he had with them, and Baffles he gave them; and Ludlow's Reply is very faint, for that he only hop'd it was not yet their Case, whereas all others knew it actually to be so, since they lay under a total defection from
Honesty, Generosity, and all true Virtue: However therefore they may wheedle others into better Thoughts; I shall stick to Cromwel's Cha∣racter, which is a strong Confirmation of my former Opinion, that they are a proud sort of People, only valuable in their own Con∣ceits. In Confirmation whereof, I shall add but this one Instance farther, in Relation to the sun∣dry fanciful Hypotheses they every Day start, to support their Politick Novels; wherein a strange Force is put upon all those Natural Obligations, and Regular Dependencies, which were formerly thought the main Sup∣port of all Humane Societies; such uncooth States of War, and Nature, such Origins of Political Societies, and Subordination of Commonwealth-Powers, as make Parents their Childrens Servants, and Magistrates their Peoples Slaves; and all this with ve∣ry little regard to the Doctrine of the Cre∣ation, which being set aside, or brought in on∣ly to serve at a hard Push, a Man may as well write a Romance, and swear it a true History, as resolve how Mankind came upon the Earth, and what Measures they took upon their first meeting there. Neither is their Deference to the Creation, less than to the Creator, not that they disown the Existence of an Infinite Being, or can imagin this admired Fabrick of the Universe should be any other way than from an Almighty Power, (for most of the Atheists have lately thought of a re∣treat to Deism, as a more tenable Fort) but then they allow this Almighty Power very little share
in the Governing Part; Man being some how or other plac'd here, is suppos'd solely to act upon a Principle of Interest and Self-preservation, without any regard to those Divine Impresses of Good and Evil, Right and Wrong, which many old Pedants, even amongst the Antient Philoso∣phers, conceiv'd as natural to the Soul of Man as Thought, and of so strong an Obligation, that the Guilt of violating, ipso facto inflicted Punish∣ment, in a just dread of the great Avenger: Thus as Preservation was truly stil'd a continu'd Creation; was Providence by the same Rea∣son presum'd to interpose in all humane Transacti∣ons; to speak upon a Philosophical, not Scrip∣ture Account, disappoint the Devices of the Crafty, turn all their Wisdom into Madness and Folly; and how can any Man imagin a more rational Supposition? than that he who made should Govern the World, continue Ab∣solute Monarch, Sovereign over all; and whenever any of our Undertakings clash with, or otherwise thwart the Eternal Purposes of his Will, how troublesom do they prove in the Man∣agement? and fatal in the End? So that howe∣ver plausible their Speculations may seem, and whatever Success attends their first Attempts; I dare Conclude with this as an infallible Truth, There can be no lasting and happy Establish∣ments, without some moral Assurance of the Almighty's Approbation and Blessing. April 6. 99.
UNDIX CAPITUM. CHAP. I. The Commonwealth-Party could never agree upon any one Model, pag. 15. Chap. II. Monarchy hath ever had the pre∣ference, p. 30. Chap. III. King James, and Charles I. de∣sign'd nothing of Arbitrary Power, p. 38. Chap. IV. Not any just Ground for com∣plaint of Grievances, p. 58. Chap. V. No reason to complain of Favorites, and Evil Counsellors, p. 72. Chap. VI. Innovasions in Religion, never de∣sign'd, p. 87. Chap. VII. No design of introducing Popery, p. 109. Chap. VIII. Of the Lent Ships, Rochel, and French War, p. 132. Chap. IX. Of the Palatinate, Bohemia, and that Queen, p. 149. Chap. X. Of the Book of Sports, p. 159. Chap. XI. Of Ship-Money, p. 175. Chap. XII. Of King James's Death, p. 185. Chap. XIII. His Government before the Re∣bellion, p. 1. Part II. Chap. I. Of the Scotch Rebellion, p. 1. Chap. II. Of the Irish Rebellion, p. 59. Chap. III. Of the English Rebellion, p. 81. Chap. IV. Of the King in Custody, &c. p. 148. Chap. V. Of the King's Murder, p. 181.
THE INTRODUCTION. TIS not full forty Years, since this unhappy Nation, for about half that time immediately prece∣dent, groan'd under the mi∣serable Distractions of an unnatural Civil War; had her Antient Monarchy and whole Frame of Government, expos'd and trampled upon by the Arbitrary impositi∣ons, of Presbyterian Rage, Independent Li∣centiousness, Protectorian Usurpation, and Fanatick Fury, all which as they took their Turns, and made their several Insults, up∣on each other, so the poor Kingdom con∣tinu'd under every of them, one dismal Scene of Slavery and Confusion; till the Provocation arose to so high a Ferment, as all Orders and Degrees of Men whatsoe∣ver, unanimously resolv'd to free them∣selves from such Intolerable Oppressions. And whoever saw the Turn of our Capti∣vity, in the year Sixty; how sensible we were of our own Madnesses and Follies, and taught by that dear-bought experi∣ence, resolutely bent upon our Old Esta∣blishment,
that well tempered Politie, in Church and State, which alone could fix us upon a sure Bottom, and prevent our utter Ruin; I say, whosoever saw this, as likewise what a fright the several Delin∣quent Factions were in, what Acknowledg∣ments and Submissions they made, what Pardons they su'd for, and how Gracious∣ly, how Generally they were misbestow'd, could ever have imagin'd that either they, or any descended from them, should pre∣sume in this Age at least, to open their Mouths by way of Apology, or Extenua∣tion, for such fatal Mischiefs, much less endeavour to have them Trump'd up, and Reacted. The few design'd for Exemplary punish∣ment, were those Execrable Regicides, who dar'd to embrew their Hands in the Blood of their Sacred Sovereign, (yet this with a reserve of Favour to such as sat, but did not sign that cursed Bill, or af∣terwards came in upon a Proclamation of Surrender) and if one of that Villanous Crew, escaping the Hangman's clutches, by a Foreign flight, had the Impudence to leave a Narrative of what part himself and some of his Complices bore in that dis∣mal Tragedy, 'tis no more than what might be expected from such Reprobate Minds, to which how far that Blood-thirsty
pack were given over, too sadly ap∣pear'd, as well from their Deportment at the Gallows, as all the former transactions of their Lives. But that the Monarchy still continuing, and a Monarch on the Throne, these Re∣mains of his should be Printed, and Pub∣lickly Sold, cry'd up by the whole Party for an extraordinary Piece, and swallow'd as such by our many superficial Readers, (who take what comes fresh from the Press, and every New Author, are brought over to his Opinion) looks very daring, as if they were not without great hopes of having their Good Old Cause new Bottom'd, and the Rump once more set uppermost: All which the Prefacer does more than in∣timate by giving so great a Deference to his Author, and the Cause he engag'd in, as if such alone made the Service of their Coun∣try the principal care of their Lives, and all Government Arbritrary but in their Hands, pag. 4. And to excite your Commisera∣tion, he adds, that when Charles the 2d was permitted to Act his part, this Gentleman who had gone through innumerable Hazards for the Liberty of England, was stripp'd of his Estate, and under the Odious Name of Traytor forc'd to Abandon his Native Coun∣try, p. 6. Such Language as this we were forc'd to bear with, when they had got
the Power into their own Hands; but sure we are not yet come to 48 or 59. when a company of profligate Villains, the Scum and Scorn of Mankind, with an Army of Ianisaries to their Assistance, took such Care of England's Liberty, as to make all Honest Men Slaves, and Loyal Men Traytors; and whoever is so easy as to believe there is one Syllable of Truth in this Prefaoer's Harangues and flourishes, I wish, (so that others might not suffer with them,) they were some time under that sort of Free-Government for their better Information. That this his Commonwealth-Champion was sent for to recover Ireland out of the Hands of those Papists, is a Secret not known before; and I fancy they that did it, had rather it should have continued so, or be quite forgotten, than the Recepti∣on he found here. To be sure, the Business was done without him; and if this his Admirer would have been so ingenuous as to tell what those Worthy Gentlemen in the House of Commons said, when they ex∣press'd their Indignation at his Return, 'twould have been as well worth transmit∣ting to Posterity as any Remarks upon that Conjuncture, p. 7. Neither is it at all for his Reputation, that his Family was Anti∣ent, and had an Estate which plac'd him in
the first Rank of Gentlemen, p. 4. The Eng∣lish Gentry were the main support of the Royal Cause, and stood by their oppressed Prince with an Unparallell'd Bravery, con∣sidering the Necessities they both la∣bour'd under: Some indeed were drawn to the contrary Party by mistake, or misinformation, and left them in due time; others persever'd too long, but when it came to the Arraignmemt, and Murther of the King, it was their utmost, and universal Detestation; this well de∣scended Gentleman had few other Associates in that Horrid Act, than Draymen, Coblers, Tinkers, &c. the very Refuse of Mechanicks as well as Mankind, especially as to the Army Officers, who were the chief pro∣moters thereof, whilst our doughty Members, whatever they thought of them∣selves, serv'd no otherwise, than as their Tools and Properties; and so indeed were they Cromwell's, though much regretted by them, when he lay'd aside his Vizard, and assum'd all to himself. Since there∣fore this Author of theirs, so basely dege∣nerated from most others of his Quality, as to become not only Rebel, but Regicide, I shall have so little regard for his Descent, as to give him the bare Name of Ludlow. Whether he writ all these Memoirs, or more than these, is not of moment to en∣quire:
The Vindicator of Oliver Cromwell tells us when Blood went to him at Gene∣va, in order to engage him in New Di∣sturbances, he found him writing of a Hi∣story, and thought he might be much more proper for that, than the Com∣mand of General, which his Admirers here design'd him; the other's quick and pe∣netrating Judgment, soon discovering his blind side, and that only his being of the Party, gave him the Reputation of Parts: And accordingly that Vindicator has as mean an Opinion of his History as the other of his Generalship. And so must eve∣ry one else who regards either Sense or Truth. Although 'tis likewise said these two Volumes are but the Abridgment of many more Reams, foul'd upon this Sub∣ject, which his Party, and Printer, thought fit to lick into somthing of Form, con∣tract, and perhaps alter too, as might best serve the present Design of promoting the Good Old Cause. As to my particular undertaking the Vindication of our Royal Martyr, I doubt not but to satisfy every impartial Reader, that he writes not one Syllable of Truth, yet withal is such a Common-place Recorder of Falshoods, as to mention nothing but those Old Calumnies and Slanders, which indeed serv'd the Faction's turn when first start∣ed,
and misled the Credulous Rabble; but have been long since detected and evinc'd by the Clearest Demonstration any mat∣ter of Fact is capable of; for the same Cheat never last's long; Truth certainly prevails in the End: Upon which ac∣count all such as take these indirect Cour∣ses, must necessarily be qualified with a quick Invention, be sure to have a New Trick at hand, as soon as the Old is disco∣vered; that the Parties impos'd upon, may have no leisure to reflect, or other∣wise discover the Iuggle: And by this Ar∣tifice, more especially were our 41 Confu∣sions commenc'd, and carry'd on, about which time a Spirit of Calumny and detra∣ction, of Evil Speaking, Lying and Slander∣ing, seem'd to be let loose, as Satan in the Revelations, to deceive the Nation, and persecute all therein, who would not wor∣ship that Gog and Magog, they were go∣ing to set up; with this Spirit, I say, our many Pulpit Beautifews and Lay Dema∣gogues, were so cursedly possest, as nothing Sacred, or Civil, could escape their Oblo∣quy, or restrain the Madness of the People, from believing their forg'd Reports, or prosecuting their Rebellious Designs; 'tis inconceivable the Delusions they impos'd upon them, the Contradictions they made them swallow, till it became so habitu∣al
to the whole Party, as every little Me¦chanick, and Blew Apron'd Brother would as naturally tell a Lye for the good of the Cause, as the Sale of their Wares; and if discovered, be as far from Shame, as the Devil from a Blush. Afterwards indeed the Evil Spirit was for some time conjur'd down, confin'd to the Dark Cell of its own Melancholy thoughts, and sad regret, for disappointed Mischiefs; but of late 'tis broke forth again, and rages most vio∣lently, prevails to astonishment upon a Reinfatuated Age; for from thence more especially it must proceed, that Men should have so soon forgot, not only God's Mercies, but their own Miseries too. Among the many other Allays which an impartial Judgment will find to abate much the envied Happiness of Princes, 'tis none of the least, that during their full Gales of Prosperity they are beset with Flatterers instead of Friends, their Impu∣nity is their danger, and Superiority to Laws leaves their Spirits unguarded, spoil'd of any other restraint than that All-Seeing Eye which hath too little influence upon the rest of Mankind. On the other side their declining Fortune constantly runs into extreams, or if they go to the Grave in Peace, their Ashes are certainly Arraign'd for whatever the Importunity of
Dependents, Distraction of Counsels, Exi∣gency of Affairs, or Iniquity of the Times, forc'd them upon. And herein no Histo∣ry affords a more deplorable Instance than that of our Royal and Blessed Martyr, who having run a Course of the most inhu∣man Treatments ever offered to Crown'd Head, since that of Thorns was worn; and then universally acquitted, not only by the Grand Inquest of the Nation, but by all others, who had the least Sense of Honour, Truth, or Virtue, in their Souls; hath now of late been Murther'd afresh, his Memory so despitefully Assaulted, and the many Old Calumnies, and Reproaches so maliciously Reviv'd, as if there had been nothing done or said in his Vindica∣tion. Could they alledge any thing de No∣vo, it might give a fresh Gloss to their Bafled Cause; but their Malice did so ful∣ly disgorge it self at first, as they can only New Chew the same Coleworts, take down and Vomit up again those Villanous De∣famations, which have been as often an∣swer'd as urg'd; and perhaps had not been urg'd again, did they not hope the Licentiousness of the Age, which God for∣bid, would bear them out, and enable them to crush any one, who should dare to reply.
He who, to the best of my Observation, first brake the Ice upon this unworthy Subject, was one Roger Coke Esq in Two Volumes, which he calls Detections of the four last Reigns, a Title of great sound, and cannot but raise an Expectation in every inquisitive Reader, of some great Discoveries, some deep Mysteries of State, or Mischievous Intrigues, the World hath not hitherto been acquainted with: Where∣as I defie any of his Abettors (for he is gone to his proper Place) to produce one single Passage, which hath not been al∣ledg'd, and reply'd to, before, and as of∣ten reply'd to, as alledg'd: An Abridg∣ment of all the Libels, and all the Lyes, since the coming in of King Iames the first, had been a more agreeable Title; for though Rushworth's Collections, and the Life of Lord Keeper Williams are mostly cited by him (Authors too too partial) yet there is not one Roguy Pamphlet from Sr. A. W.'s Court of King Iames, to Milton's , I speak in reference to the first Volume only) which hath not af∣forded Materials for this ill-natur'd Mali∣cious Work; neither could any one ex∣pect otherwise who knew the Man, and his Conversation, being of an haughty, po∣sitive Humour, with all the other ill Qua∣lities of his Grandfather, the great Lord
Chief Iustice Coke, (and perhaps too by Natural descent) without any of the good: Indeed he seem'd to be the Caput Mortu∣um of that high Spirit, so dull and insipid, as Spight it self could not raise him; for 'tis thought he wrote those bitter Inve∣ctives against the Royal Family, to be re∣veng'd on King Iames the first, for depo∣sing his Grandfather; although 'tis well known his Arbitrary, and Insolent deport∣ment in that great Trust, made it absolute∣ly necessary; but engaging in the popular Cause afterward, that expiated for all. In short, the Whole of all what he calls a Hi∣story is of as loose a Contexture as our Ca∣pitation Stuff, and of as Course a Composi∣tion, scare giving a good Word to any Person, or any Party: He declares a suspi∣tion of offending the Commonwealth's Men, and yet obliges them with one continu∣ed Libel against Monarchy, whereunto he was too well qualified by the predomi∣nancy of a Swelling Spleen, and Overflowing Gall, with other unhappy Circumstances both as to Temper and Condition, so that had they not been thus Vented, 'tis to be feared he might with Iudas have burst asunder: Yet this Uncouth Piece, because False, and foul Mouth'd, took to Admira∣tion among the several Factions, insomuch as in two Years time no less than three
Impressions were wrought off; indeed they had not been gratified with any thing of that kind for several Years before, and such perverse Dispositions (like Men in Fevers) will greedily swallow whatever allays the present Drought of their Minds, tho' it promotes the Distemper, and ha∣stens their Ruin. And upon this account is there such Care taken of a fresh supply, so that an Undesigning Integrity cannot but be concern'd for the next Age (which ge∣nerally gives the best account of that which preceded) how it will be able to Cull out the Truth from those Number∣less Volumes of Lyes and Forgeries, which every Commonwealth Bigot, and Merce∣nary Pen is free to impose upon the World. According to what I mention'd of a fresh Supply; some Months since these Memoirs of Ludlow came forth, and are al∣together as much in Vogue as the Detecti∣ons were at first; tho' as to the Libelling part upon our Royal Martyr, it discovers no∣thing but the same inveterate Spight, and repeated Untruths set forth in another Method, and different Appearance, where∣in that Spirit of Calumny, and Delusion, which possesses every Individual through∣out their several Tribes, knowing how much they delight in variety, does most
readily gratify them, finding it the readiest means to secure their complyance in the grossest Impositions, and falsest Slanders. Whilst I am Writing this, there are two Pamphlets more come to my Hand, in comparison whereof, the Two former may pass for Candid Modest Writers, Their Titles are, A Defence of the Parliament of 1640. and the People of England against King Charles I. And, King Charles I. no such Saint or Martyr as commonly Reputed; both which without doubt were design'd for the last Effort of Fanatick Effrontie; and thought to give as fatal a stroke to the Royal Martyr's Reputation, as the Ax did to his Life; and if the rudest Language that ever was Pen'd, and the impudentest Lies, that ever were Told, could be any ways Effectual thereunto, their work is throughly done; for there is not one Sen∣tence in both these Libels but must come under both those Characters: Milton had Wit and Stile, to flourish off his malicious Reproaches; but here is such Billinsgate stuff as never burthen'd the Press till our Sala∣manca Graduate led the Van; and if he wrote, as is commonly reported, by a Club, these doubtless came from the same Fra∣ternity; Their Stile, their Sense, and Good Manners, exactly accord, and so do their Temper, and Complection, all of the same
Metal, true Monumental Brass, and 'tis great pity they are not every one several∣ly Erected, without any Pedestals to sup∣port them. However I will not so posi∣tively place it here, as to exclude their Counterpart, that Club of Calves-Heads at the other end of Town. 'Tis in the mean while an unhappy Consideration, and never thought consi∣stent with any well ordered Government, that every impudent profligate Wretch, should assume a Liberty of Arraigning at Pleasure all Orders and Degrees of Men, both Living and Dead, even to the Sacred Ashes of the best Man, and most abused Prince that ever sat upon a Throne May not the Great God who Iudgeth right (up∣on defect of all Earthly Powers in doing Iu∣stice to injur'd Innocence, and oppressed Virtue) be hereby provok'd to Arise and Defend his own Cause, Remember the Rebukes his Servants have, whereby their Enemies take occasion to blaspheme his Name, and slander the Footsteps of his Anointed.
A JUST DEFENCE OF THE Royal Martyr, CHARLES I. PART I. CHAP. I. The Commonwealth Party could never agree upon any one Model. OUR Author begins his Memoirs with the Ruin of his Cause, the Roasting of the Rump, which doubtless was a great disap∣pointment, very much to his prejudice, and therefore in reference to his own dear
Self, we will grant he had Reason to com∣plain, That having seen our Cause betray'd, and the most solemn Promises that could be made to the Asserters of it, openly Violated, I departed from my Native Country, &c. Now because this Cause of his is so much magnified throughout both his Volumes, as the only Means of securing the Liberty, Safety, and publick Interest of the People, where∣as the Office of a King was Burdensom and Dangerous, the House of Peers useless; upon which account both ought to be Abolished, and the Government settled in the way of a Common-wealth, the two first Votes they made after their Execrable Parricide, it will I hope be thought no improper digressi∣on, to examin the Rise of this excellent Model, how it came first in Power? How it behav'd it self whilst so, and what be∣came of it in the end? In order whereun∣to we must know, that the Violent and Numerous Faction in that fatal long Parli∣ament of Forty, were all of one piece so long as the King was able to bear up; and most implacable against all such Loyal Faithful Members as adher'd unto him, some of which they turn'd out of the House, and forc'd many others to withdraw, as well for the security of their Persons, as in Obe∣dience to their Consciences; which oblig'd them to stand by their injur'd Prince so
that in Ianuary 43, the King assembled at Oxon a greater Number of Lords and Commons then sat at Westminster, although the latter supply'd themselves with a sort of Cattle call'd Recruiters, from such Corporations and Burroughs, as were with∣in their Quarters, where they might be sure of confiding Men, who would not fail to carry on the Work as they had be∣gun. But divine Vengeance designing further to scourge us with our own Rod, though it gave Success to their rebellious Arms, yet withal, so divided them amongst themselves, as they that expected most, had least of the Spoil; whilst the Bear and the Wolf, the Presbyterian and Inde∣pendent contended, one cunning Fox ran off with the Prey; for as soon as the Royal Cause was vanquish'd, those two Iunto's fell into implacable Enmities in the House; and because the Independent was smallest in Number, they supply'd that Defect by the Army which had been so modell'd by Cromwell, as to be all of their own Leven, and undertook their Quar∣rel so effectually, as to bring a Charge against eleven of the most leading Members on the other Side, who thereupon were forc'd to absent themselves, some of them, for their better Security, beyond
the Seas. But this Purge would not do, there must be a stronger Dose to remove the tough Presbyterian Humour, which was accordingly prescrib'd; for the other Iunto finding themselves still out-voted, ran away to the Army, and carry'd their Speaker with them, making a sad Com∣plaint, that their elder Brethren of the other Faction were obstinate and refractory, and would not let them have their Wills in going thorough-stitch to the Ruin of King and Kingdom, at leastwise would not let it go their own Way, and there∣fore begg'd their Assistance in the Accom∣plishment of so good a Work; whereupon they strait-way march'd up to Westmin∣ster, fill'd both the Palace Yards with Sol∣diers, and set double Files through the Hall, up to the Doors of both Houses, looking scornfully upon the Members which had sat in the Absence of their Speaker, and threatned to pull them forth by the Ears if they did not give speedy Satisfaction; so that at present they car∣ried all before them. However the Ar∣my, or rather, their Managers Cromwell and Ireton, seem'd herein to mis-time their Design; the whole Nation was allarm'd at these extravagant Proceedings, that the King should be so barbarously confin'd, the Parliament forc'd, now they seem'd
somewhat dispos'd to an Accommodati∣on, and all things controll'd by the Ar∣bitrary Licentiousness of a Military Rabble, even to a Vote, of no more Addresses to the King: Which first proceeded from their Motion without Doors, to their Creatures within; this made several Coun∣ties petition, and then rise in Arms; some who had been Commanders for the Parlia∣ment in Wales, endeavoured to retrieve their Country from those Mischiefs their Mistakes had brought upon it: And Scotland actually declaring against their English Brethren's Abuse of the King, provided an Army to invade them. This made our Men of the Sword post∣pone for the present, their State-Refor∣mation, and fall to their proper Calling: Fairfax undertook such loyal Gentlemen and Parties in Kent and Essex, as had en∣gag'd to free their Country from an Army of Mamaluks, and shut them up in Col∣chester, whilst Cromwell's veterane Forces found a ready Conquest of the Welsh; and the Scotch under such ill Conduct, as if they came on purpose to acquaint him, how easie it was for a Man of Resolution and good Management, to subdue and en∣slave their Nation. In the mean time, whilst this kind of second War was on foot, the whole Kingdom, besides those
concern'd in the foremention'd Engage∣ments, began to reflect what a miserable Condition they had brought themselves into: The City petition the Parliament for a personal Treaty with the King; they ac∣cordingly vote in their secluded Members, repeal that of no Addresses, and agree to a Treaty at the Isle of Wight; which never∣theless met with so many Obstacles and Delays from the adverse Iunto, as the Army had finish'd their Business before the Treaty could be brought to a Conclusi∣on; and were so incens'd thereat, as they came up in a Rage to London, took Quar∣ters at and about Whitehall, fell the second Time to reform the House, whereof they actually seiz'd and committed 41 Mem∣bers,Hist. of Indepen. part 2. pag. 31. denyed Entrance to above 160 more, besides about 40 or 50 who vo∣luntarily withdrew to avoid their Vio∣lence, so that the whole was now reduc'd to between 40 or 50, such profligate Wretches, both as to Life and Principle, that they would stick at no Villany the Bashaws their Masters thought fit to put upon them. And this is the true Origin of what is commonly call'd the Rump of the long Parliament, the End whereof is so much condol'd by our Author, al∣though it might as properly have been call'd the Excrement; to be sure their
Actions will make our Nation stink in the Nostrils of all good Men to the End of the World. We are next to enquire how this Fag End of a Parliament behav'd it self, ha∣ving got the Power into their Hands, or rather were the Substitutes, the Properties of the Army; for that is their truest Cha∣racter: And here to let the Nation see their Business should not be done by Halves, they began with these Resolves. 1. That the People under God are the Original of all just Power. 2. That the Commons of England as∣sembled in Parliament, being chosen by, and representing the People, have the su∣pream Authority of this Nation. 3. That whatsoever is enacted and de∣clared for Law by the Commons, hath the Force of a Law. 4. That all the People of this Nation are included thereby, although the Con∣sent of the King and House of Peers be not had thereto. 5. That to raise Arms against the Peo∣ple's Representatives, is high Treason. 6. That the King himself took Arms against the Parliament, and upon that ac∣count is guilty of the Blood shed through the Civil War, and that he ought to ex∣piate the Crime with his own Blood.
Whose Tryal they fell to immediately, and with an unparallel Impudence, foun∣ded their Dominion in the Blood of the Lord's Anointed, and their Liege Sove∣reign; whereas granting their Position of the People's Right to be true, as it is abo∣minably false, there was not the tenth Part of the Commons at the making that cursed Ordinance, nor would one in a thousand of the People have assented thereunto, and this the Lady Fairfax told them at the Tryal, from an adjoyning Scaffold: Had that Tool her Husband shewn the like Courage, it might have turn'd to Account; but Men that have a long time habituated themselves in Mis∣chief, God seldom permits to be Instru∣ments of any Good. To be sure, as this cursed Fact rendred the Rump most infa∣mous to all Degrees thoroughout the Na∣tion, so the Grandees of the Army, after they had traiterously serv'd their turn, paid them as little Respect, and thought they were too contemptible a Body to manage so great a Trust; to which pur∣pose the Agitators, as soon as they had first purg'd the House, declared it was re∣quisite to have a more equal Representa∣tive, and accordingly printed a Model, which they called The Agreement of the People, and so continued frequently harp∣ing
upon the same String, and pressing to have it taken into Consideration, which forc'd them upon what our Author de∣clares, Page 313. And now the Parlia∣ment being desirous to let the People see that they design'd not to perpetuate themselves, after they should be able to make a compleat Settlement of Affairs, and provide for the Security of the Nation, &c. Resolv'd, that the House would, upon every Wednes∣day Morning, turn themselves into a grand Committee, to debate concerning the Manner of assembling, and Power of future successive Parliaments, the Number of Persons to serve for each County, that the Nation might be more equally represented, &c. And thus they continued two or three Years, and would have till Doomsday according to their own Vote, since they resolv'd not to rise, till a compleat Settlement of Affairs, and the Nation's Security provided for. But Cromwell was resolv'd they should not stay till then; yet having a different De∣sign from all his Fellow Rebels, kept them in till that was ripe; in Order whereunto Ireland must be first brought into perfect Subjection: And then the Scotch gave him an Opportunity of retaliating their ma∣ny Outrages, Invasions, and such like Co∣venant Kindnesses, which he did to pur∣pose: And having gain'd the Crowning
Victory, as he term'd it, at Worcester thought it then a fit Time to pull off his Vizard, and send that Pack of Rascals, as he call'd them at a Nobleman's Table, a Grazing; the Account whereof, as our Author gives it from the 447th Pag. for∣ward, is very pleasant; and shews, that though they were every one profoundly practised in those Hellish Arts of Treachery and Dissimulation, yet Cromwell infinitely outdid them all: They were but petty Devils in Comparison with him, that true Lucifer incarnate. But what our Author saith of their be∣ing supported by the Affections of the People, Pag.459. because acting for their Interest, is so gross, so palpable a Lye, as sure he could not believe his Memoirs should be printed till every Man then living was dead: Next the Restauration, I never knew any thing more grateful, the whole Kingdom thorough, than their Dismission; it was the only popular Act wherein Cromwell oblig'd all Parties, and made his Usurpation more tolerable, by ridding us of the most contemptible Set of Men that ever sat at the Helm of any Government. But 'tis the common Cant of our Com∣monwealth Coxcombs, (and 'tis us'd as much by our Author as any of them) to give that Handful of Fools and Knaves
which adher'd to them, the Title of the Godly Party, and all the good People of England. Well, now they are gone, and had six Years time to fret and bite their Nails; for we may guess at their Regret, by the Spite and Revenge they were guilty of when got again in play, which they could never do as long as Cromwell trod the Stage; but when he was carried off, the Army resolv'd to revenge his tricking them, upon Richard who succeeded him, and could think of no better Tools to effect that Work, than by setting their old Iournymen the Rump about it; in order whereunto they plac'd them in the Workhouse, and set them to the Business, which they soon dispatch'd, although they had much ado to find a Number suf∣ficient; for however our Author pre∣tends, he gave Dr. Owen a List of 160 which had sate since the Year 48, they were forc'd to send for Munson and Harry Martyn out of the Goal, to make up a Quorum of 40. from which time for∣ward, to their final Expiration, there can be nothing more comical in any History, Romance, or Play, than the several Trans∣actions, Caballings, and Intrigues amongst them, as related all along by our Author; what Iealousies and Distrusts they had of
one another; what Plots and Counterplots, Turnings out and in, Quarrels, Treaties, and Patchings up, wherein our Author tells us what pains he took, and with what Moderation he proceeded, to little purpose, God be prais'd. One thing more especially they could never get over, and that was a settled well fix'd Form of Government: The Army were resolv'd upon a standing Senate of their own Body, I presume, to over-awe the civil Representatives: The Rump, on the other hand, thought themselves so much their Masters, as to vote the Speaker Gene∣ral, and order that all, even the most su∣pream Officers, should have no Commissions but from him; whereupon what passed between Sir Arthur Haslerig and Lambert, pag. 677, may be thought worth relat∣ing. Lambert complain'd how that Act left them at Mercy; only said Sir Arthur, at the Mercy of the Parliament, who are your good Friends. I know not, reply'd the other, why they should not be at our Mercy, as well as we at their's; which made Sir Ar∣thur shake his Head, as our Author owns: And really 'tis hard to resolve whether they were more stupid or insolent, to ima∣gine, that a Company of rusty, sturdy Iades, who had all along got the Bitt be∣tween their Teeth, should suffer such a
Pack of Fools to ride them at Pleasure. Neither was the Dispute less amongst themselves in the House upon the same Subject; some were for choosing Repre∣sentatives, according to the old Constituti∣on; others would have them proportion'd in every County, according to their Share in the Payment of Taxes: Henry Nevill, and half a Score of such Mercurial Heads, with more Sail than Ballast, strong Fan∣cies and weak Iudgments, were for a Ro∣tation, according to their Friend Har∣rington's Oceana, and much Pudder there was about it at a Club set up for that pur∣pose, with several such like maggotty Conceits, as we find Page 674. To be brief, Into such a desperate Frenzy were they fallen, as our Author owns, Page 855, and being ripe for the Correction of Heaven, nothing could prevent it, our Enemies suc∣ceeding in all their Attempts, and all our En∣deavours proving abortive: An ingenuous Confession this: When Men begin to suffer they begin likewise to reflect, and if ever, speak Truth; for General Monk having well observ'd his Friend Cromwell's Arts of Dissimulation, and how much it was in Vogue with all the several Parties, prov'd so good a Proficient therein, as to foil them at their own Weapon; made as ma∣ny Protestations to the Rump, that he
would act altogether for their Interest and Welfare, as the long Parliament did at first to the King, and kept them as well, so that the Kingdom was restor'd by the same Course it was ruin'd, which whe∣ther he design'd or not at his first setting out (for that remains still in the dark, how positive soever our Author is to the contrary) yet finding all the other Facti∣ons and Interest so slippery and false, and the Nation withal so importunate for a free Parliament, which they knew would introduce their old Establishments, there was no other way left to secure and ad∣vance himself, and quocunque modo Rem, since it was done, the more unlikely the Means, the greater the Mercy, and an over-ruling Power the more clearly visible therein; and therefore Cromwell's Cant upon his Scotch Victory (which our Au∣thor so much applauds, pag. 329) may with much more reason come in here, since the Lord, upon this solemn Appeal, hath so signally given Iudgment on Monar∣chy's Side, when all Hopes of Deliverance seem'd to be cut off: Methinks our Common∣wealths Men should give over all Thoughts of placing that in the Saddle, which ha∣ving been so often there already, could not keep its Seat. 'Tis likewise a pretty Passage our Author relates, that when
some of the Rump and Cromwell's Mirmi∣dons had a Conference about the former's Dismission, Saloway desir'd, that before they took away the present Authority; they would declare what they would have esta∣blish'd in its Room, pag. 455. To which it was reply'd, That it was necessary to pull down this Government, and it would be time enough then to consider what should be plac'd in the Room of it. And here indeed they were sure enough; for Crom∣well design'd himself, though it was not then proper for his Creature to declare so much; but the other Side could never yet resolve, and would be as far off as ever, if trump'd up again: So that in this Parti∣cular I dare be a little positive, which yet must be acknowledg'd a very reasonable Proposal, that if the Dissenters would for∣bear undermining the Church till they could agree amongst themselves (which 'tis said they are now hot upon, and are doubtless all too hot to do any thing to purpose) as to Matters of Doctrine, Disci∣pline, and Worship; and the Republicans do the same by the Monarchy, as to the Management of civil Affairs; I make no doubt but Church and State might last as long as any one Government in Europe, or the whole World.
CHAP. II. Monarchy hath ever had the Prefe∣rence. BUT though they never could, nor never will agree what to set up, yet at the Negative they are the Devil and all: Monarchy of Necessity must down, for all Kings affect to be Tyrants, to insult over, and enslave their People; neither do they care to be bound up by Laws, but are uneasie under such Restraints, and take the first Opportunity to break thorough and make themselves absolute. This is the never failing Sugar-Plumb, wherewith popular factious Spirits are sure to take with the Rabble; carry them out of God's Blessing into the warm Sun, give them good Words at present, and Repentance in Reversion: For as never any Age abounded more with State Empyricks, than the present, so 'tis generally con∣cluded by them, that the Distemper hath all along lain in the Head, without ever considering that the Head is the Seat of Knowledge, the Residence of the Soul, not otherwise to be indisposed than by the Malignity of such Humors as the Body sends up, Fumes of the Spleen or Stomach, and
too violent Ascent of Blood or Spirits, from whence alone that is disturb'd, and all irregular Affections there produc'd; and this equally holds in the politick as na∣tural Body: Neither are they less mista∣ken in their way of Cure, whether it be Ignorance, Rashness, or both; for the Head cannot ake, but they conclude it an Apoplexy, and bleed the whole to Death, and go so uncouthly about a cut Finger, every slight and trivial Hurt, as to make it gangreen: God deliver us from such Physicians as these, wherewith, notwith∣standing as we have much abounded, so are there still too many. To come therefore more calmly to the Question: As it must be granted on the one Side, there can be no such thing as a per∣fect State to be found in this World, so must it be acknowledged on the other, optimus ille qui minimis urgetur, even in this Sense, that is best which has fewest Inconveniencies; for as Grotius applies that of the old Comedian: Aut haec cum il∣lis sunt habenda, aut illa cum his mittenda sunt, the bad must be born with, in Con∣sideration of the greater good we should otherwise go without; and proceeding according to this Method, whether we consider them in Thesi or Hypothesi, the Ballance will certainly turn on Monar∣chy's
Side: For first, in Thesi, that hath ever had the Preference with all Men of sober Sense and quiet Principles; and not∣withstanding the many Harangues, and few Instances, the contrary Party are for∣ward to bring, no Monarch can be look'd upon, but as oblig'd not only in Honour and Duty, but Interest likewise, to con∣sult the Wellfare of his Subjects as much as a Father of a Family that of his Chil∣dren, and hath the same Inducement to keep and leave it in good Order to his Heir or Successor, as a Husbandman to im∣prove that Farm which he is sure shall descend to his Posterity. And thus it hath generally been all the World over, and in all Ages, where a Kingdom was look'd upon no otherwise than a larger Family (from whence at first they all came) and the Master thereof, as the Pa∣ter Patriae, the common Father of the Country; and when otherwise, the Chil∣dren have been oftner to blame than the Parent, though when the Breach was once made, nothing could be more natu∣ral than for both Sides to run into Ex∣treams. Farther yet, we should consi∣der, all earthly Powers, and every Indivi∣dual under them, are subordinate to the Almighty Sovereign of the Universe, who in a secret and wonderful manner, arbi∣trates
and controuls all humane Under∣takings, according to the infinite Wisdom of his own unsearchable Will; and when provok'd to high Displeasure by some enormous National Crimes, hath been then observ'd more especially to interpose, and give a People over to such cursed Infa∣tuations as to violate all Rules of common Discretion, as well as Duty, and precipi∣tate their own Ruin; whereof farther on, we may have too sad Occasion to make Application. And however, to∣wards the End of the last Century, and Beginning of this, several Parts of Eu∣rope were mad upon this Republican Hu∣mour, and many amongst us are so fool∣ish as still to continue the Freak; yet I have sometimes thought with my self, from the few Instances we have in Histo∣ry of this kind of Government; and them them that were, mostly founded upon the Ruin of Monarchies; continued all the Time of their being in perpetual Disor∣ders and Convulsions of State, till at last they resolv'd into a Monarchy again. This I say, hath made me think, that they all took their Beginning from the forementi∣on'd Displeasure of the Almighty; for in∣verting that Oeconomy wherein he had plac'd the World, and maugre all their Conceits and Oppositions, would have it
so continue: For the Great King of Hea∣ven is jealous, both of his Honour and Pre∣rogative; and when a few fancyful No∣vellists will dare to set up the Right of their Sovereign Lords the People, in Oppo∣sition to his Ordinances and eternal Esta∣blishments, the Decision may be easily foreseen, if with Reverence duly attend∣ed; his infinite Wisdom and Patience so wonderfully operating, and in so se∣cret a manner upon their hard and impe∣nitent Hearts, as to make themselves the Instruments of his Wrath and Vengeance. And from the same Power and secret Will it is, that the Parties themselves are so little sensible of the Iudgment, as to maintain their Opinion with more Ear∣nestness than ever, and so may continue without Controul; for, having, withal the Command of Legions, no wise Philoso∣pher will dare to dispute his best against them. However, God is not mocked, and so they will find at last. But then, secondly, If we consider this in Hypothesi, and bring it home to our own Case, we shall find a very black Ac∣count; for after all their Noise and Cla∣mors, the little Finger of this Upstart Commonwealth, prov'd heavier to the whole Nation, than the Loyns of the most rigid Monarch that ever sate upon the Throne:
Nay, 'tis farther certain, by most dear bought Experience, that there was more Arbitra∣ry Power, and illegal Commitments exorbi∣tant Taxes, Rapine and Plunder; Seque∣strations and Sacrilege, with whatever else could be most Unjust and Tyrannical; voted, and put in practice during the twenty Years Usurpation of the several Iunto's, than by all the Crowned Heads; ay, and their Favorites too (to take off all Allegations of that kind) since the Con∣quest; I might add, since the Creation; did our Histories reach so far. 'Tis mo∣destly express'd by our Author, that not∣withstanding their other Helps, the Charge at Sea and Land was so great, as they were forc'd to lay a Land-Tax of 120000 l. per Mensem: Which, notwith∣standing, if we may believe him, the People pay'd very freely. Now let us examin a little what these other Helps were: They had seiz'd, not only upon all the Crown, but Church-Lands; and di∣spos'd of them at Pleasure: They had the free Contributions of the City Dames, and all others well affected, as far as their Quarters extended, even to the poor Country Wenches Bodkins and Thymbles. They had the Sequestration of all the Loy∣al Nobility and Gentry; whose Estates they dispos'd of amongst themselves, to
several 1000 l. per Annum. They had rais'd the Customs much higher than ever they were in the King's Time: And in humble Imitation of their Brethren the Dutch, retrench'd the Excesses of Good Fellowship, by an Excise; which the Na∣tion was never acquainted withal before, and now must never be without. Besides 25th Parts, Decimations; with numberless other Ways of squeezing the People, who notwithstanding must think all too little for that happy Liberty this Free State had brought them into. One thing farther I must observe, in Refe∣rence to the Land-Tax; that as it was col∣lected according to the Lunary, or as the Term then went, Military Months; so they would not rest there, but were so good at Multiplication, as to repeat that Monthly Assessment sixteen or seventeen times in a Year: Whereas the Sum, which two or three of these Months amounted to, was as much as was ever given to, or expected by any King be∣fore, and would have made Charles I. the happyest Prince, and continued us the easiest People under Heaven. Can we be pityed to have it brought to more Millions than that made 100000 ls. and a Necessi∣ty of continuing the same? So fatal a thing it is, not to take the Wise Man's Ad∣vice;
but instead of that Fear to God, and Honour to the King, which he recom∣mends, be medling with such as are given to change, the most troublesome Generation of Men any Nation was ever plagu'd withal; for whatever Improvements our Royal Societies may make as to Natural Knowledg; Oso's in Politicks, or Religion, are most intollerable; their Chymical Heads will never forbear trying Experi∣ments, till both evaporate in Smoak and Confusion. Had Sir W. T.'s Alphonso the Wise liv'd in these mutable Times, to those four Old Things he gave so great a Preference, there doubtless had been ad∣ded a fifth, and that is, Old Govern∣ment.
CHAP. III. King James, and Charles I. design'd nothing of Arbitrary Power. IN Confirmation of what I said, That Arbitrary Power is the Grand Topick of the Faction: Our Author Ludlow begins his spiteful Charge there: Those who make any Enquiry into King Iames's Reign, will find, that tho his Inclinati∣ons were strongly bent to render him∣self Absolute, yet he chose rather to car∣ry on that Design by Fraud than Vio∣lence: But King Charles having taken a nearer View of Despotick Government, in his Iourny to France and Spain; tempted with the glittering Shew, and imaginary Pleasures of that empty Pa∣geantry; Immediately after his Ascent to the Throne, pull'd off the Mask, and openly discovered his Intentions to make the Crown absolute and Indepen∣dent, pag. 1, 2. Audacter Calumniari goes a great way in any bad Cause: To be sure this Calumny hath been so fre∣quently urg'd, so constantly inculcated, as several worthy Gentlemen, otherwise well affected to Monarchy in general, as
well as the Memory of those two Prin∣ces, are yet prone to suspect they might have some Inclinations that way; and for their Satisfaction more especially it is I give them and my self this Trouble. To shew therefore how little Ground there was or is for this Suspicion: King Iames call'd Parliaments as often as any Prince ever did, and courted them as much, perhaps more than was requisite, considering the Temper they were of: And so did his Son at first, as Ludlow owns. 'Tis true, he call'd some in the first Years of his Reign: But then makes this malicious Reflection; The People soon per∣ceiv'd he did it rather to empty their Purses, than redress their Grievances. The Truth of it is, there was such a Spirit of Innova∣tion and Faction got abroad, such ground∣less Suspicions and Distrusts every where, not only whisper'd, but openly proclaim'd throughout the Nation; as 'tis equally unaccountable how Men should have the Confidence to forge such gross Un∣truths, and the People suffer themselves to be so absurdly impos'd upon: Altho, as to this latter, nothing can seem incre∣dible to such as observ'd, what a Fright the whole Nation was abus'd into the other Day, as if between two and three thousand Irish (for that was their utmost
Number, could fire all their Habitations, and cut all their Throats. Yet by such Artifices as these, altogether as ground∣less and improbable, the People were kept up in a continual Ferment, so foolishly prejudic'd, and so freakishly peevish, as no Reason could be heard, nor Truth pre∣vail upon them; whereunto both the foremention'd Kings were too forward to appeal, and too condescending in giving an Account of themselves and Actions, by frequent Proclamations, Declarati∣ons, &c. considering they had to do with the most petulant, malicious Generation ever any Age or Climate produc'd. As to the present Charge of affecting Arbitrary Power, I cannot but remark in the first place, the different Method these two Kings are suppos'd to propound, in order to bring about the same, King Iames by Fraud, King Charles by Force. As to the former, whatever King-Craft he pretended to, every discerning Eye hath all along discovered him to be the most open easie Prince this Nation ever had; studied nothing but his People's Peace, and therein his own Quiet, the Enjoyment of himself. Such a bold, I may say, desperate Undertaking, must have a Prince that is active, daring, and resolute; of a subtile Head, and hollow
Heart; understanding all the Arts of Dissimulation and Wheadle, so as to fool the People out of their Mony, and there∣with maintain an Army to support his Usurpation; with many such like bad Qualities; as opposite to King Iames's Temper and Genius, as one Pole to the other: For to speak freely, he laboured under the contrary Extream, wanted Courage to exert his just Rights, stoop'd Majesty too low, would expostulate and reason where he ought to have command∣ed; which blind Side, the Faction, in his several Parliaments, once finding out, grew wresty thereupon, would neither lead nor drive but their own Pace and Way. What I remark in the second Place, is the Inducement our Author assigns of King Charles's attempting the same by Violence; the nearer View of a Despotick Power in his Iourny to France and Spain. What will not a Republican's Rebel Spite catch hold of? His Iourny was not in, but thorough France, which he consum∣mated in ten or twelve Days, and ri∣ding Post, had great Opportunities of be∣ing taken with Glittering Shews, and Imaginary Pleasures, &c. And his Busi∣ness in Spain was of another Nature, and took up so much Time, as he had little Leisure to make Observations, and less
Reason to be enamour'd with any thing there observ'd; to be sure, upon Enqui∣ry, he could not but find, that the seve∣ral Courts, or Councils there, have as great a Restraint upon the Crown, as our Par∣liaments have here; though they are a so∣ber wise Nation, and seldom or never found to extend their Privileges beyond Right and Reason. I shall not reflect up∣on the Prudence and Policy of that De∣sign; only observe it was hard for a young Amorous Prince to attend the te∣dious Delays of old Statesmen, where∣with having been so long kept in Sus∣pence, this Adventure was thought the only Expedient for a final Issue: Despe∣rate enough, which notwithstanding he manag'd so dexterously, as to weather all Difficulties, and come off with Honour and Safety, contrary to the Expectation of the whole World. I cannot forbear to mention the Account Rushworth gives of his Deportment there:Rush. Coll. p. 103. The Prince, for his part, had gain'd an universal Love, and was reported by all, to be a truly noble, dis∣creet, well deserving Prince. His grave Comportment suited with the very Genius of that Nation, and he carryed it, from the first to the last, with the greatest Affability, Gravity, Constancy, and, at his Farewel, with unparallell'd Bounty. Yet this excel∣lent
Prince we murder'd, and forc'd his Sons to travel for Security of their Lives; and if, during that Royal Exile, they de∣pended chiefly upon Papists for their Sub∣sistence, and observ'd how a Neighbour Prince, weathering the like Storm from his three Estates, as their Father met with (for all Rebellions do not prosper as in England) took the Government solely in∣to his own Hand; I say, if upon these Obligations and Observations, they re∣turn'd home less affected to the Protestant Religion, and our Old Establishments of civil Government, than could be wish'd; Who can we blame but our selves? Upon the Prince's Return home, and making a Report to his Father, what slip∣pery Statesmen the Spaniards were, espe∣cially as to his Sister's Concerns; King Iames, at the earnest Request of the Par∣liament, brake off that Match, who engag∣ing him in a War for Recovery of the Pa∣latinate, promis'd all the Assistance could be desired; which was soon after, by his Father's Death, devolv'd upon King Charles, and a Parliament thereupon sum∣mon'd de novo, whom he bespake with all Affection and Tenderness ima∣ginable; acquainting them how The Eyes of all Europe were upon that his first Attempt, and what a Blemish it would be to
sustain a Foyl. Hereupon a Supply was voted, which serv'd the present turn, and that was all: For in the next Session, which was at Oxon, that unquiet Spirit, which had been so troublesome most part of his Father's Reign, began to let him see what little Hope there was of better Terms from them: Immediately those old Cavils of Grievances, evil Counsellers, and what not, were brought upon the Carpet; and of these, the first insisted upon, was the Increase of Recu∣sants, the Growth of Popery, which was presented in a Petition, shewing the prin∣cipal Causes of their Increase, and pro∣perest Remedies to suppress them; where∣unto his Majesty gave an Answer, so full and satisfactory, that all undesigning Members were abundantly satisfied there∣with, and resolv'd to acquiesce therein, and fell immediately upon a Supply, which the adverse Party, unable to op∣pose, seemingly comply'd likewise, but with a Back Blow; would undertake the Fleet might be much better manag'd, both as to Conduct and Charge; and there∣upon fell most rudely upon the Duke, not sparing his Majesty in some By-reflecti∣ons; who perceiving their Heats to rise every Day higher than other, and that no Supply was to be had, unless he yield∣ed
to their unreasonable Cavils, which no body could foresee how far they would extend, or where end, He sent a Commission to some of the House of Lords, and dissolv'd them. That he was not without great Regret forc'd upon this, 'tis easie to imagine, considering the Posture of his Affairs, and that Want of timely Supply detain'd his Fleet from going out, till it should have been return'd into Harbor: And indeed the Delays he met with, where there was least Reason to expect them, had they considered the Honor and Interest of the Kingdom, not to say of the King, tho they pretended much to both, was the chief, if not sole Cause of several Miscar∣riages; which, according to the Genius of that Age, were otherwise very well design'd. However, giving some strict Orders about Recusants, and whatever else there was any Shadow of an Excepti∣on against, as likewise hoping on the other side, those fiery Spirits might be somewhat cool'd, and brought to a sober Consideration of their own, and the Na∣tion's Reputation; Another Parliament was call'd within the same Year, which prov'd no Changlings, beginning where they left off; with Miscarriages, Misgo∣vernment, Misimployment; in short, they
would have all amiss, whereas there was nothing so but themselves. Neither could his Majesty's Letter to the Speaker, have any Influence upon them,Rush. Col. pag. 215. tho' most passionately representing his pressing Occasi∣ons, and how unfit it was to depend any lon∣ger upon Uncertainties, whereby the whole Weight of the Affairs of Christendom was like to break in upon us on the suddain, to the Dishonor and Shame of the Nation; as∣suring them moreover, that having satisfied his reasonable Demands, he would continue them together at this Time as long as the Season will permit, and call them shortly again, to apply fit and seasonable Remedies to such just Grievances as they shall present unto him, in a dutiful and mannerly way, without throwing an ill Odor upon our present Go∣vernment, or upon the Government of our late blessed Father; and if there be yet who desire to find fault, we shall think him the wisest Reprehender of Errors past, who with∣out reflecting backward, can give us Counsel how to settle the present Estate of things, and provide for the future Safety and Honour of the Kingdom. This was very much to the purpose, but withal too home and true to meet with that Reception it ought to have had. Neither had the Lords better Success in a Message they sent, desiring them to take into Consideration,
the Safety of the Kingdom; receiving this grough Answer, That they desire to have a good Understanding with their Lordships, and will be ever careful of the Safety and De∣fence of the Kingdom, and maintain their own Privileges as is fitting. And having sent this, they immediately fell upon the Duke of Buckingham; in order whereun∣to, we find one Turner, a Doctor of Phi∣sick, and Member of the House, made the Factions Tool, or rather Log to break the Ice, by starting six Quaeres against the Duke, grounded only upon common Fame; and this produc'd another Quaere, indeed a very requisite one; Whether an Accusa∣tion upon common Fame, be a Parliamenta∣ry Way? And thereupon it was resolv'd, That common Fame is a good way of proceed∣ing for this House: from whence alone that great Body of Articles was usher'd up to the Lords, with as much Pomp and Rhetorick as (give them their Due) that House ever was, or will be Masters of: Yet no more than requisite to supply the Place of Argument; for whoever consi∣ders impartially the Duke's Answer, will find it so clear and apposite to every Par∣ticular alledg'd; so consistent with the Reason of Things, and Series of Affairs there mention'd, as'tis more than proba∣ble their Impeachment was design'd only
as a Ducquoy to get him into the Tower; and then, instead of proving their Articles, would have proceeded by Bill of Attain∣der, and voted it accumulative Treason, as we know it was afterwards most barba∣rously done in the Earl of Strafford's Case. In the mean while commend me to any Man, or Body of Men, who can have the Confidence to declaim against Arbi∣trary Power, and yet proceed upon com∣mon Fame (which was ever thought hard, and therefore discontinued both in Civil and Canon Law, where for some time it took place) especially in an Age, where Calumny and Slander were so scandalously rise, as no honest Man could escape the devouring Words of their false Tongues. Methinks such a Proceedure as this, has some Affinity with that old Land Story of the Cook serving his Dog, who said he would not hang him, only give him an ill Name; and thereupon threw him into the Street, and cry'd, a Mad Dog; which made all the Rabble of two, as well as four legg'd Curs, fall upon, and worry him to Death. Yet how far this way of Prosecution might have been brought into Practice, had these Gentlemen con∣tinued Rex, no one can tell, to be sure, in the next Parliament, when Neal, Bi∣shop of Winton, and Laud of London were
inveigh'd against by Sir Iohn Eliot and others, an honest Gentleman stood up and said, Now we have nam'd these Persons, let us think of some Causes why we did it; whereunto Sir Edward Coke reply'd,Arch Bi∣shop Laud's Di∣ary, p. 43. Have we not nam'd my Lord of Bucking∣ham, without shewing Cause, and may we not be as bold with them? Common Fame would do the Business thoroughly. But to return to the Duke, they thought it enough to shew their Teeth; for surely, if they could have bit, they would not have postpon'd the making good their Articles against him, when he press'd them so earnestly thereto, which not∣withstanding they did, as well as the King's Supply, and fell to hammering a new Remonstrance, which his Majesty having notice of, anticipated by their Dissolution. We shall have Occasion hereafter to observe what pass'd between this and the next Parliament, which was March 17th 1627. when his Majesty, at their first as∣sembling, plainly told them, That if his present calling them together did not answer the Quality of his Occasions, they did not their Duties, and he must rest content in the Conscience of doing his, and take other Courses for which God had impower'd him, to save that which the Folly of particular
Men might hazzard to lose: Hereupon they fell into long and tedious Debates, whether a Supply or Grievances should first take place: At length the former had the Preference out of Complement, though last consummated; for that Vote was no sooner pass'd, but the People's Li∣berty must immediately be consider'd, which produc'd the so much celebrated Petition of Right, wherein the King hu∣mour'd them to every Punctilio (though nothing but a Spirit of Opposition could have excepted against his first Answer) and pass'd it with a Droit fait come il est desire; and this with Bells and Bonfires, one would think, should have silenc'd all former Disgusts, and they gon on with a ready Supply, and mutual Confidence on either Side; whereas the next News we hear, is a Remonstrance of all the com∣mon-Fame Stories Malice or Mischief could suggest; and as herein the Duke of Buks led the Van, so the whole contain'd only such old Cavils as were easily weathered, being very trivial or very false. But when the King found there was a second Remonstrance on the Anvil, as to Tunnage and Poundage, that he had superseded all Right thereto, by granting their Petition of Right; this struck him in so sensible a Part, as he resolv'd to break thorough
that Royal Patience which had been so long provok'd, and put an End to that Session, sometime sooner than he intended, with this Declaration, That since he was truly inform'd a second Remonstrance was preparing to take away Tunnage and Poundage, one of the chief Supports of his Crown; al∣ledging, he had given away his Right there∣to, by his Answer to their Petition; which, as it was very prejudicial to him, so it disco∣ver'd that the House of Commons began al∣ready to make false Constructions of what he had granted already in that Petition; which, lest it should be worse interpreted in the Country, he made this Declaration concern∣ing the true Intent thereof. That the Profes∣sion of both Houses, in the Time of hammer∣ing that Petition, was no way to trench up∣on his Prerogative; saying, they had neither Intention nor Power to hurt it; wherefore it must needs be conceiv'd that he granted no New, but confirm'd the Ancient Liberties of his Subjects; concluding with this Com∣mand, that they should all take notice of what he had there said, to be the true Intent and Meaning of what he had granted in their Pe∣tition; but more particularly the Iudges; for to you only, saith he, under me belongs the Interpretation of Laws; for none of the Houses of Parliament, either Ioint or Sepa∣rate, (what new Doctrine soever may be rais∣ed)
have any Power either to make or de∣clare a Law without my Consent. Thus did his Majesty freely Remonstrate unto them, with Ten Thousand times more Sense and Truth than all their Harangues and Popular Allegations. For at this distance of time, when we may more Calmly judge of such Hot Debates, it cannot but be thought more Gentile and Reasonable for the House to have confirm'd by Bill, the Tunnage and Poundage in return for the Petition of Right, than from a cross-grain'd Pretence to further the Breach, making it the chief Subject of Debate next Session, and cause of a Fatal, a Final Separation. During the Recess, the Duke of Bucks was taken off by a wretched Hand, in a most Babarous manner; which 'twas thought would have abated the Edge of their furious Prosecution: As likewise Two or Three of the best parted Men a∣mongst those Fiery Tempers began to Cool, sensible, as in Charity we are oblig'd to think, what Confusions the Heats they had maintained must produce in the End, and in due time came over to his Maje∣sty's Service; but as the former had little effect, so the other was thought to exas∣perate their great Spirits, that some few should run away with the Game, which they had jointly assisted in Hunting down;
whereas 'tis probable they design'd a pro∣portionable Division amongst them all, as it afterwards happen'd, though then they fell out most cursedly about their se∣veral Shares. We are now come to the last Session of this last Parliament, who fell immediate∣ly to their wonted Work, Grievances, whereof Tunnage and Poundage was the Capital; in the Prosecution of which they were resolv'd to Trounce all such Per∣sons as had been imploy'd to Manage or Collect the same; whereupon the King sent for them to the Banquetting House, and declar'd that as he never look'd upon those Duties as Appertaining to his Heredi∣tary Prerogative, so he expected they should pass the Bill, as had been always Customary in the time of his Ancestors, which his Ne∣cessities had oblig'd him to Collect as They al∣ways did before the Bill was pass'd; and this very Parliament had profess'd they wanted only Time, not Will to grant them; yet neither this nor a Message afterward could pre∣vail with them to take the Matter into Consideration; nay, saith Mr. Rushworth, the House was troubled to have the Bill im∣pos'd upon them, which ought naturally to arise from themselves; a mighty Punctilio that: But in short they would have the King own all the Right to be in them;
and then refus'd the Grant. Whereas it had been all along rather Matter of Form than any thing else; and for four Successi∣ons immediately Precedent, pass'd with∣out the least Dispute. But when Men are resolv'd to Quarrel, they will take occasi∣on at the wagging of every Straw. To be sure whoever stood by the King in de∣fence of his Prerogative and just Right, must expect the Extremity of their Rage and Fury; to which purpose they began with Weston the New Lord Treasurer, who was ten times worse than Bucking∣ham, Neal Bishop of Winton, Laud of Lon∣don, and so doubtless would have gone the whole Court thorough, but that the King perceiving they would neither Act with Temper, nor attend to Reason, stopt the Violence of their Curreer by a Disso∣lution. How they behav'd themselves there∣upon our Author Ludlow mentions, Lock∣ing up the Door of the House of Commons, and compelling the Speaker to keep the Chair, till such Protestations were Voted as they thought fit; and by this he would have it observ'd how highly the Pulse of the Na∣tion beat for Liberty, he might have more properly said Rebellion; for that they were venturing at Pell-Mell, and had not the King prevented it, would have Act∣ed
40. in 28. But let it be call'd what they please; doubtless never any Assembly of grave and great Men as these ought to be suppos'd, (to be sure ought to have been) carried themselves in such a Rio∣tous, Disobliging, and Disobedient manner, with such high Provocations and Indig∣nities to that Sovereign Power by which they sat, and whose undoubted Right it was not only to Dissolve, but punish them too; so that notwithstanding our Author seems much displeas'd, whoever reads the manner of proceeding against them, both in Star-Chamber, and King's-Bench, as Recorded by Rushworth (though scan∣dalously partial on that side) must ac∣knowledge it a Regular Course; and that never any Men had fairer Play, or came off more easily, considering the Nature of their Crimes, and Obstinacy of their De∣portment: But with him that Text of de∣spising Dominions, and speaking Evil of Dignities is not Canonical; they could not have been good Patriots in his Sense, had they not aspers'd his Majesty's Person and Government, fomented Iealousies amongst his People, with false and scandalous Re∣proaches upon all his faithful Subjects and Servants. Neither was this Proceedure of the Kings, however severely censur'd with∣out a Precedent, even in the happy times
of Queen Elizabeth, who though she in∣dulg'd Liberty of Speech to her Members; yet if any dar'd to open, or so much as quetch against her Prerogative, or fall up∣on any Debates which did not properly come within their Sphere, she never spar'd to express the height of her Resentment; whereof take this single Instance, One Morris, a Member of Parliament, and Chancellor of the Dutchy, offer'd a Bill ready drawn, for Retrenching the Ec∣clesiastical Courts into much narrower Bounds, with several such like Altera∣tions wherewith his busy Head was pregnant: Of this the Queen having pre∣sent Notice, sends for Coke, then Speaker of the House of Commons, (afterwards Lord Chief Iustice, and a violent Beauti∣feu in these three Parliaments of King Charles) by whom she order'd this Mes∣sage to the House, viz. That it was whol∣ly in her Power to Call, to Determine, to Assent or Dissent to any thing done in Parliament; that the calling of this was only that the Majesty of God might be the more Religiously observ'd, by compelling with some sharpe Laws, such as neglect that Service, and that the Safety of her Majesty's Person, and the Realm might be provided for; that it was not meant they should meddle
with Matters of State, or Causes Ecclesi∣astical; that she wondered any should attempt a thing so contrary to her Com∣mandment, and that she was highly of∣fended at it. And finally that it was her pleasure, no Bill touching any Matters of State, or for Reformation of Matters Ec∣clesiastical should be there Exhibited. On the delivery of which, Morris is said to have been seiz'd on, in the House, by a Sergeant at Arms; however seiz'd upon he was, and committed Prisoner; kept for some Years in Tutbury Castle, dis∣charg'd from his Office in the Dutchy, and disabled from any Practice in his Prosessi∣on as a Common Lawyer: What would Ludlow have done, had he been a Mem∣ber in those happy Times? Here at home, either Tutbury or Tyburn would have been his Fate; and if got abroad, 'tis a question whether Swisserland it self could have se∣cur'd him from the long Arm of that great Virago.
CHAP. IV. Not any just Ground for Complaint of Grievances. NEither had they better Authority for the several Grievances they made such a Noise about, hunting after them with all the Earnestness imaginable, re∣ceiving none so kindly as those who brought them Information of fresh Game, though generally it proved a Brake-bush instead of a Hare. That Disparity printed in Sir Henry Wotton's Remains, between the Earl of Essex in Queen Elizabeth's time, and the Duke of Buckingham, was sometime af∣ter discovered to be the first Essay of a Younger, but much abler Pen; the Person who writ it, making as great a Figure during all the Troubles of Charles the I. and II. as any whatsoever, and upon the Restauration was advanc'd according to his great Merits and Sufferings. This In∣genious little Piece, to make good the Dis∣parity undertaken, observes how great an Advantage the Earl had from the Tem∣per of the Age, and easy Good Natur'd dis∣position
all People were then in: 'Twas, saith he, an ingenious uninquisitive Time, when all the Passions and Affections of the People were lapp'd up in such an in∣nocent and humble Obedience, that there was never the least Contestations, nor Capitulations, with the Queen, nor (though she frequently consulted with her Subjects) any further Reasons urg'd of her Actions, than her own Will. When there were any Grievances, they but Reverendly convey'd them to her Notice, and left the Time, and Or∣der of the rest to her Princely Discreti∣on. Once they were more importunate, and formal in pursuing the Complaints of the Purveyors for Provision; which without doubt was a crying, and an hea∣vy Oppression: The Queen sent them Word, they all thought themselves wise enough to reform the Misdemeanors of their own Families, and whisht they had so good an Opinion of her, as to trust her with her Servants too. I do not find that the Secretary who delivered this Message received any Reproach or Check, or that they proceeded any fur∣ther in the Inquisition. On the other side, that of the Duke of Buckingham's Fa∣vour with King Iames and Charles the I. He tells us, was a busy, querulous, fro∣ward
Time; so much degenerated from the Purity of the former, that the Peo∣ple under pretences of Reformation, with some Petulant Discourses of Liber∣ty (which their great Impostors scat∣tered amongst them, like false Glasses to multiply their Fears) began Abditos Principis Sensus, & quid occultius parat exquirere, extended their enquiries e∣ven to the Chamber, and private Acti∣ons of the King himself; forgetting that Truth of the Poet, Nusquam libertas gratior extat, quam sub Rege pio. 'Twas strange to see how Men afflicted them∣selves to find out Calamities and Mis∣chiefs, whilst they borrowed the Name of some great Persons to scandalize the State they lived in. A general disorder throughout the whole Body of the Commonwealth; nay, the Vital Parts perishing, the Laws violated by the Judges, Religion prophan'd by the Pre∣lates, Heresies crept into the Church, and countenanced: All which they themselves must rectify, without being beholden to the King, or consulting the Clergy: And give me leave to add, pro∣ving there was any Truth in those Allega∣tions they made such a Noise about. Thus far that Great Man, who hints likewise at the most probable Causes which
might produce that Frenzy, this World of ours was then got into: As 1st. The heat of young Heads, who are ever more forward to reform others, than themselves. 2dly, The Disappointments some of longer standings met with in reference to their own Advance∣ment. But more especially in the 3d. place, The Revolution of Time, which had made them unconcern'd in the Loyal Fears that govern'd sixty Years since, and the Nation too happy in that Spirit, and Condition; Un∣less more sensible of it, and thankful for it: From which stupid Humour it was, that such as cry'd Fire most, with the same Breath blew the Coals, and would never give over till they had set all in a Flame. One of these Grievous Cries was Tun∣nage and Poundage, about which we have already mention'd his Majesty's just Re∣sentments, but withall his too great Con∣descention, in hopes to give them Satis∣faction; So far beneath our self, to use his own Words,Append. p. 7. As we are confident never a∣ny of our Predecessors did the like; nor was the like ever required or expected from them. Notwithstanding which they continued their Proceedings, and as the King goes on, We endured long with much patience, both these and sundry other strange and ex∣orbitant Incroachments and Usurpations, such as were never before attempted in that House.
Roger Coke is also very hot upon this Scent,Detect. p. 334. and gives a History thereof out of his Grandfather's Institutes, so far as to serve his turn; yet withall is forc'd to own, that they had been continued to all the Kings and Queens since Edward the 4th. so that passing an Act was only Matter of Form; for if Prescription, long continued Custom, be Common Law for the People, and make the best Tenures, why not for the Prince? Nay, 'tis farther apparent, that in most of those Reigns, there were several Alter∣ations, and Additions too, as Circumstances of Trade varied, or Reason of State re∣quired: Queen Elizabeth more especially took her Liberty therein at pleasure, with∣out Regret, or Complaint, from Merchant or Member; particularly the Venetians ha∣ving Tax'd a Charge upon our English Cloath; She, to be even with them, rais'd that upon Corinth's, which continued all her Life without dispute; and when a Pragmatical Fellow stood it out with King Iames, it was adjudg'd due by the Barons of the Exchequer. But the debate here was perfect Spite, and Contradicti∣on; otherwise no Man of Sense of Ho∣nour would have made a Breach between Prince and People, in refusing to confirm what his Predecessors had enjoy'd some hundred Years before.
Especially considering the Charge and Care the King was then at, above any of his Ancestors, in reference to Naval Pre∣parations, whereto the Customs were all along assign'd. I have seen an Account of the Navy Royal as it stood in Queen Elizabeth's Time, presented by Sir Wal∣ter Rawleigh, to Prince Henry; consisting of Twenty four Sail, the best of which did not reach one of our Fourth or Fifth Rates, as now built: 'Tis true, he tells him it might be advanc'd to what Num∣ber she pleas'd, by pressing Merchants Ships of equal or greater Force. And so it con∣tinued without any considerable Im∣provement all King Iames's Time, till the Earl of Nottingham, Lord Admiral, over∣grown with Age, importun'd the King for a Discharge, as he own'd both to Lords and Commons, wherein he was com∣ply'd with, and succeeded by the Duke of Buckingham, who apply'd himself there∣to with so much Diligence and Circum∣spection, as at the same time his neglect was so severely complain'd of in the House of Commons; we had an Hundred Sail in one Fleet gon against the Spaniard; with another Squadron join'd the Dutch to block up Dunkirk; and a third to guard the Channel; which was likewise conti∣nually improv'd, so far as the King's Purse
could reach, under the many Exigenties he then lay; and would the Parliament have perform'd their Parts might have then clear'd the Ocean of all Opposition whatsoever; which they were so far from, as to make an attempt of withdrawing the Customs, the only support he had to this great Defence and Undertaking: Yet notwithstanding their perverse Dispositi∣on, 'tis a Question whether we had not the Ballance upon our Neighbours more then, than now? and as able to maintain the Sovereignty of the Seas? Though it shall be acknowledg'd, our Strength at present may be five, perhaps ten times greater, with a proportionable Charge, and Oppo∣sition too, which is worst of all. In the mean while we may from hence perceive what a creditable Evidence Common-fame is; for as the Clamour then ran, which our several Sets of Pamphletteers, and Li∣bellers would have us still believe, one would have imagin'd we had not been able to fight a Fleet of Dutch Fisher-Bus∣ses, or that our Admiral knew or car'd whether there had been two such places as Chatham, or Portsmouth; such strong Prejudices can Men of ill design Fool the People into. Neither was the Conduct of other Affairs so much to be run down as their Pettishness did Suggest, when
amongst other things they would enquire how the Reputation and Interest of our Nation came to decline so much from what it was in Ages past;Coll. 208. which if they had considered the Wise Man's Caution, they would have omitted for their own Reputation sake:Eccl. 7. 10. Say not thou, what is the Cause, that the former Days were better than these? For thou dost not enquire wisely con∣cerning this. And I am confident every ordinary Reader will judge there was more Malice than Wisdom in the Matter before us, when told; their Charge was chiefly Level'd at those Storms which Dis∣sipated our Fleets, both upon the Spanish and Flemish Coasts: On the contrary could there be a more Sober or Christian An∣swer than what the King reply'd? That 'twas God's Pleasure to send stormy Weather, and his Will must be done: Though 'tis con∣fess'd they might have gon out at a more Seasonable time of the Year, had they furnish'd him with a seasonable Supply; but it became now their usual Practice, to charge him with their own Defects. Yet notwithstanding that, and the Mis∣carriage at the Isle of Rhe, where never∣theless a great deal of English Bravery was shewn, (so little were they dege∣nerated from their Ancestors) the French were so much Allarm'd at our entring in∣to
a War, and Assisting the Rochellers, as they proffer'd the Duke of Rohan, and the Protestant Party, any Terms to join with them against the English; and it was their ill Conduct, and Positiveness, (not to excuse something of Treachery amongst them,) which made the first Attempts for their Relief, miscarry, as shall be made appear in due Time, and Place; as likewise how glad the French were of a Peace, on Ho∣nourable Terms on our Side, tho they knew too well the Perverseness of our great Senate. But to look back upon for∣mer Times, even those so happy Days of Queen Elizabeth, they were not attended with constant Success; the great Sir Francis Drake did not always answer Ex∣pectation in his Returns out of the West-Indies, and as great a Sea Captain as he, was Frozen to Death in Search of the North-East-Passage, with several such like Instances which might be given as to those Affairs. So likewise for Land-Ser∣vice, Leicester's Conduct in the Low Coun∣tries, was neither to his Mistresses, nor their Satisfaction; and that popular Fa∣vourite Essex miscarried most Scandalous∣ly in his Second Expedition against Spain; and how fatal his Irish Management was, is known to all. At some of these indeed the Queen was concern'd; but had any of
her Parliaments meddled therewith, they would have soon discovered how much she had of Henry the VIII's Spirit. Nei∣ther ought it to seem strange, if after that continued Peace God and King Iames had so long bless'd us withall, we should be somewhat at a Loss, entring afresh into War; since that we have gain'd more Experience, and paid sufficiently for our Learning, both in Blood and Treasure, and which is worse still, cannot give over when we would. And whilst we are upon this Head of Grievances, there is a Commission to seve∣ral Lords of the Privy Counsel must by no means be past by: For though it was on∣ly in general Terms,Coll. 615. To enter into Con∣sultation of all the best and speediest Ways and Means ye can, for raising of Monys for the most important Occasion aforesaid, which without extreamest hazard to us, our Do∣minions and People, and to our Friends and Allies, can admit of no long delay, &c. Yet Rushworth, and from him Roger Coke, and from them both the Defence, &c. will have it to raise Monys by way of Excise, in which Sense likewise this present Par∣liament would have it go, and made a Bussle accordingly, sending Sir Edward Coke to Harangue the Lords upon the same Subject; whose first and chief Exception
was, that 'twas ordered after their Sum∣mons, (a sufficient Proof there could be no ill Design by it) although it might like∣wise be considered, that the Parliament was not so free to grant the King Supplies, as he to Summons them; and further yet, that there were several Projects pro∣pounded to the King, which he would never rashly close with, but refer to the Consideration of his Counsel, (no mean In∣stance of his Prudence and Goodness too, above what we deserv'd) to recommend such as their Wisdoms and best Iudgments, should find to be most convenient in a Case of this inevitable Necessity: For those be the express Words in the Commission. And hereto agrees what the Lord Keeper report∣ed to the House of Lords:Col. 628. That their Lord∣ships had reason to be satisfied, with what was truly and rightly told them by the Lords of the Council, that this Commission was no more but a Warrant of Advice, which his Majesty knew to be agreeable to the Time, and the manifold Occasions then in Hand; but now having a Supply from the Loves of his People, he esteems the Commission use∣less; and therefore, though he knows no Cause why any Iealousies should have risen thereby, yet at their Desires, he is content it be can∣celled, and hath commanded me, &c.
Yet I know this Reply will not pass, tho upon his Majesty's Royal Word; un∣less we can take off that potent Allegati∣on of 30000 l. remitted over to Sir Wil∣liam Balfour, and Dalbeir in Holland, to raise a Thousand German Horse, to en∣force the Payment of this Excise, and aw the Parliament soon to be Assembled, as most of the Libellers expresly declare. That such a Sum was remitted to raise Horse is certainly true, but to be imploy'd here at home to the Ends aformention'd, as certainly false; to the making good whereof I must observe, that the Low-Countries were at that time not only the School but Shop of War, which furnish'd all the rest of Europe (even the Spaniards themselves, for a good Market) with Arms, Ammunition, and whatever else was requisite to that Bloody Trade: Nei∣ther was any thing more usual in Queen Elizabeth's Time, than to take such Eng∣lish Forces as had been exercis'd, and flesh'd in their Service, when upon any great Expedition against Spain or else∣where, and supply them with new rais'd Men to maintain their Garrisons: Ac∣cording to this Method the Lord Wim∣bleton was supply'd about two Years be∣fore in his Expedition against Spain: And these 1000 Horse were doubtless design'd
upon some Enterprise in defence of Rochel, or otherwise to Annoy the French; which upon new Councils, and perhaps a Pro∣spect of Peace, (for about that time it be∣gan to be secretly Agitated) was laid aside. To be sure had his Majesty de∣sign'd any thing of force upon this Nati∣on, he made choice of very improper In∣struments, in those two Commanders, who notwithstanding their great Obligations to the King, when the War brake out in 41. took Imployments under the Parlia∣ment (because they had most Mony I presume) and did them cursed Service. The Defence saith Dalbeir was a Papist to reflect upon the King, doubtless; with∣out considering what he did afterwards for his Parliament of 40. He was a Ger∣man and had serv'd under Count Mansfield, so that 'twas more likely he was Lutheran or Calvinist: But of what concern is that Man's Religion, who Acts without a Principle of Gratitude, or Common Ho∣nesty? And therefore to attend the Fate of this unworthy Person a little farther, when he had wrought Iourny-Work for the Parliament as long as the War lasted, he was laid aside; which regretting, as a Souldier of Fortune ought to do, en∣gag'd upon the King's Account, with the Duke of Bucks, Lord Holland, &c. in
that Design at Kingston, which miscarry∣ing, they were persued to St. Neots in Huntingtonshire, where some escap'd, some were taken; but Dalbeir was cut in pieces by his Brethren, the Parliamentarians, be∣cause he had been of their Side. If Bal∣four did not come to the same End 'twas pity; for he was a true Covenanting Scot, betray'd the King in the great Trust of the Tower committed to him, and from thenceforward sided with the Parliament. I had not been so Prolix in my Account of these two Men; but to shew, that had there been any such Design as an Ex∣cise and these German Horse to enforce the same, 'tis impossible but the two chief Commanders must have been privy there∣to, and would have consequently divulg'd it to their Patrons the Parliament, indear∣ing themselves more thereby, than all their other Bloody Services. I must beg leave to make this one Observation far∣ther, That it had been altogether as im∣possible for one Thousand Horse to en∣force a General Excise, as double the Num∣ber of the foremention'd Irish to Massa∣cre the whole Nation. Yet they had a more impertinent Maggot in 41, that there were Forces kept in Grots and Caves un∣der Ground, that should in the Night break out into the City, and cut all their
Throats: And what was more prodigious, and though ridiculous, yet saith my Author, had not a few Believers in London, That there were Designs by Gun-Powder to blow up the Thames, and choak them with the Wa∣ter in their Beds. May it not be here a ne∣cessary Quere, Whether the Invention, or Credulity be more Astonishing? CHAP. V. No reason to complain of Favourites and evil Counsellors. Dr. eren. L. of King Charles I. p. 75.FAvourites and evil Counsellors were another of their Common-place Com∣plaints, with how little Reason, or Truth, is next to be made appear. The Lord Bacon in his Essay of Friendship, observes, as a strange thing, The high rate, great Kings and Monarchs have set thereon; and that not only the Weak and Passionate, but the Wisest and most Politick that ever Reign'd, whereof he gives several In∣stances. To be sure at this time most Courts in Christendom had particular Fa∣vourites, who notwithstanding the great Figure they made, were really Participes Curarum (as the foremention'd Lord ju∣diciously
terms them) Drudges of State, Screens of popular Odium and Discontent, as in most, if not in all Places, they were made to find. And hereunto amongst the rest King Iames seem'd very much dispos'd, as ap∣pear'd by one or two in Scotland. And in process of time his Inclination continu∣ed the same Bend here, whereof one Car a Scotchman, his Page, was the first In∣stance, who having a comely well built Out∣side, the King hop'd he might be as well furnish'd within, and accordingly took much pains in the Improvement of his Mind, directed him in his Studies, and all other things requisite to the Accom∣plishments of such a Person as he wish'd, and hop'd he might prove: All which is an extraordinary Instance of a good Ma∣ster and a good Nature too: And yet to make him appear a better Prince, when he found all he had done was in vain; that this new Creature of his was a Block∣head, Insolent, Ill-natur'd, wretchedly Penurious, and intollerably Covetous, he withdrew his Favour by degrees, as any Wise Man would have done, unwilling to expose himself for an ill-plac'd Affection: But when the Business of Overbury was discovered, he detested it with the ut∣most Indignation of a good Christian
a just Prince, and ordered a Prosecution according to the Baseness of the Fact, though after several Partisans had suffer∣ed, the importunity of Relations, and Country-Men, first got a Repreive, and at length a Pardon for him and his Eve the Temptress, though it was many Years be∣fore the last was obtained, and not ma∣ny Months before the King's Death, which 'tis pity he did at all, considering the solemn Protestations he had made, that all concern'd in that Matter should suf∣fer; but what will not Importunity do, especially coming from his own Country-Men? This Court-Meteor being thus sunk down, and disappearing, the English No∣bility about the King, began to reflect up∣on the ill Influences it had, and what worse its longer aboad in that Horison might have produc'd. Hereupon they thought it their concern to take more care for the future, and not suffer a second Fo∣reign Page of as little Wit, Good Nature, or Manners to be Topt upon, or rather over them; in order whereunto they re∣solv'd to manage Matters so as an English Man might be Topt upon the King; about which they had several Consults, and several young Gentlemen of the Pri∣vy Chamber, and other Places, in their Eye;
but amongst all the rest George Villyers both for Person and Parts seem'd most promising; him therefore having fix'd up∣on, such Court intrigues were carry'd on, as the King made choice of the Person they design'd. And this is the true Ori∣gin of that great Man's Rise, whatever impertinent Relations Roger Coke makes of his Mother decking him up, and setting of him in the King's Eye when Ignora∣mus was Acted at Cambridge, with ma∣ny other as groundless and false Conje∣ctures. To be sure he no sooner appear'd upon the Publick Stage of Business and Address, but the Expectation of all con∣cern'd in his Advancement, was not only answer'd, but exceeded; neither could they any where have made a better Choice; among the Nobility there were scarce any to be found, who would un∣dertake such a Fatigue of Business, or had Parts to go thorough with it; and though there were some in a lower Sphere of more Reading and greater Experience, yet few that equall'd him in Strength of Natural Parts, dayly improv'd by consulting the most Knowing and Judicious in all the several Affairs which came before him, whereby he brought things to a better Issue, than could be expected from the most cry'd up Wisdom, accompanied with
a self-sufficient peremptoriness. So that what∣ever Odiums he lay under, as no Man ever lay under greater, (and indeed who could bear up against Common-Fame, and a House of Commons?) yet more impartial Iudgments, which consider'd things as they really were, became surpris'd at so young a Man's falling to Business with so great Application, his judicious Choice of fit Per∣sons to every concern he engag'd them in, and as Honourable Rewards upon their well Performance. I have already men∣tion'd his manage and improvement of the Navy, as likewise how express his Replies were to their several Articles, with∣out any thing of a Rejoynder on the other side, tho' he provok'd them thereto; for 'tis absolutely false that the King dissolv'd the Parliament on that Account, as shall hereafter appear. Neither was there more of Truth in that other Charge, his inrich∣ing himself by the Crown, (which of all Imputations saith the Disparity was the most unskilful, and worst laid) some few of those Lands, Engross'd by Somerset before, were assign'd him by his first Master, and that was all: Yet Roger Coke opens most violently upon this Account, and with an odd kind of Arithmetick, will consider what he received by his many great Places, without taking notice it was all Expended
in the same Service:Hamond Lestrange. To be sure one of our Historians saith he died 60000 l. in Debt; and whoever Audited his Estate then, considering he married an Heir Ge∣neral of the House of Rutland, who was a very great Fortune, will find that Sir Edward Coke, and several of that Robe since, have left greater Revenues than this Duke did of his own Acquiring. The foremention'd Roger Coke tells another idle Story,Detect. p. 419. which I shall mention here, tho it reflects chiefly upon the Good King, which was that Spiteful Fellow's greatest Satisfaction, viz. How he de∣sign'd first a Sumptuous Funeral for this Duke, his Favourite, from which the Lord Treasurer Weston put him off, by saying a Monument would be more lasting, and less cost: And when the King afterwards press'd for the Monument; the Wary Trea∣surer diverted him from that, by repre∣senting how ill it would hear in the World, should the Duke's be Erected, before there was one for his Father. This Faithful Roger relates as a great Secret, which he had from a Learned Gentleman well ac∣quainted with the Transactions of those Times; whereas it was a Common-fame Story every where whispered by the Fa∣ction, and so secret, that Mr. Hamond Le Strange was impos'd upon, to put it
into his History, and is reply'd to be Sir William Saunderson, for that mistake, who must know better, being all that time the Duke's Domestick,Sand. Hist. p. 123. and assures us he was Sumptuously intomb'd at Westminster, which his Executors paid for, and it cost not the King a Penny, nor the stately Monument Erected over his Grave. This Passage, tho somewhat out of Course, I could not but here insert, as an exact Specimen of Fanatick Sincerity what Secrets they Detect and Truths relate. Well now we have done with Favo∣rites; for Buckingham being fatally cut off, the King made no one Person his Confi∣dent; but equally consulted the Ablest, and best Principled Men he could find thoroughout the Kingdom, who were e∣qually Maligned, and Persecuted to Death by a Virulent Party, because they studi∣ed the peace and welfare of the Nation; were for every thing to run in its proper Channel, the Laws duly Administred to the People, and the King's Occasions Ho∣nourably supply'd, without Suggesting Fears, and Hunting after Grievances, the Mormo's of disaffected and designing Spi∣rits. For sometime in King Iame's Reign there was a cursed Distinction started, of a Court and Country Party, which kept the House divided most implacably in
that and this following Reign of Charles the I. (for I shall descend no further) and several honest, well-meaning Gentle∣men, like so many Barnabas's, were led a∣way by the Dissimulation of such as pro∣moted it; whereas in all well-settled Times, the King was look'd upon as the Common Father of the Country, and had constantly a select Number of Under∣standing Men, knowing the World, and well practis'd in Business, to sit in Coun∣cil and assist him, in keeping things Right, or bringing them so, when wrong: But then, Enacting of Laws, Raising of Mony, and several other Ardua Regni, are to be consulted of, and consented to in Par∣liament, where the foremention'd Privy Council were generally Members in one House or other, and as well able to ac∣quaint them with the true State and In∣terest of the whole Nation, as any parti∣cular Member of that private Burrough he Represented, and were credited according∣ly, which produc'd an exact Concord and Harmony between every Part of the Con∣stitution. On the contrary, when the Members divide and jar one with another; when all the King advise with must be suspected for Enemies to the Publick, (tho no such thing can be prov'd) and he up∣braided for consulting, or imploying them,
and that by such as affect their Places, or design to abridge his just Power; what an Ocean of Mischiefs must this toss us in? What but a Shipwrack can be expected at last? As indeed it happen'd. 'Tis a pretty Remark and Simile of Sir W. T. who tells us he had observ'd,Of Trade in Ireland. 146. All set Quar∣rels with the Age, and pretences to Reform it by their own Models, to end commonly like the pains of a Man in a little Boat, who tuggs at a Rope that is fast to a Ship; it looks as if he resolv'd to draw the Ship to him, but the Truth, and his meaning is, to draw himself to the Ship, where he gets in when he can, and does like the rest of the Crew when he is there. But this would not do in King Charle's Time, there was not Room enough to hold all that pull'd to come in, at leastwise Provision to sup∣port them when there: For however Lud∣low upbraids the poor King with the Pro∣fuseness of his Court, the standing Reve∣nue of the Crown was about 400000 l. per Annum, too little by far to supply his great and urgent Occasions: Would they have given him Mony plentifully, some new Places might have been made, or other Ways and Means found, to gratify their Kindness; but as they knew the King's Honor and Integrity would not Stoop to such indirect Courses, so 'tis pro∣bable
'twas considered on the other side, this would put them upon a worse ex∣tream, instead of giving nothing, they must give more than all. Nevertheless some were taken in. Sir Thomas Went∣worth, Mr. Noy, and a while after Sir Dudly Diggs; who had their several Posts assign'd them, and behav'd themselves with great Honor and Resolution there; which so incenc'd the rest, as they be∣came more implacable than ever, plotted all Ways imaginable to seize upon the Vessel, which at length having obtain'd, they first threw the King and his whole Crew overboard, and then sunk it. All which the Good Man was advis'd of long before, for in the heat of their Prosecution against the Duke, there was a Letter put into his Hands ab Ignoto (whereof Mr. Rushworth gives only a sneaking Abridgment, like a partial Some∣what as he is; for the whole deserv'd to have been Transmitted as well as any one thing in all his Volumes; however 'tis at large in the Cabala) giving him an Account of their several Parties,Cab. 255. and dangerous Designs, that King Iames had given too much way to their popular Speeches and Parliamentary Harangues, which since the time of Henry the VI. were never suffer'd, as being the certain
Symptoms of subsequent Rebellions, Civil Wars, and Dethroning of our Kings. A∣mongst others, he tells him, the Law∣yers in general fomented these Heats, for that (as Sir Edward Coke could not but often express) our Kings have up∣holden the Power of their Prerogatives, and the Rights of the Clergy, whereby their comings in have been abated. And there∣fore the Lawyers are fit ever, in Parlia∣ments, to second any Complaints against both Church and King, and all his Ser∣vants, with their Cases, Antiquities, Re∣cords, Statutes, Presidents and Stories: But they cannot or will not call to Mind, that never any Noble Man in Fa∣vour with his Sovereign, was question'd in Parliament, except by the King's leave, in Case of Treason, or unless it were in the Nonage, and Tumultuous Times, of Richard II. Henry VI. or Edward the VI. which happen'd both to the Destructi∣on of King and Kingdom. And that not to exceed our own and Fathers memo∣ries, in King Henry VIII's Time, Wol∣sie's exorbitant Power and Pride, and Cromwell's Contempt of the Nobility, and Laws, were not yet permitted to be dis∣cus'd in Parliament though they were most odious and grievous to all the King∣dom. And that Leicester's undeserved
Favour and Faults; Hatton's Insuffici∣ency, and Rawleigh's Insolence, far ex∣ceeded what yet hath been (tho most falsly) objected against the Duke. Yet no Lawyer durst abet, nor any else be∣gin any Invectives against them in Par∣liament. This is clear Matter of Fact, an im∣partial Account both of the Distemper, and its true Original Cause; I wish he could as easily have prescribed the Cure; but it was now too late to remove what was so deeply rooted, and become habitual. King Iames might easily have prevented its rising to so high a Crisis; had he observ'd that one Maxim of the Precedent Reign, kept up his Prerogative and those other Arcana Imperij, which were his Peculiar, with as much Majesty and Resolution as Queen Elizabeth did, who found this Pragmatical Spirit at work in her Time; But so observ'd and kept it down, as had the same Course been continued no Danger could have ac∣crew'd thereby. To ascribe any thing of Divinity to Princes above other Mortals, will I am sure at this time of Day be censured for a gross piece of Pedantry; yet really there are several Inducements would go a great way to perswade, that this happy Queen
was so far inspir'd, as to see further into the Thoughts and Designs of Men, than any, or all about her; especially that these busy Reformers affected a Parity in the State, as well as Church; design'd not on∣ly the Mytre, but the Crown to be under their Check and Control, which made her on all Occasions exert so briskly in de∣fence of her Prerogative, and other just Rights.Detect. p. 38. Insomuch as Roger Coke owns there were three things she was impatient of having debated in Parliament. The Suc∣cession of the Crown after her Death; Her Marriage, and attempting any Al∣terations in the Church, from its Esta∣blishment in the first Year of her Reign. For the last of these I have had occasion already to mention how Morris burnt his Fingers, by meddling therewith; and the Iournal gives the like Account about the former, how one Wentworth and some others were sent to the Tower, for con∣cerning themselves with the Succession; but whereas Roger Coke saith they were soon discharg'd, is one of his own Mag∣gots, and a shameful, perhaps willful Blunder, since the Iournal would have inform'd him, that the House becoming humble Sutors to her Majesty, for the re∣lease of such Members as were under re∣straint, It was answered by the Privy-Counsellors
then Members of the House, That her Majesty had committed them for Causes best known to her self, and that to press her Highness with this Suit, would but hinder those whose Good it sought. That the House must not call the Queen to an Account, for what she did of her Royal Authority; that the Causes for which they were restrain'd might be high and Dangerous; that her Ma∣jesty lik'd not such Questions, neither did it become the House to deal in such Matters. Upon which, saith my Author, the House desisted from interposing any farther in their behalf, but left them wholly to the Queen, by whom Wentworth was conti∣nued Prisoner some Years after: 'Tis pro∣bable indeed the others, viz. Bromly, Welch, Stephens might be discharg'd soon∣er. Thus did this Wise Princess hold the Reins of Government with so streight a Hand, as whenever she found it biting the Bit, and attempting to take head, a suddain Check put a stop to the design'd Curreere: Whereas King Iames was no sooner mounted, but he left them strange∣ly Loose, and in effect gave them up his first Parliament, where Roger Coke tells us, the Commons, in their Apology to him, took notice of the Queen's Restraining their Debates as to several Matters, and pray'd it might be no precedent for the future, but
that their Debates in Parliament might be free; which the King, (however charg'd by the foremention'd Roger with Rehobo∣am's Stiffness) so far comply'd with or was negligent in, as that designing Facti∣on got ground upon him every Day, to his own, and all his Ministers great Unea∣siness, with his Son's and Kingdoms ruin. And this the foremention'd Letter too prophetically foretold, that prevailing in one thing, would but encourage them to at∣tempt another, till they had pull'd out all the Feathers of his Royalty, and from impeach∣ing his Ministers, call him to an account for any thing he undertakes, which doth not pro∣sperously succeed: For thus at last he him∣self was the Evil Counsellor, and charg'd with all those Villanies and Mischiefs, these Sons of Violence had brought upon the Nation.
CHAP. VI. Innovations in Religion never design'd. BUt our pretended Patriots could not thoroughly have express'd their care, unless they had made it the concern of God as well as the King, for which Reason Re∣ligion must be taken in, and every thing call'd an Innovation, which tended to sup∣port the Church or conduc'd in any re∣spect to Decency and Order in the Exter∣nals of Divine Worship: And this Clamor of Redressing Religious Grievances, al∣tho by degrees it threw all open, and brought in upon us an universal Deluge of Licentiousness, Prophaneness, Enthusiasm, Atheism, and what not, yet the Factions are so impudent as to continue the Charge, and with that false Mother, care not how the Church be torn, or cut in pieces, so they may have their spiteful Wills. Thus Ludlow will have it, that the Clergy's influ∣ence upon the King, was alwaies greater than could consist with the peace and happiness of England, p. 2d. whereas it was never hap∣pier than then, and nothing but a regu∣lar Establishment in the Church could con∣tinue it so, as the King knew very well,
which made him so earnest to Support it; and the other Party knew it too, which made them so earnest to pull it down. Ro∣ger Coke likewise inveighs as much against the Arminian Bishops and Clergy of this King's Reign as his Grandfather, when Attorny General, did against Sir Walter Rawleigh: Who, is said by Osborn, and the Tryal speaks as much, to have Bawl'd him out of his Life. And so in the same Manner the little Pamphletteers, like Coun∣try Curs bark for Company. Ye take too much upon you, was that General, and grand Charge, Corah and his Accomplices brought against Moses and Aaron, the Prince of the People, and Priest of God: And notwithstanding the Almighty's Ven∣geance so signally appear'd in that Quar∣rel, as to send them all quick into Hell, yet the Terror thereof hath not been able to affright such Children of Disobedience from Repeating their Provocations: The Gates of Hell are continually Opening upon the Church, and though never able to prevail against the whole, may have sometimes Permission to chastise a part, and do whatever else God in his Secret purposes hath resolv'd upon; to which Unsearchable Will alone it must be referr'd, That the Anoint∣ed of the Lord, the great Defender of our Faith, (who best understood, and best
practis'd the Christian Religion, of any Prince since the Prince of Peace) was taken in their Nets, and as the other Crucified, so this by such like wicked Hands most barbarously slain. And if the same So∣vereign Disposer in this his great Displea∣sure proceeds farther, to remove our Can∣dlestick, declare he hath no pleasure in us,Malach. 1. 10. neither will accept an offering at our Hands, we must notwithstanding acknowledge, he is Righteous in all his Ways, and Holy in all his Works: For unto very nigh these Circumstances, the many Sub and Super-Reformers have reduc'd, what under the Auspicious care of its Royal Defender was the Glory of the whole Earth. That there∣fore it may be known there was such a thing as the Church of England, and as I said, in a most flourishing Condition, till these  many Physitians, or Quacks rather would be shewing their Skill; I shall take leave to make a Retrospect, and represent upon what bottom she was first fix'd at the Reformation; what false Bre∣thren they were, who interrupted and disturb'd this Establishment, and likewise by what Arts and Degrees they engag'd, I may say bewitch'd the People, to assist them in such Confusions, as were at length brought upon her. Though the Reformation of our English Church was
founded, and carried on, upon those in∣fallible Truths the Primitive Times, and Antient Fathers had practis'd from Scrip∣ture, without any regard to Foreign Pro∣ceedings; or if any, rather Luther, and Me∣lancthon, than Calvin, and Beza, had the Preference; yet the two latter would be frequently putting their Sickle into our Harvest, and partly by Corresponding, but more especially by conversing with several Exiles, both Clergy and Lay retir∣ed into those Parts during Queen Mary's Persecution, gain'd too many Admirers, who returning home upon Queen Eliza∣beth's coming to the Crown, cry'd up the Geneva Model, as the very Pattern which the Lord had shown from that Mount, and according to which the whole Reforma∣tion must be carried on, or no Blessing from him would attend it. It would be here too tedious to relate what Arts they us'd, and what Interests they made in Country, City and Court: As they began to think of setting up their darling Disci∣pline, and that in so insolent a manner as to declare,Mr. Hook∣er's Pref. That if the Government would not assist therein, they must do it whether the Queen and State will or no; insinuating how many Thousands their Party consist∣ed of, and threatned if not comply'd with, such Courses, as should make all their Hearts to ake.
Queen Elizabeth had too great a Value for her own well weighed Estalishments, to have them Superseded by every Fa∣ctious Caprice, and thereupon resolv'd firmly against them. And nothing but that steady Resolution of hers, could pre∣serve both Church and State from being, even then, ruin'd. For these pretended Children of Light, had so much of this World; were so wise in their Generation, as besides their many Abettors amongst the Common People, were not unprovided of some in the House of Commons, which Mr. Cambden tells us the Queen took No∣tice of and much dislik'd their unquiet Hu∣mor,Camb. E∣li. An. 73. greedy of Novelty, and forward to root up things well Established; to prevent which for the future, she commanded the Severity of the Laws to be every where put in Execution: And sometime after procured two New Acts, one against the Papists, and another against the Puritans, on purpose to restrain the insolency of both Factions, and by which several of them were afterwards adjudg'd to Death. But such Turbulent Spirits are not so easily quell'd, the same Historian conti∣nues the Complaint in a following Par∣liament 85.Eliz An. 85 & 88. But nothing so much irritated her great Mind, as their Villanous De∣portment in 88. for thinking they had the
Queen at an Advantage upon the Rumor of a Foreign Invasion, beset her with great∣er Importunities than ever, and play'd their Affairs with so much Confidence, as if of Confederacy with the Spaniard; never (as Cambden goes on with the Complaint) did contumacious Impudency, and contumeli∣ous Malepertness advance it self more insolent∣ly, giving an account what Scandalous Books they writ, Belching forth such Ca∣lumnies and Reproaches therein, as the Au∣thors seem'd rather to be Scullions in a Kitch∣en, than followers of Piety: The present Course she thought fit to take with such unnatural Beautifeus, was only to secure some of the most busy, and chief amongst them in Wisbich Castle, where many of the leading Papists were likewise secur'd: But as soon as that Storm was over, she resolv'd upon a more effectual Course, to keep a constant Calm at home; for in Feb. 92. a Parliament was call'd, amongst other things, to Enact such Laws as might re∣strain those Insolencies, wherewith the Pati∣ence of the State had been so long exercis'd. Wherein the Lord Keeper Puckering's Speech to both Houses of Parliament, is very Remarkable, which amongst other things lets them know, that they were Especially commanded by her Majesty to take heed, that no ear be given, nor time afforded
to the wearysom Solicitations of those that com∣monly be called Puritans, wherewithall the last Parliaments have been exceedingly impor∣tun'd; which sort of Men, whilst in the Gid∣dyness of their Spirit, they labor, and strive to advance a new Eldership, they do nothing else but disturb the good repose of the Church, and Commonwealth: And as the Case stand∣eth, it may be doubted, whether they, or the Iesuit do offer more danger, or be more speedi∣ly to be redress'd; with much more to the same purpose, even Prophetical of the Mis∣chiefs they have since produc'd. Here∣upon followed that formidable Act, Tri∣cesimo Quinto Elizabethae, which was so closely hook'd into the Nostrils of this Spi∣ritual Leviathan, as though frequently en∣deavour'd, they were never able to get it out, till they had at one desperate Plunge, freed themselves from all Regal Power, as well as Ecclesiastical Discipline. To be sure the remaining ten Years of this great Queen's Reign, the swelling Humor of that haughty Faction, was so taken down, as they never made the least effort to∣wards those Innovations either in Church, or State, which had been so uneasy to the Government before, and so Fatal since. In this Excellent Posture, and Regular Subordination, did this Prudent Princess leave an exact and practicable Model of
the English Monarchy, that her Successor, as I observ'd before, did not tread in the same steps, take the same care, and shew the like Courage; Hinc Illae Lachrymae. For coming to the Crown with a General Ap∣plause on every Side, it was never consi∣dered that the brightest Sun-rise is soonest intercepted by a Cloud; that Hosanna's from the Vulgar, as well Great as Small, naturally run into the contrary extream, unless that Mercury of theirs be fix'd by such a well weigh'd Politick as knows how to temper them in both. It was likewise no small Prejudice to our English Church, that the King came accompanied with so great a Retinue of his own Coun∣try, whose Kirk-Leven put our Puritans into a fresh Ferment, made them Swell and Domineer, with their usual insolence upon the least Countenance of Connivance from such as are in Power, or have an In∣terest in the Government. Upon this ac∣count I cannot but take Notice of a Pas∣sage in Bishop Hacket's Life printed before his Sermons; He was born of Scotch Pa∣rents dwelling in London, during the Queen's Time. They were both true Prote∣stants, great Lovers of the Church of England, constantly repairing to the Divine Prayers and Service thereof, and would often bewail to their young Son, after the coming in of
their Country-men with King James, the seed of Fanaticism then laid in the Scandalous neglect of the Publick Liturgy, which all the Queen's time was exceedingly frequented, the People then resorting as Devoutly to Prayers, as they would afterwards to hear any famous Preacher about Town. And his Aged Pa∣rents often observ'd to him, that Religion to∣wards God, Iustice and Love amongst Neigh∣bours, gradually declin'd, with the disuse of our Publick Prayers. This Observation was made at first, which we have since seen Fatally verify'd and cursedly Im∣prov'd. It was likewise no small prejudice to the Interest of our English Church, that a Scotch Peer Top'd an Archbishop upon her, no ways qualify'd with parts or principles for so great a Trust: The Story stands thus; Upon Archbishop Bancroft's Death, such as wish'd well to the Church, Bi∣shops, and other great Men about Court, recommended Bishop Andrews, a Person every way unexceptionable, to the King, who approv'd so well of him, as they thought their Business fix'd, and neglect∣ed to press it further; when the Earl of Dunbar, a powerful Minister with the King, saith my Author, put in for his quondam Chaplain Abbot, and got the King's Hand for passing the Instrument before the
Matter was discover'd; and then too late to prevent: God grant Scotch Peers may never more recommend English Pre∣lates! Indeed the less any of them have to do with our Church, the better, although in this great Time of Tryal amongst them, (where all Religious Order is run into En∣thusiasm and Madness) there are several have signalis'd themselves with a Zeal truly Primitive, not only to the spoyling their Goods, but the loss of all their For∣tunes, and of some of their Lives. For our New Metropolitan, when in Place, he fell very much short of what his own Ad∣mirers expected; to be sure his Remiss Government, and unexcusable Partiality towards the Puritans, neglecting all those worthy Methods his two Predecessors, Whitgift and Bancroft had prosecuted, in∣troduc'd those many Desolations, Fracti∣ons and Schisms, which the Church hath not yet, and 'tis a Question whether will be ever able to weather; for whilst seve∣ral worthy Prelates in his Time, and his Successor who next came in Place, endea∣vour'd to continue or revive such Arti∣cles, Injunctions, and Canons, as had been fram'd in Q. Elizabeth's Time, and to reduce the Church to the same Order and Regimen in which Abbot found it: These forsooth must be all exclaim'd against for
Innovations, and a Moulding of her to a nearer compliance with the See of Rome, as Ludlow suggests, which I shall farther take notice of in the next Paragraph, and for the present only mention what Archbishop Laud told a Friend of mine, when in the Tower, That he endeavoured the Repair of an Old House, but it had been so much neg∣lected, and run to ruin, as to fall about his Ears in the Attempt. However, for the former part of King Iames's Reign, things went smoothly on, in an easy careless course, without any considerable rub or disturbance, the first Grumblings of Discontent arose from the Spanish Match, which the King had set his Heart upon, and People as much against; the truth of it is, our Crown had generally Married there, or in France, but as there had been no Occasion for such an Alliance since the Reformation, so the different Perswasions now on foot, as to Religion, made it very difficult to accomodate that Matter: The English Papists were extreamly Zealous therein, beyond the bounds of Common Discretion, which made the rest of the Nation suspect there could come no good from what they were so forward to promote; and herein the Pu∣ritan would be sure to Lead the Van, who clamour'd and made a noise as if the Pope
had been as nigh our Gates, as Hannibal was sometime those of Rome, and ran down all as that way dispos'd, who would not be as Mad, and violent as themselves, believe Impossibilities, or fly in the face of Royal Authority. And about this time it was they began that popular charge of Innovations, which had the same Mali∣cious effect upon all Orthodox, Eminent Divines, as that of Grievances upon Mi∣nisters of State, the proof whereof must likewise depend upon Common-fame, or which is worse, a Common Appellation of their own fixing, as to some particular School, or rather Philosophical points, most innocent and harmless in themselves, yet so manag'd by a well-contriv'd spight, as the People became possest that an Ar∣minian was as dangerous as a Papist, and as nigh an Affinity between them, as there prov'd afterwards to be between Puritan and Rebel. Upon this account, one Mr. Mountague was first had Coram Nobis in K. Iames's last Parliament, as Learned a Man, and Solid a Divine, as our, or perhaps any other Church had, but having severely Gagg'd the Predestinarian Brotherhood, and conduc'd very much to the bringing K. Iames off from those Rigours, they could find no better way to be reveng'd than
by setting their Party in the House of Commons about his Ears,Detect. 237. which Roger Coke after so long a time, revives with a fresh prosecution, not considering how much both the Temper and Opinions of Men are since alter'd, that the heats about those points have been very much cool'd, or diverted, so that he might have as well inveigh'd, that Ruffs and Farthingals were not still worn, for they and Calvenism went out of Fashion together; none at this time of Day, but a few of the more Hare-brain'd Dissenters can dream of being Engin'd up to Heaven, by a Chain of Pre∣destination, whereof the Elect are so well Secur'd, as the grossest Crimes cannot de∣prive them. However, their proceedings then were with something of deference to the Church, remitting the whole matter to the Arch∣bishop, whom they knew more than enough prejudic'd for the Puritan and their Reprobation Doctrine; and perhaps were assur'd aforehand, that he resolv'd upon an Admonition, which was accor∣dingly done: But then the King was his Ordinary, to whom with the Convocation an Appeal lay, and there the Derniere Resort rested, and thither he Address'd himself in a fresh piece, called Appello Cae∣sarem, which made fresh work in K.
Charles's first Parliament, the second Session whereof, being remov'd to Oxon, by rea∣son of the Sickness in London, the Com∣mons sat in the Divinity Schools, and their Speaker in or nigh the Professor's Chair, whereby, whether they thought them∣selver inspir'd, or were rather possest, as my Author would have it, I shall not concern my self; to be sure from that time forward we never find them without a Committee for Religion, and no such Com∣mittee, but would undertake to deter∣mine the deepest Controversies, and Reform whatever they were pleas'd to call Abuses, till by degrees they fell upon the Divines, Sequestring, and Imprisoning them by whole Centuries; and so having expos'd and trampled under-foot the Doctrine, Discipline, and Governours of the Church, they introduc'd the most Extravagant Licentiousness that ever was known in any part of the World call'd Christian. These indeed were Innovations to pur∣pose, But who introduc'd them? And what would Queen Elizabeth have said thereto? Coll. 209. Mr. Rushworth gives us at large the Articles, Professor Pym Exhibited against Richard Mountague, Clerk, which upon some search he could not find Answered; as indeed, What wise Man would reply
to the Ipse Dixit of so many hundreds? Or what Influence could a Reply have, when the Conclusion was resolv'd upon, without any Consideration of the Pre∣misses? However, the Letter he men∣tions before, which upon this Occasion Three Bishops writ to the Duke, gives a true State of the whole matter, and Iu∣diciously distinguish between such Opinions as are expresly the resolv'd Doctrines of the Church, and such as are fit only for the Schools, and left at liberty for Learned Men to abound in their own Sense, so they keep themselves peaceable; and distract not the Church: This Letter Mr. Rushworth might have given at large, as well as the Articles, but for a bad reason, best known to him∣self, omitted it; nevertheless we have it in the Cabala;Page 105. to be sure the few foremen∣tion'd words carry great Soundness, and Judgment in them, and must be acknow∣ledg'd the only expedient could be fix'd upon, either to Silence the Controversy, or let them Brawl it out in its proper place. 'Tis a pleasant conceit of Mr. Osborn, who tells his Son,Advice to a Son, pag. 104. The Clergy have work enough cut out till Doomesday to resolve which is least sutable to the Divine Essence, to have bound the hands of Men, or left them at li∣berty; yet hereby a constraint must needs be put upon us, or our Maker: Now this Gordian
Knot, which all our Clergy never could, nor ever will be able to Untie, our many Alexanders in the House, resolve to Cut asunder by one Simple Vote; yet this Weapon of theirs, however very Keen, had but a thin Edge, and was turn'd be∣fore it got thorough, so that it remains still indissoluble, whether we drive, or whe∣ther we are driven, as I find the Question stated by one of our Comoedians, so well, that few of the Schools come up to it: An unseen hand may determine our freest Actions, and the deepest laid designs move Retrogade, when we think the quite con∣trary: But that the Almighty Sovereign, the Author and Disposer of All things, should Damn Men, before he makes them, Create many Millions of Beings, with design to Reprobate them into Eternal Mi∣sery, and found one main part of his Glory therein, is too gross a conception for any considering man to entertain, who ac∣cording to the perfection of the Divine Attributes, must apprehend God to be infinite in Goodness and Mercy, as well as Iustice and Power. On the contrary, such harsh and severe Notions of the Sacred Majesty of Heaven, as if he delighted in nothing more, than to Tyrannize over, and Trample upon the Slaves of his Cre∣ation, cannot but debase men's Spirits to
the like proceedings, make them in the Apostle's phrase, without Natural Affection, void of any thing that is Generous, Great, or Good, and consequently Mete unto others, what they falsly suppose, to be the Almighty's Measures unto all Mankind. To be sure it was at this time the manner of their proceedings with all true Sons of our Church, whom they never let alone till Reprobated as to this life, God be praised their Malice could not reach any thing which concern'd the next. But setting aside these rigid Determinations, which The Examination of Tilenus before the Tryers, pleasantly, yet withall solidly exposes, under the borrowed names of Dr. Dubi∣tan's, Frybabe, Irresistible, &c. the other Branches of that Controversy about Fate, Freewill, &c. in all the ordnary concerns of humane life, began long since amongst the Philosophers, the Stoicks on the one hand, the Epicureans, and Libertines on the other, wherein likewise most of the rest were concern'd, tho' with more Tem∣per, Deliberation, and Judgment. It was likewise an old Humorist amongst them, who first started that Notion of All things being Necessitated from the concurrence of precedent Causes, much improv'd by as great an Humorist amongst us, and to much worse purpose, since the former
understood nothing of the Reveal'd Know∣ledge this other design'd thereby to Sub∣vert. Christian Religion, in the mean while was kept free from these Debates, for several Centuries, till the Manachees turn'd Stoicks, and the Pelagians, Liber∣tines, wherein St. Austin became ingag'd, and had them taken up by his Followers, tho' they spred no farther than the Me∣lancholly Cells of Monks and Schoolmen, for the next Thousand years, and were rather a Diversion for the few Brisk Wits of those ignorant dull Times, than look'd upon as any ways relating to the Articles of Christian Doctrine. That Imposition was first brought upon the Church by the Council of Trent, and however their many Innovations of that kind were declaim'd against by most Protestants, yet the Synod of Dort was no less Dogmatical in Im∣posing their Five Articles, which their humble Imitators our Lay Assembly now, and our Mix'd Assembly of Clergy Lay af∣terwards, would have enforc'd with as much Earnestness, as the Being of a God, or necessity of a Redeemer. Give me leave farther to observe, that in the calm, and more deliberate Times of Q. Elizabeth, when Archbishop Whitgift had Assembled a few Bishops and other Divines, and fram'd those commonly call'd the Nine Articles
at Lambeth, (of too nigh Affinity with the foremention'd points) in order to Si∣lence some Disputes at Cambridge, which had gone out too far thereupon, Her Majesty was so concern'd at it, as had it not been for the Reverend Esteem she had of that Excellent Prelate, they would have been all Attainted of a Premunire; Notwithstanding she commanded him speedily to recall, and suppress those Ar∣ticles, which was perform'd with so much Care and Diligence, that a Copy of them was not to be found a long time after; and this the Three Bishops in their fore∣mention'd Letter urg'd as a precedent, and with great reason, but then was then, and now was now, when the Humour ran as much for pulling down, as before to support, and advance, whatever tended to God's Glory, or the Publick Good. I must here likewise beg my Reader's pardon if he thinks me too prolix, and hope upon second thoughts it may be ac∣knowledg'd requisite to represent what little No-things they would catch at, what Sound Doctrines they would pervert, and misrepresent, to Defame and bring an Odium upon such persons, as otherwise might pull off their Vizard, and Detect the Mischiefs they had in design, for all
the Law and all the Reason was on the King's side, which they could not other∣wise stifle, than by such groundless Ca∣vils against every Faithful and Loyal Sub∣ject, who had Sense and Courage to stand up for him, and the Laws, in Opposition to their dangerous Innovations and Sedi∣tious practices. But all the Fat would be in the Fire, should I pass by Sibthorpe and Manwaring, whose Indiscretions all good men pitied, none justify'd: Although Archbishop Ab∣bot's pettishness stretch'd the former Sense, further than was consistent with the Charity of a Metropolitan, or Candour of a Privy Counsellor. For the other, no∣thing could be greater than what the King declared thereupon, He that will preach other than he can prove, let him suffer; I give them no thanks to give me my due. And really, 'tis to my Admira∣tion, considering how good a Man the King was, and how Kind a Father to the Church, with the Violent Heats on the other side, there were only these Two ran into the contrary Extream; had Time-serving been as much in fashion then, as I have known it since, there had been several hundreds to each of them. It was likewise thought then, and since, that the Commons having done the King
no Right as to their own Members, Clem. Coke, and Dr. Turner, they should have been less severe against Dr. Manwaring, at leastwise upon his Humble Submission and Acknowledgment, have mov'd the Lords to remit the rest of his Sentence, which defect the King supply'd sometime after, and let them know by that Tacit Intima∣tion, how Mercy rejoyceth against Iudgment,Jam. 2. 13. and what they may expect that do the contrary: But what the Defence saith, that soon after the Parliament was dis∣solv'd, he was punished with a Fat Bi∣shoprick, is far from Truth, unless he can bring seven years into that narrow com∣pass, which on other accounts passes for the Life of a Man. To be sure, upon his Advance to that Dignity, he approv'd himself every way worthy of it. Three things more especially I find he was much resolv'd upon. First, The Redemption of Captives; Secondly, The Conversion of Recusants; Thirdly, The Undeceiving of Seduced Sectaries. Which shows him to be of a Publick, as well as Loyal Spirit. And one would think might attone for two or three Expressions, which as they were out of his Profession, so ought to have been more cautiously consider'd; but I have found this their constant course all along, every little slip upon the King's
account, shall be Aggravated to the Ex∣treamest Degree, whilst the most violent Libels, against him, his Ministers, and Go∣vernment, must have so many Grains of Allowance, as the Authors may be brought off with Reputation and Rewards; As it happen'd afterward in the Case of Pryn, Burton, Bastwick, Leighton, Lilburne, and who not? That dar'd to fly in the face of Majesty, and Abuse all that Adher'd to Church and Crown, although to my certain information, Pryn did in the Se∣quel acknowledge, that when he lost his Ears, they might in Law and Iustice have taken away his life. In the mean while what a Vexation must it be to a Good, and Wise King, that when he had call'd a Parliament to Assist him, according to the National Constitution, in a War un∣dertaken by their inducement, they di∣verted themselves in debating such School Points as belong'd properly to our Uni∣versities Exercise: as afterwards they fell upon some Innocent Ceremonies, which had been all along practis'd in the Catholick Church, and enjoyn'd by ours; ever since the Reformation; Dangerous Innovations these: Was ever so great a Cry made about so little Wooll!
CHAP. VII. No Design of Introducing Popery. THE Growth of Popery, and Coun∣tenance shown to Papists, was another pestilent Allegation, and did never the less Mischief, tho' false and ground∣less; for First it is not true, that the little Favour now shown them, was solely upon account of the Matches in Treaty with Spain and France; nor Secondly, had it been Unusual with Q. Elizabeth to dis∣charge Priests after some short time of Confinement: For those violent Bigots were as numerous, and busy in her Reign, Compass'd Sea and Land to gain Proselytes, and prevail'd upon too many weak, and unstable Minds to become so: However, 'twas a known Maxim of hers, That no Man's Conscience should be forc'd or puni∣shed, unless it did overflow into Overt, and express Acts, and become matter of Faction, in which Causes the Sovereign Prince ought to punish the Practice, though coloured with the pretence of Conscience and Religion. A larger account whereof may be seen in that Eminent Letter of Secretary Wal∣singham,Cabala, 392. to Monsieur Critoy, and what
distinction there was ever made between such as were Papists in Conscience, and those in Faction and Singularity, who set their Wits continually a-work to disturb the Publick Peace and undermine the Go∣vernment. Besides there was at this time, and had been several years before, most violent Oppositions and Quarrels, between the Re∣gulars and Seculars here in England, more especially the Iesuits, whom the fore∣mention'd Secretary, calls Seditious Priests of a New Erection, whereas many of the former had taken the Oath of Allegiance, and some written to Iustify it, desiring only to live according to the Rites of the Roman Church, without any regard to the Court, that so magnify'd Idol of the Popes Universal Supremacy, and All-disposing Usurpation: Now by fomenting these Differences, and shewing some kindness to the more Moderate Party, Archbishop Bancroft more especially, (however brand∣ed by the Faction for a Papist) and some other Ministers of State, got so clear an insight into all their Iesuitical Intriegues, as to out-do them at their own Weapon, and render their many designs Abortive; And his Successor Abbot herein was forc'd to take the same Measures, ('tis pity he did not so in every thing else) for when
in King Charles's second Parliament, some busy Overdoes gave Information to the House, and upon search discovered,Rush. Coll. pag. 243. that there were several Priests in the Prison call'd the Clink, who liv'd with great Ease and Liberty, had the Free Exercise of their Religion, with Altars, Pictures, and other Trinkets, the fore-mention'd Archbishop writ to the Attorney General on their behalf, and told him, Upon more curious enquiry that Information would be found to come Originally from the Iesuits, for they do nothing but put Tricks upon those poor Men, who do live more miserable lives than if they were in the Inquisition. By taking the Oath of Allegiance, and writing in defence of it, they have so displeas'd the Pope, that if by any cunning they could catch them, they are sure to be burnt or strangled for it; and once there was a Plot to have taken Preston as he passed the Thames, and to have Ship'd him into a bigger Vessel, and so have transported him to Flanders, there to have made a Martyr of him. In respect of these things, K. James always gave his pro∣tection to Preston and Warrington, as may be easily shew'd; Canon is an old man, well affected to the Cause, but medleth not with any Factions or Seditions, &c. So vast a difference there is between taking things at a general View, upon the first rebound
of vulgar report, and enquiring more nar∣rowly into the secret Transactions, the Reasons of State, upon which the Well∣fare of all Governments, and consequently of every private Individual depends. And since we are upon Reason of State, that will come in here upon a more un∣happy consideration as to this Affair, the Protestant Interest, especially in France, was at a much lower Ebb than formerly; they had engag'd (we are not here to re∣solve how justly) in those several pretences the Princes of the Blood set up; and so up∣held a mutual Interest, whereas now the former being worn out, or reconcil'd, it was an Impar Congressus on the Hugonot's side to maintain by the Sword those Con∣cessions it had formerly procur'd them; or otherwise prevent those many Arti∣fices, both the Court of France and Rome were daily improving to their Ruin, insomuch, as the then K. Lewis XIII. was known publickly to declare, That as his two Predecessors Henry III. Fear'd them, Henry IV. Lov'd them; so he did neither. And though the Spanist Match made the Cry, yet upon this consideration more es∣pecially it was, that in K. Iames's time, upon mature deliberation in Council, the Execution of some Penal Statutes which had already pass'd in Sentence upon se∣veral
Popish Recusants was suspended, for that the Protestants in France, Ger∣many, and elsewhere, lay under very bad Circumstances, and had no other Inter∣cessor for their Liberty, &c. but the King of England, who was importun'd on the other side to show the like favour to those of the Romish Persuasion in his Dominions: Nay, some English Iesuits at Paris, printed a Book representing how hardly their party were us'd here, instigating that King to the utmost Severity by way of Retaliation; so that had they, and the Parliament been comply'd with, what a havock would have been made all Europe over, of Papists here, and Protestants every where alse? There is a Letter in the Cabala from Lord Keeper Williams,Cabal. 269. to the Viscount Anan, a Scotch Peer I presume, upon this Subject, which fully clears the King, and justifies the proceedure by true Reason of State. The Malice of the Faction, gave out in∣deed, that the Favour look'd forward, and amounted even to a Tolleration, which the Keeper styles a dull, but withall, a Devilish Misconstruction: Yet the same prejudices were not only continu'd, but improv'd against K. Charles, by reason he Married a Daughter of France, who was not wanting, saith Ludlow, on her part to press him, upon all occasions, to
pursue the design of enlarging his Power, not omitting to solicite him also, to mould the Church of England to a nearer compliance with the See of Rome, Pag. 2. For the for∣mer, as he had no such design before, so 'tis as little probable, she should press him now, or that he should any wise give the least Ear to Insinuations of that kind. And a nearer Compliance with the Church of Rome is Nonsense; for as they will not set the least Step, give up one title in order to an accommodation, so will they admit none into their Communion without swallowing the whole Digest of their Trent Determinations, which the Iudicious Author of that History expressly declares,History of the Coun∣cil of Trent, Pag. 2. and most passionately complains of, That what was desir'd and procur'd by Godly Men, to reunite the Church, which began to be di∣vided, hath so establish'd the Schism, and made the Parties so obstinate, that the Discords are become irreconcilable. And whatever his Ignorance or Malice suggests, the Church of England is a greater Eye-sore to those of Rome than any other in the World; and not to mention, our King (of whom there was no hopes, whatever some tat∣led, and so they knew) would have ven∣tur'd, aye, and promoted the Ruin of the Queen, however of their Communion, and all her Posterity, rather than it should
have been continued in that Uniform Splendour, Decency, and Order, his pious Care had so thoroughly Establish'd. The Spaniards having the Prince in their hands, impos'd very severe Articles on behalf of the English Recusants, which amongst other things might be considered in breaking off that Match, when we came to Treat with France upon the same Sub∣ject, though Rushworth tells us, the Arti∣cles were not much short of those with Spain;Coll. 169. yet what he mentions (and he is constant∣ly found to mention the worst on the best side) are very much short of the former, requiring no more, than that such Recu∣sants as had been committed since the breach with Spain, should be set at liberty; and that there should not be so strict an Inqui∣sition after them for the future. All which, considering the Circumstances of Prote∣stancy in Foreign Parts, was neither an Unreasonable Demand on their side, nor an Unpolitick Concession on ours, and what the Violent Party both within doors and without, quarrell'd at, only for quarrelling sake. Had indeed the Popish Party no other Abettor but the Pope, his Bruta Ful∣mina might have been easily repell'd; but when the greatest Princes in Christen∣dom call themselves Catholicks, and will be zealously engag'd in the concerns of
his Emissaries, the mutual Correspondence between these Potentates, Popish and Pro∣testant, doth frequently introduce a peti∣musque damusque vicissim, mutual returns of Kindnesses, and equal Indulgence of Pardons; insomuch, as Cromwell no sooner entred into Foreign Alliances, but he was forc'd to comply therein; and the World to this day cannot tell what was tran∣sacted between Sir Kenelm Digby and himself upon that account. So likewise at present they are the only Party amongst us back'd with Foreign Friends, and it would cause very severe Sollicitations, perhaps Remonstrances too, should the Laws in that Case provided, be put in vi∣gorous Execution: Although the Scale on the Protestants side is now so drawn up, as there is very little prospect, things stand∣ing as they do, they should ever be brought even; but on the contrary, no little dan∣ger, that the Disjointed Interest among them abroad, and Unreasonable Separations amongst us at home, may once more Enslave us to that Universal Supremacy, which otherwise all their Arts and Emis∣saries could never have brought about. Nevertheless, this little favour, then ob∣tain'd, was not free from Abuse, by the too forward Zeal of their Priests, and some other Priest-ridden Persons, who
having got an Inch would take an Ell, drive on in a strange kind of Unthinking Bigottry, without the least regard to their Friends, Foes, or indeed themselves. A fault which Dissenters on every side could never forbear running into; as appear'd not long since, by that furious Cureer both of Papists and Fanaticks, when the Reins were thrown Loose upon their Necks, by a Dispensing Power. Neither doth it appear that they made any considerable progress in gaining Con∣verts more than before, some they always prevail'd upon, amongst which there might be a few well-meaning Persons, who had a real Regard for Piety and Re∣ligion, and seeing such Disputes about it, wish'd for some Infallible Guide to deter∣mine them in the Right; in which Melan∣choly Humour, they were easily Wheadled into a Belief, that an Old Man in a Chair at Rome, was plac'd there for that pur∣pose. Although the generality of their Proselytes were such loose vitious Livers, as brought little Reputation to whatever Profession they joyn'd in Communion with; and 'tis to be feared, went over on pur∣pose for too easy an Absolution: As I know a Lady, who having Sacrific'd her Repu∣tation, took the foremention'd Course, and ever after express'd a great deal of
Contempt for the Church of England, be∣cause there was no Admission of Venial Sins. Archbishop Laud, when at that Barba∣rous Trial of his by an Ordinance of Par∣liament, he was charg'd with an Endea∣vour to Advance and bring in Popery, made it appear, that the two or three Priests he had Corresponded withall, was for the good of the Church, as Bancroft, and others his Predecessors had done before; and then gave an account of what Per∣sons, by Name, he had brought over to, or retain'd in the Church of England; who, for Quality, and perhaps Number, might Vye with all, the contrary Party had prevail'd upon during that time he Sat at the Helm of Church Affairs. After∣wards, indeed, when the War broke out, several Persons who had been impos'd up∣on by their fair Pretences, discovering when too late, that their Faith was Faction, and Religion Rebellion, would have no more to do with such Protestants, and so ran over to the Roman Extream, which had a more plentiful Harvest during those Con∣fusions than ever before in this Nation. And really it hath cost me many a Melan∣choly Reflection, what, after all their Rail∣ing, that truly great Man Archbishop Laud too Prophetically Boded on the Scaffold; that however he was Charg'd, as the
Pharisaical Iews did our Saviour, with a Venient Romani, the many Rents and Di∣visions, Sects and Factions, they caus'd and promoted, was as likely to bring them upon us, as the Crucifying our Saviour did upon the others. The Defence likewise opens very loud upon the French Match, and Articles thereof, Pag. 3. yet at present charges no more than what I have al∣ready mention'd out of Rushworth; He directs indeed to them at large farther on in his Book, but none to be found; 'tis pro∣bable, upon exacter View, they fell short of the Mischief design'd, and were omitted upon that account. One thing I admire, since they delight so much in Falshoods, none of these Libellers have hit upon what is reported in several French Historians, that there was an Article, for all the Children, both Male and Female, to be at the Queen's Disposal, as well to the Religious as Civil part of their Edu∣cation, till they were Twelve or Thirteen years old: There is seldom any Bargain driven between private Persons, but more is demanded than they knew would be granted; and without doubt, the Agents, De Propaganda Fide, would take care, enough should be insisted upon; but that any such thing was comply'd with, or hearken'd to, as there is nothing extant to
make it appear, (which would have been highly acceptable, and most pestilently advantageous to the Faction's Calumnies) so matter of Fact speaks quite the con∣trary; For as soon as they came to be capable of Instruction, their Education was wholly at the King's Direction, and per∣form'd with extraordinary Care, Piety, and Judgment; And whatever Clamours or Conjectures may be made to the con∣trary, I have been inform'd by very ju∣dicious Observers, that the Queen was ve∣ry Passive therein, and carried her self with a great deal of Deference to what the King Ordered: If any of them Warp'd afterwards, it was upon our compelling them into Exile, and for that, as I said before, our selves must bear the Blame; to force Princes abroad can never turn to Account for this Nation. That other Libel too, King Charles no Saint, &c. makes a mighty Pudder about the Match, and gives us the precise Sums allowed to the several Ecclesiasticks of her Train, amounting so high in the Total, as I fancy it is nigh as much as the King could allow for the Expence of her whole Court, which indeed ought to be some∣what Splendid, in respect to both her Qualities, Daughter of France, and Queen of England; yet was it withall very Re∣gular,
and confin'd to such a Proportion, as the King's great Exigencies, and small Revenue would admit. He owns like∣wise, upon the insolent Deportment of her French Domesticks, the King dismist them, a sufficient Argument she had not that Ascendent over him these Foul∣mouth'd Blockheads prate of: But that they return'd again to their former Post is ab∣solutely false, her Retinue for the future were mostly English, and of that Commu∣nion too: Neither from that time for∣ward (for the French did some ill Offices of that kind) was there ever known a more agreeable Understanding between King and Queen, or indeed any other Man and Wife, than them two; all the Obligations of Conjugal Love, Respect and Duty, so inviolably observ'd on either side, as they were an Example to many, and a Reproach to others in the Court, and ought to have been so to the whole King∣dom thorough. The Exposing his inter∣cepted Letters shall be hereafter consider'd, as the Unworthiest Act the basest Men could be guilty of. One thing farther I shall propound to these Negative Make-bates, who so vio∣lently oppos'd his Matching either with Spain or France, Where would they have had him Match'd? 'Twas high time as to his Age, and more highly requisite,
in that he was the only Male of the Royal Line, that he should be dispos'd of some∣where; and to what purpose was it for People to cry a Protestant Princess had been better, when they could find none such, agreeable to his Quality, nor that mutual intercourse which such Alliances generally produce? For tho' 'tis true, Kingdoms never Marry, and we find a War broke out soon after, and partly here∣upon, yet it might be also the sooner Accommodated upon the same account: To be sure, if there be few private Families, of any Degree, but have some Consideration of this Nature, when they dispose of their Children, we must allow the same to Crown'd Heads, both in respect to one another, and their several Neigh∣bour Potentates, who are never without Caballing Interests, and other Intriegues of State. Neither could that liberty of the Romish Rites indulg'd her, and those of that persuasion in her Family, have been any ways prejudicial, had they who made such a Noise, so violently complain'd a∣gainst it, jointly concur'd in the Confine∣ment thereof to its proper Bounds, or Modestly Address'd his Majesty whenever exceeded; but the Froppishness of that Crooked Generation was for perverting every thing that Good Man did to the utmost extremity, as he complains in
the Declaration, when his third Parlia∣ment was Dissolv'd,Rush. Ap∣pen. Pag. 5. Seu bene, seu male facta premunt, with Mischievous Men once Ill-Affected, whatsoever seem'd Amiss, is ever Remembred, but good Endeavours never Regarded. So likewise for the Nobility and Gentry of that Persuasion, if they had any fa∣vour more than usual, it was not so much from the Queen's Sollicitation, (tho' that was commonly objected) as for that they frankly proffer'd to Advance Money to∣wards the King's Necessities, and there∣by exasperated the Parliament, as well in crossing their Designs, as upbraiding their Refractory Humour; although 'twas ra∣ther their Iealousy, than any real Effects the Loyal Gentlemen found of Kindness. 'Tis true, there was a Commission issued out, and Commissioners appointed, to Treat with them about Arrears of Forfeitures, and an Advance upon the same account for some years to come; but 'tis false what Rushworth saith,Coll. 414. That in pursuance of this Commission, the Recusants did make their Composition upon very easy Terms, as was afterwards complain'd of in Parliament; for this Project never took effect. Sir Iohn Savile, to whom the Management thereof was chiefly entrusted, thought it more Advantageous, and therefore Ad∣visable,
to Collect the Arrears of Thirds due to the King by Law, which they the more willingly paid, in Consideration of the Exigencies he then lay under, and being generally as well bred and Under∣standing Gentlemen, as most in the King∣dom, must not be blam'd, if they had some prospect of Advantage, as well as Duty. Yet whatever respect the King shew'd their Persons, we see it would not excuse their Purses, nor procure any Countenance to their Perswasions; for whenever the Management of any young Heirs in such Families, came under his hands, either as Wards or otherwise, there was effectual care taken of their Educa∣tion; amongst which, that every way most Eminent, the late Duke of Ormond was one. But Popery was the Main Spoak in that Wheel of Revolution these pretended Government Menders were so bent to bring about; and therefore, tho' they made many a Faint, yet would ne∣ver close effectually with the King in sup∣pression thereof: Thus when both Houses Petition'd the King against Recusants, pro∣pounding a provisional Law, that their Chil∣dren might be brought up in our Religion, his Majesty most readily comply'd there∣with,Coll. 517. and earnestly recommended the prepa∣ration of a fitting Law to that effect, which
notwithstanding, the Debate fell asleep, and was never after reassum'd. And af∣ter the first heat, as little Notice was taken of that Letter found amongst the Clerken∣well Iesuits, whereby nevertheless it ap∣pear'd, they equally studied the King's Ruine, with the Naetions Confusions, as Secretary Cook inform'd them from him; and withall,Coll. 505. how the French Ambassador told his Master at home, what he had wrought here last Parliament, namely, Divisions be∣tween King and People, and he was rewarded for it: A full discovery whose Tools they were, whose Game they play'd, which nevertheless they continued on, so that one would think there was a design to accept the Iesuits Challenge, and venture all upon a Trial of Skill, whether were the best Artists in Mischief, the Disciples of Loyaela, or Calvinists, who indeed set up both about the same time: Although I hope they have since wish'd the Prize had been fought upon any other Stage than our Island. The last thing I shall insist upon under this Topick, is his Majesty's Answer to the Pope's Letter, whilst Prince of Wales, and in Spain, pen'd with so much Judgment, Discretion, and true Sense of Religion, as nothing could be more properly Adapted to that Critical Conjuncture, and hazardous
Circumstances he was then under, so in∣offensively turning those Haughty Assum∣ptions of that pretended Sovereign High-Priest, as he Terms himself, to a Zea∣lous regard for the truly Catholick Church, and a sincere endeavour to Cement those Divisions and Schisms, tacitly suppos'd to arise from him; and because this most clearly appears to be the express Intent of the Letter, those Sons of Perversion, the two Pamphlet Libellers, are not content to alter Rushworth's Translation, to a Sense the Latin will by no means bear, but add whole Sentences, whereof there is not one Syllable in either: I shall give an instance or two of both kinds. The little Spite∣ful piece, which would have him neither Saint nor Martyr,Pag. 11. affirms, That he tells the Pope I shall never be so affected to any thing in the World, as to endeavour An Alliance with a Prince that hath the same apprehension of the true Religion with my self: And then, as if the Devil ought him a shame, immediately adds Mr. Rush∣worth hath it in these Words, Your Holi∣ness's Conjecture of our Desire to Contract a Marriage, and Alliance, with a Catholick Family and Princess, is agreeable both to your Wisdom and Charity; for we should never desire so vehemently to be joyn'd in a strict and indissoluble Bond with any Mortal
whatsoever, whose Religion we hated: which last Words, where the Falsification lies, runs thus in Latin, Cujus Odio Religionem prosequeremur; and if there be not a vast difference between Hating a Religion, and being of the same Apprehension with him who professes that Religion; nay, which is more, owning it for a true Religion be∣cause I do not hate it, let the World judge; Hatred is altogether inconsistent with Christian Principles, which whosoever will Live up to, must Hate nothing but Sin and the Author of it; (although I can scarce forbear it to this Author too) and since our Saviour enjoyns us to do good to them that hate us, to speak them Civilly when they do the same to us, and let them see we can really Act, what perhaps they but Hypocritically pretend, is so agreeable to all the Rules of Religion, Reason, and Good Manners, as they must lay claim to none of them who cavil thereat. With the like Ingenuity he proceeds on to the next Sentence, but forbears Rushworth's Translation, where the King declaring his great Moderation, continues the same Term, and assures him how far he should be, Ab omni Opere quod odium testari possit ullum adversus Religionem Catholicam Ro∣manam, which is rendred; I have been always very far from incouraging Novel∣ties,
or to be a Partisan of any Faction a∣gainst the Catholick, Apostolick Roman Re∣ligion. How comes Odium to include Novelties and Factions, at leastwise, that the King should declare he would not encourage them against the Roman Church? When his next Words gives a secret inti∣mation how they came Originally from thence, and therefore, setting all such Sinister Suspicions aside, he earnestly de∣sires, That as we all Confess one Individual Trinity, and one Christ Crucified, ('tis Mr. Rushworth's Translation) we may unani∣mously grow up in one Faith; and in Order to the Accomplishment of so good a Work, he Piously adds, Labores omnes, atque vi∣gilias, Regnorum etiam, atque vitae peri∣cula, parvi pendimus, which this base Fellow thus renders; We will expose Life and Estate in the Exaltation of the Roman Chair. The other Pamphlet, which I take to be Alter idem, at leastwise from the same Club of Calves Heads, gives the same perverse Translation, and forc'd Sense thoroughout the whole Letter, and to Crown the Villany,Pag. 21. adds a whole Sen∣tence at the end, which was never known before, nor could with any Coherence be brought in now; for after those Common∣place Compliments, which come in Course at the end of such Epistles, Omnia prospera,
& felicitatem aeternam comprecamur; This Fanatick Forger continues, After so many Labours and Fatigues, which your Holiness has undergone for the Propagation and Pre∣servation of the Holy True Church. We have had Volumes writ of Roman Forgeries, and very tart Reflections upon Iesuitical Equivocations, with too much Truth in∣deed, more than is consistent with Reli∣gion or Humanity it self; yet it must be acknowledg'd, these our Pseudo-Protestants have out-thrown them several Bars length, without the Wit of an Equivocation, or any thing else which the most Frontless impudence can alledge to Palliate or Ex∣cuse the matter. I presume these furious Zealots would have the Prince return'd in Answer to the Pope, That he was Anti-christ, Whore of Babylon, Man of Sin, &c. and for that reason he defy'd him and all his works: I will not resolve, whether this is proper or not in the Common Cant of that Brotherhood, but wish with all my Heart all that use or approve it were forc'd into Spain, and oblig'd to Preach the same Doctrine there, doubtless it might conduce much to the Peace of our Nation, and perhaps somewhat to bring∣ing down the price of Corn. And to show how Natural it is for the Malicious Diabolical Spirit of all this Party,
to blast our Kings, and their Memories, with too great a Respect to the Pope and his Interest. I shall give here an account of their great Oracle, Rushworth's un∣worthy dealing with King Iames, who in the close of his Collections relating to that Reign, sets down the Transcript of a Letter written from him to Pope Clement, with the Instructions given to Mr. Drum∣mond, who was sent with the same to Rome: Now Mr. Rushworth cannot but be so well acquainted with the History and Transactions of those times,Coll. 16 especially Archbishop Spotswood, as to know, that Cardinal Bellarmine having publish'd an Answer to King Iames's Apology, charg'd him therein with Inconstancy, Objecting a Letter he had sent to Clement VIII. whilst in Scotland, in which he had recommended to his Holiness, the Bishop of Vaison for obtaining the Dignity of a Cardinal, that so he might be the more able to advance his Affairs in the Court of Rome. This Trea∣tise coming to the King's Hand, he pre∣sently conceiv'd he had been abus'd by his Secretary, which he remembred had mov'd on a time for such a Letter; in short, (for I shall refer the Reader to the passage at large in Archbishop Spotswood) the Secretary was seiz'd, of Scotland, Pag. 507. examin'd, and confess'd, 'twas all a Forgery of his own
and Cousin Drummond's designing, that his Majesty was most falsly and wrongfully charg'd therewith, and that he could never move him to consent thereto: Whereupon the Secretary was Sentenced, not only to lose all his Offices and Estate, but his Life; which last, at the Queen's Intercession, was spared, though he Died soon after, as thought of Grief and Sorrow. Can any thing on this side Hell be more base and spiteful than such a procedure as this? Who can give Credit to whatever he Relates or Collects? Upon discovery of so vile a Studium Partium, which seems brought in on purpose to Contradict, or Detract from, what had been immediate∣ly before Recorded, in the Bishop of Lin∣coln's high and just Elogium of K. Iames; more especially those last Words to his Son in order to his future Marriage, whom he advis'd, To Marry like himself, and Marry where he would: But if he did Marry the Daughter of that King, he should Marry her Person, but not her Religion.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Lent Ships, Rochel, and the French War. THe Iealousies between the French King, and Hugonots, were so great on either side, that all their Accords seem'd rather as a Cessation to take Breath, till a convenient opportunity might serve for a fresh Breach, than any real design of a lasting Peace: King Iames frequently la∣bour'd herein, and did many good Offices for the Protestant Interest; and King Charles, whilst the Match was in Agita∣tion, by his Ministers there, patch'd up a Treaty between them, that thereby the French might be at more leisure to di∣vert the Spaniard, then our Enemy, both in Italy and the Mediterranean: In order whereunto they agreed with us for the Loan of Seven Ships, on Man of War and six Merchants, as they had with the Dutch for twenty, which joyning their Fleet there, might block up Genoa, and all other ways annoy them, as occasion should serve. But whilst this Design was carried on, and the Army march'd towards Italy; Sobiez, the most considerable Chief
of the Hugonots, next his Brother the Duke of Rohan, alledging, a certain For∣tress was not demolish'd, according to Agreement, got together some small Ships, Seiz'd upon the Isles Rhee and Oleron, with what Vessels they found there, and so set up for a Piratical War, having Ro∣chel and those Isles or their Retreat. This made the French Court alter their Measures, ordering their Land-Army back upon these New Revolters; and Memorancy the French Admiral, having got together what Ships they could of their own, after a great deal of Wheadle, and many Protestations, had ours con∣sign'd him, the Dutch making no demur; nay, as some say, had, by a New Treaty, agreed thereunto; with all which, he went directly against Sobiez, and disabled him for ever appearing at Sea again, re∣covering both Isles and Ships, but a few which got under Rochel: And in the same manner they prosecuted their At∣tacks at Land so vigorously, as though it cost them longer time, yet in the end they carried all, for which the Rochel∣lers, and other Hugonots, could justly blame none so much as themselves, not only in that they broke the Treaty as soon as made; but afterwards, when our King appear'd in their Defence, they refus'd
to comply with such Resolutions, as in the Judgment of Sobiez, and their other best Officers, were most proper thereunto. However, this Misemployment of our Ships was highly resented by his Majesty, and many severe Expostulations arose thereupon, that our Ships should be di∣verted from their intended expedition a∣gainst Spain, which was solely design'd and promis'd; whereto the French King reply'd, That he had no Enemies then but the Spaniard, and his intent no other, wit∣ness the like Contract with the Dutch Ships; but his Rebellious Subjects, the Rochellers, starting this necessity upon him, he was en∣forc'd to suppress the dangerous Consequence, with the advantage of those Ships, against Rebellion, which he conceives, and he hoped all Christian Princes conclude, such Subjects the greatest Enemies to all Sovereignty. With this, and the return of our Ships, fully satisfied for their Hire, these Heats for the present were allay'd, though with other Discontents, and Provocations, the next year, they broke out into an open War. Which Ludlow, with his Common∣wealth Charity, tells us, The King engag'd in, not upon the account of those of the Re∣formed Religion, as was pretended, but grounded upon personal Discontents, to gratify the Re∣venge and Lust of his Favourite, Pag. 3.
There is nothing more advantageous in any Relation, whether true or false, than in hanging things well together; Malum ex qualibet particulari, a Lye is quite spoil'd if taken triping in any one particular; and 'tis the most Judicious part of the best Historians, to have a clear Consistency in whatever account they give, with an easy Transition from one matter to another. Let us then, according to this Rule, examine the Judgment, Can∣dour, and Integrity of this great Dicta∣tor: He tells us in the precedent Para∣graph, of several Steps he would have the King set, in order to the Establishing an Arbitrary Power, (which we have already taken notice of) more especially the Committing of several Members, as he saith, For complaining of the Grievances of the Nation; as others, for their Riotous Deportment in the House, Locking up the Door, holding the Speaker in the Chair, till they had pass'd what Votes they thought fit, with many such like Heats, upon an intimation of their Dissolution: Now what we are here to take notice of, is his Transition from this Relation to the next; The King having thus assum'd this extraordinary Power, resolv'd to make a War with France; whereas the French War was begun before that Parliament
was call'd, and in a fair prospect of be∣ing ended, when those Gentlemen were so unhappily committed. He had like∣wise intimated, in the precedent Page, that the French Match was in order to their Assistance, as to an Arbitrary Power, which his next Breath Blasts with a War, and when there was so much done to∣wards the Relief of Rochel, and such Regret in the King, that he could not be Assisted to do more, with several other just Resentments for which the War was entred upon, that he should assign it to the Revenge and Lust of a Favourite; to say no more, is like the Man, his good Nature, and Loyal Principles, and agree∣able to the Party, for whose Satisfaction he writ it, who will Swallow any thing that tends to Defame the Monarchy, though it hangs together like a Rope of Sand. But to come to the War, the King had too just Grounds to engage therein, tho' too mean a Fund to go through therewith; and the one in all probabili∣ty had not been given, but that they saw how unlikely it was, he should ever be supply'd as to the other. The not suffe∣ring Count Mansfield's Army to land in France, and joyning with them according to promise, was the Ruin thereof, and highly prejudicial to the Protestant Inte∣rest
in Germany: And which was worse, gave occasion to the Male-Contents here at home, to complain of Mismanagement, and the No-Fruits of their Subsidies given to recover the Palatinate, when it all proceeded from the little Faith, and less Honour, of our Allies. And there was no more consistency in that mighty Huff, of the French King, and Court, upon the dismission of our Queen's Domesticks, since he had been guilty of the like pra∣ctice, upon the Spanish Retinue of his own Queen, not long before, and for ought appears, upon far less Provocation. The Politico's, I know, then, and since, have censur'd the Duke for some Personal grudges against Richlieu, and that he did not act the part of a true Statesman, in countenancing such of his Enemies here, as he had made France too hot for; where∣as, if they will allow him to look fur∣ther, he could not but discover, that as Richlieu was a Minister of the Deepest reach that Crown ever had, so was he likewise the greatest Enemy to ours; and his Station being at that time very tick∣lish, to assist in getting him down, had been one of the best Offices he could have perform'd for this Kingdom; since 'tis now no further doubted, but that he was the Grand Promoter, Underhand, of all
our Northern Commotions, and conse∣quently, of all our Confusions hitherto, and without end to come. Yet, amongst many other Provocati∣ons, that doubtless which chiefly influenc'd the Duke, was the Relief of Rochel, the effecting whereof might as much have reinstated him in Popular favour, as his breaking off the Spanish Match, and for as long a time, in all probability not much longer: To be sure, had his Measures been taken, there were all the Moral As∣surances imaginable of an accomplish∣ment; but coming before the Town with a Fleet, the French were not able to look on the Face, and such Additional Land-Forces, as joyn'd with their own, and the 4000 Foot, 200 Horse, the Duke of Rohan had engag'd to send, besides a constant supply from England, as occasion should require, they within might not only have been secur'd, but such a New life given to the Protestant Interest, as to have gone into the Heart, and thorough all France; and this their whole Court, and Council, were so sensible of, as to make very advantageous Overtures to the Duke of Rohan, and all his Party, pro∣vided they would joyn with them against the English. I say, when, with all this Provision and Supply, the Duke came
before Rochel, so great was their Infatu∣ation there, (quos vult perdere, &c.) that though they knew they could not depend upon what the French proffer'd, yet were they afraid to offend them by ad∣mitting the English. To gain the greater Credit with the Party, this whole Tran∣saction shall be related out of their Friend Mr. Rushworth,Coll. 426. who tell us, When the Duke with his Fleet appear'd before Rochel, they who once much long'd for his coming, now shut their Gates against him: Hereupon, the Duke of Sobiez went ashore with Sir William Beecher, from the Duke of Buckingham, (Sir Will. Beecher being also accompanied with a Letter of Credence from his Majesty of Great Britain) they were at last admit∣ted into the Town; and the Magistrates call'd an Assembly, and there Sir William Beecher declar'd unto them, That the Duke of Buckingham was come with a great Fleet and Army to their Assistance, which his Master had sent, out of fel∣low-feeling of their Sufferings; and to require from the King of France a per∣formance of the Articles of Peace, made by the King of England's Mediation, on behalf of the Protestants in France. And further declar'd unto them, that if they do now refuse to give their Assistance,
by joyning Forces with the English, he said he would, and did protest before God and Man, in the Name of the King his Master, That his said Master was fully acquit of his Engagement of Ho∣nour, and Conscience for their Relief. But notwithstanding this Declaration, and Sobiez his Earnest Sollicitation and Endeavour, the Magistrates and Weal∣thier sort of People in the Town, (being possest with the fear of the King of France his Army, then upon a March against them, and there being a Court-Party also prevalent in the Town) could be drawn to give no other Answer at that time, but this, That they did ren∣der all humble and hearty Thanks to his Majesty of Great Britain, for the care he had of them; and to the Duke, for his forwardness and readiness to do his best Service for their good: But said, They were bound by Oath of Union, to do nothing but by Common and Unanimous Consent of all the rest of the Protestant Party in France: And therefore pray'd the King of Great Bri∣tain to excuse them, in that they did suspend the Conjunction of Forces till they had sent to the rest of the Pro∣testant Towns, who were of the Union with them; And in the mean time,
their Prayers and Vows should be for the happy progress of such Actions, as the Fleet and Army should undertake. Thus far Mr. Rushworth, whose Au∣thority the strongest prejudice must sub∣mit to, for had it been possible to repre∣sent things to the disadvantage, where the King and Duke were concern'd, he would have exerted his utmost Talent that way. And whatever others may be assign'd, this false Step of the Rochel∣lers in not permitting the Duke to fix upon the Terra Firma of France, was the Chief, if not the Sole Cause, of their Ruin, and never after to be retriev'd; for the Duke Squandring away his time, and Men, upon the Isle of Rhee, and no Supplies coming as design'd, was forc'd home for want of Provisions; which op∣portunity the French failing not to take hold of, Invested Rochel both by Seae and Land, with so much Force and Art, as 'twas easie for them to Calculate the length of their Days. Hereupon, Sobiez with some other Deputies, were sent to implore his Majesty's Commiseration and Assistance, in the most Melting Lan∣guage they could express, which theirs is very capable of; and were as graci∣ously answered, That he would take them into his especial Care and utmost
Endeavours for their Relief, and set a∣bout it with all Sincerity and Application imaginable; altho' indeed it was some∣thing retarded by that unhappy suprize upon the Duke's life, neither were his Coffers or Credit able to make the Expe∣dition so quick as desired; (which occa∣sion'd that Remonstrance of the Sieur Vin∣cent, the Defence so rudely descants upon, though I fancy the Original had not so rough a Title; Nevertheless, a Gallant Fleet was at length set out under the Earl of Lindsey; who with much Bravery and Resolution, set upon their Booms and Barracadoes, and brake thorough many of them; but sometimes the Tyde failing, and at others, the Wind coming cross, the Defendants likewise repairing whatever Breaches were made, and rendring every fresh Assault more difficult than the for∣mer, the Rochellers beheld with their own Eyes, the Impossibility of any Re∣lief, and thereupon made that Unwilling Submission, their Fate, Folly, or both, had brought them unto. The French, tho' considerable Gainers by suppressing these unquiet Spirits at home, yet had so much work upon their hands from the House of Austria at Land, as they did not in the least care, to have England upon their Backs at Sea; and thereupon agreed ve∣ry
readily to a Peace, which set all things in Statu Quo, with this Advan∣tage on our side, that they became more Complaisant and Obliging in their outward carriage; did not think fit to look Big and Insult upon every private Disgust, tho' their underhand Practices were much to be Suspected, as hath been already Observ'd. This is a true and impartial Account, how far our King was engag'd in the preservation of those Unhappy People in Rochel; how sincerely he undertook it, and how they themselves, more especially rendred his most likely Attempts Abor∣tive. We are next to observe, with how much Villany and Falshood, all those his Good Deeds are Evil spoke of, and per∣verted by the whole Fraternity of Libel∣lers; Ludlow confounds the Story so a∣bominably, as to tell it without Head or Tail, or rather with that witty Fellow's pretended Monster, sets the Head and Tail Transversim; for so he makes Sir Iohn Pennington's, and the other Six Ships to be lent the French, after the Duke of Bucks had been at the Isle of Rhee, whereas it was two years before, and they had been re∣turn'd home above a year. I must beg the Reader's pardon to trouble him with the whole Hodge Podge of this Leud, Un∣couth Story.
The Rochellers, who once before, up∣on Encouragement from England, had endeavoured to defend their Just Rights against the Encroachments of the French King, till being deserted by the King of England, they were necessitated to accept terms from their King very dis∣advantageous to their Affairs, were again by frequent Importunities, and fair Promises, prevailed with, (tho' very un∣willingly) to assist the English with Provisions, and such other things as they wanted, in their Expedition against the Isle of Rhee; from whence our Forces being repuls'd, the French King sent his Army against the Protestants at Rochel, whose Provisions being before exhausted by the English, they apply'd to the King of England for Succours, accord∣ing to his promise: Who, as if he in∣tended to Assist them effectually, caus'd a certain number of Ships to be fitted out under the Conduct of Sir Iohn Pen∣nington; but private Differences being soon after compos'd, Sir Iohn receiv'd a Letter from the King, Sign'd Charles Rex, which was afterwards found by the Parliament amongst his Papers, re∣quiring him to dispose of those Ships as he should afterwards be directed by the French King; and if any should refuse
to Obey those Orders, he should Sink or Fire them; the King's Command was put in Execution accordingly, and by the help of those Ships, the French be∣came Masters of the Sea, and thereby enabled to raise a Work, compos'd of Earth, Stones, and Piles, with which they shut up the Mouth of the Harbour, and so prevented them from any Relief that way. Being straitned from all Sides they were forc'd to yield to the Pleasure of their King; and that strong Town of Rochel, wherein the Security of the Pro∣testants of France chiefly consisted, by this horrible Treachery, was delivered up to the Papists, &c. Pag. 3, 4, 5. To reduce this Chaos into any thing of Order, or Consistency, requires more than Mortal Power; Nay, the fabulous Poets would have thought it beyond that of their Deities, there being no Pre-existent Matter to work upon; most of what he saith is not, was never so in being, as to be done, or thought upon: I would gladly know when that once before was, that the English encourag'd the Rochellers to defend their Just Rights: First, No honest Man can tell what just Rights they had; It was a kind of Forty One business their Original Revolt, and prosper'd ac∣cordingly in the end. Though Secondly,
in Reason of State, Queen Elizabeth assi∣sted them considerably: Especially Hen∣ry IV. so long as he continued Protestant: And King Iames frequently interceeded, compos'd the Breaches themselves had made, but never encourag'd them in any; so that they could not be necessi∣tated to accept disadvantageous Terms upon the English deserting, who never engag'd, nor joyn'd with them: Altho' his jumbling all this together, in one Sentence, may some way or other, no Man can tell how, relate to the Duke's Expedition when at the Isle of Rhee, whi∣ther they compell'd him to Retreat; and I cannot find any considerable quantity of Provisions they supply'd him with; to be sure he was forc'd home for want thereof, not any repulse of the French, for had his Supplies come, as design'd, he had kept his Ground, and carried on the Enterprize in hand. From this in∣coherent Relation, he proceeds to that Abominable Forgery of our Seven Ships enabling the French to be Masters of the Sea, and Block up Rochel; What did the Twenty from the Dutch, those true Com∣mon-Wealth Protestants? Did not they, according to their number contribute Two Thirds more than we? The Truth of it is neither we, nor they, were ever be∣fore
Rochel, all that was done, the little while they had our Ships, was to clear the Seas of Sobiez's Piracies, at which time, most of the French Fleet was abroad in the Streights, part against the Spaniard, the rest with the Duke of Nevers against the Turks, the Algerines; whereas being now return'd into these Seas, though not strong enough to engage our Fleet, yet keeping within their Fastnesses and Shal∣lows, they so block'd up the Town, as we could not, but at our great Peril approach them; which nevertheless was attempted, and that bravely too, but without Suc∣cess: However, this rendred not the Care and Kindness of our King the less, whatever this base Fellow would hold the World in hand. And having been thus tedious in pro∣secuting the Malicious Vagaries of our Out-Law'd Regicide, I shall relate thereto,Detec. 344 for a Reply, to whatever the rest have Suggested; As that the King caus'd the Rochellers to Revolt in order to his Assi∣stance, and then Deserted them, as Roger Coke impudently affirms; whereas their Revolt was begun two years before he thought of War, and ended, tho' not to Satisfaction, before he would make a Peace. And the Defence,Pag. 45. &c. upon whose Sleeve, that other Libeller, if he be ano∣ther,
Pins his Faith, relates the Addresses on the Hugonot's side, and the Promises on the King's, whose Exigencies made his Delays seem tedious, though they saw he could not help it, which that base Fellow aggravates with the Spite and Ig∣norance of a Fanatick: And then not able to deny, that a Royal Fleet was set out, well worth so long a stay, would have the World believe it was on pur∣pose to carry over the Lord Mountague, who should betray them to the French; whereas to be sure there was no such Lord went, and in all probability no such Person, although there was one Mr. Wal∣ter Mountague, younger Son to the old Earl of Manchester, who about seven years after, left our Church, and became a busy Body in Romish Intrigues, and might be at this time peeping up in the Queen's Court; but that he was sent, at leastwise upon any such unworthy design, is as true, as the Earl of Lindsey never attempted to break their Diques, open the Passage, and put in Relief; All which, this vile Wretch affirms in one Breath, tho' every Historian even to their Authentick Rushworth,Coll. 635. posi∣tively affirm it. The continued course of impudent Untruths, wherewith these Weeders, nay Forgers of History, have so long wearied my Patience, makes me at
last resolve upon this, I hope innocent Revenge; whenever for the time to come, I meet any Person relating a most impro∣bable Malicious Falshood, from me he shall not have that common Opprobrium of a Lyer, but of a Fanatick Common-wealth Historian. CHAP. IX. Of the Palatinate, Bohemia, and that Queen. AND here before I leave the Defence, (by which term I all along mean that Libel which Undertakes to Justify the Parliament of Forty and all their Adhe∣rents) there is one Stretch must be taken Notice of, which as Physicians term it, is a Nostrum of his Own, never urg'd by any of his Brother Libellers; viz. That the Eight Ships, (for so he will have it, tho' really but Seven) lent the French, were Equipp'd with the Subsidies given for the Relief of his distressed Protestant Sister, the Electress Palatine, and the poor oppressed Protestants in the Palatinate, Pag. 3. 'Tis in a Parenthesis, and so might have been
left out, as likewise for another Reason, because not true, which nevertheless must not pass here, lest it should set aside the whole Pamphlet: But I would gladly know what Subsidies he relates to, those granted King Iames were more than ex∣pended upon raising the 10000 Men for Count Mansfield; and those of King Charles's first Parliament, were only Voted, not Rais'd, when the Ships Lent; which to clear the Matter, the French Equipp'd at their own Expence, and paid more∣over for the use of Hull and Rigging: 'Tis Odd in the mean while to observe what a Compass these Fellows will fetch, to gain one Point of Calumny, which too, after all they fail to Make. But because Roger Coke likewise Throws a great deal of Dirt upon the Memory of these two Kings, Iames and Charles the First, in Reference to that Unhappy En∣terprize; and thereby that Unhappy Family, I shall here take care to wipe it off, in making it appear, they both did what possibly could be done, to Retrieve so desperate an Affair. Mr. Coke, very desirous to make the Prince Elector a good Title to the Kingdom of Bohemia, rambles into Hungary, Poland, and whither not? And runs into more Mistakes than he pretends to Correct, and quarrels at his
Friend Rushworth, whom he never fails to follow but when in the Right: To be sure he stumbles at the very Threshold,Detec. 101 in saying, before Ferdinand Brother to Charles the Fifth, That Kingdom was Elective; whereas Uratislaus their first King was made so from Duke, by the Emperour Henry the Fourth, who always after had a right of Nomination; but his Power, in those troublesome Times throughout Germany, being very Precarious, and his Avocations elsewhere not Suffering him to attend the Transactions of so many seve∣ral Districts, the People, or States, often∣times assum'd that Power to themselves; where notwithstanding they generally had regard to the Royal Family, though not immediate Successor; some other more prevalent with the Mob, and their Leaders, carried his own Business, by promising to carry theirs better. Nay, to shew fur∣ther, that the greatest Sticklers for the People's Right, had regard to the Royal Line, when they chose this Unfortunate Frederick Elector Palatine, a Descent was fram'd for him from Sophia, Sister to La∣dislaus the Second. 'Tis likewise a gross Mistake, that the German Emperours were not Chosen till the Turks became great in Europe; Charles the Fourth was chosen 1346. at which time the Turks had not
set one foot there; and so in the same manner his Three immediate Successors; Wencislaus, Sigismund, and Albert, when he was not come nigh, nor any ways fear'd by the Western Empire, though very formidable to the Eastern; yet these Four are produc'd as Instances thereof: At which rate he runs on without any regard to Truth or History, and let them that will, follow him, I shall not; but only observe, at this very time, when the Elector was made the Peoples Property, there had been four Kings successively of the House of Austria, Ferdinand, Maxi∣milian, Rodolphus, and Matthias. Ferdi∣nand the Second, Adopted Son of Mat∣thias, doubting the Mob's Majority, got himself Nominated without them, ac∣cording to the Original Institution; and having both Prescription and Possession, two strong Titles, when those others put in their Claim, it was Baffled at the Swords Point, and the Kingdom hath been the quieter ever since. But not to think with our Enthusiasts, that Success is always an Argument of Right, I shall refer it to what King Iames told Archbishop Abbot: 'Twas a Faction in Religion set up his Son there, and God would never Prosper them. And so likewise, the Duke of Saxony sent Frederick word, That he had
often represented, what Ruin was like to at∣tend him, by taking another Crown, and for his own part he was bound to chastize the Rebels; so that it seems he look'd upon them as such, and 'tis probable refus'd the Crown upon that Account, for it was profer'd both him, and the Duke of Lor∣rain, which tend little to the Reputati∣on of a Calvinist Prince, that he should ac∣cept what a Lutheran, and Papist, whe∣ther out of Conscience, Policy, or both; thought not fit to venture upon. If this new King took that Crown,Detec. 108 in hopes of Assistance from his Father in Law here, he was much mistaken, for what∣ever Mr. Coke thinks, he thought better, and had asserted the Right of Crown'd Heads so far, as he could upon no ac∣count give way to have them transfer∣red upon every Mob Caprice. Nay sup∣posing a just Title, I cannot imagine what Supply could been have given him, Mony must have come from the Par∣liament; who had been very backward upon other Occasions, and would have been soon weary here; and for Men there was no way of conveying them, unless some Dutch Conjurer would have under∣taken it in a Cloud through the Air; no Neighbour Princes care to have such Cattle march through their Country,
and half a Score at least, must have been treated with in Order to this Expedition; most if not all of which, might have ser∣ved us, as the French, and Dutch did the Ten Thousand sent under Count Mansfield, give fair Words, but permit them not to come on Shore, till more than half were perished on Ship-board. So that to spend no more Words, nor time upon Suppositions, as matters really stood, without Good Cause, Good Courage, or Good Conduct; what could King Iames do more than he did, treat with the House of Austria, for an Accomodation, of the most Rash, Indiscreet, ay and Un∣justifyable enterprise ever any Prince en∣gag'd in, whatever the Zealous party did then, or hath ever since said to defend it, amongst which is Arch-Bishop Abbot's Letter, so carefully recorded by Mr. Rushworth, which after all shews him more a Puritan than Politician, with ve∣ry little Regard for what the truly Catho∣lick Church hath ever held in that Point. Yet this is further remarkable, that deci∣ding Battle at Prague was fought on a Sun∣day the Twenty Third after Trinity, where the Gospel holds forth: Reddite Caesariquae sunt Caesaris. But when King Iames saw the Palati∣nate invaded, and that all the Spanish
Protestations were Trick and Wheedle, he then as averse as he was to War, enga∣ged in good Earnest, to the utmost of his Abilities, by supplying the Princes of the Union in Germany, forwarding the King of Denmark to concern himself in that Quarrel, and furnishing Count Mansfield with an Army (the Miscarriage whereof he could not help) and several other con∣siderable Supplies, both of Men, and Mony; far beyond those few Subsidies his last Parliament gave to that end; and would they have been more open-fisted, he might have done a great deal more, but we have since seen how hisfi∣cult it is for the strongest Confederacy, to bear up against the United force of one Potent Prince; the Dutch slowness,Coll. 15. saith my Author, was not excusable; nor the Marquis of Ansback, General of the Union so forward to seek, or take Advantages as he might: Nay, another affirms, That he carryed him∣self neither so Faithfully, nor so Valiantly as he should have done, being much condemn'd, for suffering Spinola with his Army to pass by unfought with, when he had all Advan∣tages that could be wished for to impede his March: the greatest part of the Palatinate being lost upon that neglect, and by degrees the rest of the united Princes, either taken off from their Engagement, or ruin'd for
adhering to it with too great constancy. Yet still the Clamour must be continued, espe¦cially amongst our Factious Mend-all's; the King of Great Britain did not take care to preserve his Childrens Patrimony.Coll. ib. And for King Charles he was not much better serv'd by that great Gustavus Adolphus, when he made such an Inroad into Germany, whom he furnished both with Men and Mony very considerably, in hopes the Palatinate might be one Ac∣quest of his many Successes, and so it was, but when he came there, the Right owner was so little regarded, as he ravag'd and carry'd off, whatever Spinola and his For∣ces had left; the constant practice of those Necessitous Northern Princes, who will take your Mony, and do their own Busi∣ness if they can, but mind no other Obli∣gations. Neither was the King's Kind∣ness the less, for 'twas mostly at his ex∣pence; if that other Expedition in the Year Thirty Eight miscarry'd, as they March'd through Westphalia towards the Palatinate; only it had been well for him, Good man, if some guilty of that ill con∣duct, had fallen upon the Place, and ne∣ver come to be guilty of the same with other Mistakes, or something worse here. All which I have mention'd; and could a great deal more, to Obviate that false and
malicious Slander of Roger Coke, who saith, They, that is the Prince Elector, King of Bohemia, if you will have him so; his Queen, and Family, were more relie∣ved by the Dutch States, Prince of Orange,Detect. 202. with some Bishops and Noblemen of England, than both the King's Father and Son. For whether Relief relates to those Publick Transactions abroad, or the Subsistence of the Queen and her Court at the Hague, 'tis in both Senses a gross untruth; the Dutch States were always concern'd in their Confederacies as a considerable branch of the Union, but I never heard they con∣tributed any thing to their Subsistence, till all help from England was gone. The benefit rather accrew'd to their people from the continu'd expence of such a Court, Retinue, and Resort; for the Princes of Orange indeed they were all Nobly kind to the Queen, and pay'd her a profound Deference, there being three of them successively in the Supreme Command during her Residence at the Hague: Nei∣ther will I detract any thing from what the Nobility here did, both Spiritual and Temporal; yet still the King's did more than all these, in every respect whatsoe∣ver, whether there was a setled Allowance during the few Years of her Fathers Life, after dispossest of the Palatinate; I cannot
Resolve, but am sureher Good Brother, as she ever term'd him, gave the utmost Ex∣pressions of a Tender and Indear'd Affecti∣on; in that he not only was continually making Presents to her and her Children, took great care of them, and Advanc'd whomsoever they recommended, or be∣long'd to them, but allow'd moreover eight Thousand Pound per Annum for her Ta∣ble, which was punctually return'd eve∣ry Month out of the Exchequer, at the same time, Mony was carry'd thence, for like purpose to Whitehall; which when the Rebel Parliament had seiz'd all the Crown Revenue was continued during the Presbyterian Iunto's, Usurpation, the more readily because most of the English in her Family were of that Leven, who when the Cash fail'd, as basely deserted her, and sought Employment from her Brothers Murtherers. And I presume up∣on her being thus destitute of Supply from hence, it was that the States General al∣low'd her One Thousand Guilders per Mensem, which sounds big in the Number, but reduc'd to our Account, amounts not fully to a Hundred Pound Sterling. Her Son likewise about that time was restor'd to the Lower Palatinate, and therein her Ioynture, who promis'd fair, but per∣form'd little. To be sure there was one
Noble Man of ours, the late Earl of Cra∣ven (though for most part of that time his plentiful Estate here was Sequestred) contributed more to her, and her whole Family's Subsistence, than both the fore∣mention'd with all the World beside; and that not out of any Sinister unworthy re∣spect, as some idle People would have it thought, but a pure Principle of Honour and Religion, a Munificent, Charitable Soul. CHAP. XI. Of the Book of Sports. BUt the loudest Cry, (and that where∣in all the several Packs, however of different Mouths and Games, joyn'd toge∣ther in Hunting down) was against the Book of Sports, as they must have it Term∣ed; which is to be consider'd here, tho' not set out till some Years after, because Ludlow, according to his no Method, and Chronology, brings it in immediately after the Surrender of Rochel, and that with several spiteful and false Prefacings. About this time, saith he, the most profitable Prefer∣ments in the English Church, were given to
those of the Clergy, who were most forward to promote the Imposition of New Ceremonies and Superstitions. p. 5. Never was there more care taken in preferring the Clergy, according to their several deserts, and qualifications than by this excellent Prince, nor a greater Set of worthy deserving Men; but the promoting New Ceremonies and Superstitions, was one of their Old Common-place Calumnies upon his Pious care in consulting some other Bishops, and taking their Assistance towards keeping up Decency and Order in the Externals of God's publick Worship; the then Arch-Bi∣shop being so Remiss and Negligent there∣in. What he adds of an Oath being en∣joyned with an &c. was several Years af∣ter, that is in Forty; and shall then be consider'd as a full Testimony, what lit∣tle Nothings they would catch at to Aug∣ment the Quarrel. And I likewise defy him, and all his Party, to make appear, where one single Holy-day, tho he says, many was Introduc'd and requir'd to be ob∣serv'd with all possible Solemnity; but this however False, was a necessary Antithe∣sis to that grand Charge which follows. At the same time that they were encourag'd to profane the Lords Day, by a Book commonly call'd, The Book of Sports, Printed and
Publish'd by the King's especial Command. This Book of Sports is a large Volum, which the Defence by the help of a Big Character, makes Four Pages in Quarto, be∣ing Two Declarations one of this King, the other of his Father; and whoever look into them, (which not one of Ten thou∣sand, that rail at them, hath ever done) consider the Liberty there given, the Restraints laid down, and reasons of both, must acknowledge all contain'd therein, to proceed from a truly Christian dispo∣tion, and absolutely necessary in refe∣rence to that Superstitious Iudaising Hu∣mour, the Puritan Party were then run∣ning the whole Nation into, and there was no way to stop, but by examining what Premises they had for such Conclusions? what Authority for turning back to those Weak and Beggarly Elements? Be again in Bondage to Moses; Observe Days, &c. which all Expositors relate to the Jewish Sabbath, and not rather Stand fast in that Liberty wherewith,Gal. 4. 9. Christ hath made us Free. Here therefore, whether with their leave or without, I shall presume to enquire, First, how this Iudaising Spirit came to possess so many of the Brotherhood amongst us. Secondly, Represent how inconsistent it is with the Nature of Christian Religion, and Universal Practice of the truly Christi∣an
Church; so that, Thirdly, what both the Kings enjoyn'd was Agreeable to their Title, of Defending that Truly Ca∣tholick, Apostolick Doctrine. For what is First to be considered, it was for some time to my surprise, that the Puritan party who in all other Things so violently oppos'd Iohn Calvin's Refor∣mation to that of our Church, should not∣withstanding wholly recede from him in the Doctrine and Observation of the Lord's-day: for when our Author was at Geneva, (and that they say, was his first City of Refuge) he could not but observe, how the Elder Men Bowl'd, the Younger exer∣cis'd their Arms, or us'd some other In∣nocent Recreations, after the Publick Du∣ties of the Day were over, with as much freedom as our Kings allow in their De∣clarations, for all which Calvin gives very good Reasons in his Institutes; and most severely reflects upon all those Sabbatari∣an Zealots, we are now discoursing of, as three times worse than Iews,Inst. l.2.c.8. Qui cras∣sâ carnali{que} Iudaismi Superstitione ter Iudae∣os Superant. But upon second Thoughts 'twas easy to resolve that their respect to Calvin must always give way, when an opportunity serves of prejudicing our Church, which they set themselves in all things to contradict, and herein had a
Vile prospect of prevailing upon the Peo∣ple for a wide Breach, so that however the Calvinist quatenus Calvinist, hath no more regard for the Fourth Commandment than the Fifth, or the Romanists for the Second, yet by starting this Notion of a Divine Ordinance founded solely upon the Mo∣rality thereof, as strictly Obliging us, as the Iews, they got an Occasion from thence to cavil at, and run down all the other Fasts and Festivals of the Church, as mere Hu∣man Inventions, though most of them Apostolical, and the rest in the Ages im∣mediately succeeding, and that without ever considering, that by the same Au∣thority, our Christian Sabbath was Trans∣lated from the Last to the First Day of the Week, and therefore, by keeping so strictly to their Mosaical Mumpsimus, they ought all to comply with what their Dis∣ciple Brabourne propounded, and go back to the Saturday Sabbath, to the Obser∣vance whereof he gain'd a Party, and writ a Book in its Justification; and tho the High Commission brought him to a Retractation, wherein 'tis said he per∣sever'd, yet many of his Followers conti∣nued their Fopperies a long time after, and perhaps to this very Day; I am sure in the Year 65, there was a small English Congregation of them at Roterdam, where
a Physician of some Eminency, especially in Female concerns, was Master of the Sy∣nagogue, and under no little Perplexity at that time, for as much as there came in, or started up amongst them, some New Lights, who declared, besides their Observation of the Iewish Sabbath, there was one thing farther wanting to Perfe∣ction, and that was Circumcision, where∣unto some of the young strong body'd Fellows submitted, but the Old Members would be no such Abrahams, and more∣over by their Interest in the Magistrates, prevail'd to have those others sent a fur∣ther Pilgrimage. This I have cursorily mention'd to show how easy it is, from some plausible Pretences, and Superstiti∣ous pervertings of Holy Scripture, for Men to glide gently on, and sink into the Abyss of Iudaism, recommend their Sanctity by no other Performances than the Superfi∣cial rigours of Pharisaical Ostentation; for none but Men under such Arrogant Infa∣tuations, could presume to affirm and that Publickly in the Pulpit,Pref. parg 22, &c. as my Author de∣clares it was at a Market Town in Oxford∣shire, That to do any servile Work or Busi∣ness on the Lord's day, was as great a Sin as to kill a Man, or commit Adultery. Ano∣ther in Somersetshire, That to throw a Bowl on the Lord's day, was as great a Sin as to
kill a Man. A third in Norfolk, That to make a Feast, or dress a Wedding Dinner on the Lord's Day, was as great a Sin, as for a Father to take a Knife, and cut his Child's Throat. A fourth in Suffolk, That to Ring more Bells than one on the Lord's Day, was as great a Sin as to commit Murder; of all which Particulars Mr. Rogers in the Pre∣face to his Treatise upon the Thirty Nine Articles, assures us from certain Informa∣tions, and Knowledge, being present when the last was conven'd before his Ordnary for the same: And moreover with great Satisfaction declares, that by his means these Sabbatarian Errors and Impieties were first brought to Light, and disco∣vered to the State, and this Good ensued thereupon, That all Books, which contain'd the above-mention'd, and many more such fearful and heretical Assertions, were call'd in, and forbidden any more to be Printed and made Common; Archbishop Whitgift by his Letters, and Visitation did the one, Anno 1599. and Sir Iohn Popham Lord Chief Iustice did the other, Anno 1600. at Bury in Suffolk. Yet neither could this, nor several other prudent Courses, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, either satisfy the Scruples or restrain the Follies of those Men, who had embrac'd these New Sabbath Doctrines, but that they still went
forward to advance that Business, and made it part of the Common-Cause, no Book being publish'd by them, either as to Moral Piety, or Systematical Divinity, wherein the Sabbath was not press'd upon the Consciences of God's People, with as much Violence, as formerly with Authori∣ty upon the Iews, and from the same Ob∣ligations: To give one Instance of many, how Prevalent this Humour was, Mr. Breerwood a very learned and judicious Person, Professor of Astronomy at Gre∣sham, College, had the Charge of an Or∣phan, his Brother's Son, whom he plac'd Apprentice in London, where he conti∣nued two Years with much Satisfaction, both to himself, and Master, but then grew very uneasy, and earnest to be dis∣charg'd, the Reason whereof, after some fained Excuses, his Uncle discovered to be, for that his Master on the Lord's Day, had sent him forth sometimes on Arrands, as to bid Guests, fetch Wine, give his Horse Provender, or such like light Business; all which one Mr. Byfield a popular Preacher at Chester, when lately there, had in∣form'd him to be a Sin, a Trangression of God's Commandment touching the Sabbath, and that he was not bound to yield, nay that he sin'd against God, in yielding Obedience to his Master's Commands; this produc'd a
learned Letter, from the Uncle to Mr. Byfield, which is since Printed, with an Answer and Reply, wherein the whole Question is exactly Stated, upon what different Obligations the Iews and Chri∣stians, observ'd their different Days, that theirs amongst other Rites, as St. Paul terms it, Col. 2. 17.Page 38. Was but a Shadow of things to come, whereof the Body was in Christ; or as he express'd himself farther on, Only a Tenure for term of Life, namely that of the Ceremonial Law,Page 45. which Life end∣ed in the death of our Saviour, and the Lord's day succeeded thereupon; As it was not known or practis'd before Moses, so it ceased to oblige after Christ, being one of the Shadows which the Evangelical Light dispell'd, one of the Burthens which this Law of Liberty takes off. From whence it follows, according to what I pro∣pounded, 2dly, That these Sabbatarian Speculations are inconsistent with the Na∣ture and Practice of Christian Religion, for the Priesthood being chang'd, there is made also of necessity a change of the Law, as the Apostle tells us, different ends of In∣stitution, and different ways of Observa∣tion; the Iews were more especially en∣joyn'd a Corporal Rest, in Commemora∣tion of their Temporal Deliverance, the Christians main regard must be Spiritual
after the Power of an endless Life, and there∣fore what the Evangelical Prophet, Isaiah, declares as to the Sabbath, Isa. 56. 2. Bles∣sed is the Man that keepeth the Sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his Hand from do∣ing any evil, hath by all the Fathers, and from them most of the Moderns, been understood by way of Prediction, as to Gospel Times; what at leastwise they ought to be, St. Ierom is most express, Alioquin si haec tantum prohibentur in Sab∣bato, ergo in aliis sex diebus tribuitur nobis libert as delinquendi; for otherwise if those things therein remembred, are prohibited only on the Sabbaths, then were it Law∣ful for us on the other Days, to follow our own Sinful Courses, speak our own idle Words, and pursue our own Voluptuous Pleasures; which were most Foolish to imagin. And St. Augustine makes the 4th. Commandment so far as it concerns us Christians to be no more than Requies cor∣dis & tranquilitas mentis quam facit bona Conscientia, the quiet of the Heart and peace of Mind proceeding from a good Conscience, and therefore it hath been well resolv'd by some, that a Christian's Life should be one continued Sabbath; he that lives eve∣ry day as he ought, hath little or no Obli∣gation to observe one Day more than ano∣ther, but what between Idleness and Bu∣siness
Mankind was never Ingenious e∣nough to be left at his own Freedom. As for the Idle part God forgive them their many Extravagancies, and more especi∣ally neglect of Holy Duties on the Six Days, and let the severest Penalty attend their Violation of the Seventh. And it were well if our Men of Business would consider how much that might be forwarded, by sparing some little of their busy Time, to implore God's Blessing upon their Business: But to run into so gross a mistake as to think a strict Attendance upon Ordinances on the Sabbath Day, may expiate for the Frauds, Extortions, and other Violations of the precedent Week, is intollerable, yet some are prone to suspect, such a Delusion is not without Entertainment amongst many of the most seemingly Precise; how∣ever 'tis God alone, and their own Con∣sciences must judge herein; it were well, on the other side, they would be less se∣vere in Censuring others, especially those we here plead for, who are only the Drudging part of Mankind, such Labourers, Apprentices, and other Servants, as have let their other six Days time to Hire, and are all that while at other Mens disposal; that these after all due performance of Re∣ligious Offices, should be allowed such in∣nocent Diversions both of Body and Mind,
as their Inclinations tend most unto, can∣not but be thought reasonable, and ac∣cordingly the Christian Church never in∣terpos'd any Command to the contrary. Here then come in their Majesties De∣clarations, and more especially relate to the foremention'd Circumstances; upon a prudent Consideration, as King Charles saith of his Father, That if these Times were taken from them, the meaner sort, who la∣bour hard all the Week, should have no Re∣creations at all to refresh their Spirits; nei∣ther was there less of Prudence and Con∣sideration, in the several Limitations of this Innocent Freedom, as First that no law∣ful Recreations be us'd as the Laws of the Kingdom, and Canons of the Church prohi∣bit, for some such it seems there were, as par∣ticularly Bowling to meaner sort of People. 2dly. That this Liberty be not taken till af∣ter Divine Service; nor 3dly. That any en∣joy it, but such as are present at the Perform∣ance thereof. We may here likewise add, the reasons given, why the Declarations came out at those particular Times, which if well weighed cannot be except∣ed against; As first the Advantage the Pa∣pists took thereby, to discourage People from coming into, or continuing in our Church, by perswading them that no honest Mirth, or Recreations were tolerated in our Religion:
And this indeed gave the first occasion to King Iames, who in his Progress through Lancashire received several Complaints thereof, and having inform'd himself how justly, gave a Check to the precise Hu∣mour of such Iustice over-does, as stretched the Laws beyond their proper Intent, and true Reason of the thing; whereto like∣wise agrees what the judicious Sanderson tells us, that in Lancashire, more especi∣ally, the Rigid, froward Disposition of the Puritans, oblig'd many of the Com∣mon People to continue, if not turn Pa∣pists, between which two Parties, that County was mostly divided. Another Reason given, is for that this Prohibition barreth the common and meaner sort of People from using such Exercise, as may make their Bodies more able for War, when we, or our Successors shall have occasion; for, as it goes on, When shall the Common People have leave to Exercise, if not upon the Sundays, and Holy Days, seeing they must apply their Labour, and win their Living in all working Days? All which in no more than their Common Practice at Geneva, as hath been already mention'd; and it ought further to be consider'd, so strict a Confinement from all Diversions of Body and Mind, cannot but by degrees oppress and darstardise Men's Spirits, of English
Mastiffs, make them in the end become Setting-Dogs to some Foreign Power: To these King Charles adds, a 3d. The rather because of late in some Counties of the King∣dom, we find, that under pretence of taking away abuses, there hath been a general For∣bidding, not only of ordinary Meetings, but of the Feasts of the Dedication of the Church∣es, &c. which besides preserving the Me∣morial thereof, as he was certainly in∣form'd, tended very much to Civilising the People, composing of Differences by the Mediation of Friends, encreasing Love and Unity, by those Feasts of Charity; with Relief and Comfort to the Poor, the Richer part in a manner keeping open House. Al∣though what is mention'd just before in this Corroborating part of King Charles, might probably prevail more with him, than all the rest, viz. Out of a Pious Care for the Service of God, and for suppressing any Humors that oppose Truth, being too sensible how those judaising Dogmatists by inculcating to the People a strict and sole Observance of this Legal Institution, de∣sign'd thereby to exclude all those Chri∣stian Feasts and Festivals, which have been constantly Commemorated ever since the Gospel was Preach'd to Mankind, as the Birth, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, with the Descent. of the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles, by which Mira∣culous Gifts, Almighty God impowr'd them to Preach the Gospel to the whole World, bringing Life and Immortality to Light; and the Church accordingly hath ever pay'd a thankful Acknowledgment of those their indefatigable Labors, Ex∣emplary Lives, and Cruel Deaths; till these Enemies to all Antiquity as well as Order, and Gratitude, must have them supersed∣ed by such Iewish Observances as neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear. And it was much to my Surprise, that when some late Acts pass'd for the more strict observing the Lord's Day, the Fathers of our Church, when it came into their House, did not endeavour, at least, that some little regard might be had to the foremention'd Fasts and Festivals:Canon 13. (the Canon took care to joyn them all together) for due Celebration of Sundays and Holy Days, and God forgive those who con∣niv'd at a Separation, such an Omission could not have pass'd in Charles the 1st. Time; and one would think their pro∣ceedings then should be Matter of great∣er Caution now, for having dar'd to lift up their Hands against that true Defen∣der, they stuck at nothing which might hinder a thorough Reformation, began in∣deed at the Holy Days, but Liturgy and
Bishops soon follow'd: To give one In∣stance of many, how cursedly they affe∣cted to run Counter, against whatever our Church did practise; when in the Heat of the Rebellion Christmas Day fell on a Sunday, as it must in Course every four or five Years, that Coryphaeus of the Fa∣ction old Calamy, lest he should be thought to regard the Festival of our Sa∣viour's Nativity, preach'd upon a Passion Text. Eli Eli Lamasabachthani. How vio∣lent a Current we have bene dar'd to Stem, is neither our Ignorance, nor our Fear, Truth is a Rock which repels the Force, at the same time it causes their Noise and Foamings: Yet not to be mi∣staken herein, (which is very Natural for them to do) I shall most readily com∣ply in the strictest Observation of the Lord's Day they can think fit to prescribe, provided it be upon a Christian, not Iew∣ish Bottom, and with a due Deference to what the Wise and Good have in the best Ages of the Church resolv'd therein: Otherwise to make Exclamations, and enveigh against every one, who will not walk by their killing Letter of the Law, hath too great Affinity to those Pharisai∣cal Rigours, which were continually carp∣ing at, and Censuring our Saviour for the many Miracles he wrought on the Sabbath
Day, whilst their hard and impenitent Hearts, could not understand what that meant, I will have Mercy not Sacrifice, as likewise that the Sabbath was made for Man, not Man for the Sabbath: And that the many Reproaches rais'd against the two forementioned Princes, upon their sincere Endeavours for a right Informa∣tion herein, as well as their other good Deeds, for the House of God, and Offices thereof, proceeded from the like perverse Disposition of Spirit, can be little doubt∣ed, by any one who reflects, how exact∣ly they parallell'd the Iews in Murdering the one, and continue still most implaca∣ble against the Memories of both. CHAP. XI. Of Ship-Money. WHen a Man hath a Subject will bear an Argument, and is sure of an easy and ready Attention, to run out into bitter Invectives, and false Suggesti∣ons; argues as great a defect of Judg∣ment, as good Nature; to be sure no∣thing has rais'd a stronger Suspicion of this Prince's sincere Intentions, amongst
the soberest, and best disposed People in the Nation, than his Levying Ship-Money, which therefore Ludlow might have kept close to, without continuing his Excursi∣ons against the Clergy; but they must an∣swer for all, to which end he tells, That divers of them entred the List as Champions of the Prerogative, asserting that the Pos∣sessions and Estates of the Subjects did of Right belong to the King, and that he might dispose of them at Pleasure; thereby Vacat∣ing and Annulling, as much as in them lay, All the Laws of England, that secure a Pro∣priety to the People, p. 5. Now to prove or make appear, one Syllable of this Viru∣lent Charge, is beneath the Authority of his Memoirs; 'twill pass with the Party upon his Word, and whoever affirms, nay proves the contrary; shall be no more credited by them, than they will be at the Last Day. The Iesuits, where they have Power, are not more severe in their Inquisitions, than our well-scented Dema∣gogues upon all Transactions of the Loyal Clergy; yet excepting those few indiscreet Expressions of Sibthorp and Manwaring, (which has been already spoke to) they could find nothing else worth catching hold of, otherwise we should not have been so often hit in the Teeth with them two: 'Tis true the Clergy all along stood
firm to the Prerogative, and thought themselves bound both in Duty and Inte∣rest to support it's just Rights, against the many Invasions every Day attempted to that, and the Kingdoms Ruin; which Steadiness and Resolution of theirs, was the pretended Crime, and grand Motive, for those little Crorespondents with the Prince of the Air to raise and procure so many Storms against them. But that they had any Thoughts of stretching the Pre∣rogative beyond its due Bounds, much less of Annulling all, nay any of the Laws of Eng∣land, none but a Republican Confidence could affirm, and hath no more of Truth, than that Ludlow was an honest Man, and Loyal Subject: He goes on, Arbitrary Courts were erected; it had been well to have mention'd one that was so, all this King's Reign, which since he is gon I de∣sire his Admirers to give me Satisfaction on his behalf, or otherwise him no more credit than he deserves. The like Chal∣lenge I make, as to the Power of those other being enlarg'd, such were the High Commis∣sion Court, the Star-Chamber, the Court of Honour, the Court of Wards, the Court of Requests, &c. There was a mighty Clamor indeed against some of these Courts, not so much for any real default in them, as that they were thought too great a sup∣port
to the Prerogative, and Church, with∣out considering, how the whole Frame of Government, was so closely joyn'd and fix'd together therewith, as a Dissolution in such essential Parts, would reduce all the rest to Rubbish, and Confusion: And accordingly it fell out, at those Breaches then made, the several Herds of Schisma∣ticks, Libertines, Atheists, &c. found so free an Entrance, so uncontrolable a Ra∣vage, as 'tis hard now to tell either, where or what we are. To shew in one In∣stance, how little Ground there was for all that Noise and Fury, even against the High Commission, which lay under the greatest Odium, Archbishop Laud caus'd the Acts of that Court to be search'd,Troub. and Try, p. 164. (which can deceive no Man) and found There had been fewer Suspensions, Depriva∣tions, and other Punishments, by Three, du∣ring the Seven Years of his Time, than in any Seven Years of his Predecessor Abbot, who was notwithstanding in great Esteem with the House of Commons, whilst this other was cry'd out upon for Sharpness and Severi∣ty; whereupon the Good Man makes this sad but just Complaint, So safe a thing it is for a Man to embark himself in a Potent Faction, and so hard for any other Man, be he never so intire, to withstand its Violence. And therefore we may presume it was
not the Quantity but the Quality of the Persons proceeded against, which thus highly exasperated them; To have such Instruments, such Engines of Sedition as Leighton, and Lilbourn, Pryn, Burton, Bastwick, &c. confin'd from doing far∣ther Mischief, was to stifle the whole de∣sign; Rebellion could never so much as take Roote, if those Seeds-men were kept from planting the Crop. Yet we will sup∣pose there might be some less justifiable Proceedings, some perhaps too harsh and severe Decrees; must every Corruption or Abuse destroy the being of a Court? can∣not the Numbers, and Trickings of our Attornys be redress'd; and yet some of the Honester continu'd to follow Busi∣ness? Or must that Honourable Professi∣on of the Law be laid aside, because the present Tendency of Practise, seems more to regard their own Support than the Peo∣ples ease, and speedy Relief? Such ano∣ther Set of Thorough Reformers would much endanger the shutting up of West∣minster-Hall: And indeed that they were going about, Ludlow tells you what a quick Dispatch they had brought things to in Ireland, and they were not without the like Attempts several Times here. Which had it been put into the Hands of Wise and Honest Men, to check and regu∣late
what was amiss, we might have said Amen to, but such Root and Branch Fel∣lows were intolerable, and as they had al∣ready destroy'd the Church, so were bid∣ding fair at those Laws and Properties, our Author so falsely chargeth upon the Cler∣gy: I have somewhere read that a negli∣gent Latin Transcriber of that Parable where the Woman swept her House to find the lost Groat, writ Evertit, for Everrit; very applicable to all our vio∣lent Undertakers, who are for throwing the House out at the Windows, and all Go∣vernment out of the Kingdom. But the Total Abolition of these Courts was not till our Grandees of 40. entred their Province, and play'd Rex to pur∣pose; which is the last Preliminary Charge our Author makes, (for next he falls at large upon the Scotch Rebellion, and so on to that in England) and ac∣cording to his Brutish Courage in other Undertakings, is the most impudent Push he hath hitherto ventur'd at; And that our Liberties might be extirpated at once, and we become Tenants at Will to the King, that rare Invention of Ship-Money was found out by Finch, &c. 'Tis one thing to write a Libel, another an History, where what is said or done on each side, ought impar∣tially to be related, and had not the form∣er
been here chiefly design'd, we must have been told, the King studied nothing more than the Honour of the Nation, and Interest of his People, wherein, not being seconded by his Parliaments, as they ought; he was forc'd to enquire what other Legal Courses his Predecessors had taken, when under like Exigencies with himself; and herein the Learned Selden gave no little Light, by a Book about that Time written, called Mare Clausum: But the Person of the greatest Authority and Abilities too, to resolve any thing of Antient Customs was Attorny General Noy, not Finch, as Ludlow blunders, who all along in the House of Commons pass'd for an Oracle, whatever he declar'd to be Law, was no farther disputed amongst them; and can it be imagin'd he should recede so far from the Character ever given him, of an indefatigable Search, and morose Sincerity, as to Trifle at last, im∣pose upon the King and Kingdom, in so weighty a Concern, without being able to make out, and justify it, in every Point which 'tis affirm'd he did by several Pre∣sidents, in some of which it appear'd, That the Ship Tax had been Levyed by such Kings, as in the same Year had Sub∣sidies granted from their Parliaments for other Occasions.Sir R. Bak∣er. An. 1631. The King therefore
having so good an Authority, for a Mat∣ter which in it self appeared highly rea∣sonable, must have violated all the Rules of Discretion, as well as Policy in not closing therewith; nay could not have answered the Discharge of that Trust re∣posed in him, either to God or Good Men: For 1st. His Coasts were not only infested with Pickeroons, Turks, and Dunkirk Pi∣rates, to the great Damage of Traffick: But his Dominon in the Narrow Seas, actu∣ally usurp'd by the Holland Fishers; and the Right it self in good earnest disputed by the Learned Grotius, in a Tract called Mare Liberum; these were craving Occa∣sions and Concernments, not of Honour only, but Safety and Interest; 2dly. He had found his Parliaments so Resty, and Peevish, as there was no prospect of a Sup∣ply, that, otherwise, best way, without ex∣posing himself, and all his most faithful Adherents: 3dly. It supposes a mighty Defect in any Government, that when some inferior Parts will not act with any thing of Sense of Temper, the Supreme Sovereign Power should not take the next best Way, to secure it self, and all other Concerns thereof. 4thly. As the Learned in the Law, who are the best, and per∣haps only competent Iudges in such Cases, approv'd thereof: So when question'd
the Harangues made against them, sa∣vour'd more of Passion and Spite, than Argument and solid Reason. 5thly. What he Levyed was so effectually imploy'd, to the Reputation and Interest of the King∣dom, as they that found fault therewith, must needs, whilst doing it, blush at their own Perverseness: Especially for that. 6thly. These pretended Redressers brake thorough all the Laws of God and Man, and for every Pound he Levyed, and so honourably expended in the Nati∣on's Defence and Security; as impu∣dently, as unjustly extorted Thousands from the People, to promote a most curs∣ed and unnatural Rebellion, Nec dum sini∣tur, we are since come to Millions, and justly deserve no better, who made such a Muttering and Stir, when he did not raise above Six Pence in the Pound, and to so good Purposes, as the Dominion of the Sea, was never so well secur'd, and Traffick so considerably advanc'd, above what was ever known in the Nation be∣fore. Had they who pretended greater Right to raise Money, taken a greater or equal Care in disposing thereof to the Kingdoms and Peoples Good, all must have gon well; but to act like the Dog in the Manger, resolve to do nothing themselves, yet keep away, barkat, and
Quarrel all others, to whom it more pro∣perly belong'd, was the Extremity of Baseness, Mischief for Mischiefs sake. And which is still worse, that mischievous Humour, 'tis to be fear'd we shall never get quit of, there being several Curs, nay whole Packs of that Old Breed, which continue on the Cry, and are so wholly bent upon their Common-wealth Confusions, as to prefer them before any thing of a Monarchy, not excepting the Kingdom of Heaven, whereof having but small Hopes, they may think to oblige the Devil, by bringing Hell upon Earth.
CHAP. XII. Of King James's Death. I Have had some little Dispute with my self; whether it was requisite to take Notice of King Iames's Death, especially as relating to this Excellent Prince his Son; but finding the Calumny im∣pudently improv'd, as well from the former Age, to this, as by the several Libellers now, every one striving to out∣do the other in this Villanous Forgery, till the last hath brought it to such an Im∣possibility, as every Child may discover, and see thorough: I must trouble both the Reader and my self, with the Ex∣amination of this Abominable Nothing. King Iames had an ill Habit of Body, very unwiel'dy, and full of gross Hu∣mours, which improv'd the more upon him, for that he was so uneasy, as to the Regiment of his Health, either from his Own, or Physicians Observation; where∣upon falling into a Tertian Fever at Theo∣balds, 'twas thought by most Men, amongst the rest him himself, that Crasy Constitution of his would not be able to withstand its frequent Assaults; and it happen'd accordingly. Soon after his
Death it was whisper'd about Court, that the Duke had recommended something of a Cure for his Ague, without the Phy∣sicians advice, which doing no good, must be presum'd to do hurt; this coming to the Duke's Ear, he concern'd himself so far, as to have the Matter examin'd by the Physicians, where the Lady appear'd and disclos'd that great secret of an Ague-Cure, (few of that Quality, amongst their Country Neighbours, (for she was a Coun∣try, an Essex Lady) being without some∣thing of that kind,) which was only a Plaster of Methrydate, with a Posset Drink of Harts-Horn, and Marygold Flowers. This for that time put an end to the Ru∣mour, but about two Years after, in the Second Parliament, it was Reviv'd again, and made an Article against the Duke, which they that please may Consult, with his Reply, and perhaps be satisfied there∣with; if not I shall only add further, Lord Keeper Williams perform'd the last Offices of a Divine to King Iames, continued with him several Days and Nights before his Death, so that had he observ'd or suspected any such foul Play, there is no doubt but it would have made a suffici∣ent Noise both in Parliament and else∣where, when the Duke caus'd the Seal to be taken from him; and the Author of
his Life who relates the one, would not have been sparing to discover the other. And now to show how Artificially the Master was brought in, as concern'd, with what the Servant never did; when the Articles were Exhibited against the Duke: Sir Dudly Diggs who as Foreman manag'd the Prologue, and gave a Summary of the whole Charge; was reported to have said these Words, That he was commanded by the House, concerning the Plaister apply'd to the King, that he did forbear to speak far∣ther in regard to the King's Honour, or Words to that Effect, whereupon the King ordered him to be Committed, and Sir Dudly Carlton Remonstrated the same to the Commons, but upon his own and the Two Houses Compurgation, that no such, nor such like Words were spoken, he was again discharg'd, yet whoever Con∣sults that Eloquent Harangue, as Record∣ed by Rushworth,Coll 305. will find it very scurvi∣ly tending that Way, and thus for 20 Years following it was wholly laid a∣sleep, no one harbouring so groundless a Thought: But when God curs'd this Na∣tion with a Successful Rebellion, whereby the Army got the King into their Clutches, and so purg'd the House, as consisting on∣ly of their own Properties, they pass'd, that Preludium to his Murder, their Votes
of no more Addresses, wherein amongst ma∣ny other Villanous, Forg'd Accusations, (in∣deed whatever the Devil, or Devils of Men, could assist them withal) this of King Iame's Death was one; and 'tis ve∣ry remarkable what a doughty Topick they have to make it out, delivered down by our as doughty Authors, He Dissolv'd the Se∣cond Parliament to prevent their Enquiry into his Father's Death, says Ludlow, p. 2. And Roger Coke to the same purpose, King Charles rather than this Charge should come to an Issue, dissolv'd the Parliament.Detect. 196. The Defence to out-lye all that went be∣fore him, tells you Divers Parliaments were dissolv'd upon that Account, where∣as there was but one more, and this Bu∣siness never mention'd therein. In An∣swer to all which false and groundless Pre∣sumptions, I shall only Request them to Consult their Friend Rushworth, where they will find that Parliaments Dissoluti∣on did not in the least proceed from this, or any other Articles Exhibited a∣gainst the Duke, who had given in his Reply, and press'd for a Rejoynder, that they would come to the Proof of their Common-Fame Charge, wherein there ap∣pear'd not much forwardness. The King on the other hand was in great Expecta∣tion of those Subsidies they had Voted,
and indeed only Voted; for though that was done the 27th. of March, yet had not the Bill been once read the 9th. of Iune, by which delays, his Majesties Designs with his Allies abroad were Frustrated, and Honour expos'd, for want of supply∣ing them according to Treaty, whereof giving Notice in a Letter, they had so little regard, as to fall to preparing a Re∣monstrance, in reference to Tonage and Poundage, and other such like unseasona∣ble and unreasonable Cavils; which the King understanding, and esteeming (as he had Cause) to be a denyal of the promised Supply, and finding that no Admonition could move, no Reasons or Perswasions pre∣vail, when the Time was so far spent, that they had put an impossibility upon themselves, to perform their Promise, whereof they e∣steemed all Gracious Messages to them, to be but Interruptions, His Majesty upon mature Advisement dissolv'd them.Col. 410. This is the Account the King himself gives in his Declaration, of their unkind Dealing, and his too just Provocation for that Act; otherways would they have comply'd with him in those his urgent Necessities, there should have been no Obstruction upon the Duke's Account, they might have gon on with their Articles, and been certainly Baffled as to that of King
Iames's Death; and perhaps most of the rest. But I must not break off here, with∣out my promis'd Remark upon the De∣fence, who by adding another most Im∣possible Story, renders that aforemention'd yet more Improbable. There are few will believe, because he brings none, That for many Reasons it was concluded, King Charles had no small share in that abomina∣ble Act of Poysoning his own Father King James I.Page 44. But to add, and that Good Man Prince Henry his Son, is such a Stretch, as nothing but one by a Halter can keep pace with, and they deserve to go toge∣ther. That Prince Henry was thought to have something of foul Play, Sir A. W's. Libel does insinuate, but no Man of Sense or History ever believed a Syllable there∣of, and that Answer Intituled, Aulicus Coquinariae, clearly makes appear it was right down Libel, that is, absolutely false; and as there was no ground to place it where Sir A's. Baseness design'd, so for this unthinking Blockhead to transfer it upon that poor innocent Child his Brother, let the most prejudic'd Fanatick judge, when told, that at Prince Henry's Death, this his younger Brother was not Twelve Years Old, having been all along of a weak unhealthy Constitution, liv'd a Stu∣dious
retir'd Life, with very little Con∣versation but that of Books and Tutors, which was indeed of great Advantage to his future Accomplishments, but kept him then from making any Figure at Court, or entring upon any Intrigue there, which the most Active Princes of that Age, have seldom been known to en∣gage in, much less to carry on such an Unnatural Enterprize. Yet doubtless this is as true as the other, and whoever for the Time to come, relate either, may the same Fate attend them as did Horace's Planus, a Lying Cheat; not to be be∣liev'd when they speak Truth, tho their Lives depend thereupon. Nulla fides damnis, veris{que} doloribus adsit. Roger Coke hath another, the prettyest Maggotty Reason, to prove King Iames could not dye a Natural Death, because all the five James's his Predecessors in Scotland were carryed off otherwise. I will not con∣cern my self with what was done in Scotland, but dare be the Courts Com∣purgator for all of that Family which have dy'd since it came into England, (although none have gon off without some such ill-natur'd, and ill-grounded Suggestion) I wish I could say as much
for the Parliament, or rather a Rump of it, which out-did whatever hath been done in Scotland, or any where else upon the Face of the whole Earth: And fur∣ther to provoke Divine Vengeance, we have got a Generation of Villains, which at this Hour dare to justify it, and no Notice taken thereof. Nay these eager Blood-hounds are so delighted with that sort of Game, as when they cannot come at it themselves, will needs have it done by others, for so it was confidently mut∣ter'd of the last, which went off by Death, and if God curse us with continuing this Set of Men, will pass for an Authentick Story 50 or 60 Years hence; it was e∣nough at present to found it in a Whisper, especially since the Physicians, and amongst them Dr. L— a great Confident of theirs declar'd, that upon inspecting the Brain, there was so clear Evidence of an Apo∣plexy, as 'twas impossible to think of any other Cause. However there is nothing Extraordinary in all this, besides the grosseness of the Fiction, there are few Historians relate the Death of Princes, with∣out something of a real or imaginary Force. But to bury them alive by Supposititious Births is altogether Modern, an Advance of this present Age, with how much Interest or Honour the next may Judge.
CHAP. XIII. His Government before the Rebel∣lion. THese be the most, tho' not all, (for all it is impossible to Enu∣merate) and therefore, let it be, all the most considerable Exceptions, false Clamors, and frontless Cavils, wherewith the wide-mouth'd Factions, blackned the King, and Trumpetted up Rebellion; into which dis∣mal and bloody Scene before we enter, Let us take a general View of his Go∣vernment, during the Twelve Years In∣terstitium, or if you will Interregnum of Parliaments, (for they were never quiet till Supream, and then least of all) where we shall find this true Father of his Coun∣try, so tenderly Provident for a crooked and perverse Generation, Nurtur'd them up in so much Peace, and Plenty, such a continued Affluence of all Things requi∣site to Humane Welfare, as never any Nation enjoy'd a greater, and very few have equall'd them therein.
That he Hated, or had any Prejudice against Parliaments, is so far from be∣ing True, as if there were any Mistake, it appear'd rather, at First, on the other Side, he Caress'd them a little too much. To be sure it was by his Inducement, the Duke of Bucks made that Narrative, relating to the Spanish Match, and Trea∣ty; to both Houses of Parliament, in King Iames's Last, whereto, as occasion serv'd he gave his Attestation; which so pleas'd their Popular, aspiring Humour, as the Duke was then the Whitest Boy, and his Master the Hopefullest Prince in the World. And he doubtless intended to have gon on, in that Sincere plain-deal∣ing Way, represented Things as they really were, and expected they should have met him half Way, in all reasona∣ble Returns. But his more Experienc'd Father understood better, told them both how short-liv'd such Caresses would be, as they should find too soon: Which im∣mediately upon his coming to the Crown, most Prophetically fell out, in his first Par∣liament; where making a small Comple∣ment of Two Subsidies, they return'd to their Old Vomit, Evil Counsellors, Grie∣vances and the like, must be the only Subject of Debate, after which they made so strict a Search, as such another Set of
Busy Men; according to the Latin Adage,Nodum in Scyrpo quae∣rere. would for a Knot in a Bulrush; yet here∣upon the Breach so gradually widned, Three several Parliaments, as to part at last in a final Separation: Whereunto af∣ter all is say'd, never Prince had greater or juster Provocation. Nevertheless I cannot find, in his Proclamation set out upon the last Dissolution, or any where else, that it was declared Criminal for the People to speak any more of Parliaments, as Ludlow, with his usual Impudence, affirms, p. 2. The King, as I say'd, finding the Fa∣ctions so prevalent in all Elections, as it was impossible to get a Parliament, would either hearken to Reason, or Act with Temper, resolv'd to do as well as he could without them: Having there∣fore made an Honourable Peace with France, and Spain; he look'd into and so manag'd his small Revenue, as to keep out of those Necessities, whereof there was small Hopes of a Supply, when run into. By which means he kept a very Splendid Court, yet withal as Regular, no ways Profuse, whatever our Libellers Cant, and wholly free from such open Immoralities as have since not a little tended to Dabauching the whole Nation, without any present Prospect of Refor∣mation.
As God bless'd him with a fruitful Offspring, so the Charge of seve∣ral Royal Nurseries was considerable. Nei∣ther was there any Prince in Europe made a better Figure, by his Ministers, in all Foreign Courts, which must add to the Expence: Yet these might be easily weather'd, and every Thing else which came under Consideration, but that of a Royal Navy, which notwith∣standing was absolutely Necessary, both in respect of Trade and Reputation, and his Revenue not being able to go thorough therewith, put him upon that Expedient of Ship-Money, which we have already spoke to, and therefore shall only add, that by the help of this most easy and reasonable Supply, he kept a constant Guard in the English Channel, clear'd the Seas of all Enemies and Encroaching Friends, and Built the best Ships, which to that Day ever Floated upon the Main, and have been scarce out-done since. I have hear'd some very knowing Persons in that way, affirm, that two of his First Rates, the Royal Sovereign and the Prince, might be a Pattern to the best Builders, and the most sensible pay'd a Deference to them. His Majesty was wont to say, most Men had their Vani∣ties, and his was Building, more especially
Ships, wherein, as he might, at Pleasure, be pleasant with himself, so he could not be Ignorant in how high a Measure it conduc'd, both to his own Grandure, and the Publick Good; for by his means clearing the Coasts of all Little Enemies, and having no great Ones abroad, (whilst most part of Europe, besides were up to the Ears in Blood,) we continued the only Free-Traders in the World. The Spaniard at War with Holland, was glad to secure his Bullion in our Bottoms, which being Coin'd here, was of some Benefit to the Mint, more to the Merchant, who exchang'd it into Flanders, either by Goods or Bills, which made the greatest plenty of Coin was ever known in this Nation, and upon the easiest most advantageous Terms, (without buying Gold too dear, which may now be) all other Trades keeping an equal Ballance therewith, which made very constant and considerable Returns; and a Return of Customs proportionable, and they were the main Support of the many foremention'd Expences, with se∣veral others not mention'd, and all too little, had there not been an exact Ma∣nagment; for this whole Revenue oftner fell short of Five Hundred Thousand per Annum than rose to Six, when the Ship-Tax,
was most strictly Collected, it could not reach Seven: Yet herewith he liv'd like the King of Great Brittain at home, both by Land and Sea, was very Boun∣tiful to his Sister, and her Family abroad; and seldom without some chargable In∣trigue upon their Account in Germany; and moreover when the Scotch Rebellion brake out, had a Fund to raise an Army, 'tis pity it was not Greater, to pay them quite on, and the others off. Neither was there less exactness in the Management of all other Affairs; Iustice, was most impartially Admini∣stred, every Man's Liberty and Proper∣ty, secur'd to the utmost, where they did not assume a Freedom of Speaking Trea∣son, and Acting Sedition; upon which Account the Ministers of Iustice were stout enough to discharge their Duties, and the honester Men for it, however clamor'd against: In all other things, where a Legal Pretence could be made, the People's Right had as great a Regard as the Prince's Prerogative; both they and their Master abhor'd any thing of Trick, or Iuggle. His Ministers of State too, were every one in their Way as able as these, Men of Honour and Integrity, as well as Knowledge, who being so ill Treated, for their good Endeavours to
preserve the Government, upon its Anti∣ent Constitution, we deserve no more such Publick Spirits, and perhaps God in Dis∣pleasure will forbear to send them. The Universities never receiv'd more Gracious Incouragements, than from this Good Prince, and return'd his Favours, with a proportionable Industry and Gra∣titude; whereby the Church became Re∣plenish'd with a Set of Men, of such so∣lid Parts, sound Doctrine, and steady Principles, as when the Storm, came up∣on that, and the Crown together, they adher'd to both, with the most abstra∣cted Considerations of Loyalty and Con∣science, any Age can Parallel; they have found the Expedient of a greater Latitude since, God grant it do not prove the Broad-Way. In a Word, never was there a bet∣ter Prince, nor happier People, till the Devil of Sedition, Privy Conspiracy and Rebellion, so Hellishly possest all Three King∣doms at once. The sad Subject of our Se∣cond Part.
A JUST DEFENCE OF THE Royal Martyr, CHARLES I. PART II. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Black-Boy over against St. Dunston's Church in Fleet-street, 1699.
A JUST DEFENCE OF THE Royal Martyr CHARLES I. PART II. CHAP. I. Of the Scotch Rebellion. THat Observation of Tully is al∣together like himself,De nat. Deorum. l. 2. agreea∣ble to his peircing Judgment, both as to the nature of the Men, and Things; Nemo vir magnus sine ali∣quo afflatu Divino unquam fuit, the sedate and upright temper of long experienc'd Soul's, fail not to be bless'd with a kind
of natural Inspiration, an infallible guess in whatever prospect they make of Future Events, or other considerable Undertakings, especially as to great Revo∣lutions of State, and overturning of Go∣vernments; which we find him most fatally intimating from the several contending Factions in their own Com∣monwealth. And to bring no farther in∣stances from abroad, there were many Good Men amongst us, who most Pro∣phetically boded this dismal Storm we were now entring into, long before it came. I have heard from his Son, that the Pious and Learned Sir Henry Spelman, did frequently say with a sigh, the Puritan would have his day, and bring all to Con∣fusion. And the truly Apostolical Bishop Andrew's, in a private conversation, and consult, amongst some of his Brethren, not long before his death, did, with an unusual Transport of Spirit, not unlike the Prophets of Old, foretell the miseries shortly to come upon the Church, and particularly declare to Laud, that his life would be Sacrific'd in her quarrel, as like∣wise to another, that he should suffer much, but live to see her restor'd. I shall add but one instance more of this kind, which yet must be acknowledged most considerable; the truly Judicious Hooker's
Divining Spirit, foretold to a year, more than 40 before they came: The sad desolations Schism and Sacrilege would bring upon us. For after a general view, and sorrowful complaint thereof, he adds,Eccl. Pol. l. 5. Sect. 79. By this means they have brought to pass that as David doth say of man, so it is in hazzard to be verified, concern∣ing the whole Religion, and service of God. The time thereof may peradventure fall out to Threescore and Ten years, or if strength do serve unto Fourscore, what followeth is like to be small joy, for them whosoever they be that behold the same. Now whoever makes the Computation, will find it exactly 80 years, from that Regular Establishment of our Church in the first of Queen Elizabeth, to the set∣ting up their Dagon the Covenant in Thirty Eight. Which Caledonian Paw, as Rushworth terms it, or Northern Storm (attended even to Observation, with bad weather, and worse designs) sending forth its pestilent vapours, and Blasting the whole Island with the thick Mists, and dark Foggs of Sedition and Disobedience, to the first disturbance of our Royal Martyr's happy Reign, and the Nation's as hap∣py Peace, it will be requisite to begin with those Commotions, show how
groundless and unreasonable they were, when that unhappy people suffered themselves to be so cursedly possest with the witchcraft of Rebellion then; and how the same Spirit seems still to engage our several Setts of Commonwealth Libel∣lers, in reviving the like confusions: and to state the whole proceedure in as true a light, as such Dark designs will admit, take it in these following Particulars. 1. The Scotch Nation by King Iames's pacifick deportment whilst there, and too obliging bounty whilest her, had enjoy'd, with great plenty, a continued peace for above forty years, which none of their Records can give an account of for so long a time before, though they pretend to go as far back, as most other Nations now in being, except China; and who ever observes how frequent their Feuds have been amongst themselves, and Factious oppositions against their Kings and Faithful Adherents, may rather ad∣mire they should remain so long quiet, than now break out into open Rebellion, especially having their old Allye of France to Back and Bribe them. 2. Pretence of Religion had been the Common Theme of Contention amongst them ever since the Reformation, where∣as in too many other places, the sincere
indeavours of such as design'd a Regular and Orthodox Establishment, met with too many obstructions from the Sacri∣legious on the one hand, and the Facti∣ous on the other. However the Sober Party prevailed so far, as when in the Minority of King Iames a Consultati∣on was held for setling the Polity of the Church,Arch-Bp. Spotsw. 260. there was great regard had to Primitive Episcopacy, and several Arti∣cles agreed upon for authorizing the same, all which Roger Coke is forc'd to own.Detect 365. The Hierarchy of the Church of Scotland, as they were esteemed one of the States in Parliament, was not then, nor after taken away, he should rather have said was continu'd, as Arch Bishop Spots∣wood tells, according to a former draught, where the term Superintendent was used for Bishop: in imitation of some Luthe∣ran Churches, though their Office was during Life, and Power Episcopal. And here to show our Friend Roger's great consistency with himself, I must cursori∣ly observe, that in the same Page, where he owns the foremention'd Hierarchy, he tells us Their Reformation was purely after the mode of Calvin, and Church of Geneva. Indeed there was a Mob Refor∣mation always on foot amongst them, and so will be unto the end of the
world, unless better care be taken, and the Abetting Great ones made sensible of their infatuations, not to call them worse: yet this very attempt, according to the Re∣verend Spotswood was some years after,Spots. 275. viz. 1575. In the Church, saith he, this year, began the Innovations to break forth, that to this day have kept it in continual un∣quietness: Andrew Melvin, who was late∣ly come from Geneva, hot and eager upon any thing, he went about, laboured with a burning desire, to bring into the Church the Presbyterian Discipline of Geneva, &c. So that it seems in this judicious Histo∣rians opinion, the Geneva model was an Innovation in the Kirk of Scotland, and doubtless is no less in the Church of Christ. Iohn Knox indeed had attempted something of the same kind several years before,Spots. 174. fram'd a policy partly in imitation of the Reformed Churches in Germany, partly of that he had seen at Geneva, which a Temporal Lord called a Devout ima∣gination, altogether unpracticable, and a Spiritual gave a severer charge; but this was in their first recess from Rome, when no setled Establishment was fix'd upon; insomuch as the year before up∣on condition Queen Elizabeth would as∣sist them in expelling the French, they engaged to recieve our English Liturgy,
all which Buchanan owns, Scoti ex ser∣vitute Gallica, Anglorum auxiliis liberati, eisdem Ritibus cum Anglis communibus subscripserunt, Lib. 19. And as it appears from Iohn Knox's History, this was re∣ally put in practice, and a Constitution ordered thereupon; but their turn was no sooner serv'd, both their Enemies and Friends departed, but they immediate∣ly fell off, from what 'tis probable ve∣ry few intended ever to observe. Nei∣ther could it be expected they should long accord to any thing from us, who had so little amongst themselves, what with Deposing their Prince, and Opposing one another, the many Contests amongst the Nobility, and Factions amongst the Clergy, it was several years ere they could fix upon that little Settlement afore∣mention'd, which, when agreed to, the Rapine of Sacrilege, and Rage of Secta∣ries, abetting each other, little good effect came thereof, the sincere indea∣vours, and serious admonitions of those few who design'd well, were no more heard amongst the many intriguing clamors, than a whisper in the Cyclops's Den; per∣haps no Nation but themselves, can pa∣rallel such continu'd Distractions, both in Church and State; as they then a∣bounded
with, and upon every occasion are still ready to fly into. 3. These confusions continu'd all the Minority of King Iames, with such other insolencies, and affronts to his Royal Per∣son Crown and Dignity, as no Crown'd-head ever met with but there, some of their Neighbours indeed have been their sordid Imitators since, however as he got years, he got ground too, brought them to something of temper before he left that Kingdom, and when fix'd here in England, establish'd the Hierarchy by Primitive Ordination, and retreiv'd some of it's Revenue, from those greedy Har∣pies which oppos'd it for that very rea∣son; procur'd those commonly call'd the Five Articles of Perth, to pass the General Assembly, and afterward the Parliament, being very well pleas'd in so nigh an approach to the Church of England, which he despair'd not to car∣ry on further, as to Liturgy and Canons, the only thing wanting to the perfe∣cting the Ecclesiastical Union, his heart was very much set upon for. 4. At the foremention'd Assembly of Perth, there was an order to have a Liturgy fram'd, and Canons made for the Church of Scotland, as appears by the pro∣ceedings of that Assembly pag. 40. and
68. so that it was a great mistake in Bishop Hackett or something worse in his Patron Williams, who must be his in∣former, to say King Iames was very an∣gry with Laud upon that account, where∣as there was no one thing he was more desirous to see accomplish'd; but the Parliament, Palatinate, and Spanish match, with some other uneasinesses to his declin∣ing Age, made the prosecution thereof to be laid aside, the remaining part of his Reign. 5. King Charles likewise had the same uneasiness upon him the first four years of his Reign, which having weather'd, as well as Circumstances would admit, fell to prosecute his Fathers pious intenti∣ons of a Liturgy in Scotland, and therefore 'tis abominably false, like himself, and Party, in Roger Coke, to say Laud had not been two months Archbishop,Detect. 352. but he advised the King to make a Reformation in the Church of Scotland, whereas the Prelates of that Kingdom had been at work upon it se∣ral years before, 'tis probable ever since King Iames's incouragement at the As∣sembly of Perth: This is certain 1629, four years before Laud's advance to Canterbury, he was visited by a Scotch Bi∣shop and told him it was his Majest'ys Plea∣sure, that he should receive Instructions
from some Bishops in Scotland concering a Liturgy for that Church,Troubl. & Try. pa. 168. &c. Laud, re∣ply'd if his Majesty would have a Litur∣gy, it were best to have the English; but the Scotch Prelates were of a contra∣ry opinion, that their Countrymen would be better satisfied with one drawn up by their own Clergy, and that resolution after some debates pro and con prevailing, His Ma∣jesty commanded Laud to give them his best assistance, who thereupon set himself seriously to the work, having the King's Warrant for all he did. And herein ap∣pears his Majesty's great Judgment in the choice, as well as the Prudence of the Scotch Bishop's in procuring his assistance, who as he was a most profound Divine, so without doubt the exactest Ritualist, these or any other Protestant Church ever had: And this likewise resolves friend Roger's doubly Detection of the King's tel∣ling Marquiss Hamilton the Archbishop was the only Englishman he entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Affairs of Scotland: I wish there had been no other Brotherly assi∣stance between the two Nations, than that of these good Prelates, the Co∣venant was carryed on in another manner.
6. 'Tis likewise abominably false that the High Commission was erected by his procurement, or in his time, al∣though to render things the more invi∣dious, it is generally reported so by all the spiteful Crew, whereas would they have consulted a Brother Libeller, he could have given them better in∣formation, the Libel is term'd Altare Damascenum,Alt. Dam. p. 28. Printed 1623, who tells us Ad Anglicani Tribunalis exemplar forma∣tum est aliud in Scotia Anno 1616, &c. whether then Establish'd or only reviv'd by King Iames, I will not dispute, but that such a Court there was all their Histories agree, so that 'tis a gross mi∣stake in Roger Coke, and no man of common sense would be guilty of it, to say, in this year 1635 there was a great contrivance between Arch-Bishop Laud, and the Bishops in Scotland, how to erect an High Commission Court by the Kings Authority. There are few men so bold and dare∣ing, as though they have no Regard for truth, yet nevertheless will keep a Reserve upon Reputation, who fears not to do ill, yet fears the name, &c. and realy it will be hard to find so many impudent brazenfac'd Falsehoods and Forgeries, pack'd together upon any one subject whatsoever, as my several pretended Au∣thors
have against this excellent Prince and his Ministers, had they kept them∣selves to the Politicks, the duty of eve∣ry Historian, they might have found too much matter for spiteful Wits to Carp at, want of Resolution in prose∣cuting what was prudently design'd, too much kindness to such as did not deserve it, and consequently too much confidence in trusting and imploying them, although as to what we are now discoursing of, the Liturgy, there was no defect of this kind, especially on the English side, for Archbishop Laud writ to his Brother of St. Andrew's, that whether the English, or any other was resolv'd upon, they should proceed circumspectly, because his Majesty had no intendment to do any thing, but what was according to Honour and Iustice, and the Laws of that Kingdom;Trou. & Tryal p. 168. all which doubtless there was great re∣grad to; the only question is as to the unseasonableness of the enterprise, whe∣ther such as were continually upon the Spot, might not have better discovered the temper of the People, what strong prejudices they were possest withal, with the several Interests and Humor's then on foot: as likewise seen further into the double dealing of such Great ones, who flatter'd his Majesty, in his pious
intentions, yet at the same time, un∣der-hand, fomented the Religious Rebellion, and, when time serv'd headed them. I thought my self oblig'd to give this brief account of Church Affairs in Scot∣land, together with the Rise, and Pro∣gress of that Liturgy, the Causa Patens of their Rebellion, (and a very laudable one doubtless) that it might the more clearly appear, how basely partial, false, and malicious Ludlow is, as to whatever he relates on that Subject; for after his constant introduction of what great de∣sign's were in hand for advancing Pre∣rogative and Popery, he adds, Before any further progress should be made therein here, it was thought expedient that the pulse of Scotland should be felt, and they perswaded or compell'd to the like conformity. To this end a form of Publick Prayer was sent to Scotland more nearly approaching the Roman Office, than that us'd in England, p. 6; 7. To Prerogative and Popery we have already spoken, which is only brought in here by way of flourish and aggravation, as the main end to which all the rest were to be subservient, whereas that being false, what a crazy Structure are these fellows like to raise. That it must certainly fall is infallible; the mischief of it is, 'twill fall about
other mens ears, besides their own. The charge now on foot is that they design'd to perswade or compell Uniformity; a dan∣gerous design this, if it were so at the first Establishment of our Church by Queen Elizabeth and her Parliament, for there we find the Liturgy was reviv'd accor∣ding to that of Ed. the VI. with Arti∣cles, Constitutions and Canons, ay and a High-Commission erected de Novo, with an Act of Uniformity too, to compel such as would not be perswaded; and under these excellent Constitutions our Church and State continued; for more than four∣score years the Glory, and Envy of the Good and Bad, all Christendom thorough. But then our dear Neighbours the Scots, giving a helping-hand to their weak Bre∣thren here, did not design to relieve, but alter this compulsion; instead of Liturgy and Canons, would have the Covenant and Directory, the little finger whereof, is heavier not only than the Loins, but whole Body of our Church. However they could only succeed nega∣tively, pull down what had been E∣stablish'd; the Nation were grown too much Libertines to admit of any restraint, much less exchange a Service which was perfect Freedom, for the more than Egyp∣tion Bondage of Scotch Impositions: by
which means we continued nigh twen∣ty years in a perfect state of Anarchy both Temporal and Spiritual, every one do∣ing what seem'd Right in his own Eyes; and had some affinity with what that Judi∣cious Historian observ'd of the Ro∣mans when under the like circumstances. It was better to live where nothing than where all things were Lawful. To be sure the sense and dismal sufferings which accrew'd thereby, made us resolve up∣on our Old Establishments, to have our Kings as at first, and our Church as at the beginning, which the Parliament like∣wise thought fit to confirm by another Act of Uniformity; but what with that perverseness of spirit inseparable to such Children of Disobedience, and the kind assistance of their good Friends the Pa∣pists, all Ecclesiastical Discipline hath pas∣sed for a mighty Grievance ever since, neither can there be a greater invasion upon the Subject's Librety, than to perswade or compell men to Heaven against their Wills, and thus by Tolerating all Religi∣ons, we are in a very forward tendency to have none; nay, I cannot but fur∣ther observe our Politicks seem to be at as low an Ebb as our Piety, and it may be shortly look'd upon as an entrench∣ment upon the Liberty of a Free People,
to perswade or compell Commutative Iustice and Moral Honesty. That the Form of Publick Prayer sent to Scotland more near∣ly approach'd the Roman Office than that of England, is another instance of our Author's integrity, whereas the most con∣siderable difference between them, was an alteration of such passages in ours, as the Puritan Party had all along ca∣vill'd at: for Example, the name of Priest, (so odious to that captious Bro∣therhood) was changed to that of Pres∣byter, no fewer than sixty Chapters, or thereabouts, taken out of the Apocrypha, were reduced to two, and those two to be read only on the Feast of All Staints the New Translation Authoriz'd by King Iames, being us'd in the Psalms, Epi∣stles, Gospels, Hymns, and Sentences, in∣stead of the Old Translation, so much complained of in their Books and Confe∣rences, these were the most considerable Alterations, besides somewhat in the Com∣munion Office, according to the first Li∣turgy of Edward VI's, so far from Pope∣ry as it expresly declares against the Do∣ctrine of Transubstantiation, only retains one or two Rites, which the Primi∣tive Church did practise before that u∣surpation had got any footing in the World; and therefore I admire to find in ano∣ther
Volume of Memoirs, That the Altera∣tions made from the English, rendred it more invidious and less satisfactory; but as the humour then went, and ever will a∣mong that infatuated people, had an An∣gel from Heaven brought one down, and by express command of Iesus Christ enjoyn'd an Establishment, the Covenant nevertheless would have had the pre∣ference. Nay, farther to corroborate the Violence of their prejudices, they had got one Abernethy, who from a Iesuit Priest turned a zealous Presbyterian, to forge a Story, that the Liturgy had been sent to Rome, and revis'd by some Car∣dinals there, which he had from Seigni∣or Con, who shew'd it to himself. Up∣on this Report the Marquess Hamilton, then Commissioner, wrote to Con, retur∣ned from Rome to London, who protested he never so much as heard of a Liturgy, till he came last to England, and had never seen that Abernethy, but once at Rome, and finding him Light-headed, never again took notice of him; yet saith my Author, who shall be nameless, The story had a ready belief and welcome hearing, tho' the Lightness and Weakness of the man became afterwards so visible, that small account was made either of him, or his story; yet at this time it took wonderfully. And this is the
foundation of what the Defence, or his fellow Pamphleteer relates of that worthy Dominican Convert, Gage, who might agree with the Iesuit when both about to turn Presbyterians, and joyn together in some forgery which might merit their reception, although their Orders are ir∣reconcilable, and will believe one ano∣ther no more than an honest man of sense and understanding will believe ei∣ther of them. In the mean while that any Office in a Vulgar Tongue should be sent to Rome for Approbation, is so in∣consistent with the Policy and Cunning of that Church, as none but Fanaticks and Fools could swallow, and 'tis said, when told the Pope he laugh'd heartily at it. To be sure they would not admit their Missall upon such terms; especially we giving them so fair an opportunity of bringing it in upon their own. To give one instance further how Artificially they Ape'd the Iesuit in all Tricks of Imposture, they got a Covenanting Sister troubled either with Fits of the Mother, or the Devil, who in such disorderly Convulsi∣ons would foam out Raptures in defiance of the Bishop's, service Book, and Canons, with the bitterest invectives against all such as opposed the Covenanting Iesus, which their Juggling Preachers so dex∣terously
improved, as to make it a ra∣tification from Heaven, of whatever Villanies they had impos'd upon the People. He goes on to tell us that the reading of the New service Book at Eden∣burgh, was first interrupted by a poor Wo∣man, but withal so well seconded by the ge∣nerallity, as they who Officiated hardly escaped with their Lives. This produced di∣vers meetings of many of the Nobility, Cler∣gy, and Gentry, who entred into an agree∣ment or covenant, to root out Episcopacy, He∣resie, and Superstition. A very justifiable undertaking this, I hope they made the Goodwife Chairwoman of the Assembly when they debated these weighty points; she had as much right to do it as they, be∣sides that of Precedency, and perhaps un∣derstood them as well, to be sure never any Mob Convention, whether of the Great Vulgar, or the small presum'd to determine what is Heresie, prescribe modes of Worship, or rules of Discipline, till Iohn Calvin's Popular Ordinences came abroad in the World, which too hath been wretch∣edly improv'd by his admirers, to the scandal of all true Religion, and the Di∣sturbance of whatever Civil Government it gets into. 'Tis a known Fable, that when the Lyon prohibited all Horned Beasts, the Fox would not come nigh the
Den, for fear his Ears should be brought under that Denomination; if these In∣fallible Assertors of their own Wills shall think fit to term sound Doctrine, Heresie, Episcopacy a Rag of Satan, and the most Innocent Decencies, Superstition, who dare withstand, or contradict them, as all Or∣thodox Divines the whole Kingdom tho∣rough then found to their utter ruin; and something of the like Inhumane treatment, hath been lately on foot a∣mongst them—can the Pope be more Imposing or Inquisition more cruel? At the same rate he continues, The Clergy of England, who had been the chief Advisers and Promoters of this violence, prevailed with the King, to cause all such as should persist in their Opposition, after a certain time to be proclaimed Traytors, p. 7. Still the Clergy do all, which puts me in mind of what Plutarch relates concern∣ing the peoples Prejudice against Me∣tiochus, Metiochus is Captain, Metiochus is Surveyor, Metiochus bakes the Bread, &c. evil day to Metiochus. So crys Ludlow, the Clergy advise the King, the Clergy raise the Forces, the Clergy pay the Army, &c. evil day to the Clergy: whereas the only Clergyman of our Nation whom the King consulted, was Bishop Laud, and they that write most in vindication of
Hamilton give him a very honourable Character, as to whatsoever he advised in those unhappy affairs; although neither he, nor any of his Majesty's Faithful Loyal Subjects of either Kingdom, were satisfied with those unreasonable conde∣scentions, he was wheedled into, for that it was most visibly apparent, the more he yielded, the more insolently they per∣sisted in further demands, being so far from setting one step forward, as to stand back with the greater Obstinacy, and consider what was further to be insisted upon, in defiance of all Honour, Right, and Law; for, as Ludlow relates, The King by Commission impowered the Marquess of Ha∣milton, to treat them into a Submission, con∣senting to the suppression of the Liturgy, High-Commission Court, and Articles of Perth, but the Scots insisting upon the Abo∣lition of Episcopacy, and the King refusing his consent to it, they did it themselves in an Assembly held at Glasco. This is a ge∣neral account, and which is very much, and rare. True, but there were several Circumstances in the management there∣of very considerable: As first, they that understood and wish'd best to the King and Kingdoms interest, thought Hamilton a very improper person to be employ'd in that affair, for that several of his nigh∣est
Relations, were chief of the Cove∣nant party, his Mother more especially, so great a Heroine as to ride with Pistols at her saddle Bow, and defie both God and the King, in defence of so good a cause. Secondly, there were several other prejudices against him, which whether true or false, made many honest men move with the less vigor, because they expect∣ed no good Event from whatsoever he engag'd in; and this was most unhappily confirmed by the Concessions he cajol'd the King into as to the Liturgy, High Com∣mission, &c. For after a long and fruit∣less Treaty with the Covenanters at E∣dinburgh, attended with three several journeys to the English Court, instead of Treating them into a Submission as Lud∣low words it, they Treated the King, ob∣taining all to that time their most inso∣lent demands. What is alledg'd in his defence, That he knew the Kings condition, how unable he was, or hard it would be to bring an Army into the Field, is no ways valid, for he was then as able as after∣wards, and delays were rather to their advantage, than his, and since all men of observation concluded the Scots would never give off without blows, the Pun∣ctilio of first Aggressor was nonsence, they never stood upon it, when it would serve
their turn, and that their so grosly a∣bused Sovereign should not take the best opportunity of chastising them is against all Rules of Reason and Policy whatso∣soever; but to speak freely the King's great tenderness, and regard to those his natural and Native Subjects, as he term∣ed them, was so unfortunately misplac'd, upon the most ungrateful set of people that ever trod upon God's Earth, to his and their own ruine, as well as all others concerned with them. But if Hamilton impos'd upon the King by ca∣joling him into the most groundless concessions ever any Prince yielded to, so doubtless the Covenanters impos'd altogether as much upon him, for whe∣ther there was any correspondence be∣tween them or not as to this particular, (which for ought I can find remains still in the dark) he could not but ratio∣nally presume it would be an eternal ob∣ligation, to procure in one single De∣claration a full grant, of whatever all their Supplications, Remonstrances, Prote∣stations, &c. had hitherto demanded; and so indeed the Lords of the Council took it, subscribing a Letter of acknow∣ledgment to his Majesty, in one of the most Rhetorical Flights I have generally met with, owning that such acts of
Clemency, could not proceed from any Prince, saving him who is the lively image of the great God, Author of all Goodness.See large Declara∣tion. Which how the most, and most considerable of them kept afterwards, would be un∣happy to observe. The Covenanters, on the other side, resolved to act with∣out a vizard, which they had some time before, thrown quite away; and for fear the People should cool, and for∣bear assisting in the designed Rebellion, repair'd to the Cross at Edinburgh, ere∣cted a Scaffold under it, where a great number of Earls, Lords, Gentlemen, and others mounted, with Swords in their hands, and Hats on their Heads, having that worthy wight Archibald Johnson, (who never fail'd in any villainy, tho as pro∣perty to Oliver Cromwell, and a member in the Committee of safety,) to read the most Impudent, Ignorant, Treasonable, ay and Blasphemous Protestation that ever was penn'd, to make good which last charge, it is there expresly affirm'd, that their Covenant was seal'd from Hea∣ven, and approv'd thence by rare and un∣deniable Evidences, whereas it looks more like a Combination from Hell,Large Declara∣tion. the un∣doubted forge of all Faction, Sedition, and Schism.
Nevertheless they did not think fit to break out into open Rebellion, till they had got the Blessing of their As∣sembly, to the meeting whereof the King had likewise condescended; It hath somewhat of affinity with our Convoca∣tion, only in imitation of Geneva, was divided into several Classes, and from a Provincial choice, sent up to a Gene∣ral. These at the beginning of the Reformation play'd Rex, and Pope, all in one, would controul and Over-rule whatever Civil Determinations they dislik'd, command the King to discharge such a Minister of State, otherways they would proceed to Excommunication, and when once upon a time he had engag'd the Magistrates of Edinburgh to entertain the French Embassadours, with which Crown he design'd to enter into Ancient Amity, the little Class of that City Preachers,Spotsw. 324. proclaimed a Fast to be kept the same day, on which three of them severaly preach'd one after another, without intermiss∣on, Thundering out Curses against the Magi∣strates, and other Noble men, who attend∣ed the Embassadors. Neither stay'd ther Folly here, saith my Author, but pursuel the Magistrates with the censures of the Church, and with much difficulty were kept from Excommunication. These insolen∣cies
by degrees King Iames put a Check to, and for 60 years last past, such as∣semblies were regularly summon'd, in Subordination to their Bishop, but now they were resolv'd to have all thrown open again, and to be the surer of a Party, brought the lay Elders, to Vote in the Choice of their Commissioners, that the sober and honest part of the Clergy, which were numerous, might not over Balance them, in short never was any Election carry'd on with so much partiallity and confusion, which continu'd all the time of their Session, till the Commissioners patience was so highly irritated, as to Dissolve them, whereat they were so far from being concerned, as to stand in defiance there∣of; and indeed it seem'd to put them into their proper Post, now it was right down opposition, Treason all over; and having none to curb them, could the more confidently proceed to condemn all the Assemblies had been for 40 years before, as prelimited, and not Free, Epi∣scopacy to be sure must be declar'd un∣lawful, with the like fate to the Ser∣vice-Book, Canons, High-Commission, and Articles of Perth. They appointed the Covenant to be taken by all under Ex∣communication, and then proceeded to
the Process of the Bishop's notwithstand∣ing their Declinator, wherein being both Iudges and Parties, they could not fail to carry all according to their Arbitra∣ry Factious Wills. Thus with three or four peremptory Votes, they totally A∣bolished (so far as power without Right can go) whatever the Wisdom, Prudence, and Piety, of Two Kings, with all the sensible good men of the Nation, had been for Fifty or Threescore years E∣stablishing. From this motly Assembly Ludlow pro∣ceeds, and tells us That being inform'd the King was preparing an Army to compell them to obedience, they agreed upon the raising some Forces to defend themselves. And could they expect otherwise after such an ungrateful aswell as undutifull procedure? yet notwithstanding they were always afore-hand with the King, conscious of what they deserv'd, pro∣vided accordingly, Levy'd Forces, im∣pos'd Taxes, block'd up his Majesty's Castles, rais'd Fortifications, &c. whilst with specious pretences and Protestati∣ons they kept him in suspence, though at last he could not but see into, and thorough such Villanous Hypocrisies, and betake himself to the Ratio Ultima Regum; for which, however Ludlow
would have it a Bellum Episcopale, the Clergy's War, he had the greatest pro∣vocation upon the Civil the Temporal account, that ever any Prince met with∣all, indeed they were both intermixed, and both superlatively Base, take some of them as followeth. Large Declara∣tion.1. He could not endure that the Usurpations of an Ecclesiastical Assembly should abolish Acts of Parliament, which strikes at the Foundation of Monarchy, and indeed all other Go∣vernment. 2. To secure the three Estates of Parliament, that one of them might not be destroy'd without his and the Parliaments consent. 3. To punish such as have impos'd Taxes, raised Forts, Levied men and Arms, &c. all which by the Laws of the Kingdom, are Acts of High-Trea∣son and Rebellion. 4. To repress the Insolent Protesta∣tions of his Subjects against him∣self, his Council, Iudges, Laws, the constant practise of the Covenanters. 5. To punish the ringleaders of Re∣bellion, who have abused his Subjects, by imposing upon them a Covenant, and mutual Bond of Defence, against
his Majesties Person, and without his consent, contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom. 6. To punish such as under the name of Tables, or a Committee of the General Assembly, shall presume to sit without his consent, to order Affairs of Church, and State, refusing when questioned the Authority of his Majesty, Council, or Iudges, and appeal∣ing to a General Assembly, Blasphe∣mously calling it Christ's own immediate Council, and claiming a Sovereign Inde∣pendency, from King, Council, Iudges, and Parliament. These are some of the Reasons his Majesty himself gives for that unwilling War these furious Zea∣lots forc'd him upon. That the Clergy of England were not wanting to promote the New-Levies, as Ludlow saith, is true, but That they were the principal Authors, and Fomentors of the Troubles, is absolute∣ly False, as likewise, That what the No∣bility, and Gentry did, was rather out of complement, than affection to the design: there was a party indeed whom the Scotch had Bit, and made as Mad as themselves, but all men of sound Prin∣ples, and sober judgments, foresaw that the neighbour Kingdom being on Fire, if good care were not taken to
quench it, ours might shortly catch the Flame, and both be consumed together, contributed with all the alacrity and sa∣tisfaction imaginable, neither had there ever appear'd upon those Borders a bra∣ver Army, or more resolutely bent to beat the Scotch into better manners, whatever Arts were us'd to affright, and intimidate them, for those of that Nation in his own Family, did him more mischief than the whole Covenanters Army, by betraying his Counsels, mis∣representing their strength, and more especially letting him know how averse his Majesty was to come to the extremity, otherwise his Army wanted neither power nor will, at one single blow to have decided that dispute, which afterward cost so many, and to very little purpose; 'tis said that when the old Arch-bishop of St. Andrews (who knew his Country-men, aswell, perhaps better than most others) came to take his leave of his King at his set∣ting forward to the North, desired leave to give his Majesty three Advertisments, before his going. First, that he would suffer none of the Scotch Nation to re∣main in his Army, assuring him that they would never fight against their Country∣men; but rather hazard the whole by their
Tergiversation. The Second was, That he should make a Catalogue of all his Counsellors, Officers of Household, and Domestick Servants, expunging every one of the Scotch Nation, beginning with the Bishop himself, by which means he could not be accused of Partiality, when a person who had served him and his Father above Sixty Years so Faithfully, appear'd in the Front. A third was, that be must not think to win upon them by condescentions, the sweetness of his disposi∣tion, or Acts of Grace, but resolve to re∣duce them to their duty, by such ways of Power as God had put into his hands. Thus far that wise experienced Per∣son, and his Majesty not following such wholesome advice, I take to be the Origin of all his following Troubles, and Ruine: for the Scotch taking him now to be in good earnest, and know∣ing how ill provided they were to make opposition, having not above 3000 compleat Arms amongst them, (whatever flourishes those false Lowns their Countrymen made both in Court and Camp) thought it requisite to di∣vert that approaching danger, they had so justly drawn upon themselves; and hereupon addressed themselves to
the Earl of Essex, whom the King had sent before from York, to take pos∣session of Berwick, to him they com∣plained of some of their own Coun∣trymen, who had provoked the King against them, protesting still their own Innocency, Loyalty to the King, and Affection to the English, requesting him to procure a Pacification, by any means whatsoever, which should be thought expedient on both sides: the like Address they made to the Earl of Arundel, General, &c. Earl of Holland Lieftenant General of the Horse, in whom they had a more than ordi∣nary confidence (as knowing how well that whole Family was affected to their Covenant cause) and there∣fore not only justified themselves in their former proceedings, but request∣ed his assistance to promote their de∣sires, in a Petition tendred to his Ma∣jesty's hands. By these and such-like sly Addresses, his Majesty's good nature was too easily wrought upon to com∣ply, and agree to a Pacification, which being once signed, he fell immedi∣ately to the Execution of every Arti∣cle on his side, forthwith disbanding a brave Army, Govern'd by Colonels
and other Officers of approved Valour and Experience, mingled with the choicest of the English Gentry, who stood as much upon his Honour, as upon their own: and were not a little concerned, that having with great charge engaged themselves in this Ex∣pedition, they should be suddenly dis∣miss'd, not only without the Honour they aim'd at, but without any ac∣knowledgement of their Love and Loyalty. Whereas had he retired on∣ly to a farther distance, he had done as much as the Capitulation required, and in all reasonable probability, se∣cur'd himself from the further stratagems of that Perfidious People, and crush'd those practices at home, which after∣wards undermin'd his Peace, and di∣stroyed his Glories. On the other-side the Ink was scarce dry, which had written and sign'd the Articles of Ac∣commodation, before the Scotch had broken them almost in every particular, for the Covenanters not only entred a Protestation against the Declaration a∣greed to, but kept most of their Forces on foot in several Bodies, and all their Officers in pay. The Fortificati∣on of Leith was not demolish'd. Their
meetings, Treatings, and Consultations, upon matters of State, Ecclesiastical and Civil, were continued contrary to all Law, and Acts of Parliament; Sub∣scriptions to their Assembly at Glasco were enforc'd upon all the King's Sub∣jects, contrary to his Proclamation, whilst all such persons as took Arms for the King, are branded with the aspersion of Incendiaries, and Traytors to God and their Country. So likewise when their Assembly came to sit at Edinburgh they acted with more heats and Arbitrary insults than at Glasco, and the Parliament which followed them, stroke at all the Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, were resol∣ved to casheer one of the Three, and that formerly the first Estate of the Kingdom, together with that of the Lords of the Articles.See large Declara∣tion. A constitution of above 300 years standing, and ma∣ny other such intolerable insolencies, and indignities as were never before put upon Crown'd heads, and none but Covenanters could have done it now: more especially considering those un∣paralelled condescentions, which the King with too great kindness and confi∣dence in his own Countrymen so distru∣ctively yeilded to.
What Ludlow adds further, besides the falseness of the relation, is so impu∣dent a piece of villany, as one would think he desir'd to out do, if possible, those his Dear Brethren he is so forward to Excuse, in order whereunto, by a pretty turn of Commonwealth artifice, he transferrs one of the basest of those many Tricks the Covenanters so perfidiously put upon his Majesty, and lays it at his Door, the Story as he makes it stands thus, Upon his (the Kings return to Lon∣don, under colour that many false Copies of the said Articles were publish'd, and dis∣pers'd, by the Scotts to the great dishonour of the King, the said Agreement was dis∣own'd, and ordered to be burnt by the hands of the Hangman. p. 8. Now the design of this is to insinuate, especially amongst those of the Factious, who not only be∣lieve, but put their trust in Lyes, that they were the really true Articles, burnt under colour of being False, as likewise that the King intended thereby to dis∣own the Agreement, whereas the Ar∣ticles of Pacification were not any ways concern'd herein, as the Title which the Scotts gave that Pamphlet expresly de∣clare, viz. Some conditions of his Maje∣sties Treaty with the Subjects of Scotland before the Nobility of England, are here
set down for a remembrance. This paper consisted of Eight points, pretended to be drawn out of Notes taken upon seve∣ral Discourses with the King about the manner of his Declaration, and was dispersed not only in Scotland, but Eng∣land, to confirm their own Party, and draw off more from their Loyalty and Al∣legiance. One of these were put into the Earl of Pembrooke's hands, who de∣livered it to the K. and upon a full Exa∣mination of the matter before the Council, the English Lords who were privy to the whole transaction being present, it was judged very highly scandalous to his Majesty's Person, Honour, and Government, full of Gross mistakes, perverting His Ma∣jesty's Declaration, and of pernicious conse∣quence to the Peace of the Kingdom for which the Proclamation was published. All which several of the Lords Commissioners at the Treaty of Pacification, particularly the Earl of Holland, too much their friend then, afterwards avowed, at Berwick, to the faces of those Scotch Lords who were believed the divulgers, the Lords of the Council of Scotland being there like∣wise present: upon the full considera∣tion of which premises, the whole Board unanimously petitioned his Ma∣jesty, that this false and scandalous Paper
might be publickly burnt by the Hangman: And here I appeal to any Reader, who hath not totally abdicated all integrity, whether these two relations are not as irreconcileable as Light and Darkness? as likewise whether any but one of that infernal brood could so vilainously transfer an express matter of fact, which when detected the Covenanters themselves blushed at, for when the King charged their Commissioners at London with so base a forgery, Low∣don and the rest of them reply'd, They had no Instructions to answer for that, and those at home had better have said nothing, than make so lame an excuse, as that verbal grants made by the King might be supposed to con∣tract the signed Articles;Large Declar. Nay those grants too were of their own forging or perverting. Ludlow having thus expressed his base endeavours to bring them off here; 'tis much he did not go forward and give his helping hand in justifying that Letter several of the Covenant Gran∣dees did send to the King of France, the Original whereof coming to his Ma∣jesty's own hands, subscribed amongst others, by Lowdon then Commissioner at London, he was committed to the
Tower, which made the whole Cove∣nanting pack open lowder than ever, both as to a general justification of the thing, considering they were threatned to be punished for their Rebellion; and for Lowdon in particu∣lar, he ought to have been return'd, they said, and uncloathed of his Com∣mission, ere his Majesty could question him; as if the Law of Nations, which indeed secures the Ministers of Foreign Princes, and requires an appeal to their own Masters upon any affront or other misdemeanor, should oblige a So∣vereign Prince not to question and com∣mit his own Subjects, upon fresh dis∣covery of more palpable Treasons, though in Commission from his fellow Rebels; yet nothing would satisfie them, but setting him at perfect li∣berty, and so sent home to be try'd in a legal way, by the ordinary Iudicatures of the Land; where the King might expect just such an Issue as of a Thief at the Old Baily, from the Award of a Iury out of Newgate: however in this also his Majesty humor'd their Insolencies, and discharg'd Lowdon, not without some private assurance of Secret Ser∣vice, which was perform'd vpse Co∣venanter. But this was the last Act of
compliance his Majesty conceded to, for now his eyes were thoroughly opened (oh that they had been sooner!) and clearly discover'd how they were resolved not only upon the lessening of his Prerogative, but to over-rule and absolutely destroy every branch of his Sovereign Power; whereto things were not ripe at first, till having by the cunning of their Protestations, Trea∣ties, and Pacification imposed upon his Clemency, and got time to strengthen themselves at home, and improve their interest herein England, they now re∣solv'd not to let slip so fair an oppor∣tunity, but without farther hesitation fall directly to work, and give his Majesty a full conviction, that as the Satyrist afterward exprest it, 'twas nei∣ther Gold, nor Grace, but steel must tame the stubborn Scot: and that this only re∣medy was not made use of when the King had so advantageous an oppor∣tunity, I find passionately complain'd of by that great Clergy-man Ludlow is so inveterately piquant against. His Majesty, saith he,Trou. & Try. p. 75. would not beleeve, though often told, the Northern Commoti∣ons had their root in England, and were carryed on by a powerful Faction in both Nations, till after much intercourse, and
mediation cast away, he was betray'd by his own Agents; and when the second volume of his Troubles comes forth, which hath been some years printed off, we shall find something like a De∣tection of those unhappy times, for I am told it contains a great intercourse of Letters, about the Liturgy, and o∣ther Scotch Affairs, and then these our Scriblers, these Retailers of Libels, if possible will be more contemptible amongst all men of truth, and goodness, than they are at present, although now it must be own'd how justly they all deserve that Character, which Roger Cook fixeth upon the Scotch Co∣venanters in general, of an insolent, faithless, railing sort of men. And here Ludlow begins to triumph at the King's disappointments, telling as how he hoped a Parliament would espouse his quar∣rel, and furnish him with money for car∣rying on his disign, but they fell upon Greivances, &c. and so were disolved: p. 9. Truly the King had just reason to expect the Parliament should have joyned with him in a due resentment of those many insolencies that violent people put upon him, particularly the Letter they were sending to the King
of France, and assisted him in reducing them to their due Allegiance; and some were very prone to think, had not the King been betray'd by his own Minister, his Secretary, things might have been car∣ried with much more temper than be∣fore, or to be sure in that which fol∣lowed; for it consisted of many wor∣thy Gentlemen, and doubtless must be somewhat the better that never a Lud∣low was there, nor Father, nor Son; and had there been none of the Vanes, so related, all things might have gone well, but old Sir Henry demanding twelve Subsidies for the Kings present Exigen∣cies, stood so peremptorily thereupon, without falling down to six, as orde∣red (a cursed piece of Treachery in that unworthy man as afterward appear'd from the rest of his, and his Sons acti∣ons) the House fell into so violent a heat, as they could never after be brought to temper again, but on the contrary were resolv'd the morning of their Dissoluti∣on, to Vote against the War with Scot∣land, which forc'd an unwilling precipi∣tation thereof: and this had been as well for Ludlow's turn, as to say it was be∣cause they first fell upon Grievances, where∣as both Houses had superseded them to
a Supply, and the King in return pro∣mised to acquit his claim of Shipmoney, but when men have habituated them∣selves to untruths, it may be a curse upon them, not to relate what is right, though it would better serve the turn and salve their Reputation. The Parliament thus standing out we are told how the Earl of Strafford, and the rest of his Council advis'd the King to make use of other means for a supply, as appear'd by the Minutes of the Secretary of State, taken at the Cabal, and produc'd at the Tryal of the said Earl: the Sum of whose Advice, as Ludlow relates, shall be considered hereafter, and justify'd: in the mean while we may observe how just that Secretary Sir H. V. was to his Oath of Secrecy as a Privy Councel∣lor, and faithful to his Prince, who ad∣vanc'd him, altho' the discovery tended only to his own Shame, and eternal Infa∣my of himself and Son. All the imagina∣ble ways us'd to raise Supplys, as Ludlow most invidiously reckons them up, were no more than what several Kings and Queens have done before, upon like Exi∣gencies, yet his then Majesty found great difficulties therein, by reason of those strange prejudices and prepossessions
wherewith the Scotch Leven had sowred too many of all Qualities and Degrees. And hence it was the Covenanters got the start of his Majesty's Army and were come to Newcastle before that was strong enough to oppose them. For whate∣ver Ludlow relates of a considerable Party of English and Scotch encountring, and that the former, contrary to their wonted custom, retired in disorder not without Shame and some Loss. And then makes his refle∣ction, Of such force and consequence is a belief and full perswasion of the Iustice of an undertaking, tho' managed by an Ene∣my in other respects, inconsiderable, p. 10. How inconsiderable the Enemy were in this Rencounter, will appear from this, that there was the whole Scotch Army above 20000 against 3000 Foot and 1500 Horse, for no more did that little Body of English there consist of, who, notwithstanding the Common Sol∣diers were new rais'd men, kept their Posts till the Sconces were beaten down by the Canon, and when thereupon the Foot retired in some disorder, the Horse brought up the Rear with great Gallan∣try and Resolution against the whole Scottish force, till opprest with number and environed round, they submitted
to the Destiny of the day, some Officers being slain, and others taken Pri∣soners; and as there is no doubt but these worthy Gentlemen had a full perswa∣sion of the Iustice of their Undertaking, so had our Author had the least regard to the Iustice of an Historian, he must have ascrib'd the last, to the disproportion of force: neither can he take it ill if I assume the same liberty, and upon much juster grounds affirm, That this first attempt was the last good success they ever met with; in all their other Enterprises they were shamefully baf∣led, as when they came to assist their Brother Rebels in 44, that Body of theirs quitted the Field the first of any, for, being placed in the Rear, took that op∣portunity of getting away, though not running fast enough, were miserably trodden down by their own Parties. And afterwards, when Duke Hamilton came with a much more plausible pre∣tence, Their Rout in Cheshire was most notorious, without the least shew either of Courage or Conduct: and so likewise when the English were Ag∣gressors, from the first Action at Dun∣bar to the total Subjection of the whole Nation; which then I believe Ludlow
may attribute to a Belief and full Per∣swasion of the Iustice of the Undertaking, whereas I cry, Careat successibus, opto, &. Nevertheless it shall be acknowledged that this little Success turn'd infinitely to their advantage, for, having got pos∣session of Newcastle, where the King had a Magazine, they extended their Quarters as far as Durham, with a corner of York∣shire, after miserably harassing all pla∣ces where they came, those four Coun∣ties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, and Durham, with the fore∣mentioned corner of Yorkshire, far from the largest or richest in England, were Sess'd at a Contribution of 850 l. per Diem, which, I fancy, was more than Cromwell could make of their whole Kingdom, when he by the Just Judg∣ment of Heaven had brought them in∣to the same circumstances, nay, which is more, made an absolute Conquest. And this, I presume is the foundati∣on of Ludlow's blunder, which hath something of approach to truth, but he abhors to come close up to it, that upon the King's calling his great Coun∣cil at York, they advis'd a Cessation of Arms, and to Summon a Parliament, which, to the great trouble of the Cler∣gy,
and other Incendiaries (for they must be flung at) he promis'd to do, assuring the Scots of the payment of twenty thou∣sand pounds a month to maintain their Ar∣my, till the pleasure of the Parliament should be known, p. 11. How careful is this Good man of the Parliaments pleasure, and free of the Kings condescention? whereas impartially speaking, they had carv'd themselves the forementioned Contribution, and moreover seiz'd the total of all Estates belonging to Pa∣pists, Prelates, Incendiaries, &c. in brief, of all the Loyal, honest Gentlemen throughout that District of their new Usurpation. Afterwards indeed when the Treaty was at Rippon, the English Commissioners requir'd their demands as to the Sub∣sistence of their Army, whereto they modestly return'd answer 40000 l. per. mensem should content them for the present, and for their losses they would afterward give a particular estimate. This so much alarm'd the Commission∣ers and other Lords, when the demand was sent to the King at York, that one noble Peer made a motion to Fortifie that City, and imploy that 40000 l. to maintain his Majesty's Army rather than an Enemy's, hereupon the Scotch came
down to 30000 l.Dr. Nals. Coll. Vol. p. 455. which they own'd to be less than the 850 l. per. diem. con∣sidering they had the time past the benefit of Custome, a Provision of Coals, and Proportion of Forage. In the end, it was agreed, That with a Provision of Coals and Forage, they should be satisfy'd and take no more than the 850 l. per diem, of the four foremention∣ed Counties, under which abominable slavery those poor people continued a whole twelvemonth, for the King ha∣ving by unwearied importunity been forc'd upon a Parliament, and remitted the whole management of these their Dear Brethrens concerns to them, they so dextrously improv'd the advantage as to keep them here at the Nations expence till they had got the same unreasona∣ble concessions from him as the others had done, made him Sacrifice his Friends, debase his Prerogative, and by Enact∣ing an indissoluable Session, gave them an opportunity of playing the like game, without any thing more of their assist∣ance. Now then 'twas thought high time to dismiss them, but the greatest mat∣ter was to bring that about, turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur, &c. they
paid themselves at coming in, but we must pay even for that again, before they would set one step back, and withall at so unreasonable arate, accord∣ing to their demands, as all the Gold in England, tho' never more plenty, would not make a Bridge to carry them over Tweed. To give a short Speci∣men, there being several Demands a∣greed to by Treaty at Rippon, where∣in the Scotch were to have satisfacti∣on, the Sixth was, That they desire from the Iustice and kindness of England, Re∣paration, concerning the losses which the Kingdom of Scotland hath sustain'd, and the vast charges they have been put unto by reason of the late troubles: According to which Article, they were required, now upon departure, to bring in a full Account of their Charges, which they enlarged to the full Sum of Five hun∣dred and Fourteen thousand One hundred and Twenty Eight pound, nine shillings, &c. abating the odd pence out of kindness, whereto was added for what losses their Nation, the Nobility, and Gentry had sustain'd Two hundred and Twenty One thousand pounds, and the neglect of their Fortunes, Two hundred and twenty
thousand pounds, besides the 850 l. per. diem, exhausted from the Northern Coun∣ties, with other the most inexpressible Insolencies and Exactions ever any peo∣ple groan'd under. A surprising Sum! but cunning Chapmen know that a high demand at first, will oblige any Pur∣chaser for shame to bid somewhat like a Gentleman, and accordingly it hap∣pened here, the whole matter being adjusted for that lusty Sum of 300000 l. part whereof was paid down, and the rest secur'd by the Publick Faith of the two Houses, and more punctually dis∣charged, than any here borrowed up∣on that Credit. If any be farther In∣quisitive as to the Total of the whole Expence, I find a Report made in the House of Lords, that amounted to one Million, one hundred Thousand pounds, the most chargeable remedy this Nation to that day was ever acquainted with,Dr. Nals. Coll. 2 Vol. p. 426. and prov'd much worse than any Dis∣ease we then labour'd under, besides that itch of Rebellion we from them contracted, which hath cost a hundred times more than they carry'd off, and for ought I see may be doubled before we attain a perfect cure.
Well, now they are gone, and the King followed them, which Ludlow tells us the Parliament endeavour'd to disswade him from, or at least to defer to a fitter opportunity, he refused to hearken to them, under pretence that the Affairs of that Kingdom necessarily required his pre∣sence, but in truth his great business was, to leave no means unattempted, to take off that Nation from their Adherence to the parliament of England, p. 17. 'Tis probable he might hope so; to be sure the Parliament feared it, and had rea∣son so to do, if it had been possible to oblige such a Generation of men, for he gratified them in every demand, confirm'd all their Rebellious Innovati∣ons into Legal Constitutions, advanc'd the leading Covenanters into the highest Places of Honour and Profit, amongst whom their General Lesly was made an Earl, whereupon with Hands lift up to Heaven, he wished they might rot, if ever he acted more against so gude a King: Yet this very man within two years after, led a Scotch Army to the Parliaments assistance, and by the reputation of their name and number, rather than any considerable Action, gave such a diversion to that gude
Kings Forces as nothing conduced more to his ruin. And when no longer able to keep the Field, he betook himself to those his Native Subjects for Protecti∣on. How barbarously they use, and how basely they sold him, need not be here related. And hitherto according to the course of all other Tragedies, their two or three first Acts have been very plau∣sible and advantageous, what remains looks every Scene darker than other, and is at last Consummated in a fa∣tal Catastrophe; for whether that at∣tempt of Duke Hamilton to rescue K. Charles, his Master, from the hands of his murderers, were sincere, or with hopes of farther advantage, and as large sums as they formerly carry'd back, it met with an unhappy come off, and gave a shock to the reputation of their Arms for ever after. So likewise when they got King Charles II. and plac'd him upon their Throne, the furious Zeal of their Covenanters excluding all men of sense and courage, from having any share in the Common safety, gave Crom∣well the advantage of his first Victory, which they were never able to retrieve there, and then lost all by coming in∣to
to England: so that what remained was an easie acquest to a well blooded Army, which immediately finished the most absolute Conquest any Nation was ever brought under. And now by way of Epilogue to the forementioned Tragedy, it may not be improper to take notice, how grosly the Scotch mistook their Politicks in stirring up and promoting those hellish broils and confusions throughout the two Kingdoms, it could be nothing but a cursed spight the Devil ow'd them, to act so contrary to that cunning and over-reaching foresight, wherein at other times few Nations in Europe can bear up with them. 'Tis as considerable an observation as any occurs in all Osborn's Memoirs, that our Parliament did not exact from King Iames at his first co∣ming, and confine him to such a num∣ber of his own Country Retinue, as that other did from Philip of Spain, in Queen Mary's days, especially, since the one Na∣tion is no less distant from the English in Nature and Affection, than the other; by reason of which defect he tells us, A beggarly Rabble not only attended his
Majesty at his first coming, but through his whole Reign, were found continually crossing the River Tweed, and suffered here like Locusts to devour the good of the Land: which he further adds, King James liv'd to be sensible of, and repent, they becoming so rich and insolent, as no∣thing with any moderation could either be given or deny'd them. The result of an omission,Osb. Mem. p. 470. as he continues, no blood could expiate, but that of the greatest victim e∣ver sacrificed since Christ in so ignoble a way. To speak freely, there are no people under Heaven adore every ri∣sing Sun at a more unthinking rate than we; nor more uneasie under our own mistakes, when sensible of them: for 'tis unnatural to imagine a Foreign Prince should come, and not make his Old Friends his Favourites, receive Ad∣dresses by them, and accumulate For∣tunes upon them; if there were at first no caution to the contrary, and to think of a redress afterwards, may prove a Remedy worse than the Disease. Now altho' King Charles look'd more nar∣rowly into his Revenue, and would not suffer them to be their own carvers of what he had more urgent occasions
for, yet as to Places of profit in Court and elsewhere, the Scotch carried all be∣fore them, to so vast a disproportion, as 'twas generally concluded, there were three to one Englishman.Cypric. Anglic. p. 355. Dr. Heylin ob∣serves, that once at a full Table of wait∣ers in White-Hall, each of them a Ser∣vant or two to attend him, he and his man, were the only English in the Company. And in the Church so many of that Nation Benefic'd and prefer'd in all parts of the Country, that their Ecclesiastical Revenues cou'd not but amount to more than all the Rents of the Kyrk of Scot∣land. And as the whole Revenue of that Crown was spent amongst them∣selves at home, so did several of their Grandees live in more State here, than any of their former Kings; to support which, they had not only the best pla∣ces, as Master of the Horse, Captain of the Guards, Privy-Purse, Warden of the Cinque-Ports, Lieutenant of the Tower, &c. But there was scarce any of those Monopolies complained of too, perhaps, more than they ought, where∣in they were not concerned, for when the King at York, in his first Expediti∣on against them set forth his Proclama∣tion touching Sundry Grants, Licences;
and Commissions obtain'd upon undue sur∣mise, it was observ'd there was scarce any of them but Hamilton and his Scotch dependants, were concerned in. From all which it may appear, that by stating their accounts aright', the Lu∣crum cessans, and Damnum emergens ac∣cording to the Civil Law computation, never any people depriv'd themselves of such a Court Harvest since the Crea∣tion; and this to establish that Dagon of a Covenant, which was as likely to deprive them of their advance in the Court of Heaven too; I have been told, a Melancholy Sequestred Gentleman in the time of those Unnatural Wars, gave himself the trouble of telling over the number of Words, the Covenant consi∣sted of, and found them exactly to agree with that of the Beast 666. Whoever hath as much time to spare, may experiment the Truth thereof: however, this is certain,Revel. 13. 16. with that in the Revelations, It caused all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive that mark upon them, and brought such Desolations on our Earth, as none but that old Dragon could vo∣mit forth.verse. 5. Neither was there much difference between the times of their
rage and blasphemies which the Text saith, was to continue Forty and Two Months, for according to such a pro∣portion its power began to decline; but its deadly wounds are not yet hea∣led, neither they nor we are ever likely to recover the dismal Effects of those vials the just Wrath of God suffer∣ed them to pour forth. Such applicati∣ons as these may, I fear, be thought to have too much affinity with those Enthusiasms and Cants, which they so vilely make use of in perverting Scripture to their own base ends, and therefore I shall prosecute them no far∣ther, nor the History neither of those Ring-leaders to Rebellion, only hope for the time to come, whatever Overtures may be made by others, or golden Moun∣tains promis'd by themselves, from an English Invasion, they will make a stop at Tweed, and before they pass it, seri∣ously reflect what Cromwell and Monk brought them to in the end, for that Rubicon had no Caesars.
CHAP. II. Of the Irish Rebellion. HAving thus charg'd the Scotch-van, before the main body of English come up, we are Rencountred with the whole Irish Nation in so execrable a Re∣bellion, as no History of any Nation can parallel the abominable murders without number, or mercy upon the English In∣habitants, of what Sex, Age or Quality soever they were; and all this upon pretence of Religion too, a kind of Po∣pish Covenant, Declaring in the sight of God and the World, That they would en∣deavour the advancement and preservation of his Majesty's Service and Interest, ha∣ving no other design and intent, but only the free exercise of their Religion, and the abolition of such Laws as render the Catholicks uncapable of any Office, Place, Commodity or Profit, to the extraordinary decay of their Estates, Education and Learning. From whence it is clear, That tho' the design was laid before, yet as to the Conduct and Management thereof they exactly copyed their
Neighbours the Scots, and the Devil could not furnish them with any other Precedent more proper for their De∣sign. The King likewise was propor∣tionably abus'd in his Concessions, and Favours; for the leading men in this Rebellion having appear'd against the great Earl of Strafford, and been coun∣tenanc'd by our violent Factions here, in their Complaints of Grievance and Heavy Impositions; the Lords Iustices, who were then in the Supream Power, must be order'd to caress the Gentle∣men, and comply in whatever insolent demands they should insist upon; by which means some of the Popish Law∣yers, Members of that House of Commons, the better to carry on that Rebellion they had in design, were so impudent as to lay down these Maxims, and vouch them for Law, 1. That any one being killed in Rebellion, tho' found by matter of Record, would give the King no forfeiture of Estate. 2. That tho' ma∣ny thousands stood up in Arms, working all manner of Destruction, yet if they profess not to rise against the King, that it was no Rebellion. 3. That if a man were Outlaw'd for Treason, and his Land rested in the Crown, or given away by the King,
his Heir might come afterwards, be admit∣ted to reverse the Outlawry, and recover his Ancestor's Estate. These and many such like Rebel Tenents were publish'd that Session, after the Murder of the Earl of Strafford, an abundant confirmation, how requisite his strict Hand was for such a loose People, which to astonish∣ment, the Government did not see, or would not take notice of, till the Knife was at their Throats, and many thou∣sands of them cut: although they must have all a-long observ'd how uneasie the Irish had been under their Conquest, (tho' better govern'd perhaps than had it been in their own hands) how strangely influenc'd by their Priests, and bigotted upon that account; so that they might alledge the same pretence of Re∣ligion and Property with their Neighbours, and have just the same reason to Rebell, that is none at all. But that which sur∣priseth me most is, that these People should have liberty to sit in Parliament, Comptrol, and Vote against whatever San∣ctions had been, or were farther to be enacted, in order to keep them the better in subjection; the freedom of their Consciences might surely have been thought enough, but the Freedom of Go∣verning
too, must bring all to confusion, as it here happen'd to a horrid degree. But 'tis not my Province to take no∣tice of this, or any of their other Re∣bellions farther than the Reputation, and Memory of our Royal Sufferer is concern'd, whose treatment, as to these Irish Af∣fairs, was more barbarous and inhu∣mane than all the rest, as well from the Forgeries on their side, to inveigle and abuse the People, as the villainous spreading of them here, where it re∣quir'd some time to procure a right Information. We must know therefore, That when the Faction here had actually drawn their Sword against their Sove∣reign, amongst many other Calumnies and Detractions laid to his charge in the several Declarations and Answers they sent abroad, there were few without some secret Reflections, as if the Rebel∣lion in Ireland began by his Knowledge, and Connivance; from which intimati∣ons their impudent Agents and Emissa∣ries, the allow'd Scriblers and News Prints, the Pest of that and all other Ages, where permitted, would have those many Massacres, and Murders laid at his Door, which the Good Man's
Heart more unfeignedly lamented than all the Members of both Houses. Never∣theless as His Majesty himself foretold concerning the many Iealousies rais'd, and Scandals cast upon him by his Ene∣mies, his Reputation like the Sun (after Owls and Batts have had their Freedom in the Night, and darker times) brake forth and recover'd it self to such a degree of Splendor, as those Feral Birds griev'd to behold and were unable to bear; for as no good man believ'd any of those Ca∣lumnies at first, so the next return or two of Post or Ship, they were blown away with the same Wind which brought them hither, and the Faction forc'd to rack their Wits for a fresh re∣proach, wherewith the Devil never fail'd to supply them. But that after several years of happy Sunshine, another Sett of those nasty Birds should appear again, hooping and howling, the same notorious falsehoods to a Generation which was not then born, and too little con∣sidering the mischiefs then wrought looks very ominous, and God grant it doth not bode a greater darkness than any we then lay under.
The first reproach which this false and feather Bird Ludlow howls forth a∣gainst the King, is, That whilst in Scot∣land he had News of the Irish Rebellion, how the Papists throughout the Kingdom were in Arms, &c. and then closeth the Relation with this Villainous hearsay, The News of this Rebellion (as I have heard from persons of undoubted Credit) was not displeasing to the King, though it was attended with the Massacre of many thousands of the Protestants there, p. 17. Though we are not to take his word for the Credit of the persons who re∣lated this, yet we may take our mea∣sures from his relation, that they were equally to be credited with himself, that is not all; for all this is gratis di∣ctum, without the least Authority, a∣ny thing of a reason, or so much as probable conjecture for so hellish an Aspersion. Whereas there is express matter of Fact even to demonstration, that never any thing more sensibly af∣fected him, in that upon the first no∣tice thereof, he sent Sir Iames Stewart to the Lords of the Privy-Council at Dublin with Instructions what he thought most proper to be done, and furnish'd them with all that Money his present stores could
supply. He mov'd also the Parliament in Scotland to a speedy help, but they desir'd to be excus'd till the States of England were consulted; who, if they thought fit to use any of their men, pro∣positions should be made in order thereun∣to, designing to make a Market to themselves, of their Neighbour Nati∣ons miseries; wherein notwithstanding many of their own Countrymen were concerned. At the same time likewise he sent Post to the Parliament of Eng∣land, where several Resolves were ta∣ken, and Votes made, but little effectu∣ally done till the King's Return. To speak truly, had Ludlow's reflection been made upon them, there had been much more Credit for it, since they laid hold of all advantages thereby, not only to slander and abuse his Majesty, but to help themselves forward in that Re∣bellion they were just ripe for acting, as will by and by be made appear. With the same Owl-light Credit, he proceeds and tells us, About this time great numbers of English Protestants fly∣ing from the Bloody hands of the Irish Rebels, arrived in England, filling all places with the sad complaints of their Cruelties: whereupon the Parliament ear∣nestly
press'd the King to proclaim them Rebels, but could not obtain it to be done till many weeks, and then but forty of those Proclamations were Printed, and not above half of them Published, which was the more observ'd, and resented, by reason of the different treatment the Scotch had met with, who no sooner appear'd in a much better cause, but they were forthwith declared Rebels in every Parish Church within the Kingdom, p. 19. A very plausible story, but for want of one thing, and that is Truth, whereof it hath not the least Syllable: For first the Parliament never press'd the King for a Proclamation; Secondly, the Fourty Proclamations printed, were not for this Kingdom, but Ireland; So that Thirdly, there could be no ground of resentment upon the Scotch account, but by such pick-thank fellows as Ludlow and his Party. In short, the matter of Fact stands exactly thus: The Parliament, as they were very inquisitive to catch at every thing which might give them an advantage against the Court, having underhand information that a Warrant was sent to the Printer for the fore∣mention'd Proclamations to be forthwith provided, open'd very loud upon it,
Why so few? Why no sooner, &c. The Printer was summon'd, the Warrant produc'd, and a mighty bustle made, as generally the cry is greatest where the least Wool: In the midst of which heats, the Secretary of State gave this ac∣count of the matter, that the Proclama∣tions were printed at the Request of the Lords Iustices and Privy-Council in Ire∣land, who desir'd to have twenty sign'd by his Majesty's own hand, and no more,Dr, Nals. Coll. Vol. 2. p. 529. who nevertheless order'd forty, and sent them accordingly; I do not remember the cause was given to the Parliament why so sign'd: But 'tis probable to in∣validate that forg'd Commission where∣to they had fix'd the Kings Broad-Seal granted to a private person upon a Title of Land. Otherwise there had been Proclamations several from the first day the Rebellion broke out in Ireland, the only place where requisite. But why not in England as well as against the Scotch? as our Author insinuates: whereto I reply, First, the Scotch had seiz'd upon, at leastwise assum'd the Administration of the whole Civil Pow∣er, so that no Proclamation could come out against them there. Secondly, they had too many abettors in England
who encourag'd them to begin, and were resolv'd to follow the first op∣portunity. So that thirdly the Procla∣mation must come from hence or not at all, and was equally requisite against both. What he adds farther of the Scotch being the much better Cause, is only the private opinion of a fellow Rebel; they were both so bad as upon an impartial scanning it would puzzle their Infernal Patron to tell which was worst. Having had the confidence to averr two such impudent falshoods as afore∣mentioned, 'tis strange how he comes to mince the matter so much as to the third, and tell us the Rebels in Ireland, pretended a Commission from the K. for what they did; and his Abstract, the Defence, gives in∣deed a Copy therefore, but withal goes no farther than that it was said to be given by the King to his Catholick Sub∣jects in Ireland, p. 14. Whereas there was no one Slander more confident∣ly thrown abroad than that, and con∣tinued longer; nay, I have met with several Fanaticks within these few years, who still take it for an undoubted truth, and what they have so long enter∣tain'd, nothing but the final Iudgment
can make them renounce. Once for all therefore, to silence this Infamous Calumny, we must know the Commo∣nalty of the Native Irish, having liv'd a long time in Peace and Amity with the English, were not without some Reverence to that Government, and so could not in plain and direct terms be easily led into an avowed Rebellion a∣gainst their King, whereupon their leaders Phelim Oneil, &c. were forced to perswade them, that they took up Arms for the King and the Defence of his Lawful Prerogative against the Pu∣ritanical Parliament in England, who had invaded it in many parts, and that what they did was by his Majesty's Ap∣probation and Authority. And to gain the greater Credit to that Fiction, they produc'd a Commission, whereto the Broad-Seal, taken from a private grant, was affix'd, as aforesaid, which made it no difficult matter to perswade rude and unexperienced people to believe it real; all which in a short time was clearly de∣tected, as well by several Irish Rebels ta∣ken Prisoners, as English Protestants, who escap'd their fury; particularly Dr. Maxwell, a Reverend Scotch Divine, (against which Nation they were not
so Savagely cruel as the English) in his Examination and Deposition upon Oath, at Dublin, (which was sent too into England) declar'd, That he, whilst their Prisoner, expostulated with them for abu∣sing the King in so gross a manner;Dr. Burl. Append. 129. To whom they reply'd, That in all Wars, Rumors and Lyes serv'd many times to as good purpose as Arms, and that they wou'd not disclaim any advantage. But to silence for ever that hor∣rid Scandal of his Majesty's Commis∣sion, we have an unexceptionable E∣vidence and Proof, which will not on∣ly clear him, but render our Author Ludlow, (were there nothing else a∣gainst him) a much worse Man than the bloody'st Wretch in the whole Irish Rebellion. In the Year 52 our English Regicides (having very nigh compleated their Conquest) Erect∣ed, what they termed, an High-Court of Iustice in Ireland, to hear and de∣termine all Murthers and Massacres, of any Protestant, English or other Per∣son or Persons whatsoever, within that Nation; where, amongst many others the Iustice and Mercy of Heaven had
reserv'd Sir Phelim Oneil to receive his deserved Doom, at whose Arraign∣ment, Sentence, and Execution, another Reverend Divine, one Dr. Ker, since Dean of Ardagh, by God's great good Providence was present, and makes a full Deposition thereof;Dr. Nals. Coll. Vol. 11. p. 529. As where the Court was kept, what Iudges sat, what Witnesses sworn, the many Murthers and Robberies prov'd, &c. After which, he comes to this ma∣terial Evidence as to the present matter; That one of the Iudges, whose name he had forgot, Exa∣mined Sir Phelim about a Commis∣sion, he should have had from Charles Stewart, as the Iudge thought fit to term late King, for levying the said War he was charg'd with; Sir Phelim made Answer, he never had any such Commission; where∣upon it was prov'd in Court, by the Testimony of one Ioseph Traverse and others, that Sir Phelim had such a Commission, and did in the begin∣ning of the Rebellion, shew the same unto the said Ioseph, and several o∣thers then in Court. Upon which, Sir Phelim confess'd, that when he
surpriz'd the Castle of Charlemont, and the Lord Caulfield, that he or∣dered one Mr. Harrison, a Wit∣ness there, and another Gentleman to cut off the Kings Broad-Seal from a Patent of the said Lords they then found in Charlemont, and af∣fixt it to a Commission, Sir Phelim had ordered to be drawn up. And Mr. Harrison did in the face of the Court confess, that by Sir Phelim's order, he stitch'd the Silk Cord or Label of the Seal with Silk of the colour of the said Label, and so fix'd the said Label and Seal to the Commis∣sion; whereupon Sir Edward Bol∣ton, and Judge Donelan, urging Sir Phelim, why he would so deceive the people; he answered, that no man could blame him, to use all means whatsoever which might promote the Cause he had so far engag'd in. 'Tis farther depos'd by the said Dr. that on the second day of his Tryal, some of the Iudges told him, that if he could produce any material proof, that he had such a Commis∣sion from Charles Stewart, to de∣clare and prove it before Sentence should pass upon him, and he
should be restor'd to his Estate and Liberty. But Sir Phelim Answered that he could prove no such thing; Nevertheless they gave him time to consider of it till the next day, which was the third and last day of his Tryal, upon which day Sir Phelim being brought into the Court, and urg'd again, he declar'd he never could prove any such thing as a Commission from the King: And added, there were several Outrages committed, by Officers and others his aiders and abettors in the management of that War, contra∣ry to his intentions, and which now press'd his Conscience very much, and that he could not in Conscience add to them, the unjust Calumny of the King, though he had been fre∣quently solicited thereunto, by fair promises, and great rewards while in Prison. And proceeding further in this discourse, he was stopt and had Sentence of Death pronounced a∣gainst him. The Dr. farther de∣clares, that he was present, and very near Sir Phelim when he was upon the Ladder at his Execution, and that one Marshall Peake, and
another Marshall, before Sir Phe∣lim was cast, came riding towards the Place in great haste, and called aloud Stop a little, and having pas∣sed through the throng of Specta∣tors and Guards, one of them whis∣per'd a pretty while with Sir Phelim, whereto he answer'd in the hear∣ing of several hundreds of People, of whom my self was one, I thank the Lieutenant General for his in∣tended mercy, but I declare, Good People, before God and his Holy An∣gels, and all of you that hear me, that I never had any Commission from the King for what I have done, in Levying, or Prosecution of this War, and do heartily beg your Prayers, all good Catholicks and Christians, that God may be merciful unto me, and for∣give me my Sins. More of his Speech I could not hear, which continued not long, the Guards beat∣ing off those that stood near the Place of Execution.
Thus far this worthy Gentleman, who ought I know may be yet a∣live, for the Deposition was made in 81. And the party declared himself upon all occasions ready to justify it, and had it been then thought, such Books as Ludlow's Me∣moirs, should have ever dared to peep forth, much less be publickly sold, there would have been more care ta∣ken to anticipate those antiquated Cavils, they have now the impu∣dence to revive: Upon which ac∣count it was, that I declar'd Lud∣low a worse Man than Sir Phelim, the Bloodiest Wretch in that whole Pack, because first, 'tis demonstrative∣ly clear, he was the Person who sent the Marshall to Sir Phelim upon the Ladder ready to be thrown off, with proffer of Mercy, if he would fix the Commission on the King, there be∣ing no other Lieutenant General then in Ireland but himself, and therefore highly probable in the Second place, that 'twas by his inducement the Iudges were so earnest upon the same account, and Thirdly, that the fair
promises and great Rewards in Prison were shot out of the same Bow, and levell'd by the same Lieute∣nant General's rancorous spite at the Royal Martyr's Reputation. But then having so full a Conviction, as nei∣ther Liberty, nor Life, could pre∣vail upon the Unfortunate Man to add that to the too many other Guilts already upon his Conscience; for Ludlow, to continue the Calum∣ny, and, as far as his Credit will pass, leaves it upon Record to Po∣sterity, is such an Argument of an Impenitent Heart, and Reprobate Mind, as I look upon Sir Phelim's con∣dition to be much more Iustifia∣ble. He lay under a sad remorse for the Innocent Blood spilt, with seve∣ral other Acts of Injustice and Cruel∣ty, begged God's Pardon, and Good Mens Prayers; whereas our Lieute∣nant General seem'd to die as he liv'd; By those Remains his Admi∣rers have curs'd the World with∣all, may be presum'd to leave it, with like Regret, as the Apostate Angels did their Regions of Bliss, a∣mongst whom, (without the least
breach of Charity) I cannot but suppose him, Belching out his Blas∣phemies against God, as he did here on Earth against his Anointed. Yet 'tis to be fear'd these concessions of his Majesty turn'd no less to his own prejudice; for the Parliament having rais'd the Crisis to its full heighth, and resolving, very immethodically, as well as unjustly, to open the vein of War, imploy'd both the Men and Money rais'd for Ireland against the King, nay the very Benevolence, begg'd for the relief of those poor distress'd Protestants, was borrowed to pay their Soldiers, and a Question whether ever repaid; though the Kings Soldiers having seiz'd upon some Provisions sent by the Parliament towards Chester, as but design'd for Ire∣land, they were presently, upon com∣plaint, restor'd. Ludlow continues, That the King ac∣quainted the Parliament, that when an Army was rais'd, he would go in Person to reduce them, p. 19. which they would not consent to, for other reasons than what he assigns, tho' that of putting
him at the head of an Army might be one: he would certainly have put a speedy end to the War, which had spoil'd all their Villainous designs at home; and therefore they would not so much as trust any of those Officers which had serv'd him in the two Scotch Expeditions, though known the best in the Kingdom. The Scotch on the other side were caress'd to the highest degree, and had whatever mo∣ney, or other terms they demanded, though to serve the Ulster Plantation of their own Countrymen, several strong∣holds, Towns and Castles were put into their hands, with unusual Circumstan∣ces of Power, even to an Independency upon the Lord Lieutenant, and whole English Government; and when his Ma∣jesty did but desire them to reconsider their own Proposition, and reflect how much it might trench upon the Eng∣lish Interest, they furiously voted, that whosoever advis'd his Majesty to that delay, was an Enemy to the Kingdom, and a Promoter of the Rebellion in Ire∣land. Whatever Ludlow farther urges, how the Parliament neglected no oppor∣tunity to carry on that necessary Work, and
besides the Forces of Scotland, dispatch'd several Regiments from England thither, who were bless'd with wonderfull success against the Rebels, p. 20. 'Tis true, some Re∣giments were sent, and brave men they were, and great things they did, but not so many as design'd, or requisite, and so little care taken of them, as 'tis beyond expression, to relate how miserably they suffered for want of Victuals, Stores, Clothes, Pay, indeed whatever was requisite to their sub∣sistence as Men, or accommodation as Soldiers. The Parliament being so wholly intent upon their English Rebel∣lion, could spare no time, nor charge to prosecute that just War; upon which scandalous neglect, all Parties concern∣ed, more especially the Commanders and Soldiers, earnestly begg'd leave of the King, that they might be remov'd and en∣gag'd against any Enemy whatsoever, but Hunger. And this amongst other inducements was the chief of that Cessation, Lud∣low inveighs so bitterly against p. 65. as likewise that the Earl of Leicester staid so long and did not go at last, for he was always hastned by the K.
and every thing restor'd, more than he had occasion for, or was really de∣sign'd, thither. But he meeting with many complaints from thence, and ob∣serving how difficult it was to get a Supply by his Solicitation here, and how much worse when gone thither, upon that account did not stir. What Lud∣low further saith, as to the Cessation, that the King agreed to it, contrary to his Engagement with both Houses not to treat with the Rebels, unless they concur∣red, p. 65. is of no validity, that a∣greement was before the English were in actual Rebellion, and his Majesty thought such compliance might pre∣vent it; but falling out otherwise, 'tis a pretty Supposition that when a Prince hath two Nations in Rebellion, he must ask the one, whether he shall treat with the other? 'Tis also absolutely false that this Cessation in Ireland in∣duced the Parliament to treat with their Friends in Scotland to march to their assistance into England; 'twas the Pro∣spect thereof induced the King to the Cessation, which he was always advi∣sed of, that notwithstanding the Con∣descentions he had yielded to, and Pro∣testations made by them, they design'd
only to take breath, and would be ready at the first clinking of the Eng∣lish Money; and if they had pretend∣ed no more, there might have been something said, as they were men of Fortune, by way of Apology, that ha∣ving not repented their Rebellion, the Lucre thereof might oblige their con∣tinuance, but to continue the making Religion their property, to Rebel against their King for imposing the English Li∣turgy, or somewhat like it, and now invade his Kingdom to impose their cursed Covenant, is such a procedure as none but their own Country can give an instance of. At Uxbridge Treaty the Irish concern was one main head, wherein the Par∣liament, as indeed in all other matters, were so refractory and haughty, as to exclude the King from being any ways concerned either in the management of War or Peace; he must not so much as nominate his Deputy, or one single Officer; which therefore coming to an end without effect, his Majesty had all the reason in the world to press that Cessation into a Peace, wherein the Duke
of Ormond and several of his Friends there were imploy'd; as likewise Com∣missioners from them, treating at Oxon, but what with the Nuncio's Insolence, and Bigottry of the Ecclesiasticks, all came to nothing: whereas would that Priest-ridden Nation have understood their own Interest, and acted for their safety, they might have expiated some∣what for their former bloodshed, (where∣of many of their own Party were very much asham'd) obtain'd a reasonable Liberty of Conscience, with other im∣munities, and prevented that utter de∣solation they were afterwards so justly brought into: On the contrary they shuffled at such an idle rate, play'd the Bogtrotters in Politicks too, imposing upon every necessity, they saw his Ma∣jesty, really, or likely to be under, and so shuffled off and on, till they lost him, and in him, themselves, to a most de∣plorable condition, as bloody Savages as they were. And if there yet wants a farther con∣firmation of this our Royal Martyr's Integrity and Detestation as to the pre∣misses, take this farther account, Dr.
Nalson in the Preface to his Collections mentions a Letter, still to be seen in the Paper Office, intercepted by a Par∣ty of the Parliament Army very much a propo: it was from the Lord Digby, by the Kings order, to the Irish Catholicks as they must be termed, or no treating with them; wherein he lets them know how prejudicial their standing off had been to his Affairs and most prophetical∣ly foretells that Destruction, the prosperous Rebels here wou'd bring home to their own doors: Declaring withal, that were the condition of his Affairs much more de∣sperate than it is, he would never re∣deem them by any concessions of so much wrong to his Honour and Conscience, and yet his Affairs were now at a very low Ebb, this being written soon af∣ter the Fatal blow at Naseby. The Dr. relates farther, that he found this Let∣ter had been before the Committee, which perus'd such as might most ex∣pose the King, by being Printed and Indors'd with Rushworth's own hand (that faithful Collector of whatever tends to Treason and Mischief) Quere as to the Printing this Letter, and a little after, needless to be Prin∣ted.
'Tis much they did not order it to the Fire, since 'tis an irrefragable Testimony of the most unbyassed Sin∣cerity, any but the King of Kings could propound to walk by, and this will stifle the last Effort of our Au∣thor's rancorous spite, in reference to the Irish Affairs, who tells us the Earl of Glamorgan was impowred by private Instructions to promise the Liberty of the Romish Religion, with diverse o∣ther advantages to the Irish Rebels, &c. P. 163. the Earl of Glamorgan was a zealous Romanist, and had put himself very forward to be tam∣pering in that Affair, but still the Marquiss of Ormond was Supream in that Government, and finding him to exceed his Commission, confined him as Guilty of High-Treason, and whatever he writ to his Lady, had not all things gone to confusion, would never have been able to ju∣stifie his proceedings, nor Ludlow that vile suggestion, that the Offi∣cers and Soldiers in Dublin obliged the Marquess of Ormond to treat with the Parliament Commissioners for put∣ting that City into their hands, P.
164. I know not what flam sto∣ries Sir Francis Willoughby might think to gratify Ludlow withall, when he was Paramount in Ireland, but can∣not believe it was in his power to deliver that Castle without the Marquess's consent. To be sure the whole matter was adjusted between the King and him, some time be∣fore things came to the Extremity, for we find in Doctor Burlace, this intimation of his Majesty's pleasure, That if it were possible for the Mar∣quess to keep Dublin, and the other Gar∣risons, under the same intire Obedi∣ence to his Majesty, they were then in, it would be acceptable to his Majesty; But if there were, or should be a ne∣cessity of giving them up to any other Power, he should rather put them in∣to the hands of the English than the Irish, which was accordingly done: An Evidence even to Demonstrati∣on, that though the King treat∣ed with the Irish, and might have reaped great Advantages thereby, would they have acted with rea∣son, or consulted his Honour with the Common Interest of all the Three
Kingdoms together, which, Good man, was his grand aim. But to have any design of Promoting their Su∣perstition, or otherwise give them the least advantage upon the true Establishments in Church and State, was as far from him, as from the Commonwealth Party, not to abuse and belye him upon that ac∣count, and indeed all others what∣soever. And thus ended all Transacti∣ons between the King and that un∣happy People; but the next year when things came to extremity, and di∣rectly tended to his Murder, the Marquess of Ormond was invited o∣ver by them, to assume the Lieu∣tenancy, and a strict Union entred into between him and the Catho∣lick Commissioners, as they termed themselves, and all Partys seem'd abundantly satisfy'd in the choice of a Person who had shown him∣self Superiour to all those Calum∣nies they had formerly aspersed him with. However, so many differ∣ent Humours, Passions, and Interests
could not long stick together; the Provisions for next Campagne were not answerable to promise, and when they came to Action the Ec∣clesiasticks, and their Bigotted Par∣ty return'd to their Old vomit, would neither lead nor drive, but at the same Priest-ridden trot as former∣ly, so that quarrelling at those dis∣appointments themselves were the Cause of, and fomenting the Di∣visions they ought to have cement∣ed; Cromwell in the mean while co∣ming over with an Army of Ve∣teran well Disciplin'd Rebels, their whole Island became the most dismal Scene of War, Pestilence, and Fa∣mine, as we find any where Record∣ed, the numbers being unaccount∣able which perished by those three Arrows of Divine Vengeance; others either by Stealth or Composition, got into Foreign parts, whilst the remainder were shut up in one Corner of the Kingdom, and had all their Estates divided amongst the Conquerors. And thus ended this Popish Rebellion, which as it was begun in imitation of the
Scotch Covenant, so was it prose∣cuted with the like Insolent and Unreasonable Demands, and with somewhat a severer draught of the Almighty's Displeasure, although no∣thing but an Impenitent Heart could make either of them forbear to ac∣knowledge, how Righteous God is in all his ways.
CHAP. III. Of the English Rebellion. THE two former Prospects have been dismal enough, and could not but move both Indignation and Pity, as to the Aggressors, and Suffering Parties, had the Scene lain at the farthest Distance; but being either in our Neighbourhood, or on our Borders, and we at the sole Charge of buying the Scotch home, and buoying up the Protestant Interest against the Irish; one would think should have caution'd us to keep together amongst our selves, and take Care to prevent any further Annoyance from such troublesom Neighbours: But to continue, nay aggra∣vate the Freak, fall together by the Ears one with another, when they were both fallen upon us, was so abominably Stu∣pid, as the whole observing Part of the World became amas'd, and Posterity 'tis probable would have given no Credit thereto were we not like to confirm it, by continuing in the same Mixture of Fools and Mad-men, to the Consummation of all things. For Confirmation whereof I cannot but observe that the Scots acted
like themselves, and having so solemn an Invitation from us, could not forbear, according to the Common Policy of the World, to set forward from their own Wilderness to our Canaan. The Irish like∣wise had strong Prejudices, both as a conquer'd Nation, and from the unhappy Influence of their Romish Emissaries, upon whose Sleeves they had not only pinn'd their Faith but Obedience to the Civil Power; so that had their Defection been confin'd within any Bounds of Humanity, some Grains of Allowance might have been gi∣ven them. After all, therefore, the most Astonishing surprise lies on our Side, in that we were not only forward to foment them, but so barbarously Stupid as to Sheath the Sword in one anothers Bowels, without any imaginable Cause, but what the Historian assigns in all such Cases Nimis Felicitas. The Scene then hence forward must be at home, where will appear several Acts full of nothing but Misery and Confusi∣on; a sad Completion both of the Pro∣phets Charge and Curse,Hos. 4. 2. there being no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the Land, but by Swearing, and Lying, and Killing and Stealing, Blood touched Blood, to the Effusion of that Royal Blood, which I fear will be never expiated till the last
Conflagration; to be sure some others, though very considerable, have done lit∣tle towards it. That Observation of Amm. Marcellin. could never be more Applicable than here, Manum injicientibus fatis, hebetantur sensus hominum, & ob∣tunduntur. Fate so strongly overrul'd all our Deliberations, dazled the Sight of our Judgments and Counsels so such a De∣gree, there was no Thought left for the most Natural Principle to all Mankind, Self-Preservation; and that whether we consider his Majesty's too many, and great Compliances on the one hand, or the Fa∣ction's Impudence on the other, whose Demands continually improv'd with his Concessions, crying as the Wise Man tells the Horsleeches two Daughters incessantly do, Give, Give, nec missura cutem, nisi plena cruoris, without giving over, till the Na∣tion fainted and they burst asunder with it's Blood. And this Ludlow owns, that the King not willing to languish in Expe∣ctation, sent to the House, that they would at once make their full Demands, and pre∣pare a Bill, &c. But they perceiving the De∣sign, (for he must never be without one, though they good Creatures were as un∣designing as the Devil) return'd for An∣swer, That they could not suddenly resolve upon so weighty a Work, but would do it with
all possible speed, pa. 16. which time never came, nor was thought of after. Indeed their Thoughts were quite otherwise im∣ploy'd, to widen the Wound, and render it incurable; in order whereunto their first Attempt was to Stab the King through the Sides of his Ministers; not only re∣move from him, but Sacrifice all such worthy Patriots, as had Courage and A∣bilities, to detect and oppose their perni∣cious Enterprises. Thus Ludlow tells us, they impeach'd the Lord Keeper Finch, Earl of Starfford, and Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury of High Treason, in endeavouring to subvert the Laws, and erect an Arbitra∣ry and Tyrannical Power, p. 12. the for∣mer very prudently made his escape, the only means of avoiding that impertuous Hurricane, which Innocence it self could not otherwise have stem'd. The other two fell the Objects of their implacable Rage; and being the Persons against whom, next the King himself, our Au∣thor revives his Calumnies with the great∣est Obloquy, I shall presume to give a short Account of the Procedure against them, so Arbitrary and Illegal, as it seem'd to be carried on, not only without any regard to Iustice, but even Humanity it self.
The Earl whom they first fell upon, as he could not have a greater, so deserv'd no less Character than what his Majesty gave him, of a Person, whose great Abili∣ties might make a Prince rather afraid than asham'd to employ him in the greatest Affairs of State: which he first discover'd in the House of Commons, was very happily brought into Court, where through se∣veral Stages of eminent Trusts and Coun∣cil he arriv'd at the highest Command our Crown hath to dispose of, that in Ire∣land, which he manag'd and improv'd in so prodigious a manner, as all Men of Sense and Business, were astonish'd in their Acknowledgments thereof: And this sufficiently appear'd at his Tryal; for though 'tis true there were several Arti∣cles of a very high Nature brought against him, yet none prov'd: And herein Lud∣low discovers his Commonwealth Ingenuity, to tell us he was accus'd of Governing Ire∣land in an Arbitrary Manner, of retaining the Revenue of the Crown, without giving an Account, of promoting and encouraging the Romish Religion, &c. p. 14. whereun∣to though English and Irish, Puritans and Papists, his open Enemies and false Friends were encourag'd to give Evidence, they could make nothing of it; nor of that High Charge, which our Author menti∣oning
more than once, would have instar omnium, how he advis'd the King, That since the Parliament had deny'd him such Supplies as he demanded, he was at Liberty to raise them by such means as he thought fit, and that he had an Irish Army should assist, him to that end. All which had but one single Witness to prove it, Sir H. Vane, who hesitated very much, and though at last would have had the Irish Army imploy'd in England, all Circumstances speak otherwise, the very Council sitting upon the Scotch Affairs, and every Mem∣ber thereof averring the contrary; the Earl of Northumberland more especially, that he had heard the Earl of Strafford of∣ten say, that that Power was to be us'd Candide et Caste, and that the Kingdom could not be Happy, but by a good Agreement between the King and his People in Parlia∣ment. So that after a great deal of Art and Eloquence by the best parted bad Men Westminster-Hall ever sent into the House of Commons, with Father Pym, &c. this Great Person so clearly bafled all their Allegations and Evidences, as they were forc'd to turn the Tables, pursue another Method, and Vote him guilty by Bill of Attainder, which not only precluded all further Arguments according to the Re∣gular Course of Iustice; but made them∣selves
Accusers, Parties, and Iudges, throughout the whole Procedure, both as to Matter of Fact and Law; an odd and unusual Course; for, they say, it had been discontinu'd from Henry VIII's Time, whose grough Humour too often made use of this, when he could not otherwise gain his Point, that is, his Will: But when laid in his Cold Tomb, that Men might freely speak their Minds; next the Bar∣barous Treatment of his Queens, this is the foulest Blot upon his Memory: And as he then made his Parliament the Pro∣perties in this ungrateful, ay and unjust Procedure, so the Parliament here were as hot and violent in forcing it upon the King; and that with so great Precipitan∣cy, as the Bill was read thrice in one Day, and consequently pass'd; with an earnest Request, when carried up to the Lords of the like quick Dispatch. But they were more Deliberate, as well upon his as their own Account, which made the Commons fall to their then a la mode Course of Rabble and Tumults, 5 or 6000 whereof assembled at Westminster, crying for Justice and Execution, with many other intollerable Insolencies as shall be by and by related; upon which Ac∣count many of the Lords dar'd not to ap∣pear at the House, and of those few that
did, being 45, it was carried but by 7 Votes, 19 giving their not Content, to the 26 that gave their Content to the pas∣sing this Fatal Bill. And this brought the King into that inextricable Perplexity, being to use his own incomparable Words, perswaded by those that wish'd him well, to choose rather what seemed safe, than just, preferring the outward Peace of my Kingdom with Men, before that inward ex∣actness of Conscience before God; and this made a continu'd Remorse in his Soul for ever after, incessantly complaining of that bad exchange to wound a Man's own Conscience thereby to salve State-Sores, to calm the Storms of popular Discontents, by stirring up a Tempest in a Man's own Bosom; whereas in all likelyhood I could never have suffer'd, with my People, greater Calamities (yet with greater Comfort) had I vindica∣ted Strafford's Innocency— and not gratify'd some Mens unthankful importuning so cruel a Favour. In fine, the whole Chapter is so great in its self, as we find nothing so sincerely to express the true Remorse of a Penitent Soul, since David pen'd the 51 Psalm; and withall gives so high and just a Character of this great Man, as no People which us'd them both so Barba∣rously, ought ever to be bless'd with such a Prince or Minister. Yet one thing
I must further observe from his Majesty, how that after-Act vacating the Authority of the Precedent for future Imitation, suffi∣ciently tells the World, that some Remorse touched even his most implacable Enemies, as knowing he had very hard Measure, and such as they would be very loth should be re∣peated to themselves. The return likewise that virulent Faction made to his Majesty when he had oblig'd them with so much Regret to himself, is worth taking No∣tice, which was only this, hath he given us Strafford, then he can deny us nothing: And accordingly at the same time this cursed Bill was past, there past another to make that cursed Parliament perpetual; whereupon I find this Remark, that as the one was for the Earl's present Execu∣tion, so the other prov'd in the Event for the Kings. One thing more and I have done; when the Nation came to its Wits again in the Year 60, An Act was pass'd for reversing the Attainder of this great Worthy, wherein are enumerated the se∣veral unjust and irregular Practiecs for obtaining that Bill as well from Lords as King, together with the Illegality and untruth of the Charge it self. 'Tis pity there had not been a Clause likewise, that whosoever should dare to Libel, and be∣lye his, but more especially his Master's
Sacred Memory, or indeed any others who unjustly Suffer'd in that just Cause, should forfeit their Ears at last, if not have their Breath stop'd at Tyburn, what a company of Spill-Paper Rascals would this have fre∣ed the Press or the World of? But since 'tis thought fit to permit them, we must be Content with discovering thereby their sordid Temper, and base Principles, and ac∣cordingly discriminate them from such vertuous Understanding Souls as will not be afraid of any euil Tidings, but have the Righteous in everlasting Remembrance. Arch-Bishop Laud shall be here likewise consider'd; for tho they did not take away his Life till about three Years after, yet was he forc'd to Linger it out all that time in an unjust Confinement, kept on purpose, as one would think, to serve another turn with the Scots: For as they would not stir out of the Kingdom in 41, till gratify'd with Strafford's Blood, so they would not return in 43, without an assu∣rance of Laud's; A blessed Religion must those Covenanters be of, in thirsting as much after Blood as Wolves and Tygers; could I believe a Metempsychosis, I should very much incline likewise to think that the Souls of those Pharisees and other Iews which persecuted our Saviour and his Apostles, were now at length got so far as our Northern Clyme, and taken up their
Habitation in the several Members of our Scotch and English Sanhedrims. The first particular Charge, (as to the English Church and Nation) Ludlow brings against this great Man, is the Clergy sit∣ting in Convocation, after the short Parlia∣ment in 40. was dissolv'd, took upon them to frame Canons and Oaths, and impose four Shillings in the Pound, upon Ecclesiastical Benefices throughout the Kingdom, p. 10. Roger Coke likewise Harps upon this String; so doth the Defence; and it was one of the most considerable Branches of his Charge at his Tryal, whereto he re∣ply'd,Troub. and Try. p. 282. that he did nothing but by the King's express Order, had the Iudgment of the Council learned in Law, and exactly follow'd a Precedent of Archbishop Whitgift's in the Happy Days of Queen Elizabeth; the Ori∣ginal whereof the House of Commons commanded away, that the poor Man might be the less able to make his De∣fence, although therein they were disap∣pointed too, discovering only their own mean Spirits and his great Parts. And for the Oath, &c. or rather, &c. in the Oath which made such a ridiculous Noise, 'tis pity but Posterity should be acquaint∣ed with their Impertinency, and Prejudices therein, the Words which the, &c. in∣cluded were after Deans Archdeacons,
where the &c. cuts off, And other Persons having peculiar and exempt Iurisdiction, which was mention'd at large in the Pre∣cedent Canons, and here contracted by the Clerk, tho' design'd as the others when Engross'd; however through haste for∣gotten, and that nothing more could be intended by it, clearly appears from the Restraint of the following Words, viz. as it stands now establish'd: But if People are resolv'd to strain Knats and swallow Camels, 'tis impossible to perswade them otherwise, till they have nigh Choak'd themselves. Detect, 386.Roger Coke is very witty upon the fore∣mention'd Tax, and saith, the Clergy who now Taxed their fellow Subjects without Consent of the Commons, shall ever after be taxed by the Commons without Consent of the Clergy; where in the mean while is Magna Charta, whose first Article speaks Ecclesia Anglicana debet habere suas Liber∣tates, & Privilegia illaesa? And they tax'd none but themselves, and none else by Law can do it. 'Tis likewise false that they never Tax'd themselves since, there was a Convocation in 61. which did it: But upon the Dutch War in 65 the old Way of Tenths and Fifteenths arose so high upon the Bishops and Dignify'd Cler∣gy, as it was thought easier to be thrown
in common with the Laity; amongst whom likewise the new Rebel improve∣ment of a Land Tax, and Monthly Asses∣ments, were substituted in room of Subsi∣dies, to their very great Edification. What I most admire herein is, that when this Course was agreed upon, to throw them both together there should be no care ta∣ken, then, nor since, by the Fathers of our Church (the only Representative she hath in that Body,) to have some of the Clergy in Commission throughout each County; Arch Bishop Laud's Publick Spi∣rit and Fatherly Care, would not have been guilty of such an Omission, for want of which, they are as much enhanc'd in their Taxes, as defrauded in their Tythes; whereupon I know a Person who when he would express the Summum jus of any rigorous proceeding, doth it in this Phrase, was as kindly dealt with, as the Country-Commissioners deal with the Clergy. I do not find Ludlow bringing any other particular Charge against this Great Man; the Defence mentions the Heads of 20, he should have added four more, which would have equall'd those Articles from the Commons, and done a great Kindness in telling us how well they had been prov'd; for after seventeen Days Prosecu∣tion by Three as Virulent Tongues as
ever spake in Westminster-Hall, he made so full and vigorous a Defence, so effectu∣ally refell'd all their Cavils, and Evidences, that they were forc'd as in the Earl of Strafford's Case, to have recourse to that dead striking Bill of Attainder, by Accumulating, those many Charges they had not prov'd altogether; to make that Treason in the Conclusion, which could not be gather'd from the Premises. This was very uneasy to the Lords, though none of them his Frinds, as not know∣ing how soon it might be their own Case, till frighted by the several Threats from the Lower House, now become Paramount, Six Mean-Spirited Peers pass'd the Ordi∣nance; all the rest though they had not Courage to appear against it, yet were asham'd to give their Votes in so illegal and inhumane an Act. I cannot omit one Instance of their Barbarity. He ha∣ving obtained leave at his first Commit∣ment, to repair to his Study at Lambeth, and take thence such Papers and Memo∣morials as might conduce to his Defence, that Miscreant Pryn obtained an Order of the House, to seise upon and ravish them from him; neither were they so satisfi'd, but came again and rob'd his Pockets of his Diary, and carryed away the very Manual of his Devotions, to see
what they could discover, which was only their own Shame. That Account likewise of his Troubles, and Tryal fell in∣to the same base Hands, although by a signal Providence, retriev'd to be an Everlasting Record of their infamous pro∣ceedings. This brief Relation I thought pro∣per to give of these two great Ministers, for that they were the main Prop of all Royal Dignity, and chief promoters of whatever true Policy fell under debate in Order to the King and Kingdom's safety. And had their Advice been follow'd, the Scots had never entred England, but re∣ceiv'd the due Reward of their Rebellion at their own Doors: nor Irish thought, at leastwise attempted theirs, so long as Strafford held the Rains, without which Abettors, and Advantages, the English Confederates could have carryed on none of their Designs: But what with the King's Good Nature, Na∣tural Kindness, and strange Irresolution, his only Fault, together with the Factions Solemn Professions of Duty and Loyalty, that they would make him the most Glo∣rious and Potent Prince in Europe he lost so much ground at first, as afterwards it was impossible to retrieve it, they still pressing for one Concession after another;
till in the end they gain'd enough to ru∣ine him, as well as his Ministers; for whatever popular Clamors were made, none stood up so much for the true En∣glish Constitution as they, never denying that Parliaments were the best Expedi∣ent to settle Affairs in all great Emer∣gencies, if they would go regularly about it; but they Both thought what the One hath declared,Troub. & Try. p. 172. that Corruptio op∣timi est pessima: If Parliaments should at any time be misguided by the Practice of a ma∣lignant Party, nothing can be so dangerous, because the highest Remedy being corrupted, there is no sure Redress left. And their knowing this, and acting so vigorously to prevent those Miseries designed there∣by, was the Causa latens, that their Blood was so much thirsted after, and when spilt sadly accomplish'd what the Poet de∣clar'd in one of their Elegies, The State in Strafford dy'd, the Church in Laud. For they being gone, all the rest of the Kings Ministers thought it time to beg a Discharge,2d. Vol. 206. and provide for them∣selves, since the most unspotted Integri∣ty could not be Proof against the Stat pro ratione of an Ordinance, much less a Bill
of Attainder; Dr. Nalson in his Collecti∣ons gives us a piece of a Manuscript left by the late Earl of Manchester, the some∣times fatal Kimbolton, which tells us what tricks and juglings were used amongst them, to excuse such as had been exclaim'd against as most Obnoxious, by resigning their Places to some leading Men of the Faction, as Cottington Master of the Wards to Say and Seal. &c. So likewise for Monopolies, which Ludlow tells us they declar'd against, and expell'd the Authors out of the House, p. 11. they were generally transferr'd by Bill to more deserving on their side, as the Let∣ter Office to the Earl of Warwik for three Lives, and Sir Henry Mildmay was con∣tinu'd in the House, though a notorious Promoter of the Monopoly of Gold and Silver Thread; as also Mr. Laurence Whit∣aker, and other Commissioners in Matters of like Nature or worse; for to incou∣rage those already come amongst them, and bring in others, they laid down this Politick Maxim, That what disservice any one had done formerly, his present Actions bringing Benefit to their Common-wealth, he ought not now to be question'd. He goes on to tell you how they pro∣ceeded to take away the Star-chamber, High-commission Court, Court of Honour, with
some others, p. 13. The former of these was the antientest Court in England, but being a support of the Prerogative must down, and the other because of the Church: I have already mention'd how much better it had been to have correct∣ed the Abuses; and for the present shall only observe, that had they been ten times greater than they were, it was no redress to take them away and substitute an ordinance of the House in room there∣of, yet that it was come to, at so impu∣dent an Arbitrary rate; as no King of En∣gland, or indeed in Europe ever assumed half that Power; he that is most ex∣claim'd at now, upon that account doth nothing like it; the Grand Seignior was the only precedent they could propound. As to the High Commission, I shall only add, that Mr. Hobbs in a little Pamphlet he writ, since the Restauration, of Heresy, en∣deavours to vindicate his Leviathan from that Charge by Reason the High Com∣mission at the restless Clamours of the Presbyterians, was then abolish'd, the only Court wherein such Points could be consider'd; he did not think of a Convo∣cation, neither is it much thought of by others; but doubtless all the Heresies, Fa∣ctions, Schisms which have so miserably torn both Church and State, arose from
the suppressing that Court: For that other, the Court of Honour, Gentlemen formerly had as much regard for their Bearing, as any other property, and would be as much concern'd if invaded; but going about to Dethrone the sole Fountain of Honour, their King, 'twas their Curse, rather than Choice, to lay all things in Common, the Lord and Lacquey, Gentle∣man and Groom upon the same Level, which soon after they found more experi∣mentally true than ever was expected, and might have justly taken up the Pro∣phet's Lamentation, Servants have got the Dominion over us, and there is none to de∣liver us out of their Hand.Lamen. 5. 8. What I most condole is; that we lost the Thing as well as the Court; true Honor fell to so low an Ebb, as it hath very seldom stowd since; should I say as much of Truth, Iustice, and Common Honesty, 'twere easier to in∣veigh against, than disprove me. Upon a summary View of these through-paic'd Reformers whole Proceed∣ings, who our Author tells us, were re∣solv'd to correct the Abuses introduc'd the preoedent Years, I cannot but reflect up∣on a Simile which occur'd the other Day in a Republican Pamphlet, (to the best of my Memory, one of those about A Stand∣ing Army) where that Truth could not
pass, without the Alloy of several Fals∣hoods in reference to this and some other-Reigns; however the Metaphor is very proper, comparing Government to a Watch, or any such like piece of Clock∣work, where a disorder in any one Wheel, obstructs the regular Course, if not the whole Motion: But then what can we say, when not only several Wheels are taken out, but the Spring it's self is set aside, every conceited Commonwealth Man, and Clumsy-fisted Clown, having liberty to tamper with, and thumb it at Pleasure; yet this, impartially speaking, hath been our Condition most an end ever since These rude Artists fell to work. For what Hudebrass saith of Religion, is alto∣gether as true of Government, One would think it was intended, For nothing else butto be mended. Were it not for shame of the Quibble, I would add, they design'd perhaps to make a Pendulum of it, by which means it hath hung tottering ever since. What he next entertains us withal is a Protestation agreed upon by the Lords and Commons, to maintain the Power and Privi∣ledges of Parliaments, the Right and Liber∣ty of the People, &c. p. 13. taking no no∣tice of the precedent part, to Defend the Protestant Religion express'd in the Do∣ctrine
of the Church of England, &c. and according to the Duty of Allegiance, Main∣tain, and Defend his Majesty's Royal Person, Honour and Estate; all which Ludlow omits; and it was very ingenuously done, for he knew it never intended. In the mean while they acted above board as to the Discipline of the Church, whereof they took no notice, designing forthwith to set it aside: for this Protestation was but a Prologue to the Scotch Covenant; notwithstanding several Good Men both Clergy and Lay, were driven by the Strength of that Popular Current to Sub∣scribe it at a most unthinking rate. What comes next is one of the best improv'd Lies in the whole Libel, of a treacherous Design set on foot not without the King's Participation, as appear'd under the King's own Hand, to bring up the Eng∣lish Army, and by Force to Dissolve the Par∣liament; the Plunder of London being promis'd to the Officers and Soldiers as a re∣ward for that Service; this was confess'd by the Lord Goring, Mr. Percy, and others. The Scots Army was also try'd, &c. p. 15. This is his Story, Let us now see Truth. The chief Officers in the English Army were a Set of Worthy Loyal Gentlemen, both of Sense and Honour, and conse∣quently could not but take notice how
partial the Commons were to the Scots Army in prejudice to theirs which caus'd Commissary Wilmot (who with some others was a Member of the House) to tell them, upon a Paper the Scots had presented to get Mony design'd for our Army, that if Papers could procure Money he doubted not but the English Officers would soon do the same; Neither were their Resentments less upon the King's than their own account, that after so many complyances and too great condescention they should still press forward, to the overturning of all; whereupon they entred into a confedera∣cy, obliging themselves by an Oath of secrecy, to Petition the King and Parlia∣ment upon these Four Heads, For Money for the Army; not to Disband before the Scots; To preserve Bishops Votes and Fun∣ctions; To settle the King's Revenue. Which being shown to, and approv'd by the King, he sign'd; all which appears both from Mr. Percy's letter to the Earl of Nor∣thumberland his Brother, that they resol∣ved to act nothing which should infringe the Subjects Liberty, or be prejudicial to the Laws.Nals. mem. 2d. Vol. 272. As likewise from the fore∣mention'd Manuscript of the Earl of Man∣chester which gives the same account. And could Ludlow, or any of his Parti∣sans imagin there should be no Men of Courage and Resolution left in the Nati∣on,
or that having Swords by their Sides, they should keep their Hands in their Pockets, and see Votes and Ordinances do more mischief than all the Gunpowder of a seven Years Campain; and since the Parli∣ament were resolv'd upon a War, 'tis Pity these Gentlemen parted with their Forces: Had they come up, and cut Ten, or Twenty the lowdest Throats in the House, it might have sav'd the effusion of a great deal more, and much better Blood, and pre∣serv'd both King and Kingdom from Ruin. To shew farther that the Parliament was always in danger the King continu∣ally plotting against them, they never a∣gainst him, our Author tells us, how a great number of loose debauch'd Fellows repair'd to Whitehall, where a con∣stant Table was provided, and many Gentlemen of the Inns of Court tam∣per'd with to assist him in his Design; and how briskly he took up one for speaking against the Fellows at Westmin∣ster, who upon this fright desir'd leave to provide themselves a Guard, and that the Militia might be at their disposing, p. 21. To turn a Story, or frame a Lie so as to make it serve their own turns hath been all along observ'd the peculiar Talent of our Commonwealth Men, and of the whole Party, Ludlow had most right to the
Whetstone. That the Fellow should be so impudent to charge the King with raising Tumults, or threatning Force, when all the World knows it was the chief Engine the Parliament had to carry on all their mischievous Enterprises, and when any thing stuck with him or the Lords, a Rabble of 5 or 6000 were immediately summon'd out of the City to affright and threaten all that would not comply according to their Desire, and in their passage by Whitehall did the same to the King, till their Insolencies grew so intolerable, as he was forc'd to leave that and Parliament at once, for which they had the confidence to charge him, and yet would take no care he might be secure with them; and this oc∣casion'd what Ludlow relates, Several Gentlemen about Town, more especially at the Inns of Court, were asham'd to see Majesty so scandalously affronted, prof∣fer'd their service for the security of Whitehall, his Majesty and Family, which was kindly accepted, and some little Entertainment made for them, from whence this vile Fellow rais'd his great Story. And since he hath given me this just provocation, it will be here very proper to give some small account of those many violences from the insults
and tumults of the Rabble, how necessary the Faction found them, and thereupon what Encouragement they had. The Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford went on very slowly in the House of Lords, and 'tis probable but for the Menaces of the Mob had never pass'd, whereof 5 or 6000 came up to Westmin∣ster, fill'd the Palace-Yard, posted them∣selves at all the Entrances to the Par∣liament House, and stopped every Coach crying Iustice and Execution, which up∣on a Sign given was repeated with such an hideous Noise as to create Amaze∣ment in the greatest Constancy. Such Lords as they knew were averse to Hu∣mour them, they threatned most severe∣ly, and had the Impudence to add, if they had not the Leiutenant's Life, they would have the King's; whereof his Maje∣sty complained by Message to the Lords, they to the Commons, and there it stuck: For sometime after when they trudg'd away to cry no Bishops, as Hudibras hath it, and the Lords complained in a Conference with the Commons, of their horrible In∣solency, Mr. Pim their chief Setter cry'd God forbid we should proceed to dishearten People from obtaining their just Rights; and the rest of that cursed Cabal secretly whisper'd, they must not discourage their
Friends, this being a time to make use of them; which vile Abettings made them so Impudent as to threaten White-hall too, and declare as they pass'd by, there should be no Porters Lodg, but they would come to speak to the King without Control, and at their own discretion: And when presently after there was another descent of the same Rout, and some Opposition made upon their Attempt upon White-hall Gate, till the Sheriffs of London and Middelsex with what Guard they could draw toge∣ther, seiz'd, and committed some of them, the Commons immediately posted up Mr. Hollis to the Lords, complaining 'twas a Violation of the Liberty of the Subject, and an affront to the Parliament, and so the Good Boys must be discharg'd. 'Twere too tedious to relate the several Insults of this kind, both King and Lords were forc'd to put up, the Commons under∣hand giving them all Encouragement imaginable, and had their Setters in the City to be ready on the first Intimation, whereof Dr. Cornelius Burges, a Lectur∣ing Beautifeu, was chief, seconded by a Lay Brother one Ven, the Captain Tom of those Times; the Dr. as he led up these Doughty Champions, was wont to look back and cry,Athen. Oxon. Vol II. p. 236. These are my Ban-dogs, I can set them on, and I can take them off again;
by which means, saith my Author, four parts in five of the Lords, and two parts in three of the Commons, were frighted out of the House, to leave the Faction absolute Ma∣sters thereof. All these before unheard of Affronts to Majesty and Government, our faithful Recorder of Memoirs takes no Notice of, but a few honest Loyal Gen∣tlemen, asham'd to see such abominable Insults, and therefore coming to defend, if occasion serv'd, their abused, ay and threatned Prince, must pass for a Plot up∣on the Parliament, and they forsooth must have a Guard. With like veracity he re∣lates the Kingston Plot too, where the Lord Digby with Colonel Lunsford, in a Coach and Six, and three or four Foot∣men attending, pass'd for a Body of 500 Horse; with many such like extravagant Rumors, rais'd on purpose, that their Worships might be thought to stand in need of a Guard, whereas if such a thing was wanting it must be to Guard the King and Government from them. In that Divine Pourtraicture of his Ma∣jesty's Solitudes and Sufferings, there are two Chapters, one upon the many Iealou∣sies rais'd, and Scandals cast upon the King, to stir up the People against him. The other upon the Insolencies of the Tumults, in both which he doth so passionately set forth
how abominably he and his Subjects were abus'd by their Lyes and Slanders, as would Convince, ay and Convert too any Reprobate whatsoever, but a Repub∣lican: As to the Tumults, how just and reasonable is that Resentment of his; I confess, saith he, when I found such a Deafness, that no Declaration from the Bishops, who were first foully inso∣lenc'd and assaulted; nor yet from Lords and Gentlemen of Honour, nor yet from my self, could take Place for the due Repression of these Tumults, and securing not only our Freedom in Parliament, but our very Persons in the Streets; I thought my self not bound by my Presence to pro∣voke them to higher Boldness and Con∣tempts; I hoped also by my with∣drawing to give time both to the Eb∣bing of their tumultuous Fury, and others regaining some degrees of mo∣desty and sober Sense. But his hopes were altogether frustrated, they perse∣ver'd at the same Rebel rate, till, as he foretold, the Just Avenger of all Dis∣orders, made those Men, and that Ci∣ty, see their Sin, in the Glass of their Punishment, which soon after happen'd in the same way they had offended.
But never was this Meteor Mob so high in Meridian Altitude, as when the five Members were accus'd; it was indeed the sole Support of that cursed Cause, with∣out which the King had curs'd them all to the Scaffold, and so sent them to their proper Place, where all Rebellions are first laid, and in the end Punish'd. Here then let us see how Ludlow palliates this Busi∣ness, which being clear Matter of Fact he had no way to flourish off but with his continu'd Impudence in reflecting up∣on the King, whose violent Ways not suc∣ceeding, he fell upon other Measures in ap∣pearance more moderate, &c. p. 20. and to colour his Proceedings with a Form of Law, sent Sir Edward Herbert his Attorny Ge∣neral, to accuse of High Treason in the name of his Majesty, Mr. William Stroud, &c. and Lord Kimbolton, accquainting them, that he intended to proceed against them ac∣cording to Law; and then gives us the Articles which are foul enough, yet not exact to the Original, no where calling them Traytors, as that justly doth: But whatever he further saith as to the House of Commons is altogether a Chymera of his own, there were no Foot-steps of it, in all the Procedure. His Words are these, Upon this the House made answer to the Attorny General, that they were
the proper Judges of their own Mem∣bers: That upon his producing the Articles, if they found Cause, they would leave them to be Proceeded against according to Law; but commanded him at his Peril not to proceed further against them or any other Member, without their Consent. After which they published a Declaration to the same purpose, &c. p. 24. upon which Relati∣on of our Author, give me leave to make these few Remarks, as first. This Charge of the Attorny General's was given in to the House of Lords as a Court of Iudicature, whereupon they fell to Debate. 1st, Whe∣ther this Accusation of the Attorny General's be a regular Proceeding. 2dly, Whether there were any such Proceedings ever before in this House. 3dly, Whether an Accusa∣tion of High Treason may be brought against a Peer of Parliament. With some others; and yet this blundering Fellow supposes all this to be done in the House of Commons, and frames an Answer accordingly; but any thing will pass with the Fanaticks from a confiding Brother, who, perhaps too, will like it the better for being Pre∣posterous and False. 2dly, Supposing that to be their Answer, as it was indeed the Sense of all their Votes, Speeches, and De∣clarations, what Law made them Judges
of their own Members? From the begin∣ning it was not so. Nor 3dly, That a Mem∣ber could not be proceeded against with∣out their leave, we have been told, that formerly no Priviledges could secure any Member from Justice for Murder, Felo∣ny, and Treason; but now, having made Prerogative a Cypher, they might add as many as they pleas'd, to Multiply what they thought fit to call their Rights; al∣though in order thereunto methinks they should have repeal'd that scurvy Proverb, of Asking ones Fellow whether he be a Thief. 4thly, Had the Gentlemen accus'd been really Innocent, they need not have made such a Noise and Pudder, nothing could have been a greater Baffle to his Majesty than such an unjust Charge; the contrary is therefore to me Demonstration. 5thly, The Commons indeed, when the King was gon, fell upon the Attorny General, and had him Interrogated at the Lord's Bar by a Committe of theirs, whereto his Answer not being Satisfactory, they made some angry Resolves, but I cannot any where find he was sent to Prison, for his Proceedings in that Matter, as Ludlow saith. Well, the King finding the Lords afraid to burn their Fingers, by questioning these Idols the Rabble so ador'd, took an∣other
Course, sent one Mr. Francis a Ser∣jeant at Arms to the House of Commons, to demand of them, and Arrest of High Treason the five Members, which was done as order'd, and their Names declar'd; whereupon four Members were order'd to attend his Majesty, and acquaint him, that the Message was a matter of great Con∣sequence, and the House would take it into Consideration, with as much speed, as the greatness of the Business will permit: But notwithstanding their fair Words, in∣stead of complying herein, Sir William Fleming and another Gentleman, who by Warrant from the King had seal'd up the Studies and Trunks of the five Mem∣bers, were apprehended by Mr. Speaker's Warrant, as Delinquents, and Order'd to re∣main in the Serjeant's Custody till further Or∣der; so that it seems they could Commit though the King must not. Neither of these Courses taking effect, his Majesty resolv'd upon a Third, which was to go to the House, and demand them himself; which he did with all the Tenderness and Regard imaginable; for whatever Ludlow saith of 3 or 4 Hundred, and amongst them several Desperados enter∣tain'd at White-hall, the whole number did not consist of above one, the Gentle∣men Pensioners in Course, with other Lords
and Gentlemen then in Attendance, or about Court, who were commanded to move no further than the Stairs, nor of∣fer any Violence, though provok'd; him∣self with the Elector Palatine only, entring in; where he found the Birds flown, and the whole House, as soon as he was with∣drawn, flew after them into the City, with a grievous Complaint to their Pro∣tectors the Rabble, that they could not speak and act Treason at Pleasure with∣out being question'd by his Majesty; in short what a prodigious Advantage the Faction made of this just and reasonable Demand, what Out-cries and Revilings follow'd there upon, is altogether unima∣ginable, by such as were not Witnesses thereof, so that having fix'd their Party in the City, by tarrying there some Days, they return'd to Westminster, accompa∣ny'd with an hideous cry of Rabble-Guards both by Land and Water. His Majesty seeing it was absolutely impossible to have any Justice done against these accused Persons, who were so surely Intrench'd in the Rabble's Fa∣vour that they were out of the reach of Law; and finding also, that he was in perpetual Danger of having his Person as well as Authority, expos'd to the dar∣ing Affronts of the deluded People, who
ran up and down in Multitudes, as if they had lost their Wits as well as Loy∣alty; resolv'd (notwithstanding several Gallant faithful Gentlemen proffer'd their Service, to curb any Insolencies should be Attempted on him) to withdraw him∣self, and Family, Queen and Children; hop∣ing that Time having allay'd their first Fury, they might be brought to Reason and Tem∣per: And whosoever reads his Majesty's Paper upon this his going to the House of Commons, must own there was ne∣ver Prince so grosly abus'd, had his Acti∣ons so abominably perverted, with a to∣tal Subversion of all Law, Iustice and Rea∣son whatsoever: Hereupon his Majesty re∣tired to Hampton-Court, from thence to Windsor, whither none of those enter∣tain'd at White-Hall repair'd, except his own Family, as Ludlow basely Suggests: And since he owns likewise the Houses, though I believe 'twas only the House of Commons, were about to accuse the Queen of High Treason, can she be blam'd to withdraw into Holland? And if she carried the Iewels of the Crown with her, 'twas much better than to have them seiz'd up∣on by the Parliament, as they did what∣ever else belong'd to the King, to carry on their Rebellion against him.
Ludlow tells us, That during his ab∣sence, many Papers pass'd between him and the Parliament, the chief aim of those of the latter was to perswade the King to return to London, and settle the Militia in such hands as they should advise. Those from the King, that he could not part with the Militia, esteeming it the best Jewel of the Crown, nor return to London with safety to his Person, p. 27. all which is true, and that is much; as likewise that the Declarations on both Sides prov'd inef∣fectual, wherein notwithstanding it was observ'd that the King's had all the force of Law, Reason and Argument; theirs no∣thing but Cant, popular Wheadles, and false Suggestions: He goes on to tell, that the King's Designs both at home and abroad being grown Ripe, he ex∣press'd his Dissatisfactions more open∣ly, and withdrew to York: Had he said the Parliaments Designs, there had been a great deal of Truth in it, for so indeed it was; they, under pretence of a Guard, had rais'd a considerable Force, setled the Militia of London and Middle∣sex in confiding Hands; sent down seve∣ral Members to do the like in most Coun∣ties throughout the Kingdom, could dis∣pose of the Mony and Men rais'd for Ire∣land,
to what purpose they please, and imploy'd them most shamefully to pro∣mote their Rebellion, seiz'd upon his Ma∣jesty's Revenue, Fleet, Forts, Magazins, &c. even to Hull its self, where Hotham deny'd him entrance, in the Name of his Brethren, and was well rewarded by them. The King on the other Hand was left destitute of all Things but the Hearts of Loyal worthy Gentlemen, where∣of he found more than his Enemies ever imagin'd; and were not a little surpris'd at; with which Stock alone, and hopes of God's Blessing upon his just Cause, he lay'd aside all Thoughts of Treating with those unreasonable Men, for that he evi∣dently saw, they resolv'd to seize upou the Militia by Force, since they could not obtain it by Perswasion; and their ma∣ny fine Pretences to Loyalty and Duty, had been only to gain Time for ripening their Rebellion, of all which he now re∣solv'd to let the World know how sensi∣ble he was, by Publishing his Grand De∣claration from York; wherein he saith ve∣ry truly, 'twas more than Time after so many Indignities to his Person, Af∣fronts to his Kingly Office, and trai∣terous Pamphlets against his Govern∣ment, to Vindicate himself from those damnable Combinations, and Conspi∣racies
contriv'd against him; giving a full Account of his own sincerity as to his many and too gracious Concessions, since they, on the other Side perverted all to Sedition and Treason: Amongst other Charges he brings one against an Impu∣dent Fellow call'd Sir Henry Ludlow, who said Publikly, That the King was not worthy to be King of England, that he hath no Negative Voice, that he is fairly dealt with that he is not depos'd, that if they did that, there would be neither want of Modesty or Duty in them; upon which I shall only observe that our Author could be no Bastard: The King there tells them further, how they Committed his great Officers for doing their Duty: Rais'd an Army, and chose Essex General, with Com∣mission to destroy all that adher'd to him. Converted the Mony given to discharge the Kingdom's Debts, and for Relief of Ireland to carry on their Rebel-War; whilst his Levying a few Gentlemen for his Guard, must be Voted waging War against the Parliament. Now this Declaration was too much to the Pur∣pose for Ludlow to take Notice of, or in∣deed any thing else which gives an im∣partial Relation, how the Rage and Fury of those Men, engag'd the whole Nati∣on
to Lanch into a Sea of Blood. Neither doth he mention how the King went in∣to Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, &c. to assure the Gentry of his upright Intentions, and confirm them in their Loyalty: Only his going into Leicestershire must be re∣membred, because he had a Brother there, one of the first in Rebellion against his King, and first taken Prisoner, and bet∣ter us'd than he deserv'd. But tho' Ludlow takes no Notice of the King's Declaration, he would be sure not to omit the 19 Propositions sent by the Parliament, which 'tis strange he should say were intended that they might leave no means unattempted to perswade the King to return to them, p. 30. whereas he im∣mediately adds, and more truly, much of the Parliaments Intentions appear'd in them, and they were in effect the principal Foundation of the ensuing War; for which Reason he thinks it not amiss to recite them at large; it had been more Candid, and Historian like, to have recited the King's Answer too, so full and express, as they never thought of any other Reply but by Essex's Army, and therefore no wonder if omitted here. Amongst other things the King tells them, some of their Demands are in the Style not on∣ly of Equals, but Conquerors, and tend
so far to the Subversion of this equal, well-pois'd Government as to make him from King of England, a Duke of Venice; and this of a Kingdom a Repub∣lick: And in that which we may call another Answer, those Divine Meditations of his, he declares, How in all those Propositions little or nothing could be observ'd, of any Laws dis-joynted, which ought to be restor'd; of any Right invaded, of any Justice obstru∣cted, of any Compensations to be made, of any impartial Reformation to be granted; to all or any of which, Rea∣son, Religion, and true Policy, or any other Humane Motives might induce him: But the main Matters propound∣ed, in which is either great Novelty, or Difficulty, relate to what were for∣merly look'd upon as Factions in the State, or Schisms in the Church, and so punishable by the Laws; though now they have the Confidence, by vulgar Clamors and Assistance, to demand not only Toleration of themselves, in their Vanity, Novelty, and Confusion; but also Abolition of the Laws against them; and a total Extirpation of that Govern∣ment, whose Rights they have a mind to invade. Thus solidly did his Maje∣sty refel the little Rebel Flourishes of the
Westminster Iunto, and therefore no won∣der they were deliver'd to the King with∣out Success, they knew before-hand he had more Honor and Conscience, than to grant them; otherwise would not have caus'd them, to be presented; and if he thought as Ludlow would perswade us he did, as good terms as these might be ob∣tain'd, if reduc'd to the last Extremity, he had great Reason so to do, for doubtless no one breathing did then so much as dream of, or imagin that execrable Act, their continu'd draughts of Blood did in the end prompt them unto. In which unnatural Broils of State Par∣ricide, and Domestick Fury as I shall con∣cern my self no further than this base Fel∣low, and his Comrades, reflect upon the Memory of our Royal Martyr; So I can∣not but observe his Design hath been all along hitherto to manage his Lyes with so much Art and Cunning, as to make the King according to the Procedure of their horrid High Court of Iustice, the first Ag∣ressor and Promoter of the War: The Parliament were as Innocent as an Assem∣bly of so many Devils, and desir'd only to do with him and his Kingdoms, his Queeu, Children, and his Friends as they pleas'd, which his Stubbornness refusing, the Charge their Insolencies had assum'd to
themselves, resolv'd to force him, as they really did, which yet he (Ludlow) would have turn'd upon them: What I shall first mention, tho' there are several such like Hints before is p. 16. The King hav∣ing laid his Designs in Ireland, as will af∣terward appear, was not without great Dif∣ficulty, prevail'd upon by the Parliament, to consent to the Disbanding those eight Thou∣sand Irish Papist, that had been rais'd there by the Earl of Strafford: How far that Army was from being Irish Papists will appear from this, that all the Irish Gran∣dees of that Perswasion, agreed with the Faction in our two Houses here to pro∣mote the Disbanding that Army, which had it been kept on Foot, the Rebellion could not have Succeeded there, nor consequently here. The next Instance I shall give is p. 22. The King's violent Ways not succeeding, he fell upon other Mea∣sures in appearance more moderate, &c. What violent Ways were these? Why those few Inns of Court, and other Gen∣tlemen, who proffer'd their Attendance to secure him from the Insolency of the Tumults, (which this bad Man, for whom no bad Name is bad enough) takes no Notice of, though got up to that prodi∣gious hight as the King could not think those, and all his other Friends able to
secure him at White-Hall. In like man∣ner upon his Majesty's demanding the Five Members, p. 25. The Parliament-sensible of this Violation of their Priviledges, and fearing they might be further intrenched upon, &c. a strong Violation that, to de∣mand Traytors to Iustice, but 'twas their Interest to oppose it, otherwise they might have all follow'd: For having related, after their many other Usurpa∣tions, how well the Parliament approv'd Sir Iohn Hotham's Conduct, declaring he had done well in denying the King admit∣tance into Hull, 'tis added next Para∣graph, p. 29. The Parliament began now to provide for the securing of all Places; whereas there was not a Place of any Importance, they had not secur'd be∣fore; even to York it self, in which, by his Majesty's too great Passiveness, they had a Committee to observe and beard all his Undertakings. And this brings me to the last In∣stance of this modest Man's Veracity, p. 38. The King having set up his Standard at Nottingham the 24th of August, 1642, for he tells us to a Day, and 'tis well he doth, The Parliament thought themselves oblig'd to make some Preparations to defend them∣selves; whereas in the Paragraph im∣mediately
precedent, he declar'd how the Fire began to break out in the West, what success the Earl of Bedford had there upon the Parliament Account, and how the Governour of Portsmouth decla∣ring for the King, that was besieg'd and re∣duc'd by their Forces. And for a fuller Te∣stimony of this, let us compute the time of raising these Forces; Essex under pre∣tence of a Guard to the Parliament had been levying Men all that Spring; on the tenth of Iune the Order past both Houses for the Citizens to bring in their Plate, to carry on the War, which they did most zealously; on the 9th of September, Essex march'd out of London, in a great deal of Pomp, having all his Masters at∣tending him, 16000 strong; very little more than a Fortnight after the King set up his Standard, where there did not appear the fourth part of the forementi∣on'd Number. But the Parliament had got that common artifice of all bad Men, to cry Whore first, as the Proverb expresses it, inflame the Peoples Minds with Dan∣gers and Designs, that the King intended to levy War against them; whereas 'twas design'd against the King, who most so∣lemnly declar'd from York how far his Desires, and Thoughts were from it; and had this attested by more than forty
Lords then with him, how they saw not any colour of Preparations or Counsels that might reasonably beget the Belief of any such Design; and were fully perswaded his Majesty had no such intention: But when he un∣derstood what preparations they were making at London, and indeed every where else, that Hotham had deny'd him, Hull, and Essex was coming to take him from his Evil Counsellors, then he thought himself oblig'd, to make some pre∣parations for himself; that I may turn Lud∣low's impudent Falshood into Truth. But suppose the King had begun sooner as 'tis great pity he did not, exerted the just right of his Prerogative, and sove∣reign Power, against the many encroach∣ments they daily made, and unknown Priviledges they constantly assum'd, all the Laws of God and Man would have born him out therein. For most Men of Sense long before the Sword was drawn, clearly discover'd, nothing would satisfy them but a total Subversion of the whole Government. An honest Gentle∣man expostulating with Mr. Hambden, upon the King's many Concessions what they could expect further, he reply'd, they expected he should commit himself, and all that was his to their care; an exact Mo∣ral of what the Wolves propounded, that
if the Sheep would put away their Dogs, they would be very careful of their Pre∣servation; and though the Proposal did not take, yet the Design was carryed on, and the Nation, most abominably wor∣ryed, the just Judgment of Heaven giv∣ing way to the cursed credulity of an infatuated People who could take none but Wolves for their Protectors. As I have already declar'd to be no further concern'd in this dismal Scene of Blood and Slaughter than the Memory and Honour of our Royal Martyr is concern'd; so I must further add, that whatever Re∣lations our Author makes, as to any par∣ticular Battle, or other considerable war-like Action, is so Lame, Partial, and False, as the Diurnals of those times (which nevertheless ly'd most abomina∣bly on each side) may pass for Authentick History, in comparison with him. But then for his own dear Self, as to the De∣fence of Warder Castle, and other little Atchievements in Willshire, and else∣where, (in which too, generally, his rashness brought him by the Lee) the ac∣count he gives is so vain and fulsome, trivial and tedious, that 'tis hard to re∣solve whether he makes the greater Discovery of his Pride, or Folly, to be sure they are both very transcendent.
The Vindicator of Ol. Cr. exposes him ve∣ry briskly for those many impertinent Pa∣nigyricks upon himself, and will have it a plain Demonstration, of the Narrowness of his Soul and the Lowness of his Genius; and I fancy, he might have added, the Insolency of his Temper. To confirm what I said of a lame and partial Account of Things, his Relation of that first Battle at Edge-Hill is a full Testimony, where this Man of Iron owns himself at a loss from his Troop, at the beginning, and tells little but his own wanderings up and down to find them: Yet by all means the Victory must be theirs, and there was a great Defect somewhere, the Fight was not renew'd next Day, whereas such as were in it had enough the Day before; and he intimates as much by saying, that Prince Rupert, taking advantage of the Disorder our own Horse had put the Foot into, press'd upon them with such Fury, that he put them to Flight. And then adds, If the time which he spent in pursu∣ing them too far, and plundering the Waggons, had been employ'd in tak∣ing such Advantages as offer'd them∣selves in the Place where the Fight was, it might have prov'd more serviceable to the carrying on the Enemies De∣signs,
p. 50. Which is very modestly express'd because to the King's prejudice, otherwise he might have said, had not the Prince been guilty of that gross over∣sight, Neglect, or Rashness, for 'twas all in one, that Day had in great Probabi∣lity, put an end to the Dispute; the Army had never return'd to their Masters at Westminster, nor our Author any oc∣casion to trouble the World with the im∣pertinency of his Memoirs: for to speak-freely, yet nothing but Truth, the Prin∣ces indescretions of that Kind, his great Courage, and little Conduct, in whatsoever Battles he engag'd in, conduc'd more to the discomfiture of the King's just Cause, than all the Rebel Forces, or whatever other Arm of Flesh appear'd against him, as may be further on observ'd. However that their Advantage was not considerable, appears from what he further adds, that the Army return'd to London, not like Men that had obtained a Victory, but as if they had been beaten, p. 52. which is a shrewd Circumstance that they were so, and to that he joyns another every way as considerable; upon the King's advance with part of his Army to Maydenhead, or there abouts (for it was really Colebrook, and those seven Miles were a considerable Addition to his ap∣proach)
the Parliament sent to him, to as∣sure him their earnest Desire to prevent the effusion of more Blood, and to procure a right understanding between his Majesty and them. A certain Omen they were not much transporteed with the Victory, this being the first last time, they began a Motion for Peace: He goes on, The King profess'd in his Answer to desire nothing more, upon which they thought themselves secure; whereas the next Day he took the Advantage of a Mist, and March'd within half a Mile of Brandford before discover'd, &c. p. 53. and beat off what Forces were there; though he tells us they made a brave Defence. This coming by way of surprise, he calls Treachery, and all the Round-heads about Town made a loud Clamor upon the King's forfeiture of his Royal Word; whereas upon enquiry all the Trick and Treachery was on their side; for as they propounded no Cessation of Arms in their Petition, so the King had News brought, that Essex was drawing his Forces, and Ordinance out of London to∣wards him, so that without seizing Brand∣ford, their Forces at Windsor, Kingston, and Acton, might have hemm'd him in, and his Army depriv'd both of Move∣ing, or Subsisting: So that after a tedi∣ous
Paper Scuffle upon the Matter, the Parliament were forc'd to own, That they gave direction to the Earl of Es∣sex to draw the Army out of London, and that part of it was at Brandford whilst the Committee was with the King; and conscious to themselves of a just exception cautiously add, That they sent a Messenger to know whe∣ther his Majesty intended forbearance of Hostility, but he found them in fight, and could not pass Brandford. So that having kept up the Ferment among their City Gulls by the foremen∣tion'd Slander, which our impudent Au∣thor calls the treacherous Design of the late Expedition, they again sent Propositions to Oxford, being the same in effect with those de∣livered at York, but they found no better Reception than the others had done, p. 56. Neither did they expect otherwise, or inde∣ed desire, considering the insolency of their Demands, which the King tells them in his Answer, Had he not given up all the Faculties of his Soul to an earnest endeavour of Peace and Reconciliation &c. he could not but resent their hea∣vy Charges, and not suffer the Re∣proaches cast upon him: The whole procedure of that Treaty may be seen in Whitlock's Memoirs, who treats the King
like a Gentleman, and speaks Truth where himself was concern'd, for neither of which this our Brute hath the least Re∣gard, nay seems wilfully to defy both. I must not here omit what that scribling Fellow, K. Ch. No Saint, nor Martyr, al∣ledges; That he took a most Bloody and Treacherous Advantage of the Parlia∣ment's Army near Colebrook, whilst he was under Treaty at Uxbridge with them, p. 4. whereas the Treaty at Ux∣bridge was more than Two Years after. Would the present Age be content with such licentious Impudence to Characte∣rise, and expose them in the next? In this Year 43 our Governor of Warder Castle before he falls upon his great Charge, and weighty Atchievements there, gives a cursory Relation of what pass'd in other Parts. In the Spring, he saith, our Army was Master of the Field; The King making it his Business to be on the defensive, till the Queen should arrive with an Army to his assistance, p. 58. and when her Army was come with other Necssa∣ries of War, the King was in the hope∣fullest Condition of the whole Four Years, for so long the contest was in dispute; and had there not been Neglect, Treachery, or both, amongst his Councils, either of State or War, he had unnestled the Re∣bels
at London, and put a final End to any further Blood-shed, but what in due course of Law such Villanies deser'vd. In relating how the Earl of Essex took Reading, it must not be omitted that Sir Arthur Ashton a Papist was Governour therof, to which I shall add that Sir Ar∣thur had been brought up a Soldier in Foreign Wars, a Person of good Experi∣ence, who as soon as he found we were running into his Bloody Profession, prof∣fer'd his Service to the King, more than once, who as often reply'd, that the Fa∣ction had brought such a Slander upon him in reference to those of his Perswasion, it would much prejudice his Cause to imploy him: at length he came to the King and shewed him a Letter, wherein Essex profferd him a Command in the Parliament Army, and told his Majesty plainly that he was a Sol∣dier of Fortune, and that if he could not be entertained on the one side, he would betake himself to the other; and by this Means he became Governour of Reading: for the Parliament, as they had several Papists in their Service, so 'twas nothing but a vile Interest made them reject the rest, force them into the King's Quarters, that they might have the benefit of their Estates, and the King the Odium of their Company. In the mean while I would
gladly know whether a Loyal Papist be not a better Man, ay and Christian too, than a Rebel Protestant; to be sure Lud∣low and his Gang agreed with them in the most exploded, and pernicious Do∣ctrine, was ever laid to their Charge, and what but few of them, and that very clandestinely have maintain'd, viz. that of Deposing, and Murdering Kings; for which Reason I look upon him, as a ba∣ser Man than Fryar Iacob, or Ravillac, and the whole set of Regicides, the most abo∣minable Assembly that ever met, since the Scribes and Pharisees preferr'd Barabbas; to be sure they brought upon the Refor∣mation the greatest Reproach Hell its self could suggest, and yet for ought I see not only the Reproach but the Practice is like to continue. Though Essex was Master of the Field in Spring, the King had the Command all Summer, his Forces making so great a Progress in the West as to take Exeter, Bri∣stol, and many other considerable places, give a total defeat to Sir Will. Waller at Devizes, and so clear'd all those Parts from any Enemy in a Body, as indeed they had none at London; hereupon it was debated in several Councils, of War and private Cabals, whether was best, to march directly thither or to stay and
take Glocester first, the only place of any considerable Strength, which remain'd to the Enemy in those Parts; the gene∣ral Vogue went for the March, and ve∣ry considerable Reasons urg'd for it, both Essex's, and Waller's Armies, were crum∣bled away, the City of London in Muti∣ny, an Insurrection in Kent for the King, the Lords voting a Treaty, and the Com∣mons in dismal Frights. On the other side it was urg'd how ill it would look to leave such a place behind them, that 'twas ill situated, and not well fortified, or pro∣vided with Men, so that a few Days would certainly make the King Master thereof, long before the Enemy could get a Recruit, much less March so far to relieve it: Of this Perswasion was Prince Rupert, and most of the Sword-men, which made some suspect they fear'd the War would be done too soon, and were the more confirm'd therein, for that the Siege was carryed on at such a slow rate; so that after a whole Month of precious time lost, and Essex appearing unexpe∣ctedly with a considerable Army, they were forc'd to raise the Siege. I have been told a Passage much credited by ho∣nest Gentlemen in those times; that a lit∣tle before the King made that fatal halt, a certain Peer finding Essex very pensive
in the Lords Lobby, ask'd him how Affairs went? He reply'd, very ill, and they must be all ruin'd, unless the King could be in∣duc'd to lie down before Glocester, which he hop'd by one Engine to bring about; what or who that Engine was the World is yet to learn; but that there were too ma∣ny such about his Majesty, appear'd in most undertakings he engag'd in. Nei∣ther was the Battle upon their Retreat, at Newberry, so advantagiously manag'd as it might have been, for the Royal Ar∣my having happily got Possession of the Town, and consequently stood in their way to London, should have been whol∣ly upon the Defensive, so plac'd their Ar∣tillery, and lin'd the Hedges, that the dif∣ficulty should have been on the Enemy's side to force their Passage, which they must either have done or starv'd, for to my certain information, in the Vil∣lage where they were oblig'd to stop two Miles West of the Town they had neither Bread, nor Drink, not somuch as Water, it having been a dry Season, the Ponds were little else than Puddle, the Springs low, and the few Wells so soon drain'd, as several Officers did proffer a handful of Money for a Pint of clear Water; so that it must be right down Grinning Honour, as Hudibras terms it, which put the Ca∣valiers upon attacquing them in their
thick Hedges, or otherwise coming within reach of their Cannon, which let alone, they must have try'd to Eat; yet at this rate Things were carryed till ha∣ving lost a great many Noble and Brave Gentlemen, and their Ammunition almost Spent, they withdrew into the Town, and set the Enemy a free return, more than they expected, or to be sure deserv'd. Our Author ends this Year with bring∣ing in the Scots, and relates how prettily Sir Henry Vane trick'd them, In removing the last and greatest difficulty, about some doubtful Words in the Covenant which was to be taken by both Nations, concerning the Preservation of the King's Person, and reducing the Do∣ctrine and Discipline of both Churches to the Pattern of the best Reformed; For which Sir H. found an expedient, by adding to the first Clause, In pre∣servation of the Laws of the Land, and Liberty of the Subject: And to the se∣cond, According to the Word of God, p. 79. and by this Evasion look'd upon themselves as oblig'd by neither, but left free to Murther their King, and use the Covenant as it deserv'd. He saith like∣wise that for their, the Scots Encourage∣ment, the Lords and Commons sentenc'd, and caus'd Execution upon William Laud, Arch-Bishop
of Canterbury, their Capital Enemy. Which nevertheless was not till that time Twelve-month; however done it was, and perhaps thought a very Christian act, by such as had nothing thereof. And here to put his Murthers together, we are also told Sir Iohn Hotham and his Son, were condemn'd to lose their Heads, for they could make Treason in reference to them∣selves at pleasure, though the King was not to be heard upon the justest Accusa∣tion; yet this is certain, had not they acted that Treason against the King, there could have been no occasion for the Par∣liaments pretences. Sir Alexander Ca∣rew was also beheaded for endeavouring to betray Plimouth; whereupon I must re∣late this passage, that Worthy Brave Gen∣tleman Sir Bevill Greenvil, was Knight of the Shire for Cornwal, with this Sir Alexander, and upon the Earl of Strafford's Business, came to him with this request; I pray Sir Alexander let it not be said the Representatives of our County, had any thing to do in the Blood of this Great Man; Whereto he reply'd with much earnest∣ness, I will vote for the Bill, though sure my Head were to be Cut off on the same Block, which accordingly fell out. Could the Fanaticks meet with any thing like such Instances of Divine Vengeance on the
other side, what a Noise would they make? what an Annus Mirabilis should we be plagu'd withal? In this following Year 44. Ludlow scarce finds occasion to make one Invective a∣gainst his Majesty; the Misfortune, or as he would have it Mismanagement of their own Affairs, took up all the Gall he had to vent, tho' very well stor'd therewith: For now I perceive the Independent, Com∣mon-wealth Party both in House and Army, began to pique at Essex; indeed all the No∣bility, in Command, and most of the Pres∣byterians, as Linsy-woolsy Brothers, which did their Business by halfs. His greatest Disgust is that Essex and Waller divided their Army, yet owns that Waller had the more Forces when routed at Cropredy-Bridge; and the King's Forces were ve∣ry prevalent in the West, so that the De∣sign was lay'd well enough, only the foremention'd Rout gave the King an Op∣portunity of following Essex, to his to∣tal Defeat in Cornwal; where his Majesty was put upon another most destructive Halt, in lying down before Plymouth, and not marching up to London, by which Delay the two shatter'd Armies had time to recruit, and the Foot which the King had seiz'd in Cornwal, being discharg'd upon Condition, never to take Armes a∣gainst
him more, were absolv'd by Ca∣lamy, and the other Presbyterian Iesuits, and so took up Arms again, which (Lud∣low commends for an Heroick Act,) and fought like perjur'd Villains, who knew they ought to be hang'd if taken. But the greatest Prejudice to his Majesty's Af∣fairs this Year, was Prince Rupert's rash Conduct, and consequent Defeat at Mar∣ston Moor, which lost most of the North, and gave part of the Rebel Army leisure to return, and obstruct his Majesty's fur∣ther Progress in the West: The two Ar∣mies meeting, a second time about New∣berry, where the King reliev'd Denington Castle, and proffer'd Battel: But the Re∣bel Generals disagreeing amongst them∣selves, it was not accepted; whereupon he March'd to Oxford; and they, disper∣sing their Army to London. His Majesty upon both his Successes, at Cropredy Bridge, and in Cornwal, sent Overtures of Peace to the Men at Westminster, which were coldly receiv'd; yet being further press'd by him from Oxford, they could not but comply, to have a Treaty at Uxbridge, but to little Purpose; for though the King's Commissioners consented to many Particu∣lars, and Alterations of great Importance, the others would not abate one tittle, but insisted peremtorily upon the Parlia∣ments
first Propositions, which were an Absolute, Dissolution of all Old Esta∣blishments, indeed the whole Frame of Go∣vernment, both Ecclesiastical and Civil: So that all Ludlow's Flourish upon this Occasion is false, and mention'd only to express his continu'd Spite at the Church, as if the Treaty came to nothing upon that sole Account, that the Proposition con∣cerning Episcopacy was rejected; p. 150. whereas they were as positive, in refe∣rence to the Militia, Ireland, and what∣ever else came under Debate. It had likewise been a great Omission in such a foul-mouth'd Fellow as himself, to have pass'd by, what that Lecturing Beautifeu Love preach'd in the Town whilst the Treaty was on Foot, although every Word he saith of the Matter is as false, as what the other preach'd; for first he was not Chaplain attending the Parlia∣ment's Commissioners; for when the King's Commissioners complained of his Treasona∣ble Insolence, they answer'd he was not of their Train; neither in the Second Place is it probable the Preachment was before the Commissioners, for it was a Le∣cture, on the Market-Day, and they had something else to attend. Nor Thirdly, were the Words spoken as he relates, that the King was a Man of Blood, &c.
they were not come to that height of Impudence, till the Independents were Trump, and the King in their Hands, and therefore as it was related, when complain'd of, the Words run thus, That the Commissioners came with Hearts full of Blood, and there was as great distance be∣tween this Treaty, and Peace, as Heaven and Hell. I shall only add further, that when Ludlow and his Complices had mur∣ther'd the King, and assum'd the Power, they cut off Love's Head, though upon an∣other Account; yet not without the just Reflections of many, as a retaliating Ven∣geance, for his Seditions, and Bloody Dis∣position, with so much Untruth and Im∣pudence, vented here. We are come now to that unhappy Year 45. wherein Ludlow according to his no Divinity, would have Iudgment given against the King, by that Power to which both Parties had made their solemn Appeal; for though indeed it put an End to the Fighting Part between King and Parlia∣ment, yet thereby the Nation did but Triumph over its self, and perish, as Rome of Old, suis & ipsa viribus; the two fore∣mention'd Factions being the more at leisure, to foment their Feuds, and mul∣tiply those Distractions, which the Peo∣ple now saw, and were sorry for, but
could not prevent. The first Onset the Independents gave the other Iunto, was the Self-denying Ordinance, which our Au∣thor handles very Tenderly, yet cannot forbear to let us know. By this means the Earl of Essex, Manchester, and Sir William Waller, were laid aside, the latter rather to show their Impartiality, than from any distrust of him, he having never disco∣ver'd to that Time, any Inclination to fa∣vour the King's Cause, p. 146. The Truth of it is, the two former were sensible, with several of their Confederates, to how deplorable a Condition they had brought Affairs, sed revocare gradum; but to set them right, heal the Wounds, repair the Breaches they had made, 'twas as much beyond their Power, as to get to Hea∣ven. Neither is it without something of ma∣licious Satisfaction that he mentions, about the same time the Parliament made Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax General, the King made Prince Rupert so of his Forces, notwithstanding his late ill Success at Marston Moor,Short Life of K. Ch. by P. H. p. 148. whereto I find a much honester Man adding, his apparent want of Age, Experi∣ence and Conduct for so great a Trust. I say this was probably mention'd with no little Satisfaction, because that Prince's Rashness, and Indiscretion, contributed
more than any one Thing, to their curs∣ed Success at the fatal Naseby, which he gives an Account of with great Insult; but what he adds, that it was the more astonishing, because obtain'd by Men of lit∣tle Experience in Affairs of that Nature, and upon that Account despis'd by their Ene∣mies, is false; besides several Old Soldiers, there were few or none but had had the Experience of three Years War, and if that will not inform any Man of Sense, I would advise him to follow some more innocent Imployment: Neither were they despis'd by their Enemy, but look'd upon as the best Body of Men the Parliament ever had together; notwithstanding which, had not Prince Rupert given Cromwel the same Advantage here, as before at Mar∣ston-Moor, it might have prov'd the De∣ciding Battel to the King. But what Compleated the Triumph to their unworthy, mean-spirited Souls, was the taking his Majesty's Cabinet, with seve∣ral Letters in it, most of them to the Queen, which they Published to their eternal Re∣proach, and this Fellow with like Base∣ness revives here again. The Grecians in their Wars with Philip of Macedon, a Foreign Prince, and most unjust Usurper upon his Neighbours, having intercepted a Pacquet of his Letters, of the rest in∣deed
they made what use they could, but those to his Queen, they never offer'd to open, but sent them back with all Re∣spect, and Tenderest regard imaginable; how much those Heathen Greeks out-did our Christian Barbarians is very unhappy to reflect: Yet not at all strange that Ludlow should continue the same inhu∣mane way of Procedure, 'tis as Natural to him as Poyson to a Toad, although he is much put to it, to find any thing there which may feed that base Humor; what he urgeth of the Lord Digby's Letter, that the Design of making War upon the Parli∣ament, was therein discover'd to be early, is absolutely false, p. 154. for it was after the Tumults had forc'd the King from White-Hall; the Parliament had fix'd their Guards, and were securing the Militia, &c. and then `twas time for his Majesty to consult his Friends, and look to him∣self. But I find our Author very forward to catch at every thing which may tend in the least to make the King first Ag∣gressor, wherein his many Fetches have as ill Success, as that of the Commission with Sir Phelim Oneal. He adds, besides the many Printed, others of no less Conse∣quence were suppress'd, as I have been in∣form'd, by some of those that were intrusted with them, who since the King's return have
been rewarded for it, p. 156. The little Truth herein stands thus: A Person im∣ploy'd by the Parliament to uncypher those Letters, found several Figures he could not compass, and so was forc'd to let them stand; and to save his Bacon upon the Restaration, alledg'd it a design'd O∣mission in regard to his Majesty's Honor and Reputaution, which nevertheless few or none believ'd, he being then as zeal∣ous and forward in the Faction as any, though to so little Purpose, as he hath, since run into the contrary Extream of as great Indifferency; neither do I believe he had any other reward, than what the Ge∣neral Indemnity oblig'd him with; which was too much to a great many, unless they had made more grateful Returns. But whatever was really writ, or their venemous Rancor think fit to Comment thereupon, all Men of Honour and Vir∣tue must acknowledge, what his Majesty writ to Secretary Nicholas, and publish'd in a Declaration upon that Account, that the Papers contain nothing an honest Man, or good Protestant may blush at, yet would fain know that Person, who would be willing the Freedom of his private Letters should be publickly seen, as mine have been, however (so that one Clause be rightly understood)
I care not so the rest take their For∣tune; it is concerning the Mongrel Par∣liament. The Truth is, the Earl of Sus∣sex his Factiousness at that time, put me somewhat out of Patience, which made me freely vent my Displeasure a∣gainst those of his Party, to my Wife, &c. This Expression I find Ludlow and his Fellow Libellers more than once carping at, which yet cannot be stretch'd further than that some cross-grain'd Dispositions might be among them, who having some Ferment of the Westminster Leven, halted between both Parties, for whom no Epi∣thet could be more proper than that of Mongrel, and with too many such the King was plagu'd: Upon the whole there was no one thing expos'd the Factions more to Obloquy and Scorn than this un∣worthy Act, all their own Party, who had any regard for Modesty and good Man∣ners were asham'd of it; and such as more narrowly look'd into things, observ'd there such a Royal Mixture of Good Na∣ture, and Great Iudgment, as considering him in those several Respects of Husband, Father, Master, or King, it would be hard to find his Parallel: Afterwards when at too much leisure, in his Confinement, he pen'd that Excellent Meditation of his, upon this their inhumane Usage, which
I fancy few of them ever dar'd to read, for fear Remorse and Guilt should oblige themselves to supply the Place both of Iudge and Executioner. Upon these two great Victories over his Majesty's Army, and Honour, as this worst natur'd Fellow of the whole Rebellion, would have it thought, he goes on to relate, the great Successes their Forces day∣ly met with, and having mention'd as many as he could call to Mind, adds by way of Insult, with divers others of less Importance, and therefore unnecessary to be mention'd here. The Truth of it is, the King was never able to weather that dis∣mal Storm which scatter'd him so at Naseby; though he himself made several Noble Efforts, for having the remains of his broken Horse recruited out of several Garrisons, he march'd up and down to encourage such Loyal Souls as chang'd not their Faith with his Condition; which alas were too few; for the Parliament having made Propositions in order to a Compositi∣on for Delinquents Estates; 'tis incredible what a Number flock'd in, and how de∣servedly they were Cheated, every Days new Success producing new Qualifications, whereby some were to forfeit a Third Part, others a Moyity of their Estates, and all upon this Condition, that they
should cordially submit, and take the National Covenant appointed by Ordinance of Parliament; and therefore it was ob∣serv'd that such as stood out and yeilded not but by force upon their Garrisons, obtain'd much better Terms from the Commanders and Generals, than others found from those Sneaking Fellows at Westminster, who indeed would be some∣times angry at it, especially the Oxford Articles; but the Army beginning to grow Masterless, they must begin to let them have their Humor. Things standing thus, and his Majesty failing in the Relief of Chester, and hearing the Lord Digby was defeated in his March with a Body of Horse to the Noble Montross, who did Won∣ders in Scotland: Finding likewise great Disorders amongst his Officers at Newark, where his two Nephews fail'd much of their Duty and Respect; and his Council at Oxford, either gon to make their Peace, or in such Confusion as not able to ad∣vise him; the Rebel Army being just rea∣dy to Besiege that his chief Garrison, he was forc'd to make a Vertue of Necessity, and once more try the Sincerity of his Antient and Native Subjects the Scots.
CHAP. IV. Of the King in Custody of the Scots and English. THE King's being withdrawn from Oxon, and not known whither gon, made a mighty Disturbance amongst the Grandees at Westminster; Ludlow tells us, they suspected he might design to come to London, to raise a Party against them, publishing an Ordinance, that whosoever should harbour or conceal the King's Person, should be Proceed∣ed against as a Traytor to the Com∣mon-wealth; p. 176. By what Law this I beseech you? The truth of it is, the Expences and other Mischiefs by the War, had made the City so sensible of their former Infatuations; that 'twas ge∣nerally believ'd had the King appear'd amongst them, the Rabble as well as more sensible Part of Men, would have endeavour'd their utmost to set him upon his Throne; but 'tis easier to pull down, than build up, to make, than retrieve, Alterations, as appear'd afterward when the Army so tamely rid them. But in few Days they were freed from that Suspici∣on,
though not more surpris'd at his Loss, than to find him in the Scotch Hands, who would be sure to make the best of so good a Prise. There had been no small Con∣trasts between them and their English Brethren before, who finding the fight∣ing Work nigh over, were desirous to be quit of some of their own Forces, much more of such troublesome, and chargable Hirelings: The Scots on the o∣ther Side, as Ludlow tells us, repeated their Instances, for a Consideration of the Articles of Religion contained in the Covenant, to give a speedy Peace to his Majesty, to pay them near two hundred thousand Pounds, which they pretended to be due for their Arrears, and make a just Estimate of the Los∣ses they had sustain'd by Land and Sea, &c. which they computed at more than the former Sum, p. 174. He goes on to relate, how the Parliament thought it not convenient to comply with the King's Propositions; demanded an ex∣act Account of what was due to them, and requir'd that they would with∣draw their Garrisons from such Places as they possest in England. Some dif∣ferences he saith likewise there were with the Scotch Commissioners, about the King's Concern in the Militia; their
intermedling with the Government of England, the Education of the King's Children, the disbanding the Army, and an Act of Oblivion; in which Matters the Parliament would not have the Scots to interpose; and by degrees the Debates grew so warm, as there being found in those Demands of the Scots some Expressions very much re∣flecting upon the Parliament, the two Houses declared them to be Injurious and Scandalous, and order'd them to be Burnt by the Hands of the Com∣mon Hang-Man, p. 175. During these Controversies the Scotch Army continu'd in the Northern Parts upon free Quarter, at an abominable rate harressing the Poor People to the utmost Extremity; till af∣ter some Month's Time, Matters being accommodated a little for the present, up∣on the Advance of 30000. l. with Shooes, Stockings and other Necessaries; they were prevail'd upon to Besiege Newark, at which Leaguer the King came to them, just as Articles of Surrender were agreed upon, and so the more at leisure to march off with him to Newcastle, for 'tis false what Ludlow affirms, that the King soon after his Arrival in the Scots Quarters, gave Order for the Delivery of Newark in∣to their Hands; the Articles were agreed
upon before the King came thither, or his Friends in the Garrison dreamt thereof; however it happen'd very Opportunely for the Scots to march off with their Ro∣yal Purchase, and prevent the Clamors from their Brethren at Westminster, who as Lud∣low tells us, forthwith sent an Order to their Commissioners in the Scots Ar∣my to demand the Person of the King, judging it unreasonable that the Scots being in their Pay, should dispose of him otherwise than by their Order; resolv∣ing further that he should be Condu∣cted to Warwick Castle, and the next Day commanded their Army to ad∣vance, in Order to hinder the Conjun∣ction of the King's Forces with the Scots, p. 176. Whereof doubtless they were sore affraid, 'tis pity they were not hurt, the Scots by that one Act might have expiated all their former Perfidy, but to expect that, had been to wash a Blackamore, so Blessed a good was not to, be thought of from those accustomed so much to the worst of Evils, Rebellion and Sacriledge; and therefore 'tis probable it gave them some ease to hear, that though Levens the Scotch General, had march'd with the King to New-Castle, he had by Proclamation forbidden his Forces to have any Communication with the King's Par∣ty;
and thereupon only order'd that the Scots should keep him for the English Par∣liament, and so they did, but must pay a round Sum of Mony, before they should have him. We are next to see what Entertain∣ment the King had among the Scots, who though they pretended to be much sur∣pris'd, as Ludlow tells us, yet afterwards it appear'd that this Resolution had been Communicated to them before, p. 116. The Truth of it is, Montrevil a French Embas∣sador or Agent in the Scotch Camp, had adjusted the Matter with Levens, and other General Officers, who engag'd to secure him, and as many of his Party as should seek for Shelter with them, and to stand to him with their Lives and Fortunes: Yet in that excellent Meditation his Majesty, penn'd upon this Occasion, 'tis own'd a forc'd Push, where Necessity was his Counsellor, in an Adventure upon their Loyalty, who first began his Troubles, for which Reason he studied to fortify his Mind, so as not to offer up his Soul's Liberty, or make his Con∣science their Captive; but no less conform his Words to his inward Dictates now, than if they had been, as the Words of a King ought to be amongst Loyal Subjects full of Power: And Good Prince he was soon put to his Tryal, for though the Committee of
Estates at Edingburgh, upon the first No∣tice of his being in their Hands, sent Commissioners, with great Expressions of their Duty, and good Intentions, protesting how dear the Preservation of his Sacred Per∣son, and his just Power and Greatness should ever be to them, yet their Actions im∣mediately spake the contrary, as if all were intended with the tacit Conditi∣on of a Covenant Clog, and such harsh Usage as might bring, or force him thereto, for within few Days the King call'd both the chief Officers of the Army, and the Commissioners sent out of Scotland, and in presence of Monsieur de Montrevil did Expostulate; That whereas he did come to their Army upon the Assurances Monsieur Mon∣trevil had given him, that he should be safe in his Person, Honor and Consci∣ence, the two last were not kept; for he was pressed to settle Religion as they desir'd, wherewith his Conscience was not satisfy'd: Next his Subjects had not free access to him, but Proclamati∣ons were issued out, forbidding them to come to him; neither was the Ceremony due to him as King, suf∣fer'd to be paid him at his entry to New-Castle: And lastly his Servants were not suffer'd to wait on him. And his
Majesty attested Montrevil, if those Con∣ditions were not made to him, who confidently affirm'd it in all their Presence, and that he had the Authen∣tick Assurances in French. The Com∣missioners retired to think of an Answer; but when they return'd they desired his Majesty would put Montrevil to it, to declare what those Assurances were, and who gave them; but this was not done. Next they said, they would not treat with the King in his Presence, nor admit the Interposition of any Foreign Agent, between them and their Native Prince. And the Commissioners of the Army resolv'd, that no suspected Per∣son should be suffer'd to wait on the King, with which his Majesty was highly displeas'd, and for some Days would not eat in Publick, but only in his Chamber. This last Passage I have from an unex∣ceptionable Authority, whose Affection to his Native Country could give Place to no∣thing but Truth, and therefore he seems to palliate the Matter a little on their be∣half; that Montrevil did not declare what the Assurances were, nor who gave them, which yet seems not to be his Fault, for that they fully resolv'd against his Pre∣sence and Interposition for the future in
any such like Affairs. And upon the same account, he declares further on, it did not appear what Grounds Montrevil had for giving the King those Assurances, and must be very slight, and only from sin∣gle Persons, not any Iunto or Iudicatory, Such a secret Transaction could not be done with all the Formalities of a Solemn Treaty, yet doubtless Montrevil had his Assurances from Levens with most of the other General Officers, and Scotch Commis∣sioners then before Newark, which was a considerable Iunto; and I humbly con∣ceive Iudicatories have little to do in con∣cerns of that Nature. But it had been all one though never so exactly drawn up, and would have been as little observ'd, as the first Pacification, or last promise, of never drawing Sword against him more. But my particular Business is to trace Ludlow, who tells us, The Commission∣ers of Parliament joyning with those who were before with the King, en∣deavour'd to perswade him to agree to the Propositions of the Parliament; but he disliking several Things in them, and most of all the abolition of Epis∣copacy, to which Interest he continu'd obstinately stedfast, refused his consent, upon private Encouragement from some of the Scots and English, to ex∣pect
more easy Terms, or to be re∣ceived without any at all, p. 183. The Encouragement he mentions is only a Flam of his own, the Scots kept too strict a Guard upon him, to have any but his Enemies to converse with; nay, which is worse, they oblig'd him to discharge all his Friends then in Arms, not only here in England, but Montross in Scotland, and Ormond in Ireland. Neither was the Abo∣lition of Episcopacy the main Obstacle al∣though it was hard, when he alone by himself had so shamefully bafled their great Champion Henderson upon that Subject, to be so violently press'd from a Truth they could so little disprove. But setting aside this Fellow's Spite, who would needs make this the chief obstacle, the King in his brisk Answer to the whole body of their Propositions from Newcastle August. 1. 46. tells them, They were such as did import the greatest Alte∣rations in Government both in Church and Kingdom; yet these were posi∣tively sent for his Majesty's Concurrence, without allowing the Commissioners to give Reasons for their Demands, or the hearing the King's Reasons against them, which occasion'd his smart Reply upon their saying, They had no Power to treat that, sa∣ving the Honour of the Business, an honest
Trumpeter might have done as much. To these Propositions, Ludlow tells us, the Scots Commissioners, especially Lord Low∣don, press'd the King very earnestly to comply; telling him that though they were higher in some Particulars than they could wish, yet if he continu'd to reject them, he must not expect to be received in Scotland, whither they must return, and deliver him up to the Parliament in England. But whatever they or the English said made no impression, &c. p. 184. The Truth of it is after all the Scotch Rodomantades, Low∣don's in particular, how much it was against the Laws of Nature, Nations and Hospita∣lity, to Deliver, and betray those that had fled to any for Succour; their Brethren at Westminster knew how much there was of Iudas amongst them, and having re∣duc'd their demand of a Million, to 400000 l. agreed upon the Payment of one Moyety, and the Publick Faith for the other, to have the King Deliver'd to them,Upon the Scots Deli∣very the K. who good Man laments that his Price should be so much above his Saviours. And to clear himself from the base Re∣flections they made upon his Steady, well grounded Resolves, he declares what they call Obstinacy, I know God accounts honest Constancy, from which, Reason and Religi∣on, as well as Honour forbid me to recede.
For you must know the Scots, whilst in their Hands, not only permitted, but encourag'd the most Rigid of their Kirk∣men, to bait him at an impudent Rate, as well from the Pulpit as otherwise, as positively denouncing him damn'd for re∣fusing the Covenant, as 'tis to be fear'd, might fall to their lot, for forcing it. In the next Paragraph, p. 186. Ludlow Commenceth a Quarrel with all the World both at Home and abroad; for upon the French Embassador's coming over to endea∣vour a Reconciliation between King and Parliament, he tells you how it was rejected, they resolving to determin it themselves with∣out the interposition of any (an infallible sign of a just Cause, where no body but themselves must Iudge) having experienc'd that most of the Neighbouring States, espe∣cially the Monarchical, were at the bottom their Enemies. That they were not their Friends was certain, but that they should be so little their Enemies, was a great Shame, that so many Crown'd Heads should stand by and see a Brother Monarch, Dethron'd and Murther'd at so barbarous a rate, was a Sign that which is call'd An∣tient Honour was at a very low Ebb, and the Sacro-Sancta Mrjestas left destitute of all Appeal but to the King of Kings, who for ought we know may be still making
Inquisition for that Blood, this Son of Beli∣al so much thirsted after, and never at rest till poured forth: and therefore henceforward 'tis his sole Business to en∣veigh against all that would not go along with him, and his Crew, in that horrid Perpetration; first he falls upon the Parli∣ament, for their frequent Overtures of Peace made to the King, though he had not a Sword left wherewith to oppose them, p. 187. The Overtures were not frequent, or if so, always the same, and totally destructive of all old Establishments without condescend∣ing to debate or alter any thing. And for his not having a Sword left, denotes our Author to be of the same Principle with that Atheist, Virgil so judiciously ex∣poses for his Dextra mihi Deus; because they depended upon the Sword, must it fol∣low the King had no other Right? To be sure they found it a very precarious Title, for the same Sword which set them up, more than once pull'd them down, and after all, Right took place of the several Usurping Powers, and it will be never found so in the end. But what makes him the more out of Humour, is the Peo∣ples expectation of the King's return to the Parliament, being inform'd the Pres∣byterian Heads had promis'd the Scots, that as soon as they had disbanded the
Army they would bring him to London in Honor and Safety: The People might expect, and certainly did desire this, but whoever observ'd the Presbyterians de∣portment both in Scotland, and here, how obstinately they adhered to their Covenant Rigours; and how conscienti∣ously positive the King was to the con∣trary, could see little hopes of an Accord. These Things, he saith, made the Peo∣ple ready to conclude, that though his Designs had been wonderfully defeat∣ed, his Armies beaten out of the Field, and himself deliver'd into the Hands of the Parliament, against whom he had made a long and Bloody War; yet certainly he must be in the Right; and that tho' he was guilty of the Blood of many Thousands, yet was still unac∣countable, in a Condition to give Par∣don, and not in need to receive any: which made them flock from all Parts to see him as he was brought from Newcastle to Holmby, falling down before him, bringing their Sick to be touch'd by him, and courting him as only able to restore to them their Peace and Set∣tlement. This really was the Temper of the People at that time, who now ful∣ly discover'd those Mists, and Misrepresen∣tations, wherewith the Factions had so
long amus'd them; and were very ear∣nest to have the King reestablish'd, that they might be once more so, in that abundance of all things, they even wan∣tonis'd in, when under his sole Govern∣ment. 'Twas likewise well known to them that a violent Party in Parliament forc'd the King to stand upon his own Defence; and when to make an Invasion upon all his just Rights and Prerogatives, they had open'd an Issue of Blood, how incessantly did he endeavour to stop it, by Messages and Overtures of Treaty, and Peace? which like so many deaf Adders, he could never Charm them into: and as at the time he is now upon, there was not one in many Thousands had the impudence to charge the King with be∣ginning the War, and the Effusion of Blood thereupon, so those few that did, knew or believ'd the contrary, (amongst whom our Ludlow is chief) but could not other∣wise carry on that execrable Design, the Devil had so thoroughly engag'd them in; and this makes our Author so for∣ward to inveigh against all the rest of his Partisans, whom either Shame, Guilt, or Sense of their Countries Desolation, had caus'd to desist, or desire an Accommodati∣on, as Men of a neutral Spirit, who would
not, Cataline like, add to their former Evils, the total Ruin of the Nation, for that was it's, then real Condition, the King their Prisoner, and the whole King∣dom their Slaves; and that decisive Iudg∣ment from Heaven, by which alone they claim'd their Power, was no other than what a Gang of High-Way Robbers may pretend to, which in several Sets, the just Vengeance of Heaven, suffer'd to harress this proud and foolish People, till in the end they were broke quite in Pieces, some of them Hang'd, though not enough, by our Author at least, unless his long and lingring Exile, had brought him to some∣thing of Remorse; and this I take to be the decisive Iudgment, as to this Life, and as to the next shall only say, that if eve∣ry one whose Conscience doth not accuse him were thereby justify'd, final Imponi∣tency would be an happy End. Ludlow takes little Notice of the King whilst at Holmby, being I presume well satisfy'd with the ill Treatment he re∣ceiv'd from the Commissioners there, which could not in that Conjuncture have been more rude and insolent, had he been one of them; for they deny'd him his Chap∣lains, Discharg'd all his Antient Servants, and would not permit any one of ac∣ceptable Conversation, to come into his
Presence; which Restraint was devout∣ly improv'd in more constant Addresses to Almighty God, as we find from those Meditations and Vows in his Solitude at Holmby. Neither were their Impositi∣ons less Vexatious, those two Pulpit Beau∣tifeus, Marshal, and Caryl, having attend∣ed, as Chaplains upon the English Com∣missioners at New-Castle, return'd with them to Holmby, and were recommended to Preach before the King, and say Grace at Meals; but were deny'd as to both, the King always saying Grace him∣self, with an audible Voice, standing un∣der the State: Though 'tis said, that Marshal did on a Time put himself more forward than was meet to say Grace, and while he was long in forming his Chaps, as the Manner was among the Saints, and making ugly Faces, His Ma∣jesty said Grace himself, and had eaten up some part of his Dinner, before Mar∣shal had ended his Cant. But this Scene lasted not long, Cornet Ioyce gave these Commissioners, and their Chaplains, an un∣willing Discharge, carrying the King to the Army; 'tis unaccountable to what a height the Feuds between those two Fa∣ctions, Presbyterian and Independents were now grown, how cursedly that Hell was divided within it's self, what Plots, and
Counter-plots, were continually carrying on, each Party conceiving the King's Person, and Presence, of great Advantage to their Designs, though both of them no less against him, than each other: For his Majesty's Thoughts hereof, take from his own Excellent Words;Upon the Army's surprisal of the King. What Part God will have me now to Act, or suffer in this new and strange Scene of Affairs, I am not much Solicitous; some little Practice will serve that Man who only seeks to represent a part of Honesty and Honor. In this my Surprise I tell the World, That a King cannot be so low but he is con∣siderable, adding weight to that Par∣ty where he appears: And so goes on, most judiciously observing the Hand of Divine Iustice, how they that by Tumults, first occasion'd the raising of Armies, are now chastned by their own Army for new Tumults; The Members of both Houses who at first withdrew, (as my self was forced to do) from the rudeness of the Tumults, were count∣ed Deserters, and outed their Places in Parliament; such as staid and enjoy'd the Benefit of the Tumults, were as∣serted for the only Patriots: Now on the contrary the Deserters are abetted by the Army, and such as remain'd,
and kept their Stations, are charg'd for Tumultuary Insolencies, and be∣trayers of the Freedom and Honor of Parliaments; and doubtless amidst those many Distractions and Perplexities this Excellent Prince labour'd under, it could not but be some Satisfaction to see such visible Retaliations, since there was not a Member of the Covenant Class, but might take up Adonibezek's Ac∣knowledgment, As we have done, so the Lord hath requited us. The manner of Ioyce's carrying off the King hath not one Syllable of Truth as to the Circumstances thereof, in Ludlow's Relation. He saith, Ioyce had an Or∣der in writing to take the King out of the Hands of the Commissioners of Parliament, p. 191. whereas upon the King's demanding a sight of his Instru∣ctions, that, saith the impudent Fellow, you shall see presently, and drawing up the best part of his Party into the inner Court as near as he could to the King, say'd, these Sir are my Instructions; where∣to his Majesty Smilingly reply'd, Your Instructions are in fair Characters, and Legible without Spelling: Neither is it true, that the King would have retract∣ed his Promise to Ioyce upon the Com∣missioner's Perswasion; it was by his In∣ducement
the Guards were taken off their Lodgings; and when Ioyce press'd the King to go along with him, no Prejudice being intended, but rather his Satisfacti∣on, upon the King's saying he would not stir unless the Commissioners went with him; the other reply'd, that for his Part he was indifferent. Neither did the King take Horse, but went in a Coach, with the Earls, Pembrook, Denbeigh, and Lord Moun∣tague, who as the rest of their Fellows were very Shagreen upon this Force, his Majesty being observ'd the Merryest in the Company: And when Colonel Brown, and Mr. Crew return'd to the Parliament is not certain, to be sure they did not go from Holmby, but attended the King to Hinchingbrook, tho an Express was sent from the first Notice of Ioyce's Approach. The whole Passage of this Force, (with several others very considerable from hence forward, to his Majesty's Murder) is most faithfully related in the Athenae Oxon. as the Author had them from Sir Thomas Herbert, a constant, and some∣times sole Attendant upon the King, in all those his Solitudes and Sufferings. In all probability, it was with no little regret to our Author, before he saw whe∣ther it tended, that the Army paid so great a Deference to the King, suffer'd
his Officers to continue, and publickly own'd the Design. Colonel Francis Russel, and others attending the King, became soon con∣verted by the Splendor of his Majesty, &c. p. 193. And some Pages before, 177. he inveighs bitterly against Colonel Brown the Wood-monger, for that having been as great a Rebel as himself, (indeed much more Considerable and Mischievous) he no sooner came into the King's Conversati∣on, but became a Convert, which Ludlow would have the effect of a low and abject Original and Education, whereas there cannot be a greater Instance of a generous Temper, to acknowledge his Mistakes, and beg his Majesty's Pardon when there was nothing but Obloquy and Persecution from the prevailing Power, which he met withal sufficiently, and was as for∣ward to return when occasion serv'd, be∣ing one of the Bloodyest Butchers of the Parliament's Friends, p. 178. Indeed up∣on the Restauration he was very forward in apprehending, and condemning the Regicides, and it was by an unlucky Chance this Fellow escap'd his Hands. The Devils knowing themselves under Sentence of Eternal Reprobation, are ne∣ver better pleas'd, than to have engag'd a Man so far, as to lay aside all Thoughts of Pardon, of Reconciliation with God;
and really I never met with a Person more truly Proselyted to Hell, upon that, and indeed all other Concerns, than our Author, as having not only abandoned all Thoughts of Peace and Mercy in him∣self, but an implacable Spite against such as were any ways inclin'd thereto; on the contrary wherever his Majesty met any of such ingenuous Christian Dispositi∣ons, he certainly Convinc'd them of their Mistakes, and brought them over to his Party: There are too many Instances of this Kind, and too well known to be here set down;Pag. 244. That of Mr. Vines, in Dr. Perenchief's Life, is very Considerable, because as rigid a Presbyterian as the rest, who declar'd he had been deluded into un∣worthy Thoughts of the King, but was now convinc'd to an exceeding Reverence of him, and hoped so of others, &c. There was one Dell an Army Chaplain, counterpart to Hugh Peters, and tho less a Buffoon, yet as much a Rogue, they jointly giving out, when their Villanies were ripe, that the King was but as a dead Dog: This un∣worthy Wretch said once in my hearing, that whilst in the Army, it was told him the King express'd a desire to see Dell; but said the Fellow, I would not come at him, because we found he had a cunning way of getting into Men, and
making them think well of him, and his Cause: This indeed I find from several Particulars, that the Prejudices of such Ulcerous Minds kept them off upon a false Surmise, that the King could Pardon and Forgive no more than they; upon which String I observe Ludlow of∣ten harping, especially upon his Obser∣vation of the Army's respect in this Jun∣cture, whom he seems to laugh at for not considering how easy it would be for him to break through all his Promises and En∣gagements, upon pretence of being un∣der a Force, p. 193. 'Tis true, they had violated the solemnest Oaths and Tyes imaginable in putting a Force upon him; whereas he, good Man, was so Religious to his bare Promises, as in the end it cost him his Life. What he further relates of Transacti∣ons between the King and Army, is, as we are told from a Manuscript, written by Sir Iohn Barkly, and left in the Hands of a Merchant at Geneva: That Sir Iohn, since Lord Iohn Barkly, was attending up∣on the King at this Time, is certain, and we will grant 'tis his Manuscript, to be sure none of our Authors, being of a more polite Stile, pen'd like a Man of Sense and Business, so that wherever brought in, it looks like a piece of New Cloth, to make
bold with the Parable, put to an Old Gar∣ment, and renders his thred-bare Stuff, an abominably patch'd Business. From these Papers he would have us believe that the Grandees of the Army, Cromwel, Ireton, &c. were once in so good a Mood as to design the Restauration of his Majesty, whose ill Conduct in not following Sir Iohn's Directions, and caressing them as expected, spoil'd all. And this ought to be taken into Consideration, because I have met some honest Gentlemen too forward in giving Credit thereto; and the Commonwealth's Men run away with it as infallible, notwithstanding the quite contrary appears from Ludlow's own Re∣lation; who perhaps too hath pervert∣ed several of Sir Iohn's Expressions to the King's Prejudice, (for there is no∣thing so base and false he would not be guilty of upon that Account) as when he is reported to break away from them, and say, Well, I shall see them glad e're long to accept of more equal Terms, p. 203. and that p. 205. you cannot be without me; you will; fall to ruin if I do not sustain you; which manner of Carriage he saith was ob∣serv'd with Amasement, and so it might well, for he was never observ'd to do so by any other Author, or Person: And
when a little further on, 'tis said Dr. Hammond was the Governour's own Kins∣man, it must certainly be Ludlow, for Sir Iohn certainly knew him to be his Brother. From these and several such like Instances, it may be inferr'd, that though such Papers were left by Sir Iohn, yet might they be alter'd, or ad∣ded to by Ludlow, to Blacken, as their Term was, his Majesty's Discretion and Policy, though they could not his Vir∣tue. It may be further observ'd there was no good Understanding between Sir Iohn, and Mr. Asburnham, though both of them doubtless very Faithful and Loyal; Sir Iohn really believ'd the Army was in good Earnest, the other very much suspected, and who of the two had most Reason therein, the Event declar'd, the King in the mean while might hesitate between both, and rather incline to Mr. Asburnham's Opinion. To pass by therefore, those Difficulties and Distractions the several contending Par∣ties lay under; and how impossible it was for his Majesty to come to any thing of a fix'd Resolution amidst so ma∣ny Confusions; we will come to this one Enquiry, whether Cromwel, and Ire∣ton ever really intended to establish the King upon his Throne? For I look upon
them two as the gand Intriguers, driv∣ing on a distinct Design of their own, which none of their Comrades then so much as dreamt of, but were implicit∣ly carried on to promote what at first they could not see, nor at last prevent: For that Cromwel was the exactest Piece of Dissimulation Hell ever in∣spir'd, must be own'd on all Hands; so that he and his Confederates, sending Sir Allen Appesly to Sir John Barkly, and desiring them both to assure the Queen, and Prince of their good Intentions, was but a Blind to fortify their Interest against the Presbyterians, who as Lud∣low, or the Paper tells us, though much weakned by the Absence of the Eleven Members, pass'd a Vote, that the King should be brought to Richmond, where∣to he inclin'd, so that the Army were oblig'd to cause the Parliament to re∣call their Vote: Neither were Crom∣wel's Protestations to Sir Iohn the least to be regarded, Of that tenderest Sight his Eyes ever beheld, the Interview between the King and his Children; and that never Man was so abus'd as he, in his sinister Opinion of the King, who he thought was the most Upright, and Conscientious of the Kingdom, &c. concluding with this
Wish, That God would be pleased to look upon him according to the Sincerity of his Heart towards the King, pag. 199. Such Tricks as these were as natural to him as his Meat and Drink; and no less requisite to support the Life of his cursed Designs: Did he not at the same time assure the Parliament, That the Army should at their first Command, cast their Arms at their Feet; and solemnly Swear, that he had rather himself, with his whole Family should be consumed, than the Army break out into Se∣dition? Yet at the same time did he by his Creatures, administer new Fewel to those Flames; and posting down to the Head Quarters, set the whole Sy∣nagogue of Agitators on Work, and di∣rected them in carrying on the Con∣spiracy; and therefore however Sir Iohn's Sanguin Temper, and good-natur'd Dis∣position might be impos'd upon by Cromwel's Arts, the King was not with∣out considerable Cautions from others, of the no Trust which was to be put in any thing he said, that amongst his Con∣fidents he did frequently boast of his fine Arts in imposing upon the King, and that thereby he intended nothing less than his Destruction: It must indeed be acknow∣ledg'd
that some of the General Officers were Sincere to his Majesty, really his Converts, one of which seeing Cromwel hold the King's Hand between his own during a solemn Protestation of unfeign∣ed Assurances, and even washing it with Tears; when he came out, ask'd the Of∣ficer who stood by, whether he had not acted his Part very well? Who replied, Why were you not in good Earnest? Not in the least replied he, for which he ever after Abominated him, and acquainted the King with what a Devil incarnate he had to deal withall. And here I must observe no small Piece of Perfidy in our Author, that he will not let us know what Part Sir Iohn, what himself bears in relat∣ing these Affairs; for what I question'd as to some harsh Expressions he would have the King use towards the Army, seems much confirm'd from an absolute Falshood he relates, as the effect there∣of, which runs thus, pag. 205. The King having thus bid Defiance to the Army, thought it necessary to bend all his Force against them, and especially to strengthen their Ene∣mies in the Parliament. To this end a Petition was fram'd to press them to speedy Agreement with the King,
and presented in a Tumultuous man∣ner, by a great Number of Appren∣tices and Rabble, back'd by many Dismiss'd and Disaffected Officers, &c. This indeed was the last Ef∣fort of the Presbyterian Iunto to preserve themselves from the Army's Lash; but as it took no Effect, so the King was not at all concern'd therein, but con∣tinu'd with the Army, and upon very good Terms; for it was not time to throw off the Vizard, till as Cromwel whisper'd Ludlow, they had pull'd the Par∣liament out by the Ears, page 189. In the mean while, to show how Ludlow contradicts himself; the King who just now was said to bid defiance to the Ar∣my, upon showing his Answer to the Officers before it was sent, they seemed much satisfyed with it, and promised to use their endeavours for a Personal Treaty; Cromwel and Ireton and many of their Par∣ty in the House, pressing the King's desires with great earnestness; wherein contrary to their expectation, they found a vigorous op∣position, &c. pag. 213. This Fellow Ludlow, cannot be so ignorant of those Intrigues as he would seem: That Crom∣wel and his Confidents ran with the Hare, and hunted with the Hound; set on their Properties in the House, and Agitators in
the Army, to complain of that free Access all the Cavaliers had to the King at Hamp∣ton-Court: Of Sir John Barkly's, and Mr. Ashburnham's Intimacy with the Chief Officers of the Army; that Cromwel's and Ireton's Doors were open to them, when shut to those of the Army; whereat, saith our Au∣thor, Cromwel was much offended, telling Mr. Ashburnham and Sir John, that if he were an honest Man, he had said enough of the sincerity of his intentions; and if he were not, nothing was enough, &c. pag. 212. So likewise he tells us, Cromwel wheadled with the King, acquainting him with his danger, and protesting it was not in his power to undertake for his secu∣rity in the place where he was, viz. Hampton-Court; assuring him of his real service, and desiring God to deal, &c. as before; all which was abomi∣nable Trick to affright the King into those Nets and Toyls, he had so craftily set for him, till a fit opportunity of proceeding to his Murder: And that all the Caresses, wherewith most of the Army, more especially those two Nonparells of Treach∣ery, the Father and Son in Law court∣ed the King, tended thereto, is clear from every Circumstance of their Pro∣ceedings; as likewise from that Assu∣rance Ireton gave Ludlow at first, who
tells us, he went down to Mayden-head, their Head-Quarters, where Ire∣ton suspecting these Things (their caressing his Majesty) might occasi∣on Jealousies in me, and others of their Friends in Parliament, desired me to be assured of their stedfast Ad∣herence to the publick Interest, and that they intended only to dispense with such Things as were not mate∣rial, till they could put themselves into a Condition of serving the Peo∣ple effectually, pag. 194. And when the Army drew up that bloody Remon∣strance November, 48. in order to taking away the King's Life, the same Ireton sent him Word, that now he hop'd he should please him, which he owns they did, by the way they were taking, &c. pag. 266. Now had Ludlow been a Man of any Thought, any Reflection upon himself, he must needs have consider'd, what a contemptible Fellow they took him to be, as not vouchsafing to trust him in a Design, his wicked Soul most earn∣estly desir'd to have Accomplished. As for Cromwel's ambitious Enthusiasti∣cal Spirit, that he had some thoughts by removal of the King, to ascend the height he at last attain'd unto; there are seve∣ral inducements to perswade. Ludlow
tells us of many Passages and Actions which when the Riddle was unfolded, discover'd what he aim'd at. Parti∣cularly about this Time, when the King was in the Isle of Wight, there were frequent Consults and Conferences a∣mongst them, about reconciling Par∣ties, and fixing a Government; where∣in Cromwel kept himself in the Clouds, and would declare neither for Mo∣narchical, Aristocratical, nor Demo∣cratical, maintaining that any of them might be good in themselves, or for us according as Providence should di∣rect, pag. 238. And when Providence suffer'd this glaring Meteor, with all it's Evil Influences, to rest so long upon our Horizon, and his vain Mind affect∣ed to add the Regal Title to that Power, he had so unjustly assum'd, one main Inducement of his attempting it, was thought to be a Dream he had of being King, whilst a young Rake in Sidny College, Cambridge, (for so he real∣ly was) which he frequently declar'd to his Companions, and was not a lit∣tle proud of; and that it made a deep∣er Impression upon his Mind, than any Learning he got there, give me leave to add this odd Passage, when he was Protector, I knew an Old Man, who
in his younger Days had been Serving-Man to his Uncle Sir Thomas Stewart, was the Fac totum in the Family, and had more especially charge of the Cel∣lar, where he told me, Cromwel and he toss'd the Pot many a Time, and when his natural Enthusiasm, was assisted by a good Dose of strong Liquor, would thus vent himself; Well, Iames, notwith∣standing my Uncle's and Aunt's Un∣kindnesses, I may yet be a great Man before I die; I had a lucky Dream at the College, and I have a young Daughter, a shrewd Girl she is, who will be often telling me, Fa∣ther you will be a Great Man Father, I cannot sleep soundly a Nights for Dreaming of your being a Great Man; indeed Father you will be as Great as the King; and then he would go on; I don't know Iames, nor can I see any thing of likelyhood yet; but God of∣ten times brings strange things about, and if he should call me to any thing extraordinary, sure I should under∣stand to prosecute my own advantage. This the Old Man told me, he would be often repeating over his Cups, several years before the Wars broke out; which as he laugh'd at then, so he had thought upon it a thousand times with astonish∣ment,
since he came to be Protector. I hope this Story will not be thought alto∣gether impertinent upon this considera∣tion; that it shows how much his Mind was puff'd up with hopes, even when there was no ground for them; but when he saw all sorts of Mischiefs and Rebellions, begin to work with such Hellish success, and himself got into the Second Command of the whole Army, under such a Cypher of a General, as he manag'd him no less than he did the Infe∣riour Officers, most of whom he en∣gag'd to oppose all Superiors, as well their Masters the Parliament, as their Sovereign; This doubtless made him dream of a Crown every Night, and think a Year an Age, till possest of the sole Power. For having Modell'd the Par∣liament according to his Will, made them as tractable as Setting-Dogs, to whatsoever he and his Mirmidons thought fit to put them upon; and wheadled the King into a Prison, under a Property of his own; for whatever Ludlow or Sir Iohn relates of Hammond's Surprise and Consternation at the News, pag. 218. the History of Independency assures us, he had been with Cromwel, who sent him down fully Instructed, as to his Deport∣ment in that Critical Affair: And from
hence forward we hear no more of his Caresses and Protestations: May the Lord deal with him according to the Sincerity of his Heart towards the King, &c. But a tendency on all hands to the De∣struction both of his Person and Govern∣ment. CHAP. V. Of the King's Murder. WE are now come to the last Act; so full of Horror and Amase∣ment, as nothing but the doing it could make the Attempt credible; and seems to transverse that Old Conceit of the Ly∣canthropi, Wolves and Tygers appearing not only in humane Shape, but humane Societies; for of some such Composition must those several Scenes of Regicides be, which made up those Conferences our Author mentions, p. 238. and forward; in the first of which he tells us, the Commonwealth's-men declared, Monar∣chy was neither good in it's self, nor for us. That it was not desirable in it's self they urg'd from the 8th Chap∣ter of the first Book of Samuel, the
8th. Verse, where the rejecting of the Judges, and the choice of a King, was charg'd upon the Israelites by God himself as to rejecting him. Scrip∣ture is so much out of these Peoples way, as they never blunder more, than when they think to support their Cause from thence, as will appear from this short Account of the whole Story: Where first, it was not the Israelites rejecting the Iudges, but the Theocracy which gave the Provocation, for so Almighty God himself declares in the precedent Verse 7. upon Samuel's Complaint, they have not rejected thee, but me they have rejected that I should not reign over them. Samuel was not only as a Viceroy to see those Laws observ'd, which the Supreme Sove∣reign had already Enacted, but as a Prophet, and so the Mouth of God, further to declare whatever Divine Will thought fit to Prescribe. And if in the second Place, if he believ'd or would have it thought there was any thing of Demo∣cracy in the Iudges Regency, it is a gross Mistake; indeed when the Monarchy was interrupted upon the Death of Ioshua, we find no Successor appointed by him, as Moses had done, nor fix'd upon by the People; and 'tis probable every Tribe became a State Provincial in their several
Allotments, for the Text saith, The People served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and of the Elders that out-liv'd Joshua, who had seen all the great Works the Lord did for Israel, Judg. 2. 7, 8. But when all that Ge∣neration were gather'd to their Fathers, there arose another Generation which knew not the Lord, nor the Works he had done, but followed other Gods of the People that were round about them, and bowed them∣selves unto them, and provoked the Lord to Anger; and here indeed I take them to be a true Commonwealth, a Free-State, with a General Toleration, every one doing what was right in his own Eyes. But this ad∣mired Liberty pleas'd none but them∣selves, nor themselves long neither, for the Text further adds, the Anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he deliver∣ed them into the Hands of the Spoilers, that spoiled them, &c. vers. 14. till sensible of their Folly, and Ingratitude, upon their humble Address unto the Lord, he raised up Iudges, and was with the Iudges, and dilivered them out of the Hand of the Ene∣my all the days of the Iudges, vers. 18. Yet to see how steady all popular Resolves are, the next Verse declares, when the Iudge was dead, they return'd and corrupt∣ed themselves more than their Fore-fathers, in following other Gods, &c. they ceased not
from their own doings, and their stubborn ways, vers. 19. Whereupon I shall take leave to make this general Observation, That when God designs to curse a Peo∣ple into Misery and Ruin, he leaves them to their own evil and foolish Ways, which will never be redress'd, without true Repentance, and a return to such Establishments as are agreeable to his Will. And therefore, Thirdly, 'tis an abominable Mistake to urge that Text in Samuel as an Argument against all Mo∣narchy, in general, whereas the Charge God brings against them, the People of Israel, was their rude and undutiful De∣portment, their Mutinous manner of de∣manding a King, and the reason they gave for it, that they might be like other Nations, which he had taken all possible care they should not be, and most strict∣ly enjoyn'd them not to imitate any of their Practices; and this is clear; for that as their Government had been always Monarchical when under God's Hand; so he foresaw, and consequently cau∣tion'd them against such popular tumul∣tuary Heats, Deut. 17. 14, &c. when thou art come unto the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, &c. and shalt say, I will set a King over me, like as all the Nations which are about me: Thou shalt in any wise
set him a King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall Chuse. God was well con∣tent that they should have a King, but reserv'd the Election to himself; he would have no transferring of Rights, no mutual Contracts, but chuse his own Representative. He proceeds to his other Topick, That it was no ways conducing to the Interest of the Nation, (viz. Monarchy) was endea∣vour'd to be prov'd by the infinite Mischiefs and Oppressions we have suffer'd under it. 'Tis the modestest Expression in his whole Book to say it was endeavour'd to be prov'd, since it hath been already made appear, that the little Finger of these Commonwealth-Iobbers prov'd heavier to the whole Nation than all the Monarchs which ever sat upon the Throne. So likewise further on he tells us, The Question in dispute between the King's Party, and us, being as I apprehend it, whether the King should Govern like a God by his own Will? &c. or the People be govern'd by Laws made by themselves? &c. p. 267. If he will apprehend things wrong it cannot be help'd, for neither the King nor his Par∣ty ever intended the People should be otherwise Govern'd than by their own Laws; 'twas what they stood up for,
and endeavour'd to preserve according to all antient Establishments; but God thought not fit to give them a present Success, that the People might experi∣mentally find the Madness and Folly of their Innovations. Mr. Thomas Farnaby, who had been the famous School-Master of those Times, was committed by an Order of the House in 41. for saying, he believ'd we should find it better to live un∣der one King than 500; how Legal that Commitment was is easily resolv'd, yet went they on in the same Arbitrary Course for five or six Years together, Committing whomsoever they dislik'd, or so much as suspected to dislike them. Did not these Men govern by their own Wills? Yes surely, though more like Devils, than God. Neither yet did it rest here, the 500 were reduc'd to a Rump of less than 50. and they over∣aw'd by a Military Rabble of more than twice 15 Thousand; Were not the Good People of England excellently represent∣ed now? Their Laws and Liberty in a hopeful Condition? And their Purses free, when the Soldiers commanded them? And this is the next Diabolical In∣trigue our Author very frankly declares they design'd to enterprise; for however
the several Iuntos had hitherto jointly concurr'd, nay even contended who should make the greatest Invasions not only upon the Peoples, but there Prince's Li∣berty; yet now hath become divided within its self, a major part of the House being not willing to concurr with the Army in Murdering that Person whom they had nevertheless both agreed to Un-King; and this, as Ludlow tells us, occasion'd another Meeting between some Members and Officers of the Army, wherein it was resolv'd to purge the House once more of all such Members as should attempt to fru∣strate what these Sons of Belial were resolv'd to go through with, p. 266. and to justify himself herein he brings another Text of Scripture, whether with more Impudence or Folly let the Reader judge, that Blood defileth the Land, and cannot be cleansed but by the Blood of him that shed it, Numb. 35. 33. I have al∣ready observ'd if the Wolf may be Judge, no Sheep shall be Innocent, and as these Beasts of Prey, began the Chace, and worried all that would not go with, or dar'd to oppose them, till their Blood was shed like Water round about the Land, so that Royal Effusion in the end, must doubt∣less have brought such a Stain upon it
as we may justly fear will never be washed out; whereof several worthy Loyal Patriots in the Parliament 60. were so Religiously sensible, as they propound∣ed, that not only the rest of the Regi∣cides should have receiv'd their due Re∣ward, but that for every one of the King's Party who suffer'd by their pre∣tended Forms of Iustice, there should have been a Retaliation upon the same Number of such as had been most for∣ward, in those base and unjust Prosecu∣tions; this might have done something towards an Expiation, and put away the Guilt of Innocent Blood amongst us, by neglect whereof to return the Text up∣on Ludlow and his Party, 'tis to be fear∣ed the Land still continues defiled there∣with. And next to this of Blood-guiltiness, give me leave to add my Suspition, that we have another deep Arrear, for their gross Abuse and Profanation of Scrip∣ture, whereof our Author hath given an exact Specimen in the two foremention'd Texts, although he is very sparing in comparison with his Fellow-Rebels, espe∣cially the violent Pulpit-Drivers, who studied nothing so much as to pervert it, and that not only to their own, but the whole Nations destruction: Curse ye
Meroz, &c. did more Mischief than all the Trumpets in the Army, and made as loud a Noise; and their numberless Fast-Sermons, were but a wresting so many Texts to Sedition and Treason. In the same manner likewise they manag'd Controversies: All Church-Government must be fram'd according to the new-fangled Conceits of their Geneva Rabbies, though the continued Sense and Practice of Antiquity, speak the quite contrary: And because the Doctrine of Obedience is so expresly laid down in 13th. to the Romans, and elsewhere, they hammer'd out this Impudent Evasion, that the Apostles deliver'd what the Circumstances they lay under forc'd them unto, not hav∣ing Strength to make Opposition, otherwise might have been as very Rebels as them∣selves. In the mean while the AEqui∣vocal Sense of our English word Power, was thought to give them so great a Latitude, as they might submit to what∣ever came uppermost, and if you urg'd them with the different Acceptations of  and  in the Original, 'twas Heathen Greek to them, the Language of the Beast, and ought not to restrain the Liberty of their perverse Spirits; neither are such Prejudices altogether laid aside, but seem rather to be assum'd
afresh, too many of our present Divines being very backward to consider those two Words themselves, or attend to the Information of others, and yet a very nice Case depends thereupon. But com∣mend me to our Modern Commonwealth's Men, who finding with how ill Success their Predecessors made use of Scripture, have taken a much shorter Cut, set up for Theists, or Atheists, and thereby su∣persede all Authority from thence. What he relates as to the Treaty in the Isle of Wight, is a barefac'd discovery of their Design, that having got the King there, with the Parliament, and City un∣der their Lash, they were now resolv'd to kill and take Possession; his Majesty therefore is no more caress'd by the Ar∣my, Sir Iohn Barkly's cold Entertain∣ment from the Officers at Windsor, was a full discovery of what they all along had in purpose. Yet since he takes no Notice of the King's Deportment in that grand Affair, but represents their Jea∣lousies of him, according to the Guilt of their own just Deservings; I shall take leave to observe, that never any Prince strugled with so many different and vio∣lent Interests, as this good Man at that Treaty, nor deported himself with great∣er Honor, Iudgment, and Discretion. The
Presbyterian Iunto in the House, tho sen∣sible of that deplorable Condition they had brought both King and Kingdom into, yet stood so stifly upon their first Propositions, as their Commissioners were not allow'd to recede one Ace from them. The Scotch likewise stood by rather to serve themselves than him, and observe how they should next play their Game, for now every Eye could discover what∣ever Protestations they made, Mony and Covenant was the only Diana they con∣tended for. The Independent Party in the House, tho out-Voted as to the Trea∣ty, yet were able to start so many Scru∣ples, Restrictions, and Delays, as might baffle much sincerer Intentions than ap∣pear'd in their Opponents. Yet contra∣ry to all their Expectations, the King in his own Person manag'd the whole Debate with such incredible Prudence, found out such Temperaments for their harshest Demands, and made such Con∣cessions, with a reserve both of Honor, and Conscience, as astonish'd them all, and wrought a full Conviction in such as had any Reserve even of Humanity left in their Breasts. One Passage I must needs relate from our Author, whereby we may guess at his, and all his Com∣plices Ingenuity; he saith when some
Commissioners who had been with the King pleaded in the House for a Concurrence with him, &c. p. 268. Sir Henry Vane oppos'd it, and inveigh'd against the King in his Reasons against it; concluding, that if they should accept of these Terms without con∣sent of the Army, it would prove but a Fea∣ther in their Caps: And yet this base Fel∣low, Vane, perswaded the King at the Isle of Wight not to be too prodigal of his Concessions; that he had already yielded more than 'twas fit for him to give, or them to ask, and undertook to make it evident to the whole World: How could any Prince, or indeed other Person, of a steady Vir∣tue, and undesigning Integrity, deal with such Proteus's as these? Quo teneam no∣do? What Hold can be laid on them? What escape from so damn'd a Perfidy? All which his Majesty at that time ful∣ly discover'd, that tho' some were of a sensible Complyance, yet those of most Power were most obstinate, intended nothing less than Peace, nor could they more than his Destruction. The breaking off that Treaty by the Army, their Force upon his Majesty there, bringing him from thence to Lon∣don, with the Hellish Pageantry of his Tryal, was insult enough for our Author's bloody Mind, to relate Matter of Fact
in Common with others, and is too Me∣lancholy a Subject for me to repeat: Only what he saith as to Bishop Iuxton, must be all his own, and probably invented to be reveng'd on him and the King, because his Majesty he saith, and I believe truly, refused such Ministers as their Court of Injustice had appointed to attend him, amongst whom that unhal∣lowed Buffoon, Peters was one, and the rest had been all most violent Fire-brands of Rebellion, and therein of his Murder: At last therefore, tho' with some Relu∣ctancy, (and I doubt not but with Lud∣low's Negative) it was granted that Bi∣shop Iuxton should be permitted to at∣tend his King, and Master in this his Translation from a Temporal to an Eter∣nal Crown; and though doubtless it was with unexpressable Regret, as to the manner of his Departure, that he was put upon these holy Offices, yet that he should declare himself altogether unpre∣par'd, or complain for want of warning, as having nothing ready, is a true Piece of Fanatick Wit, that is, a snarling Reflecti∣on, without any Truth at the Bottom, or Ingenuity in the Expression; as no Man approv'd himself more Eminent both for Parts and Integrity, than this worthy Prelate, in those several Publick
Trusts, Ecclesiastical and Civil commit∣ted to his Care; so his Piety, and exact Understanding in all Religious Rites, qualified him for the most devout Per∣formance of all holy Duties: With like Rudeness and Impertinency he conti∣nues; But recollecting himself a little, he put on his Scarf, and other Furniture, and went to the King, where having read the Common-Prayer, and one of his old Ser∣mons, he Administred the Sacrament to him, &c. pag. 282. Could any thing like a Christian, or indeed a Man, play the Buf∣foon at so silly a rate, upon so solemn and sad an Occasion? Whether the Ser∣mon was old or not, is more than he knows, to be sure it was very much to the Purpose, that is, of the final Iudgment, when God shall judge the Secrets of all Men by Iesus Christ; whereat had Ludlow, or any of his Confederates been, there is no doubt but their guilty Souls would have Trembled, as much as Felix did; but withal too, persever'd as little in their Recognitions: With like impious. Con∣tempt he reflects upon the Holy Sacra∣ment, most ignorantly cavils at, and as profanely Ridicules it; a true Saint of the new Edition; above Ordinances in their Lives, and without them at their Deaths; according to that great Author in the
Book of Wisdom,Wisd. Ca. 2 v. 22. As for the Mysteries of God, they knew them not, neither hoped they for the Wages of Righteousness, nor discerned a Reward for blameless Souls: 'Tis represented likewise, according to his no Understanding of such Religious Preparations, as if all these Holy Offices were hudled together on that fatal last Day, whereas the Bishop was with the King on Saturday, had the Sermon and Sacrament on Sunday, where Mr. Herbert, the only Person they permitted to at∣tend his Majesty, was another Communi∣cant with them, however the foolish Fel∣low flouts, and considers not what Dis∣pensations are allow'd upon such sad Ne∣cessities. But since he is for relating Circum∣stances, as to this worthy Prelate's holy Performances, there is one, which tho all good Men must be well acquainted with, ought never to be omitted when upon this Subject, viz. That the last Lesson his Majesty heard read, in that Morning Office of his Suffering, was the History of our Saviour's Passion, in the 27th. of Matth. which he suppos'd the Bishop had made Choice of, as most ap∣plicable to his present Condition, till he otherwise inform'd him, that it was the proper Lesson for the Day, as appear'd by
the Kalender, wherewith saith Mr. Her∣bert, then present, his Majesty was much Affected, and doubtless received great Consolation thereby. Others have gon further and made several Parallels be∣tween their Sufferings, which I shall on∣ly mention in general; that as there was never a more barbarous Act, since that Lord of Life was Crucified; so neither a more Innocent Soul through his Merits and Satisfaction, assum'd into the Regi∣ons of Bliss: So that a certain Lord upon the Seaffold, the Noble Capel I think it was, had great Reason to say, that if he were to wish his Soul in any ones stead, it should be in his; and Sit anima mea cum Carolo; Heaven cannot be so, if he be not there: And therefore to take my leave of this worst of Men Ludlow, it shall be in the Words of the foremen∣tion'd Author of the Book of Wisdom, where declaring that the Souls of the Righteous are in the Hands of God, how∣ever in the Sight of the unwise and wicked they seem'd to die; he adds, For though they be punished in the sight of Man; yet is their hope full of Immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly reward∣ed; for God proved them, and found them worthy for himself.Cap. 3. v. 4, 5.
This strange, and never before heard of Procedure, against the Sacred Person of their Monarch, being thus accomplish'd, and in him the Ancient Monarchy of Eng∣land totally Subverted, our Author is too intent upon their new Project of Liberty-Keeping, to persue his Calumnies any further, and therefore relating how his Body was Interred at Windsor, by some Good Men, Noble and Worthy Persons, who attended it thither (he might have added the Lamentation made over it, not only by them, but the whole Kingdom thorough, for doubtless never was there greater for any Prince in the World) whether, as I said, from the many Designs his projecting Head was carrying on, or to shew that Humani∣ty had not totally Abdicated his Breast, he lets it rest there, without farther Di∣sturbance. But that pitiful Fellow Roger Coke was so Spiteful as to rake into those Sa∣cred Ashes, and not permit so much as the Grave to give them rest. Can any thing be more base than to reflect, that the Office of our Church was not suf∣fer'd to be read at his Enterment? A Man of Sense, of Virtue, and Loyalty might have been justly severe upon the Gover∣nor, who refus'd so innocent a Request;
but his Majesty's very Memory must be thereby the more Eminent, in that their Baseness persued him so far, as not to permit his dead Corps, the External Rites of Religion. And as he was buried without an Office; so his next Insult is, that he lies without a Monument; and thereupon relates how the Commons had Voted, 50. (he saith) but 'twas really 70000l. for the Charge of taking up the King's Bo∣dy, with making a Solemn Funeral, and Monument, which yet came to nothing: Whereto he Maliciously adds, that 'twas said his Son forbid it; which indeed was likely to be said; for Lying, with Whig∣gism, began about that Time to be much in Vogue, and several Plots there were on Foot to serve the Son, as they had done the Father; but the People were not then mad enough to follow their Lure, and it was the Old Loyal Par∣ty, and Principle, which preserv'd the King at that Time. But for the 70000l. in order to a Monument, the true Ac∣count stands thus: That Session in which it was Voted, rose in some Heat with∣out passing any Bills, whereby this a∣mongst the rest was Obstructed: And at their next Meeting, their continu'd Heats cool'd this worthy Design, the ra∣ther
for that a certain busy Female as∣sum'd the Honor of having it first mov'd. Although 'tis likewise probable, that the Old Faction, which with their young Spawn, began about this Time to be very busy in the House, might not be want∣ing to put by so ungrateful a Memorial of their Villany: And thus the Court was too justly repaid, for the Care they took at the Restauration, to Sweeten the Sowr-humor'd Fanatick, and amongst o∣ther things, that their Consciences should not be over-jogg'd, by too many Re∣membrances of this Eternal Reproach, which though an Indempnity pardon'd, no Oblivion will ever be able to deface; and this occasion'd a worthy Divine (in this Critical Juncture most eminently deserving of the English Church) preach∣ing at White-Hall upon that cursed Day, to tell them freely, They had added to his Ignominy, by Burying his Funeral: To be sure had the least motion for a Monu∣ment been made in those early Days, it would have pass'd without Control, but in that Juncture we were mighty fear∣ful of offending those who could never be oblig'd. Dr. Donne in that odd Poem of his, The Progress of the Soul, when he had plac'd it in the Whale, and declar'd, how without any Provocation the Thre∣sher,
and Sword-fish, plotted together, and destroy'd him, the next Stanza turns off with this Apostrophe, Who will revenge his Death? Or who will call? Those to Account that sought, and wraught his Fall? Stanz. 37.The Heirs of slain Kings, we see are often so Transported with the Ioy of what they get, That they Revenge, and Obsequies forget, &c. For what remains is as Applicable to that unhappy Neglect, when the whole Kingdom thought nothing too much for expiating the Guilt, and honouring the Memory of so excellent a Prince, so bar∣barously Treated. But tho' the Bill did not pass for the Monument, yet the same Parliament had done another Thing before, which may out-last all of that Kind, in Westminster, or elsewhere in the whole Nation, viz. Enacted that the Day of that horrid Parri∣cide, be observ'd as a Solemn Fast through∣out the Kingdom for ever; and doubtless could they have foreseen any Person would have taken the Confidence to As∣perse his Sacred Person, or Memory, at that impudent Rate, our Libellers, and too many  do, it had been Voted no
less Treason than his Murder; yet howe∣ver there be Enemies still which speak Evil of him, and some that hate him wrong∣fully are Mighty; with all that are Wise and Good, his Name will be Blessed, and his Righteousness had in Everlasting Re∣membrance. To which purpose I shall here add a little Passage of a Reverend Divine lately deceased in Buckingham∣shire, who amongst other Ingenious Le∣gacies out of the Common Road, gave 40 s. per Annum for ever to New College, whereof I presume he had been former∣ly Member, for a Speech on this dismal Day. And 'tis to be hoped the continual Pro∣vocations, of such bold Profligates, as dare to open their Mouths against, and Blaspheme whatever is Superior to them, either in Heaven or Earth, may in due time rouse up some generous, Publick Spirits, which shall at leastwise put to Silence, if not punish the Ignorance and Impudence of those foolish Men; for 'tis not an easy thing to stem a strong Tide of Virtue, or hold out long against the Truth; and therefore as my foremen∣tion'd Author denounces,Wisd. 3. v. 17. 18, 19. Though they live long, yet shall be nothing regarded, and their last Age shall be without honor; or if they die quickly they have no hope, nor com∣fort in the Day of Tryal; for horrible is
the end of an unrighteous Generation. And this brings me to one further Consideration, of greatest Consequence, though I fear least regarded; that how∣ever defective Men have been as to the deserved Obsequies of this our Royal Mar∣tyr; the Iustice of Heaven fail'd not to do him Right; and kindled such a Pile to his Memory, as the Romans most pom∣pous Magnificence of that Kind, could ne∣ver reach in the least Degree; indeed it never was, nor ever will be paralell'd, till the last Conflagration; I mean the dismal Fire of London, which to my Ob∣servation when that Iudgment was im∣mediately upon them, there was scarce a Fanatick so hardned, as not to think it a return from Heaven for that impious, and abominable Fact, though since they have learnt to Palliate the Matter, or shuffle it off with Plots and Popery, whereas could they prove, nay grant∣ing, that it no ways hinders, but the Almighty Avenger might make use of them as well as any other secondary Causes, to kindle the Flames of his most high Displeasure; to speak really, and the Truth, a groundless Suspition there∣of, did so far infatuate them into a stu∣pid, careless Neglect, as even that seem'd to be part of their Curse, although it was
impossible for the utmost of Humane In∣dustry to stop so violent and rapid a Cur∣rent, which was driven on by one con∣tinued Breath from Heaven, flying over all with an irresistible Force, agreeable to the Severity of that upright, and om∣nipotent Power which made the Inquisi∣tion. I shall not here omit a Passage, which however now it may seem Ridiculous, made no little Impression upon most Men, even of Sense, at that Time, that Nostredamus a French Man in a Ramble of Prophesies, Printed above an Hundred Years before, expresly foretold this Fire, and for this Cause: The Original indeed is somewhat obscure, as nothing of that Nature was ever supposed to be positive∣ly declar'd; yet was it then thought so clear, as it occasion'd an Impression of the whole Book in French and English, with Annotations upon every Stanza, ac∣cording to which, take it thus rendred by a Friend of mine, with the Original. Le sang du Iuste a Londres fera faute, Brusser par feu, de vingt & trois, les six La Dame antique cherra de place haute, De mesme secte plusieurs seront ouis.
A Righteous Monarch's Blood shall London spill (Which to avenge, not expiate the Ill) Her lofty Piles to Ruins shall be turn'd, At least three parts in four to Ashes burn'd. Her Antient Temple too shall be consum'd, And many more to the like Fate be doom'd. We are told likewise that the Numbers seem to imitate the very Year in which it should happen 1666, and really they look very much that way. That this Account will meet a different Reception now, from what it had at first when that Iudgment was abroad amongst us,Isa. 26. 9. I am fully sensible, yet the same Text de∣clares that to be the time for the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth to learn Righteousness; and could wish our Modern Wits had some better Argument to refel what they are so forward to run down, than an af∣fected ridiculous Contempt. That Reply the Soothsaier made Iulius Caesar, The Ides of March were not past, prov'd almost as sharp as the Daggers which soon follow∣ed: If all Predictions of this Kind must be Exploded, because we cannot tell from whence they come, History will have but little Faith, and Men by de∣grees must dis-believe their Senses. How∣ever
this is only en Passant, we de∣pend upon a more sure Word of Prophe∣cy, that the true and Righteous Iudge will avenge the Blood of his Servants, and more especially upon such, as stretch forth their Hands against his Anointed. It was a Saying amongst the Iews, that whatever Iudgments they lay under, tho' upon other Accounts, there was al∣ways some Grains of the Golden Calf mixt with them: and I have found the Appli∣cation several times made, in Discourses upon that Day, that whatever Calamities this Nation hath hitherto or shall for the future lie under, there are some Drops of this Royal Blood in the Composition; and therefore could I prevail, one of the larg∣est Chappels in this New St. Paul's, should be finished all with Black Marble, and the Corps of our Royal Martyr remov'd thither, to which the Lord Mayor, Alder∣men, and Common Council, should repair every 30th of Ianuary, and with a parti∣cular Office for that sad Occasion, Deprecate those Remains of Divine Vengeance, which may yet hang over that City, as well as the whole Kingdom. But let this pass for a Conceit, a Wish of mine; yet there is something of a Memento in the Monu∣ment, which no good Man can behold, without reflecting upon the Premisses, and let them alter the Inscriptions as often
as they please, they cannot alter the De∣crees of Heaven. I shall here further add, that two other large Towns, N—n, and W—k, have since met with the same Fate, in the same irresistible manner, without the least surmise either of French, or Fireballs; and I desire it may be enquir'd, whether next the foremention'd Metro∣polis of Rebellion, as well as otherwise, any two Corporations in England were more zealous for the Factions, and conse∣quently more violent against our Royal Martyr's Cause and Person. And that the Sovereign Iudge of the Universe, still con∣tinues his Inquest upon this Righteous Prince's Sufferings, with those Generous Loyal Spirits, which Sacrific'd themselves, or were otherwise cut off upon his Ac∣count, is no more to be doubted, from the Oeconomy of Divine Providence, than that Ierusalem was destroy'd, for Cru∣cifying our Saviour, and Persecuting his Church; which nevertheless, our Repub∣lican Whiggs, and Fanaticks, will no more believe now, than the Iews did then, and God grant it be not for the same Reason, hid from their Eyes. The last thing to be consider'd in this Iust Defence, are those Sacred Remains of our Royal Martyr, his , which
for height of Matter, elegancy of Stile, and most Devout Addresses of an afflicted Soul, equally express the Resignation of Iob, and Inspiration of David. But 'tis not for me to recommend, what all Men great, and good, have ever had in the profoundest Veneration: My Province is to reflect upon those railing Shime's, who have so impudently traduc'd these Glo∣rious Reliques of his extraordinary Parts, and exemplary Piety; for that Bradshaw himself was forc'd to acknowledge, ask∣ing, in his Examination of Roiston, who Printed it, how so bad a Man could write so good a Book? No better Character of his Person, could be expected from the Monster which pass'd Sentence upon his Life; and therefore 'tis abominable Stuff in the Defence, as ridiculous, as impu∣dent, though he voucheth a Peer for his Author, who saith, Let that Book be written by the King, or any body else, there is little in it deserves E∣steem, pag. 14. There was nothing shock'd the several Sets of Rebels more, nor made a deeper Impression upon the Minds of all such, as had any thing left of an ingenious Recognition: Upon which, and many such like Accounts, I always look'd upon that Pamphlet, as coming from one of their Grubstreet Scriblers,
who write for Bread, and so must re∣solve to Sacrifice both Truth and Reputa∣tion, in gratifying their Party, with groundless Stories, and malicious Lyes: Neither was I much beside the Mark if it came, as by a late View, I have Reason to Conjecture, from the Author of Milton's Life, where I find this excel∣lent Piece, treated in the like rude, and foul-mouth'd Manner, in many Places, even to the same Expressions. That the Person wants no Assurance, his other Treaties speak, both as to Matter and Management; but that he should repeat all those vile Calumnies to render it Spu∣rious, which either Dr. Walker's Igno∣rance, or from him, the Faction's Impu∣dence, have so lamely urg'd, and take no notice of the Vindication which so clearly, so fully refels every Particular as groundless and false; argues a very broad Forehead, and most profligate dis∣regard of whatever tends to Reputation, good Manners, or civil Esteem: But this is not the first Time by many, that Per∣son hath discover'd how naturally he abounds with such bad Qualities: And therefore, as a worthy Divine lately ob∣serv'd,Mr. Black. Serm. Jan. 30. p. 16. We may cease to wonder that he should have the Boldness, without Proof, and against Proof to deny this
Book's Authority; since for several Years last past, he hath endeavour'd to do the same with Holy Writ, where∣as were it for no other Reason, than that it is the Establish'd National Religi∣on, even Heathen Rome, would have be∣fore this given him a toss into Tyber: And surely those to whom it belongs, will sometime or other awake, and call him to Account for both. When his Ma∣jesty we are now discoursing of, had so far baffled Henderson in that grand Point of Episcopacy, as the peevish old Fellow in the end would not vouchsafe him a Reply, He pleasantly tells him, you may have something of that which Chaucer saith belongs to the People of England, What they not like they never Understand; the common Practice of Fools and Knaves; Prejudice of Iudgment upon Conviction becomes Perversness of Will; the Conclusi∣on they are resolv'd to stick to, though convinc'd their Premises, prove nothing: And hence it is that these abominable Fellows have the Confidence still to in∣sist upon Pamelia's Prayer, though the Vindicator hath made it fully appear, that many Impressions were wrought off, and Sold, before that appear'd; as like∣wise how Bradshaw and Milton impos'd upon Dugard, to put it at the end of his
Edition. I remember, when a Boy, to have heard some Relations of mine say that Dugard had lost them, and all his honest old Acquaintance, by that vile Complyance; as likewise, that besides the King's Book, He in his Private Press had Printed Dr. Bates's Elenchus Motuum, &c. which gave a due, that is, severe Character of many Rebels, more espe∣cially the Regicides, upon Detection whereof they had got the School-Ma∣ster under their Lash, and would not take the Rod from over him, till grati∣fied in this abominable Foregery. So likewise for the Author they would assign, of that incomparable Book, Bi∣shop Gauden, to repeat the several Testi∣monies of Dr. Walker, Madam Gauden, &c. and take no notice with how irre∣fragable an Evidence the Vindicator hath reply'd to every, the least Particular urg'd by them, is a Modern way of managing Controversies, the World was never before acquainted with, and hath some Affinity with what I have heard related of a no very wise Judge in those Times of, Rebellion, who having heard the Council on one side thought it very clear, and took up such as spake on the other for perplexing so good a Cause. Nevertheless according to Civil Law,
Testes Domestici are adjudg'd invalid, which will wholly exclude the two a∣foremention'd, who relate nothing but what they had from the Bishop himself; a Person so Ambitious, Popular, and vain∣ly Affected, as because his Lady a rich Widow, and of some Quality, fell in Love with him, fondly conceited all others must have the like Admiration; whereas indeed his Composition was of such an unhappy Eantre deux as to fix him no where; he had too much of a Gentile, Good-natur'd Humor to be a Presbyterian, and too little of a Solid Di∣vine for the Church of England; how∣ever being patroniz'd by, and match'd into Puritanical Families, he ran with that Stream, and took it very ill Thomas Goodwin was trick'd into the Assembly of Divines, when he was design'd for the same Place, and County: Although a∣bout the same time he fell into better Company, that is, Archbishop Laud's, whose Convert he became, and that up∣on this Occasion: The Archbishop tho' kept in the Tower by the two Houses, yet neither of them would dispose of any of his Preferment when fallen void, but only recommended such as could make best Friends amongst them, where∣upon the Deanery of Bocking (for so that
Rectory is term'd) being vacant, Dr. Gauden, by the Earl of Warwick's In∣terest, was recommended by the Lords, and the Archbishop liking him the best of those many, wherewith he was every Day Solicited, gave him his Nominati∣on, and withal set him right as to the several Prejudices, his Puritanical Con∣versation had possest him, both against the Archbishop in particular, and the whole Church in general, all which he owns in his Ecclesiae Anglicanae Suspiria, and from thence forward set himself more impartially to consider both the Truth and Necessity of our Church Constitutions, in order to our Nation's Peace and Happiness. But when it ap∣pear'd they design'd the King's Life, then his old Party, and that he was come over to, joyn'd Issue, and his In∣terest in the former, rendred him the better qualify'd to do Service, amongst the several Iuntos; and it must be own'd he us'd the best of his endeavours, to prevent that fatal Blow; and as the Vindicator observes, the Protestation he writ upon that Occasion, might occasi∣on the Thanks and Acknowledgments he received from the Loyal Party. But to return to the King's Book, I shall here likewise venture to give a
little Account of my own Private Know∣ledge; for going to School with a Re∣verend Sequestred Divine, (during those times of Anarchy, and Commonwealthism) I remember to have heard him frequent∣ly mention, with much Respect, and tender Affection, his Brother Symonds; that they were Comrades together in the King's Quarters, all that War; from whence they accompany'd one another beyond Seas; and that upon their re∣turn to London, Dr. Gauden very kind∣ly treated, and reliev'd them both, (they having been old Acquaintance, and all Puritans, till they saw what Madnesses that desperate Party ran into) furnish'd my Master with Money to go to his Fa∣mily in Suffolk, and as he would say, was very liberal to Brother Symonds, whilst he attended upon Printing the King's Book; and this agrees with what the worthy Vindicator relates from Wil∣liam Allen, sometimes Servant to the Doctor, that the Copy was borrowed of Mr. Symonds, p. 32. which his Cha∣ritable Obligations in those Necessitous Times, might easily command. And upon this doubtless was the Doctor's Claim founded; Mr. Symonds dying soon after at Graves-End, stealing over to the Young King, then at the Hague,
there was no other Copy left, nor in∣deed need of any, the Book being Print∣ed, but to serve a false Pretence. Ne∣vertheless it was very cunningly done of the Doctor to continue it a Secret at the Restauration; for had it been then as publickly pretended to as now, more than enough would have appear'd to divest him of his borrowed Plumes, and sufficiently expose both his Folly and Presumption; as another was, though not in a pretence of so high a Nature, which it may not be amiss here to re∣late; when at that time the two Bi∣shops, Sheldon, and Morley were more especially entrusted to recommend such Suffering Divines, as deserv'd Prefer∣ment, upon the Church's Re-establishment; a certain Person came to the latter, Bi∣shop Morley, desiring to be consider'd up∣on that Account; he having moreover written several Things very beneficial to the King's Interest; the Bishop desir'd to know what they were, that he would name some one Piece; whereto he re∣ply'd, Killing no Murder; nay said the Bishop, herein you must excuse me, that was written by a Lay Man, and beyond Seas, I saw every Page as it was Penn'd before dry upon the Paper: And there is no doubt had Dr. Gauden made his
Declaration then, before the same Bi∣shop, he would have made the like Re∣ply, or something of that Nature, which should as easily disprove him; and that might have hindred his first Advance, and next Remove; as likewise, sav'd the Expence of Clapham-house, which if it were built upon an Expectation of Winchester, was such a Vanity as none but the two Brothers could be guilty of; for had the Thing been really done, the pretended Secret a Truth, there were se∣veral others who had done, and suffer'd to a much higher degree, and every way infinitely more deserving both of Church and Crown. What the Vindicator further urgeth as to their different Stiles, must likewise be absolutely convincing, to every unpre∣judic'd Mind; no two Things as to Speech and Writing, can bear a greater Disproportion, than that Strength of Rea∣son, and Majesty of Expression, which flows through every Line of the one; compar'd with those Frothy, Metaphori∣cal Flourishes, the sole-set off to whate∣ver the other said or writ. It well be∣came his Eminence and Gravity to write an Apology for Women's Painting, yet that Discourse of Artificial Beauty was certainly his, and the Language hath great Affinity with the Subject, a daub
a fucus of Words, without any thing underneath, either Solid or Satisfactory. And I would desire the Author of the foremention'd Life, (who as he abounds in Words, so pretends to Sense,) that he, and his Fraternity, would for a lit∣tle while divert their Thoughts and Dis∣course, otherwise continually imploy'd in undermining Religion and Govern∣ment, in considering the foremention'd Difference both as to Words and Mat∣ter, and then resolve whether there is not the same Disproportion, as between the abominable Rhymes, and Prose, of Withers, Prynn, and Vicars, compar'd with that Masculine way of Expression their admired Milton hath in both those Kinds, the abused Excellencies of a ve∣ry bad Man. In the mean while it looks not well, and can bode no good to the Nation, that upon a little Turn of the Monarchy, no Dissolution, the most injur'd Prince which ever Reign'd, and the best Defence injur'd Innocence e∣ver made, and so allow'd by all Men of Judgment and Integrity for half a Century together, should on a suddain be run down, and exploded, not dis∣prov'd, by a Pragmatical Set of young Upstarts, who think themselves wise enough to control all Antient Constitu∣tions,
both Sacred and Civil, despise Do∣minion, and speak evil of Dignities: But not to nauseate the foul Stomachs, or Minds rather, of their Deistships with fulsom Scripture, I shall remit them to the just Censure of unexceptionable Tul∣ly,Pro Ba Estenim Saeculi hujus labes quaedam & macula, virtuti invidere, vel ipsum florem Dignitatis infringere. The CONCLUSION. IT was an Observation I made at the Beginning, that whatever Distem∣pers happen to the Head, they arise from such Malignant Vapours, or too violent Concourse of Spirits, which the Body sends up; and this whole Book, as big as it is, hath been little else than an Enlargement upon, and Proof of, that sad Truth, making it appear, that our many State-Empyricks have proceed∣ed in so odd a Course, as to heigthen the Crisis, and so habituate the Indispo∣sition, as it seems gone beyond, not only their own, but all abler Men's Cure: For as the Learneder Physicians further declare, when that Sovereign Part comes to be once jog'd, either with Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Frenzies, &c. though for the present it may be re∣cover'd
from that Fit, yet they seldom find it brought to that Strength of Sense or Health, as formerly, and under con∣tinual Apprehensions of a more dan∣gerous Relapse. How many returns we have had of this Kind, is a very Me∣lancholy Reflection; to be sure we seem so much weakned thereby, in our In∣tellectual Part, as to admit none but the same, or such like Quacks as first brought us into this unhappy Condi∣tion, and have all along discover'd, that they design more the Tryal of their own foolish Experiments, than to Re∣estate us in that perfect Vigour of Health and Strength, which before their tampering, we abundantly enjoy'd: And hereupon some have further taken no∣tice that a Gubernandi Pruritus seems to have superseded that other of Dispu∣tandi; an Epidemical Itch of being all Governors, sets not only our Fingers, but our Heads on Work; hath more than once already brought us from Scratching to right down Blows, and in the end must certainly ruin all Go∣vernment. And therefore to step out of these cloudy Allegories, I shall pre∣sume here in the Close, frankly to de∣clare, that as our Indisposition first be∣gan, from rejecting that Excellent Re∣gimen,
wherewith this Royal Martyr and his Predecessors, for so long a Time perserv'd us in perfect Health and Hap∣piness: So perhaps after another half Century of Experiments, we may be brought to full Conviction, that nothing but that old Course, can Work an ef∣fectual Cure. And from hence doubtless more espe∣cially it is, that our Commonwealth Im∣postors, (who cannot live without Op∣position, even amongst themselves, when they have gain'd their Point upon o∣thers) continue to asperse the Memory of this Excellent Prince, with a Spight inveterate as Hell, and false as their own Souls, and with an Impudence, none but themselves can reach. To take no Notice of whatever is said in his Vin∣dication, though clear even to Demon∣stration, or as the Noon-day Sun; I say were not these Prejudices perpetually kept up against his Person and Govern∣ment, wherein they first began their Freaks, and set the whole Nation a madding, most of the People, as the Spanish Proverb propounds, might chance to rise Sober and Wise some few Morn∣ings together, and then not only their Projects, but the Projectors would soon meet with such an End as they deserve.
Could I think these Provocations might have any Influence upon them, so as to reply, or own a Conviction, I should then add this further Request, To consider, and from thence try what they can object against that great, yet withal just Account, Dr. Perencheif gives both as to the Active and Passive Part of his most Religious Deportment, when their Mouths, and their Canon roared with equal Force, and Noise against him; for that is no Hyperbole or strain of Rhetorick from the Doctor's Loyal and Affectionate Pen, but a Col∣lection of such Observations, as several Noble and Worthy Persons made du∣ring their Attendance upon him, espe∣cially under his Confinement, and was oblig'd alone to Combate those many Brutish Adversaries, who had nothing but the Shape of Men, which many Conflicts rather than Disputes, he ma∣nag'd with so much Iudgment, Temper, and truly Conscientious Care, both of his own Soul, and People's Safty, as asto∣nish'd those hardned Reprobates, which would not be convinc'd, and fully as∣sured all others, that Almighty God ne∣ver fails to furnish great and good Men with Assistances answerable to the Afflicti∣ons he brings them under; whereto he
was likewise adapted from that natral Steadiness of Mind his very Infant Studies apply'd themselves unto; for I find when Prince of Wales, at an En∣tertainment in Oxon, he Matriculated himself, as their Custom is, a Mem∣ber of that University, by writing this Sentence, Si vis omnia Subjicere, Subjice te rationi; according to which the whole Course of his Life was most exactly steer'd, both in Prosperity and Adver∣sity. Tho' Plato may be thought a little partial to his own Profession, yet was it a pretty Conceit, That nothing conduc'd more to the Happiness of a∣ny State, than to have their Kings Philosophers, or Philosophers Kings: To be sure the foremention'd Golden Rule spake so much of both, as had his Par∣liaments in any degree endeavour'd the same, the fabulous Golden Age, might have found here, something of Reality; but they were for Subjecting their King rather than themselves, and by that means subjected all to Slavery and Con∣fusion. There is but one Mistake I shall fur∣ther take Notice of, wherewith this Petulant, Licentious Humour, of Libelling and Lying, hath prejudic'd and prepos∣sest many a good Man, who are there∣upon
prone to think of a vast diffe∣rence between Queen Elizabeth, and the two following Reigns; whereas paying all the profoundest Defference to that Wise and Happy Princess, there was a continual Advance, in every thing but the Humor and good Disposition of the People, for nigh 40 Years after: To be sure during King Charles's first Fifeteen, the Wealth, and Trade of the Nation was Trebled to what it had been at any time in her Days, and every thing else Pro∣portionable; and tho' the Trade is, or at leastwise was till of late, upon the Im∣prove; yet take all things together, and I am afraid the Child is still unborn who may see them so again; their sole De∣fects were in reference to themselves, studying more the Peoples Satisfaction, than their own Security, all which I hope hath been made out in the Premises. And here I must take leave of our Royal Martyr, without venturing to Cha∣racterise those Divine, Superlative Per∣fections, the ablest Pens could never yet fully reach. As Man, what they have borrowed from Vell. Paterc. is highly ap∣plicable, Homo virtuti simillimus, & per omnia Ingenio, Diis quam Hominibus pro∣prior, &c. and as Christian none ever came nigher that Man of Sorrows than
He; So that however some foul-mouth Hell-hounds still continue to Bark at, and Blaspheme his Memory, there is no doubt but less Partial Posterity, will unanimous∣ly agree with all good Men now, and Seat him in the uppermost Room amongst those Sacred Sufferers, OF WHOM THE WORLD WAS NOT WORTHY. FINIS.
