C1705 99825648 30034
CERTAIN MEDITATIONS UPON JUSTIFICATION By Christ alone. THe News is good, Christ shed his Blood, Our Peace is made in Heaven; And now He's gone, up to His Throne, All Power to him is given. Shall Sin or Hell, God's People quell, Or ever keep them under? Lo, Christ hath dy'd, Sin Crucifi'd, And Hell-Bars rent asunder. Our Glorie's great, we are compleat, In Gods Free-Love we stand; We are on high, Exalted by Christs own Victorious Hand. We once were Lost, to Hell did Post, But God in Mercy found us; And now he hath taught us Lifes Path, And with his Glory Crown'd us. The Blood of Christ, our Great High-Priest, Which once for us was Shed, Hath Purg'd the Blot, and Cleans'd the Spot, Wherewith we were bespread. A Glorious Change, a Wonder Strange, That sin should not defile; And those appear, as Christ, most Dear, Who once did seem so Vile. All things Behind, are out of Mind, The Saints are made Divine; Fixt in the Love, of God above, In Glory they do shine. None are so Dear, nor yet so Near, With God they are made One; Who now doth see them such to be, As is his onely Son. Christ is our Guide, we cannot Slide, Or ever Fall away; Our State is sure, and must endure, Though all things else decay. Then let's be Bold, our Heads uphold, The Time is drawing nigh, When we shall Reign, and eke Remain With Christ Eternally. Let all Base Fears, and Needless Cares, Out of our Mind remove; With speed let's flye, to God on High, And dwell with him above. Where we shall be from all Fears Free, Which here do us Annoy; And then possest of Perfect Rest, In our Dear Saviours Joy. Which to Obtain, let us Remain, Doing our Fathers Will; Waiting the day, when he shall say, Come, Children, Take your Fill. All is your own, to Feast upon, Your Father hath to give; Your Glass is Run, your Work is Done, In Pleasure you shall Live. No more Dejected, Faith's That is in Heaven. Neglected, To which now bid Fare-well; And Welcome Love, that Grace above, Which only doth Excell. Now Faith doth cease, Love shall increase, In Fulness of Degree; By which we shall, appear to all, Perfect like Christ to be. LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood, and entred according to Order, 1684.
