C2763 09316429 42716
HIS MAIESTIES ROYALL DECLARATION AND PROTESTTION, TO all his loving Subjects in England. BEING A full satisfaction to all the whole world, against all aspersions which have lately been cast upon His Majesty, that he is Popishly affected, to the great dishonour of his Majesty, and the withdrawing His loving Subjects from him. TOGETHER, With His Gracious Resolution for the mainte∣nance of the true Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liber∣ties of the Subject, with the just Priviledges of Parliament. Published by His Majesties speciall Command. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the famous University.
His Majestyes Royall Declaration, and Protestation to all his Loving Subjects in England. IT is a wonder that We so just, so pious, and merci∣cifull in our words and intentions should not be believed in all our Declarations and Protestations: certainly it is impiety to be so full of infidelity towards the words of a King, some whereof we have here drawne out of our own severall wri∣tings, that all the world may see Our faire ex∣pressions, of our self and the just end of all Our actions, and how unjustly both have been interpreted. First concerning Our being affected to Po∣pery, We protest in the word of a King, and call the searcher of all hearts to record, that We intend not the alteration of the true professed and established Protestant Religion, the Lawes of the Kingdome, the knowe libertie of the Subject, the right and just Priviledges of Parliament. Of the Lawes his Majesty saith thus: A new power hath been assumed to interpret and declare Lawes without Us, by extempora∣ry votes, tending to a pure arbitrary power: Ordinances, and Orders were pressed upon the people as Lawes, and their obedience required to them. His Majesty saith further, We doe beleeve, and accordingly pro∣fesse to all the world, that the malignity of this designe (as dangerous to the Lawes of this Kingdome, the power of the same, and the Liber∣ties of all Our good Subjects, as to Our self, and Our just Prerogative) hath proceeded from the subtill informations and evill Counsells of am∣bitious turbulent Spirits, disaffected to Gods true Religion, and the uni∣ty of the Professours thereof, Our Honour and safety, and the publick peace and prosperity of our people. His Majesty addeth further: But how fautly soever others are, we shall (with Gods assistance) endeavour to discharge Our duty in the uprightnesse of heart. The King goes on further in declaring his own candor and uprightnesse, together with af∣fronts offered unto Him, saying thus they endeavour to turn this go∣vernment into a new Eutopia of Religion, and therefore We are resolved to change none of Our trusty Officers, till they appear to have behaved themselves otherwise then they ought to have done, and bee evicted
by legall proceedings to have done so. We were ever willing that Our Parliament should debate, resolve, and transact such matters as are now proper for them, and we heartily wish that the course of Law be no wayes diverted, much lesse disturbed. Moreover we call God to wit∣nesse that as for our Subjects sakes all rights are vested in Us, so for their sakes as well as for Our own, we are resolved not to quit them, nor to subvert (though in a Parliamentary way) the ancient, just constitution of the Government of this Kingdome, nor to make Our self of a King of England, a Duke of Venice, and this of a Kingdome, a Republick. Be∣sides the Kings Majesty saith further, Nolumus leges Angliae mutari, We promise that We will be as carefull of preserving the Lawes in what doth concern Our subjects, as in what most concerns our self, for We professe to believe that the preservation of every Law concerns Us. We have by many of Our messages to you by Our voluntary promise to you, so solemnly made never to pardon any popish Priest by Our strict Proclamation which lately published in this point, sufficiently expressed Our zeal herein. We wil also with constancy maintain (while We live) The Protestant Religion in its purity and glory, not onely against all in∣vasions of Popery, but also from the irreverence of Schismaticks, and Separatists, wherewith this Kingdome of late, and Our City of Lon∣don abounds, to the great dishonour and hazzard, both of Church and State. To conclude, We conjure you, and all men to rest satisfied with the truth of Our professions and the reality of Our intentions. And then We shall receive much more in the hope of a full & constant happines of our people in the true Religion, and under the protection of the same by a blessed union between Us and Our Parliament, & so much desired by Us, then in any increase of Our own Revenue, which beyond former grants of Our Subjects when most wealthy, could by our Parliament be settled upon Us. Thus We in all our Protestations and Messages desire the good of the Kingdome, before Our own private interest. His Majesty saith further, We professe before and declare to all the world, that we alwayes have and did abhorre all such designes, but that all Our endeavous (according to Our many Professions) did and shall ever tend to the firm and constant settlement of the true Protestant Re∣ligion, the just Priviledges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, the Lawes, Peace and prosperity of this Kingdome.
In a Letter from His Majesty to both Houses of Parliament, the conclusion you may reade thus. If all these present distractions (which so apparently threaten the ru∣ine of this Kingdome) do not (by the blessing of almighty God) end in a happy and blessed accommodation, his Majesty will then be ready to call heaven and earth, God and man to witnesse, that it hath not failed on his part. I am confident that you expect not I should give a speedy answer to this strange and unexpected Declaration, that in the distraction of this Kingdome, you should think this way of addresse more convenient, then that proposed by my message the 20 of January last to both hou∣ses: as concerning the grounds of your feares and jealousies, I will take time to answer particularly, and doubt not but I shall do it to the satisfa∣ction of the whole world. God in his good time will discover the se∣crets and bottomes of all plots and treasons; and then I shall stand right in the eyes of my people. God so deale with me and mine, as all my thoughts and intentions are upright, for the maintenance of the true Protestant profession, and for the observation, and preservation of the Lawes of this Land, and I hope God will blesse and assist those Lawes for my preservation. When we duly weigh the dishonour which will perpetually lie upon this Kingdome, if full and speedy relief be not dispatched, We could not, nor cannot think of a better way to discharge Our duty to Almighty God, for the defence of the true Protestant Profession, or to manifest Our affection to Our three Kingdomes, then by ingaging Our Person in this Expedition, as many of Our royall Progenitours have done even in Forraigne parts, upon causes of lesse importance and piety, with great honour to themselves, and advantage to this King∣dome. For the danger of Our Person, We conceive it necessary and Worthy of a King, to adventure his life to preserve his Kingdome, neither can it be imagined, that We will fit still, and suffer Our Kingdome to be lost,
and Our good Protestant Subjects to be massacred, without exposing Our Person to the utmost hazzard for their reliefe and preservation. God, in his good time, We hope, will so informe the hearts of all Our good Subjects, that We shall recover from the mischiefe and dan∣ger of this distemper, on whose good pleasure We will wait with pa∣tience and humility. For the bringing up of the Army to London, as we have heretofore (by no other direction then the testimony of a good conscience) called God to witnesse we never had or knew of any such resolution; so upon the view of the Depositions now published with that Declaration, it is not evident to Us, there was ever such a designe, unlesse very loose dis∣course or argument be instance enough of such a designe. And if no better effects then losse of time, and hindrance of the pub∣like affaires have beene found by Our Answers and Replies, let all good men judge, by whose default, and whose want of duty such effects have beene. And We call Almighty God to witnesse, all Our complaints and jealousies, which have never been causelesse, nor of Our Houses of Parliament, but of some few schismaticall, factious, and ambitious spi∣rits: Our deniall of the Militia, Our absenting Our Selfe from London, have beene the effects of an upright and faithfull affection to Our Eng∣lish Subjects, that We may be able, through all the inconveniences We are compelled to wrastle with, at last to restore their Religion, Lawes, and Liberties unto them. Wee desire Our actions may no longer prosper, or have a blessing from God upon them and Us, then they shall be directed to the glory of God in the maintenance of the true Protestant profession, to the pre∣servation of the property and liberty of the subjects in the observation of the Lawes, and the maintenance of the Rights and Freedome of Parliament, in the allowance and protection of all their just priviledges. We would have you to be assured, that We never intended the least neglect unto you in any former Summons of the county, Our love, as well as Our protection, extending to all Our Subjects; but as you are a great body, time and conveniency must be observed in your assembling. That you may know the generall reasons of Our being here, you
must understand, that when We found it neither safe nor honourabl to expose Our Person to the tumultuous and licentious proceedings of many (which to this day are unpunished) who did disorderly approach neere Our Court at White-Hall, Wee trusted this part of Our domi∣nions chiefly to reside in, where, as most of the Gentry already have, so Wee assure Our Selfe, the rest of you will give Us cleere testimony of your service and obedience, which We will never use otherwise then for the defence of Our orthodox Religion, professed and setled in Queene Elizabeths time, and confirmed by the authority of the Statutes of this Realme, the defence of the Lawes and fundamentall Constitu∣tions of the Kingdome (as the justest measure and rule for Our Prero∣gative, your Liberties and Rights) and lastly, for the preservation of the peace of this Kingdome. As for Our owne zeale to the Protestant profession, we refer all the world to Our daily exercise of, and Our Declarations concerning it, and execution of the Laws against the Papists, so likewise We cannot but declare Our Selfe most heartily sorry to finde such Separatists and Schismaticks, who presume against Law, to foment new doctrines and disciplines, to the disturbance of Church and State. For the Law, it being the common inheritance of Our people, We shall never inforce any Prerogative of Ours beyond it, but submit Our Selfe to it, and give you and all Our Subjects the fullest latitude of it, both for the liberty of your persons, and the propriety of your estates, and for an inviolable confidence and assurance hereof, as We take God (the searcher of all hearts) to witnesse Our reall intention herein, so We shall no longer desire you to stand for the defence of Our Person, Honour, and just Prerogatives, then We shall maintaine the Lawes of the Land, the li∣berty of your persons, and propriety of your goods. For the resort of Papists to the Court, His Majesties great care for the prevention thereof, is notoriously knowne, that when he was in∣formed two or three of his Guard were of that Religion, he gave spe∣ciall direction, with expressions of his displeasure, that they should bee immediately discharged, and provided, that no person should attend on him under that relation, but such as tooke the oath of Allegiance and Supremacie. There having been many rumours spread, and informations given, which may have induced many to believe, that We intend to make war gainst Our Parliament. We professe before God, and declare to all the world, that we alwaies
have and doe abhorre all such designes, and desire all Our Nob and Councell, who are  place, to declare whether they have not been witnesses of Our frequent and earnest Declarations and Professions to this purpose, whether they see any colour of Preparations or Counsells that might reasonably beget a belief of any such designe; and whether they be not fully perswaded, that We have no such inten∣tion, but that all Our endeavours (according to Our many professions) tend to the firm and constant settlement of the true Protestant Religi∣gion, the just priviledges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, Peace and prosperity of this Kingdome. The God of heaven direct you, and in mercy divert those judgements which hang over this Nation, and so deale with Us and Our posterity, as We desire the preservation and advancement of the true Protestant Religion, the Law, and the Liberty of the Subject, the just Rights of Parliament, and the peace of the Kingdome. FINIS.
