C6144A 11196503 46686
THE COPPIE OF A LETTER SENT FROM ONE OF THE QVEENES SERVANTS AT THE Hague to a Gentleman in West∣minster Dated the second of May. 1642. VVHEREVNTO is added two strange Prophesies concerning these times. With the predictions of Henry of Huntington. Written by Tho: Asladowne, in the year of our Lord, 1556. LONDON, Printed for I. T. 1642.
A Letter from the Hague. Sir. GIue me leave to assure you, that you have further obleiged me, by your paines already taken in writing to me then rom this place you can expect to have any satisfactory requitall in that way. There hapned a very sad disastrous accident (on Friday the 15. of this instant Aprill) vnto the sonne of the Lady Kingsmels, who was servant to the Prince Elector, and had remined in the Emperours Cort a Prisoner with Pr nce Robert du∣ring the time of his restraint there. And thus it was; there had passed a quarrell and single Duell, betwixt one M. Stepkins a Cavelere (who came over when we came, & whom I remember I had lately seene in England) and M. Cutts sonne to the Lady Morton; and it so falling out that they were to meete a second time, (upon some aggravations, had beene given by way of report from Stepkins, as that he had disarmed Cutts, and given him his life) in the intrim, M. King smell being an intimate frind of Master Cutts, unluckily interposed, and unnecessarily ingageth himselfe to fight with Stepkins and paid his life for it, that morning on the strand at Skeiveling, close by the Sea side little more then a myle from the Hague. The Q eene was yesterday entertained by the Prince of O∣range at his House at Hounslow-dike, the same place she dined at the day she came to the Hague; She did returne the last night a∣gaine, and is to see Roterdam on Munday next, which is not a∣bove 3. or 4. houers goeing by land or water. And (they say) returnes the same night, which I hardly beleive. About a fortnight after that, she resolves to see Amsterdam, which will be about the time, the Price goes to the Feild. Then after we have seene Virick▪ and Leyden and other places; I sup∣pose the returne will be to the Hague. The Imperiall City Cullen (in Germany) is straitly beseiged by the French and Hollanders, and it is presumed they will take it; the bearer hereof (one of the Queenes footemen) returnes a∣gaine suddainly; I pray you write at large: So presenting my love to you, and all my freinds I rest yours M. M. Hague the 2. of May, 1642,
A PROPHECIE CONCERNING these Times. VVHen Iames shall seek a second Crown, as in white Armour ore the Down: Iames needs not crosse the brinish seas, but take the fatall stone with ease. High consultations when they hold, best counsell oft shall be controll'd and false in heart, grow strong and bold. But the harm that they for others hatch, shall be a snare themselves to catch. A marriage shall be gone about, not without danger, fear, and doubt. They shall misse the mark, yet all is well, but when they hit, the times shall tell. Though Iames be wise and learn'd withall, yet stumble in the end he shall; And Iames shall vanish from their face at halse Elizabeths royall Race. High Courts of head and members knitting, are now not thought so much befitting. But using Forraign policies, grudgings and discontents arise, Yet shall they assemble to that seat, about some work of moment great.
But there shall such dissentions grow, that each at other gloves shall throw: Which strife shall so encrease, that they in fury all depart away. Who shall their Tenants and their men, with all their forces gather then, And lead them forth to our great Heath, where many a man shall taste of death. Then proclamation shall be made, to gather forces for their ayde. The Souldiers shall full fast encrease, foure severall times till silver cease. First twelve pence, then four groats is cride, then twenty pence to help their side: Two shillings then they cry for ayd, but yet this last shall ne're be payd, for ere they come an end is made. Thus shall they greater forces crave, though maintainance want for those they have. Then each to other shall complain, a Princes power who can maintain. Then one shall looke upon another, and by some means confer together: And secretly appoint a day, to take their Leaders lives away. Before those times a Plague shall raign, and even then shall still remain, which with the number of the slain. Such as in those times live, shall see great trouble and calamitie. To such as are good Land-lords known, perhaps some favour shall be shown: And such as have plenty of store,
are in lesse safety then the poore. Then twenty pound of money in hand is better then so much yearly land: A loafe, a cloake, a privy clough, exceed six Oxen and a plough. When Forraine Countries gaine what tribulation we sustaine. Then one from France shall claime pretend, who on a blocke his life must end. From Scotland then one needs be chiefe, which there must dye without reliefe. From Ireland likewise shall be one must lose his head upon a stone. A childe with his Chaplaine then shall come, which to this Realm his right shall doome: He shall this Kingdome wisely guide, and other Kingdomes nine beside. Then foure great Dukes he shall elect, whose Lawes shall ever take effect. No man shall Lawyers counsell crave, for men their right at home shall have: And Officers each Towne within, shall right the wrong, and punish sin. He shall bring down Romes godlesse pride, and spread Christs Gospel far and wide, the Turke shall not his force abide. Worthies be nine, so reckon we, and this the tenth, and last shall be. The Moone obscured sixty yeare, Shall get her light, and shine full cleare.
Henr. Huntingdonensis Hist. l. 6. initio. PRedixit etiam eis quidam vir Dei quod exscele∣rum suorum immunitate, non solum quia sem∣per caedi & proditioni studebunt, verum etiam quia semper ebrietati & negligentiae Domus Do∣mini dediti erant, eis insperatum A Franciae ad∣venturum Dominum, quod & eorum excellenti∣um in aeternum deprimeret, & honorem sine ter∣mino restitutionis eventilarent. Predixit etiam quod non eagens solum, verum etiam Scotorum quos vilissimos habebant, eis ad emeritano con∣fusionem dominaretur. Praedixit Nihilominus varium edeo saeculum creandum, ut varietas quae in mentibus hominum latebat, & in actibus ptae∣bat, multimodo variatione vestium & in Damen∣torum designaretur.
A PROPHECIE OF Tho: Asladovvne, Written in the yeare of our Lord, 1556. THe time shall come, that there shall bee shewed many strange things. First, the peaching of Traytors, of divisions in divers Realmes; Great rising of Merchants, Confusion of Money-makers, great stealing; The destru∣ction of Traytors, and of rich men▪ much witch∣craft, great plenty of Wormes, Rats, and Frogs ingendied in the Ayre, great hunger amongst the People, great dearth and scarcenesse of divers things: Namely, in the Land of Britaine, and in England, and France, great oppression of bloud, imprisonments of many men. In England shall be much Battaile, so that there shall be few or no quiet place to abide in; and the counsell of Aged men shall not be set by. The men of the Church,
Princes, and Lords shall forsake righteousnesse. The common people shall not know for feare which way to turne themselves. The Father and the Mother shall be hated of their Children. Men of Worship shall have no reverence of their Subjects, Chastitie shall be broken with Maydens, wedded-Women, Men, and Widdowes, and also with men of Religion. Many Sects and Heresies shall arise in those times; and great desolations shall be fall by the sword, which is the greatest evill; with much more then I can tell, from the which Almightie God defend, and bring us to thy blisse, sweete Iesus. FJNJS.
