C6530 99828058 32485
The Country Farmer's Vain-glory; in a New Song of Harvest Home: Together with an Answer to their undecent Behaviour. Sung to a New Tune much in Request. Licensed according to Order. OVr Oats they are how'd, and our Barley's reap'd Our Hay it is mow'd, and our Hovel's heap'd; Harvest home, Harvest home, We'll merrily roar out our Harvest home, Harvest home, harvest home; We'll merrily roar out our Harvest home, We'll merrily roar out our Harvest home▪ We cheated the Parson, we'll cheat him again; For why shou'd the Vicar have One in Ten, One in Ten, One in Ten, For why should the Vicar have One in Ten: For why should, &c. For staying while Dinner is cold and hot, And Pudding and Dumping's burnt to pot, Burnt to pot, burnt to pot, Till Pudding and Dumpling's burnt to th' Pot, Burnt to pot, &c. We'll drink off our Liquor while we can stand, And hey for the Honour of Old England, Old England old England, And hey for the Honour of Old England, Old England, &c.
An ANSWER to Harvest Home: OR, A True Character of such Country-men who Glory in cheating the Vi∣car, & prefer Bag-pudding & Dumpling before Religion & Learning. To the Tune of Harvest Home. THE Country store up Hay, Oats and Wheat, And glory how they can the Parson cheat, Parson cheat, Parson cheat, And glory how they can the Parson cheat, And glory, &c. The Country Bumpkin may speak with shame, That ever he cheated, for he's to blame, He's to blame, he's to blame; That ever he cheated, for he's to blame, That ever, &c. Likewise by the Laws of this potent Land, Now he in the Pillory ought to stand, Ought to stand, ought to stand, Now he in the Pillory ought to stand, Now he, &c. Degrading of Learning do's plainly show, They never knew nothing but Hi, je, ho, Hi, je, ho, hi, je, ho; They never knew nothing but Hi, je, ho, They never, &c. Their hungry Appetite to suffice, Bag-pudding and Dumpling they Idolize, Idolize, Idolize, Bag-pudding and Dumpling they Idolize, Bag-pudding, &c. And still as their Paunches they stuff and fill, Faith they are as safe as a Thief in a Mill, Thief in a Mill, Thief in a Mill Faith they are as safe as a Thief in a Mill, Faith they, &c. Religion and Learning they all contemn, A lusty Bag-pudding is more to them, More to them, more to them, A lusty Bag-pudding is more to them, A lusty, &c. Tell them of going to Church to pray, They'd rather hear Robin the Piper play, Piper play, Piper play, They'd rather hear Robin the Piper play, They'd rather, &c. And when they have gather'd in all their store, They merrily revel, nay rant and roar, Harvest home, Harvest home, They merrily roar out their Harvest home, Harvest home, Harvest home, They merrily roar out their Harvest home, They merrily roar, &c. Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Dencon, J. Blare and J. Back.
