D1319 R449 11778168 48956
A DIALOGUE Between Monmouth-shire, AND YORK-SHIRE. About Cutting RELIGION according to Fashion. Mon. THis Religion (Mr. York-shire) is a very Seasonable Garment; cool in Summer, hot in Winter, and Suits with Spring and Autumne both. York. Ay in troth, so 'tis; and I have a good mind to make me a Cloak on't; for that's the Wear I fancy most. M. Why a Cloak, prethee? Y. Oh, Sir, Have you never experimented the Conveniency of that Garb? I'le tell you how it sav'd me a Scouring once, when I met my Tutor full-but with my Neighbors Cock under my Cloak, who inquiring what I had got, was soon satisfied with this answer; 'Twas a Riders Dictionary: God-a-mercy Cloak for that shift: I had as certainly gone to pot as the Cock did afterwards, had not my Cloak hid the Roguery. M. Well, and ever since you love the wear. Y. Ay, and ever shall do as long as I live for several substantial Rea∣sons; whereof I give this as one: That a man in a Religious Cloak may walk incognito, carry Vice on with Virtues Face, present his Friend a Dagger; when he expects but a How do you; and a shake by th'hand; appear upright, though stigmatiz'd and ill stampt by Na∣ture. M. But what piece of Religion do you fancy most to make a Cloak on? There's the Protestant-piece, the Présbyterian piece, the Roman∣singers, Independents, Quakers, and the Lord knows what? Y. I know that well enough, but the Roman-piece for me, that's the Original, and is most in Fashion all o're the World. M. Don't tell me of Rome, France, Italy and Spain, and them For∣reign Places: I am for what is most worn in my own Country, and for that which my Father wore before me. Y. Now you say something; ha, ha, ha! Your Father wore before you, quoth the man; prethee how doest thou know what Cloaths thy Father wore? M. Why I am sure 'twas a Protestant Cloak. Y. Ay, but what was the Coat and Britches? M. Faith I can't tell that, for the Cloak was always wrapt so close about him, that the Devil himself could not see what Cut the Suit was of. Y. Well with what Antiquary will you consult for the Fashion? M. Hold I-I-I have a pretty pattern of a Britches; but I— Y. Something like that on Oliver's Half-Crown.
M. Ay, ay, 'Twas the Half-Crown I had in my Head. Y. Pox o' that pattern, it cost my Father a whole Crown, and I hate the Fashion ever since, and dare not countenance it, lest it shou'd cost me one too. M. Prithee, what doest talk of Fashion? This is all the difference 'twixt ours and yours: We cut our Cloth according to Religion, you your Religion according to your Cloth; we make interest according to Religion, you Religion according to Interest. Y. Ay this Religion and Interest go glew'd together with you and us too; for which reason I'le make me such a large Roman Cloak, that shall be subject enough for three Kingdoms to talk of. M. I'le lay you a Crown; my Britches in Octavo, shall raise as much discourse as your Cloak in Folio. Y. Prithee don't think to bubble me out of my Crown so: I know not what correspondence you have with the Rabble, I will not hazard any thing to their wavering Fancy. M. That which you terme Correspondence, perhaps may prove such Influence, as shall be able to trounce you out of Fifteen Shillings; then how will you look when you've lost Three Crowns, if you stick so much to hazard One. Y. Trounce me! what's trounce me? I am sure you can't get it by Fair play, and therefore you must use some Cheat; and malè parta, malè dilabuntur, what's got over the Devils Back, is spent under his Belly. But God bless him that holds the stakes. M. Amen, from you and all York-shire Blades. Y. Why from all York-shire Blades, do you think there's none sound and honest of them. M. I can't tell how sound you are, but this I'me sure, there has been a sad Murrain among you: Neither know I your honesty, but I believe there's not one of you wou'd stick to cut his Brothers Throat for interest, and that your red letter'd Calender signifies well enough. Y. Prithee don't pretend to be so much of a Head-piece, as to make expositions on any thing: What's what is enough for you. M. Marry, but I know I may lawfully pretend to any Head-piece more than you, either to the Fore-piece, or Hind-piece, but especi∣ally to the Crown-piece. Y. I confess you might have had better pretensions than I far to't, had you not met with that unlucky Knock in your Cradle, which crack't your Crown. M. I vallue not that Knock, though it beat it flat; for I doubt not when the Colledge of Physitians shall set in commune bonum (for ev'ry ones disease) but they'le take me into cure too, and settle my Crown fast enough I'le Warrant you, and I am resolv'd to stand the Touch. Y. Perhaps your Body of physitians may work extraordinary things, and alter ev'n Natures course contrary to all right and reason; but I be∣lieve you must Fee 'em high. M. Nothing shall be wanting toward so extraordinary a Cure, nei∣ther diligence nor confidence; and then with what a Jesuitical Face will you look? Y. Troth I shall have reason enough to put on a sowr countenance, but stay till it comes. M. I'le wait the opportunity, and pray don't you use means to hasten it. LONDON, Printed for W. R. 1681.
