D1566A 99825699 30085
The discontented Lover. To a pleasant new Court Tune. TOul, toul, gentle bell for a soul, killing care doth controule, And my mind is sore opprest; But I fear I shall die. For a glance of that eye, Which so lately did fly, Like a Comet from the sky, Or like some great Deity: But my wishes are in vain, I shall never sée't again. When I, in the Temple did spy, This divine purity, On her knees to her Saint, She séem'd so divine, All her graces did shine Far more fairer then the shrine▪ Faith I wisht she had béen mine, And my heart full resign, May powerfully prove No Religion like love. Fair, fair, and as chaste as the ayr. Holy Nunns breath in prayer. Was this Votresse divine: From each eye dropt a tear. Like the pearl'd violets were When the Spring doth appear To usher in the year, But I dare safely swear, That those tears trickle down For no sins of her own. But now, encreaseth my woe, I by no means can know Where this beauty doth dwell: All her rites being done To her Lady and her Son, I war left all alone, And my Saint was from me gone, And to Heaven she is flown, Which makes me to say I can scarce live a day. NOw I, must make haste and die, And ascend to the sky, Where my hopes are inthron'd: You Ladies all adieu, Be your Loves false or true, I am going for to view One that far excells all you, One whom I never knew, But must breath out my breath For acquaintance in death. Ring, ring, merry bells while we sing Drinking healths to our King, And our minds all advanc'd; Let us never fear to dy, Till we drink out each eye, Let cash and cans fly Like hail-stones from the sky, Bacchus great Deity: But my wishes are but in vain, Fill the Cans round again. When I in the Tavern did spy Such fair boon company On our knées drinking healths, We look so divine. When our noses do shine, Well burnisht with rich wine. Faith I wisht the cup were mine: Vnto thee I resign, And may powerfully prove In drinking thy love. Free, free, as the ayr let us be, Esteeming no degrée, But to all breaths alike. From one eye dropt a tear, Lest you Maudlin apear. And next morning do fear To be physick'd with small Béer, But I dare safely swear, If a tear trickle down, 'Tis for love to the Crown. And now, increaseth my woe, I by all means must know What is due for our Sack; But the reckoning being paid To the Hostess or Maid, We néed not be afraid To be scurvely betraid To the Constables aid: Let us honestly pay, Else we scarce get away. Now must I make hast and see What will us all frée All our hands from the Bar; You Ladies all adieu, Be your reckoning false or true, I am going for to view What belongeth to all you. Though we pay more then our own, Yet my purse will I spend, And my life for my friend. London Printed for Richard Harper living in Smith-field.
