E1758 09811813 44157
ORDERS From the High Court OF PARLIAMENT. FOR The voting of the new Bill of Subsidies by the Lords House. With The Earle of Bristols Speech at a Con∣ference with both Houses, Concerning The gathering of money for the Souldiers. Printed in the yeare 1641.
The House of Peeres. Octob. 20. 1641. THe Lords sitting upon the late new Bill of Subsi∣dies, which was brought up unto them by the House of Commons, before the re∣cesse, it was voted and subscribed by the Lords then present.
THE EARLE OF BRISTOLS SPEECH At a Conference with both Houses. GEntlemen, and you the Knights, Citi∣zens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, I am commanded by the Lords to let you know that they have taken serious deliberation of the propositions made by you the other day in a conference con∣cerning the extremity in which the kingdome was for want of money to give satisfaction to both ar∣mies: I am commanded to let you know their
Lordships pleasure in this or in any thing else that may conduce for the service of the King, and good of the Kingdome, and will be very ready to give such assistance as you shall propound, or upon de∣bate with them thinke fit to advance the worke. You were pleased to declare the great industry u∣sed for raising of moneyes: and truly we conceive it can scarce be paralleled in any time, where the House of Commons have shewed so great affecti∣ons to the good of the Kingdome, as in their owne particulars to bee so ingaged as they have beene. But they now perceive, though as good security as can be, and they conceive the cause of this hin∣drance, must be some apprehension of danger, for which the Kingdome hath, and particularly the City of London, the feare of unquiet and dange∣rous times, and so loath to part with money, for we cannot conceive but there is mony in the king∣dome, and in the City. This feare is that which maketh them all keepe the wealth they have to serve their turnes in extremity of danger, and ther∣fore think fit that since there is great use of money, to open the credit of the Kingdome; for the gran∣ting of Subsidies must get credit, and peace and tranquility will incourage the lending of money; and therefore the Lords have commanded the Lord Commissioners with all speed to bring unto you the bottome of the Treaty with the Scots, that the Kingdome may see in what state they are. And then no doubt for these great summes the Lords
will likewise concurre in that and all things else that may conduce to the happinesse of the State. And therefore because wayes of money are more proper to proceed from you then from us, if you shall thinke fit that any way may be propoun∣ded by you may be effectuall, or if you propound not, their Lordships will let you know some of their propositions. If you bee not now prepared to conferre about it, we shall when you please, de∣bate the same. FINIS.
