E511 99826863 31272
A further Account of the progress OF THE GOSPEL Amongst the Indians In New England: BEING A Relation of the Confessions made by several Indians (in the pre∣sence of the Elders and Mem∣bers of several Churches) in or∣der to their admission into Church-fellowship. Sent over to the Corporation for Propagating the Gospel of Iesus Christ amongst the Indians in New England at Lon∣don, by Mr Iohn Elliot one of the Laborers in the Word amongst them. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Macock. 1660.
TO ALL That love the Lord Iesus Christ in sincerity, and have a zeal for the propaga∣tion of Gospel-light, to those who sit in darkness, Grace and peace be multi∣plyed. Brethren, IT was the holy ambition and strife of the Apostle Paul (that chosen Vessel to bear the Name of Christ before the Gentiles) to preach the Gospel where Christ was not named, lest hee should seem to build up∣on another mans foundation, Rom. 15. 20. To hand on a good work begun by another is very commendable, and shall not loose its reward; but to break the ice and begin a good work is ve∣ry honourable, and shall surely have a great re∣ward. I am much perswaded it hath been the gracious strife, I am sure it hath been the lot of many of our faithfull Brethren, in New Eng∣land, to preach the Gospel where Christ was not named before; and the Lord hath given a signal Testimony, that they have not laboured in vain. Wee reade of the First-fruits of Achaia unto Christ (Rom. 16. 5. and again, 1 Cor. 16. 15.)
Wee have also heard both of the First-fruits and Second-fruits of India in New England unto Christ; and these are a fair assurance of a plen∣tifull harvest there in due time. A blessed Foun∣dation is laid, yea, the Building begins to appear above ground, in the visible profession or professed subjection of many poor Souls unto the Gospel of Christ. May wee not therefore hopefully expect, that the Top-stone shall be set up with a shout of Grace, Grace to it? Hee that attentively readeth the Report, which is made in the following Collection of the Exami∣nations and Confessions of several Native Indi∣ans, who have been wrought upon by the preach∣ing of the Word in the Wilderness, will see much cause to admire the free grace and goodness of God to them, as also his mighty power and the re∣vealing of his arme in them. What strong and clear convictions of sin, both of the sinfulness of their natures, and of the sins of their lives have they been under, who lay (before) dead in tres∣passes and sins, wholly alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that was in them? What strugglings and strivings with corruption and temptation do they speak of, before they could come off from sin, and from
that vain conversation received by tradition from their Fore-fathers? What wrestlings had they with unbelief, before they could close with Christ in the promise? What full resignations of themselves have they made to the commands of Christ after closing with him by faith in the pro∣mise? Yea, what hungrings and thirstings do some of them express for more intimate communion with Christ in attendance upon all his Ordinances in a Church-state or holy Fellowship with his People? Surely, what these late Aliens from the Common-wealth of Israel have found and declared (as their spiritual experiences) about the dealings of God with their hearts, in bringing them off from sin, and home to himself, may shame many among us, who have been born and bred up in the aire and sound of the Gospel all their dayes. I may, not unfitly, make use of those Prophesies of Moses and Esaias concern∣ing the Iewes and Gentiles (and so applyed by the Apostle Paul, Rom. 10. 19, 20, 21.) in this pre∣sent case between us in England and the Indians. The Lord hath begun to provoke us to Jealou∣sie by them that were no people, and by a foolish Nation hee hath angred us, hee is
found of them that sought him not, hee is made manifest to them that asked not after him, but all the day long hath hee stretched out his hands unto us a disobedient and gain∣saying people. Conversions are grown some∣what rare (that's sad) in England; and such accounts of Conversion much more rare. And as we finde but few able to give any passable account of their conversion to God, so wee finde not a few offended at the requiring and taking of it, before admission into compleat Church-communion. Wee have many who profess the Religion they were born in, but wee have (comparatively) only a few, who profess Religion upon the evidences of their New-Birth. And that's one great reason why the Church and the world, the pretious and the vile, are in so lamentable a mixture in most places at this day. It were a very desireable mercy, that the pra∣ctise and example of our native Brethren, yea, of the native Indians in New England might kindle in us the fire of a blessed emulation in this matter; and that the Ministers of the Gospel would every where exspect and diligently enquire after some hopefull proofs of the work of Grace from all those, who, in their own right, partake of those
higher Priviledges, the Seals of the Covenant of Grace. Doubtless, then, Churches would appear more like Churches in the beauties of Holiness, and the fruits of the presence of Christ would be more gloriously visible in them. The great thing which wee (upon whom the ends of the world are come) should earnestly pray, endeavour and wait for is, that the new Jerusalem may be seen coming down from heaven, like a Bride adorned for her Hus∣band; and to be any way, rightly, instrumentall for the bringing in of this glory, is a piece of the best Glory which wee are capable of on this side our heavenly Glory. 'Twas therefore a very gracious as well as a noble Design, to create and establish a Corporation in this our England, to receive, improve, mannage, and is∣sue a free contribution and the profits arising from it for the constant support, encouragement, and promotion of this work of Christ in That Other England. Nor can wee but with much thankfulness to God take notice of the liberal cha∣rity of many who have already contributed to it, as also of the faithfulness, diligence, prudence, and Godly zeal of those worthy Persons who are en∣trusted with the disposal of those Contributions. And because, as the whole Work is great, so there
are some great parts of it now in hand, as the Printing of Davids Psalms and the New Testa∣ment (besides an intendment of printing the whole Bible) in the Indian Language, which must needs be a work of great charge as well as of excellent use, (for these reasons I say) it would be a most acceptable Charity, either to procure or advance additional Contributions. How can any honour the Lord better with their perishing sub∣stance, then by forwarding a Design which may be a means to keep thousands of Souls from perish∣ing? Yea, what an honour will it be to this whole Nation, that the Holy Bible should be printed in our dayes and at our cost in a Language and for a Nation which never had it to this day? That this blessed and beautifull Vndertaking for the gathe∣ring in of those poor Souls, who yet wander in that Howling wilderness, to the Flock and fold of Christ (the Great Shepherd of the Sheep) may not want their compassionate and chearfull assistance, who are already (through grace) gathered into his ho∣ly flocks and folds, is the hearty desire and prayer of The 6th of the first Moneth, 1659. Sirs, Your affectionate friend to serve you in the Lord, JOSEPH CARYL.
A brief Relation received from Mr John Elliott of the late Proceedings with the Indians in New England, in order to their admission into Church-fellowship. In the year of our Lord 1659. The fifth day of the fifth Moneth. THis is the third time that the Praying In∣dians (some of them) have been called forth into publick, to make open con∣fession of the Name of Christ, to come under the publick tryal of Gods people, whether they be indeed Christians, as fit matter for a Gospel Church. Truth loveth and seeketh the light. I was stirred up hereunto▪ and quickened by Letters from England. The Lord put it into the hearts of such as are honourable, reverend, and of eminent service to Christ in England, to move mee, before I moved. When I moved this last time, I perceived that it was the general inclination of the Spirit of the Saints, both Magistrates, Elders, and others, that (at lest some of the principal of them) should (for a season) be seasoned in Church-fellowship, in communion with our English Churches, before they should be Churches among
themselves. And when it was Objected, What should the rest of the people do, if the principal and most able should not keep their Sabbaths among them? It was Answered, That their usual Sabbath conversation should be at home among their own people, only some∣time to be among the English; viz. for participation of the Seals, the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and for any special Exercise of Discipline. When it was Questioned what English Church they should joyn unto? All with one mouth said, that Rox∣bury Church was called of God to be first in that ser∣vice of Christ to receive the praying Indians. In the accomplishment whereof, I yielded my self up to fol∣low counsel in the Lord. The Elders offered them∣selves, on some Lecture day, to meet (if need were) at Roxbury Lecture, then to speak with the Church, to perswade to an unanimous accord, in receiving the In∣dians for a season; which accordingly they did: and the Lord was so effectually present in that meeting, that all Objections, so far as I know, were silenced. Soon after, our Church passed a Vote for the receiving of the Indians. The Elders of Roxbury called eight of them to a private preparatory Confession, in order to our publick proceeding. Wee gave notice of the time and place of this meeting, and many were present to hear them, both men and women; which Confessions I shall here set down, for reasons which seem to mee to have much weight; and they are as followeth.
An Abbreviate of the Confessions of some of the Indians, which they made before the Elders of Roxbury, (sun∣dry Christian people being present, both men and women) the 15th day of the second Moneth, 1659. preparatory, in order to their admission into the Church. Nishokou. OH God of Grace and Salvation, help mee by thy spirit to confesse truth and grace, in the pre∣sence of God. 1 I confesse, that I have now learned out of Gen. 5. 1. that God made man in the Image of God, and Adam lived 130 years, and begot a Son in his own I∣mage, ver. 3. which then was not the Image of God, but by reason of the fall, was the Image of Satan; and that Image of Satan hee did communicate to us, so that wee are all born in sin, and so I lived. After wee pray'd to God about three years, my heart was not yet right, but I desired to run wilde, as also sundry others did. Then I understood, that the Lord did make heaven, earth, sea, and all creatures, and also
man, and therefore I understood that God made mee. Yet I being young, I was still vain, and ran about; and I liked to do acts of youth and vanity, and lust, as o∣thers did. And I went to Pawwauing among others, and these things I loved throughly, and they grew in my heart, and had nourishment there, and especially lust; if I cut my hair, it was with respect to lust, to please women; if I had long hair, it was with respect to lust, and all I did was with respect to lust and women; when there was meetings, drinkings, sports, they respe∣cted lust, and these things I perfectly loved. When the Minister came to teach us, hee taught, and I came to meeting; but I came to look upon women, I under∣stood not what hee taught; sometimes I came, and un∣derstood nothing at all, only I look't on women. A∣bout two years after, I began to understand what the Minister preached: I understood that Scripture Iam. 1. Hee that doubteth is like a wave of the sea, driven of the windes and tossed; and if any man lack wisedom, let him ask it of God. This I understood, yet I only under∣stood it, but it was very hard to believe. Afterward, I heard out of Gen. 6. that God spoke concerning man, I will destroy man whom I have made, because God saw that the way of man was corrupt before him; and this trou∣bled mee. And again, in the same Chapter it is said, That God saw that the iniquity of man was great upon the earth, and that every imagination of the thought of his heart is only evil continually; this troubled mee, for I saw the roots of sin in my heart: yet it was hard to be∣lieve. Again, in that 6. of Gen. God rebuked that sin in man, which was my sin, and then my heart was troubled. Sometime my heart said, it is better to
run wilde as I did before, then to pray to God; for if now I sin, or commit lust, I shall be punished, or put in prison; but if I run wilde, I have liberty to sin with∣out danger: but I was ashamed of such thoughts, and repented; but yet I doubted. After half a year I heard the Minister preach this; That Christ his death is of infinite value, but our death is little worth; God is satisfied with the death of Christ, and promiseth to pardon our sins for Christ his sake, if wee be∣lieve in Christ: wee deserve to die, but Christ standeth in our stead, and dyeth for us, and so saveth us from death. Next time the Minister came, hee asked, what I remem∣bred of this I now spoke of: and I did remember it, and do remember it to this day; and I desire to pray to God as long as I live. I believe Christ dyed for sin∣ners, but I doubted concerning my self. Then I heard this promise; If you repent and believe, you shall have pardon and be saved: and therefore sometime I believe, and sometimes I doubt again. Afterward, I had tem∣ptation to drinking, and to vain courses, nigh half a year; yet when Sabbath came, my heart would turn to God; when the Soldiers came upon us on the Sab∣bath, while wee were at meeting, and made us bring our guns hither: then my heart said, Sure God hath not said, Keep the Sabbath day holy; and then my heart cast off God, yet it was only in my heart. When wee came to the Magistrates, and Cutshamoquin asked, Why they came on the Sabbath day? my heart was trou∣bled, and I did believe, when wee went from the Ma∣gistrates. I was thirsty, and I drank a great deal; and I was drunk, and was carried before the Magi∣strates, and then I was ashamed. Then I came to the
Ministers house, and I was greatly ashamed; and my heart said, Sure I have now cast off praying to God; but I repented and cryed to God, Oh God, pardon all my sins, and this my sin; for my sins are great. I had other temptations to drinking, and I found my heart weak, and doubting, but my heart was troubled, and I was ready to stumble like a little weak childe. After this, I heard that word of God, Mat. 12. Do yee not remember what David did on the Sabbath day, and was blamelesse? Then I thought the Souldiers did not sin; but then I saw that I was a great sinner, and that I had broken the Sabbath. Again, I heard that word, Mat. 3. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewen down and cast into the fire: and this troubled mee, because I had evil fruits. Again, Mat. 6. Christ saith, Be ye not like hypocrites, which seem to pray before men. I thought this was my case, I did only pray before men, but I doubted of Christ and his Grace. Again, Mat. 5. Who ever breaks the least of Gods Com∣mandements, and teach men so to do, shall be least in the Kingdom of heaven. Then I was troubled, because I had been an active sinner, in lust, and other sins, and I was worse then a beast in my sins. Then I cryed to God, Oh Christ pardon all my great sins, Oh Christ have mercy on mee, Oh God remember mee, to par∣don all my sins. Thus I cryed and desired pardon, but I was weak in believing. But then, about two years af∣ter, I was greatly troubled about my weakness: I desi∣red to do well, but I was weak: Then I cryed to God, Oh God help mee by thy spirit in mee, and send thy
spirit into my heart. Sometimes I read and taught on the Sabbath day, but weakly. Then I heard, Mat. 23. Christ bid the people do what the Scribes and Phari∣sees said, but not do as they do. I said (Lord) that is my case; I teach better then I do: and therefore I desi∣red repentance for my sin, and to forsake my sin. Then Mat. 7. Christ saith, Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thy own eye, and then thou mayst see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brothers eye. My heart said, Truly it is so; I teach others, but I do not well my self; I re∣prove sin, and yet I do it. Then was my heart weary, and I desired again to do well, and amend, but I found my self very weak. Sometime my heart hated pray∣ing to God, and meeting on the Sabbath dayes; and therefore I see I deserve hell torments: and then I cry∣ed, Oh Christ pardon all these my sins. Then afterward my heart desired strongly to pray unto God, but I saw I deserved misery and punishment, and I was weak. Then I desired my heart might be made strong by Church-covenant, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which might be as a Fort to keep me from enemies, as a Fort keepeth us from our outward enemies. Yet my heart was sometime backward, and said, No matter, do it not, but still do what thy heart would have thee. And I saw Satan did thus follow mee with these tem∣ptations to misbelief and doubting. But now I see Sa∣tan tempteth mee, because hee desireth I should be ever tormented with him. Then I learned that in Iohn 6. I am the true bread, and hee that eateth mee shall live for ever, and hee that drinketh my blood shall have life; but hee that doth not eat my flesh and drink my blood shall not have life. Then my heart saith, Truth Lord, that is
my case. Again I learnt, Iohn 3. Hee that believeth shall not perish, but have eternal life: And my heart said, Yea Lord, let it be so. Again, Mat. 16. Christ saith, Thou art Peter a Rock, and on this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: Therefore my heart said, I desire this; because Christ dwells in the Church, and is in the midst of them▪ where two or three are met toge∣ther in my name. Oh! I do therefore desire Church Ordinances, that I might be with Christ, and that I might have the Seals. Mat. 3. Christ sayes, Let it be: for it is necessary that I should fulfill all righteousness: My heart said, Oh that I might also so do O Lord, now my heart desireth and thirsteth; Oh God have mercy on mee and pity my weakness, that I may have pardon in Christ, and strength from Christ in all his Ordinan∣ces, and that I might leave all my sins; and Oh God pardon all my sins for thy mercies sake; I know not what to do I am so weak, Oh God help, and have mer∣cy on mee. And the same I desire of you, before whom I am in this house, help mee; for Mat. 16. whom yee binde on earth are bound in heaven, and whom yee loose on earth are loosed in heaven: and my desire is, that Christ would pardon all my sins, and that I may be helped. Elder Heath propounded this Question, which hee answered in broken English. Question. Whether doth Satan still tempt you with former lusts and temptations? and what do you when you are tempted?
Answer to the first part. Yes, alwaies to this day. To the second part: When Devil comes, I sometime too much believe him, but sometime I remember to do Gods Word, because Gods Word is all one a sword, and breaks the Devils temptations. Deacon Park propounded this Question. What is it in sin, why hee hateth it now more then before? Answ. his answer in broken English. I did love sin, but now not all one so, because I hear Gods Word, and that shewes mee, that which I loved is evil, and will bring mee to hell, therefore I love it not now. Deacon Park urged, Doth hee hate sin because it is a∣gainst God? Answ. That chiefly. Anthony. FIrst, I make confession in the presence of God, and of all these Elders: and this I confesse, that I am not able to speak before the Lord, yet I do it ac∣cording as God requireth I should. Assuredly I am a sinner, but now I hope Christ hath taught mee his Word; Oh let him (my Lord!) help mee to speak it. I confesse, that in my mothers belly I was defiled in sin: my father and mother prayed to many gods, and I heard them when they did so; and I did so too, be∣cause my parents did so: and in my childhood, (afore I could act sin) I did delight in it, as dancing and Paw∣waug: and when they did so, they prayed to many gods, as Beasts, Birds, Earth, Sea, Trees, &c. After I was born, I did all such things. I loved lust when I was
a youth, though I did act these lusts but a little. But when I had a little begun, my heart did very much de∣sire more to do such sins: I saw the English keep Sab∣bath; I cared not, but played, and catch't birds, or any thing: yet when I saw Englishmen, I ran away, on the Sabbath day, because they should not see mee. As yet I knew not of great sins, as Murder, Adultery: then some Indians said we must pray to God. When I was in English houses, I saw them pray, and I thought it a vain work. They said there was but one God; I thought, nay, there be many Gods. When Indians said, Wee will pray, my heart said, No; I will not so long as I live. Yet I heard more and more of praying to God, and that my brothers prayed to God; but my heart said, Praying to God is vain. After I heard Waban did pray, and my brothers, Wom∣poas, and Toteswomp; yet my heart said, No: I am well enough. I have not so sinned as other men, I am no Murderer, Adulterer, &c. Then I ran away; yet I was not much troubled, because my brothers prayed. A little after I came, and my brother said to mee; I pray you pray to God. I answered him not, but my heart said, No: yet I was troubled, because I heard my brothers. I thought, if any should kill my brothers, I would kill him: if any Warrs were, I would go with my brothers; only I thought of my love to my bro∣thers: and then that, if my brother make Warr, I would go with him, to kill men▪ Now he prayes, shall not I go with my broth  my brothers love me, and they both pray to God,  should not I? They prayed morning and  they eat, and on Sabbath dayes, then I thought I would do so: but
it was not for love of God, or fear of God, but because I loved my brothers. Again, when I came to Noonan∣tam▪ I heard the Minister preach, and I desired to hear what he  taught, but I understood not, , because I under∣stood stood  to hear, I heard some youths  Roxbury. My brother said to me. Go you, because you may learn Smithery: For that reason I did go, but desired not to learn to pray: all these things were vain. When we came to Roxbu∣ry, I said, I desired to learn Smithery: But my Master said, I may not teach him my Trade, lest Indians learn to make Locks and Guns. Then I would not dwell with him, and thought to cast off praying, and thought I would forsake my brothers. My brother perswaded mee to dwell one year there, but I would not: yet at last I did dwell there one year, and went to meeting, but in vain, for I understood not one word. After that year, I returned to Noonantam, and then I heard that God made all the world, but yet I did not pray to God one jot, but still sinned, and especially the sin of Lust, & I made light of any sin. I heard, and understood the Commands of God, Thou shalt not murder, commit a∣dultery, steal, bear false witness, covet; and that made me afraid to commit sin afore man, lest I should be punish∣ed or put to death, but I feared not God. After I heard the Minister ask, Who made you? A. God: and Who redeemed you? A. Christ: and Who must sanctifie you? The holy Ghost, and that God made Heaven, Earth, Sea, &c. then I a little considered of God, who made all this world, and then I was afraid. I saw that no man could make these things, and that therefore we
must pray to God, Then my heart said, Assuredly it is so; God made all things, and made mee, and I must pray to him: After this, my brothers were sick, and I prayed God, Oh that they may live! and then I heard, that now God tryeth mee whether I will pray or no. I confesse I have done many sins, especially lust, though I had not been a Murderer, or the like. But then my brothers and kindred dyed: then my heart said, Sure it's a vain thing to pray to God; for I pray∣ed, yet my friends dye therefore I will run wilde, and did cast off praying, I did not pray morning and night, and at meat, only on the Sabbath day I came to meeting, but I cared not for hearing, nor did I believe any thing I heard, but I still lived in sin, and my heart said, I will run away; for here we are hindred from sin, in other places I may freely sin. Then my brothers which lived were troubled for mee. Then I said I will abide with my brothers, because I love them, but not because I would pray. Then that Winter God broke my head; I knew but little, I was almost dead: Then my heart said, Now I know God is angry with mee for my sins, and hath therefore smote mee; then I prayed hard, when I was almost dead. I remembred my sins much, and conside∣red them much: I remembred that God made all the world, and therefore assuredly there is a God. I heard that God made Adam, and made him in his own image, Gen. 1. and assuredly none but God could make all the world, heaven, earth, sea, &c. then I did believe that God did make the world. Again, I confesse, I saw that I had offended against God, and sinn'd against him, and that I had the root of
sin in me, and that I had deserved all miseries, and death, and hell. I heard, that God made a Covenant with Adam, and forbad him to eat of the Tree in the midst of the Garden; and yet he did eat, and therefore God was angry with man: and I was born in sin, and there∣fore God was angry with me: and because I have some∣time forsaken God, and run wilde, therefore I now know my sin and my offence against God. I desire no more to cast off God and prayer, for now I know my sins, and that I have deserved misery: therefore now I desired to pray to God, as long as I live. I desired pardon of my sins, and I thought it may be God will pardon mee: and my heart prayed to God, Oh God if thou give mee life again, I will assuredly believe and obey; and now I know my sins by the sin of Adam: but when I had thus done, quickly my heart would be vain again. After my wound, when I came to my self and awaked, I saw my sin, and promised God to pray unto him, when I saw the mercy of God was so great unto mee: I heard that word, Say not, I will pray hereafter, but now, Today if yee will hear his voice, har∣den not your hearts, but pray to God; and that made my heart to yield to do it. Then I understood, Gen. 2. that God formed man out of the dust of the earth, and brea∣thed into him a living soul: by this I did believe that God made me. And I heard that God caused Adam to sleep, and took out a rib, and made it a woman: and by this I believed, that surely this is the work of God. Again I heard, that wee are born in sin, under the guilt of Adams sin: and by that I believed that I was a sinner. Again I heard, Gen. 6. that all the thoughts and imaginations of the heart of man, are only evil continually; and that
God did threaten to destroy man whom hee had made, and all beasts and living creatures which hee had made: and by this I saw, that surely sin is a very great evil. Again I heard, that Noah found grace, and hee onely was upright before God, and that God drowned all the world, except Noah, and his sons, and their wives, eight persons: this did make mee remember my sinnes, and confesse them, and I saw that God is angry with sin. It rained forty dayes, and so drowned all the world: then I said, Surely this is Gods work, and hee doth as he threatned to do to sinners; and the same may God do to me, who am a sinner; and my heart is full of sin, and evil thoughts, &c. And then I prayed, Oh God be not angry with mee, but be mercifull to mee, and shew mee what I should do. Then I considered why did God bid Noah make an Ark, and saved Noah and his Sons, and their Wives: and by it my heart saw, that this is Gods work, who does what hee speaketh, and hath mercy on whom hee will. And my heart thought, does God par∣don mee, and love mee? It may be God will have mer∣cy on mee. I heard that promise, Mat. 3. Repent and believe, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand: then my heart said, Oh that God would help mee, and pardon my sins. And God made mee wonder at Gods mercy to mee. I heard of Sodom, and their great sin, and de∣struction, and that did make me to remember my great sins, and the great work of God that hee had almost kill'd mee; Oh, I thought this is Gods work, to shew mee my sinnes: and as God saved Lot by the Angels, and sent him out of the place, but burnt Sodom and all the people, this I saw to be Gods work, & now I desired to fear God and pray unto him all the dayes of my life.
Again I heard, Mat. 3. The axe is laid to the root of the tree, every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewen down, and cast into the fire: then I feared my own case, because my fruits were sin, and I deserved to be cut down; then I desired to believe in Christ. I did believe that Christ is the Son of God, by that word Matth. 4. Satan tempted Christ, If thou be the Son of God, &c. but Christ conquered Satan; and therefore assuredly hee is the Son of God. Then I considered that place, Mat. 11. Many came to Christ, the halt, and blinde, and lame, and deaf, and sick, and hee healed all, and if they did but touch Christ they were healed; and therefore my heart believed assuredly, hee is the Son of God: and therefore now I will pray, and Oh let Christ save mee. And Christ hath promised, Whatever yee ask in my name, it shall be done: therefore now I prayed, Oh Christ Jesus pardon mee; but my heart is weak and doubting, and I cannot believe. And I heard that word, that every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, is cut down and cast into the fire: then I said, I deserve that. Again, that word, Not every one that sayeth, Lord, Lord, but hee that heareth the Word, and doeth it. Assu∣redly it is so; and I desire not only to hear the Word, but to do it: then my heart was ashamed of my sinnes, and grieved. I heard that word, Matth. 6. Blessed art thou Simon bar-Ionah, flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, but my heavenly Father: then my heart said, Yea Lord, no man has taught mee Christ, onely God hath taught my heart to know Christ. Again, I heard that word, Mat. 1. Hee will save his people from their sins: then my heart said, Be it so to mee, Oh Lord. Again, I heard that Christ rose again
the third day with an Earth-quake; and the Watch∣men were afraid, and fled: then my heart said, Sure∣ly this is Christ the Son of God; and whosoever be∣lieveth in Christ, his soul shall go to heaven: For again, I heard of the Ascension of Christ, and more then five hundred saw him ascend; and therefore I believe this is Christ the Son of God. Again, I heard that in John 14. No man cometh unto the Father, but by mee: my heart answered, Yea assuredly, Oh Lord, Christ is the way, to believe in, and come to God. Again, I heard that Mat. 25. Christ saith to the wic∣ked, Depart yee cursed: I said, God might justly say so to mee, and send mee to eternal death. But I ear∣nestly cryed to God, Oh God, set mee into the right way, and give mee Christ, that I may ever walk with Christ; for I am poor and weak: and Christ promi∣seth, that what wee ask hee will grant; and I say, Let God do with mee what hee will: but I beg mercy in Christ, onely I desire to pray to God as long as I live. Iohn Speen. THis I confess, that I assuredly am a great sin∣ner before the Lord: but now I beseech God to help mee; Oh Christ, lead mee in the right way, that I may speak that which is right. This I confesse, that before wee prayed to God, I was wholly a sinner, and not only before, but since praying to God, I have been a great sinner: and now
I desire to make a short confession [for we desired that they would be shorter, the time requiring so]. At first when I prayed, my prayer was vain, and only I pray∣ed with my mouth; and on the Sabbath, only I came to the House of Prayer. I prayed morning and eve∣ning, and when I eat, but I considered not what I prayed for; I was sometime angry and passionate about wordly matters; and I was troubled when I saw my brother was chosen to be a Ruler, who was younger then I; because now I saw that I was a sinner; and though I repented, yet presently again I fell into sin: therefore I thought, surely God hath cast me off, be∣cause I thus sin; and still my heart was full of sin, all my thoughts were full of sin, all my talk and doings were sinfull. But now of late, about 2 yeares ago, I heard this word, Mat. 12. When the unclean spirit was cast out, hee went up and down unquiet; then hee returned and took 7 devils with him, worse then himself, and dwelt in that man, and the latter end of that man was worse then his begin∣ning. When I heard this I feared, my heart feared; I feared that my repentance and praying and all was nought, and that God hath almost quite cast me off. Then I considered how I fell into these sins: I remem∣bred that the Serpent did deceive the woman, & she the man, and thereby brought sin; and thereupon God pu∣nished both the man and the woman. Hearing this, my heart thought; Surely I am a great sinner, and I was born in sin, because my parents were sinners, and so am I. I have sinned against God, and I was born in sin. My Parents broke that Command, Thou shalt have no other gods but Mee; but they served many gods, and so did I,
and therefore the earth bringeth forth thorns and weeds unto man, when he laboreth: therefore by this I remembred my troublesom life, and all is because God is offended at me, because of my sins. And then I remembred that many of my children are dead; this is Gods punishment on me, because of my sins. Some∣time men punished me, and were offended at me, but now I remembred my sins against God, and I saw that the punishments of God are a greater matter. Again, I heard that word, that hee that keepeth his word shall finde mercy. I thought so it is indeed; but I am a sin∣ner. I considered what I should do, because I was a sinner, and born in sin, and have lived in sin. I con∣sidered assuredly there is a God, and God made hea∣ven and earth, and all that is therein, and all destructi∣ons and deaths are the work of God. I remembred my vain praying to God, and considered what to do▪ I confessed my sins before God, and begged pardon for Christ his sake. I did finde I could not deliver my self, but Christ only is my deliverer; and my heart desired to believe, and pray to him, and yet knew not what to do, nor how to please God, and get pardon; only I prayed, Oh Christ deliver mee, because I am a sinner, and know not what to do. Then I remembred that God layeth on us two deaths in this world: First, the soul is dead, and wee are made guilty of Adams sin, and have lost Gods Image, and hereby my soul is a fool, and hereby my soul is dead: and a man dead can do nothing, nor speak, nor go, nor stand, and verily so is my soul dead, and I shall fall to eternal damnation by sin. Therefore now I cry to God to help mee, for I am throughly a sinner.
After I heard that God pardoneth penitent believers: and I remember the word of Ionas, when he was al∣most cast off, he repented, and God made a Whale to eat him up; and then he looked to God, and cryed for mercy; and then I saw that if I cry for mercy, and be∣lieve, I shall have pardon. I heard that Christ healed all manner of diseases; therefore I believed that Christ is the Son of God, able to heal and pardon all. Now I confess I know nothing, almost nothing at all. Again, Christ saith, Hee that is not with mee is against mee; my heart said, True it is so, so must I do, I must be with Christ: and, Hee that gathereth not, scattereth; I said, So it is with mee, I have so done; I scatter, and am a stranger to Christ. And I did not truly love them that prayed to God, but I was a stranger in heart unto them. But now I desire in my heart to do as they do; and our poor teaching, I desire to obey it, and do what God bids; and what he saith you shall not do, that I desire not to do: But yet again I do sin, and my sins troubled me by hearing the word of God, and yet I would do them. I heard that God will pardon all kinde of sins, that men sin, but the sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be pardoned in this world, nor in that which is to come. Then I fear'd that I was such an one, and that God would not pardon me. Then I earnestly en∣treated God to pardon and deliver me, because he was the true deliverer. Again, I heard that word, that they that are well need not the Physitian, but the sick. My heart said, True; I did even so, I sought not help when I was well, but now I remember my sins, and now my soul is dead, and now I desire that my soul may live, and I desire the Physitian of my soul to heal
mee; and Christ will not in vain heal souls, but such as convert from sin, and believe in Christ, their sins Christ pardoneth: this my soul doth earnestly beseech of Christ, and else I know not what to do. Again, I heard that Christ dyed for our sins, when we are sinners. Again, Mat. 26. Christ saith, This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins: my heart said, Yea (Lord) let it be so for my soul, and let me not be a stranger any more before thee. I know not what to do, Lord help. I desire to be washed from all my filthy sins, and to be bapti∣zed, as a sign of it. I am as a dead man in my soul, and desire to live. Ponampam. A Little I shall speak. I was young, about 8 years old when my father lived. I did play as other children did, and my father did chide me for playing. I wondered at it, for he said we shall all die. I wondered and sat amazed about half an hour, but I soon forgot it. That Winter the Pox came, and al∣most all our kindred dyed. I and my mother came to the Bay, and there dwelt till we pray'd to God; but I did nothing but sin, as the rest of the world did. Then hearing the word of God, I heard that from the rising of the sun to the setting thereof, my Name shall be known among the Gentiles: therefore all must pray to God. But my heart did not desire that, but to go away to some other place. But remembring the word of
God, that all shall pray to God. Then I did not de∣sire to go away, but to pray to God. But if I pray a∣fore the Sachems pray, I fear they will kill me, and therefore I will not pray. But yet when others prayed, I prayed with them; and I thought, if I run away to other places, they will pray too, therefore I will pray here. Then on a Sabbath, none taught, and some bid me teach, what the Minister had taught us; but I feared, and durst not for fear of the Sachems, yet they urged me, and I did. And I taught them what I re∣membred, and they were angry at me, and we fell out, and I went away. I thought that my praying would be in vain, and I laid by praying; and there was Paw∣wauing, but I doubted to do that, because I had pray∣ed, and I did think they would laugh at me. After I returned again, and was among them which prayed, but my heart did not rightly pray, though I came on the Sabbath day. Then about the time that my Son (who was at School) was born, the Minister taught on 1 Chron. 28. 9. Thou Solomon my son, know the God of thy fathers, &c. if thou seek him, hee will be found of thee; if thou forsake him, hee will cast thee off for ever: Then I feared, for I said, This already I have done, I have cast off God, and therefore he will cast off me; for every such one God will cast off, I know not what to do. It repented me for my sin, I feared Gods wrath and damnation. Then I prayed, and call'd upon God, yet only sometimes I repented, and after I found my heart full of sin again: But then I was angry at my self, and knew not what to do; alwayes I did fear, God hath cast me off, for all my many sins which I have done. Hereby I was troubled and angry at my self. Then I
heard that word, Who ever repent and believe shall be sa∣ved, Il'e pardon them: Then my heart cryed, Oh Christ let it be so, that my sins may be pardoned, and that I may pray alwaies. Then I begged, Lord give me repentance and faith, and I did pray to God much. Then I did beg, that I might give up my self, wife, and children to God as long as we live; and then I prayed. Then I heard that word, Mat. 5. Hee that looks on a wo∣man to lust after her, hath committed adultery in his heart. I then remembred my sins; that though I had promi∣sed to pray, yet I had thus sinned, and my heart was now troubled about this. My heart said, Cast off pray∣ing, because you are filthy in lust, your heart and eyes still commit adultery; therefore run away from these that pray to God, and go to Qunniticot, or some other place; and if you be in other places, you may do what you will, and my heart almost inclined to this sin: But after that, this merciful word of God I heard, That Satan led Christ into the wilderness to tempt him, and so I thought hee would do me. Then I desired God to be merciful to me; then I turned to God, and cryed, but knew not what to do, for I feared God had cast me off, and I shall perish for ever; God has cast me off, and I have deserved hell fire. Then I heard that word, Joh. 14. 6. None come to the Father but by me: I did pray, Oh Christ let it be so, that by thee I may come to God; and I pray Christ Jesus pardon all my sins, this mercy I beg. Then I repented my casting off praying to God; then I promised I would not re∣turn again to sin, and if Christ help me, I and chil∣dren shall serve God. Then that Spring my mother and two children dyed, and I was troubled, and knew
not what to do; my heart said, Lay by prayer, but that I did not: but I saw Christ came to give eternal life, and therefore what Christ will do for me, so let it be. Therefore I believe only in Christ for eternal life; and what Christ will do with my soul, so let it be; and my soul desireth that I may receive the Seals to make strong my heart. Piumbuhhou. ASsuredly, I have nothing that I should confesse as I ought, for my heart is full of foolishness and darkness; stopt up is my heart, and deaf are my ears. I know not by what way I can get life. I was born in sin into this world, and therefore I am in folly, and I know my heart is full of foolishness and ignorance. I am a great sinner ever since I saw light in this world; my foolishness appeareth in every thing I do in this life. I know not what God hath given me, but now I hear of the mercy of God, who hath made the world, and all things in it; by this great work of his I know there is a God, and because my heart checketh mee for sin, and I fear the punishment of God: And the Word of God now sheweth me that there is a God; therefore my heart sayes, I desire to pray to God: and because God is angry with me for all my sins, I know nothing by my self but that which is evil. I heard that word Mat. 5. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Then my heart said, So be it Oh Lord to me, and I love thee as long
as I live. Then said my heart, I am a poor man, and desire to pray to God. Again, God said, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled. Then when I heard that word, my heart re∣joyced; and yet again I doubted, and my heart mis∣believed and feared. Then that word came, that Christ saith, Be ye mercifull, as your heavenly father is merciful. And again, Hee maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good; and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. When I heard it, my heart rejoyced to hear of the mercy of God; yet I doubted, and my heart was hard again. Now I confess before God, be∣cause God is a great God, and a mercifull God, and I pray to him. I heard of Gods great mercy, to give us his only Son to dye for us; therefore I loved God, and I begged, Oh God pardon all my sins, and I give up my self to Jesus Christ. Monotunkquanit. BEfore I prayed to God, I lived at Nipmuk. I did not know that there was a God, only I lived for nothing, for no end or purpose; but I alwaies did wilde actions. I kept no Sabbath, nor Lecture, nor any work of Prayer; nor did I remember my works. I now know that all my words and works are naught, my eyes and ears are stopped, and mad works I dayly did. After I went to Dorchester Indians, the praying Indians; and they that were my friends, did say it was good to pray to God; and said, Tomorrow is our Le∣cture,
and the Minister cometh to teach us; then my heart desired to see the Minister, and hear what he said: next day he came, and taught the Indians; I went and desired to see: when I came, my son Sam. came with mee; the Minister call'd my son, and set him afore, and asked him, Who made him? and he was taught to answer, God. Then he commended my son, and asked whose son he was; they said, Mine. The Mi∣nister gave him two apples: then the Minister said to me, Do you pray to God? you see your childe saith, God made him;[Note here that God hath so blessed this youth, that hee is one of our School-masters, and an hopefull young man.] and therefore it is your duty to pray to God: Then I considered what he said, I could not sleep that night. I considered whether I should pray to God; my heart did much doubt that night! Shall I pray? my heart said, No; yet I doubted. Then Waban came to my house to Nipmuk, and perswaded me to pray to God; I said, I know not how to pray. Hee said, God will teach you; God is a great God, and made all the world. I answered, Who knoweth that? and who can witness that? He said, The Minister is sent of God, and sheweth us Gods Word, and hee by that teacheth us, Then I promised Waban, that when hee came again I would pray to God. Then Toteswamp came, and exhorted me to pray to God, and told me of Christ, and pardon of sin; and then al∣most my heart prayed to God. Then I said, English men understand not me, and does God understand me? They said, God made all, and understands all: then I said, I will pray to God. Then I heard first,
that God made heaven, and earth, and all things, and in six dayes finished them; and also made man in his own Image, wise and holy like God. Then I heard that Satan came and tempted Eve, and cozened her, and she tem∣pted the man. And God had said, Eat not of the tree in the midst of the Garden, if yee eat thereof yee shall dye; yet she did eat, and gave unto man, and he did eat: and thereby he sinned, and all his posterity became sinful, and deserved damnation. Then my heart said, What shall I do? and I prayed for my children, for now I hear of eternal damnation, and sure I am a great sinner. Again, I heard the Minister preach, That Christ was born like a man, and was both God and man, and dyed for us, and sheweth us the way of eternal life. Then I cryed, Oh Lord give me Christ, because Christ hath dyed for us, and hath made his righteousness ours, and our sins are Christs, as Adam made his sin ours. Now my heart was broken, and I saw that I was a great sinner. When I heard of the great works of Christ, I said, Oh what shall I do, that I may get Christ? & I said in my heart, Oh let the holy Spirit help me, for I am ashamed of my sins; melted is my heart, and I desire pardon of all my sins; now I desire to forsake all my sins, and now I desire dayly to quench lusts, and wash off filth, and cast out all my sins, by the blood of Jesus Christ, and this I do by believing in Jesus Christ. Gen. 6. there was only one Noah righteous, and God saved him: then my heart said, Oh mercifull God, who savest them that trust in thee, save mee. Again, God made his Co∣venant with Abraham, and with all the seed of Abraham: now I desire to have this Covenant, and to receive
this Commandement of Christ. Abraham was strong in faith, and followed Christ; and my heart doth de∣sire to follow Christ, because he hath dyed for us. Wutásakómpauin. OH Christ help mee! I confess my sins before God, and before men. We are all born in sin, because Adam sinned, and made his sin ours. Our Parents knew not God, nor the way of life; we In∣dians are all sinners, and did all sins, afore we heard of God; we did pray to every thing that is in the world, and knew not the way of life. When En∣glish men came first, we did pray to the Devil, and many were our sins; and God doth know all our sins, all which we have committed, before the English came. After the English came, I went to Sudbury, to Mr Browns house, and he said to me, Pray to God; but I did not like it, nor to hear of praying to God; but afterwards I heard Waban prayed to God, and I was not glad of it; yet after Waban prayed, he told us of it, and that the Minister came to Noonantam. I heard him, and he taught, that the souls of good men die and go to heaven, the souls of the wicked, when they die, they go to hell; but I only heard it. Then we resolved we would pray to God, and carry our children to Rox∣bury, that they might learn to pray, but we feared that we should not learn to pray. After the Minister taught that word, that every man himself must pray and be∣lieve to be saved; and though your sons be at Roxbury,
and learn to pray, yet if you pray not, you must be damned. Again, I heard many words of God; this was one, Therefore watch, for ye know not the day, or hour, when the Lord will come: When I heard that, I knew not what to do, nor do I know when is the day of death. But I am full of sin, and when I die Christ will not receive me, because I am so full of sin. After that my wise dyed, and then weak was my heart, almost I left praying to God, but yet I did not so. But after, I heard that word of God, Who ever heareth the word, and doeth it, is like a wise builder, who built on a rock; and when the storms and floods came and beat upon the house, it stood, because it was built upon a rock: But hee that heareth the word, and doth it not, is like a foolish builder, who built upon the sand, and the storms and floods came and beat upon that house, and it fell, because it was built on the sand. By this I saw that I was a foolish builder, because the death of my wife did almost make me leave praying to God. After I had another wife, and shee dyed also: Then I heard that word, That it is Gods love, by afflictions, to call us to repentance; and therefore my heart said, Oh Lord I will pray, Oh Lord help me. Again, I heard another word, that at the end of the world all must ap∣pear before the Iudgment Seat of Christ: and there∣fore now confess all your sins, and repent, because Christ hath writ down all your actions, both good and bad, and all shall be opened; and therefore repent of your sins, that they may be pardoned. Then I said, I am a great sinner, and ever I com∣mit sin; I confesse I have deserved hell, and I cannot
deliver my self; but I beg of God, Oh Lord give me Christ; and I give my soul to Christ, that all my sins may be pardond, and I now confess my sins before man but at the end of the world I must be judged by Jesus Christ. Now I desire the spirit of God would help me to confess all my sins to God, that they may be pardoned in Jesus Christ. THese Confessions I wrote in English from their mouthes with the best of my en∣deavours, both for diligence and also faithful∣ness; and so soon as they had done, I read them unto the Elders and Brethren and Sisters there present, and that the substance hereof was deli∣vered by them, and faithfully translated and de∣livered by me (to the lest of my understanding) I do here before the Lord testifie. JOHN ELIOT.
I Did understand most things that some of those Indians spake; and though others spake not so well to my understanding, yet many things I understood of what they all spake: and thus much I may testifie, that (according to what I un∣derstood) the substance of their Confessions is here truly set down. JOHN ELIOT, jun. Waban being sick when the rest made their Confession, after the Lord had restored him, came to Roxbury, and before the Elders made his Confession as followeth. UNto this day I do understand but little of the English Language; the Word of God came not first unto my heart by the English Language. I did not know what state I was in at my first birth, and my sin by birth I knew not: When I was young I knew not what I was, as now I do know; for now I know that I am a sinful man. Since I prayed to God, I know
more of my self; but afore, I cared not for such things, nor what they said. If I heard any thing, I took no heed to it; if any asked me whether I knew God, I did not regard it; yea, I hated the knowledg of God, nor did I regard any word of God: but other kinde of praying (which we used) I did love; to pray to the Devil, this I loved. But afterward, I began to think; it may be they say true, that speak of God; it may be it is true, that God is in heaven; and should any teach me in my language, I might know God: but if I should pray, it may be it is in vain to pray in my language; could I speak English, I might learn to pray. And I see the English love us, and therefore it is like, that is true which they say of God, and I desire to live for ever where they do. When I first heard the Word, it said, God is good; a little I believed it, but I did more doubt. Mr Iackson asked me if I did pray to God: I ask∣ed him whether God understood our language, if I prayed to him: Hee said, yea, all things God doth know, and all languages. Then my heart said, It may be I may attain to pray. But my heart was hard, and therefore I could not pray, afterwards it may be I may. Sometime I thought if we did not pray, the English might kill us; but if I prayed, I thought I did not pray right. When I saw, and considered, that all men in the world dyed, I knew not how I might come to live for ever, how my soul might live, and therefore I desired I might pray to God aright; because they that so pray, are all one as if they dyed not, but live for ever. I wish't I could pray aright,
but could not tell how to do it. I did in my heart love wandering about, and our wilde courses alwaies; and when I did pray, it was but out-side praying, for in my heart I understood not right praying to God; I un∣derstood not how to pray, and I regarded not my wea∣riness of that which was good, many things hindred my heart; I was ashamed, because my heart was full of evil. Sometimes I thought of my sins, but it was but a little, and I was soon weary of any good. I did not think God was not mercifull, but I saw my heart was naught, and very little did I know the evils of my heart. No humility was in my heart, and to this day my heart is evil, and hard is my heart, When you taught us the Word of God, my heart did not be∣lieve, but went contrary to the Word of God. I saw my mourning for sin was not good: I do confess my heart did not submit to God, only I hoped I might might learn the Word of God, which you taught us. My heart did afore love praying to the Devil, but I do not finde that I so love praying to God: therefore I did pray, Lord break my heart, that I may pray to God aright. My heart was weary of praying quick∣ly; and therefore my heart said, Surely my heart is nought, and I am like a dead man: and therefore I prayed, Lord help me now to pray aright to God. Now I knew that God knoweth all the thoughts of my heart, and my many sins, and contrary doings, and how little I know of God. Surely I am a great sinner, and this I do throughly know, that great are my sins, and that my heart is contrary to praying to God, and my heart desired wilde courses, and I see that my heart loveth not praying to God. Yet now my heart began
to desire to pray, and to love those things which are according to right praying; but I knew not what to do. Then I asked what I should do; then I heard this answer, I should desire Christ to break my heart by his spirit, none else in the world could do it; no man could work faith in me, but the Word which I heard doth it. I could not my self repent of sin, or be asha∣med; but this I know, that the Word of God saith, Those that believe in Christ shall not perish, but have eter∣nal life: Then my heart said, Oh Lord, let it be so to me, and let not my heart say contrary. Again I heard, If any be foolish, let him ask wisedom of God, who giveth freely: Then my heart said, I am foolish, Oh Lord teach me. Then I feared that my heart in vain seeketh, and then I desired humility, and that I might not pray in vain, and that I might not pray only outwardly. But my heart had contrary and misbe∣lieving thoughts dayly, and my heart did not dayly desire after God, and but a little could I remember of God. Sometime my heart desired not to be like to such as prayed aright unto God; therefore I desired the Image of God upon me, and that I might be like to them wch prayed to God aright; alwaies I thought that what God said in his Word was right. I heard this word, The Foxes have holes, and the Birds have nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head: Then my heart said, Truth (Lord) the riches of this world are of no value; and therefore I desire not this worlds goods, but only heavenly blessings and grace, & I desire the way to the Heavenly Kingdom. And always my heart saith, touching my poverty and misery, I give myself and my soul to God and to Christ, because
that is right. Again, I learn in the Catechize, Q. What hath Christ done for us? A. He dyed for us, hee was bu∣ried, he rose again for us, and by his resurrection hee raiseth our souls unto grace, and also at the last day: And my heart said, Oh let it be so in me! Again it is said, What else hath Christ done for us? A. He ascen∣ded to heaven, to raise our hearts first to heaven, and then to carry us to heaven also, to be with him for ever. My heart saith, Oh God I am not able to save my self, I cannot save my own soul, this is only thy work Oh God, and my heart believeth it; and with God is mercy and goodness, but in this world is nothing but weariness, and I know my weakness; therefore I am ashamed, and Oh let God put grace into my heart; and my heart saith, Oh let me not say in vain that I be∣lieve, Oh Lord help that I may truly believe, not by my works, but by thy Word Oh God. Again it is said in Catechism, Why is Christ a Prophet? A. To teach me the way to heaven: therefore my heart desireth that Christ may ever lead me by his Word; and it is only the mercy of Christ that must do this for me, and he giveth me true comfort only by believing in him.
THe Lord was so graciously with them in these Confessions, that they had good acceptance. Wee advised with the Church touching our further progress; the conclusion whereof was, that we sent Letters to all the neighbor-Churches, informing them of our progress in this matter, in order to our receiving them; desiring them, or any among them, that had any just offence against any of these eight Indians, whom we named, that they would orderly communicate the same unto us, and seasonably; or if they had such knowledg of any of them, as to give us encourage∣ment, we should be thankfull; or their silence, we should take in good part also. We had both incou∣ragement and testimony from some Churches, only the paucity of Interpreters to co-attest with my Inter∣pretation, was a matter of much difficulty, and no small impediment; for which cause I sent to Mr Peir∣son, to old Mr Mayhu, to Thomas Stanton, to be present with us, losing no known opportunity to bring our waies into the light, and to make all things clear. We proposed it to our Church, to agree about the publick day of Confessions; the conclusion was, that a Coun∣cil was called, we sent unto ten Churches about us, re∣questing them by their Messengers to be present on Roxbury Lecture day, being the 5th of the 5th Moneth, 1659. acquainting them that that day was set apart to hear the Indians Confessions, and we requested coun∣sel and direction from them, and concurrence with us. After Prayer, I first declared to the Congregation
what supply of Interpreters we had for co-attestation with my Interpretation of the Indians Confessions. First, here was Mr Peirson, and we had (for clearness of our way, because of his unacquaintance with our dialect) ordered the confessing Indians to keep Sabbath at Roxbury; we spent half the Sabbath among them, a good part whereof was spent in hearing some of their Confessions, and all the second day we so spent, so that Mr Peirson had taken in writing all their Confessi∣ons; so that, if the Assembly pleased, they might hear the Confessions which they made before the Elders of Roxbury, which I have here in writing, and had been already seen by sundry of the Elders; also they might hear the Confessions which Mr Peirson and I had taken yesterday; which (compared with what the Lord shall assist them to utter this day) may help to clear up the verity and reality of their hearts in these their Confessions. Moreover I declared, that here was a godly brother of Martyns Vineyard, named Peter Fouldger, who had for many years taught the Indian School in Mr Mayhu's life time; & since, he hath been by the Cōmissioners imployed to teach the Indians each other Sabbath; who told me, when I spake unto him about this work, that by reason of the different dialect, he durst not alone un∣dertake to give in a testimony; but if he brought one of his Indians with him, (as need might be to help him) then he durst undertake to give a testimony upon Oath, if need were. This man, and his Indian with him, are this morning come, and are present in the Assembly, and set in a convenient feat together. Again I de∣clared, that my son was present, who doth in some mea∣sure
understand the Language: Also here are present two sons of Thomas Stanton, one of which the Com∣missioners maintain at the Colledg. And lastly, here are the Indian Scholars present; so that if the As∣sembly think meet to make use of any of these youths in this grave business, they might so do. Further I declared, that in all this matter we did submit our selves to the guidance of the Reverend Council here present, and desired them to direct us and order us, as they saw meet to do in the Lord. Then we proceeded to hear the Indians Confessi∣ons, which are as followeth. Nishóhkou. I called him forth, and said, Stand up and make your Con∣fession before the Lord and his people. Hee said, I Desire to confess before God and all these wise men, and God helping by the mercifull help of his gracious spirit, that I may confess all my sins. I heard that word, Gen. 5. that God made Adam in his own Image, both male and female; and after many years Adam begat a son in his own Image, having lost Gods Image. And God did form man in the womb of our mother, in Adams Image, and so I was formed in the Image of Adam; and when I was born I lived in the same way, in the Image of Satan, and original sin was rooted in my heart, and grew up there; also I
confess, that when I was a Child, my Parents and I were all wilde, we prayed to many Gods, and many other sins we did, and all the people did the same, both men and women, they lived in all lusts, they pray∣ed to every creature; the Sun, Moon, Stars, Sea, Earth, Fishes, Fowl, Beasts, Trees, &c. all these things I saw when I was a youth, and all these things I liked and loved to do, and was delighted with these things; in all these things I lived, and with these things my memory was exercised, and in my youth I did what I listed, as pauwauing, or what else I would; when I was grown up, I loved lust, and delighted in it, I knew it not to be a sin, but an excellent delight: I loved all sin, but especially lust, and all that I did, was for the sake of lust, such things as women might like of; if I cut my hair, it was to please women; if I cut my hair in another fashion, and left a Lock on one side, it was with respect to lust; if I got fine cloaths, stockins, shoes, all was for to serve lust; our meetings and drinkings were with respect to lust: so that this was the chief thing I did delight in; and these things were in my bones, and there grew; then the Minister came to Channit to teach us: I came to the Meeting, but in vain; I came for lust to look on women, alwayes I did thus, and I thought teaching to be madness, and so I continued two years after we prayed to God; after two years I heard a little, my ears were a little open∣ed; I first understood that word, He that doubteth, is like a wave of the Sea, driven to and fro, and tossed; and that word, If any man lack wisdome, let him ask it of God, who giveth freely, and upbraideth no man. Also the same Winter I heard that word, Gen. 6. God said,
I will destroy man whom I have created, and he repented that he had made him. These things I understood and remembred, but I confess before God, that I did on∣ly hear and know these things, as I did sometimes speak of what I did remember, but I believed not, yea I laughed, as other youths did, at all these things, because thereby did original sin grow in me, and hard it was to root it out, and hard to believe. Af∣ter this I heard still, and more I understood; I heard, Gen. 16. that the people were full of sin, lust, and all o∣ther sin, and therefore the Lord destroyed them; and I knew that I had the same sins, and therefore I was a∣fraid; but I feared only this bodily life, and not for my Soul: After this, my heart did a little desire to pray to God, because God found Noah righteous, and did save him, therefore I desired to pray; but again I laid it by, and I said it is vain to pray, for if I pray, and should commit sin, I shall be punished, or impri∣soned, but if I pray not, I may commit what sin I will, and have no punishment for it. About a year after, I heard the Minister teach another word, that the Death of Christ is precious, and our death is nothing worth, therefore God promiseth pardon of all sins for Christ his sake; he bid us remember this against next time: When he came again, he asked me, and I did remember it, and do to this day; but I confess I did not believe, only I did remember it, and answered when I was asked: And then again, I desired to pray to God, and would not go away, but it was because I loved our place and dwelling; I prayed, but I belie∣ved not, I considered not Eternal Life, but only this worldly life: And thus I went on, till they chose Ru∣lers
at Natik, they chose me, and I refused, because I believed not: After that, my Wife and Child died, and I was sick to death, but lived again, and being well, I thought I could not pray, I was a Child, and therefore could not, I put off praying to God, my Relations died, and why should I pray? but then I considered, why does God thus punish me; yea, the Minister spake to me about it, and said, it may be it was because I refused to do Gods work, as Moses, when he first refused, God was patient, but when he persisted in his refusal, God was angry; and then my heart saw my sin, and then my heart almost believed: I desired to do right, and to keep the Sabbath, for I further heard in the 4th Commandment, Remember the Sabbath to keep it holy; and Psa. 101. I will walk wisely in a perfect way: Also in Isay 58. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, and do not thy own works, nor find thy own pleasure, nor speak thy own words; therefore my Soul desired to keep the Sabbath, then the Soul∣diers came upon us on the Sabbath day, while we were at meeting, and took away our Guns, and caused us to bring them as far as Roxbury; that night my heart was broken off, my heart said, God is not, the Sabbath is not, it is not the Lords Day, for were it so, the Soul∣diers would not have then come; then my heart cast off praying, then we came before the Magistrates, and Cutshamoquin asked, Why they came on the Sabbath∣day: It was answered, that it was lawful; but I did not understand it: That day I being very thirsty, did drink too much, and was brought before the Magi∣strates, and was ashamed: I came to Roxbury to the Minister, and there I was ashamed also, because I had
greatly sinned; then I cried to God for Free-mercy, because precious is the Death of Christ, oh pardon this my sin: Yet again I had temptations to drinking, and then I considered what a great sinner I was, even like a beast before God: Then I heard that word, Mat. 5. He that breaketh the beast of Gods Commands, and teach∣eth others so to do, shall be the least in the Kingdome of Heaven: My heart said, Lord, such an one have I been, for I have been an active sinner; yet I cried again for mercy, O Lord freely pardon my great sins. Again, I confess I am very weak, even like a very child, and I so walk, and know not what to do; if I die, I fear I shall die in my sin; yet I cried again, O God pardon me for Christ his sake. Again, further I confess, that when I was troubled about our wants, poverty, and nakedness, I considered that text, Foxes have holes, and Birds have nests, but the Son of man hath not where∣on to lay his head. And again, Mat. 6. The Birds plough not, and the flowers spin not, and yet God doth both feed and cloath them; and therefore be not over-much trou∣bled about these things, yet I desire to follow labour with my hands, because Gen 1. God gave Adam do∣minion over the creatures, and commanded him to Till the ground: And Gen. 2. He set him in the Gar∣den, and commanded him to dress it, and keep it: Also Gen. 3. he said, Thou shalt eat thy bread in the sweat of thy face all thy dayes, till thou returnest to thy dust. When I remember these things, my heart doth bow to labour: also I heard that riches were the root of all evil, and Dives with his fine apparel, and dainty fare, was in hell, and poor Lazarus was in heaven: When my heart is troubled about our Land, nd about riches,
I quiet my heart with these meditations. Also I fur∣ther heard, when my heart was troubled about Sal∣vation, and doubted, I heard that there is no means of Salvation but Christ, not any thing in the world can carry us to heaven, only Christ, which I did be∣lieve, by Gen. 28. where Iacob dreamed a dream, and he saw a Ladder which stood on earth, and the top reached up to heaven, and that Ladder is Christ; who is Man, and so toucheth the earth; and God, and so is in heaven, and by believing in him, we ascend to heaven as by a ladder. This helped me almost to be∣lieve, and I cried, Oh Christ be thou my Ladder to heaven! Again, Ioh. 14. Christ saith, None cometh to the Father, but by me; therefore I believe, nothing can carry me to God, but only Christ, if I penitently believe in him. Again, I confess I do still find my self very weak to resist sin, for if I read, and teach on the Sabbath, I teach indeed, but I do not as I ought; and therefore that Word of Christ doth re∣buke me, Mat. 23. Hear, and do what they say, but do not as they do. When I do, among others, re∣prove sinners, that Word of Christ reproveth me: Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou mayest see clearly so cast the moat out of thy bro∣thers eye. Again, when I pray, I find hypocrisie in my heart, to do it to be seen of men, and that Word of Christ reproveth me, Mat. 6. They pray to be sen of men, verily they have their reward; and then I cryed mightily to God, O Lord help me, pardon me, what shall I do. Again, I heard Mat. 9. The Son of Man hath power to pardon sin on earth, and therefore me O Lord; then my heart did desire Christ, and to
pray as long as I live, and my heart was stirred up thereunto, by Luke 18. Christ spake a parable, that we should pray, and not be weary, because the Wid∣dow tyred the unjust Judge, and made him help her; how much more shall God the righteous Judge, hear and help his children, that cry night and day, there∣fore I desired to pray unto God as long as I lived: Then my heart said, What shall I do, for I am weak, and I fear I shall perish; then I heard that word, Ioh. 3. God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have E∣ternal Life. And again it is said, that God loved his Son, and gave all things into his hand: I am weak, and though I pray, yet I am weak, therefore I desired to be in Christs hand, as in a Fort; in a Fort we are safe from exercise, they cannot easily catch us; out of a Fort we are open to them: So I desire Church-E∣state, the Seals of Baptisme, and the Lords Supper, and all Church-Ordinances, as a Fort unto my Soul: I heard that Word of Christ, Mat. 16. Thou art Peter, and on this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it: Oh I desire to be there kept! Again, I heard Mat. 3. God is able of these stones to raise p seed to Abraham; therefore raise up me O Lord: And again, Christ came to Iohn to be baptized, Iohn refused, but Christ said, Suffer it to be so: It is necessary to fulfill all unrighteousness, there∣fore so I desire to do all that is right, and I desire to be baptized. Again I confess, I fear I shall sin again, and defile my self, after I am washed and baptized, e∣ven as the dog returneth to his vomit; therefore I cry, O God help me for thy free mercies sake. Again,
I heard that in Mat. 18. where two or three are met toge∣ther in my Name, Christ is in the midst of them: There∣fore I desi to have the Ordinances of Christ, to be with Christ; but my heart saith, if I be bound by Or∣dinances, then I shall be imprisoned, but yet I desire to be there in pron with Christ; if my heart say, I shall be as dead, but yet I desire to be so with Christ. Again, I heard in Iohn, Christ saith, Who ever cometh to me, I cast him not away, but he shall have life: But Ioh. 5. Christ doth say, Ye will not come unto me, that you might have life: Therefore my heart did greatly fear, and pray, Oh that I might come to Christ! and Christ is the everlasting Son of God; therefore my Soul desi∣reth to be with him: And this I confess, that though I believe in Christ, yet I am still weak; and therefore I desire to be made strong by the Seals; but I fear I am unworthy, because of that word, Mat. 7. Cast not Pearls before Swine, nor holy things to dogs; yet my heart saith, O Lord remember me, and yet let me a dog come under thy Table to get a crum; and I cry to God because of all my weakness! I confess I cannot deliver, or help, or save my self, only Christ Jesus can do it, and let Free-grace pardon me, and save me, O God have mercy on me! Again, Mat. 18. Whatever ye bind on earth, is bound in heaven; and whatever ye loose on earth, is loosed in heaven; therefore I desire to be loosed both in earth, and in heaven, and to be sealed with Gods Seal.
When I had read this Confession of his, I said, because the Lord hath said, that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses, every Truth shall be established; therefore I de∣sired that the rest of the Interpreters might at∣test unto this which I had read. FIrst, Mr. Peirson said, so far as I discern, I doubt not of the truth of what Mr. Eliot hath delivered, and for that which he hath now uttered, though some things the Indian hath added more then he spake in private, and some things left out, and some things o∣therwise placed, yet for the substance of his present Confession, it is the same with that which he deliver∣ed in private, where we did carefully try all things, that we might be sure that we understood him right. Then Bro. Fouldyer was desired to speak; who saith, That he did not expect to have understood so much of his speech, and so plainly as he did, and his Interpre∣ter did perfectly understand all; and to his best un∣derstanding, that which Mr. Eliot had delivered, was the very same which he spake. I said unto the Assembly, In that he spake so plain to his understanding, it is because I had advised him, and so all the rest, to express themselves in the most plain and familiar words and expressions they could, for my more easie and perfect understanding. Again,
for that my Bro. Peirson observed, that they left out something, and added other, and varied in sundry expressions: It is true, I observed the same, and it may well be so, for they have not any writing, or like helps, only their memory, and the help of Gods Spirit, to read in their own hearts, what they utter. Then the two Sons of Thom. Stanton were called, to testifie the Schollar spoke first, and said, that he did understand perfectly all that the Indian said, and he did not observe any difference in what Mr. Eliot had delivered, but it was the same which the Indian spake. The other spake, and said, he did not perfectly understand all that the Indian said, but so far as he did understand, Mr. Eliot had delivered the truth. My Son was called to speak, who said, I did, for the most part, well understand the Indian, and to my best understanding, my Father hath given a true in∣terpretation thereof. Antony. He was next called, who thus spake. I Confess my sins before the Lord, and all these peo∣ple and godly men, for ye throughly know that we are great sinners, not only before God, but before man also. I confess that in my Mothers Womb I was concei∣ved
in sin, and that I was born in iniquity; my Fa∣ther and Mother were sinners, and lived in fin, they prayed to many Gods, the Sun, Heavens, Beasts, Trees, and every thing in the world, they made them their Gods, and throughly we followed these sins: When I was born, I was in the Image of Satan, I knew not that God made all this world, I was only wise to sin, and I did all those things which I liked to do, even all lusts, from my youth up; and now I confess my sins before God, and all men, for God and men do know them: I did all my delights. When I was a youth the English came, but I regarded them not: Afterward I heard that the Indians prayed, but my heart-said, I will not pray so long as I live, for they be vain words to pray unto God, my Parents taught me to pray unto many Gods: Sometime I came to English Towns on the Sabbath day, and I played, for I did not regard that sin; I thought it vain to keep one day, yet I feared that the English should see me play, least they should be angry, but not because I offended God. Afterwards I heard that my Brothers prayed, and therefore I disliked them, and I thought I will forsake my Brothers, because they do a vain work, and I did run away into the Country, but they soon found me, and asked me to pray, and they pi∣tied me, and loved me, and therefore I returned, not because I loved God, but because I loved my bro∣thers: My brother said, Go dwell with the English, and learn their manners; I yeilded, because I loved my brother: I dwelt here at Roxbury, and came to this meeting house, but in vain, I prayed not one word, and my heart did misbelieve; I heard the Minister
preach that there is one God, and he made the World, and all things in it, but my heart thought it was a vain word; I thought my Father made me, and not God. Again, I returned from this Town, but yet I did not pray; I heard the Commandements, Thou shalt not murder; Thou shalt not commit adultery; Thou shalt not steal; Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neigh∣bour; Thou shalt not covet, &c. and other sins and punishments I heard of, and I feared to sin because of man, and because of punishment, but not for fear of God; therefore vain were all my wayes. When I came back to Noonantam, I did the same sins again, e∣specially I loved lust; yea, after my praying and being among them, I loved it more then before: When the Minister came and taught, I went to the meeting, but in vain; I learned nothing, but I still loved all our sins and lusts: Afterward hearing the Catechism, Who made you? God. Who redeemed you? Jesus Christ, &c. my heart misbelieved, and said, I will not believe, I will go away into the Country. Again, I heard that God made all the world, and then a little I believed, and thought I will pray to God, but weak it was. A∣gain; I heard Mat. 7. Ask, and ye shall have, seek, and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened to you: Then I prayed a little, and then I thought there was a God who made the whole world, I thought man could not make the world, but only God; and therefore I did pray unto him. Afterward my Brothers were sick, and others also, I remembred that word, Ask, and ye shall have; then I prayed, to try if that word was true, but they dyed; then I thought that was a vain word, and that God heareth not our prayers, and that God is
not; therefore I thought I will cast off praying, and run away. I did not believe in God; my heart said, I shall die, whether I pray, or not pray, all is one: Then I heard that praying was the way to Everlasting Life, but yet I regarded not praying, I thought of running away, and yet I thought, whether I go or stay I shall die, and therefore I was troubled, but I did not pray: Afterward I was at work▪ and my head was broken in the Saw-pit, and then I knew God was an∣gry with me, because I prayed not; and then I did much know my sins, I thought surely God is angry; I remembred that I had heard that Word preached, Watch, for ye know not the hour that the Son of Man com∣eth; this I remembred when my head was broken, I heard that God made all the world, and Adam, and set Adam in Paradise, and bid him eat of all the Trees, saving of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, if he eat thereof he should die; but Adam did eat thereof, and died; then my heart believed, surely God is, and he made the world, and man, and me. I heard Gen. 1. God said, Let us make man in our own Image, and let him have dominion over all the creatures: Then my heart believed, sure God is good to man, and man is a sinner against God; and therefore God is angry with me for my sins. I heard that God formed man of the dust of the earth, and breathed into him the breath of Life; and then my heart said, surely God made the world, and man, and me, and all things, and my heart believed: And now I know God is angry with me; now I will pray to God as long as I live, and no more return to sin, but I will do Gods Word all my daies. Again, I heard that God made Adam sleep,
and took out of him a rib, made it a woman, and brought her to man; then I thought, sure God made us, and the world, and these great works shew, that there is a God. Again, I heard that God called her the Mother of all living, and by that means we have life, and then I believed that God made us; and therefore I will pray to God as long as I live, and no more cast it off. Again, I heard Gen. 6. that God saw the sin of man, that it was great, and that all the thoughts and imaginations of his heart are only evil continually; and therefore God was angry, and repented that he had made man, and therefore drowned the world, and every living creature; he caused it to rain fourty dayes on the earth; then my heart said, sure there is a God, and he will perform all his threatnings, he is God, and therefore he will do it. Again, I heard that God found Noah righteous, and he found favour in his sight; he believed in God, and did obey his Word, and God saved him: Then my heart desired to believe that God is, and to pray unto him. Again, I heard Gen. 19. that the Angels of God came to Lot in Sodom, and de∣livered just Lot, but did burn up with the wicked Sodo∣mites with fire from heaven, who had cast off praying to God, and did commit great sins against God; therefore I saw that I had deserved to be burnt, be∣cause I had done their sins: And when God sent his Angels, and did deliver just Lot, and then the rest were burnt, then I saw in my heart, sure God is mer∣ciful to them that love him; and therefore my heart said, I will no more return to sin, but I will follow God; but yet, sometimes I doubted, but I believed the mercy of God, according to that I heard, Mat. 1.
she called his Name Jesus, for he saveth his people from their sins: Then my heart thought, surely it is true, that Christ is the Son of God, and was made man, and is merciful; but yet I still did doubt whether Christ was the Son of God. Again, I heard Mat. 3. Repent, for the Kingdome of Heaven is at hand. And again, The voice of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight: My heart said, I desire to repent, and to make ready my heart for God, that I may have mercy and pardon in Christ Jesus. Again, the word saith, The Tree that brings not forth good fruit, is cut down, and cast into the fire: My heart said; sure so is my heart, and I have deserved to be cast into the fire; I have brought forth such fruits as may justly cut me down. Again, I heard the word of Christ, He that heareth the Word, and doeth it, shall be blessed: Then my heart said, I have deserved not to be pardoned, but I beg for mercy. Again, the word saith, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: My heart said, sure God is merciful to send his own Son, and Christ is merciful that he came and died for us. Again, I heard that the Tempter came to Christ, and said, If thou be the Son of God, make these stones bread: But Christ said, man liveth not by bread only, but by every word which cometh out of the mouth of God: Then I believed that Christ was the Son of God, and that my Soul liveth not by bread, but by the Word of God. Again, Mat. 8. the Leper came to Christ, and said, Lord if thou wilt, thou canst make me whole, and Ie∣sus touched him, and he was healed: Then my heart said, surely Christ is the Son of God, and he only can heal my sins. Again, I heard in Mat. 6. If ye forgive one ano∣ther,
God forgiveth you: Then my heart said, I desire to do this, else God will be angry with me. Again, I heard Mat. 9. all diseased came to Christ, the blind, halt, &c and he healed them; therefore I believed that he was the Son of God, and I begged of Christ to pardon my sins, and save me, because sure he is Christ the Son of God. Again, the word saies, Not every one that saith Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome, but he that doth the will of my Father: Then my heart said, I do fear, because I do very weakly obey the Word of God; and therefore Christ saith, Depart ye workers of iniquity: My heart said, such an one am I but now I cry to, and trust to Christ, to pardon all my sins. A∣gain, I heard Mat. 11. that Christ said Capernaum was lifted up to heaven by the Gospel, but should be cast down to hell, for refusing it: I thought I did now pray, i I now fall off I shall perish. And again, Christ saith, It shall be easier for Tyre and Sidon in that day: Then my heart said, I have deserved the worst of Gods wrath, for I believed not the great works of God; and therefore I desire pardon of all my sins, and to for∣sake all my sins, and to pray to Christ as long as I live. Again, I heard Mat. 5. That Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot or tittle of the Word of God, but all shall be fulfilled: Therefore my heart did desire, that I may both hear and do the Word of God, which will never perish. Again, I heard Mat. 16 Christ saith, Who say ye that I am? Peter said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God; Christ said, Blessed art thou Peter, flesh and blood hath not revealed this to thee, but my Father, and on this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it: Therefore my
heart believed that God helped me to receive Christ, and I desire to take that promise to Peter, and my heart joyed more and more in Christ, and in the Word of God. Again, I heard Mat. 26. Iesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it, and said, Take eat, this is my body which is broken for you, and likewise the Cup, &c. saying, This is my blood in the New Testament, which was shed for remission of sins, &c. My heart said, sure Christ is full of love, and hath given us great mercy, and I desire to partake of it. Again, the wick∣ed did kill Christ, but he rose again, and ascended to heaven; then my heart believed Christ. Again, I heard Iohn 14. No man cometh to the Father, but by me: My heart said, so be it Lord; I desire to come to God by Christ; and I said, Why did the wicked kill Christ? My heart said. I believe that Christ died for my sin; and therefore I desire to believe in Christ: Then my heart did joy in Christ, and to heartle Word of God; but yet to this day I have doubts in my heart, my heart is weak to this day: And now I know that in six daies God made the world, and before that God I desire to confess my sins, and forsake them, and no more to do them. Sometimes my heart is in an ill frame, and lo∣veth sin, and my heart hateth good; therefore I desire the free Mercy of Christ to hold and keep my Soul.
When he had finished, and I had read before the assembly this confession of his, we called upon the witnesses to co-attest. Who did in the same order as before express themseves to the like purpose. Only when we called for Tho: Stanton his sonnes, they were not pre∣sent, nor did they any more appeare in the Congregation, to attest the Indians confes∣sions all the day. Ponampiam He was next called forth, and thus spake. I Confess my sinnes before the Lord, and his people this day. While my Father lived, and I was young, I was at play, and my Father rebuked me, and said, we shall all die shortly. [In private we asked him what ground or reason moved his Father so to speak? he answered, it was when the English were new come o∣ver, and he thinketh that his Father had heard that Mr Wilson had spoken of the flood of Noah, how God drowned all the world for the sinnes of the people.] Then I was troubled, and thought sure what God saith, shall be, and not what man saith; but I quick∣ly forgot this, and thought not of any good. That same Winter the pox came; all my kindred died, on∣ly
my Mother and I lived, we came to Cohannit, by Dorchester, where I lived till I was a man, and marri∣ed. All those daies I sinned, and prayed to all gods, and did as others did, there I lived till the Minister came to teach us. When I heard that they prayed, my heart desired it not. Sometime I prayed among them, and sometime I neglected it. I feared to pray because of the Sachems, therefore I put it off, for the fear of man. Afterward I considered in my heart, to pray to God, not because I loved the word, but for other reasons. I heard that Word, Mal. 1. From the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering, for my name shall be great among the heathen, saith the Lord of hosts. Then I was troubled in my thoughts about running away, yet then I thought if I should go to another place, they must pray also, and therefore I cannot flie from praying to God, therefore I tarried, and when others prayed, I prayed with them, only I still feared man; after I heard the same word again, to perswade us to pray to God; and I did so, but not for Gods sake, only it was before man. I re∣membred the Sabbath, and I heard Mr Mathews also preach of it, and therefore I thought I would keep the Sabbath, but still I feared man. Upon a Sabbath, they wished me to teach what I remembred, that the Mini∣ster had taught. I did so, and we had talk about what I said, and we fell out. Thereupon I went away, and left praying to God. I went into the Countrey, but I remembred my wife and children, and quickly returned, but not for Gods sake. Again the Minister
preached on 1 Chron. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my son know the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a per∣fect heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord search∣eth all hearts, and understandeth all the imagination of the thoughts; if thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. This greatly troubled me, because I had left praying to God, and I had deserved eternall wrath. Then I desired to pray, I begged mercy, but I knew not what to do, for my sins were many, my heart was full of originall sin, and my heart was often full of anger; but then I was an∣gry at my self, for I found my heart quickly carried af∣ter sin. Afterward, through the free mercy of God, I heard that word, He that penitently believeth in Christ shall be pardoned and saved; then my heart did beg ear∣nestly for pardon and mercy. I heard Ioh. 15. Whatever ye ask the Father in my name, he will give it you; therefore my heart did now greatly beg for mercy in Christ and pardon. Afterward I heard Mat. 5. 28. Who ever looketh upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed a∣dultery in his heart. Then my heart was troubled, be∣cause many were my sins, in my eies, and heart, and a∣ctions too. My heart did love the having of two wives, and other lusts of that kind: Then Satan said to me, You are a great sinner, and God will not pardon you, therefore cast off praying, and run away, it is a vain thing for you to pray. Here you want land, but in the Countrey there is land enough, and riches abundance, therefore pray no more. My heart did almost like it, but I heard that word, Mat 4. Satan tempted Christ, and shewed him the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory there∣of, and promised to give them to him, if he would worship
him. Then my heart said, that even thus Satan tempteth me to cast off praying to God; and therefore my heart desired to believe that word of Christ, Thou shalt wor∣ship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. Then I prayed again, but still I was full of sin, and very weak I was, and I loved sin. Again I heard, Ioh. 14. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, no man cometh un∣to the Father but by me. Then I fully saw that Christ only is our Redeemer, and Saviour, and I desire to be∣lieve in Christ; and my heart said, that nothing that I can do can save me, only Christ: therefore I beg for Christ, and a part in him. Then said my heart, I give my heart and my self to Christ, and my wife and chil∣dren, let him do with us what he will. Then my mo∣ther and two children died, and my heart said, What Christ will do, so be it; I have given them to him, and I begged pardon and mercy, if God will please to pardon me a poor sinner, blessed be his name. When I had read this Confession in the Assem∣bly, we called upon the witnesses, as before we did, whose answer was like as before it was. John Speen Hee was next called forth, and thus spake. I Confess my sins this day before the Lord, and not only before God, but before all these people. Be∣fore I prayed, verily I was a great sinner, yea, in my mothers womb I was a sinner: my sins are such as not
only God knows, but people also know them. Before our praying, I did thorowly sin, and did commit all sins; and now I confess these my sins before God. After I prayed, I did alos live in sin. At first when I prayed, I did not worship God, nor believe in Christ; but I did therefore pray, because my brothers, and friends, and Waban, and the rest did pray, for their sakes I prayed. And again I therefore prayed, because many English knew me, that I might please them; and because I saw the English took much ground, and I thought if I prayed, the English would not take away my ground, for these causes I prayed. When I prayed, it was but with my mouth, yet I thought I do well e∣nough in that I pray thus, and I thought, that for it God will pardon all my sins; and I thought that my praying was good enough. But yet again I sinned, and did the like sins as before, only I did outwardly pray, but I mourned not for my sins. I thought, if we pray and leave Pauwauing, who shall make us well when we are sick. But again, I thought man could not make us well, because he must die himself, and there∣fore Pauwauing is a vain thing, and they die though they Pauwau. But still my heart did not believe pray∣ing to God: then I heard that word, Repent and be∣lieve; and if we repent and believe, God will pardon all our sins. Then sometimes I repented, yet again quick∣ly I committed sin; and sometimes I thought I am throughly a sinner. I heard that God made the world, and all things in it, and lastly man, and that God for∣med him of the dust of the earth, and breathed into him the breath of life, and he became a living soul, and that God made a Covenant with Adam, that he
should eat of all the Trees of the Garden, save one in the midst of the Garden, and if he eat of that Tree, he should die. Then I understood that Adam sinned, & fell, and thereby I uneerstood that I became a sinner, born in sin, my heart full of sin, and God will not pardon sinners; and yet again I sinned, and therefore I fea∣red that God will not pardon me, because more and more I sinned: and thus I sinned after praying, as well as before praying. When they chose Rulers, and chose my brother, and not me, my heart was in an evil frame, and then I thought sure I am a great sinner, and yet still I was more and more a sinner. After my bro∣thers loved me still, and then I repented of my sins, but not for Gods sake, but for my brothers sake; then I desired to pray as long as I live. My brother died, which troubled me; the people said, Be you in your brothers place: then my heart thought, I will no more do as I had done, but sure I was weak, my praying was but words, I was a great sinner. After this, a while since I heard that word, Mat. 12. The unclean spirit be∣ing cast out of a man, he walketh about seeking rest and findeth none; then hee returneth and bringeth 7 other spi∣rits with him worse then himself, and the end of that man is worse then his beginning. When I heard this, my heart feared. I thought now I repent of my many sins, for verily I am a great sinner, & I have offended, I am 7 times worse then before I prayed; then I repented. Again I heard that Word, He that penitently believeth shall be saved, and then my heart did desire to repent and believe, then I thought that men will not forgive me, and therefore it is not good to abide in this place, but I remembred that I had learned to read the Word,
and if I should forsake my friends, I should lose the Word of God. Then I heard that Word, Repent, for the Kingdome of Heaven is at hand, my heart said ô let it be so, and then my heart rested; but yet quickly it was unquiet again. Then I did strongly desire to re∣pent of my sinnes. I heard that Word, that God Sow∣ed good seed, but evill seed was sowen by the Enemy, and such were in my heart, and as in my field there were many roots, and weeds which spoyled the corne, and I plucked them up, and cast them out; my heart said, verily just so is my heart, the Word is but a little in my heart, and there be many ill roots in me, and there∣fore God may justly cast me out from among his peo∣ple, because of my many sinnes. Then my heart said, I desire to pray to God as long as I live, and now I forsake my sins, who have been a great sinner. Now I beg of Christ, O give me thy spirit, that I may con∣fess my sins before God, and not only before men; a∣gain I remember that I cannot pardon or help my self, but only Christ must help me. Again I heard that Word, All manner of sin shall be forgiven to a man, but the sin against the Holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come. Then my heart feared, because many and great were my sins since I prayed to God, and I cried to God for mercy and pardon: and then I thought I will pray to God as long as I live. But verily I am a sinner, for I am guilty not only of A∣dams sin, but of my own sins also, and they are many. I remember that in Catechisme I learn, that God made a Covenant of works with Adam, Do the Com∣mands, and thou shalt live, and thy seed also; but if thou sin, thou shalt die, and thy seed also; therefore by that I
know I am a sinner, and have deserved to die. Then I crie to God, O God have mercy upon me, and par∣don me. Again, I heard of the mercy of God, but I am forgetfull, and cannot remember Gods mercies to me. God made a Covenant with Abraham and said, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, then my heart said, O let it be so to me O Lord. And now Abraham is in heaven, who believed, and kept Gods Covenant; So I, if I believe and keep Gods Cove∣nant, God will have mercy on me. I remembred the Covenant of Circumcision to him, and all his family; and such a Covenant I desire for me and mine. Again I heard, Mat. 3. In those daies Iohn baptized in Ior∣dan: saying, Repent for the Kingdome of God is at hand. When I heard this my heart said, the same is now with us, not Abrahams signe but baptisme, and therefore I desire to repent, and Confess before God, and be∣fore the Church: and I desire not only to confess, but to have repentance, and faith, that I may have grace, mercy, and pardon: and such repentance as workes obedience. Again, the same Word saith, vers. 6. They were baptized confessing their sins; So I desire to do. I do confess before God, and desire to cast off, and forsake my sins, and to go to Christ. The pro∣mise of pardon is to them that penitently believe, and rest on Christ. In the same Baptism of Iohn, he said, I baptize you with water, but he that cometh after me, is mightier then I, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire. Now this Baptism I desire, and not to receive the signe in vain: I desire to purge out evill thoughts, and therefore I confess these sins before God, that they may be purged, and I desire the spirit of God
may dwell in me for ever, to turn me to Christ. I can∣not of my self do any of these things, but only Christ Jesus can by his spirit in me. Again I heard another word, As the Eagles are about a carkass, so believers come to Christ: then my heart said, So be it Oh Lord; when I receive the Covenant of God, I am like the Eagles; when I come to Christ, I desire not to come in vain; but if I feed not, I shall die, my soul will die. Then I greatly begged that I might feed my soul on Christ; and Oh Christ send thy spirit into my heart, that I may not only know, but do the Word of God. Again, Christ, near his death, took bread, and blest it, and broke it, and gave it to his dis∣ciples, and said, Take yee, eat yee, this is my Body which was broken for you: And so also he did the Cup, and said, Drink yee of it, this is the Cup of my blood in the New Testament which is shed for the remission of sins. Now this believers in Christ must do, not only to eat Bread, and to take the Sign, but soul food: there∣fore Christ sending his spirit, and helping me, I desire to receive the Sign, not in vain, but to help my faith. When I had read this Confession in the Assembly, we called upon the witnesses, (as before wee did) whose answer was to the like purpose as before.
Wutasakompauin He was next called forth, who thus spake. HElp me Oh Jesus Christ, to confess before the Lord; Oh I am full of sin, because Adams sin made mine, and so was a sinner in my mothers womb. When I was a youth I found many sins, and after I was grown up, I did the same alwaies, all the daies of my life I lived in sin. After the English came, I went to their houses; they would teach me a∣bout God, but I hated it, and went out, I did not love such teaching. Afterward the Minister taught, and at first Waban perswaded me to pray, and taught us; I did not at first like it, yet afterward I did. Four years the Minister came to Noonantam; I came, but I only came, I lost all he taught. After I considered one word; the Minister said, That God sent him to teach us; then I thought surely there is a God, therefore I must believe and pray: a little I believed, but when I heard, I did only outwardly hear. After, my wife and children died, and then I almost cast off praying. I had ano∣ther wife, and she died also; and then my heart said, Surely God is angry with me, who doth thus afflict me. Then I heard that word, Mat. 22. God made a Feast, and invited his Guests, and they would not come, and therefore God was angry with them: So did I; for I came not to the Word of God, when he called me, I cared not for the Feast of Christ. Again, after many of my friends were destroyed, I thought
it was because they prayed not to God, therefore I fea∣red that God is angry with me also, because of his punishments. I fear, I believe not Christ; and my heart feareth, because of my sins; daily I break Gods Commands. Another Word I heard, Mat. 5. Bles∣sed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied; this is the Word of Christ, and I desire to hunger for Christ, and begged O Christ help me. Again, I remembred that Word, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; my heart saith, O Christ help me to be so, that cleane may be my heart. Again, I heard that Word, Blessed are the peace-makers, for they shall be called the Children of God; then my heart thought, O that I had peace with God in Christ, that I might have that blessing; and there∣fore I now confess my sins before God, and I beg mercy from God in Jesus Christ. When I had read this short confession, (for the day spent, and brevity was called for) we called upon the witnesses who spake as formerly. Monotunkquanit. He was next called, who thus spake. I Have heard the word, and prayed to God several yeares. And I confess that before I prayed, I was full of sin, and yet I do not know my sins. I thought they were all good waies, and therefore I did them. I knew not the Sabbath, nor Lecture daies, nor any good, only I knew wild Actions, daily I desired falshood,
vile actions, singing Indian songs, these things I de∣sired to do: but all good things I was ignorant of, and very much I sinned, daily. Then I heard of praying to God. I came to Cohannit at Dorchester, from Nip∣muk where I lived, but my heart laughed at praying, and said its a vain action, only those actions that I was bred up in, I liked and esteemed, but these new things I derided. The Sachims disliked it, and therefore so did I. The rich men disliked it, and therefore so did I. I believed not, that God is; I went to Cohannit, not for praying, but to gather clams: When I came thi∣ther, they exhorted me to pray: and said, The Minister cometh to morrow to teach, it is lecture day. I desired to see him: he came, they met together. I went, and carried my son Samuel: I saw the Minister, he called my son; asked him, Who made you; they bid him say God; but I had not so taught him. He asked, whose son he was, they said mine: he said, do you pray to God? I said no, for I am a poore man, and naked: they that pray are cloathed. Therefore I will not pray, can poore men pray? Therefore I would not pray: I went home. Then Waban and Totherswamp came to my house, and taught me to pray. They intreated me, now pray to God; My heart liked it not. They said, God is a great God, and made all the World. I said, who is witness of that? They said, the Minister will answer you. A∣gain, they taught me the Commandments of God; but I did not believe. Totherswamp promised to come a∣gain, he did so; and said, now pray to God, because God is good. I thought it a teadious thing to pray to God. Then he strongly intreated me: I said I will try; but not for praying, but in vain. Then my kindred said,
praying is a vain thing, why will you pray? therefore returne again: then I went, and prayed. When I first came, Waban taught that Word. The night is farre spent, the day is as hand, therefore let us cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the Armour of light. My heart asked what are dark workes? They answered, sianes; and what is day? they answered, praying to God, and the wisdome of the Word is light: And this is now almost come unto us. Then my heart smile, I will pray to God. Again, I heard the Minister who said, these words, Thou shalt have no other Gods but me; thou shalt not make to thy selfe any graven Image, nor the like∣ness of any thing in Heaven above, in the earth below, in the waters under the earth: thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them; Then my heart said, that I did worship many false gods, therefore if I pray, it may be God will kill me: but they said no, he is a good God; then I prayed, and then my kindred hindred me. Therefore my heart said, If my kindred pray, then I will pray. Then I was taught more, and I did heare the Word, that God made Adam of the dust, and made him sleep, and took out a rib, and made a woman, and thus God made man. My heart said, It may be God made English men, but not us poore naked men, as we are of a strange language; and therefore I doubt∣ed to pray. Then I heard of Nimrod his building of Babel, and that God was angry, made strange to each other their language, and brake their work: Then my heart said, Surely so it is, as I did believe. Again I heard, that God found one man just, Noah, and saved him in his Ark, and did drown the world: then my heart said, I desire that God may find many just persons with us,
therefore I pray to God: then I more prayed. Again I heard, that God made a Covenant with Abraham and his seed, to be their God. My heart said, so let it be: I desire to be in this Covenant of God, and to pray so long as I live. I thought, if I do well, God will par∣don all my sinnes: the Minister said no; If you do all good, as perfectly, yet God will not pardon: God will pardon, only for Iesus Christ his sake. Then I be∣lieved Iesus Christ was both God and man, and made peace betwixt God and man: Christ did for us all the Com∣mandments of God, and died for us, he payed death for us; and therefore for his sake God will pardon us, if we believe in Christ. I heard that which Mat. 7. Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened, &c. Then my heart said, I will pray as long as I live, and knock at heaven dore. Again I heard that word, Enter in at the streight gate, &c. My heart said, Sure it is so, narrow and hard is the way to Heaven, broad and easy is the way to hell; I desire to walk in the narrow way to heaven. Again, Christ died for us, and thereby saveth us; and saith, Come to me all that are weary, and I will give you rest. Then my heart said, Great is my weariness, for many are my sinnes, and I desire rest in Christ. I heard that Christ only is our redeemer and Saviour, my heart did much joy in it; and I desired to pray and heare the Word as long as I live. Another Word of Christ I heard, Whoever forsaketh father or mother, or brother or lands for my sake, &c. My heart said, ô Lord let it be so, I have for Christ his sake left all, and come to pray. And I desire now to confess before the Church of Roxbury, and do submit to your government, and Gods Ordinances among you. He was going on, but
shortness of time made me take him off. When I had read this confession, and the witnesses had spoke as before, some of the Elders present, did move that seeing there be two more to speak, and the time streight; and seeing Mr Peirson had in private taken in writing their confessions, which they perceived by his testi∣mony, to be for substance the same which they ex∣pressed in publick; What if the Assembly should heare Mr Peirson read those two remaining confessi∣ons, according as he had taken them? The motion was acceptable to the Assembly, and he did read them, which are as followeth. Piumbuhhou. First, THis I say in the presence of God, and in your presence, Verily I knew not how or what to confess or God, before I prayed. I knew not who gave me life and being, but I thought my life was of my self. I confess I was born in sin, my Parents were sinners, and I thought I had life from none but my Parents, therefore my sins were very great: from the first time that I saw light, untill this day, I do no∣thing else but sin; hard is my heart, proud is my heart, and hypocriticall: I do hypocriticall acts, to this day. I act foolishly, and deceitfully; therefore so many are my sinnes, that I am not able to express them; only this I say, that I am naught. Then I heard that Waban prayed, and they said to me, pray to God: but I ha∣ted it, for I had a wife, and many children, and there∣fore
I cared not for praying. I thought if they were any of them sick, the Pauwaus could make them well, therefore I believed not Waban, when he exhorted me to pray to God. Then my wife and children died: then my afflicted poore heart came in, and the Mini∣ster came to me and said, pray to God, because God afflicteth and tryeth you; my heart said, when the Mi∣nister spake to me, let it be as you say, that God may shew me that mercy: then my heart said, I will pray to God, from henceforth, as long as I live. Then I heard the Minister Preach of the great works of God, in making Heaven and Earth, and therefore fear the great punishments of God; and because my heart so feared, and condemned me, therefore I did believe that God is, who had punished me, and took away my children. Again, I heard from Mat. 5. Christ saith, Blessed are the poore in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdome of God: and blessed are the mercifull, for they shall find mercy; my heart said, I am a poore man, and there∣fore I will pray to God so long as I live: and I desire to find mercy with God. Again, now my heart saith, I am weak and doubting, and full of misbelief. A∣gain, I heard that Word of Christ, which saith, Come unto me all yee that are weary and heavy laden, and yee shall find rest; my heart said, be it so O Lord: and now I will pray to God, as long as I live; my heart said, surely I am greatly laden with many, and great sins: and therefore I will go to Christ, and pray unto him, as long as I live. Again, Christ saith, Take up my hur∣den, and learne of me, for I am humble and meeke; then my heart said, surely I am a great sinner, and therefore I desire to learne of Christ, and to follow him. Again
Christ faith, Yee shall find rest to your soul; and there∣fore my soul desired to pray as long as I live, that I may find rest to my soul in Christ. Again, my heart did gladly hear the Word of Christ, and the great redemption of Christ. Again, I learned in a Cate∣chism, that Christ sendeth his Spirit into my heart, to break it, to make it repent, to convert me, to cause me to believe: my heart said, therefore I desire to pray to God, and to believe for pardon, and adoption, and peace with God. Then hearing of the mercy of Christ, my heart said, I am like a dead man, and therefore I desire to be with Christ as long as I live: my heart did not know how to Convert, and turn to God, therefore my heart did gladly pray to God for it; my heart did desire to pray, because I heard, Christ is our redeemer, and doth deliver our soules. I cannot deliver my selfe, therefore I desire that Christ may be my deliverer: therefore I betrust my soul with Christ as long as I live; and because Christ is my mercifull God, therefore let him do with my soul what he will.
When Mr Peirson had read this Confession, he was desired to go on, and read the last, which was Wabans Confession, and is as followeth. Waban. First, I Confess, that before I prayed, it was hard to love another fashion then my old course: my Parents were sinners, and in my Mothers belly I was in sin: after I was born, the same way of sin I followed. When I was a child I grew up in sin, and I did not know that they were sins, but now of late I know them; in my youth also, in the same sins I lived, and did not know them to be so, but by the reme∣brance of my waies, I do remember my sins, and hereby I am made to understand, that my Parents taught me to love sin. And after they were dead, o∣thers taught me to sin: I liked to be taught to com∣mit sin; those that taught me, said to me, Choose to be a Pauwau: they said, If you be a Pauwau, you may make others to live; and if you he a Pauwau, God will blesse you, and make you rich, and a man like God. Then I desired so to do: also I alwaies desited other sins, for my heart did desire to grow up in those sins, alwaies lust I desired, alwaies my heart labo∣red and desired to know how to adde to, and to mul∣tiply my sins. Thus it came to pass that I knew abun∣dance
of sins, before I knew my waies were sin. When the English came hither, they said, when I came to the Englist houses, that I loved the Devil: then I was very angry, and my words were, You know the Devil: I do not know the Devil, and presently I would go out of the house: Sometime they spake meekly to me, and would say, God is in heaven, and he is a good God: yet I regarded not these words, but strongly I loved my sins: it was hard for me to believe what the English said: after many yeares, I sometime believed a word, but I left not my sin. When I began to understand more, I began to doubt, but I desired not Conversion from sin. Afterward, when the English taught me, I would sit still, because they would give me good vi∣ctuals; then I sometimes thought, certainly God is in heaven: then my thoughts said, It may be I have sinned. Again I thought, if I prayed, God could not under∣stand mee; then I found it hard to believe, and love God, because I was almost an old man, because I thought, if any could read the book, he would love God. I asked Mr Iackson, Whether God knew our language? Hee answered, Yea: God knoweth all languages in the world, and therefore now pray unto God; then I first thought, I will pray unto God; a little I thought of praying; sometimes I would a lit∣tle pray when I eat; about that time you came to teach us; then I remembred the Word, Glad tidings was sent us from Heaven; then my heart said, Now I will pray, because the Minister is come to my house, now I heard the Word of God. Then you called the Children to Catechism: and one que∣stion
is, Who redeemed you? then you taught, that Christ died for our sinnes. Then my heart thought, that Christ is a very great life-giving God. Then I feared not Pauwaus, nor loved them; and the Mini∣ster taught, that we must take heed of all these sins. Then my heart said, I will leave off my sins; and again my heart said, I will pray to God as long as I live. Further you taught, that Christ died for sin, was bury∣ed, rose again, ascended: then my heart hoped and de∣sired, Oh that it might be so, that I might have eter∣nall life by Christ, because Christ is a great life-giving God. But then I found that I did not understand right words, and therefore I walked not in the right way: when the Word of God said, Six daies shalt thou labour, then I was strong, yet I did not labour; and I was soon weary of praying to God: and therefore I saw, I found not the right way unto righteousness; therefore now I verily see that I am a sinner, and did not believe: my heart feared because of my great sins, and my heart feareth that I do not yet much know the Word of God. Sometime my heart saith I believe, I am a believer: but my heart wandereth away, and the deceits of my heart I sometime know, and my po∣verty I know, but my heart careth not for that; I re∣ject riches, but my heart saith strongly, I will pray to God so long as I live; I do not throughly know the va∣nity of my mind. I have heard the Word but belie∣ved it not. I remember that Word of Christ, the Pharisees said, Why doth you Master eat with Publicans and sinners: Christ said, Those that are not sick need not the Physitian, but they that are sick. My heart said, sure I do not need the Physitian: but my desire is now, that
I may need him, and spirituall life by him. Again, I heard that Word of Christ, A leper came to Christ, and worshiped him, saying, Lord if thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane: and Christ touched him, and he was per∣fectly healed. Then my heart said, that outward heal∣ing which he had, my soul desireth, that I may have it in my soul: for Christ healeth the outward diseases of the body, but especially the inward filth of the soul; this I desire may be healed. Again I heard that Word, go learn what that meaneth, I desire mercy and not sa∣crifice: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to re∣pentance. Then my heart said, my own righteousness cannot obtain mercy for me; then my heart said, Oh I fear that Christ the truest righteousness is not in my heart: I am almost ready to die; and now I desire to know Christ. WHen Mr Peirson had done reading these two last Confessions. Mr Wilson spake to this pur∣pose, though they have all spoken well of Jesus Christ, in their Confessions, and especially the last viz: Mono∣tunkani, yet he desired further to heare how they were instructed in the knowledge of Christ. This question touching Christ, I called Piumbathou to an∣swer, and his answer was to satisfaction: and then ma∣ny other Catecheticall questions were propounded, which would be too long to rehearse, as touching Grace, Ordinances, Sacraments, Baptisme and the Lords Supper: about Repentance and Faith, all which they readily answered, & so as that there was no reply.
Nishhko, answered the question what Faith is, Mr Allin asked him, whether he had that Faith in his heart, which he now spake off; to which after a pause, he an∣swered to this purpose, that he feared himself about it, and if he spake, he must say no! but he hoped in the Lords mercy that he would work it in him, and help him to believe. Then Mr Danforth said, I ask you Nishohkou this question, and answer me in English whether the same lusts which you have so much confessed, do not fol∣low you still; and what you do to resist them? I said that a question to the like purpose was asked him, when he made Confession in private, to which he an∣swered in broken English, if the Assembly pleased I would read that: but he was desired to answer now, and his answer was to this purpose; that the Word of God is all one like a sword: and he did with that, resist his temptations. He was asked further, if he did di∣ligently watch against his sins: he answered, he did not well know what a diligent watch is, but he hoped that Jesus Christ would keep him. Then Mr Danforth called Anthony and asked him, whether he believed that it was the duty of men to la∣bour six daies in the week? After a pause, he answer∣ed, he believed it was Gods command, but he con∣fessed he did not obey it so much as he ought to do; and saith Mr Danforth, that I would have asked you next, whether you obey it, for you ought to do so; and follow labour, and cloath your selfe and family better, and you ought to give towards the mainte∣nance of Gods Ordinances. After this I remember no more questions.
Then I declared to the Congregation, that they having heard their Confessions; if they thought meet, they might hear what testimonies we have to produce touching their Conversation, but it went not forward, and so we ceased the work, and Reverend Mr Wilson concluded with prayer. After the publick meeting, the messengers of the Churches met together, and considered what answer to give to our Church: and the vote among them all was, that as touching their Confessions, which was the work of the day, they were satisfactory, and they appeared in that respect, to be fit matter for Church estate. The End
THese are to testify to all men whom it may concern, That two of five Indian youths, viz. Cales and Ioel, that are instructed and educated in the Grammer School at Cambridge, were publiquely exa∣mined at the Commencement in Cam∣bridge (mon. 6. 9. 59.) concerning their progress in the learning of the Latine Tongue, out of Buchanans Translation of Davids Psalmes, and they gave good satisfaction unto our selves, and also to the Honorable Ma∣gistrates, and Reverend Elders that were present, and others that were judicious, as we have had opportu∣nity
to inquire off: and we conceive, that the other three Indian Youths, that are trained up in the same School, have made some competent proficien∣cy, for the short time that they have been with us: In witness whereof we have subscribed our hands. Camb. Sept. 6. 1659. Charles Chauncy Praesident of Ha∣ward Colledge in Cambridge. Elijah Corlet Lon∣dinensis olim & jam Ludimagister Can∣tabrigiensis.
