F1120 12621179 64518
Five remarkable passages, which have very lately hap∣pened betweene His MAIESTIE, And the High Court of PARLIAMENT. 1. The Humble Petition of the Gentry and Commons of York, pre∣sented to His Majesty, April 22. 1642. 2. His Majesties Message sent to the Parliament▪ April 24. 1642. concerning Sir Iohn Hotham's refusall to give His Majestie en∣trance into Hull. 3. The Parliaments resolution concerning the said Sir Ioh. Hotham 4. A Declaration from both Houses of Parliament concerning the stopping of passages between Hull and the Parliament. 5. The true Catalogue of all the names of the Divines approved of by both Houses of Parliament, for each severall County in this Kingdome of England and Wales; as fit persons to be consulted with by the Parliament, touching the Reformation of Church-Government, and the Liturgie. Together with an Order from both Houses to the same effect. 28. of Aprill 1642. London, Printed for F. Cowlet, and T. Bates.
Die Sabbati, 9 April. 1642. THe Lords and Commons doe declare, that they intend a due and necessarie reformation of the government & Li∣turgie of the Church, & take away nothing in the one or other, but what shall be evill, and justly offensive, or at least unnecessarie and burthensome: And for the better effe∣cting thereof, speedily to have consultation with godly and learned Divines. And be∣cause this will never of it selfe attaine the end sought therein, they will therefore use their utmost endevours to establish learned and preaching Ministers, with a good and sufficient maintenance thorowout the whole Kingdome, wherein many dark cor∣ners are miserably destitute of the meanes of Salvation, and many poore Ministers want necessarie provision. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Die Martis 26 April. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the Sheriffs of the Counties of York and Lincolne, and likewise the Lords Lieute∣tenants of the said Counties, and in their absence, their Deputies allowed by Parliament, and the Iustices of Peace, and all other his Majesties Of∣ficers, shall suppresse all Forces that shall be raised, or gathered together in thse Counties, either to force the towne of Hull; to stop the passages to, and from the same; or in any other way to disturb the peace of the King∣dome. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this Orde shall be printed and published forthwith. Io. Browne Cler. Parl.
To the Kings most Excellent Majestie. The humble Petition of the  and Commons of the Countie of YORK. Most Royall Soveraigne: ENcouraged by your Majesties many Te∣stimonies of Your gracious goodnesse to us and our Countie, which we can never sufficiently acknowledge; We in all du∣tie and loyaltie of heart addresse our selves to Your Sacred Majestie, besee∣ching You to cast Your eyes and thoughts upon the safetie of your own Person, and Your Princely Issue, and this whole Countie, a great meanes of which we conceive doth consist in the Arms and Ammunition at Hull, placed there by Your Princely care and charge, and since upon generall apprehension of dangers from forraine parts represented to your Majestie, thought fit as yet to be continued. We for our parts, conceiving our selves to be still in danger, doe most humbly beseech your Majestie that you will be pleased to take such course and order, that your Magazine may still there remaine, for the better securing of these and the rest of the Northerne parts. And the rather because we think it fit, that that part of the Kingdome should be best provided, where your Sacred Person doth reside, your Person being like Davids, The light of Israel, and more worth than ten thousands of us. Who shall daily pray, &c.
His Majesties Message sent to the Par∣liament, April 24. 1642. Concerning Sir Iohn Hothams Refusal to give His Majestie Entrance into Hull. HIs Majesty having received the Petition in∣closed from most of the chiefe Gentry neere about Yorke, desiring the stay of His Ma∣jesties Armes and Munition in His Maga∣zine at Hull, for the safety (not onely of his Majesties Person and children, but likewise of all these Northern parts: The manifold rumours of great Dangers inducing them to make their said supplication) thought it most fit to goe Himselfe in Person to His towne of Hull, to view his Armes and Muniti∣on there, that thereupon He might give directions, what part thereof might be necessary to remaine there, for the security and satisfaction of his Northerne Subjects, and what part thereof might bee spared for Ireland, the arming of his Majesties Scots Subjects that are to go thither, or to replenish his chiefest Maga∣zine of the Tower of London; Where being come, upon the 23 of this instant Aprill, much contrary to his expectation, he found all the Gates shut upon him, and the Bridges drawn up, by the expresse command of Sir Iohn Hotham, (who for the present commands a Garrison there) and from the walls flatly denyed His Majesty entrance into His said Town, the reason of the sayd denyall being as strange to his Majesty, as the thing it selfe, it be∣ing that he could not admit his Majesty without breach of trust to His Parliament; Which did the more incense his Majesties an∣ger against him, for that hee most seditiously and trayterously would have put his disobedience upon his Majesties Parliament; Which His Majesty being willing to cleare, demanded of him if he had the impudence to aver, that the Parliament had directed
him to deny his Majesty entrance and that if he had any such or∣der, that he should shew it in writing, for otherwise His Majesty could not beleeve it; which he could no way produce, but mali∣tiously made that false interpretation according to his own Infe∣rences, confessing that he had no such positive Order, which His Majesty was ever confident of: But his Majesty not willing to take so much pains in vain, offered to come into that His Towne onely with 20. horse, finding that the maine of his pretence lay, That His Majesties traine was able to command the Garrison: Notwithstanding, His Majesty was so desirous to go thither in a private way, that He gave warning thereof but overnight, which he refusing, but by way of condition (which His Majesty thought much below him) held it most necessary to declare him Traytour (unlesse upon better thoughts, he should yeeld obedience) which he doubly deserved, aswell for refusing entrance to his naturall Soveraigne, as by laying the reason thereof groundlesly and ma∣liciously upon his Parliament. One circumstance His Majesty cannot forget, that his Sonne the Duke of Yorke, and his Nephew the Prince Elector, having gone thither the day before, Sir Iohn Hotham delayed the letting of them out to His Majesty till after some consultation. Hereupon His Majesty hath thought it expedient to demand Iustice of His Parliament against the said Sir Iohn Hotham, to be exemplarily inflicted on him according to the Laws, and the rather because His Majesty would give them a fit occasion to free themselves of this imputation, by him so injuriously cast upon them, to the end His Majesty may have the easier way for the chastising of so high a disobedience.
The Names of those Divines that are nomi∣nated by the Knights and Brugesses of each County, for the Consultation, or Assembly. Bedfordshire. MAster Dillingham. Mr. Boldes. Buckinghamshire. Mr. Henry Wilkinson. Mr. Valentine. Berkshire. Dr. Twisse. Mr. Rayner. Cambridgeshire. Doctor Thomas Wincop. Mr. Thomas Goodwin. Cambridge University. Doctor Brounrig, Bishop. Doctor Ward. Cornwall. Master Gamon. Master Hicks. Cheshire. Master Iohn Lea. Master Thomas Case. Cumberland. Doctor Hoyle. Master Bridges. Durham. Master Iennison. Master Morton. Derbyshire. Doctor Love. Doctor Gouge. Devonshire. Master Pine. Master Whiting. Dorsetshire. Master White. Master Peele. Essex. Marshall Glocestershire. Master Mew. Master Dunning. Huntingtonshire. Master Backhurst. Master Philip Nye. Hartfordshire. Doctor Smith. Doctor Burges. Herefordshire. Master Greene. Master Gower. Kent. Master Wilson. Master Taylor. Lincolnshire. Master Tuckney. Master Coleman. Lancashire. Master Herles. Master Herrick. Leicestershire. Master Clayton. Master Gibs. Middlesex. Doctor Calibute Downing. Master Burroughs. London. Master Calamy. Master George Walker. Master Seaman. Master Caryll. Munmouthshire. Doctor Harris. Master George Morley. Northamptonshire. Master Edward Reynolds. Master Hall.
Nottinghamshire. Doctor Robert Saunderson. Master Foxcroft. Northumberland. Master Iohn Iackson. Master William Carter. Norfolke. Master Thoroughgood. Master Arrow-Smith. Oxfordshire. Master Robert Harris. Master Crosse. Oxford University. Archbishop of Armagh. Doctor Stiles. Rutlandshire. Master Samuel Gibson. Master Whitaker. Somersetshire. Master Samuel Crook. Master Cunnet. Shropshire. Master Edward Corbet. Master Hildersham. Surrey. Doctor Stainton. Doctor Daniel Featley. Staffordshire. Master Francis Cooke. Master Lightfoot. Hampshire. Master Langley. Master Tisdale. Suffolk. Master Tho. Young. Master Iohn Philips. Sussex. Master Pickering. Master Henry Nye. Westmorland. Master Hall. Master Hutton. Wiltshire. Master Henry Scudder. Master Baily. Worcestershire. Master Salmay Doctor Prideaux, Bishop. Warwickshire. Master Burges. Master Vines. Yorkshire. Master Levell. Master Michlethwait. Anglesey. Master Buckley. Brecknockshire. Doctor Temple. Cardiganshire. Master Jos. Shute. Carmarthenshire. Master Nichols. Carnarvanshire. Master Thomas Gataker. Denbyshire. Doctor Rich. Flintshire. Doctor Parsley. Glamorganshire. Master Tozer. Merioneth shire. Master Sprstow. Pembrookshire. Master Francis Channell. Montgomeryshire. Master Ellis. Radnorshire. Doctor Hackwell. Iland of Gernesy. Master de la Marse. Iland of Iernesey. Master de Lasser.
Die Martis 26. April 1642. Resolved upon the Question. THAT Sir Iohn Hotham Knight, according to this rela∣tion, hath done nothing but in obedience to the Com∣mand of both Houses of Parliament. Resolved upon the Question. That this declaring of Sir Iohn Hotham Traytor, being a Member of the House of Commons, is a high breach of the priviledge of Parliament. Resolved upon the Question. That this declaring of Sir Iohn Hotham Traitor without due processe of Law, is against the libertie of the Subject, and against the Law of the Land. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that these Votes shall∣be printed, and sent to the Sheriffes, and the Iustices of the Peace to be published in all the Market Townes of the Counties of York and Lincoln. Io. Brown Cler. Parliament. Die Martis 26. April 1642. IT is declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the stopping of the passages between Hull and the Parliament, and the intercepting of Messengers imployed from the Parlia∣ment to Hull, or from any that are in the Service of the Parlia∣ment, or any Letters whatsoever sent by any to, or from the Parliament, is a high breach of the priviledge of Parliament, which by the Lawes of this Kingdome, and the Protestation, we are bound to defend with our Lives and Fortunes, and to bring the violater to condigne punishment. And hereby all Lords Lieutenants, and their Deputies autho∣rised by the Ordinance of both houses of Parliament, all Sheriffs, Iustices, Majors, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Officers whatso∣ever, are required to give their uttermost aid and assistance to all that are imployed in the said Service, for their better and more speedee free and safe passage: And to apprehend all such as by co∣lour of any warrant or other authority whatsoever, shal endevour on  about to hinder any that are employed about the same, and them to apprehend, & in safe custody to send up to the Parliament. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this Declaration shall be forthwith printed and published. Iohn Browne Cler. Parl. FINIS.
