G100A R223618 99833908 38386
VOX SOLIS: OR, An ASTROLOGICAL DISCOURSE OF The great ECLIPSE of the SUN, which happened on June 22. 1666. in 10 deg. of the Watry signe Cancer. SHEWING What EFFECTS may most probably attend it, AND Unto what Persons, Kingdoms and Countries, they are chiefly Directed. By JOHN GADBURY, . With Allowance. Intended to have been publisht in his Ephemeris for this present year 1667. but prevented by reason of the late terrible Conflagration of London. Sol & Luna, post Deum, omnium viventium vita sunt. Hermes. digram of a solar ecclipse North East West South London, Printed by James Cotterel, for Eliz. Calvert, at the signe of the Black Spread-Eagle in Duck-lane. MDCLXVII.
To the TRUELY LEARNED, And most WORTHILY ACCOMPLISHED, Elias Ashmole, Of the Middle-Temple, Esq; Windsor-Herald, Comptroller of the Excise, and Keeper of the Medals and Antiqui∣ties belonging to his sacred Majestie King CHARLES the Second, &c. Most honour'd Sir! THe Astrologers of this Age and I∣sland, swarm to You, as their Pa∣tron, (for shelter and protection of Themselves and Books) as Bees to their Hive. It is an Argument of
true Sapience (I confess) to lodge the choicest Jewels, in the Noblest Cabinets: And the Worthiest Sciences, fare always best, with the most Honourable Mecoenas. Such Policie I approve of, and (although, at some times, (by reason of Tortuous interposures) I could not, yet) shall now, follow. For, when after-Ages shall understand, that I have made, not the meanest Additions to this Celestial Study; It may reasonably put them into Admiration, if not Astonishment, not to finde me, set with∣in some convenient distance of your honoura∣ble Acquaintance and Favour. 'Tis true, in the twilight of Great Britains hope, and Restauration by his Sacred Majesty, [when it was a Crime, either to be known Loyal, or to own any one of that (then-despi∣sed) inclination and Judgement] I, with ano∣ther, did present unto You, An Emendation of the Learned Hartgil's Astronomical Tables; which Book, You were pleased generously, not onely to accept, and approve of, but nobly to encourage us, to a farther Enquiry into the Mysteries of that Science we had then espou∣sed.
But singly, have I never yet payd my Ac∣knowledgements, or the honour I owe, unto your exquisite Skill in all Mathematical, Her∣metical, and Physical Learning; your emi∣nent acquaintance with the Constitutions, Cu∣stoms, and Manners of our own, and forraign Nations; your Admirable Knowledge in the Law, Heraldry, &c. as also, in all Politiques and Ethicks: Be pleased (learned Sir) to accept it here. I disdain to make you Patron of my Gall and Rudeness, as some (without a Blush) have lately done: or yet, to play the Parasite with You, and propound a Gain to my self, by this Undertaking. No: my Dedication of these few Sheets of Paper, proceeds (ex intimis Medullis) not from a Spurious, but Legiti∣mate honour and affection, and a desire to let the Learned, in times to come, know, That no Artist in this Age, had a more Cordial esteem for You, and your incomparable Vertues; or, could more readily acknowledge, your continu∣ed, and often-reiterated Favours, to the inge∣nious Students in all Learning, then He, who
assumes the boldness, (and accounts it his greatest Glory) to entitle himself (Honoured Sir) Your most humble, and most obliged Servant, JOHN GADBURY.
To the READER. THe Heavens of late years, have not been la∣den with more various Causes, and Monitors of ensuing Mischiefs, then the Earth hath been burdened with sutable Effects. No sooner have we been quit of one Evil, but our Ears have been terrified with the noise of another's approach; like that of Job's messengers. Poor Europe hath laboured under many of Israels heavie Judgements; perhaps, deserved them as much as she; for her Hy∣pocrisie, Pride, Rebellion, &c. And the two thun∣dering Verses in Deuteronomie, Chap. 28. v. 21, 22. have been notably fulfilled unto (almost) all the several Kingdoms and Countries therein: Faciet Jehova ut adhaerescat tibi Pestis, donec consum∣pserit te ex ea terra quo tu venturus es ad possi∣dendam eam jure haereditario. Percutiet te Jeho∣va tabe, calidaque, & aestuante ac adurente Febre, & siccitate & uridine, & morbo regio; quae per∣sequuntur te donec pereas. The late Sufferings of this Western part of the world, do eminently English the most of the Latine: We have been smitten with the Pestilence to pur∣pose; as also, with the Consumption, and Fever; with the Sword, and extreme Burning: yea, a dif∣ferent, and (perhaps) more dreadful Burning, then that mentioned in the Text. God of his mercy grant, we be not pursued with Blasting and Mildew
too, to make up the complement of our punishments, which doubtless are the just rewards of our Sins. A Learned Dr. Gell, in a Sermon in∣tituled, No∣ahs floud re∣turning, p. 15. Preacher observing the vitious incli∣nations of the men of this Age (some years since) parallels us with Sodom, thus: They of Sodom prefigured the men of this unclean generation; and must not we expect a like Judgement unto that of Sodom? And (when we call to minde the late strange providences) we may for ever hereafter believe it, for a divine and infallible Truth, That like Sins, have like Punishments. But there is hopes of a tree, (though cut down) that it may sprout again! and I have a more-then-ordinary reason to believe, (and I hope I do not deceive my self therein) that Englands afflictions are neer their period: and can therefore with the more confidence, adde this word of Comfort unto it, That the Famine, threatned by the late So∣lar Delinquium, is not likely to prove the tythe so sharp and cruel unto this Kingdom, as unto many other Kingdoms and Countries in this part of the world. [Jupiter is in Aries.] Yet I cannot say, that we shall be totally free, from the talons of that black and dreadful enemy. Deus avertat. So prayeth, the earnest Implorer of Englands peace and prosperity, Jo. Gadbury. Brick-Court, neer Deans yard Westminster, March 14. 1666/7.
A DISCOURSE Of the SUNS ECLIPSE Which happened on June 22. last past, in the morning. IN my Ephemeris for. this present year 1666, I de∣clared to the World my resolution to publish a Treatise of this great Solar Eclipse: which pro∣mise I had (according to engagement) discharged in my DIARY for the ensuing year 1667. ha∣ving much enlarged the same, and obtained License, thereof, for that very end and purpose. But the late dreadful Conflagration happening to London, wrought so great a destruction among the Statio∣ners and Printers in that Citie, (they suffering the most by the Tyrannical Flames, of any one Society whatso∣ever) that I was constrained to reduce my Annual Book to its old number of Sheets, and reserve my Discourse of the Eclipse to be printed apart by self. And conceiving it to be of convenient Caution and Consequence, not one∣ly
to England, but other parts of Europe, &c. I thought it proper, rather then stifle it, (after so much pains) to print it. For although the Eclipse it self be over, its ef∣fects are to come; and may continue among us (if Astrolo∣gie fail me not, as seldome it doth) these two years yet: (of which more anon.) I therefore presume this short Tractate will not appear like an unfortunate Guest, (post Festum) after the Table is clear'd; but very opportunely, for the Information and Advantage of such as are there∣by concerned. I need not (for an Exordium) acquaint you, that Ecli∣pses have been always attended with Astonishing Effects; or that at the sight of them, whole Armies have been smitten with amazement, fear, and horrour: or of the scorching Sum∣mers, unkinde Winters, destructions of Countries, ruines of Cities and Towns, the death of Kings and Great per∣sons, alterations of Governments, change of Laws, &c. that commonly accompany them. All these things I shall (at present) pretermit, and come to the Discourse intend∣ed; which I will consider, First, Astronomically. Secondly, Astrologically. In the Astronomical part, I shall first take notice of some Notable Observations that have been made of this Eclipse, by several eminent persons in different places; which I shall exhibit in the following Tabular form.
This Eclipse was observed in the following places. June 22. in the morning, 1666. At London. In Paris. At Madrid. In Southam∣pton Neer York. At Oxford.   H.M. H.M. H.M. H.M. H.M. H.M. Beginning at 5 43 5 45 5 0 5 25 5 34 5 27 The Middle of it 6 15 6 42 6 2 6 22 6 32 6 23 End thereof 7 37 7 43 7 5 7 23 7 30 7 24 Total Duration 1 54 1 58 2 5 1 58 1 56 1 57 Digits Eclipsed 7 4 7 50 7 46 7 22 7 18 7 15 The Reader need not much to wonder at the Differen∣ces of these Observations, if he do but consider they were taken in several places, where the Pole hath a different E∣levation; and that the Parallax might materially differ. Yet it seems a little strange, that there should be less diffe∣rence between those Observations made at London and Pa∣ris, then betwixt them made at London, and those at Sou∣thampton and Oxford. But the Errour thereof may be oc∣casion'd from the imperfection of the Instruments the Ar∣tists made use of; or else, for want of Exactness in the ob∣servers themselves: it being easier (in any thing) to be o∣vertaken by Errours and Mistakes, then to keep pace with Truth and Certainty; chiefly, in Astronomical Observa∣tions. With the most concurrent of these Observations, do the Rudolphine and Philolaick Tables agree; so also do those of my loving friend Mr. V. Wing, and our Country-man Mr. Jeremy Shackerly. The Ricciolan and Lansbergian, &c. are found to differ much, both in the beginning, continuation,
termination, and obscuration of this eminent and famous Eclipse. But next unto the safest Observations, do I prefer Mr. Wing's Tables, where you will finde this Solar deliquium   ho. min. sec.   To begin at 17.28.0. June 21. P.M. The visible Conjunction at 18.22.38. Middle of the Eclipse at 18.24.48. The End of it at 19.26.4. Total Duration 1.58.4. Digits Eclipsed 7.25.14. This premised, I shall in the next place consider (with Ptolomy) how many hours there are (on the day of the Defect) between Sun-rising and the middle-time of the Eclipse; unto which Astrologers always erect their Figure of heaven. For take notice (saith the same Author) how many hours the Sun is Eclipsed, for so many years shall be the duration of his Effect. Sun rises at 4 a clock in the morning. Interval between Sun-rising and the Middle of the E∣clipse is 2 ho. 25 min. o sec. The Duration, according to the best Observations, and Mr. Wing's Tables, is 1 ho. 58 min. o sec. This obtained, I work by this Analogie: As the length of the day on which the Eclipse happens, is to 365 days: so the interval between Sun-rising and the Middle of the Eclipse, is to the time ere its Effects begin to shew themselves. Demonstration.   Length of the day 16 ho. 20 min. or 1080 m. 30334237 365 days, or one year, 25622929 Interval between Sun-rising and the Middle of the Eclipse is 2 ho. 25 min. or 145 min. 21613680 The sum is 47236609 Time ere the Effects begin, 49 days. 16902372
Which 49 days numbred from the day of the Eclipse, viz. June 22. the Effects thereof initiate, or first begin to shew themselves, on the tenth day of August following. Now for the Continuation of the Effects, that is known from the Duration, which is two hours ferè; Ergo, they will continue in force neer two years from the time they first commence, viz. from August, anno 1666. until July, anno 1668. Thus much may serve for the Mathematical part: now I come to the Astrological. And therein I shal first pre∣sent you with the Figure of heaven erected to the Middle-time of this famous Eclipse, in the following form and shape; and afterward with the genuine signification there∣of. Longit. Solis   ♋ 10 d. 23 m. Asoentiō Recta Solis 101. 18 Temporis 276. 15 Med. Coeli sine Cir. 17. 33 Huc adde pro primo domo   90. 0 Summa totius addenda   107. 33 Ascentio Obliqua primae domus  
Thema Coelicum Eclipsis Solaris, 1666 D.H.M. Mens. Junii, 21.18.25. P.M. Sub Lat. 51 deg. 32 mi. ☽ à [] ♂ ad ☍ ♄. 17 deg. 33 min. 107 deg. 33 min. 107 deg. 33 min. {earth} 5.10. ☉ ☽ 10.23. ☿ 19.23 Aldebaran. ♊. 31. ♈ 19.2. Eridanus. ♃ 28.8. ♓ 20. ♋ 14. ♀ 28.41. ♌ 9.16. ☋ 9.16. Cor Leonis. ♍ 0. ♍ 20. ♂ 7.25. Spica Virg. ♎ 19.2. ♐ 3. ☋ 5.10. ♄ 17.54. ℞ ♑ 14. ♒ 9.16. ♓ 0. ♃ 28.8. ♓ 20. chart showing solar ecclipse The Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets in this Eclipse. ☉ is weak by 6 Testimonies. ♄ is strong by 3 Testimonies. ♃ is strong by 19 Testimonies. ♂ is strong by 6 Testimonies. ♀ is strong by 16 Testimonies. ☿ is strong by 21 Testimonies. ☽ is strong by 13 Testimonies. Hence it appears, that Mercury and Jupiter are Lords of this Eclipse, as having the greatest number of Testimonies in strength: the Sun (the Luminary eclipsed) is weak by 6 Arguments, and hath not one Fortitude either Essential or Accidental to assist him.
Judicium Astrologicum. IN this Ecliptical Figure, the Regal and fiery signe Leo a∣scends the Horoscope, and the Sun (the Dominator of that signe, and Luminary eclipsed) is posited in Cancer, a Cardinal-Tropical-Feminine signe, moveable and watry. As if many matters or things of most eminent note, that for divers ages past have been flourishing, fixed, or stative, are by this Solar Deliquium, portended subject to a strange kinde of instability, inconstancie, and fluctuation: and this most apparent in Islands, and among such Nations or People as are surrounded with, or chiefly live and inhabit by, and upon the Sea. The signe wherein the Defect hap∣pens, is the Horoscope of Holland, and the nest of the Ʋni∣ted Provinces, the Seigniory of Venice, Scotland, &c. and they may assure themselves they are concerned therein: of which more shall be said anon. It is the Moon, the lesser light, (or rather, a body that is opake, and hath no innate light at all) that thus Ecli∣pseth the Sun, the Royal Lamp of heaven; the glorious Fountain of Light, from whence she her self receives illu∣mination. I hope and pray, That no actions of Ingrati∣tude, correspondent to so unusual an Eclipse, may appear, or be perpetrated in any part of this our European world. The Moon Eclipseth the Sun, in her own dignities; in a place, where she hath power to triumph and tyrannize to purpose. The Sun (say Astrologers) signifies, the most il∣lustrious and glorious, of Persons and Things: the Moon, the basest, and most-to-be-contemned and despised. I could acquaint you with many such kinde of Eclipses, both of former and later times; and with the tristitious attendants of them: but I would not be thought Dolores renovare, to
renew old Sorrows, or awake the sleeping Errours of either our own, or any other Kingdom or Nation. A Signo deliquii sumitur judicium generis rerum afficicien∣dorum. Astrologers in giving Judgements upon the de∣fects of the Luminaries, say, That the Effects of them shall fall principally upon those kindes of men or things, which are signified by the signe wherein the Eclipse happens. Eclipsis Salis in ♋, ♏ aut ♓ obscurae, turbae ignobilis{que} ple∣beculae interi∣tus, diuturnae bellorum, sedi∣tiones, & a∣quatilium ma∣rinorum{que} & aliorum in ae∣quore degenti∣um magna per∣nicies. Procl. The signe wherein this famous Eclipse is celebrated (as you have already heard) is Cardinal-Moveable-Watery, and Foeminine. The learned Proclus saith, An Eclipse of the Sun in the Watery Triplicity (chiefly the diguities of the Moon, she having signification of the Popular multitude) denotes a rot or consumption of the vulgar sort of people, many rumours and discontents, great Seditions, Mutinies, and expe∣ctations of Wars; a destruction of Water-fowl, and death of Fishes; great Inundations, and overflowings of Sea-banks, drowning of many places; with many great and unheard-of mischiefs, acted and done by and upon the Waters. In secundo De∣cano, stuvios & fontes exsic∣cat, inconti∣nentiam, & petulantium mortalibus in∣tentar. Procl. And as very much damage and prejudice to some peo∣ple, parts or places, is probable to happen, by or upon the Waters, &c. so also it is very likely to fall out unto others, by reason of a want or searcity of Waters. And so saith the same Author, in these words;— When the Sun shall suf∣fer an Eclipse in the second Decanate of Cancer, Fountains and Rivers shall be dried up, and there will be a great want of waters; mach incontinencie among men and women doth also succeed; and a great deal of fraud, circumvention and deceit will be practised. But now, as this eminent Eclipse falls in a signe of the Watery Triplicity; so it happens in a Cardinal Tropical signe likewise. And all Astrologers consent, that Eclipses in Aequinoctial and Tropical (which are the onely Cardinal) signes, are of the must eminent concernment unto this ter∣rene Globe, and pour down their influences upon it the most forcibly and violently. Aequinoctia signa & Tropica turbulentiora & populariora dicimus, & generaliter significant rerum Civilium mutatio∣nem, saith one: (id est) We finde by experience, that your
Tropical and Equinoctial signes are more violent, turbulent, and popular, then are any of the other parts of the Zodiack; and Eclipses, great Conjunctions, Comets, &c. happening in any of them, are the most remarkable in their effects. The reason hereof is neer at hand: the greatest and most noble of actions and things (be they Ecclesiastical or Ci∣vil) are dependant upon Cardinal or Tropical signes; they are the Hinges or Axis upon which the most weighty and illustrious Persons or Matters (either of Universal or Par∣ticular, Publique or Private concernment) move or turn. And when an Eclipse, Comet, or other Celestial Phaenomena happens therein, such things, or persons, most naturally and principally are designed to share in their Influences. We have instances familiar enough, in the common vi∣cissitudes of the Weather, of the great verity hereof. For when any grand Satellitium, Conjunction, Opposition, or Quadrate Aspect of the Planets happens to be in Cardinal Signes, the Air is more then ordinarily perturbed; as we saw it in the Effects of the Quadrate of Sol and Saturn, on March 30. this year, and upon the Opposition of the Sun and Saturn on June 29. following; as also, upon the Qua∣drate of Sol and Saturn on September 27. after that: these Aspects all happening in Cardinal Signes; as may be seen by the Ephemerides. We know also, that persons born un∣der Cardinal Signes, are more vigorous, active, and (I was about to say) violent, then others: as to instance in the late King of Sweden, Carolus Gustavus; Oliver Cromwel; the present Emperour of Turkey; cum multis aliis, of for∣mer and later times. We could prove likewise, that those Kingdoms, &c. whose Ascendents are Cardinal Signes, are more spirituous, couragious, active, furious, mutable, and inconstant, then are other Kingdoms, whose Horoscopes are in other parts of the Zodiack; as Germany, Polonia, France, Saxony, Alsatia, Holland, Denmark, and England too; for that is under Aries, and hath been subject (the more is the pitie) to mutability and inconstancie as much as any other Nation whatever. But to pass by this little Digression: not onely the E∣clipse
is in a Cardinal Signe, but at the time of the defect, the two infortunate Stars (so called by reason of their in∣temperate natures and qualities, and the malignant Ef∣fects they are always by experience known to send among mortals) Saturn and Mars, do obviate the Luminaries from Cardinal Signes; thereby making the darkness much blacker in its effects, then otherwise it would be. And these two Planets do not onely conspire against the Sun, (the Luminary suffering) and the Moon, the Agent in this Deliquium; but cross and square each other, and that (in some respects) maliciously. As if they intimated some more then ordinary mischiefs, and alterations to be (un∣der the influence of this Eclipse) hatching and contriving (either in Italy, Holland, or some other parts beyond the Seas;) which when brought to pass, the Projectors them∣selves (Saturn and Mars) by contending with each other, will but make room for the advancement and promotion of some yet-unexpected and unthought-of person or inte∣rest. Mercury sits and smiles at the forward solly, and rash adventures of the other Planets:Planeta qui est in undeci∣ma domo, alti∣or est illo qui in 9, 6, aut 3 est. Haly. Mercurius do∣minus deli, uii generaliter quidem in illi∣us stellae natu∣ram se insinu∣at, at{que} conver∣titur, cum qua fuerit configu∣ratus, &c. Ptol. l. 2. C. 8. Apotel. 'tis he that is the stron∣gest Planet in the Figure, and of all most nobly placed in the Heavens. A Planet in the eleventh house (saith Haly) is higher then one in the ninth, sixth, or third: And able (there∣fore) to attempt and compass nobler things then he. The nimble Planet Mercury being Lord of an Eclipse, gene∣rally assumes the nature of that Planet with whom he is configu∣rated. Howbeit, as he is the Author of quick and violent motion, so he intimates celerity in humane actions, affairs, and concernments; irritates much cunning, craft, and subtilty, lying and deceit, perjury, &c. much robbing both at Sea and Land; makes much controversie in the Customs and Laws of Nations, alterations of old Privi∣ledges, Charters, or Corporations; many Law-suits and unappeasable differences he promotes. In the Air (he be∣ing cold and dry, and mostly neer the Sun) he generates high and blustering winds, great tempests, thunders and hightnings, sometimes earth quakes, &c. Heresies and Schisms get ground under his Regencie, (Europe has no
need of that) and a race of people usually appear, that will contemn Ceremonies, and throw dirt in the face of all Religious Worship: he also denotes depopulations, and a destruction of things useful for the support of humane life; and hinders the growth of vegetables: he stirs up diseases of siccity, as Consumption, Ptisick, Fevers, &c. These are the natural significations of Mercury, as Lord of an Eclipse: but as he is in Aspect of Jupiter, (though it be by a Quadrate) it is to be hoped that his effects will meet with some abatement; but much I cannot promise my self, because Jupiter is just leaving Pisces, and neerly in Opposition of Mars in this Ecliptical Figure: yet some∣what he will perform, by vertue of his own benefique na∣ture, and of his having rule in this great Deliquium, next unto Mercury, whose effects I have at large related. And not onely Mercury hath signification of the afore∣said distempers, but the Eclipse in general is the fore-run∣ner of many tedious and durable infirmities that shall af∣flict the persons of men and women: Saturn̄ is in Capri∣corn in the sixth house, (of the Greeks called , from the great infelicity and unhappiness which diseases bring to mankinde; they being the envious opposites un∣to health, which is the greatest blessing in the world, and most of all to be coveted!) and there powerful to do mis∣chief: Mars also is Lord of that Angle by Exaltation, and (being in reception and Quartile of Saturn) shall in part designe the diseases portended, viz. the Calenture, Jaun∣dies, Imposthumes, Madness, Pestilence, Pox, Botches, In∣flammations, &c. Wherefore, by reason of his violence and destructive poysonous qualities, he is much to be fear∣ed. Cave iram Martis: we ought, when in a Figure of an Eclipse we finde Mars in a position apt for the promoting of mischiefs, to beware of his raging and thundering threats. It is the opinion of Hermes, Aphor. 90. that Saturn per∣forms evil more slowly, but Mars more swift: and Mars is there∣fore (saith he) observed to hurt more then Saturn. Most sure I am, that although Mars, in regard of his velocity and
heat, hurts more, (that is, more furiously and ragingly) then Saturn doth; yet is Saturn (as I before urged) the au∣thor and procurer of the most durable mischiefs and mise∣ries unto mankinde: And as he (secundum Hermetem) per∣forms evil more slowly, yet by reason of his tardous mo∣tion, and envious tenacious nature, he is most certain to accomplish it the more surely: and this I am afraid we poor mortals shall finde and experience to purpose, from his envious, malignant, and pernicious effects, portended unto us by his position in this Solar defect. Surely God is angry with these Western parts of the world, and that exceedingly! in that he shews so many e∣minent and signal tokens of his divine displeasure against us. But lately, viz. anno 1663. on Octob. 10. was celebra∣ted an unusual Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in the Regal and fiery signe Sagittary: such a Conjunction that happens but once in 795 years, it beginning the circuit of those two Planets in the Fiery Trigon See more of this Conjuncti∣on in my Dies Novissimus, or Dooms-day not so neer as dreaded. And a little after that, there appeared three dreadful Comets or Blazing Stars, as so many Monitors of approa∣ching terrours and dangers to befal most part of the habi∣table Globe: those Comets having relation in their mo∣tion, unto almost three parts of the whole Zodiacal Cir∣cle. And now this year, (as if those rare and unusual Phae∣nomena were not of themselves sufficient to presage hor∣rour enough to compleat poor Europes already-begun mi∣series!) we are fallen under the effects of a Solar Eclipse, in a Cardinal Tropical signe: and this defect was visible to all this Occidental part of the world: the glorious Lamp of heaven refusing to afford us his wonted benigne influences, by suffering (in this defect) his nobler rays to be with-held from us. As the sad and to-be-lamented effects of these several Celestial Ambassadours, we have had our sufficient share of Wars, the company of that horrid, black and dismal ene∣my the Pestilence; a miserable desolation and destruction by Fire; and all these too long and too heavie upon us! and yet Gods anger is not turned away, his hand is stretched
out still   the envious Planet Saturn, and furious Planet Mars (by their malesique positions and configuration in this Solar Deliquium) are yet working more mischiess and di∣sturbances, in the mindes, manners, and actions of man∣kinde; and will (by their evil influence) hinder and ob∣struct the course of things, both in Natural Generation, and in Trade, and in affairs of most kindes. God grant a Famine succeed not those several former severer Judge∣ments of the Almighty, if it be his blessed will. Although those other Judgements have been afflictions grievous to be born, and eminently terrifying (almost) unto all sorts of people; yet the least part of the Famine will be far more transcendently intolerable and crued unto mankind, then all the other put together. Famine (saith one) is sometimes so fierce, that it makes the mother use the teeth in stead of her lips to her own childe; to bite without pitie the infant which she used to kiss; and in stead of giving it suck, to let out the bloud of it. God keep so black an enemy from the doors of all true-hearted English-men I we have had our portion of Plenty, and this in so great and abundant measure, that we have wallowed therein: Oh! that we might be able to divert our part of Penury, by acts of Charity, Prayer, and Repentance. Had we no assistance from the Celestial movers for our Judgements in these matters, yet those observations we are able to make from common Experience, might readi∣ly inculcate to us a more-then-ordinary probability there∣of; since it is the Order which God and Nature observeth, to pursue a Plenty with a Dearth, and to punish extreme Wantonness with griping Want. Bright mornings oft have blackest afternoons. Ecliysiū Solis effectus poten∣tes sunt, unde si in florentem Messim inci∣derint sterili∣tatem afferunt Seg. 2. Aph. 16 The learned Hieronymus Cardanus tells us, (and I am a∣fraid too oraculously) that the effects of an Eclipse of the Sun are very powerful, which happening in the beginning of a hope∣ful and flourishing harvest, denotes sterility and barrenness to follow. I fear, I fear, that the great strength of Saturn (I
Cadentia sunt spiritus, & quicquid acci∣dit in eis, dem accidit in spiritibus. Haly. mean not particularly in this Solar Eclipse, but) in this whole year, and some years yet succeeding, will, and doth presage, not onely Sterility, or a Dearth of Corn, &c. but a destruction of all things growing upon the earth, useful for mankinde. He is in a Cadent house in the heavens, thence afflicting the Lights: Haly says, that Cadent houses are as it were spirits; and whatsoever happens in them, (he means either of fortitude or afflication) happens unto the spi∣rits of men or things. Hence I am fearful, that not onely the spirits of seeds of Vegetables will lose their soul and vigour, and not be capable of rooting and bringing forth the fruits of the earth, as at othe times. Saturn is a Pla∣net cold and dry; and therefore (in a Physical sense) a great enemy to, and hinderer of all Natures products, and indeed of all natural Existencies: And he is now posited in Capricorn, in a cold, dry, melancholy and feminine signe; as if the most hopeful conceptions were threatned to be destroyed in , or in the womb, and scarcely suffered to see the light; much less to come to maturity. The learned Rigel, in his 83 Aphorism, sets it down as an absolute Conclusion, That Saturn is the most pernicious and destructive in his effects, when he is posited (as now in this E∣clipse) in a feminine signe. Thus you see, Authors are positive and agreeing: An Eclipse in the beginning of a Harvest, denotes barrenness, saith Cardan. The spirits of Vegetables, &c. are afflicted, saith Haly. Saturn is most destructive when in feminine signes, saith Ri∣gel. The Eclipse it self began in June, a little after the be∣ginning of the Summer, viz. when the Grain begins to harden in the Ear. We have had a very dry Summer; a hot and moist Autumn; (as if the natures of the Seasons were really changed.) Let us petition, that God of his infinite goodness, would not permit or suffer our Harvests for some years succeeding, either by unkinde and bitter frosts, Mildews, or unseasonable Showers, to be either blasted or
lodged, or suffer other damage or prejudice, before it comes to be fully hardened, and fit for the painful Husbandmans Sickle. Yet a little further. Sol omnibus Planetis tribuit vires: (they areSegm. 5. A∣phor. 171. Cardans words.) The Sun (as he is Rex Plane∣tarum, the King of all Stars) gives strength and power to the Planets. And when his sight is hindered, his influence is obstructed, and Nature receives a check in all her teem∣ings, and is thereby much molested in her noblest and free∣est operations. Sol omnium fortunarum maxima est, neque Planeta ullus magis benifious. Card. And, There is no Planet more benefique and friendly unto this earthly Globe, then is the Sun: for he is the greatest of the for∣tunate Stars, and disperses his happie rays and influences most liberally. Great therefore must the damages and in∣juries be unto mankinde, when his most illustrious and nou∣rishing beams shall be with-held from them, though but for the smallest portion of time: much more, when we shall be deprived of his friendly rays some hours together, as now in this Solar Deliquium. And although there be some men who weakly main∣tain, that Eclipses have no more influences upon terrene bodies, then the black-fac'd night; yet deny they cannot, that the one is natural and ordinary, the other prodigious and extraordinary: and certainly their effects must be as different as their natures. Nay, they that quarrel most against the influences of such obscurities and defects, can∣not (by their quarrelling) anticipate the effects thereby portended, in either their own, or friends Nativities. The Diurnal motion of the Earth, (or Sun, if people will have it so) is such, that there is an apparent Physical reason to be rendred of the common and never-failing in∣tercourse of Day and Night. But Eclipses happening in no such order, and at no such certainty, (in respectu tempo∣ris) clearly demonstrate the darkness of the night less va∣lid and efficacious, then that in Eclipses: the one coming to pass by a constant and unalterable Law or Edict of Na∣ture; and the other happening by Natures Decrees also, but at no such certain, distinct, and determinate times.
Were Eclipses as certain to happen as is she night, (I mean, when the same reason in Nature is afforded) then should we have Eclipses of both Luminaries every month: for, if we consider that the Sun is eclipsed onely in his Sy∣nod or Conjunction with the Moon; and the Moon suffers an obscuration when she is diametrically opposed to the Sun; we must conclude the cause of the Suns Eclipse to be the interposition of the Moon between him and the Earth; and the cause of the Moons Eclipse to be the in∣terposition of the Earth between the Sun and her. Now we know, that there is not a month passeth us, but affordeth a New and Full Moon; yet we may be six months and more, sometimes, without an Eclipse of either Lumi∣nary: Ergo, Eclipses are of far greater concernment un∣to mankinde, then the Enemies of Astrologie are aware of, whose ignorance in Starry matters, would seem to make them of one and the same influence and effect with the ne∣cessary darkness and obscurity of the night. The natural privation of light in the night, is (in its kinde) of as good use unto all things sublunary, as the splendour and beauty of the day; and is as necessarily op∣posed thereunto, as the siceity and calidity of the Summer and Autumn, to the humidity and frigidity of the Spring and Winter. But as it must be destructive to have two Summers in a year, where one is of sufficient force to ri∣pen all that one Spring can produce; so must it needs be contrary to the increase and nourishment of the seminal vertues of all terrene productions, to have a double night; or in the stead of one, a night and a half, whenas one singly is endowed with vigour enough, to concoct and al∣lay the heat of bright Phoebus's scorching rays, that one day affords. I will conclude this Digression with an Ex∣cursion of the learned Peucer concerning the effects of E∣clipses: Quantos incendit aestus quamdiu flagrantes, Solis sub ♈ anno quadragesinno? Quos motus in Orbe Terrarum commovit, cum haec Solis, tum altero anno post Lunae Eclipsis? Nata ex illis & propagata sunt semina malorum omnium, quae tunc cum nostras urgeant cervices, & vitae fortunisque miniten∣tur,
imme intentent atque in ferant perniciem, evidentius senti∣mus & ferimus ac deploramus acerbius. Quantas lites, quam superba dissidia, & occulta odia, insidiasque quam violenta con∣silia severint struxerintque quae bella indicerint, quae pericula no∣cument aque frumento fructibusque crearint, deliquia anni qua∣dragesimi quarti, cum Luna tota, atra caligine, ter foedum in modum deformaretur? Sol plus de unce sui orbis obsuscaretur, adeo, ut in quibusdam locis interdiu stellae illuxerint, ac conspe∣ctae sint; eo ipso, & sequentibus annu, ex eventu didicimus. Casp. Peue. fol. 661. de Astrolog. Prudenter Sa∣lem considera; nam judicia Solis non sant oblivioni a∣denda. L. Ri∣giis. To proceed; we are advised by Rigel, prudently and wa∣rily to consider the Sun, and in no wise to forget in our Judge∣ments what effects are dependant upon him; chiefly in an E∣clipse. And Leovitius writing upon the great Eclipse of the Sun which was conspicuous upon April 9. 1567. with relation to the great Effects thereby portended, exclaims, Profe∣cto tam tetram ac horrendam Eclipsin Solis ab anno Domini 1544. non habuimus, nec etiam multis futuris saeculis habituri sumus. (i. e.) We verily (saith he) have not had so horrid and prodigious an Eclipse of the Sun, since the year of our Lord 1544. neither shall we in many ages to come, have the like a∣gain. As Leovirius said then of that, so may I say of this E∣clipse; (and I hope, in some respects in may be received as a word of welcome to the world; it intimating, though not at present, yet a future happiness unto it) we shall not in many Ages have the like Eclipse again: but (mistake me not) this I say not, by reason of the number of di∣gits eclipsed; but by reason of that part of the Zodiack in which the defect happens, with a regard had unto the many sad attendants it hath, and the several rough con∣comitants it meets with, in signification and portent. Some (perhaps) may wonder I insist not upon the effects of Jupiter somewhat more in this Discourse, he being the next in dignity to Mercury in this Solar Eclipse. But to such I answer, that his benifiqueJupiter must suffer many hardships, run thorow great difficulties, combat with many hazards, torments and afflictions, suf∣fer several scoffs & jeers & many scars, wounds & dis∣graces, before he can come to shine, and shew himself in his native lustre, signification and portent. significations are hin∣dered by Mars, (as before I urged) and also Saturn; so that
his noble significations are herein totally impeded and ob∣scured, at least for a time: but possible it is, by that time Jupiter comes into Cancer again, the Saturnine evils will be a little blown over, and Europe may then begin to partake of his illustrious and noble rays and influences; which will then be so glorious and dazling, that Envie shall not stand before them. Thus far in general: Come we next to some particulars by this Eclipse denoted. The Effects (such sad ones as they are) you have heard of already: my first particular Enquiry shall be of the Ʋ∣bi, the place where those several before-mentioned Effects shall operate, or chiefly shew themselves: And those are such, as Astrologers (from a large Experience of the beau∣teous smiles, and black events of heaven) have placed under the Celestial Signe Cancer, and its Quadrangle, viz. Libra, Capricorn, & Aries; some whereof (as you may see in my Doctrine of Nativities, from pag. 83. to pag. 87. in Part 1.) are Holland, Zealand, Scotland, Granada, Burgundia, Nu∣midia, Carthage, Africa, Bithynia, Colchis, Denmark, Sweden, Germany, England, France, Palestina, Polonia mirtor, Austria, Livonia, Sabaudia, Thuseia, Caspia, Maccedonia, Illyria, Thrace, Albania, Bulgaria, Lituania, Saxonia, Hassia, Thuringia, India, Isles of Orchades, &c. for Kingdoms and Countries. And for Cities and Towns, these: viz. Naples, Florence, Capua, Ferraria, Augusta, Verona, Brunswick, Padua, Amsterdam, Ve∣nice, Genoa, Constantinople, Tunis, Cadiz, York, St. Andrews, Lisbon, Antwerp, Arles, Spires, Vienna, Frankfort, Placentia, Oxford, (poor Oxford!) Constance, Mecklin, Brandenburg, Vilna, Cleves, cum multis aliis, &c. All which Kingdoms, Countries, Cities and Towns, or any of them, I say, are strongly menaced by this eminent Solar Eclipse; and their inhabitants will have great need to make use of both pray∣ers and tears, to avert the heavie Judgements of a highly-offended God, at this time, and for some ensuing years, impending over them. A Word unto each of these Kingdoms and Countries, more plainly.
Holland and Zealand, you are in the first and chiefest place, concerned in this Celestial Apparition. Saturn is in Opposition to your Ascendent: the Sun is Eclipsed in your Horoscope: and the fiery Planet Mars is in Quadrate Aspect unto it. Your Trade is in danger of being total∣ly ruined; your Merchants, of being utterly undone: your Great-ones, are at their wits end; and Poor-ones, ready to mutiny for want of Bread! Make peace with England betimes, or shortly it will be too late for you: a little more strugling will reduce you from High and Mighty, unto Poor and Distressed States! Let not your own Astrologers (as of late they have done) flatter you with the hopes of what is never likely to happen: for I unfeignedly protest, all these (and greater) mischiefs will fall upon you, unless you are wise in time, and by a prudent and sudden Submission and seeking of Peace prevent it. This was written before the late Rebel∣lion there; but the Caution may serve for the future. Scotland hath always had the reputation of a wise Na∣tion: let not an Ignote Zeal against things indifferent, o∣vercome thy Prudence: Cross the Proverb which says, Omne malum à Boreale. Be peaceable, and be happie. Granada, thou wast first raised out of the ruines of Illi∣beris, and hast long continued in great splendour: be not too confident of thy strength and riches, but keep peace and amity with thy Neighbour-Princes: pay thy Tribute quietly to thy undoubted Soveraign, and then thou mayst escape returning into thy first matter. Burgundia, thou didst first own the God of the Christians for thy advantage: it will be for thy profit now, to main∣tain thy Religion, and thy Peace. Numidia, be quiet within thy self; quell Mutinies and Insurrections in the bud; and pray that thy Prince be as fortunate as Massinissa was. Carthage, (once the Lady and Mistress of Africa, and so continued neer 730 years;) thou hast been often obscured; now thou art threatned again, but not with total ruine: It was thy Custom to crucifie, not onely the unhappie Ca∣ptain, but even him whose bad counsel had a prosperous
event: Improve at this time the advice of thy vertuous Counsellors, and be happie. Africa, (the Romane Africa I mean) thy abundant Plen∣ty is turning into Want. Bithynia, thou wast not formerly more peaceable, plea∣sant, and fertile, under the Government of the Christi∣ans; then now thou art likely to prove unquiet, distur∣bant, and barren, under the Turks. Colchis, the glory of Armenia, thy Chymical Sun is neer an eclipse; thy Golden Fleece, and all thy Mynes, are de∣parting from thee. Denmark, thy Prince hath a Royal Genesis, yet he is but a man: let not a Cancerian people by their policy bring thee under water. Sweden, if Sword and Sickness get not the upper hand of thee, thou mayst do pretty well: thy damage comes from the South. Germany, be patient a little, and let the Whirlwinde pass thee; and thy Sun shall shine again, and thy Eagle shall extend her wings, and flie a pitch, beyond the power of Turk or Tartar to molest thee. England, be quiet a while, thy Storm is neerly over: practise Loyalty, keep Peace within thy self, and the con∣spiring world shall never injure thee. France, the effects of Med. Coel. to a Square of Mars at∣tend thee: trust not too confidently to thy Purse and Power. Palestina, the Sun's ashamed to see thy Holy Land. Polonia minor, thou art falling retrograde under the ef∣fects of this Eclipse; there needs no other bridle to keep thee from advancing. Austria, cherish not Factions within thy self: thy E∣clipse will prove but Platique, and that (sine mora) with∣out continuance: thou wilt recover thy glory again. Livonia, thy Merchants smart to purpose; domestique Quarrels, and petit Tyrannies, bring the scourge upon thee. Sabaudia, thou art molested both at home, and from
abroad, and wilt be for a season: afterwards, thou mayst of Malvoy, become Salvoy again. Thuscia, the honour of Italy, for promoting Celestial Learning; the glory of the world, for unexhausted and never-failing Steel-mynes: pray that thy slighting the former, bring not upon thee the malevolent effects of the later. Caspia, Intestine Jars, and Forraign Enemies, create much trouble unto thee: be assiduously vigilant and preparing, that the Parthian sword prove not too sharp and heavie for thee. Macedonia, be careful to prevent Fires, and trade not too much Westward. Illyris, 'tis thy lot to have many Conquerours. Thrace, thy ancient Custom was to mourn at the birth of Children, and to rejoyce at their death: it was a Practice Orthodox and Pious; assume it again, it may now be ne∣cessary. Albania, kick not against thy Superiours, nor thy Peace; lest another Scanderbeg rise out of thy own bowels again, to punish thee. Bulgaria, be wise; lest thy too strict adhering to a Turkish faith, ruine thy stately Palaces, and destroy thy Princely Cities. Lituania, Worship and serve the true God; your Dish∣pan, or God of Smoke, cannot save you from common Flames or Troubles. Saxonia, keep peace with the Emperour, and ward a Westward storm. Hassia, thy Lion barry is like to lose his Crown; engage not too far, for fear on't. Thuringia, History makes mention of thy having been many times burnt, but thou hast revived, like a Phoenix out of the ashes, into greater glory. God grant thou mayst be so happie now, and ever. India, as thy Country is great and populous, so thy afflictions designed by this Eclipse, will be great and emi∣nent.
Orchades, thy Swans sing not so sweetly as in times past; and thy great plenty of Fish, seems wasted: thy inhabi∣tants grow sluggish and inactive; Diseases waste their cou∣rage: but you will meet with timely relief and amend∣ment. Secondly, and not onely to Kingdoms, Countries and Cities, &c. are these Ecliptical effects carryed or directed; but unto many individual persons, men, women, and chil∣dren: more especially unto such, that shall have either the tenth degree of Cancer, or its opposite Signe Capricorn their Medium Coeli, Horoscope, or place of either of the Luminaries in their Nativities. Unto some persons, they denote death; to others, tedi∣ous and durable infirmities; unto a third sort, they de∣nuntiate a Catastrophe of Honour, and a ruine of reputa∣tion, fame, &c. affliction by continual Controversies, ve∣xatious Law-suits, &c. to a fourth sort, destruction of Pa∣rents, friends and acquaintauce, or an absolute hatred be∣tween them and the Natives contracted or procured, no ways reconcileable. To a fifth sort, Imprisonments, Ba∣nishments, Exile, the wrath of Princes and Potentates. To a sixth sort, Blindness, or loss of one of the Luminaries of their bodies: and this most certain, if the Sun and Moon were weak, or any way afflicted at the birth of such persons. Thirdly, such persons as shall be born at the time of this Eclipse, will either suddenly, (or else in some short time after it) die: or if for some competent space of time they should possess a place among the living, they will live most miserable and diseased; subject to a thousand trou∣bles and infortunacies, &c. And I could wish that any in∣genious adversary to Astrologie, (for some such I have charity to think there are) would take the pains, and ob∣serve the births of such children, (for I, God permitting life and liberty, intend to do the like) and after a candid inspection, of the Figures, and serious observation of the Natives unto whom they belong, publish them, either to
the disparagement of Astrologie, or conviction of their former thoughts thereof. The tryal would be easie, and might either correct the confidence of Astrologers, or bet∣ter in form the judgements of their Antagonists. Fourthly, to put a little more weight in the Seale; per∣sons that shall be born at the time of this Eclipse, if they shall prove vital, will be ugly, or of an ill-favour'd aspect; that for their evil looks they shall be hated and abhorred by many while they do live. The reason hereof is this: Saturn and Mars, the two infortunate Stars, afflict the Lu∣minaries at the time of this Eclipse: and Astrologers say, (nemine contradicente) When the Sun or Moon shall be (an any Geniture whatever) in Conjunction, Quartile, or Op∣position of Saturn and Mars, (chiefly when both of them shall so suffer) it portends an ill aspect, and great detri∣ment and damage to the Natives sight, if not an absolute blindness. But then (perhaps) you'll say, this Astrological reason is not Universal enough: take then a Physical one: The sight resides in the Eyes, and particularly in the Chrystal∣line humour there; which is by nature cold and moist, and governed by the Luminaries of heaven: [for Man, you must know, is a , or little world, and hath a Sun and Moon in him, like the greater:] now this noble and Celestial humour, being opposed and oppressed by one more earthly, (as Saturn properly signifies) or by one more hot and fiery, (as Mars governs) is attracted beyond its proper and peculiar seat; and thereby made not onely less serviceable, but less pleasant, according to the quanti∣ty of the oppression it labours under. Whence come those unpleasant looks, and abhorred defects in many persons, commonly called Purblinde, Squint-ey'd, &c. and some∣times an absolute blindness, or total deprivation of sight. Many more matters might have been observed from this eminent and famous Solar defect; but these short Animad∣versions touching upon the principal things thereby signi∣fied, shall serve to illustrate the effects thereof; and also to commute for my promise made in my last years Ephemeris concerning the same.
POST-SCRIPT, Ad Lectorem. BEing in London all the late terrible Visitation, and ob∣serving this quondam-glorious Citie labouring under the mightiest Discontents imaginable; sadly lamenting the dismal sight of Coffins, and their Cadaverous guests; having no other Musick heard within her, but Bells to a mournful tune, and her inhabitants in every corner wretchedly bewail∣ing the loss of their Relations of all kindes: And taking notice, that, not onely Empericks, but the learned Physici∣ans themselves, were deceived in their Prognosticks and Cures of that Raging Pest. 'Tis true, they used divers Means, to put a check unto its fury; but, as the number of their Antidotes increased, the Weekly Bills augmented: as if God and Nature were angry beyond an ordinary de∣gree of Pacification, and would not suffer those Celestial influences to be baffled, from whence these cruel Calamities issued. Observing these things, I say, I was resolved to try how far Astrologie might be serviceable in this matter, and ac∣cordingly took Pen in hand; and (for this dejected Citie's comfort and encouragement) wrote a short Discourse, which I intituled, London's Deliverance predicted, &c. In which Book, according to the true and plain Rules of A∣strologie, I acquainted the world, when the Pest should ar∣rive at its greatest height; and afterwards, with the time of its abatement; as also of the several Countries suffering thereby. And although I aimed at nothing in that Tractate, but the comfort of the (then) many suffering souls in this great Citie; I have had the hard hap to be mis-interpreted for
many things therein; chiefly, for my plain discussion of this urrifying, but most necessary Question to be scann'd, viz. Whether the Plague be catching. For my pains in this Enquiry, Mr. John Booker, in his Al∣manack for 1666. is pleased to spend above a Page upon me; and urges a Definition of the Plague, and ingeniously explains it: but yet is pleased to let my Arguments stand untouch'd, and onely says, he could instance the Plague to be infectious and catching by innumerable means, but that he wants room. I should (I confess) have been glad to have seen his Arguments brought in opposition to mine; being as ready (if Reason require) to retract an Errour, as write a Truth. But for any man to say, he is not of my Opinion, and not to shew me a reason wherefore, is not (I conceive) the way to win me unto his. There is another Gentleman also, a Doctor of Physick, (which Title (fairly obtained) and Profession also, I ex∣ceedingly honour) hath been pulling at me in Print, for my maintaining the Negative in the Question above pro∣pounded. This Antagonist is angry in earnest, and tells the world, That I deserve to be answer'd by the Magistrate, and that there is no way to suppress my Opinion, or answer my Argu∣ments, but by putting in execution an Order published in Queen Elizabeth's days. To which I answer: If there be any such Order as he pretends, I humbly submit my self and Opinion unto it; as also unto all other Edicts proceeding from Authority. Contra Legem nonest disputandum: and he must be strangely Rebellious, that opposeth the Laws he liveth under. To contemn what we cannot conquer, some commend as good Policie; and to pretend to answer a serious Argument with the power of the Magistrate, or an Act of Parliament, is (I confess) the onely infallible way to stop any Opponents mouth. How like a Philosopher that way of arguing is, let the knowing world judge. But I believe this Gent. is as bold with Authority, as rigid with me: for I never yet heard or read of any Order publish∣ed,
to prove the Plague contagious, or to prohibit a discussion of that Question; except from his Pen: although I can say, I have often consulted Poulton. And considering some other passages of his, I perceive that he is not more angry at that my Opinion, then at the Celestial movers, the Stars; whom (saith he) many have accu∣sed as the Authors of the Plague. I have (I acknowledge) in the Book before mentioned, proved the Stars to be (sub Deo) the Causes of the Pestilence: but nowhere do I bring an ac∣cusation against them, as I know of; believing them free from guilt, and not meriting an Impeachment for the same; they onely performing that Office therein, which God appoint∣ed them for at the beginning. But this Gentleman (notwithstanding his aim, and fruit∣less pains, to render me ridiculous, and the Stars (I studie) inefficacious;) is not (in the mean time) aware, of his own running into an Errour of far greater magnitude; viz. in his asserting the Original of the Plague to have been the ROT∣TEN MƲTTON eaten in the year before. Now, let any rational man consider whether of the two, come neerest the Truth: I, in asserting the Stars; or he, in maintaining Rotten Mutton, to be the Cause of the Pest. An Epicurean may, and frequently doth ascribe more to his belly, then unto those glorious and ever-busied Lamps of heaven. I cannot stand here to repeat the Arguments I have urged, to prove the Plague contagious; I must refer the Reader, for that, to the Book it self. But if Rotren Mutton be attended with such fatal effects, why not a Plague every year after a Rot of Sheep? which is the common consequence of every moist Summer. Or, if the Plague were truly the effect of Rotten Mutton; how then holds it true, what he asserts elsewhere, in the same Dis∣course? viz. That the Plague came to us from the Nether∣lands, and to them from Smyrna, in a parcel of infected goods. Was there a Rot of Muiton in Smyrna too? Risum tenea∣tis, &c. To conclude: let it suffice at present, that I deny any such way of infection by Goods; and reject the Romance of
his Rotten Mutton: and (as before) do assert, the Stars (sub Deo) to be the true and essential causes of all Plagues: and subscribe unto it. John Gadbury. From my Study in Brick-Court by the Bowling-Alley, neer the Deans Yard Westminster. ADVERTISEMENT. THe BODY of ASTROLOGY (so often by me promised) consisting of many various and different Subjects, each of which requires much more Study and Pains then I at the first expected, will, I hope, this year be fully ready for the Press; I having gone thorow the greatest part thereof already, and doubt not (by Gods assistance) to compleat it in due time: which whensoever done, I shall (with all Candour and Faithfulness) make publique, for the Advantage of the Industrious Students in this Art, and perfection of Astrologie in the English Tongue.
Several Books written and published by JOHN GADBƲRY. AN Emendation of Hartgil's Astronomical Tables. The Celestial Ambassadour. The Doctrine of Nativities. The Nativity of King Charles the First, of blessed Me∣mory. Britains Royal Star. The Nature of Prodigies. The King of Swedes Nativity. The Spurious Prognosticator unmasked. The Novice-Astrologer instructed. Nuncius Astrologicus. The Collection of Nativities. Dies Novissimus, or Dooms-day not so neer as dreaded. An Astrological Disceurse of the three Comets, in 1664, and 1665. Londons deliverance from the Plague. Vox Solis: or, A Discourse of the Suns Eclipse in June 1666. Besides his Almanacks, annually continued since 1655.
