G1192 13566116 100311
Prelatique Preachers NONE OF CHRIST'S TEACHERS: OR, A Disswasive unto the People of God from attending the Ministry (so called) of those, who preach by vertue of an (Apocryphal) Or∣dination, received from an Order of men, commonly stiled LORD BISHOPS. Wherein Arguments are tendered to their serious considerations, by way of Motive against that practice; the unlawfulness thereof demonstrated: and the Pretences briefly answered, which commonly are, or lightly can be pleaded, in justification of it. And what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? for ye are the Temple of the living God:—Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you; and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, saith the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. For such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apo∣stles of Christ. And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light. Therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. —From such turn away, 2 Tim. 3. 5. Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces, [that is, of their Doctrine] Matth. 16. 6, 12. He that is not with me, is against me; and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad, Matth. 12. 30. —Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them, Jer. 15. 9. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loveth) where thou feedest, where thou makest thy flock to rest at noon; for why should I be as one that turneth aside by [or, unto] the flocks of thy Companions? Cant. 1. 7. . Ignatius, Epist. 6. Malus Ecclesiae Praepositus deseri cum suâ communione potest, imo debet. Cyprian 1. 1. Ep. 4. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.
A Disswasive unto the People of God, from attending the Ministry (so called) of those, who preach by ver∣tue of an (Apocryphal) Ordination, received from an Order of men, commonly stiled, LORD `BISHOPS. Take heed whom you hear. THE Idolatrous madness of the Common-Prayer∣Book-worship, hath of late been made so manifest to all the Houshold of Faith in the Nation, that my confidence is great, that it shall not proceed any further to ensnare and pollute any of the Sons and Daughters of God, by joyning in the offering up of such strange fire unto him. And though there be some, who, having formerly cast it off as a menstruous rag of Popish devotion, are of late, with the Dog, returned unto their vomit, ma∣king themselves transgressors by building up, what once they destroy∣ed; yet God (I trust) will suddenly stop and heal this unclean issue in the body of his People, and so curse the root of this bitterness, that it shall not bring forth much fruit, nor many be defiled with it. Yea, though a second Repentance in such cases, be not a fruit that groweth very plentifully on the Tree of flesh and blood, yet am I not without all hope but that through the grace and mercy of God, some of those may awaken, and recover themselves out of this Snare of Satan, whose foot hath been taken, and is (at present) held in it. I confess the World hath of late given a furious on-set and charge upon the Saints of God amongst us, yea, upon all that professed any thing (almost) after the manner of Saints, and as becometh the Go∣spel, to cause them to give back from that holy ground which they had gained, and on which they stood; Neither is it any marvel, there being so many millions of a stricter Profession in the Nation, that all of them should not prove valiant in fight, or that some of them, for
fear of the fiery Furnace, being het seven times hotter than ordinary, should not how down to the golden Image of that Worship, which the Nebuchadnezzar-like Interest of the Prelatical party in the Nati∣on had set up. But leaving those, who tremble to make gods of men, by ascribing unto them the incommunicable property or prerogative of God, in appointing and imposing his own Worship, unto the safe∣guarding of his blessing upon those convictions of the Truth, which have subdued their Judgments and Consciences under it; and those that are turned aside like a deceitful [or, warped] bow, unto the mer∣cies of God, for the bringing of them back again from Babylon unto Sion, that they be not surprized in the vengeance of Babylon, (which is now even at the door) I shall proceed to tender unto the Consci∣ences of those, whose sovereign interest it is to approve themselves throughly unto God, a few Considerations, by the light whereof they may see how unlawful it is (especially as the case now standeth) to be Hearers, where men of Episcopal Ordination, by vertue hereof are the Teachers. CONSIDERATION I. That Authority of Teaching; wherewith the Teachers we speak of are invested, by that kind of Bishop which presumes to give it, is a meer nullity and lye. The Gospel knows no Bishop of such a chara∣cter or complexion, as are appropriately theirs, who claim and exer∣cise a power as of obtruding upon Christ and his Churches, on the one hand, what persons they please in the name of Ministers, or Teachers, (only if they be desirous to accept of this sacred investiture from their hand;) so on the other hand, to keep back such from their Service, whom both the one and the other, most desire in this relation, only because God hath not given them Darkness for a Vision, or sent them this strong delusion, confidently to imagine, that they see Prelates, or Diocesan Bishops, walking like Angels in the plains of the Gospel, and Christ giving them power to prescribe in his Church what forms of Worship, be they never so uncouth, and what Ceremonies, be they never so apish, they please. Besides many other Writings, both for∣merly, and more lately published, which demonstrate the Generation of such Bishops to be Aliens and Strangers to the Laws and Statutes of the Common-wealth of Israel, The Un-Bishopping of Timothy and Titus, with the Angel of the Church of Ephesus (a Book first com∣piled and printed, Anno 1636, and lately reprinted, with sundry Enlargements, by the Learned Gentleman, William Prynne Esq;)
clearly vindicates the Gospel from all complyance with them, and sends them to seek their pedigree and original, where they will be ashamed to find it. And (doubtless) the contest about Prelatical U∣surpations had been comprimised long before this, and the Churches of Christ discharged of such unsupportable burdens, were not all dis∣putes against carnal Interests, like gapings against an Oven, and the Truth, though Speaking with the tongues of Men and Angels, a Barbari∣an unto those, whose Judgements and Consciences are under an arrest by the pomp and grandure, either in Spe, or in Re, of this present world: For to reason Un-bewitched, it cannot (lightly) but appear an incredibility of the first Magnitude, that Christ should appoint such an High Officer in his Church, as the Diocesan, and especially the Me∣tropolitan Bishop beareth himself with an importune and high hand to be; and yet neither give them any name whereby to be known or di∣stinguished from others, nor yet assign them any work or Service at all, in, or for the Church. When Christ ASCENDED on High, and gave gifts unto men, he gave some Apostles; and some Prophets; and some Evangelists; and some Pastors and Teachers: but we hear of none given, either Lord Bishops, Diocesans, or Metropolitans. When he DESCENDED into Hell [or, into the lower parts of the Earth] themselves will not plead, that he brought them up from thence. Therefore (without controversie) they are no plants of Christs planting; neither is there any thing in the Church for them to do: For the whole work that concerns the spiritual welfare of the Church from first to last, is committed to the Church-Officers lately named by the Apostle, as being every way sufficient for the effectual per∣formance of it. This the Context speaks plainly enough, and without a Parable: He gave some Apostles,—and some Pastors and Teachers; For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edi∣fying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the Ʋnity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; That we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, &c. Ephes. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14. So that there is no empty or void space in the spiritual Concernments of the Church, for our Diocesan bishops to thrust in with their importune and offici∣ous interposure; Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers; have the whole heritage of this work divided amongst them by the Lord Christ himself. Or if there be any thing left for our Lord Bishops to do by way of service to the Church, it is to teach them, as Gideon taught the men of Succoth, with thorns and Bryars, to perfect them through sufferings, and so to prepare them for their glory: this service
(I confess) they do them with great diligence, and very effectually. Nevertheless, Christ never set them up in his Church, to do either this or any other service unto it: only he permitted them, whilst the Church slept, to convey themselves slily into it: And because the teaching of the members hereof by Afflictions, is a necessary work, and most proper to be done by the vilest and most unworthy of men, therefore (I conceive) he hath judged it meet to afford an opportunity to this Generation of men, to be the Actors in chief in it. But now that kind of Bishop we speak of, being no Gospel Creature, nor any wayes derived or descended from Christ, it is a clear case that he hath no right of authority or power from him (and from any other he cannot have it) to exercise any Ecclesiastical function at all, much lesse to create, or make any Gospel Minister. It is a true rule, Non Entis nullae sunt affectiones, nulla est efficacia; That which is not, hath not wherewith to act, or operate. So that as the Apostle Peter said to the Criple, Silver and Gold have I none; but such as I have give I un∣to thee. (Acts 3. 6.) Our Diocesan Bishops may on the contrary say unto those that come unto them for Authority and Power to preach the Gospel, Silver and Gold we have in abundance, but that which we have, we will not give unto you; but what we have not, that we freely give unto you; Go, and preach the Gospel [although neither do they give this their nothing very freely, unlesse it be in such a sence, wherein a Merchant may be said to part with his bad commodity very freely, or willingly, when he knows he shall receive more mo∣ney for it than it is worth] Therefore they, who embrace men Epis∣copally ordained, as Teachers sent by Christ, and upon this account hear them, set their eyes upon that which is not, yea, and do homage unto an Idol. CONSIDERATION II. To afford our presence and attention unto men preaching by Epis∣copal Authority, is to strengthen the Hierarchical Interest, to credit and countenance the horrid Usurpations of the Prelatical Order, in, and over the Churches of Christ: and consequently, to involve our selves in the guilt of all those out-rages of oppression and cruelty, whereby they daily waste and wear out the Saints of God amongst them; and so to render our selves justly liable to partake with them in their plagues, when God shall bring the day of their vengeance upon them. To own those for our Ministers and Teachers, who are sent forth by them to teach (and own them for such we do, if we
frequently, or ordinarily, hear them) is to own those who send them, and to set to our seal, and give them testimony, that they are intrusted, and invested by Christ, with that authority and power, in the name (or by the pretence rather) of which they so send them. For what can we (lightly) do to commend them unto the world upon higher terms, then by such our approbation of them? Or were we desirous, as far as lyeth in us, to make the mountain of their present power so strong that it should never be moved, by what other means more probable, or promising, could we endeavour, or attempt it? For who, though but in face a Christian, will not fear to have a hand in the rooting out, yea, or in opposing, such men, or such an order of men, amongst them, who have this testimony from serious and well∣advised Christians, that Jesus Christ hath entrusted them with the care, and power of providing meet and worthy Ministers for all his Churches round about them? Verily, Verily, I say unto you, (saith Christ, John 13. 20.) If I send any, (So our former Translation, and so the Original) he that receiveth him, receiveth me; and he that re∣ceiveth me, receiveth him that sent me. He is said to receive a Mini∣ster, or messenger, sent by Christ, who heareth him, (as appeareth by the parallel place, Luke 10. 16.) that is, who heareth him, as, or be∣cause, sent by Christ; or, who heareth his Doctrine with reverence and submission, and so as to own it. Now the receiving of Christ [in his Messengers, or, in their Doctrine] is such an act which tendeth highly to the honour of Christ, and to the confirmation and enlarg∣ment of his interest in the world, and is mentioned under such a con∣sideration as this, in the words now cited: Therefore upon the same account, he that receiveth, or heareth, persons sent by our Apo∣cryphal Bishops to preach, receiveth them, and hereby contributeth not a little towards the establishment of them in the possession of that exorbitant and monstrous power, by which they tyrannize over the consciences and comforts of those, that are loyal and faithful unto Jesus Christ, and so (as hath been said) becomes accessary to all the sufferings of the Saints, by means of that power, in those mens hands. This is another consideration disswading the people of God from at∣tending upon Episcopal Emissaries in their work of preaching. CONSIDERATION III. The hearing of men sent by the Bishops, being (as was now shewed) a receiving of these Bishops themselves (in the sence declared) must needs be a walking uncharitably towards them, and a means to keep
their foot fast in that snare of death, wherein it is at present taken, and to put far from them the happy day of repentance from their unchri∣stian usurpations (together with many other high misdemeanours ac∣companying these) whereby they might be saved. For when they shall see the servants of God (especially the more knowing, and better ad∣vised of them) rejoyceing in the light of Ministers of their making, and sending forth, how shall they not applaud themselves in their of∣fice, yea, and think they do both God, and his Churches special ser∣vice, by supplying these from time to time with men of worth, who are able to speak unto them words, by which they hope they may, or shall be saved? Men that receive so large a testimony of the usefulness of their callings, and goodness of their practises and walkings in them, from persons so considerable as those mentioned, are not like to re∣sent, or suspect, any such evil in either, for which they need any open, or solemn repentance. So that for the servants of God to honour, with their attendance, the Ministry of men preaching by Episcopal authority, is (in reality of construction) a flattering of the Bishops themselves; and (doutless) what Solomon speaks (Prov. 26. 28.) of a flattering mouth, as viz. that it worketh ruine, is altogether as true of flattering actions, by which men may be flattered into ruine, as well as by words of like import. Now though the Bishops we speak of be guilty of the blood of many thousands of precious souls, for whom Christ dyed, partly by thrusting out of the Vineyard of Christ many true and faithful labourers, which Christ himself had sent in thither; partly by keeping out many others of like worthy character, not per∣mitting any entrance, but onely by the polluted door of their Ordina∣tion, by which very few, or none, qualified aright for the Ministry, can obtain leave of their consciences to enter; but chiefly by setting over them, or obtruding upon them, ignorant, scandalous, and pro∣phane persons, for spiritual Guides, besides many other exemplary misdemeanors, and unworthy practises, in their own lives and conver∣sations? although (I say) our Bishops (so called) do by these means, without the least regret, or remorse of conscience, bring upon their heads the blood of many thousand precious souls, yet will not this justifie, or excuse the children of God, if they shall act any thing, which is like to further the perdition of their souls, the salvation whereof, (the enormous wickedness of the men notwithstanding) they stand bound, both by the Law of charity, and in conscience to∣wards God, not to hinder (as by encouraging, or hardening them in any evil way) but to promote with the best of their understanding. Therefore,
CONSIDERATION. IV. As the Apostle (2 Thes. 3. 6, 14.) prescribeth unto the Saints, the separating, or withdrawing of themselves from a Brother that walketh in∣ordinately, as a proper and christian means to make him ashamed (that is, to bring him to repentance, by occasioning him to reflect upon the evil of his way more seriously, and so to further his salvation) in like manner, the withdrawing of good Christians from the Prelates in their Ministers (in whose creation, and imposition upon Churches, they walk most disorderly) being a means of a promising and likely import, to make them ashamed of such their Prelatical presumptions and misde∣meanors, cannot in reason, or in conscience, but be interpreted as a matter of duty lying upon them to practise: If men have any thing of men, any spark of ingenuity in them, any sence of interest either with God or men, they cannot but be severely jealous of such wayes and do∣ings; upon which the Generation of the Righteous shall set the black brand of their dis-approbation, by refusing all communion and fellow∣ship with them, even at a distance; and this out of Conscience towards God, and for fear of his displeasure. CONSIDERATION V. To accept, with contentment and satisfaction, of spiritual means, proffered, or conveyed unto us, by a false authority, or by persons no wayes interessed, or intrusted by Christ, is, as far as in us lyeth, to make void, or (however) to discredit, the right and just title of those, upon whom Christ hath (indeed) conferred this trust and honour; and as he, who renting another man's Ground, shall turn Tenant, and pay his Rent to a false Land-lord, upon a pretended claim made by him of right to the said Lands, much weakneth and disableth the title of the true: In like manner, he that from time to time shall honour with his presence and attention, a Ministry advanced by such an order of men, who have no right, but only a frivolous and empty pretext of right, to impose Mi∣nisters upon Christian Congregations, must needs hereby obscure and wrong the just title and claim, which the Churches of Christ have, by the gracious donation and grant of Christ, to chuse, ordain, and set over themselves Pastors and Teachers. CONSIDERATION VI. For a man not to depend upon God for such a blessing upon his dili∣gent and prudent endeavours in a lawful calling, which shall supply
and furnish him with things needful for this present life, or not to be content with such supplies in this kind, which the blessing of God upon his honest labours, furnisheth him with; but to turn aside into dishonest wayes, as of their, deceit, &c. through fear of want, or of being star∣ved, or the like; any of these practices is a (constructive) complaining of the Providence of God unto the World (or rather, indeed, unto the Devil:) And for Christians to seek their spiritual food at those lips, which not God, but his enemies have opened, and polluted, by touching them with a dead coal from their Altar, is it of any better interpreta∣tion, than a professed jealousie, or doubtfulness of mind, whether Christ will nourish them with the Words of eternal Life, and make them wise unto Salvation, in case they should strictly confine and keep themselves to the use of such means only which he hath sanctified, and which are unquestionably approved by him, especially, when like the Waters of Siloam, they run but softly, and not embolden their Consciences to com∣port with such other means for their edification, the lawfulness where∣of, as themselves formerly scrupled, so many thousands of the Saints absolutely deny at this day, not daring to accept of any soul-provisions promised or pretended by them. CONSIDERATION VII. To undermine and defeat the counsels and attempts of men, who re∣sist the Truth (as Jannes and Jambres did Moses, 2 Tim. 3. 8.) by means and wayes lawful and sutable to the Gospel, and which are within our power, is (without controversie) a duty lying upon all men: how much more upon all Saints? That our Lord Bishops are deep in the condemnation of resisting the Truth; and this much after the same manner, wherein those Egyptian Sorcerers resisted Moses (name∣ly, by promoting a counterfeit and false worship and service of God, like unto the true: as those Sorcerers deluded Pharoah and the Egyp∣tians, by counterfeiting those real and true Miracles which Moses wrought, and hereby sought to frustrate Moses his Negotiation with Pharoah about the Israelites deliverance) is no Paradox, nor Pro∣bleme [or difficult question] amongst true and knowing Christians. Again, that a detection or discovery of the folly or madness of those, who either thus, or in any other way, resist the truth (for the Scripture supposeth a designed resistance of the Truth to be madness, or folly in her exaltation, in whomsoever it be found, 2 Pet. 2. 16. 2 Tim. 3. 9.) is an effectual means to supercede their wickedness in that kind, and to prevent their further progresse in their course, the
holy Ghost himself informeth us: But they [men of corrupt minds, and re∣sisting the Truth] shall proceed no further: for their folly [or, madness] shall be manifest unto all men, as their also was, 2 Tim. 3. 9. Now then, if the refraining of the Saints from those spiritual Tables, which are spread by the Bishops (I mean, from the Preachments of men of their anoynt∣ing) be a proper and likely means to manifest their folly unto the world, in their hostile devices and attempts against the Truth, it is (certainly) a duty incumbent upon them to use such abstinence. That this absti∣nence is a means promising the happy effect mentioned, may be con∣ceived by that discovery, which Davids absence once and again from Saul's Table, made of Saul's wickedness, in his unreasonable malice against David, and consequently against God himself. The Historical Passage hereof may be read, 1 Sam. 20. from vers. 24. to the end of vers. 34. For, as Saul, finding David's accustomed place at his Table empty twice together, was hereby provoked to shew himself in his co∣lours of wretchedness and impiety: So is it not unlike but that sober and good men, by a constant absenting themselves from Ministers of the Hierarchical Unction, on whose Ministry they had formerly been wont to attend, will draw out into the view of all men, that same , that folly, or madness, in their great Lords and Masters (the Bishops) which being discovered, will render them the general abhorring of men, and so cause them to fall like Lightning from the Heaven of their Glory and put a period to their Kingdom. And as the providence of God de∣livered David from the malicious and bloody rage of Saul, wherewith he pursued him upon his absence from his Table; so may the good Peo∣ple of God expect protection from on high, in case the said Bishops, making themselves aggrieved at their departure from thei spiritual pro∣visions, which they have ordained for them, shall attempt to magnifie themselves in wrath and revenge against them. Besides, the general refraining of sober and understanding Christians from the Ministry of a Prelatical erection, which many of them had (in the simplicity of their hearts) formerly frequented, cannot but occasion persons of ingenuous and free spirits, to enquire into the grounds and reasons hereof; in which enquiry, very probable it is that they will discover, or be led to some∣what, either in the Office, or Usurpations, of the Prelatical Order, as the just occasion of it; the consideration whereof may cause them also to turn Apostates from their former esteem and approbation of them. CONSIDERATION VIII. If we speak of the generality of those Ministers, who retain the Sig∣nature
of Prelatical hands laid upon them, and have not some wayes or other defaced it, we may truly say (in the Scripture Phrase, Mic. 7. 4.) The best of them is as a Bryar, the most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge. Few Sermons are preached by them, in which something is not uttered, that is justly offensive and grievous to the Spirits of holy and good men. Yea, of these Apothecaries, such as are accounted both the most honest, and skilful, in their profession, and to vend the best, and wholsomest Druggs, and Receits, have one or other dead fly (and commonly more then one) in their Oyntment, which causeth it to cast forth a stinking savour in the Nostrils of those who have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil. (Neither can it in reason be ex∣pected otherwise: For being sworn Vassals to the Prelatical Interest and Design, and this being to subject the power of godliness unto the form, and so to uphold their super-numerary Function, Dignity, and tyrannical Grandure, in, and over the Churches of Christ, the Mini∣sters we speak of are ever and anon, or at times, necessitated to act their parts in opposition to the holy desires and design of the true and faithful servants of God, whose hearts are deeply set within them for the advancement of the power of godliness in the world, above the form of it, and not to acknowledge, or do homage unto any person, or persons, claiming dominion over their faith, but unto Christ onely. The particulars, by one, or more of which, the said Ministers are wont to make the hearts of persons truly godly, heavy and sad, are these (with their fellows) 1. They are expresly enjoyned by their Patent to shew their child like (that I say, not blind) obedience to their Grand∣fathers (the Bishops) by saying over their Creed, and their Pater-Noster, over, and over, and over, once (at least) every month, toge∣ther with the rest of the devices comprehended under the Title of Common-Prayer, and this publickly, and in the face of their Congrega∣tion, appearing also in their Masters Livery [I mean, the Surplice] that all men may know to whom they belong, and whose Servants they are. This is one great nuysance done by these men to the spirits of those who truly fear God. 2. They bow down their necks to the yoak of Ceremonies, and yeeld that observance to the fopperies of men, which is due to the most weighty precepts of God. 3. There are few of them, who content themselves with the simple observation of these Ceremonies, but think it their duty to take pitty on them, be∣ing so generally hated, opposed, and condemned, and to speak a good word for them now and then, and to justifie both the practice and im∣position of them. 4. There are not many of those, that are least ob∣noxious amongst them, but will think it, either their duty, or their
wisdom, or both, to steal an Opportunity (sometimes) to speak ho∣nourably of their gracious Lords and Benefactors, to commend their Function as Sacred, and of Divine Institution, and as singularly neces∣sary for the Peace and good Government of the Church, &c. 5. Who is there of them, but, be he never so concise and short in his Prayer before his Sermom, yet alloweth a large roomth for the mention of his Reverend, if not Right Reverend Fathers in God; (as if they sus∣pected that God would not know that they meant them, unless they presented them in their Pontificalibus before him) yea, and giveth flattering and unbeseeming Titles to other great persons also? 6. They are the smallest number of them, who will not semel in anno (at least) teach (in effect) the importune Doctrine of blind Obedience to Supe∣riours, both Ecclesiastical and Civil: It is like, they will not teach this Obedience under the term of, blind, because Protestant Writers have made it infamous amongst persons of this profession, by oft charg∣ing the Doctrine of BLIND Obedience, as Antichristian, upon the Jesuites. But when they fall upon hammering this nayl (I mean of obe∣dience and subjection to Superiours) they so sorge it, as that they leave no liberty or freedom of judgment, or conscience, to inferiours, to judge of the lawfulness, and unlawfulness of the Superiours command; but conclude those amongst transgressors, and persons worthy severe punishment, that refuse to conform themselves to their injunctions, though their judgments and consciences conclude them never so (mani∣festly) unlawful. And what is this, but (in effect) to preach and press the ungodly, yea, unmanly doctrine of blind Obedience? Yea, some of them do not forbear to place the Perfection, or highest strain of that Mortification and self-denyal, which they preach, in that kind of blind Obedience to Superiours, which hath been mentioned. 7. They are not a few of those that are of best esteem in the said party of Ministers, who will not find, or take occasion (sometimes) to vent themselves in unworthy and base reflections upon the Power of Godliness, and upon persons more tenderly conscientious than themselves, and who strain at the Camels, which they swallow. 8. (and lastly,) There is hard∣ly one of a thousand of them, that (according to their duty) will cry aloud, and lift up their Voice like a Trumpet, to shew their great Lords and Masters their great transgressions, in persecuting the Servants of the living God, in suppressing their Christian and just Liberties, in thrusting their zealous and faithful Teachers out of the Sanctuary, in obtruding upon them dumb Doggs (or worse than dumb) or greedy Wolves, in their stead; in exasperating the spirits of Rulers against them, and representing them as persons dangerous to the State, and
troublers of its Peace; in assenting unto, if not procuring the making of hard and cruel Laws against them, (with the like.) These are part of the unhappy wayes and practices, by which even our best Preachers of the Episcopal Character, are alwayes apt, and often wont, to make sad the spirits of holy and good men, when they hear them: so that though they may (possibly) hear several Sermons from them, from none of which they shall actually suffer in any of these kinds; yet they cannot at any time go to hear them with any reasonable Secu∣rity, but that some or other of this Gall and Vinegar will be given them to drink. This then is another Consideration to take off our edge from hearing them. CONSIDERATION IX. As for the generality, or far greater part of the body of that Mi∣nistry, from which we endeavour to perswade good men to turn away, they are a company of sad souls, men, who (according to the Proverb) Animam habent pro sale; they have souls serving only to preserve their bodies from putrifying: Some of them profoundly ignorant, scarce understanding their Rubrick, or how to finde out the Psalmes and Lessons appointed for the day in the Bishops Calender: others, drown'd in sensuality, desperately debauched, much fitter to be made Priests to serve at the Pagan Altars of Bacchus, and Venus, than to minister the Holy things of Jesus Christ: others possessed with a spirit of prophaness, which maketh them bold to take the Name of God in vain, and to make frothy jests and conceits of things most sacred: Others wolfishly covetous and cruel, rigorously exacting of their People the utmost Farthing of Wages, which the Law alloweth, for the smallest pittance of Work, or Service, which the Law tolerateth. All these have (as it were) given hostages to Satan, to secure him that they will never make any hostile attempt upon him, nor disturb him in his possession of any soul under his power. Now this retrimenti∣tious party of the Ministry we speak, are , fellow-members of the same body of Ministers, with those, whose Character was given in the former Consideration, and to whom we here likewise gave the preheminence in worth, amongst and above all their fellows: So that those respects, and that honour, which we cast upon these in our atten∣dance upon their Ministry, redound (in part at least) unto the others also: and so by countenancing the worthiest and best, of this disor∣dered order, we countenance and comfort the worst and vilest likewise; For (as the Apostle saith) If one member be honoured, all the members
rejoyce with it, 1 Cor. 12. 26. [viz. as being partakers of that honor which is done unto it:] In like manner, when we confer the honour of our presence upon such of the Episcopal Clergy, who are least obnoxi∣ous, we encourage and rejoyce the heart, even of the refuse and tail of this Clergy also, these being flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone, and all of them in their calling to the Ministry, descended from the loyns (or hands rather) of the same Ghostly Fathers, the Bishops. Now for Christians to honour that (though at a distance, and in a colla∣teral way only) which Christ himself hath pronounced to be good for nothing, no, not so much as for the Dunghil, but only to be cast out, and txodden under foot by men, (Mat. 5. 13. with Luke 14. 33, 34, 35.) must needs be judged a very great dis-service unto him, and of a most un∣grateful resentment with him. CONSIDERATION X. Whereas the Ordination of Ministers, when regularly and duly performed, is of a very promising consequence unto their Ministry, the blessing of God (as it were of course) following it; the Ordination of the Prelatical Clergy, being not only contrary to the Laws established by Christ, in the Common-wealth of Israel, for the government there∣of, but also managed and transacted by men that are no friends of God, nor lovers of his Saints, nor of the purity of his Worship, nor of the power of Godliness, is, in respect of the success of their Ministry, much more threatning, than promising, God being no wayes like to give any testimony from Heaven unto them, being sent forth into his work upon terms so highly dishonourable and displeasing to him; for, the Prayers, by which the Minister to be ordained, is recommen∣ded unto the Grace and Blessing of God, in the work of the Ministry, by those that are present, and assisting in the business, being (upon the matter) the All in All, of, or in, the transaction (for laying on of hands is only a Ceremony, and questioned by some whether necessary, yea, or fitting, to be used in these dayes) and the sacrifice of the wicked being an abomination unto the Lord, as the Prayer of the upright is his delight, (Prov. 15. 8.) we have but a quick-sand for a foundation of any hope, that Ministers Prelaticall ordained, are sent forth unto the great work of the Gospel, with a blessing, and not rather under a curse. Besides, suppose we (for argument sake) that our Lord Bishops, and their Chaplains (who are the great, if not the only doers, in the Solemni∣ties of their Ordination) were lovers of God indeed, and no wayes disaffected against persons, truly holy and conscientious; yet the Mini∣sters
ordained by them, not being to serve or minister unto them in the most important affairs of their souls, it is not like that their prayers for them, or for the blessing of God upon their labours in preaching, would be (in any degree) so effectually fervent, as the prayers, where∣with the Ministers, who are by the particular Churches of the Saints chosen to serve them, in the high concernments of their eternal salva∣tion, are, by them solemnly assembled, with prayer and fasting for the purpose, presented unto God in the day of their Ordination. That Charity is rate, which keepeth not her self warmer at home than abroad. CONSIDERATION XI. Many who at first intended nothing more in hearing the Ministers we speak of, but their own Christian Edification and Comfort, and nothing lesse than to become Proselytes to their dead forms of imposed wor∣ship, or to comport with them in their detestable things (Ezek. 7. 20. I mean their Fanatick Ceremonies) or to approve of their Hierarchi∣cal Mission into the Vineyard of Christ, &c. yet by a frequent and fa∣miliar converse with them in their Ministry, have in time (and some in a very short time) been so transformed in their Judgements & Con∣sciences, as to swallow all these Camels without straining, and to make one spirit with them in all their Antichristian Principles and Practices. The heat of that pleasure and contentment which we sometimes take in the commendable and worthy sayings or doings of men, proves a snare unto us to fall in with them in sayings and doings of a contrary import, and which are of a very dangerous, if not destructive consequence un∣to us: so that in this sense it is not only true, that , evil ho∣milies, or discourses (as the Apostle expresses himself with the heathen Poet, 1 Cor. 15. 33.) but even , good and worthy commu∣nications, many times, occasionally, and from some kind of men, cor∣rupt good manners. The unsound and rootten Doctrines of the Pharisees (as of the Sadduces also) were (it seems) of a leavening nature, apt to Spread, and to insinuate themselves into the minds, and judgements, and affections of men. Our Saviour himself declareth this unto us, part∣ly by comparing them unto leaven, but more plainly by admonishing the people; yea, his Disciples themselves, over and over, to look to them∣selves that they were not ensnared with them: Then Jesus said unto them, TAKE HEED and BEWARE of the leaven of the Pharisees, &c. Mat. 16. 6. See also Mark 8. 15. Now one main reason why their evil and unsound Doctrines were so catching, and likely by little and
little to gain in the approbations and consents of their Hearers (was in all probability) their frequent teachings, and zealous pressings, of many wholesome and savory Doctrines and Truths, according to the tenour and true intent of Moses's Law: for as many an Horse, that is unserviceable, and worth little, by reason of some grand defect that is not easily discerned, is yet bought and sold at a considerable rate, Quod pulchri clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix. by reason of some features that are curiously commendable in them: In like manner many a mans Ministry may be approved & swallowed, root and branch, head and tail, by the brokery and mediation of some choice Sermons, or points of Doctrine, managed and handled effectu∣ally, or however to the high contentment of the Hearer, although this Ministry taken in the whole body, or course of it, be not so well and safely calculated for the saving of the Soul. I have heard of (and, in in part, known) some, to whom, when they first became hearers of the Prelatical Clergy, their imposed Common-Prayer, their lumber of Ceremonies, their Hierarchy, with all their implements and trinkets, &c. were Hey, Stabble and Wood, yea, or rather, Dung and Filthiness; who notwithstanding, by the droppings of the tongues of these men in∣to their ears, became, after no long time neither, so bewitched in their Judgments and Consciences, that all these were conceited by them as Silver, Gold, and precious Stones. Good words are oft-times too hard for good meanings, and lead men, honestly disposed, into a snare: nor is there any Method more commodious or promising unto men, whose design it is to work sober and good men out of a love and liking of some part of those Truths, which at present they believe, then by giving them their fill of satisfaction and contentment in some others of them. CONSIDERATION XII. Although we be in some strait yet to combine with any corrupt In∣terest or Correspondency, for accommodation or help, or to fall in with men, who have not God amongst them, however they may be otherwise of a very promising aspect unto us, hath often, if not al∣wayes, been of dangerous consequence unto those, that have attempt∣ed and expected, the bettering of their condition in such a way. When Amaziah, King of Judah, judging himself unable to wage war against the Children of Mount Seir, with his own strength, had hired
an hundred thousand MIGHTY MEN OF VALOUR out of Israel, for an hundred Talents of Silver, there was sent unto him a Man of God with this message; O King, let not the Army of Israel go with thee; for the Lord is not with Israel, &c. 2 Chron. 25. 6, 7. So the People of God seeking for help, first of the Assyrians, and afterwards of the Egyptians, even when they were in an afflicted and hard condition, got nothing by these applications but sorrow and shame: God threat∣ned them by his Prophet Jeremy; Thou shalt also be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria, Jer. 2. 36. The Scripture is pregnant with this Truth: See Isa. 8. 6, 7. That the Prelatical Interest is Ec∣centrical to the Glory of God, to the Cause and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, runs in a Channel by it self, a-part from, and in opposition to these, and consequently is carnal and corrupt, and obnoxious to the displeasure of God, needeth no anxious demonstration unto those, the eyes of whose minds are not bewitched and blinded with it; however, somewhat hath been argued to the point already in these papers, and somewhat more may be added before we conclude: and the question (if yet a question it must be) hath been largely discussed, and learned∣ly decided by others. As for the late reviving of this Interest amongst us, after it had lain sick, and languishing, ready to have given up the Ghost for many years together; it cannot be looked upon with a spi∣ritually-discerning eye, but (what is frequently observed in long and wasting sicknesses) a lightning before death: and as the setting up of Dagon the second time in his place, after he had once fallen upon his face to the Earth, before the Ark of God, occasioned his second down∣fall, by which he lost his head (1 Sam. 5. 3, 4.) so, according to the course of divine Providence, the lifting up of our Bishops from the gates of death, is like to prepare the way to their second death, or fall, from whence there will be no redemption. Now, the Ministers of whom we speak all this while, being of the Prelatical descent, are members, or appurtenances of this (I mean the Prelatical) Order, and have a great venture in the same bottom with their Ghostly-Fathers: So that suppose we should be somewhat scanted for Soul-accomodati∣ons, or much straitned for want of spiritual provisions otherwise, yet to have recourse unto these men (yea, be it unto the best of them) in their Ministry, for supplies in this kind, with an expectation that they should bless us, or befriend us in our need, is to comport with the unhallowed Interest we speak of, and to seek help of such a Generati∣on or Association of men, whom God (as the Scripture saith) behold∣eth a far off, taking no pleasure to be amongst them: and consequent∣ly, such an application of our selves for aid and relief, is like to turn
to no better an account unto us, than a disappointment, if not a far worse inconvenience. CONSIDERATION XIII. As far the greater number of the good People of God in this Nation stand now perswaded in their Judgments and Consciences, touching the hearing of Ministers ordained by a power ill-affected to Jesus Christ and his Interest on Earth, it is just matter of scandal and offence to the weaker sort of this people, and of sorrow and sadness of heart to many of them that are more spiritual, and knowing, to understand, or hear, that any of their Christian Brethren, formerly united unto them in the same mind and judgment against all the Superstitious and Antichristian doings amongst us, are (frequently) present in those As∣semblies, unto whom men sent unto them by the Prelates onely, pre∣sume notwithstanding to speak in the name of God, bearing themselves as the Embassadors of Christ, lawfully commissioned by him for the Service they perform. Now the Scripture oft speaks of scandalizing, in one kind or other, those that are weak in the Faith, as of a very sin∣ful and Un-Christian misdemeanor in those who are called Christians, and of a provoking resentment with Christ himself: But if thy Brother be grieved with thy meat [when as thy life and health may be preser∣ved with such meats otherwise, which will not offend, or grieve him] now walkest thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat [that is, eat no such meat, the eating whereof by thee, may very possibly through the scandal given thereby, prove his destruction] for whom Christ dyed, Rom. 14. 15. For meat destroy not the work of God. All things indeed are pure, but it is evil for that man that eateth with offence. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak. Hast thou faith? Have it to thy self before God. Happy is he that condemneth not himself [namely by scandalizing a weak Brother] in that thing which he alloweth [as lawful for him to do] Rom. 14. 20, 21, 22. For if any man see thee which hast knowledge, sit at meat in the Idols Temple, shall not the Conscience of him that is weak, be emboldned to eat those things that are offered to Idols: and through thy knowledge shall the weak Brother perish, for whom Christ dyed. But when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak Conscience, ye sin against Christ, [grieving and indangering those, who believe in him, and therefore are dear unto him] 1 Cor. 8. 10, 11, 12. And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it is better for him that a Milstone were hanged about his neck, and he
were cast into the Sea, Mark 9. 42. See also Matth. 18. 6. Luke 17. 1, 2. The clear result of these, and other-like sayings of the Holy Ghost, is, that to scandalize, offend, or grieve any weak Believer, yea though it be but by an undue exercise of our lawful liberty (lawful, I mean, otherwise,) is very unworthy the profession of the Gospel, and an indignity offered unto Jesus Christ, sorely threatning him that shall offer it, without repentance. It is true, where there is any obligation upon men by way of precept, or duty, to do that, at which a weak Christian is offended, here is no scandal, or offence given, but onely taken; and if any man be offended in this case, he must bear the bur∣then of his ignorance himself. God is to be obeyed, though the whole world should be offended at it. But that it should be incumbent or necessary, by any precept or command from God, to hear (at least ordinarily, and from day to day) Ministers of a Lordly creation, or Prelatical tincture, never yet (I suppose) came within the Verge of any mans thoughts, unlesse (haply) of some Episcopally addicted above their fellows: nay, the practise hath not found (that I can find or hear of,) any competent Defender of so much as the lawfulness of it, to this day. Therefore if it should be given (by way of Charity) unto those, that have made bold to take the liberty of hearing the Ministers we wot of, that this their practice, simply, and in it self con∣sidered, is lawful; yet in the case of so much scandal and offence, as it gives to many thousands of their weak Brethren in the Nation, it be∣comes in them Un-Christian and Unlawful; yea, and it is the more Un-Christian and unworthy, in as much as it further causeth much sad∣ness and grief of heart, even unto those that are of more understand∣ing; because, besides the scandal given by it unto the weak, they judge it a practice altogether, and in it self, unwarrantable, as being deroga∣tory unto the Royalities of Jesus Christ, as Sole King, and Law-giver unto his Church; of which, as somewhat formerly, so a little more may be said hereafter. CONSIDERATION XIV. The practice lately mentioned, and hitherto disswaded, as it is of∣fensive to all good Christians, who either suspect, or conclude, the unlawfulness of it, and in this respect is a breach of the Law of that tender Love, which we owe unto them; so is it of no good consistence, no not with that Love, which we stand bound to shew even to those persons themselves, whom we hear in such a way, although they be men, who without any order from Christ, receive Ordinations and
Commissions to preach, from his Adversaries; (his Adversaries, at least in their claim and exercise of a co-ordinate power with his, in and over his Churches, which is a broad incroachment upon the most sacred and high Prerogative of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) But though this compliance in the Ministers we speak of, with the said Adversaries of Christ, be adjudged by us (and this according to the Truth) a sin very enormous, and of sad consequence to the Saints, and Gospel; yet we, who stand charged by our Great Lord and Master to love our enemies, ought not to strengthen the hand, or to harden the heart of these men in their evil way, or to do any thing which is like∣ly to be a snare unto them, to put the good day of Repentance (and consequently Salvation) far from them, but rather unfeignedly to en∣deavour with the best of our understandings, to convert them from the error of their way, and to save their soul. Now, as the Apostle Paul (as we formerly observed) prescribeth the withdrawing of our selves from a Brother that walketh inordinately, as a christian and proper means to make him ashamed of his sinful course, (2 Thess. 3. 6. & 14.) and so to move him to abandon and forsake it; So on the contrary, to give the right hand of fellowship unto, or to frequent the company of a person engaged in any sinful way (especially when, or whilst, he is actually walking in this way) must needs be a direct means of en∣couragement unto him to persist in his way, and to hide Repentance from his eyes: Therefore they who customarily wait at the door the lips of an ill-procured Ministry, and frequent the Assemblies where such a Ministry is exercised, if they be persons of any note for the knowledge and fear of God, or for a christian and worthy con∣versation, cannot but stand in his light, who officiates unto them in the way of this Ministry, so that he cannot see the error and danger of his way. For who is like to suspect (much less to be throughly con∣vinced) that such a practice or course, is evil, (especially being like∣wise commodious to the flesh) which receiveth such a weighty testi∣mony that it is lawful and good, as the approbation of persons of great esteem both for light and heat, in matters appertaining unto God, and this testified by their constant, at least frequent correspondings with it? CONSIDERATION XV. Yea, such of the Saints and Servants of God, being in any degree considerable in their Generation, who by the practice so frequently put to rebuke in these Papers, shall give countenance, credit, and con∣tentment to the present Generation of a Prelatical Clergy, hereby
become generative of a succession of birds of the same feather, and threaten Christians yet unborn, that they also shall be served with no better then a spurious & illegitimate Ministry. For when those young ones, who intend to serve at the Altar, and separate themselves for the office, and work of the Ministry, shall see and understand, that men sent forth into the Christian world by Prelatical Order and Au∣thority, find favour and acceptance in the eyes of good and discerning Christians, as well as those that are set over the Churches of the Saints by the holy Ghost himself, how shall not their consciences be hereby emboldned to accept, without scruple, of a Prelatical mission, and through the temptation, strongly to imagine, when they clim'd up, and got in at the window, that they came in by the right door? Yea, upon the same account, how shall not the Prelates themselves, though (at present) abundantly satisfied (in their affections, at least) touch∣ing, not the lawfulness onely, but even the necessity of their needless (though not harmless) Office and Function in the Church, be made two-fold more the Sons of confidence, that they are the Stars of the first magnitude in the hand of Christ, and that the Axle-tree of the universal Church turns upon their shoulders? But somewhat to this effect in a former Consideration. CONSIDERATION XVI. The Holy Ghost taketh notice that such Teachers, unto whom the world (that is, carnal and worldly persons, professing Christianity) are wont to resort in the exercise of their Ministry, taking pleasure and contentment therein, are no true Ministers of Christ; insinuating withal, that sincere Christians, and persons spiritually-minded, more generally (at least) decline them, and deny them their presence at their teachings. The beloved Apostle John, speaking of false Teach∣ers, giveth these three characters of them (amongst some others) first, That they are of the world (that is, members of the fraternity, or bro∣ther-hood, of worldly men; or lovers of this present world:) second∣ly, That they speak of the world; or, (as it might well, and more signi∣ficantly, I conceive, be translated) , out of the world: meaning, that they are wont first to make enquiry into the world about them, and to inform themselves what humours and practices, what principles, notions, and opinions, are most predominant, and of best resentment, amongst both the great men of the world, and the generality likewise of the People (although these commonly are at too good an agreement in such matters;) and again, what Doctrines and
Tenents will be well enough born and endured, by both, without any disgust of him that shall teach them; and on the contrary, what are like either to bring him into trouble, or to cast him out of favour, &c. and when they have satisfied themselves, and well understood the World in these particulars, they model and mould the tenour of their Ministry and Preaching accordingly, waving those Truths, be they never so importantly necessary to be made known, the preaching or owning of which, they understand is like to shake and weaken (if not wholly to annihilate or destroy) their interest in the World; and with∣all, cunningly wresting and perverting the Word of God in such pas∣sages, which truly understood, rise up with great evidence and power against those Doctrines, by which they oblige and insure the World unto them. Upon some such account as this, they are, or may be, said to speak , of, or out of, the World: This is a second character of them. Thirdly, The third (and last) is, that the World heareth them; meaning, that carnal and earthly-minded Professors of the Gospel (for Professors, either of Judaism, or of Paganism, can∣not be here meant) resort unto their Ministry, are their setled and accustomed hearers, and well apaid and satisfied with their teachings, 1 Joh. 4. 5. Whereunto the Apostle immediately subjoyns; We are of God; he that knoweth God, heareth us; [that is, relisheth our Mi∣nistry, and with diligence and delight, attendeth on it] he that is not of God, heareth not us, &c. clearly implying, that such Teachers, unto whose Ministry carnal Professors and loose Christians, ordinarily and in great numbers are wont to gather themselves, sitting from time to time with contentment and satisfaction under it, are not Teachers of that kind, or of that spirit, with whose Ministry spiritual and sound Christians can long rest satisfied, or care to attend upon. These are those Strangers, whom Christ saith his Sheep will not follow, but will flee from them, because they know not their voice, John 10. 5. There∣fore as the Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians, that he could not speak unto them, as unto Spiritual, but as unto carnal, because they walked in several carnal practices (1 Cor. 3. 1, 3.) So may we without any breach, either of Charity or Truth, look upon those Christians, as savouring the things which be of men, more than the things which be of God, who addict themselves to such a Ministry, which is constantly frequented, countenanced, approved, applauded, and delighted in, by such Pro∣fessors of Christianity, who by their ignorance, prophaness, and all manner of debauchery in their lives and conversations, blaspheme their holy Profession, and stain the glory of the ever-blessed Gospel of God. And is not this the undeniable and appropriate character of
the Prelatical Ministry? Do not the dregs and refuse of the Nation, generally, and in all places, gather themselves unto it, and rejoyce over it, being as well apaied with it, as Micah was with his Idola∣trous Priest made of a silly wandring Levite? Now know I (saith he) the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest, Judg. 17. 13. Yea, this Ministry seems to be, both intended by the foun∣ders of it (the Prelates) and also form'd and managed by the inferi∣our Clergy, who exercise it, for the gratification of such persons, and this rather, by perswading them that they are truly religious, and in favour with God already, than by making them so indeed. Therefore they who being (not in their own eyes only, but even in the judge∣ment of discerning and found Christians) living members of the houshold of Faith, shall notwithstanding relish and savour a Ministry calculated for the World, and accepted by it accordingly; hereby give testimony against themselves, that as yet they retain too much of the spirit of this World, to be fill'd, as they ought, with the Spirit of God, and of the World which is to come. CONSIDERATION XVII. Neither may it be unworthy our consideration in the case before us, that we read in the Scriptures, that unbelievers and persons destitute of the saving knowledge of God, did sometime come into the Religi∣ous Assemblies of the Saints, to partake of their Ministry, and were herein blameless: 1 Cor. 14. 22, 23, 24, &c. but do not any where find that Believers were wont to fall into the Assemblies of Idolaters or Unbelievers, to receive instruction amongst them, or from their Priests, in things appertaining unto God and his Worship. Yea, the Apostle Paul adjudgeth it a practice altogether inconsistent with true Christianity, to eat and drink with false worshippers at their Idolatrous feasts, although it were done to escape persecution, 1 Cor. 10. from ver. 13. to the end of ver. 23. And the sacred Author of the Epistle to the believing Hebrews, admonisheth and exhorteth them, thus; And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works; Not forsaking the assembling of OUR SELVES together, as the manner of some is, &c. Heb. 10. 24, 25. He admonisheth Believers to assemble with Believers, and not to withdraw themselves from these, especially not to joyn or mingle themselves in the Assemblies of Idolaters or Unbelievers, as some degenerating spirits amongst them (it seems) did, out of fear of suffering persecution. For that these Christianiz'd Hebrews were in a sore storm of persecution when
this Epistle was written to them. and consequently, when they were charged not to forsake the assembling of themselves together, is evident from many passages in it: yea it is more generally conceived by the best Expositors, that the principal intent and scope of the Epistle was to support and comfort the Hebrews under thieir great afflictions for the Gospel, and to encourage them unto constancy and perseverance in their profession of it unto the end. So that feare of persecution is no Christian ground for those that desire to approve themselves faithful unto Jesus Christ, and the Gospel, to turn Renegadoes from the holy Assemblies of the Saints, in which, and over which, they formerly rejoyced, and to run to the tumultuous and disorderly conventions of carnal and prophane persons, as unto cities of refuge, hoping in these dark thickets to find covert and shelter from those stormes and tem∣pests, which threaten those, who know God better, and feare him more, then to shrink from him for feare of men. And great reason there is, why Saints, who have been nourished with the sincere milk of the Ghospel, bred, and brought up (as Christians) amongst their (Spiritual) Peers, in their Holy Assemblies, should not dare to quit these Schools of light and holiness, to become proselytes to the un∣hallowed and rude Synagogues of a politique and worldly constituti∣on; because they seldome, or never, change their quarters upon these terms, but they doe it to their certain damage and great loss in their Spiritual estates, if not to the loss of their immortal crowns, them∣selves in the end. For when they have for any space of time, been in∣fluenced, and seasoned, by the Prelatical Ministry, which still super∣intends these Congregations, experience sheweth that they are chang∣ed, not from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, but from glory to shame (I mean, from a Christian and humble frame and temper, unto that which is worldly, sowre and supercilious) as by the spirit of the world, working effectually (for the most part) in the Children of a Prelatical Ordination. And as Country huswives observe that when any of their pulleyn, or hens have been trodden by Crowes, up∣on this unnatural copulation, they lose their native shapes, become deformed, and seldom or never thrive, or recover after it: In like manner, when men and women, who under a Christian Education in the congregation of the Saints, were known to have been upright-hearted towards God, and good men, zealously addicted to the purity of Gods worship, haters of all superstition, and flesh-devised Ceremonies brought into this worship, lovers of the Saiuts, asserters of their li∣berties, promoters of their comforts, holy, humble, harmless, &c. when (I say) they shall forsake these assemblies, and go in to a Pre∣latical
Ministry, and converse familiarly with it, after a short time they are sound to degenerate, and grow out of their kind, savouring of quite another spirit; now they become learned Pleaders for Baal, their consciences are enlarged to swallow Ceremonies of all sorts in the worship of God, as smoothly, and with as little regret, as fishes drink water; to approve of the Hierarchy in their usurpations, oppres∣sions, and vexatious practises against the Saints, to cry up that Idol of Jealousie [the Common-Prayer-Book] in disparagement of the Hea∣venly gift of Prayer in the true Ministers of Christ, as those Idolatrous wretches (Act. 19. 28.) cryed out (in a wrothful opposition to Paul's Doctrine concerning the true worship of the true God) Great is Dia∣na of the Ephesians; they become alienated in their affections towards the Saints, chusing for their bosome converse, persons whom they judge most able, and willing withal, to justifie them in their Apostacy, and to maintain the Prelatical cause, from the one end to the other, with greatest zeal and dexterity; they become self-willed, self-con∣ceited, boasting of their knowledge, imputing it to the weakness and ignorance of all others, that they do not sacrifice at the same Altars with them, or that they scruple, question, or condemn any thing, which they allow and practise. In a word, these Crow-trodden professors, (let the Metaphor offend no man) by offering and suffering, their judgments and consciences to be ridden by a Prelatical Clergy, be∣come in time, not only transform'd into an uncouth, strange, and hard favour'd kind of Christian, much unlike unto themselves, when, and whilest they consorted with the Sons and Daughters of God, and drank of the same waters of life with them; but (for the most part) so intoxicated also, besotted, and bewitched with their new wine, that they seldom, or never, recover that lovely image of God, wherein they formerly appeared, to the comfort and joy of many a precious Soul: For that which Solomon saith concerning the woman, which forsaketh the Guide of her youth, and forgetteth the covenant of her God; namely, that none that go unto her return again, Prov. 2. 17, 19. may be said of those that turn aside to a Babylonish Ministry: God in judgment, poureth out upon them the spirit of deep sleep, and closeth their eyes (Esa. 29. 10.) so that they hardly ever awake out of the snare until they dye. CONSIDERATION XVIII. Nor falleth it much short of a Demonstration of the Evil, or sin∣fulness, of that Way, from which, by many Arguments, we
have disswaded already; that so much secular violence hath been, and still is imployed to compel and force all men into it. How did the Prelates heretofore, before the great mountain of their power and glo∣ry was removed by the late King and Parliament, turn every stone of tyranny, cruelty and oppression, to constrain both men and women to keep their Parish Churches? What troups of Summoners and Ap∣paritors were levied up and down the Nation, to hunt out, and pursue, like Blood-hounds, all, both male and female, bond and free, whose Judgements were too full of Light, & their Consciences of Goodness, to drink of the waters of those polluted Cisterns, which they had hewn out, chusing rather (some of them) to worship God chastly and pure∣ly, even with two or three gathered together in the name of Christ; a∣mongst whom he hath promised his presence (Mat. 18. 20.) although in such an attempt as this they exposed themselves to the danger of being, with Daniel, cast into the Lyons Den (I mean of being brought into their High Commission, or some of their Antichristian Consi∣stories) many (I say) chusing this, rather than without any such dan∣ger, to communicate with the Parish Assemblies, either in their adul∣trous worship or idol ministry: and of late, since their deadly wound was (almost) healed, how have they, by their sorceries, insinuated and prevailed with the Legislative Powers of the Nation, only to legiti∣mate Ministers of their spurious brood and conformity, and to disin∣herit all others of their functions, as if they were basely descended, because they do not call them, Fathers; and not only this, but by se∣veral penalties also to restrain all assemblings of men for the Worship of God, and their Christian Edification, excepting only in consort with such Congregations, where they shall be necessitated to hear such Teachers only, who bring their office of teaching from under their hands? Thus doth the spirit of Prelacy, in conjunction with an arm of flesh, & with the powers of this world (instead of those of the world to come) labour in the very fire, to bring the whole trade of hearing to the shops of their journey-men, be their wares never so braided, sleight, or deceitful: and this verifieth the saying, Superbia appeti∣tum habet unitatis & omnipotentiae; i. e. The Pride of man greatly affecteth unity, and omnipotency. Now it can hardly be shewed, that ever the real interest of the Gospel, or true Christianity, endea∣voured their advancement or promotion in the World, by threatning or inflicting secular punishments, as Fines, Confiscations, Impri∣sonments, Banishments, Deaths, or the like, upon those who refused to comply with them; but upon their service, and for their gaining upon the world, rather offered and exposed their own proselytes
and friends, upon all occasions, to the suffering of these things from the world: Whereas (on the contrary) it is well known that Idolatry, Superstition, and false Worships (almost in every kind) in all ages, for the enlargement of their quarters, and for encreasing the number of their Proselytes, have, according to their strength, warred after the flesh (in the Apostles phrase) and pleaded their cause with Fire and Sword, and all manner of outward severities, against those that refused com∣pliance with them. By how authoritative, and bloody an Act of Uniformity, did King Nebuchadnezzar endeavour a universal concur∣rence of all within his vast Dominions, to joyn with him in his Idola∣trous Worship of the Golden Image which he had set up? Then (all his Princes, and great Officers of State, being summoned together, and present) an Herald cryed aloud, To you it is commanded, O People, Nations and Languages, That at what time ye hear the sound of the Cor∣net—ye fall down and worship the Golden Image, which Nebuchad∣nezzar the King hath set up. And whoso falleth not down, and worshippeth, shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 4, 5, 6. And when only three persons in his Dominions, were ac∣cused as Nonconformists to this his Decree, with what fierceness of indignation doth he proceed against them? First, In his rage and fury he commanded to bring them before him: Being come, he himself exa∣mined them, or rather expostulated with them about the crime laid to their charge, as if it had been an high affront put upon him, or an undervaluing of his Majesty and Power. Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abeduego? Do ye not serve my gods, nor worship the Gol∣den Image which I have set up? Even as our Prelates, and great men of their Inspiration, count it an insufferable disparagement and re∣proach unto them, when persons of meaner rank in the World, judge it not safe, or well-pleasing unto God, to worship him after the same mode with them, as with the same Ceremonies, the same Gestures or Postures of body, in the same places and assemblies (the same, I mean, in nature or kind) and especially with the same Liturgies and forms of Prayer, when they shall authoritatively, solemnly, and with a borrowed visor of gravity and devotion, impose all this upon them. When the King having re-minded the said three Servants of God, of the tenour of his Decree, concerning the worshipping of his Gol∣den Image, and threatned them with the heavy doom therein expres∣sed, in case they should persist in their Nonconformity; after all this, understood that they nevertheless, without any demurre in the case, stood fast and firm in their resolution, not to comport with his Decree, in a great fury he commanded that the Furnace should be
heated seven times hotter than ordinary, and that the strongest men in his Army should bind these three persons, and cast them into it, ver. 13, 14, 15. &c. We may in this story, as in a glass, behold the spirit of Idolatry and Superstition, acting, like it self, in rage and blood, to compel, through dread and terrour of outward sufferings, an univer∣sal subjection of all persons, to all the prescripts and commands of it. In like manner, the Beast that had two horns like a Lamb, but spake as a Dragon [that is, that professeth the humility and meekness of Christ, the Lamb of God, but speaketh in his Bulls, and Excommunications of Kings and Princes, and whole Nations, like the Great Red Dragon, the Devil, who boasteth of a power, delivered and given unto him, to dispose of all the Kingdoms of the World as he pleased, Luke 4. 6.] this Beast (I say) according to that Heavenly Vision, wherein his pra∣ctices and doings were long since revealed by Christ unto his beloved Disciple (John) causeth ALL, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive [from him, or by his command] a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: and that no man might buy, or sell, [and consequently, have any means of livelyhood, or subsistance, as far as he could hinder it] save he that had the Mark, or the Name of the Beast [meaning his own] or the number of his Name (Rev. 13. 16, 17.) that is (in the general; for we must not, at present, enquire af∣ter the particulars) save only such, who should give testimony, by one means or other, that they owned his Authority, and submitted their Consciences to his Faith and Religion. And vers. 15. it is said, that by his power he gave Life [or Spirit: the word is, ] unto the Image of the Beast [that is, to his own Image; meaning, that what by means of his temporal, and what by means of his spiritual power, which he should get in the world, he would so animate and inspire his Image; that is, the Systeme, or aggregate Body, of his Ecclesiastical Consisto∣ries, or Courts of Judicature in all places, which in their bloody pro∣ceedings and actings against the true Worship and Worshippers of God; resemble his Genius and frame of Spirit, and may therefore be termed his Image]  this body, or Image of his: saith John, He had power to give Life, that it should both speak, and cause [that is, so speak, as to cause] that as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, [that is, reverentially own and acknowledge this his Jurisdiction and Power, as given unto him by God] should be killed. The other Inter∣pretation of this passage given by some, maketh the result of it the same in reference to our present purpose: And the practices of the Papal Judicatures for many Ages past, in all places and Nations under Hea∣ven, where the Authority and Faith of the triple Crown prevailed,
give a pregnant and loud testimony to the truth contained in the Scri∣ptures now cited; yea, and afford a clear light for the right under∣standing of them. It were no hard matter to exemplifie and confirm the obsrvation now before us, by many more instances, as well from the Scripture-Records themselves, as from Histories of the best cre∣dit otherwise. So that it is a shrewd presumption, that a co-assem∣bling with Parish-Congregations for the Worship of God, and the or∣dinary or constant hearing of a Prelatical Priesthood, have nothing of God in them, make not for edification in Faith and Love, in that they are so rigorously exacted, and under such severe penalties imposed upon all men by the greatness of this World, this being the accustom∣ed, known, and appropriate method of Idolatry, Superstition, and hu∣mane-Inventions, to maintain and propagate themselves, and their interest, in the World: Nor are they that ride upon the high places of the Earth, wont to be so zealously addicted or through-hearted, to pro∣mote the real concernments of Heaven, where they have to do. The reason why Christ shall not deliver up the Kingdom, which at present he administreth, unto God the Father, until he hath put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power, is declared thus: For he must reign, till he hath put all ENEMIES under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. clearly implying that persons of high interest in the World, are seldom in any other sence, friends to the Kingdom of Christ, but only by opposing it; their enmity and opposition to him [in his Saints and Worship] ministreth an occasion unto him, according to the projecture of the Wisdom and Counsel of God, to continue this Kingdom so much the longer in his hand; namely, until, in a most equitable and fair process of Justice and Judgment, and after much patience, and a large space given for Repentance, he shall abolish for ever their places of dignity and power from off the Earth. CONSIDERATION XIX. When God hath vouchsafed a sufficiency of , and these un∣questionably lawful, though not so rank of flesh, or so highly promi∣sing (upon such an account) as some others, for the attaining of any, good and desirable end; as well a declining and forsaking of these means, (whether out of diffidence of the sufficiency of them for the end desired, or upon any other reason whatsoever) to espouse others that are more (carnally) flattering, and pretending to more strength and efficacy, but want the feal of Divine Approbation upon them; as the associating of means of this latter kind with those of the former,
hoping by such a Conjunction as this, to pursue our desires with less danger of a defeat, or disappointment; I say, both the one and the other of these projections and practices have still been displeasing un∣to God, and of sad consequence unto those, that have been no better advised than to make tryal of them. Examples of the truth of this observation the Scriptures afford many. When King Ahaz would not rest satisfied with the strength of his own Kingdom, and men, by whom God had promised him protection & deliverance from the two Kings his neighbours, who combined in War against him, but judg∣ed it better policy to call in the King of Assyria to his assistance, con∣trary to the mind of God made known unto him by the Prophet, in these words, Take heed, and BE QUIET [that is, trouble not thy self in seeking after forreign help, from one place or other: It is much the same expression, and upon a like occasion, which we find, Isa. 30. 7. Their strength, saith God, is to sit still; meaning to de∣pend upon him in the use of such means for their protection and safe∣ty, as they had at home, or he should direct them unto, and not to weary themselves, or waste their treasures, by sending abroad to court strange Princes for their aid] Fear not, neither be faint-hearted, for the two tails of these smoaking fire-brands, &c. This King (I say) by this prudential course (as he supposed) for the preservation of himself and his Kingdom, provoked the just severity of God to the great mi∣sery of both, Isa. 7. 4. compared with vers. 17, 18. &c. and 2 Chron. 28. vers. 16, 19, 20. For brevity sake, and partly because of the affi∣nity with the subject matter of the 12th Consideration preceding, hath with the Argument of this in hand, and partly because the Observa∣tions asserted for Truths both in the one, and the other, are so agree∣able to the Wisdom and Righteousness of God, as the Great Judge of all the Earth, we shall forbear to argue any more Texts of Scripture upon the service of what hath been laid down as the strength of our present Consideration, although there be very many more, which both in face and in heart, carry the substance and effect hereof, as (by name) Isa. 8. 6, 7, 8. -30. 1, 2, 3, 15, 17. 2 Chron. 25. 6, 7, 8. Jer. 2. 36, 37. Ezek. 16. 26, 27, 28. (with several others) I shall onely instance the case of those Judaizing Christians in the times of the A∣postles, who to make all sure (as they thought) for their Justification before God, would needs joyn the righteousness or works of the Law, and more especially Circumcision, with the belief of the Gospel, or Faith in Christ for the obtaining of it. But through a carnal diffi∣dence of the sufficiency of that way and means, which God hath san∣ctified for their justification, whilst they went about to supply the ima∣ginary
defect hereof with an additional means suggested by their own wisdom (or folly rather) unto them, they miserably miscarried in that so important a design, meeting with condemnation, instead of justifi∣cation, from the hand of God; according to what the great Apostle plainly declared unto some of them: Behold, 1-Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised [namely with an opinion of obtaining justification, either in whole, or in part, by it] Christ shall profit you nothing. And again: Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justi∣fied [that is, expect, or hope to be justified] by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace, Gal. 5. 2, 4. Let us now bind the present Consideration, with what hath been proposed and argued in it, fast and close to our present purpose. First, Certain it is that God hath provided, yet and at all times, or at least, ordinarily, even in times most threatning the sincere profession of the Gospel, affordeth unto his Saints, means both unquestionably lawful, and unquestionably sufficient, (if the Scripture may be Judge in the case) through his accustomed Grace and Blessing, for their E∣dification, Comfort, and Salvation. Secondly, It is no less certain, that neither is a Prelatical Ministry, nor an attendance hereon, any means, authorized or approved by God, for the promoting or effecting of these ends. From hence, ac∣cording to the plain tenour of the premises laid down in this Conside∣ration, it roundly follows, that either to decline and forsake the means vouchsafed unto us by God for our Edification and Salvation, to im∣brace others, or out of a conceit or pretence of an insufficiency, or defectiveness in these means, for those ends to joyn others with them, which he hath not authorized, as (by name) the attendance upon a Prelatical Ministry (however specious or highly promising this means may be in our eye) is a policy or course, much more like to endam∣mage and hinder us in those great concernments of our souls, than any wayes to bless us in promoting them; as it is said of Tilgath Philnezer King of Assyria, of whom Ahaz King of Judah had desired aid against his enemies, that when he came unto him, he distressed him, but strength∣ned him not: Yea, it is added the second time, as a matter worth the minding, that he helped him not, 2 Chron, 28, 20, 21. Now that God affordeth unto his People sufficient means at all times for their spiritual Edification and Salvation, without the help of a Prelatical Ministry, might be proved at large from the Scriptures, if the case were doubtful enough to require it. But the more degrees of visibility there are in the Object, the fewer degrees of light will serve the visive faculty to discover it.
First, The Scriptures themselves, diligently read, and with a good and honest heart searched into, are able to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Tim. 3. 15. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheri∣tance amongst all them which are sanctified, Acts 20. 32. But these [things] are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his Name, John 20. 31. These places also well understood, speak (with many others) the same thing. Luke 16, 29, 31. Psal. 19. 7, 8, &c. 2 Pet. 1. 19. John 5. 39. Rom. 15. 4. Heb. 4. 12. Secondly, If any shall pretend, that the Scriptures, at least in many places, are obscure, and hard to be understood aright without a learned Interpreter; the answer is at hand: 1. The great variety of learned and profitable Expositions on all parts of the Scripture, wherewith the good providence of God hath inriched this Nation in their native tongue, in these our dayes, render such a pretence as this, in refe∣rence to the People of God amongst us, as light as vanity it self: Nor is it like that the present Ministry founded upon the Apocryphal Order of Prelacy, should be more Canonical or Orthodox, in giving out the mind of God in the Scriptures, than they. Not to mention the like variety of elaborate and solid discourses, (well nigh) upon all par∣ticular Subjects, or Heads of matter relating to Christian Religion. 2. It is a generally-acknowledged Truth, That in all things simply ne∣cessary unto Salvation, the Scriptures are plain, and the sence of them obvious to every ordinary understanding. 3. (and lastly, for this) The Judgments and Understandings of many, if not of most Christians, have in all ages been led aside from the mind of God in the Scriptures, (and this in things of very material consequence) by the false lights of such their Teachers, who were in great esteem for parts of learning, and knowledge in the Scriptures; in whom hath been verified that of the Prophet: O my people, they which lead thee, cause thee to erre; they swallow (for so the Original) the way of thy paths [meaning, that they do not stand much to consider what they teach thee, either to beleive, or practise] Isa. 3. 12.—9. 16. Thirdly, The Saints are able to build up one another in Faith, and Love: yea and are exhortted, or commanded, by God so to do: But ye Beloved, building up your selves on [or, in] your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost; Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord, &c. Jude 20, 21. Wherefore comfort your selves to∣gether, and edifie one another, even as ye also do, 1 Thes. 5. 11. See also Eph. 4. 16. Col. 3. 16. Rom. 15. 14. Heb. 10. 24, 25. Jam. 5. 19, 20.
Fourthly, Even the smallest number of them, two, or three, meet∣ing together upon such terms as they may at any time, and sometimes (at least) ought, may have the presence of Christ amongst them as oft as they desire; and consequently, need not be in any danger of mis∣carrying in their important design of Salvation: for where two, or three (saith Christ) are gathered together in my Name [that is, either out of Conscience of my command in that behalf; or rather, out of any real trust, or hope, that they may have in God through me] there am I in the midst of them [meaning to bless them, and cause them to prosper in any holy business they shall meet about, the presence of God, or his being with, or amongst, any of his creatures, still importing such a thing, Gen. 39. 2, 21, 23. Exod. 3. 12. Josh. 1. 5. Mat. 28. 20. Deut. 7. 21. Josh. 22. 31. and elsewhere, very often] Mat. 18 20. Now so small a number of Godly persons, as two, or three, may, with a little prudence and caution, even in the hardest, and worst of times, meet together in the name of Christ, without much danger from their enemies. If Christ had said, Where five, or six, are gathered together in my name, there, &c. his presence amongst his Saints must have been sought for by them at their greater péril, and with more obnoxious∣nesse (as it seems) to the Laws of men. So then the four means now mentioned (to which might be added, if need were, others more of a like character, as Prayer, Meditation, &c.) together with the use of them; are 1. Authorized by the Broad Seal of Heaven, being confes∣sedly on all hands approved by God: and 2. (as hath been now shew∣ed by the cleer light of Divine Revelation) are sufficient by his ordi∣nary blessing upon them, to build up the precious souls of the Saints in Faith and Love unto Salvation, at least when the great Benefit and Blessing of a Christian and worthy Ministry shall, by his providence, either operative, or permissive, be denyed unto them. But Secondly, Concerning a Prelatical Ministry, it is terrae filia, a daughter of the earth, being the product, or fruit, of one kind of those Tares, which the enemy took his opportunity to sow in the field of God, whilst men slept, (Mat. 13. 25.) and hath no Communion with that Divine Politie of Church-Government, which the Gospel holdeth forth, and commendeth unto the Christian world; nor hath it been fed, or nourished, with the sincere milk, but with the blood of the Scriptures; whose genuine sence in all places arrested at the suit of it, hath been sacrificed upon the service of so mischievous an Idol. And inasmuch as it came not down from Heaven, it is not like, according to the course of Gods standing providence observed in the present Consideration, to help any of his Sons or Daughters thither, but rather
to obstruct and hinder them in their way: especially it being withal considered, that they are otherwise provided of means sufficient, both for their present Comfort, and future Salvation in due time; and then such, upon which the light of God's approbation shineth clear, yea, and which, as he hath prescribed them to use, so hath he promised to bless with the attainment of their end. CONSIDERATION XX. When any great storm or tempest of Persecution is raised against the sincere Profession of the Gospel; and whilst it is incumbent here∣on, so that the Saints cannot, with any liberty or freedom, meet open∣ly in their holy Assemblies for the Worship of God, and their Chri∣stian Edification, but if they shall attempt it, they must do it at their peril, either of loss of their Liberties by Imprisonment, or of their Estates by Fines or Confiscations, or of their Country hy Banishment, or of their Lives by Death: under these & such like exigencies, Christ is wont secretly to direct his faithful Ones unto more private opportu∣nities, for their spiritual repast, and religious employments, that so they may be somewhat more out of the way of their enemies rage, and serve their God with the less fear of men: yet he is not wont to incline them, or to put it into their hearts to disband themselves, or break up their respective companies, and to become as Sheep scattered, every one feeding a-part by himself, and from all his fellows, but to assemble and keep together in such number as they shall find willing to accept of such opportunities, and judge convenient in point of safety, to as∣semble together. Yea, it is the Genius and Property of a soul devoted in Love and Loyalty unto Christ, earnestly by Prayer to seek directions from him in such hard seasons as we now speak of, whither to repair for its spiritual accommodations, and for his presence amongst his Saints. Tell me (O thou, whom my soul loveth, saith the religiously ingaged Soul, unto Christ, Cant. 1. 7.) where thou feedest, where thou makest thy Flock to rest at noon [that is, vouchsafe to direct me how and where I may partake of that soul-nourishment, and those spiritual refreshments, wherewith thou art wont to support and comfort thy Saints and People in their holy meetings at noon; that is, in the heat of Persecution, as the best Interpreters do expound it.] From hence these two things are observable. 1. That Christ is not wont to feed his Sheep in times of persecution, where he usually feedeth them in dayes of liberty and peace: If this were so, there had been no occasion for the religious soul to have desired of him to know, where He fed his Sheep at noon (in
the sence given) she knew well enough where he fed them in the cool and refreshing times of the day, as evening and morning; as, viz. in open places, where every man might know & come into their Assem∣blies; but in the heat and scorching time of the day, at noon, he still withdrew them into some more shady and retired place, where the danger or troublesomeness of the heat might not interrupt them, whilest he should be feeding them. 2. It is further observable from the same words, that the soul-prudently Christian, and throughly ap∣prehensive of her spiritual concernments, is not wont to rest satisfied with her closest Communion with Christ, or with his giving his loves unto her in private, but besides, and beyond this, longeth after those Communications of himself, wherewith he is wont to entertain his Friends (his Saints I mean) when they gather themselves in any num∣ber unto him; especially in times dangerous, and threatning unto those that shall thus assemble, his heart in these times being (usually) more enlarged, and his mouth wider opened, unto them, than ordi∣nary; even as some men count it generous to feast their friends more sumptuously in the time of Lent, than at other seasons. The Soul which made the request unto Christ now opened, in the latter part of the verse giveth, this reason of it; For why should I be as one that turneth aside [or rather, as the former Translation, with others, read it, to, or unto] the flocks of thy Companions. By the flocks of Christ's Com∣panions, are meant (as some of the best Expositors that I have met with understand the words) the Congregations or Assemblies relating to, and depending on such Pastors who make themselves Christs Com∣panions, or Equals, by instituting new formes of divine Worship, as well as heSocios Christi vocat bitiosos  qui  cultus, ue ac Chri∣s ipse, insti∣erent. . Others, not much differing from the former, by the Companions of Christ here, understand forreign or strange Shepherds, unrelated unto Christ, and having no Communion with him, but only in the appearance and appellation of a ShepherdSociorum  i.e. Pa∣rum  qui nibil te , sed   ecum estoris specie, appellatione.  in notis locum.. So that the reason why the religious Soul desireth of Christ to be directed unto his feedings in times of Persecution and danger, is, lest she might otherwise be tempted, and through weakness yeeld to fall in with such Assemblies, which have Ministers or Shepherds only so called, set over them, by whom she know that He took no pleasure to feed any of his Sheep. But that Christ (as hath been said) in tempestuous and foul weather, (when the spirit of the world rageth high against Church-meetings) is not wont to feed his Sheep in the champion, or open fields, where all men use to come, but to lead them into by-places, or solitudes, into in∣closed grounds, narrow lanes of a long time dis-used, or un-occupied,
under hedg-rows, or the like, and to feed them here; the Scriptures inform us elsewhere. When the Woman that brought forth the man∣child, was persecuted by the Dragon, there were given unto her two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, prepared for her of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred, and threescore dayes [the whole time of her persecution] Rev. 12. 6. with 13, & 14. Therefore the Woman that brought forth the Man-child (that is, the successive body of Saints, or true Belie∣vers) during the times or reign of the Beast, is not spiritually fed and nourished in such Assemblies or Congregations which are publick∣ly authorized, countenanced, or approved by the Beast, or by the World, which goeth wondring after him (Rev. 13. 3.) but in those which are retired, solitary and private, and which neither of them can well brook or bear, but that God hideth them. The Meetings of Christians for the exercise of their Religion, being hateful unto the Jews, and which they (it seems) would not have tolerated amongst them, had they had knowledge of them, without doing mischief, in one kind or other, to those that thereby should have provoked them: The Apostles themselves, by the guidance of the Spirit of God (for they were not, doubtless, led unto it by the wisdom of the flesh) the better to secure themselves from their rage when they assembled, 1. Made choice of a private house to meet in. 2. Of a private time, the Evening, yea, some what late in the Evening (as some collect from passages recorded, Luke 24. 29. to vers. 36.) 3. Of as much privacy in that private house, as they could well devise; for the doors of the room where they were, were shut: And in this posture of privacy, they did enjoy the blessed Presence of Christ. Then the same day at Evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut, where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus, and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you, John 20. 19. We reade of another meeting of Christians for the Worship of God, under all the same circumstances of privacy; and this, doubtless, upon the same account (I mean, for fear of the Jews) Acts 12. vers. 6, 12, 13, 14. compared: This meeting also had Christ in the midst of it (in the sence formerly declared) for by his Mediation and Interposure, their Prayers fetch'd Peter out of a strong Prison with an high hand. So again, we reade of another religious Meeting of the Apostles, together with a considerable number of other Christians, in an upper room, for the greater privacy and security, comers and goers being oft upon occasion, and for civility sake, brought into one, or more of the lower rooms of an house, when there is no occasion of their going or carrying
up into the higher. Besides, a continual voice may much more easily be heard, and estimated, by those that only pass by an house out of alow room, then from an high; this being more remote, and from whence, though the sound of a voice may (possibly) be sometimes heard below, yet the articulateness of it, being confin'd to a narrow∣er Sphere, expireth and is lost by the way. And though Dr. Hamond laboureth in the very fire (as his manner is when any thing occurs him in his way, that seems to frown upon Episcopacy) to prove, that the upper room here spoken of, was not any room in a private house, but one of the upper Cambers of the Temple: yet he hath so much of a man in him (I mean of Ingenuity, whereof when a man suffers himself to be dispoyled, he is only a man so called) as to acknowledge (and this twice over, for failing) that Christians here met, did that more private∣ly, which could not, we may persume, be done in the Temple [he might have added, nor in any Synagogue] in any more publick place, the Chri∣stian Religion being not much favoured [that is, bitterly hated] by the Jews, [even as the Religious Worship of the true Saints of God amongst us, is not much favoured by those, that say they are Jews, and are not (in the sence of these words, Rev. 2. 9.) And what the Doctor here granteth; namely, that believing Christians kept their holy Assemblies by, and amongst themselves, privately, for fear of disturbance, or mis∣chief (in one kind or other) from those, that hated their way and man∣ner of serving God, maketh as much for our purpose, as if the or, Ʋpper room, which he so wearieth himself to find in the Temple, should prove to have been in a private house. But whether the word here translated an Ʋpper room, signifieth in this place, an upper Cham∣ber in the Temple, or no; certain I am, that Acts 20. 8. it signifieth an upper Chamber in a private house (or at least, in an house common∣ly and properly so called) where also we find another private Meet∣ing of Christians, and Christ (in the sence we wot of) in the midst of them: Elsewhere it signifieth (and this twice together, as Acts 9. 37. & 39.) an upper Chamber in a private house; but no where at least in the New Testament, an upper Chamber in the Temple. But this by the way. From the tenour and contents of the present Consideration, it clearly appeareth, that in times of trouble, when the Saints are not permitted, but under great dangers or penalties, to assemble themselves together for their holy occasions openly, Christ is not wont to bless them, or do any great things for them in such promiscuous Congregations, which are of a worldly complexion and constitution, as well Priest as People, and which, upon this account, are publickly countenanced and rejoy∣ced
in; but his manner and good pleasure hath been, in such hard seasons as these, to allure them into the Wilderness, and there to speak kindly and graciously unto them, or to gather them together under his wings privately, as a hen gathereth her chickens, and so to communicate his heavenly warmth and vivifick influence unto them. CONSIDERATION XXI. They that keep the Word of Christ's Patience, shall be kept by him from the hour of temptation, which will come upon others to try them, (Rev. 3. 10.) whereas they deprive themselves of the benefit and blessing of this precious Promise, who shall betray, forsake, or decline this Word. By the Word of Christs Patience, though it be with some difference, yet not great neither, understood, may (with greatest pro∣bability, as I conceive) be meant, any Gospel-Truth, which is opposed with a strong and high hand, in the place where we live, and can hard∣ly be owned and professed without suffering, or at least, without dan∣ger of suffering in one degree or other: Such a Truth as this, may be called, The Word of Christ's Patience, because he is the occasion, by his charge upon men in that behalf, why any man suffers for the profession and defence of it at any time: (or more briefly) because it is for his sake that any man, in any case whatsoever, suffereth for it. In a State or Nation professedly Pagan, and where Christianity, upon what terms soever professed, is a reproach unto those that profess it, or matter of deeper inconvenience, the whole Gospel, or Doctrine hereof in gene∣ral, is, and may be called, The Word of Christ's Patience. In King∣doms or States, professing Christianity, the Doctrine of the Gospel in general, is never this Word, because every man here may profess that he believeth this Doctrine in general, without exposing him∣self to any danger of suffering. But the Word of Christ's Patience in such Communities of men as these, is alwayes some particular consi∣derable and weighty Truth of the Gospel, one or more, which either plainly and in express words, or else constructively and by clear con∣sequence, whether in opinion or practice, or both, is denied or oppo∣sed, either by the Ruling Powers, or by the Ministers, and others re∣puted Learned and Orthodox, or by the generality of the People here: So that whoever shall keep this Word, that is, shall discover himself to own such a Truth, or shall upon occasion openly plead the cause of it, renders himself hereby obnoxious unto the hatred and ill-will of the one and the other, and consequently unto all such sufferings, both for nature and degree, which they shall think meet, and please to inflict
upon him (God permitting them so to do;) as on the contrary they may be said to let go, sell, or betray such a Truth, and give it up, as an Error, into the hand of the enemy, who being convinced in their consciences that it is a Word or Truth of Christ, shall notwithstand∣ing, either dissemble, or deny it, when they ought and are called to give testimony unto it, or shall comply with the Adversaries in their opposition to it. Now concerning the Promise made by Christ, unto those that shall keep the Word of his Patience (in the sence given) by being kept by him from the hour of temptation, which will come [or, may come at one time or other] upon the generality of Christians, to try them [throughly, or with the greatest and forest tryal of all] is meant, That when other Professors of the Gospel shall, in many places, be tryed with a bloody persecution, whereby they will be brought to this sad exigent, either to waste their consciences by denying some manifest Truth, or else either to lay down their lives, or to undergo somewhat that will be bitter in the next degree to it; they shall be kept or preserved from that storm. So that this is the Rule of Equity, by which Christ de∣clares that he will walk towards those that profess his Name and Gospel; They that shal shew themselves loyal & faithful unto him in owning any of his Words, when they are opposed, although their faith∣fulness in this kind shal expose them unto, or bring upon them, lighter sufferings only, and, which are more easie to be born, shall notwith∣standing, upon the account of such their faithfulness, be excused or ex∣empted by him from greater tryals, and which are unto blood: where∣as those that shall faulter with him, and turn their backs upon any of his Words or Truths, when the danger of owning them is but little (comparitively) shall be in danger of being exposed and left by him unto temptations that are most fiery and grievous, and exceeding difficult to be resisted. Let us now apply the consideration of these things to the business in hand. One of the Words of Christs Patience amongst us at this day (and which, for weight and moment, hath the preheminence amongst some others that may passe under the same denomination) is, That Christ is not onely the Sovereign, or Supream, but the sole and onely Law∣giver unto his Church and People, in matters appertaining to the Wor∣ship of God. Whether the open asserting and maintaining of this Truth in the terms now expressed, and no further, or otherwise, will create danger or trouble unto any person amongst us, or no, I cannot affirme: But certain I am, that both an oral and practical maintaining of it, in the right sense and import of the said words, is
of a threatning concernment amongst us. For if the Legis-lative au∣thority in matters of Divine worship, and things requisite, and ne∣cessary, at all times, and in all places, hereunto, be vested in Christ alone, then they that shall keep, own, and give testimony unto, this word, must not consent unto, or comply with; either in word, or deed, any model or form of praying, any ceremony, one, or more, in, or about the worship of God, any Church-of∣fice for the regulating and ordering of this worship, which Christ him∣self hath not prescribed, ordered, and appointed, but are introdu∣ced, imposed, and commanded, under mulcts, and penalties, by hu∣mane power and authority only. For any thing by command made necessary in, or for, the worship and service of God, and without which men are not permitted (but at their peril) to worship him, hereby becomes essential to this worship, and so somewhat, and a part, of it. Those circumstances, which God commanded in relation to any main part of his worship under the Law, though they were, in themselves considered, things indifferent, as that the beast to be sa∣crificed should be killed on the side of the Altar Northward, Levit. 1. 11. that the crop and feathers of the fowles sacrificed should be cast besides the Altar on the East part, ver. 16. That the Priest should dip his finger in the blood of the Bullock offered, and sprinkle it seven times before the vaile, and put some of it upon the horns of the Altar, Levit. 4. 17, 18. All these circumstances (I say) with many others of like consideration, however indifferent in themselves, yet being com∣manded by God with reference to his worship, and so that this could not be performed, regularly and with acceptation, without the obser∣vance of them, hereby became parts of his worship: From whence (by the way) it is observable likewise, that for men to claim an au∣thority, or right of power, to make indifferent things necessary, in, for, or about, the worship of God, is to make themselves equal in authority (at least in matters of this high and sacred concernment) with God himself; and consequently, to deny Jesus Christ to be the sole Law-giver unto his Church in things appertaining to the wor∣ship of God. And as under the Law, God himself commanded all indifferent things in, and about, his worship, which were in any re∣spect commodious, or comely in it, or for it, judging all other in∣different things, which he left un-commanded in this case, to be as necessary and fitting to be thus left (I mean, un-commanded); in like manner it argueth very unworthy (that I say not, blasphemous) thoughts of Christ in any man, to question, either, 1. Whether he per∣fectly knew what indifferent things were necessary, or in any respect, or degree, would be comely in the worship of God under the Gospel;
or 2. Whether he neglected to prescribe by himself, or (which signifieth the same) by his Apostles, all such particular things; which he knew to be any wayes needful, or meet, in this worship, judging it better to betrust the wisdom and wills of men with the enjoyning of them, or (at least) of some of them, then his own; or 3. (and lastly) Whether he did not well know, that it was better, and more conducing, both to the glory of God, and to the benefit and comfort of his Church and people, that such indifferent things, as he left free, and un-commanded, should remain so still, and that his counsel in that behalf, should not be defeated, or made void by men; who now by their impositions of such things, which Christ would not im∣pose, deal between him, and his people, much alike as Gehazi did between his Master Elisha, and Naaman the Syrian: Behold (saith this unworthy servant) My Master hath spared Naaman this Syrian, in not receiving at his hands that which he brought: But, as the Lord liveth, I will run after him, and take somewhat of him: And being as good (or rather, as bad) as his word, he undetermined, and disanul∣led, through his base covetousness, the honourable intention of his worthy Master, which was, that Naaman's cure should cost him no∣thing, 2 King. 5. So do they who Diotrephes-like, affect a prehe∣minence, and power in, and over, the Churches of God, which are incompetent to them, (in effect) say: Our Master Christ spa∣red his Church and people, and was over-indulgent to them in mat∣ters appertaining to the worship of God, left them at great liberty, imposing few external observances upon them herein, and those easie; but as the Lord liveth, our little finger shall be thicker, or heavier, unto them, than his loynes, we will enslave them, and set task-ma∣sters over them, Vicars-Generall, Chancellours, Arch-Deacons, Officials, Commissaries, Apparitors, (who shall spoil both for themselves and for us) Church-wardens, Sides-men, Parish-Priests, Parish-Clarks, (all, either Apostolical, or Apocryphal, Officers in the Church;) Moreover we will lay a load of Ceremonies and Observa∣tions upon them, we will compel them to worship and serve God with the same Liturgies, Letanies, Collects, and other devices, wherewith we are content to worship him; to hear, where, and whom we shall appoint them to hear; we will make them pray, when we say, pray; bow, when we say, bow; kneel, when we say kneel; stand up, when we say, stand up; be uncovered, when we say, be uncovered; swear, when we say, swear; inform, when we say, in∣form: In a word, we will rule them with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel, if we find them refractory and
disobedient unto us, and not to do all things that we command them. Doubtless those men, in whom such a spirit as this worketh effectually, do not in good earnest, and with the whole heart, acknowledg Jesus Christ to be the Sole Law-giver unto his Church and People. For where he imposeth one Law or Observation upon them, concerning the Wor∣ship and Service of God, they impose ten (if not a greater number than so); thus through their pride, and lust of domineering, utterly defa∣cing and defeating the gracious intendment of Christ towards them, which (as was lately said) was to make the yoke of the Worship of God, in respect of the external part of it, exceeding easie and leight, and to leave it free and dis-incumbred, as from the rudiments of the world, so from the Traditions, Ritual Injunctions, and Impositions of men. Therefore they who any wayes countenance or comply with, these men in their clame, or exercise of such a power, in or over any of the Churches of Christ, or shall submit unto any of their Injunctions issu∣ed forth, and imposed, under a pretence, or by vertue of this power, do not keep, but give up, and betray that word of Christs patience, which asserteth unto him the Sole Legis-lative power over all his Churches, (as hath been declared) and consequently, lay themselves open and naked unto farre more grievous and formidable temptations, which sooner or later they are like to fall into, if not to fall under: For the promise of being kept by Christ from such temptations as these, is (as we have heard) made onely unto those, who have kept the word of his patience, [meaning, when the danger of keeping it was less, and the temptation to forsake or betray it, more easie to be resisted, and to stand upright under]. I shall not need (I suppose) further to add, that they who do homage with their attendance and dependance upon that Ministry, which is pretended to be erected in the Church, and upheld by the power which magnifieth it self against the Prerogative of Christ in his power over his Churches, do most notoriously and palpably be∣tray that word of his patience, which asserteth this his Prerogative unto him (the erecting of a Ministry, being one of the most daring, insolent, and Heaven-affronting actings of that usurped power), and so for fear of being beaten with Rods, take a direct course to be scourged with Scorpions. These are some of those important considerations, which being throughly digested in the Judgments and Consciences of good Chri∣stians, cannot (leightly) but so affect them, as to cause them to distast the practice of hearing a Prelatical Ministry. I could have encreased the number of them with some others, which (haply) might have done as good execution upon the judgments of some, as any of them. But I
am earnestly perswaded that God will ere long raise up a better work∣man, who by his direction and assistance, shall hammer this nayl to more purpose, then hath yet been done. In the mean time, because errour, and sin, have their glosses and colours, as well as Truth and Righteousness, their weight and substance; let us briefly survey some of the fairest Pretexts, wherewith the practice hitherto censured, and disswaded from, may (probably) hope, yea (possibly) be confident, that she is able to justifie her self. Cities and Castles, that have been long built, and were never yet attempted, at least never conquered, either by siege or assault, are like to impute their freedome in this kind, and long continued safety, unto their own strength, The Ar∣guments then, whereby the practise condemned in the premises, seems most desensible, are these following: And verily I shall acknowledge my self a Debtor, as for a signal courtesie, unto him that shall either mend, or improve these my Arguments, or offer me others of more strength. Argument I. Our Saviour Christ, to the multitude, and to his Disciples, saith thus; The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat: All therefore whatso∣ever they bid you observe, that observe and do: but &c. Mat. 23. 1, 2, 3. If it were lawful, yea matter of duty, (for so the command, or charge of Christ maketh it) for them to observe and do whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees taught them according to Moses's Law, then is it lawful and no less matter of duty, for Christians to observe and do, whatso∣ever Prelatical Ministers teach them according to the Gospel: For these are not, at least many of them are not, a more unworthy Genera∣tion of men then they: And if they stand bound to do whatsoever they thus teach, they stand bound to hear them when they teach, at least they may lawfully hear them. Answer. 1. The reason why Ministers of a Prelatical Edition ought not to be heard in their publick teachings, is not because they are a Generation of men more wicked and vile then the Scribes and Pharisees were, but because their delinquency is such, and so unhappily conditioned, that we cannot wait upon them in their Ministerial employments, without being partakers with them therein; and we stand expresly charged by God not to be partakers of other mens sins, 1 Tim. 5. 22. Eph. 5. 11.
(with many other places). For deriving, and accepting, their Mini∣sterial Function from an Anti-christian Power (I mean, such a Pow∣er, which exalteth it self against, and in many things, above the pow∣er of Jesus Christ, acted and exercised by him, in and over his Chur∣ches, as was shewed in the last Consideration) in and by every ex∣ercise and administration of this their Function, they avouch and justi∣fie that so highly-sacrilegious an Usurpation: and they who counte∣nance them with their presence, whilst they act this great unworthi∣ness, do nothing less then justify such their justification, and so must needs share with them in the iniquity of it. Whereas the Scribes and Pharisees, of whom our Saviour speaks in the Text before us, according to Dr. Hamand's own Paraphrase of the place, were of the Sanedrim, and to be looked upon by them [the people, and his Disciples themselves] as their lawful Rulers that had Authority over them, succeeding Moses and the seventy Elders, Numb. 11. 16. According to this notion (which is not altogether improbable) there was no reasonable ground of any scruple about hearing them, when they expounded and declared Moses his Law. And if it could be proved on the behalf of the Ministers, whom we judg it unlawful to hear in their Teachings, that they in any such sence, sit in the Seat, either of the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, or Teachers, which Christ, when he ascended up on high, gave for the perfecting of the Saints, &c. neither should we question the lawfulnesse, yea or duty (upon occasion) of hearing them. But the conjecture of Grotius seems more rational, and better comporting with the Scriptures; which is this, That the Jewes had no Consistory of Tryers, nor any person or persons, publickly authorized among them, to examine, or take account who were meet, or fit to be allowed for expounders of the Law, but that it was free for any man, whose heart served him for the work, or take it upon him, and to instruct and teach the people accordingly: only adding, that more generally, they who did take this profession or work upon them, were Pharisaici instituti, of the Sect or perswasion of the Pharisees: As (saith he) among the Romans, it was permitted unto any man that would, to plead any mans Case at any Bar of Judicature in their state. That which we read, Acts 13. 15. favours the said conjecture: And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, ye Men and Brethren, if ye have any word of Exhortation for the people, say on: which seems to imply, that any person amongst them, might, without breach of any order or custome, teach the people pub∣lickly out of the Law and Prophets. If it were thus, neither could there be any the like reason for the Jewish people to deny their atten∣dance
upon the Scribes and Pharisees in their teachings of the Law, which, according to the premises, there is, why Christian people should separate themselves from Priests of the Prelatical Unction in their preachings of the Gospel. These pollute themselves by polu∣ting the most Sacred and Blessed Name of Jesus Christ, in accepting their Office, or Power of Preaching, upon the terms they do, where∣by they become irregular for this employment; whereas the other, supposing them of competent abilities for the work, committed no of∣fence, offered no indignity unto God, in accepting, or entring upon it. Argument II. The Apostle Paul rejoyced, yea, and professed that he would rejoyce, that Christ was Preached every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Phil. 1. 18. Therefore certainly it is lawful, yea, and more than lawful (even matter of duty, upon occasion) to hear such (at least) of the Prelatical Teachers, who preach Christ, which it seems hard to deny but that some of them do. For such preaching, which no man can hear without sin, cannot be any just matter of rejoycing unto a Christi∣an, nor (indeed) unto any man. Answer. 1. This general expression, every way, is to be limited and under∣stood, according to the Subject matter in hand. There is nothing more frequent in the Scriptures than to deliver that in general terms, which yet admits, not of a simple, or absolute universality in the meaning of it, but only of such, which renders it consistent with the tenor and notion of other Scriptures, and is (for the most part) com∣mensurable to the present occasion, Matth. 23. 3. Mark 1. 5.—11. 24. Luke 2. 1. 10.—6. 30. John 10. 8. Acts 5. 42. Rom. 1. 5. (to omit other instances without number). Besides, it is a common and true Rule, Praedicata sunt talia, qualia à subjectis suis esse permituntar: In Propositions, the sence of one part is to be regulated by, and ac∣commodated into the sence and import of the other. So then the Apostles meaning (in the words before us) is not that the preaching of Christ, or that which may (in a sence) be called, the preaching of Christ, in what way, or upon what terms, or by what persons soever, it should, or could be performed, would be matter of rejoycing: Such a sence as this (besides that the words no wayes necessitate unto it, but rather
lead aside from it, as may be shewed presently) is inconsistent with what we find in the Scripture elsewhere. For when the Devil preached Christ, affirming, upon his knowledge, that he was The Holy One of God, Mark 1. 24. Luke 4. 34. And again, that he was Christ, the Son of God, vers. 41. The Lord Christ was so far from rejoycing in being thus preached, that he rebuked the Preacher, and commanded him to hold his peace, Luke 4. 35. 41. Mark 1. 25. Thus the Damsel that followed Paul and those with him, crying out, and saying, concerning them, These men are the Servants of the Most High God, which shew unto us the way of Salvation, did, in effect, and after a sort, preach Christ, by giving testimony unto those, who did truly preach him, yet Paul rejoyced not in this her preaching of him, but on the contrary, was grieved at it (as is expresly said, Acts 16. 18.) They also preach∣ed Christ, who preached Justification and Salvation by him, though not by him alone, but in Conjunction with Circumcision, and the works of the Law; yet neither did Paul rejoyce in his being preached in such a manner, or upon such terms, Acts 15. 1. Gal. 5. 2. 4. Phil. 3. 2, 3. Gal. 5. 12. compared. Nor is it like that he would have much rejoy∣ced in his being preached by such persons, of whom he prophesieth, Acts 20. 20. Grievous Wolves—not sparing the Flock. Amongst other Characters of persons, of whom God himself demandeth What have you to do to declare my Statutes, or that you should take my Covenant into your mouth, this is one; that when they saw a Thief, they consented with him, Psal. 50. 16, 18. which in a very Emphatical sence, is found in those Preachers, whom we judge it unbecoming a good Christian to hear. For in accepting their Office of a Ministry from the Hierarchical Lords, they consent with them in their sacrilegious robbing the Lord Jesus Christ of that Authority and Honour, which God hath judged meet to confer upon him, in anointing and appointing him to be the Sole Law giver unto his Churches in things appartaining to the Wor∣ship and Service of God, as well in things to be practised, as in things to be believed. But of this we have spoken formerly. By what hath been said to the Argument in hand, it is sufficiently evident, that the Apostle's general expression concerning Christ's being preached every way, is to be understood with limitation; and consequently, that no Argument, or Proof for any thing, can be drawn from the generality of it. 2. In propriety and strictness of speaking, Christ cannot be said to be preached by a Prelatical Ministry. For only then he may be pro∣perly said to be preached, when he is preached, and set forth, like unto
himself, without any diminution, impairment, or dis-mantling of his glory: and if any person be preached under the name of Christ, unto whom any part of that glory is denyed by those who preach him, in, or by, their act of preaching him, which is appropriate unto the true Christ, the Christ of God, it is not this Christ, but another, an Idol Christ, that is preached. Now the Ministers we speak of, in, and by, their very act, or deed, of preaching, justifie those, who both in words, but especially in deeds, deny the true Christ to be the Sole Lawgiver unto his Chur∣ches (as hath been proved) which yet is one of the richest, and most il∣lustrious and shining Gems in that Crown of Glory, which God the Fa∣ther hath set upon his head: and whilst they preach such a Christ as this (a Christ who hath no such Prerogative, or Royalty, belonging to him, as a Sole power of Legis-lation unto his Churches, but hath weak and sinful men joynt-sharers with him in his Authority in this kind) do not preach the true, the real Christ, the Christ of God (as Peter termeth him, Luke 9. 20.) but a Christ formed in their own imaginations, & having no existence but here only, and in the fancies of their Proselites, and is not able to justifie men from their sins, nor to save their souls, though (it is like) they ascribe these great things unto him, as Idolaters in all Ages have been wont to attribute the great works of God unto their Idols. And as Christ is said to APPEAR in Heaven for us, (Heb. 9. 24.) meaning, that his very appearance before God, considering what he hath done, and suffered on our behalf, is, without any other expression, or application of himself unto him, as by oral request, prostration, or the like, a most effectual interceding with him for us: In like manner the Sole appearance of a Prelatical Minister in the Pulpit to perform the act of preaching, it being known and considered, how, and by what, or whose, Authority, he appears upon such an account here, is an in∣terceding, or pleading, with all that are before him, for that Antichri∣stian and lawless power, which is blasphemously claim'd, and exerci∣sed, by the great Masters of the Hierchy, and consequently, against that Most Sacred Prerogative of Christ, which giveth him the honour of being the Sole Law-giver unto his Churches. And as the Apostle speaketh of some, Who [in words] profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, (Tit. 1. 16.) So in case such a Minister as this, should in his Doctrine, or Sermon, affirm Jesus Christ to be the Sole Lawgiver unto his Churches, yet in, and by, his very act of preaching he should deny it. 3. (and lastly) This distribution, Whether in pretence, or in truth, plainly sheweth, that the Apostle in his general expression of Christ's
being preached every way, intended only these two; his being prea∣ched, either , in pretence [or, as some render it, occasi∣nally] or, in truth. Now Christ may be said to be preached, , in pretence, when they who preach him, are acted and moved hereunto by indirect and unworthy ends, and yet would be thought to preach him in truth, [that is, out of a sincere and upright intention, and desire, to serve God, and man in the work.] And inasmuch as they who preach Christ out of sinister and by-ends, may neverthelesse be free from Scandal, and from the guilt of any such known Act, or Practise, whereby Christ is denied in any of the Divine Royalties appropriate to his Kingly Office, or annexed to his Mediatory Throne, their preach∣ing of Christ, if it be according to the true tenor and purport of the Gospel (as it may be, and as it seems, theirs was, by whom Paul sup∣poseth he was preached in pretence) in respect of the Glory that may hereby redound unto God, and the benefit that may accrue unto men, is just matter of rejoycing unto a sober and considerate Christian: yea, though it should be revealed unto him by God (as it was unto Paul in the case before us) that such a man's aims or ends in preaching, are not honourable, or Christian. But this maketh nothing for the countenanc∣ing of their preaching him, who openly consent unto, and are conse∣derate with, those, who devest him of his Glory, yea, and are publickly known to divide the spoyl with them. Argument III. Yea but some of those Ministers, whom you would make it unlawful for us to hear, are holy and good men, of exemplary lives and conversa∣tions, sober, temperate, just, full of good works, given to hospitality, charitable to the poor, &c. It seems an hard saying unto us, that it should not be lawful for us to hear such men as these, at least if in their preaching of the Gospel; they turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left, but keep close all along to the counsel and mind of God therein. Answer. 1. I verily believe, and this upon terms better pleasing unto those, with whom we are in contest, than of meer Christian Charity, that there have been more than a few of those, who have accepted their Office of Ministry from the irregular hand of Prelacy, of that Christian and worthy Character specified in the Argument, viz. holy and good, of exemplary lives, &c. Yea, I am not without hope, but that there may
be amongst us at this day a remnant of the same Generation, who are sound at the heart, and love Jesus Christ in sincerity, who (setting aside their compliance with Prelatical Usurpations and Superstitions, the great evil whereof may not as yet be arrived at their judgments) are Christianly Orthodox, both in their Lives and Doctrines: Nay, I doubt not but that the Prelatical Order it self hath, by it's enchant∣ments, tempted many of the true friends, and faithful Servants of God, into the embracements of it. But, 2. Our English Proverb, which remindeth us, that All is not Gold, that glistereth, may a little quallifie our credulity, without making any breach upon our Charity, in the case in hand; considering that the great Apostle himself, in reference hereunto, speaketh as much (if not much more) where he informeth us, as of a Secret, that it is no great thing [that is, no wonderful, or rare thing, as the word, great, often signifieth in the Scriptures] if the Ministers of Satan be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness, himself being transformed into an Angel of Light: Yea, he had spoken immediately before of certain false Apo∣stles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. So that men may be false Apostles, Ministers of Satan, and deceitful workers, [that is, may, in the course of their Ministry, slily, and subtilly, drive on some Un-Christian and Satanical design, dangerous to the Souls of those that hear them] and yet, both in their lives, and in the ordinary and general current of their Preach∣ing, outwardly appear so like unto Ministers of Righteousness, and of Christ [for they must artifically resemble them in both, to compleat their transformation] that it will be a very hard matter, till after some considerable space of time, and without much narrow observation, to detect and discover them. And it is much to be feared, that many of those few amongst us, whom we have ground, both from their lives, and ordinary teachings, to judge persons of Christian worth, and integrity in that way, will sooner, or later, bewray themselves not to be the men in heart, which for a time they were in face. For some, who are wont to quit themselves like Angels of Light in thier usual, and more fre∣quent Preachings, being persons also sober and grave in all that is vi∣sible in their Conversations, yet upon some occasions, and, for the most part, in their Sermons on dayes of Publick Humiliations, or Thanks∣givings, and sometimes in their Funeral Discourses, are prevented by thier proper and true Genius; so that the cloven foot now ap∣pears.
3. Amongst the Authorized Teachers of the Romish Faith, and Re∣ligion, Priests and Jesuits, there are some (and haply a larger propor∣tion) no wayes behind, if not before, the best approved of our Prelati∣cal Ministers, for any thing singular, either in their Lives, or ordinary Teachings. Therefore if we judge it not safe, or well-pleasing unto God, constantly, or ordinarily, to seek our edification in things ap∣pertaining unto God, and to our eternal Salvation, at the lips of these men, in their ordinary, or setled course of Teaching, why should we not be as conscientious and tender to seek it upon such terms at the mouths of those amongst us, whom our Prelatical Lords are pleased to send forth, and appoint for the same great ends, and services unto us? For (doubtless) as well the latter, as the former, are in the great con∣demnation of supporting an Antichristian Interest and Power, and this even by that which is commendable, and pleasing unto men, either good, or bad, both in their Lives, and in their Doctrine: and conse∣quently go hand in hand in promoting such a design, which counter∣works the holy project and design of Jesus Christ, which is, that his Saints may serve him without fear [as well of sufferings from men, as from God] in holiness and righteousness before him all the dayes of their lives, Luke 1. 74, 75. And it hath been seldome, or never known, that any great community, body, or party of men in the World, have long subsisted (at least upon any competent terms of credit, peace, or safety) but by means of some few of their Members (respectively) who by their wisdom & worth above their fellows, have been as pillars to bear up their several Polities, or Parties, and keep them from sink∣ing; as Paul speaking of James, Cephas, and John, saith, they seemed [or, were counted, as our former translation had it] pillars, (meaning, to support the Christian Interest in the world.) As though there be some thousands of Laths, and many slight pieces for partitions, and otherwise, in a building, yet those few Substantial and main pieces of sound Tymber, unto which the Architect coupleth and fastneth the rest of his work, are they which give strength unto the house, and make it able to endure, and stand, all winds and weather. So that when God (whether out of his wisdom, for the tryal of those, who profess his Name, or out of Judgment, to punish their unworthiness, or upon what other account soever, whether known, or unknown, unto us) plea∣seth to give way unto Satan, by his subtile and plausible insinuations and suggestions so far to tamper with the hearts and spirits of some Professors of the Gospel, as between them, to raise up, and set on foot, and for any considerable Tract of time to maintain and keep on foot,
a corrupt Interest under some Religious pretence (one, or more) in the Christian world, he is pleased likewise to suffer the plausible pleas, and pretences of this Interest, together with the large portion of worldly accommodations which it promiseth unto those, that shall es∣pouse it, so to dazle and blind the eyes of the reasons, judgements, and consciences of some wise, learned, and good men all along the conti∣nuance of it, that they shall not see the evil of it, nor yet be convinced hereof by those who do see it most clearly, but shall cleave fast and close unto it, and stand up in their might to justifie and plead the cause of it, It is said that the eyes of the two Disciples travelling to Emaus,  (Luke 24. 16.) were mightily, or powerfully held; by reason whereof they did not know the Lord Christ, though present with them in his proper countenance and face, with which they were so familiarly acquainted: only (as it seems by what Mark affirmeth, Chap. 16. 12.) he was somewhat disguised in his apparel; yet all this while their eyes were as open to see and discern all other objects, but onely the face of Christ, as at other times. In like manner the eyes of the minds and understandings even of men piously-learned and grave, may, upon Gods withholding his wonted concurrence with them in reference to the discerning of such, and such particular Truths, be so deluded, captivated, and bewitched with the false colours and appear∣ances of truth in the contrary-errors, that they will without fear, or scruple, embrace these, yea and with an high hand of confidence and importunity, rise up to justifie and maintain them: when as they may all this while approve themselves for men of an exact judgement, and discerning spirit between truth and error, in other cases. Men of this Character, or (at least) seemingly such (I mean, holy and good men, generally quick-fighted, but particularly blinded) generally have been, and are at this day, the main Props, and Supporters of all those adul∣terate and Anti-Evangelical Interests, and Combinations of men, which are found in the Christian world: (although I make a little more question, whether they also were such, who were the first Founders, and Authors of them.) Such persons as these now and then found within the Territories of the Romish profession, have been, and are, the breath of the Nostrils of that Religion: Such as these, taking part with the Admirers of, and Contenders for, the Common-Prayer-Book, prescri∣bed Liturgies, &c. Keep life and soul together in this party of men amongst us. Some such persons likewise, have incorporated them∣selves with that body of men, who dote upon the Prelatical Hierarchy (as if it had either Scripture, or sound Reason, to friend, or both) are helpers in chief to prolong the days of that Interest, which otherwise
would soon be Aposynagogized by the Christian world. And were there not some persons of the Character mentioned in the numerous retinew of those, who flatter Christian Princes into formal Antichri∣stianisme, by teaching them to lay claim to both Swords, as well the Spiritual, as the Temporal; neither would this Generation, or Sect of men, lift up their heads at that rate of height and confidence, which now they do. It were easie to adde many more instances, if need were: But by what hath been lately, and formerly, discoursed in these papers, it plainly appeareth, that the holy and good men, who have interessed themselves in the cause of Prelacy, and avouched the de∣scent of it from the Great Apostle and High Priest, of Christian Pro∣fession, by accepting their Office of Ministry from it, are they who have compassion on it (as the Ziphims had on Saul, when he persecuted David, 1 Sam. 23. 21.) and in, and by, the exercise of their Ministry, are the chief Contributers towards the maintenance of the life of it in the world. Therefore those worthy qualifications of holiness and good∣ness, in such Ministers, are so far from, being any reasonable Grounds, or Motives, unto Christians to strengthen their hand in the way of their present standing and relation unto Prelacy, by a consciencious at∣tendance on them in their Ministry, that, the evil tendency of this Mi∣nistry considered, they are rather grand dissuasives herefrom. For strike the shores and props from under a crazie and tottering building, the fabrique will soon fall as flat as the walls of Jericho, to the ground. Sathan by none of all his other Methods, or Devices, is able to con∣sult the peace of his Kingdom upon such terms of advantage, as by tempting holy and good men with secret overtures, or promises of en∣joying the goodly and great things of the world, to fall down, and wor∣ship him. Nor hath God any means more proper to weaken this King∣dome, and prepare it for destruction, than by opening the eyes of his Servants, that darkness be no longer for a Vision unto them, and that they hasten out of Babylon, which, whilest their eyes were held, they verily thought to be Jerusalem. Argument IV. But God himself hath, from time to time, given testimony to that Ministry, which you would perswade us to decline as being unlawful, by granting the conversion of many souls unto himself to be wrought by it, together with the edification of many (formerly converted) in their most holy Faith: Yea, he hath done much good by it in both these kinds, in this very Nation, since he brake the yoke of Romish subjection
from off the neck of it: Or doth not such a gracious concurrance, or co-operation, of God as this with a Ministry, amount to as much as the setting of his Seal unto it that it is true, and such wherein he delight∣eth, the Apostle Paul writing thus to the Corinthians, For the Seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord, 1 Cor. 9. 2. Can it then it be unlaw∣ful for Christians to here such Ministers, whom God himself-counte∣nanceth, and blesseth, in their work? Answer. 1. That voice from Heaven [that is from God] Come out of her my people, [meaning out of Babylon, the Mother of fornications] Rev. 18. 4. sheweth that there may be conversion of Souls, even in Baby∣lon, and this (as seems not improbable) by the Spurious Ministry that is exercised here. It is no wayes like, that those persons, whom God, by the Name of, his people, warneth by a voice from Heaven, to come out of Babylon, were his People [that is, truly regenerate, and believing] before they entered into Babylon, and that afterwards they went, and took up their dwellings here. If conversion may be wrought by a Baby∣lonish Ministry, it is a clear case that it is not universally, and in all ca∣ses, a convincing proof of a legitimate and true Ministry. And there∣fore whereas the Apostle termeth the Corinthians, the seal of his Apo∣stleship, it was not simply, or so much, in respect of their conversion by him unto the Faith, but rather in respect of the extraordinary man∣ner, and high hand of divine power, which appeared with him, and in him, for their conversion; without which he seems to imply, that in respect of their more than ordinary indisposition to submit unto the Gospel, being a wealthy and worldly-wise people, and under several disadvantages otherwise, there had been little likelyhood of their con∣version to the Faith, especially, in such considerable numbers, as now, by this means had embraced it. For upon some such account as this it is, that he reminds them in these words, Truly the signes of an Apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in signes, and wonders, and migh∣ty deeds, 2 Cor. 12. 12. From this passage, and the words next fol∣lowing with some others in these two Epistles it appears, that God judged it necessary and meet that this his Apostle should make more use of his gift of Miracles amongst this people, in order to their con∣version, and confirmation in the Faith, then in any other place, whi∣ther he was sent to preach the Gospel. This plainly sheweth them to have been a Generation of men of that Character, which our Saviour pointeth at in those, to whom he said, Except ye see signes and wonders,
ye will not believe, John 4. 48. which temper, or complexion of mind, argueth a great estrangement in men from God, and an utter un-ac∣quaintedness with his Nature and Attributes. Therefore the Apostle affirming the Corinthians to be, the Seal of his Apostleship [meaning, an effectual proof, and confirmation of the truth of it, and that he recei∣ved it from God] intendeth it not in respect of their conversion by him, simply considered, but of those miraculous appearances of God with him, for, and in, the effecting of it. So that nothing can be con∣cluded from hence to prove true conversion unto God, to be alwayes, or in all cases, an argument, or proof, that that Ministry, by which it is wrought, is from God. For the further clearing of which it may be considered, 2. That God, in his dispensations, and applications of himself unto the children of men, putteth a very great difference between times of ignorance, and times of knowledge; indulging many things in way of favour, mercy, and compassion, unto persons offending through the ig∣norance of his will, when this ignorance is not affectate, or willingly, and upon a cursed design of sinning more freely, kept and maintained in the soul, but hath been, and is, occasioned, either by the scantness of Light, or shortness of the means about them, whereby to come to the knowledge of the truth, or else by the weakness and flowness of their understandings, or else by meer incogitancy, or that backwardness of making district enquiry after truth, which so easily (and almost uni∣versally) besetteth flesh and blood; or lastly, by means of a strong and flattering perswasion that they know the truth already, and so need not make any such enquiry after it; God (I say) is wont to make many large allowances in grace and favour unto those that are ignorant of his will upon any of the occasions now mentioned, though they act contrary to it, which he will at no hand indulge unto those, that either know, or easily may know it, and yet will notwithstanding walk in the sight of their own eyes, and in the ways of their own hearts. This obser∣vation (I verily believe) for both number and clearness of Scripture testimonies, may compare with any other truth asserted here. The pla∣ces that speak to the heart of it, were they drawn together, and a little argued, would amount to a just Volume. I shall mention onely one (a Text well known) and point to a few others. And the times of this ig∣norance God winked at: but now commandeth all men every where to re∣pent; because he hath appointed a day [that is, he now maketh known unto the world that he hath appointed a day; for the day was appointed as much in the former times, as now: but things in Scripture are fre∣quently
said to be done, when they are made manifest] wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, &c. Acts 17. 30, 31. It is evident from hence in the general (for we must not now stand to scan particu∣lars) that God was much more favourable to the same kind of sinners, who sinned in times of ignorance, then he was resolved to be unto those that should sin in times of greater light. If you question in the least the truth of the observation now propounded, these Texts (with their fellows of like import) are of sufficient authority to set your judge∣ments at liberty, Luke 12. 47, 48. Gen. 20. 5, 6. Numb. 15. 30, 31. Psal. 94. 10.—97. 6, 7. Rom. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, &c.—2. 8. John 9. 41.—15. 22. Luke 23. 24. Titus 3. 10.—1 Tim. 1. 13. Heb. 5. 2.—6. 4, 5, 6. James 4. 17. Unto these Scriptures, I onely subjoyne (for their Sympathy in notion) a memorable saying of an an∣cient Father and Martyr: The simple error [or ignorance] of men might be pardoned [by God], but when he hath inspired them with, or discovered, the truth, if now they transgress, they sin without the pardon [or leave] of ignoranceIgnosci  simpliciter  antibus:  inspiratio∣m vero, & velationem ctam, sine ig∣rantiae  peccatur. ypr. Ep. 63.; meaning, that they are not like to find that favour, or mercy, which God is wont to vouchsafe unto those, that sin out of meer ignorance. This Consideration leadeth us by a straight line to this Conclusion; that during that long tract of time, wherein God judgeth it meet to punish, try, and exercise the Christian world with Prelatical encroach∣ments, and the un-natural swellings of Episcopal Power, and conse∣quently to suffer the reasons & understandings of those, who otherwise might, and (doubtless) would have detected, and withstood, those high Usurpations over his free-born Sons and Daughters to be so held, or otherwise incumbred and diverted, as to overlook the intimations of his mind in the Scriptures against those monstrous exorbitancies in his Church; that God (I say) during the times of this ignorance, and incogitancy, amongst Christians, might in mercy do good to the souls of some, even by such a Ministry, which he never allowed, nor appro∣ved, but onely tollerated until the times of Reformations yea, and which he will not allow his people to countenance, or credit, by resort∣ing unto it, when once he hath caused the irregularity of it to be brought to light, and the Gospel to utter and speak out that enmity, which it beareth to it. Nor is it like, that when he shall have plainly, and to the full conviction of reasonable and sober men, discovered the nakedness and shame of it, that ever he will have to do, or co-operate with it, either to the conversion, or edification, of any soul more. And as Abraham lived well, enjoyed the love of God, throve in his
estate, and prospered in the world, whilst he lived in his own Coun∣trey, amongst his kindred, and in his Father's house, before God called him out from hence to dwell in the Land of Canaan, where he intended to bless and prosper him yet seven times more, whereas had he diso∣beyed the call of God, and continued in his Father's house still, this call notwithstanding, doubtless he had highly provoked God, neither would his own Countrey, Kinred, or Father's house, have been the same unto him in comfort and peace, which formerly they had been: In like manner, though an honest and upright soul may be in the love and fa∣vour of God, and thrive competently in its spiritual estate, under a Prelatical Ministry (and haply in Babylon it self) whilest it remains ig∣norant of the mind and will of God concerning its removal, and wanteth light to discern the evil of such standings; yet if it shall chuse, and resolve, to keep these postures, or standings, after that God shall have called unto it to forsake them, they are not like to yield any of their former accommodations unto it, nor is God like to take the same delight in (or rather to shew the same compassion on) this soul, which he did before: but according to the observation, and saying of David, He turneth a fruitful Land into barrenness, for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein, Psal. 107. 34. If it be demanded; but when, or how, doth God call any soul, or person, from under a Prela∣tical Ministry, or out of Babylon? I answer; when by a clear light he discovers the sinfulness, or (which is the same, in effect the danger, or threatning consequence, of a mans abiding under the former, or in the latter. Conviction of any thing sinful, or unlawful, in any of our wayes, is a loud call from God unto repentance and reformation. And as Abrahams obedience unto the call of God, when he called him out from his own Country, Kinred, and Fathers house, is commended by this, that he went out, not knowing whither he went, (Heb. 11. 8.) but sped never the worse for this: So when God shall call us from under an un∣lawful Ministry, it is not Christian-like to make any such allegation, or plea, as this, against our ready and cheerful submission to his call; we know not where we shall mend our selves, or find the like spiritual pro∣visions, we are like to be losers by the change, &c. It would be much more worthy a Son, or Daughter, of God in this case, to consider and work upon that which David immediately subjoyneth to the passage lately cited from him▪ He turneth the WILDERNESSE into a stand∣ing water, and dry ground into water springs; and there he maketh the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a City for habitation, &c. Psal. 107. 35, 36, 37, 38. They who shall forsake a polluted Ministry, though otherwise plausible, and in all points besides lively resembling
the true Ministry of Christ, upon divine conviction of the pollutedness of it, need not fear that they shall be losers in their spiritual estates hereby, or suffer in their inner man. The woman cloathed with the Sun Rev. 12. when she fled from the City into the wilderness, being (as it appears) admonished by God so to do, had a place here prepared for her by God, where she was fed and nourished [with a more whole∣some diet, doubtless, then she should have been in the City] for many years. 3. Although for argument sake, and in part (I confess) for proba∣bility sake, and likelihood of truth, it hath been granted, that some have been truly and savingly converted to the faith, and some edified, by a Prelatical Ministry, yet I believe it will sorely rack the parts and learning of the greatest Patrons of it, to make any demonstrative proof of either, especially of the former. It was a right and useful ob∣servation of Aristotle, that to take , that which follows in time for the effect of that which goeth before, is a common mistake amongst men. Those that have been converted after, or upon the hearing of a Sermon, possibly might not be converted by it. Again, it is well known unto those, that are but competently ver∣sed in Ecclesiastical Records, as well of ancient, as of latter times, that great numbers both of men and women, have been savingly wrought upon by other means and dispensations of God, and not by hearing Ministers of a Prelatical creation. Not to insist upon particu∣lars in this kind, as either the conversion of Constantine by reading the Sibylline Oracles, as some of these records report; or of Augustine, be∣gotten unto God (as himself in his Confession giveth the Christian world to understand) between a miracle (or the miraculous voice of Tolle, et Lege, take up, and read, heard by him in a Garden oft repeated, as with a singing tone) and the reading of those Texts of Scripture, Rom. 13. 13, 14. or of Victormus, Antonius, and several others, mentio∣ned by him in these writings, as brought off from Heathenisme unto God by the like, or not much unlike, means, (or of others that might, without number, be collected out of other Authors). Baronius reports that three whole Nations, the Franks, the Goths, the Longobards, were converted from Paganisme, and many impious errours, unto the Chri∣stian Faith, by three women; the Franks, in Gallia, by Chrotildis (a Burgundian); the Goths, in Spain, by Ingundes (a Frank); the Longo∣bards, in Italy, by Theodolinda a Bavarian. Besides the Woman cloa∣thed with the Sun, &c. (of whom we lately spake, and by whom we sig∣nified, according to the concurrent testimony of all Expositors, that I
have seen, or heard of, is meant the true Church of Christ, consisting of real and true Believers) during the whole term of the grandure of the Beast, and whilest the world went wondering after him [that is, whilest the Great Body, or Bulk of visible Professors throughout the Christian world round about him, owned his spiritual, and consequently his tem∣poral Jurisdiction also, over them] fled (as we likewise heard) into the wilderness [namely, from the Dragon, who had now slily, and undis∣cernably to the greatest part of professing Christians, conveyed and wound himself into the said two-horn'd Beast] here, by the gracious in∣terposure of God, to be fed and nourished. Now this Woman (the true Church) was not barren, but brought forth children, Sons and Daugh∣ters unto God, during her abode in the wilderness from first to last: but she brought not forth these children by the knowledge of a Prelati∣cal Ministry; the Ministers of this Order exercising their Ministry in the City [I mean, openly, and in places prepared, and allowed, for such purposes, by the Civil Magistrate, and so had no occasion to flee into the Wilderness, or to seek solitary and private places for the em∣ployment of their talent in this kind]: Unless we shall conceive, that the Woman we speak of, was all along supplyed with children out of the City, by the publique Ministry here, God, secretly admonishing, and perswading those Sons and Daughters of his, that were begotten by such illegitimate Fathers, as soon as, or not long after, they were spiri∣tually born, to with-draw themselves from under the hand of such Fa∣thers, and to joyn themselves unto his true Church and People in the Wilderness, here to be fed and nourished, that is, to be built up in their most Holy Faith, and prepared for their Heavenly Glory. So that one of these two Propositions must needs be yielded; either that conver∣sion, for many ages by-past, hath been wrought by other means, and by another Ministry, than that of a Prelatical descent, and so not necessa∣rily by this; or in case this Ministry hath converted any, that these up∣on their conversion, have been required by God not to remain, or sit still under it, but to seek their edification amongst their Brethren in Assemblies of a beter complexion, and from a Ministry of a more ho∣nourable and lawful extraction. The former of these granted, confirm∣eth the Argument in hand: the latter, the main cause we have under∣taken. 4. (and lastly) Concerning that great good Service in the cause of Religion, which is pleaded to have been done in former dayes, by the Ministry so much decried by us, in this our Nation: I confess that our great High Priest, who is more able than Priests taken from
among men, , sufficiently to compassionate the ignorant, , and those that are [led] out of the way, (Heb. 5. 2.) did so far shew mercy unto some, who in the simplicity and up∣rightness of their heart, suspecting no evil in such an action, comport∣ed (I might say, compounded) with the Prelates for their Ministerial functions, that he kept them faithful unto him in his work, and vouch∣safed them the great honour of co-operating with them to the bringing home of souls unto God. But, 1. The number of these was but small, scarce exceeding the pro∣portion of one of a City, and two of a Tribe. Out of the great Cloud of Prelatical Priests (for their Ordination baptizeth them by that name, nor are they offended at it) Sathan rained upon the people, Snares of Idolatrous and Superstitious conceits, and practises, without end: and in these snares of death the feet of the greater part of the poor igno∣rant souls in the Nation, are taken, and held fast, to this day. Nor is it any breach of charity to conceive and think, that for the greatest part of these Ministers, were in their course of preaching, more zealously bent to beget Sons and Daughters to the Church of England (in their notion) than unto God; although possibly (to allay all seeming hard∣ness in the saying) they might suppose that men and women being made the true Sons and Daughters of the Church of England, were hereby made the true Sons and Daughters of God also. For what may not Ignorance, and Interest, conspiring together, suppose? Doth not the Apostle, speaking of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth say, that they supposed gain to be godliness, admonishing Timothy to with-draw himself from men of such importune and unreasonable suppo∣sitions, 1 Tim. 6. 5. But for the Church of England, who shall live, when either of her Sons, or Fathers, will be able to declare her Generation, or satifie the world, who, or what kind of creature she is? 2. Those few Ministers of the Prelatical Sanction, whom Christ was pleased to separate from their fellows, in blessing their labours to the begetting of Sons and Daughters unto God in the Nation, were smoak in their noses, and as thorns in the eyes, of those who had in∣trusted them with a Ministerial employment, being by them looked upon as a spurious and illegitimate brood of children, and as walking contrary to the Interest, both of the Spiritual Lords, their Fathers, and of the Lady, the Church of England, their mysterious Mother: Yea, for their laboriousness, zeal, and faithfulness unto God, and men, in the
work of their Ministry, which, by reason of the success that God gave unto them in the hearts and affections of the people, their Ghostly Fa∣thers were not able, or rather, not willing to distinguish from Schism, Faction, Popularity, &c. they were evil entreated, injurious∣ly handled, vexed with Summoners and Apparitors, cited into their Courts (where they must, at their peril, appear at the day and hour appointed, how long and wearisome, how unseasonable, or expersive, how tempestuous, or dangerous soever their journey hither should be) here to be falsely charged, to be vilified, and reproached, before all that are present, by Chancelors, Commissaries, &c. (persons who many times know not their right hand from their left, in things apper∣taining unto God; as meet to fit in judgement upon a learned and godly Minister, as in the Greek proverb, , as an Asse is to play upon a Harp) and after all this, were sometimes silenced or suspended, deprived, degraded, imprisoned, yea constrained through an experimental sence of the implacableness of these bloody aven∣gers, to commit themselves unto the Seas, how inconvenient or dange∣rous soever, either through age, tenderness or weakness of constitu∣tion, present indisposition of body, or otherwise such journying were like to prove unto them, and to seek for a Sanctuary in strange Lands. So that the Ministers that with greatest zeal and faithfulness planted the saving knowledge of God, and promoted the Interest of true Godliness in the Nation, though (being led out of the way by the false light of those times) they owned the Prelates in their Usurpations, by accepting their Office of Ministry from their unhallowed hands, yet the Prelates soon after, namely, as soon as they saw or heard, that they held a straight course in preaching the Gospel, disowned them, and took from them, at least from many of them, and their will was the same towards them all, but that prudentials hindered the sameness of execution upon some, by silencing and suspending them, the exercise of that Ministry, and so in effect, the Ministry it self, which they had conferr'd upon them. So that by this time, if we respect the reality of things rather than the rigour or formality of words, the Ministers we now speak of, were no Ministers of a Prelatical investure: for they who had invested them, devested them again. Adde hereunto (that which we may, not only in charity, but according to the guidance of reason it self, suppose their conscienciousness and loyalty unto God, in all other their wayes and actings considered) that had they known or once suspected, the great evil of putting their heads under Prelatical hands to receive an Evangelical function from them, they would rather have suffered them to be taken from their shoulders, as John Baptist's head
was, by the hands of the common Executioner. This being so, they were but in a very deminutive sense Ministers of a Prelatical Ordinati∣on, nor ought they in reason, to be simply, or absolutely, termed such. For when the mind and will of a man are really set and bent against the doing of any thing whatsoever, that is sinful, in case he shall through ignorance, or mistake, do any thing which is sinful, this action is impu∣table unto him onely in the letter, not in the spirit of it: For so far as his will stood against it, and was not consenting to it [that is, or as far as, it was sinful] it was not properly, or in a moral and equitable consi∣deration, his action, but rather to be charged upon the ignorance that was in him; nothing that a man doth, being, in moral equity, and fair∣ness of construction, chargeable upon him as his action, but onely what his will, and as far as his will, was consenting unto in the doing of it; according to that of the Apostle, (who is not wont to flatter himself, or to extenuate, or deny his sinful infirmities at any time) Now if I do that, which I WOƲLD NOT, it is NO MORE I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me, Rom. 6. 20. Yet further, the Ministers of whom we now speak, & by whom much real good was done to the souls of many in the Nation, applyed themselves wholly and intirely to the work of Christ in preaching the Gospel, and did not make merchandize of the word of God bywresting or perverting it at any time, as if it any where spake to the heart of the Prelatique Interest, or recommended any such Officer, or Ruler, unto the Church of Christ, as a Prelate, or Bishop, (in the by-sense, or high sense of the word, or gave him power to ob∣trude what, and what numbers, of Ceremonies, and Apocryphal pray∣ers, and prayers only so called, he pleased, upon the people of God, as well Ministers, as others, upon severe penalties to be inflicted on those whose Consciences were not wide enough to swallow them. Now such Ministers, who, though having received their Office from Prelates; yet shall in the course and work of their Ministry, wholly and constantly wave, and decline their cause from the one end of it to the other, ne∣ver opening their mouths to cast respects, either upon their Office, or any thing, that hath so much as one lineament of their Image, or one letter of their Superscription, upon it, and instead hereof, shall zealous∣ly and faithfully preach up Jesus Christ in the glory of all his Offices, as the Gospel asserteth and declareth them, which consequentially, is the preaching down of Prelacy, as the bringing in of the Ark of God unto Dagon's Temple, was the downfal and destruction of that Idol; such Ministers, I say, that shall quit themselves in the way of their Mini∣stry, upon such termes as these, do constructively, and in effect, and with as much advantage to the glory of God, and edification of men,
renounce their Prelatical Ordination, as if they should do it more lit∣terally and formally. So then, all things weighed in the ballance of equity, the Ministers, unto whom God gave the honour to triumph in Christ, (as the Apostle's phrase is (2 Cor. 2. 14.) and by whom to make manifest the savour of his knowledge amongst the Inhabitants of this Na∣tion, were not Ministers of a Prelatical Ordination (in any compleat, direct, or thorough sence of the denomination) but only in some such mysterious and obscure notion, as that, wherein the Beast is termed, the Beast which is not, and yet is, Rev. 17. 8. They that were round∣ly, right down, without any abatement, or need of explication, such have, amongst them, in matters of true Religion, sound knowledge, and piety towards God, reduced the generality of the Nation to a morsel of Bread: All those Idolatrous and Superstitious conceits, and practi∣ses, all that bloody ignorance and prophanesse, all that customary bold∣ness in sinning, that hatred of goodness and good men, which are the nakedness and shame of the Land, and render it obnoxious to divine displeasure, may justly call this Generation of men, either Fathers, or Foster Fathers, or both. Argument V. Many learned and good men have been, and many such at this day, are very confident, that ordination by Bishops, in the high sense of the word, is regularly founded on the Scriptures; yea, and that there can be no lawful, or true Minister any where created, where there is not the hand of such a Bishop to sanctifie the action, and to raise it to that worth and dignity, that it may be meet to yeild the sacred fruits of a Gospel-Ministry. And it is generally known, and acknowledged, that Ordination of Ministers by Bishops, in the upper signification of the word, hath been very antiently, and for many ages by-past, practi∣sed in the Church, scarce any man questioning, or contradicting it. Therefore why should the hearing of such ministers be now censured as unlawful? Answer. This Argument calleth for the consideration of sundry particulars for it's full and due satisfaction: Others, many have largely and substanti∣ally answered all that is pretended, and pleaded, from the Scripture, in the behalf, either of the Order or Office of Bishops, in the sence of the word lately specified, or of their Sole power of Ordination: So
that as unto these, I shall be very cursory and brief, chiefly pointing at the heads of some few Considerations, whereby it will be made mani∣fest, that although all that the Argument saith and pretendeth unto, should be granted as true, yet all will signifie little, or nothing, as to the proof of what is intended. Therefore, 1. Learning, is very neer of kin unto knowledge, if it be not the same. Now knowledge, though it be a very useful and commendable endowment, yet it hath one bad property, (which the Apostle himself taketh, and giveth notice of, 1 Cor. 1. 8.) it puffeth up; that is, it is apt to lift men up into a confident conceit that there is more worth in them, than in deed and in truth there is. Neither will a very good degree of goodness in the same subject, at many turns, and in many cases, prevent the operation of this evil property upon it. Learned and knowing men, though good men, will too frequently assume more unto themselves, than by the assignment of God, or good reason, com∣eth to their share. The Apostle Paul plainly signifieth that God knew that he would have been exalted above measure through the abundance of revelations vouchsafed unto him, if the excessive heat of his propension in this kind had not been corrected and allayed by a Messenger of Sa∣than, sent and given unto him to buffet him, 2 Cor. 12. 7. 2. When men of learning and knowledge more than ordinary, shall reflect upon their own worth in this kind, and hold intelligence with their great parts and abilities (as the best of men, thus accomplished, are apt to do, witness the great Apostle Paul himself, who told the Corinthians, that though he was rude in speech [meaning, as they thought, and talked of him] yet not in KNOWLEDGE, 2 Cor. 11. 6. See also Eph. 3. 4.) especially when they shall be conceited withal, that their line of knowledge and understanding is raised higher, than really it is (which is a weaknesse frequently incident to the strongest of this Ge∣ration), they are precipitately disposed to presume [as our former translation read it; or, to be wise; or, to favour, as the word, , oft signifieth] above that which is written (1 Cor. 4. 6.) and so to embrace (sometimes) and to assert, with great confidence, such notions and tenents for truths, which the Word of Truth, diligently consulted, and well understood, absolutely disclaimeth; yea, and which sober and sound reason it self will not brook. There is scarce any age but hath yielded instances more than enough to confirm the truth of this obser∣vation. The best Records of Antiquity, yea, the most un-questioned writings of the most learned and devout Fathers themselves proclaim
it aloud; in which it appears that they did not alwayes build Silver, Gold, or Precious Stones, upon the true foundation, but sometimes, hey, stubble and wood, in their stead. Neither is the Scripture it self barren of sayings, and passages of story, which look the same way. But my inten∣ded brevity forbids me to insist upon Quotations, where they may be omitted with as little damage to the cause in hand, as they may upon the present occasion: and as for those, which the works and writings of the Fathers afford upon the account, they have been already drawn out, and presented unto the world by others: Yea, who is there but either knoweth, or hath heard from those who do know, that seldom or never, did any error, that proved of any dangerous, or sad conse∣quence, up amongst Christians, but might call some person of choice parts a learning, Father? The common saying (which car∣rieth a truth in it worthy more consideration, than is by many given to it) is, Nullum est magnum ingenium sine mixtura insaniae, There is no great wit, but hath a mixture [or allay] of madness in it. So that men of great learning and parts are no infallible Oracles to consult about a dubious opinion, whether it be an error, or no. 3. The notion, conceit, or opinion of an Hyper-presbyterian Epis∣copacy, is of such a calculation, nature, and import, that without the assistance of, or any monitory suggestion from Sathan, it is as apt to breed, and to be ingendred, between a corrupt ambitious heart, and an head rank of wit, and learning, as the Bull-rush is to grow out of the mire. Some indeed have laid the mischievous brat at Sathan's door, confidently avouching him, by reason of the enormous, and even super∣natural antipathy in it unto God, and true Godliness, to be the Fa∣ther of it: But herein they rather flatter, than accuse, or charge, that unhappy parcel of flesh and blood, which first gave warmth and forma∣tion unto it in the womb of their brain. And whereas some, expert in the Records of Antiquity, carry up the day of the dawning of it up∣on the Christian world, to the year 140 after Christ, or thereabouts; others, seeming as capable as they of the same pretension, bring it down to about the year 300; the truth is, that though both these cal∣culations of the Nativity of it, especially the former, give it the oppor∣nity and advantage of a long and specious prescription, yet the be∣witching complexion of it considered, together with the amorous in∣clinations towards such objects, so frequently found in pregnant wits, and large endowments, which are apt to afford men lively hopes of enjoying them, it may rather seem strange that it is not more ancient, than either of the dates mentioned will allow it to be, and, in respect
of time, nearer to some Apostolical Institution. It seem's (indeed) that even in the dayes of the Apostles, there was one (whom the Apo∣stle John call's, Diotrephes, Ep. 3. ver. 9.) that had an Episcopal Em∣bryo, an unform'd conception of a Bishoprick, in his heart; for he did , loved a Lordly Superiority over, or amongst his Christian Brethren: but for want of an artificial Head (as is pro∣bable) to give unto this natural conception its specifical and due form, it proved an abortion, and like the untimely fruit of a woman, which ne∣ver seeth the light of the Sun. It is no where found that Diotrephes ever was a formal Bishop, although he acted the part of a Bishop in not suf∣fering the writings of an Apostle to take place against his own Interest, in the Church, John Ep. 3. vers. 9. 4. The notion of Episcopacy (in the lofty sense of the word) being once started, though by one person only, in the Church, and brought into consideration and discourse amongst Christians, it was easie to prophesie, Plures annabunt thynni, & cetaria crescent: More tunies will come swimming to the bait, and that the generality of men, whose gifts and parts of learning, wit, &c. were paramount to those of the ordinary sort of their Brethren, understanding themselves more capable, and likely than others, to as∣cend the Throne of this honour, in case it were once built, and well setled in the Church, would be very diligent and studious in finding out all colourable and plausible pretences to commend such an office unto the people, and to perswade them that it would conduce much to their Christian welfare, if they did live under it, and subject them∣selves unto it. And though there have been many, both in ancient, and later dayes, conscientious and learned, that had not the mettal in their foreheads (wherewith the Prelatical Advocates amongst us, have, more generally at least, steeled theirs) to obtrude the Office we speak of, upon the world, under the high and indisputable title of Jus Divi∣num; yet were they so far overcome with the enticing sweetness of the morsel, as to swallow it as lawful, though of humane preparation and contrivance. Never did there a dead body, or carkass, falling on the earth, by the scent and favour of it, more effectually draw the Eagles together about it, than the pleasant notion and conceit of the Episcopal dignity, having once been named in the Christian Church, allure and engage many persons of eminent gifts and abilities, age after
age, in the maintenance, approbation, and commendation of it. They are not like to speak evil of dignities, who live in hope and expectation of enjoying them themselves. So that all circumstances duely weighed, the great multitude of learned Assertors of the cause of Prelacy, is but a slender argument to prove, either the goodness, or lawfulness of it. Who is he (saith the Son of Sirach) that hath been tryed by Gold, and found perfect? Ecclus. 31. 10. 5. As for the Arguments and Grounds, which these learned Dis∣puters commonly levie, and urge from the Scriptures, to compel the judgments and consciences of men to a submissive and quiet acknow∣ledgement, that their high places and functions in the Church, are of kin to  (Acts 19. 35.) The Image which fell down from Jupi∣ter, and that they also came from Heaven, and are supported by the stately and strong pillar of Jus Divinum; the truth is, that being weighed in the ballance, I do not say of accurate reason, but of common sense it self, they would be found too leight to balace the floating ves∣sel, wherein that proud Lady, Episcopacy, with all her triobular accou∣trements, is imbarqued; yea, and were it not for some poor relief, ever and anon brought in from the shattered and sophisticated Records of after ages, scarce one decree above ridiculous. I shall in few words, give you a taste, though not of the letter, or words, (this being a part that cannot be acted, but on a larger Stage, than we are now upon) but of the spirit, strength, and substance, of some of their chief arguings from the Scriptures; by which you may give a neer guess how little their longsome dissertations and discourses upon the point signifie. From Eph. 4. 8, 11, &c. they reason to no more purpose than thus: Christ, when he ascended up on high—gave gifts unto men: and he gave some Apostles,—some, Pastors and Teachers, &c. Ergo he gave some Diocesan Bishops. But if such Bishops as these were given by Christ at his Ascension, why should the Apostle hide them, either be∣hind the Apostles, or behind his Pastors, as if he were ashamed of them? For the Great Officers we now speak of, are at a great loss amongst which of the Officers, expressely named by the Apostle, they should seek for their divine Institution, or Donation by Christ unto the Church. One while, when their courage is up, they claim high, and will needs find their Institution in, and together with, the Apostles, as their Pre∣decessors, under whom their Successors also (as they plead) who they cannot (being so affectionately convinc'd through the in-evidence of the thing) but presume themselves, and all of their Order, to be, were comprehended in the same Institution with them. Otherwhile, fear∣ing
such a pretence as that, to be too obnoxious to the incredulity of all considering and un-ingaged men, they fall lower, and judge it more passable to take up with Pastors and Teachers, and content themselves with part and fellowship with them in their Institution. Thus we see our Spiritual Lords wandring up and down to seek a divine Institution for their high Functions and Dignities: but it is no marvel if they can∣not find that which is not. Notwithstanding they knock hard at several other doors for relief, but none openeth unto them, nay, they are all made fast with bars of Iron against them. From these words of the Apostle to Timothy, (1 Tim. 1. 3.) As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, &c. In conjunction with those, Lay hands suddenly on no man, &c. (1 Tim. 5. 22.) they conclude, Therefore Timothy was made Bishop of Ephesus, a Diocesan Bishop, by Paul. Whereas the express tenour of the words, I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, riseth up (as it were) with manifest indignation against such an inference, as might be shewed and proved at large, but that this hath been lately done to the stopping of all mouths, that have either ingenuity or conscience, belonging to themMr. W. Prynn, Ʋn-Bi∣shoping of Timothy, &c. re∣printed with ad∣itions, Anno. 661. . 1, 2, 3, . (af∣ter the Post∣script.). Holy and zea∣lous men, in both which qualifications Timothy excelled, need no be∣seeching or exhorting, to abide, or reside, upon their Bishopricks, or to attend the cure of souls committed unto them. Or if they will un∣derstand the place either of Timothie's being made Bishop of Ephesus, or of his accepting the Bishoprick hereof, being offered unto him by Paul, they shall do well, and un-like themselves, to follow his exam∣ple, and not to be made Bishops, until they be sought unto, and de∣sired to accept of the honour. Besides, Timothy was an Evangelist, 2 Tim. 4. 5. and so by vertue of his Office, had a right of power to do all those Canonical actions, as laying on of hands, &c. which our high assuming Bishops appropriate to their Apocryphal Functions. Therefore neither doth this Scripture take any pity at all upon their miserable cause. They shew themselves the Sons of impertinency also when they discourse unto us, Titus 1. 5. as if this Text had somewhat to say for them, the words being only these: For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain [or rather settle, or place, ] Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee. It is plain from the words, that Titus was LEFT [not seated, or setled] in Crete by Paul, for such business, or such ser∣vices unto the Churches there, which might be dispatched within the space of a few months. And that he did not make his abode here ma∣ny months, at least with Paul's consent, and that Paul intended to send for him away from hence, the winter following, or rather before, is evi∣dent
from Chap. 3. vers. 12. And from other passages in the writings of this Apostle, it appears, that being called back by him from Crete, he imployed him otherways, sending him up and down to several Church∣es, in several Countries upon occasion: nor is there the least mention any where found of his returning again unto Crete at any time after, nor is there (indeed) the least probability of it. Therefore our Dioce∣san Advocates vex and trouble this Scripture also (as they do several others) to no purpose; this with all the rest solicited in their cause, crying aloud unto them with one voice, Depart from us, we know you not. He that desire further conviction that neither Timothy, nor Titus, were ever made Bishops (in the now-ruling sence of the word) may receive it in abundance (together with the knowledge of many other things concerning that Generation of men, which would much enlight∣en the darkness of these times) by the perusal of a Treatise lately pub∣lished by Mr. W. Prynne Esquire, under the Title of, The Ʋn-Bishop∣ing of Timothy and Titus, &c. This considered, it is no great marvel, that learned men, more generally, who bare good will (more than enough to the Prelatical Interest and Cause, not onely in a times of a more ancient date, but even in latter years also, yea, within less than 140. years, all the Bishops, Arch-Bishops, Arch-Deacons, and Prelatical Clergy, themselves in this very Nation,See Mr. W. Prynne, Ʋn-Bi∣shoping, &c. p. 76. 77. esteemed it their wis∣dom, to stick in the inferior tenure of Jus Humanum for the Episco∣pal Dignity, fearing (as it seems, or however, as they had cause to fear) that Jus Divinum would be an adversary to it, and overthrow it. I crave leave, upon the occasion before us, to acquaint the Reader with a very memorable passage (if he hath not heard it formerly) of an Arch-Bishop in Scotland, who in a Recantation publickly made in the Synod of Fisse, Anno. 1591. Professed ex animo, from his soul, That Bishops and Ministers by God's Word were all equal, and the very same; That the Hierarchy and Superiority of Bishops over other Ministers, hath no foundation at all in the Word of God, but was a meer humane Institu∣tion long after the Apostles times, from whence the Antichristian Papacy of the Bishop of Rome, hath both it's rise and progress: and that for 500. years la past, it hath been the chiefest instrument of persecuting, and suppressing the Truth and Saints of God, in all Countries and King∣doms, as all Historians manifest. The name of this Great Exemplar (worthy to be had in everlasting remembrance) was, if my Author. mistakes not, Patrick Adamson. But even this man, though he was at last one of a thousand , in his Repentance, yet was he first one also of many thousand , who suffer themselves to be overcome of the tempting splendor of that new-divised worldly
thing under an old spiritual name, commonly called Bishoprick: So that he also beareth witness, as well to the truth of the particular in hand (acknowledging in effect, that the Scriptures are perverted and wrest∣ed by those who make them speak, either for Bishops, or Arch-Bi∣shops) as of the particular last proceeding, namely, that Bishopricks, notwithstanding the Scriptures, and they be at odds, have yet a be∣witching property in them to make great Scholars, and learned men, who are in a capacity of enjoying them, excessively in love with them. 6. Nor hath it any thing of an argument in it worth the insisting on, to prove the lawfulness of attending the Ministry of a Prelatical Clergy, that the Professors of Christianity, have more generally atten∣ded such a Ministry ever since it had a being in the Church, which is (in our English phrase) time out of mind ten times over (as is on all hands confessed). For, 1. It being the counsel of the will of God (as we gave knowledge formerly) to suffer that plant of bitterness, Episcopacy, (in the Anti-Canonical sense of the word) not onely to be planted in the Soil of his Church, but to take fast root, to thrive and prosper, and spread her branches far and neer, and bring forth fruit from many Ages, before he intended the , that tearing of it up by the roots, (of which our Saviour prophesieth as the common doom of all plants in the Church which should be planted by men, and not by his Heavenly Father, Matth. 15. 13.) he judged it meet, and well comporting with that his counsel, to suffer the generality of Christian Professors, to be so far deluded by the fair flourishes, and enticing pretences, of those who designed the setting up of the Episcopal Government over them, as to yield their necks unto the yoke, and so to conform themselves to all the constitutions, and Magisterial injunctions thereof in matters of Religion. For unless the multitude of Professors had been both at first, and for many after Ages, so far bewitched, as willingly to bow dow at the feet of this exotique Government, it could never have taken that deep rooting in the world which now it hath done, nor made so much work for the right hand of Heaven, to rid the world fair∣ly and fully of it, as now it is like to do. For though the compliance of many Kings, and Princes, and Nobles, yea, and of many wise and learned men, yea, and of some worthy and good men also, with it, were necessary (as God esteemeth things necessary in such cases) to make the mountain of it so strong, as (according to his permissive decree) it hath been, for many ages by-past, in many parts of the Christian
world, and is at this day in many, yet had not the generality, or main body of Christian people fallen in also, and made one and the same shoulder with them to support it, it had (in Davids comparison) been as grass upon the house top, which withereth before it groweth up, where∣with the mower filleth not his hand, nor be that bindeth sheaves, his bo∣some. So that the general practice of Christians in receiving their spiri∣tual food from a Prelatical Ministry, thought continued for many Gene∣rations, yet the practisers having all along suffered a spirit of slumber to grow upon them, (for the tares were sown, whilest men slept, Matth. 13. 25.) and God not judging it meet to awaken them, their example signifieth little as to the justification of the practise. 2. As the Apostle saith of the poor Gentiles, that they were carried away to dumb idols, even as they were led, 1 Cor. 12. 2. So (the truth is) the common sort of Christians, through an un-Christian, yea, an un∣man like, oscitancy and supiness of spirit, have been in all Ages (and are at this day) exceeding apt to be carried away with Opinions and Tenents, even as they were, and are, led by their Teachers. It is a right saying of an Heathen, Omnes malumus credere; quam judicare: There is scarce any of us all but naturally had rather, even in matters of a moral) and much more, in things of a spiritual, and religious) con∣cernment, believe what others, whom we can have any pretence, or colour, to think well of, shall commend for truth unto us, than put our selves to the labour and travel of a serious and district examination whether it be truth, or no. Offendt pleros{que} limae labor; & mora: to work at the file, is both toylsome, and tedious, and few there be that love it. This was observed long since, by him that said, Many loth to weary themselves with searching out the truth, turn in to the errors next at handA Multi raedio in∣vestigan∣dae veri∣tatis, ad proximos divertunt errores. Minut. Felix. Yea, it was the saying of one that had been a Teacher of the Romish Faith, That had not God raised up, and sent Luther amongst them, they should have perswaded, and brought the people to eat hey, So then the Spiritual Guides and Teachers of Christian people having been (for may Generations) Ministers made such with Prelatical hands, and justifying this Ministry before their people, as legitimate and approved of God, both by their accepting it, and by their acting in the vertue, and by the authority of it, (besides all occasional plead∣ings for it otherwise) it is but matter of course (as it were) that their people should swallow it, and make no question about it for conscience sake. 3. The peoples attendance upon an Episcopal Ministry anciently, and near unto the times when Episcopacy was first conceived, and brought forth in the Christian Church, was nothing so broadly incon∣sistent
with the Rule of the Gospel, as now it is, but by many degrees more tollerable, and defensible, than that attendance upon a Ministry of the same denomination, which is in these dayes exhibited unto it. The Bishop that now is, (I mean, that is now commonly so called) is another kind of creature, specifically distinct from those that were so called, about the times when the Name (in the high signification of the word) was first heard in the Christian world: For if the best Records of Antiquity signifie any thing, the Bishops we speak of, at, and some while after their first Original, were chosen by the people, who were to live under their inspection and Government, in conjunction with their Ministers. So that those Ministers, who were made after∣wards by these Bishops, were, in a sence (viz. mediately, and re∣motely) made by themselves (I mean by the people themselves) in and by that act of theirs, whereby they close their Bishops, and gave them power (I do not mean, a lawful power, for such was not in them to give) to ordain Ministers for them. Now then if they did attend upon Ministers Episcopally ordained, upon the tearm specified, their ex∣ample no wayes paralel's, no wayes countenceth, much lesse justifi∣eth, the practise of any in these dayes, who from time to time sit under a Prelatical Ministry; considering that the Bishops, which the world now affordeth, are of a quite different extraction from those in anci∣ent times, far more spurious and degenerate, the people of God being so far from chusing, or defiring them, that they make their way by an high hand to make themselves Lords over them. 7. (and lastly, for this) As for those, who have dealt so effectually with their judgements and consciences, as to make themselves both able and willing, to conceive, that there can be no lawful Ministry, but that which springs from under a pair of Episcopal hands; the conceit is so prodigiously importune and unreasonable, that to engage in any solemn or serious opposition to it, may seem to be a work proper onely for him that hath little else to do. Nevertheless, because I find that there are not wanting amongst us, who have suffered themselves to be baptized in the spirit of this conceit, (to the disparagement of their judgments, to the ensnaring of their consciences, and who knowes to what publique inconvenience besides?) to set them at liberty from the bands of this inchantment, I mast heartily and seriously recommend unto them the diligent perusal of that elaborate and learned Discourse of Mr. W. Prynne lately mentioned, once and again) published the second time with some enlargements, not long since, under the title of, The Ʋn-Bishoping of Timothy, and Titus, &c. In this Discourse, be∣sides
that which is projected in chief (the vindicating the Holiness and Honour of Jus Divinum, from having any thing to do with the dunghill-Institution of the Episcopal Dignity; for so it deserveth to be abased for exalting it self so high as to claim Jure Divino) the Reader shall find the priviledge of ordaining Ministers, challenged by that Order of men we speak of, as incommunicable unto all others, vested by God himself in persons of another Order, and not at all in them considered (as they use to consider themselves in the businesse) in their elevation. Argument VI. Some again plead; That Christ hath purchased a liberty for all his, to seek, and to receive, their Christian edification where-ever they can find it, and where-ever they shall desire to seek it with any hope of finding it. So that they are not tied in Conscience unto any one sort, or kind of Ministers, but may as lawfully, and without sin, hear as oft as they please, even such Teachers, whose entrance into their Office of Ministry is most abominable and hateful unto Cod, as those, who enter by that door, which he hath sanctified, and appointed for this purpose, and so come to the great work of the Ministry with abundance of his blessing upon them: Especially they plead, that the hearing of the vi∣lest of Ministers is sin-free, if they deliver any thing that is good for edification, and this be received: and in case they utter any thing of a contrary import, that this be rejected. Answer. This Argument savours of a spirit that hath flesh and bones relating to it, and these covered with a skin, which it desires to keep whole to sleep in. But, 1. The liberty purchased for us by Christ, is an un-valuable treasure, a benifit and priviledge that passeth all humane understanding. But as in the true and right notion of it, it highly accommodates the Spirit, making it abundantly fruitful, as well in righteousness, as in joy, and peace; yea, and in some respect, accommodates the flesh also, as namely by easing it of the insupportable burthen of the Levitical Ce∣remonies: So in a corrupt and false notion, it hath been from the be∣gining, and is at this day, made a pretence of much unworthiness, and a cloak and covering for many uncomly and sinful doings. The Apostle
admonishing the Galatians not to use that liberty whereunto they had been called by Christ, for an occasion unto the flesh,Gal. 5. 13. [that is, for the encouraging and strengthning of themselves in any carnal practises, or wayes unbecoming the Gospel] plainly implieth, that there is a great aptness in professors of the Gospel to stumble at this stone, and to think they may lawfully do many things under the covert of their Christian liberty, at which otherwise their Consciences would boggle, and stand more in awe of the word of God restraining them. Where∣as the incomparable priviledge of the liberty purchased for us by Christ, engageth us unto all things, which make, either for the honour of the Gospel, or for the comfor, peace, and salvation of men, upon higher, and more awful, and sacred terms, than otherwise we had been; yea, and upon the same terms, to refrain and forbear all things, though otherwise lawful (if they be not necessary also) which are contrary unto, either the one, or the other. This is the plain and unquestionable Doctrine of the Scriptures, and is accordingly taught by the generality of Ministers learned in them. Now then, 2. The hearing of a Prelatical Ministry by those, who judge them∣selves strong, being a great offence, and stumbling, to their weak Chri∣stian Brethren and this being known unto them so to be, the practise is as diametrally repugnant to the Law of Christian liberty, as lightly a practise can be. For this Law (as the great Apostle hath drawn it up) is, that Christians by love should serve one anotherGal 5. 13. Now what this Apostle speaketh elsewhere concerning material meat, is, in the case before us, altogether as applicable to the spiritual meat, or food, of Christians; nay, the misdemeanor in this case, is much greater, than that mentioned in the other. But if thy Brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not charitablyRom. 14. 15. [that is, according to the emphasis and weight of the phrase,Adverbia ne∣candi, ejus cui dhibentur contrarium sig∣nificant. Mede  Apoc. p. 152 as Expositors observe in sundry the like in Scripture] thou walkest EXCEEDING uncharitably. For if it be objected, that we are not bound by any rule of charity, to for∣bear our spiritual food, for the offence of any, as we are our temporal; I answer, yes: in the like sense, and respect, in which we are bound in charity towards a weak Brother, to forbear temporal meat, we stand bound to forbear spiritual also. If a Brother were so weak, as to be offended that I should eat any meat whatsoever in case of the utmost necessity for the support of my life, when I cannot come at any other, in this case I were not to regard his being offended, but to eat the meat which God hath given me to releive me in my extremity, howsoever: The reason is, because in such a case I stand bound in duty towards
God to preserve my life, which I cannot do in any other way, but on∣ly by eating such meat, my eating of which may (as the case supposeth) offend my Brother. But when I may relieve my hunger, and sustain my life, by several kinds of meat, one of which my Brother judgeth it not lawful for me to eat, but taketh no offence at my eating any of the other, if in this case I should eat that which offendeth him, I should not (as the Apostle saith) walk charitably towards him: but destroy him, and so abuse my Christian liberty, and sin against Christ. There is al∣together the same consideration in chusing our spiritual nourishment, and means of edification. Suppose we judge that we may, yea, and that we do edifie by resorting to a Prelatical Ministry (about which we shall notwithstanding a little demur before the close of this answer) yet knowing that our resorting hither, is an offence and scandal to many good Christians, though weak, God having afforded us great variety otherwise of worthy means for our Edification (as hath been proved formerly)Considera∣tion 19. such a practise (were it in it self lawful, yet) being against charity, is an abuse of our Christian liberty, a kind of wanton and contemptuous trampling upon the peace and comfort of our weak Brethren (who may be as precious in the sight of God as our selves, notwithstanding their weaknesse) and consequently, must needs be a sin highly provoking the Lord Christ, Indeed if God had commanded us to hearken unto this Generation of Ministers, what means soever besides he should vouchsafe unto us for our edification, or should have threatned us with the vengeance of eternal Fire, if we did not hear them, in this case should any person be offended at us for hearing them, he must bear the burthen of his offence himself for we should be innocent) but if under the circumstance mentioned, we shall comport, in our attention with them, & a weak Brother shall be offended at our comportance in this kind; God will require his offence at our hand. An offence may be taken at the performance of a duty; but cannot be given but by an act of liberty. Again, The misdemeanor of offending a weak Brother by receiving our spiritual meat from the hand of a Prelatical Servitor, is in this re∣spect more sinful, than to offend him in eating any material meat would be, namely, that the offence given in the former case, is by an action or practice that is in it self, and out of the case of scandal, un∣lawful (as hath been proved at large) whereas in the latter case, the offence is given by an action, which simply, and in it self considered, is lawful: For every creature of God (saith the Apostle, speaking of material meat) is good, and nothing to be refused, &c. 1 Tim. 4. 4.
3. It hath been proved in the preceding Considerations, that the frequent recourse of Godly persons to Prelatical Ministers in the pub∣lick exercise of their Ministry, is, in several other respects, besides that of scandal and offence given unto weak Christians, a manifest breach of the Law of Chrity; As 1. Because it encourageth such Ministers in an evil way, and hideth Repentance from their eyes; whereas their withdrawing from them, is a proper means to make them better acquainted with themselves, and to help them to be ashamed of their Babylonian preferment. 2. Because by countenancing and strengthning the hand of these men in their way, they help to harden the hearts of their great Lords and Masters also in the evil of their way, which is more provoking in the sight of God than the other. 3. Because by honouring the Ministers of the Prelatical Creation, with their dependance on them for the words of eternal life, and high con∣cernments of salvation, they keep up and strengthen the Interest of the Prelates in the hearts and minds of the people, and so make the moun∣tain of their power the more strong and durable; and consequently, bring upon their own heads the guilt of being accessary to all the out∣rages of persecution and cruelty, wherein this generation of men shall magnifie themselves against the Saints of the Most High. 4. Because by accepting of Ministers of an Episcopal recommendation and inve∣stiture, they wrong and weaken the right-vested by Christ in his respe∣ctive Churches, for the choice and ordination of their respective Mi∣nisters. These particulars we argued more at large, and brought the truth of them into a clear light in the foregoing Considerations: there∣fore we only mention them here. The Reader may please to review Consideration 2, 3, 4- 13, 14, 15. So that the liberty purchased for the Saints by Christ, is so far from being a reasonable ground whereon to justifie or warrant the practice condemned in these papers, that it is a most sovereign disswasive and retractive from it: For the greater love Christ hath any wayes manifested unto them, he hath laid so much the greater and stronger engagements upon them to love others, and more especially those of the houshold of Faith; and consequently, to refrain all wayes and doings that are inconsistent with this affection towards the one or the other. 4. (and lastly) The liberty purchased for the Saints by Christ, was intended by him only for their comfort, welfare and peace, not for their prejudice or loss: Therefore any man to plead this liberty to embolden himself unto any such practice, whereby he is likely, or
rather cannot but prejudice and endammage himself, and this in mat∣ters of greatest concernment unto him, must needs be an abuse of this liberty. Now that for the Servants of God to attend upon, or (which is the same) to hold Communion with such a Ministry which is no where approved, or sanctified by Christ in his Word, but obtruded up∣on Christians with an high hand, by those who are confederate both in spirit & practice, with the Scarlet Whore sitting upon the Scarlet-coloured Beast, and drunken with the Blood of the SaintsRev. 17. 3, 6. (a description which belyeth not the Prelatical Priesthood, or Ministry) must needs have a direct and strong tendency to their real loss and detriment, may be thus brought out of darkness into light. The great jealousie and fierce wrath of God are again and again reveated from Heaven, not only against the Antichristian Beast himself, that had two Horns like a Lamb, yet Spake as a DragonRev. 13. 11. &c. but also against all his complices and followers, against all his Worshipers, and those that should communi∣cate with him in his sins [that is, in any of tho sins which are more appropriately his, his, as he claims to be Vicar General unto Christ, and to Umpire matters of Christian Religion and Divine Worship, as he pleaseth, and by what Penalties, as well Civil, as Ecclesiastick, he pleaseth] And the third Angel followed them, saying, with a loud voice, If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his fore head, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture [that is, without any allay of mercy or compassion] into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoak of their torment ascendeth up for ever. And they have no rest day nor night who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his nameRev. 14. 9. 10. 11. else∣where the sore displea∣sure of God is declared (threatning∣wise) against those that shall compo with this Beast in his sins, Rev. 8. 4. Chap. 19, 17, 18, 2 Thes 2. 12.. A most dreadful denunciation and warning! enough to make both the ears of him that shall hear it, to tingle; and to prevail with any man that loves not the vengeance of hell fire, or to have God his Enemy in the fiercest of his Indignation, to keep off, at least, the thousand six hundred furlongs distance, spoken of (Rev. 14. 20.) from all com∣munion with the Beast, Babylon, the False Prophet, and Scarlet Whore, in all their lewd and detestable doings. And whereas several other things of moment might be observed from the passages now cited, I shall at present) take notice of these two only. First, That the most severe and dreadful vengeance here described, is not threatned against any inward defection, or leaning in heart, mind or judgement, towards the wayes and practices of the Beast, but against any outward compliance with him, as in the receiving his mark in the forehead, or
in the right hand, &c. So that it is in vain for men to plead the inte∣grity and goodness of their heart, if in their outward man they con∣form to any of his abominations. Secondly, That the Holy Ghost expresseth those compliances, or those acts of compliance, with the Beast, against which the most heavy doom described is threatned, in words and phrases that are obscure and of difficult interpretation (as the worshipping of the Beast and his Image, the receiving his Mark in the Forehead, or in the right Hand) that so the Saints might be made jealous and fearful, not only of such actions und wayes wherein they should broadly and right-down symbolize, and comport with him, but even of those also, which have the least and lightest appearance of such a comportment. Men use to be more circumspect in their way, and more careful of keeping themselves at a sufficient distance from Ditches, Precipices, and places of danger, when they walk in the twilight, the light of the Sun is apt to make them more bold and ven∣turous. And it is the express will of God concerning us, that we abstain, not only from that which is really and unquestionably evil, but from all appearance of evil1 Thess. 5. 22. likewise, yea, and from whatso∣ever is of an inviting, tempting, and alluring nature unto evilProv. 23. 1. Exod. 34. 5, 16. Deut. 2. 30. (with many other;); yea, and from whatsoever we are not reasonably, and well assured in our Judgements and Consciences, that it is not evilRom. 14. 14, 23. Now that our ordinary and frequent attendance upon persons commissioned and sent by Prelates to preach, is a countenancing of, and consequently, a communicating with, as well the one, as the other, in their sins (with the Prelates in their blasphemous usurpations and incroach∣ments upon the high Prerogative of Christ; with the Preachers, in their consenting unto their Masters in those sacrilegious impieties, by dividing the spoile with them, and accepting a Ministerial Dignity from and under them) hath been demonstratively proved formerlySee Consi∣deration 2, and 4.. And the sin of Prelates in claiming and exercising such a power in, and over the Churches of Christ, which is competent only unto Christ him∣self, and accordingly appropriated unto him by God, being (for kind) one of the most notorious and stigmatical sins of the Babylonish or Anti∣christian Beast; they who justifie, or any wayes communicate with the Prelates in the sin, justifie the Beast also, and communicate with him in the same, and consequently, bring themselves under the dint of those most terrible threatnings from Heaven, which are bent against him, and all that bird him God speed in the way of his Antichristian Abominations (as we lately heard) neither are they who quarrel with him, or declare themselves with the greatest zeal and passion against him, about other matters wherein themselves are, or (probably) may
be some wayes concerned, hereby either made, or declared innocent from the great offence of complying with him, and justifying him. For thieves may fall out, and draw swords upon one another about dividing the prey, and yet-justifie one the other in following the same wicked course of thieving: and Sampson's Foxes were tyed toge∣ther by their tails, when their heads looked contrary wayes. In like manner, men may preach and write with a keen stile, yea and make most severe Laws against him, that calleth himself Christ Vicar [that is, AntichristThe word Antichrist sig∣nifieth as well Christ's Sub∣stitute, Depu∣ty, Vicar, or one that acteth in his place or stead, as one that is an Ad∣versary or E∣nemy to him: although it be true, that he that acteth in his Head, ex∣ercising such a power, which is appropriate∣ly his, & vest∣ed in him on∣ly, is his grand Adversary, and must needs be so, as might be shewed at large. The preposition , as our best Lexicons in∣form us, most properly sig∣nifieth, pro, vice, loco; for, instead, or place [of ano∣ther] and is in this sense frequently used in the New Testament, Matth 2. 22. Luke 11. 11. Jam. 4. 15. Not is it (I verily believe) here so much as once used in an adversative  Yea, incomposition it is used in the like signification. Acts 18. 2. and elsewhere.] and against those that profess a religious subjecti∣on unto him (whom we call Papists) and yet may symbolize, and be in the same condemnation with him, if they claim or exercise, yea, or maintain and justifie that kind of power which he claims (though over greater numbers of men) and exerciseth, but in much a larger Sphere than they; a power (I mean) of imposing upon men what they please in matters of Religion, or of Faith and Worship, under what penalties they please also. The claim of this power over the Chrictian World, (or, I might say, over the whole World) consti∣tutes him that maketh the claim, whoever he be, that Notorious and Grand Anti-Christ, or Vice Christ, of whose coming into the World in his season, the Christians in the dayes of the Apostles Paul and John, had heard,2 Thess. 2. 5, 6. 1 John 4. 3. and whose History (his rise, progress, ex∣ploits, continuance, together with his most doleful and dreadfull Catastrophe, or end) is prophetically set forth by these Apostles; by the former more briefly, 2 Thess. 2. by the latter, more largely in the Book of the Revelation. And whosoever they be that claim the like power, though it be over a smaller part of men, and over those only, who live under their Civil Government and Power, (as most Rulers and Governours that are called Christian, do) they justifie that very power in the nature or kind of it, the claim and exercise of which is the very life and soul, and quickning spirit of Antichrist emphatically, and , to called: and consequently, in this respect, may (with too good propriety of speech) be termed Anti∣christian, or Antichrists of an inferiour order. But this by the way. From the late premises it plainly enough appeareth, that the lend∣ing of our ears and understandings, from time to time, to a Mi∣nistry of a spurious and earthly descent, and which the Prelates (rank of the spirit that breatheth in Antichrist the Great) may
truly call theirs, is a constructive justification of this Antichrist, and that in his fundamental wickedness (as was even now hinted) and so exposeth us unto danger of partaking with him in his plagues: and therefore cannot be encouraged, or led unto it by the sweet Ge∣nius of the liberty purchased for us by Christ; this (as hath been shewed) most effectually disswading and drawing us aside from all actions and wayes, that are of any threatning or dangerous conse∣quence unto us. Secondly, Whereas the Argument pleadeth that the benefit of Edification may lawfully be sought after, and received, from any Ministry whatsoever, not only in the Reformed Churches, but even among Papists themselves, as from Jesuites, Fryars, &c. I answer; 1. That evil ought not to be done, for the compassing or obtaining of any good whatsoever. The great Apostle being reported to af∣firm the contrary, rejects the report with great indignation, as an unworthy slander, Rom. 3. 8. And no marvel; it being repugnant even to the Light of Nature (as might be shewed from the Sayings of some of her Prophets) that the attainment of that which is good, should be endeavoured by unlawful wayes: The reason whereof might be insisted on, but that we are in hast. Now it bath been for∣merly argued, and proved, by Considerations not a few, That to at∣tend upon any Ministry, which is of an Apocryphal and sinful erecti∣on, and consequently derogatory unto Christ, and his care and faith∣fulness over the House of God, whatsoever our ends or expectations may be, in, or from such our attendance, is unlawful, and displeasing unto God, and more especially, and unquestionably, in the case of Scandal given to weak Christians. No goodness of ends or inten∣tions, will make atonement for a sinful action. 2. Though Edification be more necessary, and of greater concern∣ment to be endeavoured and sought after by a Christian, than his daily bread, yet God having provided orderly and regular means, and these every way sufficient for his obtaining it, (as hath been with greatest evidence proved from the ScripturesSee Consi∣deration 19.) he is not to please himself with breaking the Divine appointment on this behalf, or to be his own Carver, when God hath set out a meet and full allowance for him; no whit more, than with seeking his daily bread by indirect and un∣warrantable practices, when as there are honest wayes and means to supply him in this kind, which have the blessing of God annexed by promise unto them, and he well capable of the use of them. The ho∣ly Ghost chargeth it upon the Saints as a special duty and service for
the honour of Christ, that they observe a Decorum, and comely Order in their Church Assemblies, and in managing the Ordinances and holy Institutions of God. Let all things be done decently, and in order1 Cor. 14. 40.. And the Apostle Paul signifies to the Colossians that he rejoyced, be∣holding, though onely in spirit, (for he was now absent in body) their OrderCol. 2. 5. And Titus was left by him in Crete to put things in order, or (as the word signifieth) to set matters at rights, in the Churches thereTit. 1. 5. Now as it is a manifest breach of order, when a wife is dis∣obedient to her own husband, her obedience unto him being fit and comely (as the Holy Ghost himself hath adjudged it, Coloss. 3. 18.) So is it no lesse disorderly for any person, who hath freely embodyed himself in a Church of Christ, the members whereof ought to submit them∣selves one to another in the fear of the Lord (Ephes. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 5. 5.) And again, to serve one another in love, Gal. 5. 13. To build up them∣selves in their most holy Faith, Jude vers. 20. To obey those that are over them in the Lord, and to esteem them very highly in love for heir work sake, 1 Thes. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 17. Not to forsake the assem∣bling of themselves together, but to exhort one another, Heb. 10. 25. Not to make rents or Divisions in their body, 1 Cor. 1. 10. or to cause offences, Rom. 16. 17. (with several other things of like import with these) it is (I say) disorderly in the highest for any Member being un∣der such sacred obligations as these, unto his body, or fellow-members, to turn his back upon them, to abandon their communion, to forsake their holy Assemblies, and under a pretence of Christian liberty to seek after edification, to betake himself from time to time unto strange Teachers (especially being of an infamous and polluted Order) and to frequent Congregations of a Politique Constitution, and worldly com∣plexion, in the name of Churches of Christ. Now for any man to ex∣pect edification by violating the Order, which Christ hath established in his Churches, is with as little reason, as to expect to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of chistles. 3. (and lastly, for this) Were it granted, or supposed, that a person might gather as much, yea, or more, knowledge in the Misteries of the Gospel, from the lips of strange Teachers in their Ministry, than he was like to do by the teachings in his own Church, and amongst those, from whom he hath sperated himself; yet neither will this prove that he edifieth, as much, or more, as, or than, he might have done, by waiting upon God at the door of the lips of him, or them, who speak from God, in his own Congregation. The Silver, and Gold, which an ungodly man possesseth, may be of the same kind of mettal, and of the
same allay, and refining, with that, which is possessed by one that is righteous: yet the Prophet David saith, that a little that a righteous man hath, is better [that is, is serviceable to the owner upon a better account] than the riches of many wickedPsal. 37. 16.. The reason is, or may be, because the righteous mans little, being honestly gotten, or obtained, hath the blessing of God upon it, and is sanctified unto him: Whereas the riches of wicked men, being either unjustly obtained, or unconsci∣onably detained and kept up, or both, are polluted unto the owners, and have the curse of God cleaving to them, according as he threat∣neth, Mal. 2. 2. I will curse your blessings. In like manner, the know∣ledg in things appertaining unto God, and relating unto the saving of the soul, which is obtained by breach of Gospel-order, and by attend∣ing upon a Ministry of an unclean Parentage and descent, may, in the letter and notion of it, be altogether the same (yea and possibly ex∣ceed it) with that, which is gained by keeping close to God in his Gospel-Institutions & Appointments, and received from those Tea∣chers, which the Holy Ghost hath set over us, or is dispensed in our own Christian Assemblies; and yet come far short of it in the matter of true Edification [I mean, in building men up in Faith and true holiness.] For there is an aptness in knowledge, in conjunction with the weakness and vanity of the heart of man, to puff men up (as the Apostle speaketh) which is as contrary to Edification, as contrary may be, unless the flatulency and windiness of it be corrected by the Grace and Blessing of God. Besides, the Scripture in many known places, informeth us, that knowledge and ungodliness agree too well together (many times) in the same subject and soul. Now though God may (as hath been argued, and granted, formerly) sometimes countenance and bless a Ministry of a forreign plantation, to the conversion of some, and edification of others [namely when, and whilst, the irregularity and unlawfuess of it remains un-discovered, so that people in the sim∣plicity of their hearts resort unto it, and whilst other means of Grace are scant, and Gospel Churches few, and remote] yet there is little question to be made but that he much more rejoyceth over a Ministry of his own contrivance and establishment, to work gracious and great things by it for the precious souls of men. And Ministers, who re∣ceive their Commission for their work from him, or in his way, are oft found Ministers of the Spirit, when as those of an exotique and earth∣ly protrusion, though of greater gifts, and parts of learning, prove (in comparison) Ministers onely of the Letter. Therefore they that go wondring, or wandring, after such Teachers as these, upon a design or desire of Christian edification, expose themselves by a like course, unto
a like curse or disappointment, with those Jews of old, concerning whom the Prophet said, They shall commit adultery [that is, they shall take unto them many wives] and shall not increaseHosen 4. 10. And as it is re∣corded of Daniel and his three Companions, who refused to defile themselves with the portion of the Kings meat, or with the wine which he drank, chusing rather to eat pulse, and to drink water; that their counte∣nances appeared fairer, and fatter in flesh, then all the children that did eat the portion of the Kings meatDan. 1 8, 12, 13: In like manner they, who out of Conscience, shal content themselves with that spiritual diet, though it seems but spare and thin, which God judgeth meet to provide for them, are like to thrive better in the inner man, and to grow faster in Grace, than those Teachers, by whom the souls of the Princes, and Great men of the Earth delight to be served. So the Israelites in the wilder∣ness, being dissatisfied with Manna (which yet was Angels bread Psal. 98 25) villifying it as a light breadNumb 21. 5, and complaining, that their soul was dryed away for want of better nourishmentNumb 11. 6., fell a lusting after flesh: wherewith though God was greatly provoked, yet they were not disappointed of their lustPsa. 78 30, flesh was given them in great abun∣dance Numb 11. 31.: But while the flesh was yet between their teeth, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, and the Lord smote them with an ex∣ceeding great plagueNumb 11. 33.. And it is greatly to be feared, that such Members of Christian Congregations, who kick against the spiritual provisions in those Houses of God, to which they relate, as if there were neither marrow, nor fatness, nor any good nourishment in them, and think to feast sumpiuously with the World in their Synagogues, and Assemblies; greatly (I say) it is to be feared, that the sweet morsels they shall eat here, will never digest kindly with them, nor breed any good blood, but turn to wind and water, and bring the displeasure of God upon them. Therefore if Edification be the end which men propose unto themselves in taking a liberty to travel to drink of the waters of Abanah and Pharpar, they might with much more wisdom, and likelihood of success, have consulted the obtain∣ing of their desire in this kind, by staying at home, and contenting themselves with the streams of Jordan. Argument VII. Lastly, Some conceive they may lawfully hear those Ministers whom these Papers all along have endeavoured to perswade all good men to decline and turn away from, if they hear them onely as men
well furnished by God with gifts and abilities for the preaching of the Gospel, and shall not at all mind, or regard, their Ordination; neither whence it comes, nor whither it goes, nor by what, or whose, Authority they stand forth to preach. For that it is lawful to hear any man preach the Gospel, even without any Ordination by men at all, if we perceive, or understand, him competently qualified for the work, is more generally, if not universally, acknowledged by knowing and understanding men. Answer. 1. There is little question to be made but that it may be lawful to hear, yea oft, and from time to time, to hear such a man preach, or declare in words, and in a continued discourse (for this I call preach∣ing) the counsel and mind of God in the Gospel, who never received Ordination (in the common, and best known Notion of the word) from men; yet under these Conditions, or Proviso's. 1. That he pretends not to an Ordination, having never received any, true, or false, and the falshood of his pretence, or his lye in this case, is either known to us, or justly suspected. It is not worthy a Christian, to countenance a liar, or a person justly suspected for such, in so sacred a work, as the dispensing the Oracles of God. 2. That he hath not submitted to any Mock Ordination, or such which is irregular (in the principal, or main of it) for such an Or∣dination is a meer nullity (as was shewed soon after the beginning of this Discourse) in which respect, he that walketh under it, may well be taken for a Non-Ordained man. Yet such a man is not to be countenanced, or honoured, with the presence of a Christian, when he presumes (not having first, by one means or other, testified his Re∣pentance for such a miscarriage) to minister the Glorious Gospel of Christ. For it is not meet that the sheep of Christ should give ear to such a Shepherd, who entreth not by the door (that is, by Christ, and according to his appointment) into the Sheep-fold, but climbeth up another way, Joh. 10. 1, 5. compared. But this is the main part argued hitherto. 3. That we find him to be, in some degree at least, , en∣abled by God to teach: which requireth, 1. Some good acquaintance in the Master Veins of the body of the Gospel: And 2. A convenient
utterance, so as to be able to communicate the conceptions of his mind, unto the minds and understandings of those that hear him. To encourage any private Christian to the exercise of Prophesying, in any more publick way than amongst those of his own family, whom God hath not recommended unto his Brethren, by the common Do∣nation of both these Gifts unto him, especially the former, in some considerable proportion above the generality of his fellows, tendeth rather to the dishonour of the Gospel, and to the disparagement of him that is encouraged upon such terms, than otherwise. 4. That he be a person of a modest, humble, sober, and grave spi∣rit, of an inoffensive and exemplary behaviour, not under any ob∣servation or reproach for any thing scandalous or unchristian, in his course. If they shall undertake to preach Christ, who are ene∣mies unto him, (as all those are who obey not his Gospel, or will not suffer him to reign over them, Luke 19. 27.) they are not to be honoured or encouraged in such their undertaking, by those who are his friends. 5. (and Lastly) That whilst we honour a private Christian in his exercise of those good Gifts, which God hath given him for our Edi∣fication and Comfort, we do not prejudice (in the least) that greater and more solemn Ordinance of the Ministry, which Christ hath given as a singular blessing unto his Churches; nor any wayes discourage or grieve those, who are over us in the Lord, and must give an ac∣count for our souls. The Ordinances of Christ are all necessary in their (respective) seasons, and amicably affected towards one ano∣ther: there is imployment enough, and this honourable, for them all; so that one needs not endamage or entrench upon the privi∣ledges of another. These Cautions and Conditions observed, there is little question but that it is very lawful to attend upon the Gospel∣exercises of a private person, or a man nor ordained (in the common sense of the word) for the Work of the Ministry, or of Preaching: Yet this proveth not (as was even now briefly shewed) that it is in like manner lawful to hear he preachings of a person, who hath so far neglected the honour and pleasure of his great Lord and Master CHRIST, as to purchase leave and liberty, to preach the Gospel, of those who have neither power to grant, nor power to deny, and least of all, power to sell, any such thing, but are intruders upon, and usurpers, yea, and prophaners of the holy Priviledges both of Christ and his People.
2. If it be unlawful to hear such Ministers as these, as, or be∣cause they are Prelatically Ordained, it cannot be lawful to hear them as gifted men, or as persons well qualified, in respect of know∣ledge and utterance, to preach the Gospel. For it is a general and true Rule, That no particular or individual action, which is unlaw∣ful in respect of any one circumstance, can be made lawful by the innocency of never so many circumstances otherwise. Nor is there any particular action so broadly unlawful, but hath some circum∣stance (haply, many) lawful enough relating to it, according to the saying, Malum semper habitat in alieno fundo, Evil alwayes dwells in a soyl that is none of its own; meaning, that it still cleaveth un∣to somewhat that is (naturally) good. 3. (And lastly,) In case he that thinketh it lawful to hear the Ministers we speak of, as men well accomplished with Gifts for the work of Preaching, though not as men sinfully ordained, should openly and publickly declare and profess, that he heareth them only in the former consideration, and at no hand in the latter, his act in hearing them (I conceive) would be much more excusable, both with God and good men; but whether it would be wholly ju∣stified hereby, I somewhat doubt. If a man should bow down to, or before an Image, although he should never so seriously protest and say, that he boweth not down to it, or before it, as it is silver, gold, wood, stone, or the like, nor as it is the workmanship of mens hands, but only as it putteth him in mind of God; I believe this would not make him innocent of the great offence of violating the second Commandment, where bowing down to an Image is expresly forbidden: for no consideration put by man upon such an action, which is a direct breach of any Commandment of God, can alter the property of it, or cause it to be no such breach. Therefore if it be against the mind of God, that we should with our presence ho∣nour the Teachings of such Ministers, who come in this Name unto us, from under Prelatical hands, it is not our considering them as persons gifted for the Ministry, when we do thus honour them, that will reconcile our acting in this kind with the mind, or will of God; how much less, if we shall keep this our consideration to our selves, and within our own breasts? For in this case, how shall our weak brother, who is offended at our hearing such Ministers, come to know, but that we hear them upon the worst, and most offensive terms of all, namely, as Preaching by vertue of their Episcopal Ordination, and so be offended much more? Again, How shall
the Ministers themselves whom we hear, not think but that we hear them as Ministers of Christ, rightly Ordained, and so be strengthened or hardened in the evil of their way, upon a suppo∣sal of our concurrence in Judgement with them, touching their Ordination, and the goodness of the Way by which they have en∣tered into the Ministry, if we hear them from time to time, with∣out declaring or protesting against their Ordination? So that who∣ever they be, that judge it unlawful to hear them as Prelatical Mi∣nisters, have no reasonable ground to think that they may notwith∣standing lawfully hear them as gifted men, unless they shall make their tongues the Interpreters of their minds and intentions in the case. Neither dare I warrant them that the loudest declaring of themselves in this kind, will warrant their practice in hearing them: But I really believe, that they will find it much cheaper of the two, and every way more commodious for them, wholly to wave the hearing of the men they wot of, than to make any such Declaration. FINIS.
