h2913 99827269 31686
The Poor Mans Misery, OR Poverty Attendeth Vain COMPANY, WITH A Speedy Call to Repentance from their ways. Wherein you may behold who they are that are reckoned in the ranck of vain persons, and also the great danger they live in, whilst they live in Vanity, and follow the ways of sin and wickedness, Very necessa∣ry for all to Read and consider of the danger thereof in this day, wherein so many take pleasure in sin, and wicked company. By Roger Hough a lover of Sobriety. Psalm 119.63. I am a Companion of all those that fear thee and keep thy precepts. 2 Thessal. 3.14. If any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. London, Printed for Tho. Passinger at the sign of the Three bibles on the middle of London-Bridge. 1670.
To the Reader. COurtious Friend, in this my labour small, Thou mayst behold a Duty great withal: Read and Consider, and get good hereby, If thou art vain, to God for mercy cry. For sure vain company will ruine bring, For vanity doth  with it a sting; The slugard may unto the Ant repair, Because he take no early harvest care Vain idle company then flee thou from, And in the place of wickedness, by no means come. If that thou profit by this labour small Give God the glory for his graces all
Proverbs 28.19. He that followeth vain persons, shall have poverty enough. THe wise man by the Morral vertue of the laborious man, holds forth the bad consequences that do attend the contrary: He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of herad, but he that fol∣loweth after vain persons shall have pover∣ty enough. The serious consideration of the folly and madness of wicked men at this day, if matter of great lamentation to all those tht truly fear God, to soe men through their own olly and ignorance o run their poor souls upon the hzard of eternal de∣struction, by their associateing themselves with vain persons: My dearly beloved friends, I desire you may seriously consider it, and lay it to heart: what profit can you have in wasting, your precious time, and letting slip over the days of our youth, and dishonouring your Heavenly Father, by your unequal walkings: herein Solomon the Son of David King of Israel, that was the wisest man that ever was before him, or that ever should come after him, 1 Kings
3.12. saw the evil of this, and in this Text if ee , he makes it known unto us; He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread, but he that followeth after vain per∣sons shll have poverty enough: in which w  man learn this necessary reason. That poverty attendeth vain company. When persons leave off their honest and lawful casting, to follow after vain and idle company, this their folly will bring them uno poverty Prov. 12.11. He that till∣eth his land shall be satified with bread, but he that followeth vain persons is void of un∣derstanding. Sirs, as you love the lives of your cious and immortal souls, look to your Companions, vain Company will be the ruine and bane of your immortal souls without deep repentance, look but to that example or the prodigal, Luk. 15. 16. who when his substance was gone, and he left in a disconsolate condition, would have béen content to have fed upon the Husks that the Swine did eat, and no man gave them unto him; then this is the condition you are brought unto by associateing your selves with evil Companions, If any que∣stion who they are that are vain persons, who are to be considered under this notion; I Answer in the General they are such per∣sons,
as daily delight in vanity, then are such persons as live in wickedness: Vani∣ty is unprofitableness either to the soul, or to the body, but more perticularly there is a thréefold vanity, and a thréefold poverty, that attends that threefold vanity. First, There is a vanity of common known Sinners. Secondly, There is a vanity in the self Righteous Moral, Worldly man, the civillest men of the world; And, Thirdly, There is a vanity in unsound Professors: now the poverty that attends these thrée Ranks of Vanity are: First, Temporal want to the outward estate of Man, attends your communion with known sinners. Secondly, Spiritual blindness, and self-confidence, without a sure foundation, or a real reliance upon Christ, that attends the second Ranck of Vain persons; And, Thirdly, Eternal misery in Hell for ever, besides the shame and disgrace they meet with on this side the grave, amongst those that fear God, when their Hipocrisie is discovered, and the filthiness of their shame is made known: This attends the third Rank of vain persons. For the first of thse, who are these com∣mon
known sinners, that are to be avoided; they are persons that live in sin and sinful courses, idle-headed persons, that to fulfil their own lusts, and nourish vice and wick∣ednesses un on headlong to their own de∣ft action: from such therefore turn aside, every known sin that any man lives in, he transgresseth against God in his sin, and herein doth his vanity appear, every wicked man's a vain person, wicked sin∣ners are vain persons. Al Lrrs, Idle Discoursers, Common Searers, Tale-bearers, Strife mongers. Dscno-sectors, Flatterers, Deceitful Talkers, Drunkards, Whore mnmers, Sabbath-breaker, Contemners of Gods People Dsuers of his Ministers, and Ddnces, Grinders of the faces of the Por Proud Persons proud in Words, proud In A  is, nd Fions of the times, com∣mon Gunstes, Stage Players, Sorce∣rers, Jugglers Murderers, Chieves, Char∣mers uchauers Errortioners Vsurers, Vrpers of other ures powers. Busi-Lodes in other mens matters, without a law ulcall thereunto, Quarious Cavi∣lrs, Cihers of Iumotnt persons by In∣justice, Dspisers, Markers, Sorners, and Persecurs of Gods People, Imvezellous,
Wasters and Destroyers of their own and other mens substances, whatsoever known sin any man lives in and delights in, that sin makes him a vain person, therefore to follow after such sins, or such sinners, will bring poverty; For poverty attendeth vain company. Now sirs consider before we pass to the second Rank. what profit can you get by your accompanying with any of these sin∣ners? do you not learn with the Lyer, to pass a way your time for idle stories, and with the prophane, to be prophane? do you not learn with the deceiver, to deceive? and what can you get by flatterers and de∣ceitful talkers, and such like? David was of another mind, when he said, Psa. 101.4, 5, 6, 7. A froward heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked person; whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off; him that hath a high look and a proud heart will not I suffer; mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me, he that walketh in a perfect way, he shall serve me: he that worketh deceit shall not dwell in my house, and he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight: Well then, let this teach you sirs to put forth of your Society and Company,
those that good David will put forth of his sight: But, Secondly, There is a Vanity in the self Righteous, Moral, worldly man, or the vilest men of the world. There is vanity in them though there is in them to the outward shew, a Civil car∣riage and a fair show of uprightness, yet where there is not a true zeal for God, and a relyance upon Christs merrits for salva∣tion, they are yet in the dark paths of ig∣norance, notwithstanding this their gilded carriage in the world, the young man in the Gospel, he had kept all the Comman∣dements from his youth, Mat. 19.20. here was a Moral man, he had done his out∣ward duty towards God and towards his Neighbour, and thereupon he might be reputed that he had done no man wrong, he was therefore as touching the Law blameless, yea, that which was yet more, he came to Christ for Counsel, he suppli∣cated for eternal life in the 16. verse at his very first entrance, and when Iesus had reeated the commandements of the Law to him, all these have I done, verse 20, what lack l yet, he is frill Inquiring after heaven, but comes not to the price thereof, but when he must part with all his substance,
he would kéep that, And so he went his way sorrowing, that one thing needful he could not attain unto, because he could not part with that one thing burdensom; for the text saith, he had great possessions, and they were such a burden unto him that he went away sorrowing, if God contend with such men, they are not able to stand before him, the Civil Morral men of the world, though they carry themselves uprightly to the out∣ward eye of man, yet they are too low for heaven, he that is too high for grace, is too low for glory, and herein their poverty ap∣pears, as being deprived of the best things which are durable for a few fading world∣ly endowments that leaves them when death comes to arrest them: Nichodemus could come & reason with Christ, that was a great Ruler, about Regeneration: yet understands not the words of Christ, though he was a Master in Israel, John 3.10. Also Gamahel a Doctor of the Law, could stand up in the Councel, to defend the lives of the Apostles, Acts 5.34, to 40. but beleived not himself. Now a spiritual blindness and self confidence, without a sure foundation or ral reliance upon Christ at∣tends this the Morral mans vanity. Indéed by the company of these worldlings, you
come to no outward standers o disgraces, as you may do by the first rank. But you get nothing by their company, but learn to seele your selves and take root in their self-confidences; though you waste not your outward substances hereby, yet you loose your precious time, for that which prof∣teth not, and settle your selves upon false rests. As first, upon a civil life and chaste carriage, & think by that means to mer∣rit heaven. Secondly, by self righteousness they will walk uprightly, and use what they haue of the world to their best advan∣tage, and not offend: Is it because they will deal uprightly in all outward appea∣rances, and think thereby to Merrit hea∣ven. Thirldly, Some others will be very charitable to the poor, and freely impart what the Lord bestowes upon them, think∣ing thereby to attain eternal life. Fourth∣ly, Others there are that will come néerer to the mark of profeshion, and diligently at∣tend the Ordinances of God in publiue, and go daily every Lords day to hear the Word preached, & think thereby to obtain heaven. Fifthly, Others will do their duties incombent upon them by the Word of God, they will read and pray in their families, and maintain family Duties, and think
thereby to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. Nay, sixthly and lastly, there are some per∣sons will do all these duties, and repeat Sermons in their amthes and declare to others what external gifts they have re∣ceived front God, and discourse much of Heaven and Eternity in a high manner, and yet for all this fall hor of eternal happiness, because they rest themselves up∣on these slaves, on the Ladder of Eternity. My beloved friends, these things you must do, if ever you intend to be sved, but here is not any of these to be rested on, the way to heaven is by faith in Iesus Christ, for faith without works is a dead faith, you must have works to accompany your faith, James 2.17. Even so faith being without works, is dead being, alone: But, Thirdly, There is a vanity in unsound professors, and false worshipers of God; all such as worship God in a false way contra∣ry to the rule of the holy Scriptures, these are vain persons, such are all Papists, Idolatrous, Will-worshippers of God, and such as worship God by a rule of mens In∣ventions, and not according to his Will, all unsound Teachers, that speak without the life, féeling, and scence of the holy Spi∣rit of God, strengthened and Authorized by
the rule of the Scriptures, to guide and direct them in the truth, and to be the touchstone of tryal, to strengthen, uphold, and maintain them, and herein all such scismacical and heritical opinianists, show forth nothing but vanity; such Craft, mongers, and soul-deceivers win God take in their own crastiuess, John 5.13. Be∣cause such when they know God they glo∣rifie him not as God, neither are they thank∣ful, but become vain in their imaginations: their foolish hearts being darkened, pro∣fessing themselves wise they became fools, Rom. 2.21, 22. and therefore all such as follow them in their dark paths, though it may be in the way of a profession, shall have poverty enough. For where the sound bread of life is de∣jected, the soul for want thereof may be in∣fected, now the poverty that attends these, is eternal misery in hell for ever (without a hearty and deep repentance) besides the shame and disgrace they méet with on this side the grave, amongst those that fear God, when their hypocrisie is discovered, and the filthiness of their shame is made known. As first the Papists their cruelty against
the truth, their idolatrous worshipping of Saints and Angels, unnecessary consecra∣tions and all their idolatrous ceremonies, where with they delude the simple, and stéep them in ignorance and blindness, which impostrous Religion path deluded many poór souls: And then Secondly, All such as contemn and dis∣pise the Ordinances of God, in a way of profession by corrupt opinions, springing up amongst them, as your Socinians and Frée-willers, that would desure and pub∣lish Frée-will, and a general Redemption to the world, with many other opinianists, that I shall not here stand to name because I am scanted of Room in this small Trea∣tise, and therefore must hasten to draw to a conclusion: Therefore take héed my be∣loved that you grow not wilfully ignorant, that this spiritual and eternal poverty do not overtake you: Sirs, you here sée the evil consequences that attends vain per∣sons: that is poverty Temporal, Spiri∣tual, and Eternal. Now there is same reasons-why it is that poverty attends vain persons: And they are these.
First, Because vanity is thee oked with poverty, look upon the outward frame of wickness, and you will find poverty ever attending vanity, Psalm 62.9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are as a lye to be laid in the ballance they are altogether lighter ten vanity, Now I do not say th very poor man in the world is a vain person: poverty is servant to vanity, but vanity may not be a servant to poverty: we read of poor Job, but not of vain Job, his poverty was not vanity, nor poor Lazarus was not vain, Lazarus vanity, would be no servant to poverty, neither to Job nor to Lazarus, but yet for all this, there is a poverty that attends vanity, either Temporal or Spiritual, if not Tem∣poral, yet for the most part Spiritual or E∣ternal; Dives had not Temporal poverty, but when he was in hell, he had so much poverty as satisfied for his cruel covetous∣ness, for whereas before on earth he would not give one crumb, in hell he must not have one drop: surely then sirs, here was poverty enough, so much poverty, as to make him eternally miserable. Secondly, Poverty attends vain persons, because of the vain glory that is in them, vain persons take glory in their vanity,
like unto the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3.19. That said she was rich and encrea∣sed in goods, and did not know her poverty, Now that she was, retched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Thirdly, Poverty attends vain persons, because of that ignorance that is in vain company, there is a palpable ignorance in vain persons, Ephes. 4.17, 18. This I say therefore, and testifie in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles, walk in the vanity of their mind; Having their understanding darkened through the igno∣rance that is in them, because of the blind∣ness of their heart. Surely , where there is ignorance, there is blindness and po∣verty. Fourthly, Poverty attends vain company, because of their evil Councel, vain persons are vain counsellours, this you may sée plainly in Roboam King of Israel, when he forsook the Councel of the Acients that stood before Solomon his Father, and took Councel at his Companions, that we cal∣led young men that were brought up with him, 1 King. 12.8. then the judgement came upon him, and all the Tribes were taken from him, to be governed by Jerobo∣am, save only the Tribe of Judah, which he
and his Posterity raigned over: So you . Beloved, that there is reason why pove ever attends vain company, because verty is yoked to vanity: poverty is séen  the vain glory of vain persons; there is a palpable ignorance in vain company, and because of the evil of the bad councel that vain persons are apt to giue to those that attend them, and company with them: I might give several other reasons, as grounds to confirm this truth, why po∣verty attends vain company, as the unpro∣fitablenesse of vain company, the discredit that you shall have by following of them: the evil of their ways, the losse of our pre∣cious time with several other grounds that for brevity sake I omit at this time. But now by way of Inference my Be∣loved (if poverty attend vain company) In the first place, this lets us sée the great un∣profitablenesse that is in vain company, as for the first rnk of vain persons before spoken of, expertence may teach you the proof hereof, how many have we séen in England, by wasting their precious time (and sping thereof) become temporally poor, by following after vain jesters, and ile soriors, and by delging in their lies,
éen given up to strong delusions, to  before then will ihace the  Thess. 2.11. and have not only alled  outward states, but are by this inens brought into the state of eer∣nal misery, without spéedy repentance, for which end they were giuen up to the strong delusions, vers 12. that they all might be damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousnesse. Again, how many persons have we sée by experience amongst, us; that have been possessed of good estates, in this Nation, I think I may say without fencible error, that almost every Wilae, Town, throughout England, can exsperience it, as many a wasted all their outward estate by following after vain drunkards and whoremongers and common gameing and gamestd, and such like Company, which companying with them, hath brought them into the depth of pover, so that then have thereby consu∣med their outward states, and brought themselves to beggery, and thrown them∣selves, down under poverty temporally, wanting necessaring for the outward man, but it were well it this wre the rit,  this is lut the smallest lsse  the by, they are in w of all things that should he ee to the s, they want spiritual
strength to stand, they want spiritual power to pray, they want spiritual relief for the soul, for in such company they never hear of, or see, or fóel any good, or comfort for the souls refreshing, and is not this pover∣p enough think you, Nay, that which is more, this beget your eternal milery both of body and soul, at the day of judgment, when we shall all appear before the judge∣ment seat of the Almighty God, there c∣ive our sentence of salvation or dam∣nation, if then you be put on the left hand, with this sentence, Go you cursed, Mat. 25.41. Is not this poverty enough think you to be deprived of beaven, and thrown into eternal misery  nay you shall find many that have made profession of Christ. many that have received the Ministry, and teachings of Christ, to the outward ears, that have done duties, and sought after Christ, to fall short of heaven, and surely this you may sée, Mat. 7.22, 23. Many will sa to me in that day, have we not prophe∣sied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out divess, and in thy name have done won∣derful words; Sirs you sée here are people making a great profession in duty, they have probe sied in the Lords name; Nay, that which is more, in his name have cast out divels, these people a man would think
should be in high labour with God, they had done wonderful works too: I pray you consider of it these were for from vain per∣sons that could prophesie, cast out devils, and by wonderful works, and yet sall short of heaven, yea verily, vers. 23. and then will I profss unto them, I never knew you, Depart from ye workers of iniquity. Ah! poor souls, that are running the hazrd of your upon destruction. Consider this, if these men that have thus outwardly proest Christ, by prophesg in his name, & cast∣ing out of Devils, and doing wonderful works shall be shut out of heaven, what will become of you that have done none of these things. Again, what do you think by as such as are despisers of Gods People Scof∣fers, and Scorners of them that profess Religion, and the ways of godliness; Be∣loved, all manner of wickednesse is vanity and nothing, wicked persons are vain persons they say, as in Psalm 12.4. We have said with our tongues we will prevail, our lips are our own who is Lord over us, the Prophet David was hear complaining, v. 2. Saith he, they speak vanity every man to his neighbour, with flattering lps and with a double heart, do they speak well, saith he, verse 3. the Lord will cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud
things: Sirs, you sée here the palpable wirediness of vain persons, therefore he perswaded so look so pant companions, As for the. Fanssovalst persons cious, mor∣tal woudly many thself righteous men, you  no good nor inward comfort by them; Because they want that one thing udful there is one thing lacking, & that is their following of Christ, and pasting with the world; the young man in the Go∣spel was Morra righteous, he had kept the commandemeni of the Law, yet one∣thing was lacking, Go, sell all that thou hast and follow me and thou shalt have creae in heaven. Beloved, a man may be  careful in obserding his duties, and  the commandments of God, and pro∣ have Inge possessions of the world in his heart, he may be ned to many super∣ito worldly onts, be  have his he gre upon the treasures in the world, or  the Pleasures of the world, many a  maken profession, and yet the  of the world draws away his heart, of the Pleasures of the world draw  off,  becomes ain: we read  Mar∣  busie-avaine the world, into  thing the  when as Mary , word the aking in  of Mary, there one thing
needful, & Mary had chosen the better part. Thirdly, The third rank is unsound pro∣fessors of Christ, these are as dangerous as the first, nay moda is in false professors of Christ, a man may as well ne∣ver profess Christ at all as profess him in an eonias may the Papist those Pass mon∣ers that profess Christ under a notion of I∣mage worship, & mens raditions, & inden∣tions of men cense  Darers of Popes, and Cardiolls; and as they say the Auri∣quitie of the  of Rome, whom they firm to be the Mat er Church of the World, and the Pope the head thereof, declaring him to  Peters Successor and to fit in Peters their whose Declaration is false, and their Religion pernicious, and the Pope himself an Im the  Antechrist of the Wor  of yt danger of them but  fined to keep in  Sosinians,  will not alow the Desep of Christ, prede thrée sub∣stances in the God heart, whic is false and  Script  there is a sub∣stance of the Father making man at the first  his own.  that be not suff to prove the substance of a person, Christ is called, Heb.  the exprest Image of his Fahers person Secondly, Christ his self come down from his Fathers hosoe,
took upon him the similitude of man and dyed yilded his body to the smiters; surs∣ly here was the similitude of a person in Cist, who had a humane body given unto him. Thirdly, the Holy Ghost He then af∣firm not to be a person: if that perticle (He) be not sufficient to prove him a person in the Deity; where Christ saith (He) shall tell you all things, yet there is a bodily shape put upon him when Itsus was bap∣tized by John in Jordan, in the 3. of Luke, it is said, the Holy Ghost descended upon him like a Dove, there was a bodily shape, to prove this undenyable truth; and then the Arminians that hold Frée, will, and ge∣neral Redemption, as if persons had power within themselves, of themselves to stand or to fall at their own will and plea∣sure; These-company beloved are very dangerous to comply with for the avoyd∣ing of which, take this word of exhortation, if it be so that poverty attende vain com∣pany, then ee vain company & the compa∣ny of vain persons, & that you may thus do. First, Consider the discredit that is at∣tained by vain company, it is a disgrace to be found complying with vain persons Pro. 28 7. Whoso keepeth the Law, is a wise son, but he that is a companion of riotous men, snameth his Father, Prov. 13.5. a wicked man
is loathsom and cometh to shame, Secondly, Consider the great wast you come by, by following vain persons, whose society many times wasteth your outward substance, Prov. 29.3. Whoso loveth wisdom, rejoyceth his Father, but he that keepeth company with Harlots spendeth his substance: the Prodigal in the Gospel wasted his sub∣stance after this manner. Luk. 15.13. Thirdly, Consider the advice that is given you by the holy Scriptures, the Apostles & followers of Christ, exhort you to fly had company, 1 Cor. 5.9. I wrote unto you in an Epistle, not to company with fornicators, ver. 10. Yet not altogether with fornicators of this world, nor with coverous not extor∣tioners, for then must you needs go out of the world, but now have I writ unto you ver. 11. not to keep company, if any man that is cal∣led a brother be a fornicator or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one do not ea. Fourthly, Consider that such companions are reserved for destruction, & shall be thrust out of heaven without repentance, Rev. 21.8 The fearful and unbeleiving, the aomina∣ble and murtherers, and whore mongens, & & forcerers, & idoliters & all Ipers, shall have their portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstour now beloved, if you ask
what you may do to avoid the evil, take these helps along with you. 1. Eye your company, watch v your selves, while you enjoy the presen of your Companians, and cry them vp the Word of God in their discourses, for with the holy thou shalt be holy, and with the prophane, thou shalt learn prophaneness, 2 Thes. 3.14 If any man obey not our word by this Epi∣ste note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. 2. Get into the company of all those that fear God & kéep his commandements, Psalm 119.63. I am a Companion of all those that fear and keep thy precepts. 3. Set your delight on such as fear God really, let your soul delight in them, Psa. 16.2, 3. O my soul, thou hast said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord: my good∣ness extendeth not to thée: but to the Saints that are in the earth, & to the excellent its whom is all my delight. Dearly beloved in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, consider of these things, you have heard what evil attends vain company & the Lord of his infinite mercy and goodness, in Jesus Christ the great Shepherd and Bishop of our sous, set it home upon your hearts, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. FINIS.
