H3629 99832665 37139
The Humble REPRESENTATION AND ADDRESS Of severall Churches and Christians in South VVALES, and MUNMOUTH-shire, &c. DƲBLIN, Printed by VVILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1655.
To his Highness OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR Of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging. The humble Representation and address of severall Churches and Christians in South Wales, and Monmouth-shire. May it please your Highness, VVE should yet longer have contented our selves with praying and praising God for you, in secret, and ta∣ken advantage from our distance as
to publique affairs, and from your Highnesses most Christian and fa∣vourable understanding of us, to have still for born any address of this manner to You; but that a late prin∣ted Paper, Intituled (A Word for God, or a testimony, &c. from severall Chur∣ches, and divers hundreds of Christians in Wales, &c.) comming to our view (the largeness of which title to those that did not compare it with the sub∣scriptions, nor know that Country might seem to involve under it the generallity of the good people there) VVe therefore think our selves loud∣ly called upon, to assure your Highness, that most of such as feare the Lord in that Country, are not led aside with those temptations, but continue still through grace, such as you judged them once to be, highly
esteeming and honouring not onely your Person, or being before them in Christ, but also that Government and Magistracy which God by most eminent, and signall providences, hath called You to the exercise of, o∣ver these Nations, and cannot now but in the reare of some thousands of good people, beare our testimony in this manner to it, as that wherein at present, we believe the cause, and in∣terest of God, so long contended for, the protection of the Saints, the liber∣ty of the Gospell, the interests of all the people, are under God imbar∣qued; And we cannot see if some who are so earnestly set against this Government (and for no other visi∣bly) had their wills, how these mer∣cies can be preserved to us. And in∣deed (my Lord) it hath not a little
affected us, that while you are sitting at the Sterne, and wrestling with dif∣ficulties for us, any professing Christ (and especially from among us) should the while, be doing the thing that tends evidently to sink the whole Vessell, Nor can You easily judge how much we are grieved that your Highness should have any seeming occasion, to think the generallity of the poor Saints of Wales, who were once so much your joy, should now so sadly degenerate, as to have head, heart, or hand in this unseemly Pa∣per. And though we hope we should have hearts to blesse God for You exceedingly, if we might but under You lead a quiet and peace∣ble life in all godliness, and honesty (as who, having a heart to it may not, and be also greatly encouraged
from the Authority) which is a mer∣cy would have been valued at an o∣ther rate by our Fore-fathers, and such as no Nation in the world be∣sides, that we hear of, do injoy, Yet we cannot rest there, but must ac∣knowledge that (which in private hath rejoyced our hearts) we see o∣ther good things upon the wheele: Endeavours and waies taken to re∣move all oppressions from the bo∣dies of men, also godly Governours, appointed into all parts to protect the well affected, and discountenance sin and wickedness. Taxes lessened as far (at least) as the safety and pre∣servation of the whole could give way. Godly Protestants of For∣reign parts owned, and sympathized with, in their distress; Designes laid in the most probable way for the ex∣tirpation
of Popery, and making fur∣ther passage for the Gospell, and Kingdom of our Lord in the world; which the hearts, and spirits of the Saints, for this many hundred years have been engaged on, and yet we wonder, Friends, that seemed once to be of the same mind, should take the advantage that was too sadly given the Enemy, to pass so hard a sentence upon the works of God, whole waies are in the deep; not weighing aright what experience might have taught us all ere this, that his usuall course is to pull down where he intends to build, and to make instruments base and vile, that his own arme may be considered, when he shall appear with them. And we humbly take notice, that not onely in this case men that run before God, in prescribing
waies, and times, for the bringing forth the mercifull dispensations, he hath pomised to these latter dayes, seem to have a spirit to the work in their own time and way, but none in Gods. And for what remains undone of all that was declared, prayed, and sought for, we and the rest of our Brethren of this Com∣mon-wealth, may if we would deale faithfully with God, and our selves justly acknowledge, that our grie∣vous sins, and our sad unparralleld abuse of those manifold mercies al∣ready received, together with the monstrous pettishness, and too com∣mon indisposition in divers good men; to follow God, and to yeild cheerfull obedience to him in the Government, (which doubtless is of his own workmanship) is the re∣all
proper Cause, why any good things hoped for, by any man, is so sadly retarded, and indangered, it is not our meaning to trace our Bre∣thren, in all the particulars instan∣ced in that Paper; as the imprisoning some Noblemen, &c. which VVe conceive to be the mildest course could be taken, and keep them from ruining themselves, and hazard the whole Nation with them, and we wish in naming such with the respect they do, though Cavileers and Ene∣mies, our Brethren, to magnifie the opposition, do not forget the spirit themselves were once of towards they, and all their Party; nor what they urge touching the continuing the Army together, with the Taxes, Customes, Excise, &c. even as they say in the time of Peace, without
considering by what hands under God, that Peace, and all the Mercies with it, as it was obtained; is to this very hour (and as yet cannot with∣out a Mirracle be otherwise) con∣ceived to us, onely we are so far from undervaluing, that we must remem∣ber and own with them the noble Principles, that were in some of our Patriots in the old Parliament, and the frequent appearances of God, for his Cause and People, during their sitting, and yet wonder our brethren should so soon forget their own sence of them in the latter end, how wea∣ry they were grown of their Go∣vernment, and how far they were then from judging it to be a disho∣nour to God, a scandall to Religion, or grief to good men, to have a pe∣riod put to that authority. But we
greatly fear many of our dear Bre∣thren take too too much liberty, to censure the manifest revolutions, and actions, that the right hand of God hath brought forth amongst us, and to ravell into, and put contrary sen∣ces on those passages of Providence, which themselves, together with the Generation of Saints, had once writ∣ten EBENEZER upon, which God in his own time will (we hope mer∣cifully convince them of, in the mean space as VVe have through Grace some fellow-feeling with you in your burthens, so we rejoyce in the goodness of God to You, that hath armed You with such a mea∣sure of strength, as in the middest of trouble, enough from other hands, to be able to bear with the nume∣rous oppositions, contradictions, and
infirmicies of the weak Saints; and while the spirit that is in them (which perhaps they knew not) carried them to be pulling down, the VVall, and Hedge, God hath set about them. That You should still con∣tinue a Protection and Defence to them, and us, and not to be dis∣couraged in the work of God under Your hands, and we trust that the provocations and evill of this late Paper (though it be very great) will not prevaile over that glorious Spirit in You, but that You will still in some likeness to-Your Heavenly Father, be doing good for evill, and rendering love and compassion for perversness, and so convince ca∣lumny it self, And God even Your God will be with You in the rest of the VVorks he hath given You to
do, And (after we hope many years longer over us) reckon You a∣mongst the Over-commers, and welcome You into his own Eternall Ioy and Glory, which is the Pray∣er of Your Highness most humble Servants, and Subjects in the Lord, &c. FINIS.
The Names of the Subscribers. RAl. Williams Edw Harry Geor. Robinson Hgh Rogers Ion Nicholas William Blethy Edward Herbert Thomas Martin. Iohn Williams George Morgan Rich. Williams Rice Iones Richard Parker. Morgan Iones Iohn Gregory Thomas Calles Nichol. Peather William Arnold Iohn Watkins Lewes Rogers Robert Iones Iames Kemeyd Alexander Iones Francis Watkins Walter William Harry Iohn William Iohn Robert Curnock Griffin Ienkin William Pitcher Francis Iohn Walter Howel Andrew Lewes Edward Lewis Lewis Richard George Edwards Morgan William Hopkin Rogers Morgan Rosser Iohn Bygan Rosser Edward Walter William Rich. Howel William Thomas Giles Morgan Rice Williams Rosser Thomas Harry Thomas Edw. Iohn Tho. Williams Thomas Arney Robert Baker William Richard Lewis Evan Iohn Thomas Knewill Thomas Walt. Williams Charles Iones Thomas William Edw. Hutton Iohn Baker George Ambrose William Packer Edmond Iones of Itton. Wil. Richard Iun. Thomas George Rice Williams Thomas Iones VValt. Radock Rich. Charnock Hen. VValter VValt. Ienkins Iohn Taylor Iohn Perin Iohn VValter Iohn Iones Iohn Morgan VVil. Philips Rosser VVilliams VVil. Potheras Richard Pen Rich. Namer David Iones Francis Sincus VVil. Bide VVroth Richard Rich. Buller Iohn VVilliams Thomas VVhite
Iames Morris Roger VVilliams Thomas Evans Gresham Bray Charles Ienkins Philip VVilliams Iohn Davies Iohn Morgan David Morgan Thomas Caple VValt. Richards George VVhite Lawr. Nonney. VVil. Iones Iohn Iones VVil. Iones Iohn Evans Iohn Morris Iohn Powel R. Ouldaukine Iohn Bowens Iohn Daniel Tho. VVilliams Maur. Bedwill Iames Iones Iohn Roberts Tho. Philips Iohn Daniel Iun. Rowl. Thomas Iohn VVhithear Thomas Daniel Hopk. Thomas Iohn Morgan VVil. Price Frankl. Mathews Lancl. VVilliam Evan ab Owen Robert VVilliam VValt. Iones Iohn Biyes Daniel Higgs VVil. Richard Iohn Thomas Ienkin Byvan Mrma. Mathews VVil. Iones Griffin Bowen VVil. Prichard David Baily Ioh. Retherought Matthew Iones Edward Lewes Iames Philips Evan Griffiths Moor Py VVilliam Baily VVilliam Morris Iohn Ace Ienkin Tayler Richard Bevan Iohn Lucas Iohn Knaeth Iohn David VVilliam Rogers Iohn French Iohn Powel Edmund Ellis Edward Gamage Robert Puel Henry Nichols Iohn Gowler Giffith Darild Robert Thomas Wil. Watkins Rice Davies Morgan Thomas Edward Barter Ienkin Edward Evan Lewelin Ienkin Elliot Ienkin Thomas Iohn Nichol Christo. Ienkin George Mathew Edward Thomas Rice Smuel Iames Walker Edward Morse Edward Wrinch Wil. Wrinch Iohn Morgan Iohn Thomas Ienkin Lloid Matthew Cuffe William Cuffe Waking Nichols Waking Thomas Leyson Thomas Arnold Griffith Charles Robeot Tho. Williams Griffith Richards
Ienkin Evan Thomas Davids Anthony Lutton Morgan Howel David Lewis William David Griffith Howel Rawleigh Fox Thomas Griffith Morgan Cook Thomas Nichol Richard Ienkin Iohn Harry Thomas Thomas David Lewelin Ienkin Griffith Howel Prichard Evan Howel Thomas Iohn Rees William Morgan David Richard Howel William Howel Morgan Griffith Morgan Thomas Edw. Matthew Edward Thomas Morgan Lewis Morgan Evan William Thomas Lewis Harry Watkin Robert Watkin Thomas Rice Iohn Iohn Moses Thomas Iohn Harry Philip Riche Ioh. William Edward Thomas Lewellin Iohn Andrew Rosser William Iohn Lewis Iohn Robert Philips Morgan William Rosser Thomas Iohn William Morgan Bruir Reinold Morgan William Thomas Warkin Iones Iohn Day VVil. Morgan Edw. Rowland Edward Lloid Henry Morgan Mo. Tho Gunter Evan Iones William Philip Edward Gabriel Miles Bruer William Ienkins Evan Rosser Tho. Lewis Morgan Iohn Barkley Tho. ap Thomas Howel Iohn Rosser Richard William Richard Walter Howel Knywilling Iohn Rob. Williams Henry Williams Wil. Williams Edmond Turban Evan Rosser Tho. Giles Lewis Rosser Thomas Lewelin David Philip William Edmond Harry Philip Thomas Rice Iohn David Mered. Thomas David Evan Philip Thomas Iohn William Morgan William Patrick Walter Gibbon William Iohn Howel Nathaniel Ripid Iohn Evans Samuel Lort Robert White Thomas Elliot Henry Garlake Edward Wills Richard Lort Giles Denham Abel Bishop Griffith Howel
Rice Price Rober Tennant Thomas Warren Stephen Young Iohn Elliot jun. Thomas Howel William Hughs William Steward David Dyer Iames Picton Ieni in Iones William Moyl Thomas Wills Edward Morris From the Church of Christ at Lan∣gom in Penbrook¦shire, the 11 month, 17 day, 1655. Edward Carver Iohn Sayes Christop. Iackson Hump. Gunter Erasmus Hicks Anthonie Stocks Iohn Lewis Owen Young Thomas Melets Iohn Luntley Robert Peiest Richard Brown Stephen Love Peregrine Philips Thomas Smith Richard Rayler Edmond Thomas Walter William William Watkin Ros. Tho. Griffith Evan Lewes Rice Harry Iames Richard Thomas William Philip Lewis Iames Lewis Morgan Rosser Thomas Evans Nicholas Watkin Lewis Rice William Evan Rice Iohn Lewis Iames Rosser Harry Llewellin Iohn Rees Wil. Iohn Rosser Harry Lwis Ros. Th. William. Th. Ed. Thomas Wil. Iohn Morg. Thom. Edwards Thomas Iones Iohn David Iohn Thomas Edward Morgan David Morgan Iohn Davies Rosser Watkin Iohn Lews VVatkin Harry Thomas Howel Lewis Llewelin Philip Rees Edmund Evan Iohn Iones Edmund Morgan Thomas William Elias Harry Evan VVilliam Thomas Morgan VVat. Ioh. Philip Harry Morgan VVilliam David Lewis David Thomas Evan Thomas David Ioh. Phil. VVilliā Thom. Rowland Rowland Robert VVill. Rithersh VValter George Henry Morgan Iohn Herbert Ioshua Miller Thomas William Watkin Benedict David Iohn Lawrence Reece Lew. Harr. VVat. Edward Lewis Harry Edmond Harry Iohn
Reynald Morgan Rice Iohn Lewis Wil. Wat. Rosser Harry Evan Harry Th. Iohn Rosser Evan Rosser Gregory David Rice Philip Lew. Ross. VVat. VVill. Benedict Thomas Reece VVilliam Green Iohn Myles David Davis William Thomas Morgan Iones Iohn Price Lewis Thomas Iohn Thomas Evan Bowen Howel Griffith Thomas Iones Iohn VVilliams Iohn Beaban David Thomas Thomas ab Evan David Hopkin Owen Llewelin David Hopkin Evan Thomas Edward Robert Thomas Hopkin VVill. Nicholas Iohn Morgan Sim Butler Philip Iohn VVil. Thomas David Thomas Robert Matthews Charls Morgan Philip Ienkin William Mathew VVill. Morgan Hugh Bayly VVill. Morgan David Griffith Owen Dowl Thomas Hopkin Richard Edward Thomas Iohn Ienkin Franklin Iohn Knayth Nicholas Tanner VVilliam Rees Moses Whityard Reese Pue George Williams VVill. Badcock Evan Iohn Edward William Roger Thomas Howel Iohn Evan Llewelin Iohn Dvid Leison David Iohn Davies Morgan Iones George Rood Philip Iones Llewelin Evan David Lawrence Hgh Matthew Wiliam Thomas Evan Tory Robert Edward Iohn Givelin Richard Else George Harry Hopkin David Philip David Griffith Bowen Francis Williams Howel Iones Reynold Thomas Robert Callow VVilliam Philips Iames Philips Robert Morgan David VVilliam Morris Iohn David Morgan William Philip David Ienkin Daniel william Ieavan William Lewis Richard Will. Huddliston Abeding Godfre. Morgan Aubre Henry Griffith Thomas Proud Morgan Robert
Thomas Beevan William Thomas Griffith William Vincent Powel William Watkins Thomas Watkins William Watkins Rice Powel William Proserp Owen Parry Iohn Howel Iones Lews Thomas Thomas Prosser Watkin Thomas Ienkin Morgan Watkin Philips Watkin Lewis William Prichard Thomas William Thomas Ienkin Will. Wakin David Rogers Roger Iones Watkin Thomas Humph. George William Price Richard Powel William Powel Thomas Powel William Parry Thomas David William Philip Richard Prees Walter Griffith Iohn Medith Roger Morgan Roger Prosser Thomas Lloid William Morgan Thomas Pugh Dvid Pugh Richard Williams Edward Bruhord Llewelin William Thomas Fainton Iames Philips Anthony Rydley Richard Coslat Charls Rosser Rog. Tho. Badam Philip William Morgan Rosser Lewis Ienkin Wlliam Morgan Richard Gibbon Wil. Ioh. Morgan William Badam Thomas Edward Lew. Iohn Howel Iohn Howel Tho. Iohn Rosser William Morgan Andrew Morgan Mirick David Edward Lewis Rich. Iohn Thomas Price Watkin Ienkin Tho. Williams Rees David Thomas Lewis Iohn Ienkin Richard Creed Iohn Iones Thomas Edmund Watkin Ienkin Ienkin Watkin VVill. VVatkin Rosser Morgan Rees Iones Edmond David Rosser William Harry Lewis Morgan Iohn Thomas William William Ienkin Iohn Rosser Renald William Iames Watkin Iohn Parry Watkin Harry Ioh. Rosser Ioh. William Renald Will. Preet Andrew Ienkin Ric. Ioh. Meredith Iames Iames Meredith Richard Rice Griffith Walter Thomas William Philip William David
illiam Iones en. R. Williams Robert Knaeth hn David Owen William Thomas Lloid Edward Frood William Raterd Rees Iohn Evan Ienkin Michael Howard Robert Thomas Thomas Rice Daniel Howel Ien. Grifih Llewlin Morgan William Iones Hamphry Philips Thomas Parry Will. Watkin Owen Lewis Evan Llewelin Matthew Hodson Walter Prosser Edw. William William Hughs Philip Lacock Philip Pember Richard Clark Edward Morgan Thomas Mason Eustace Mason Thom. Matthews Iohn Larcot Richard Heigh Iames Lacock Iames Crews Walter Edwards Roger Watkin Thomas Prosser Thomas Bevan Thomas William Thomas Watkin Roger Prosser Roger Philip Iohn Iones Thomas Prosser Thomas Williams Watkin Iohn Res Price Richard Bevor Howel Yohan Thomas Lewis Iames London Thomas London Iames Williams Watkin Brown Iohn Lewis Hrry Rees Watkin William Oliver Gilbert David Francis Thomas Williams Roger Iones Christoph. Price Iohn Edward Iohn Morgan Iohn Richard Thomas Lewis Edw. Owsley William Gunter Rosser Ienkin Iohn Parry Thomas Rogers Anthony Parry Lewis Hughs Abergaveny. Wlter Sampson Richard Iohn Peter Harry Giffith Ienkin William Thomas Howel Lawrence Thomas Richard Reynold Tumlin Walter William Edward Water Evan Griffith Hrry Thomas Will. Nicholas Iohn David Iohn Iones William Davies Iohn Abbot Will. Prichard Richard Rosser Edward Giles Walter Williams William Morgan Andrew Morgan Sampson Ienkin
Lewis Samuel Thomas William Ioshua Rosser Richard Gibeo Walt Williams William Beran Morris Philip Iohn Hughs Sen. Stephen Hughs Richard Ienkins Evan Davies David Williams David Harry David Morris Walt. Richard Harry William Nich. Richard Iohn Nicholas Anthony Griffith Samuel Iones Ien. Daukings Iohn Rice Thomas ap Owen Iohn William evan ap Owen Dav. Wil. Philip Morgan Thomas Rees Evan David Evan Iohn Ievan David Richard William Rees Evan Dan. Griffit. Rees David David Griffith Iohn Evan William David Thomas Iohn Evan Thomas Iohn Powel Meredith Davis Francis Davis Thomas David Rice Iohns Drahern Evan David Iohns Dav. Matthew Owen David Rees Iohn Morgan Iohn Iohn Bowen Griffit. Humphry Thomas Morgan Iohn Owen Rees Thomas Griffith Iohn Dav. Bowen Owen David Morgan Thomas Iohn Evan Evan Morgan Iohn Walter Richard Hugh David Harry Antho. Thomas Ezekias Thomas Iohn David Griffith Hopkin. FINIS.
