h3834 12083748 53679
THE WARR IN NEW-ENGLAND VISIBLY ENDED. King PHILIP that barbarous Indian now Be∣headed, and most of his Bloudy Adherents submitted to Mercy, the Rest fled far up into the Countrey, which hath given the Inhabitants Encouragement to prepare for their Settlement. Being a True and Perfect Account brought in by Caleb More Master of a Vessel newly Arrived from Rhode-Island. And Published for general Satisfaction. Licensed November 4. Roger L'Estrange. C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms LONDON, Printed by J. B. for Dorman Newman at the Kings-arms in the Poultry, 1677.
NEW-ENGLANDS WARR Visibly Ended. SIR, IN my last, which I hope you received, I must acknowledge what I writ (though truth) yet I had not that comfortable sa∣tisfaction in my spirit, to give me hopes, that our publique Ca∣lamities were so near an end as now I have, which God in Mer∣cy sanctifie to us, that we may see the Rod, and wherefore it is come. We have been, and still are ready to put different Reflections upon the Murders and Spoils that have been made upon us by this Destructive War: Various are mens thoughts why God hath suf∣fered it, all acknowledge it was for sin; many wish there hath not been some leaven of that spirit in the provocation for which we left Old England: I am in great pain while I write, to remem∣ber how severe some of us have been to Dessenters, making Spoil without pity, but God is teaching us Moderation. That black cloud (God be thanked) begins to waste almost to no∣thing, which may not only give us an hopefull opportunity of re∣pairing the Spoils made by our Barbarous Neighbours, but also de∣liberating upon the true causes of these great distractions: for now we have no visible appearance of an Enemy: Terrour is fallen up∣on very many, who come in dayly with submission, and the rest withdraw into places remote, hiding their weapons of War, and flying from Justice in small Numbers. King Philip, who hath been a pestilent Ringleader, that had once three hundred men (Barbarously inclined) as I told you in my last, was reduced to ten, but now is killed, in this manner. He being hid in a Swamp on Mount Hope-neck, with his little Party, one of his Indians being discontented with him, made an escape from him, and came to Rhode-Island, and informed Captain Church a Plimouth-Captain of a Company that was in search after this said King Phi∣lip, (the Captain being at this time on the said Island, refreshing his men with Necessary Provisions) but understanding where King Philip was, and that he intended very speedily to remove far off, to provide his Winter-quarters, retaining still the same Barbarous spirit and purposes, without the least appearance of reluctancy offers of Mediation, towards his surrender to Mercy; whereupon
the said Captain and his company with some Rhode-Island men went in pu  after him, taking an Indian Guide with them, and  where, they heard he was, which was very mi∣ry, and the ground so loose, that our men sunk to the middle in their attempts, to come at this sculking Company, but all in vain, the passage was to difficult. While we were thus beset with difficulties in this attempt; the Providence of God wonerfully appeared for by chance the Indian Guide and the Plimouth man, being together▪ the Guide espied an Indian, and bids the Plimouth-man shoot, whose gun went not off, only flashed in the pan; with that the Indian look'd about, and was going to shoot but the Plimouth-man prevented him, and shot the Enemy through the body, dead, with a brace of Bullets; and ap∣proaching; the place where he lay, upon search, it appeared to be King, Philip, to their no small amazement and great joy: This sea∣sonable Prey was soon divided, they cut off his head, and hands, and conveyed them to Rhode-Island, and quartered his body, and hung it upon four Trees: One Indian more of King Philips Com∣pany they then killed, and some of the rest they wounded, but the Swamp being so thick and miry, they made their Escape. This is the substance of this Enterprize and the small remnant we left as inconsiderable, who must either fly up into the Coun∣trey or perish in the place. There is one Potuck, a mischeivous Engine, and a Counsellour; taken formerly, said to be in Goal at Rhode-Island, is now sent to Boston, and there shot to death. One Quonepin a young lusty Sa∣chem, and a very Rogue is now in Goal at Rhode-Island, who was there some years ago for his Misdemeanours, but broke Goal, and run away, and could never till now be lid hold on. God be thanked, many Indians come in daily, and submit them∣selves with much dejection, crying put against King Phillip, and o∣ther ill Counsellors, as the causes of their Misfortunes. The English go many of them now to their Old Habitations, and Mow down their Ground, and make hay, and do other occasions necessary for their, re-setling? All which gives his comfortable hope, that God with graciously repair our breaches, and cause this Bloody War to End in a lasting Peace, So prays, Your faithfull friend, R. H. FINIS.
