h48 99827130 31544
PARADISE Transplanted and Restored, IN A MOST Artfull and Lively REPRESENTATION OF The several Creatures, Plants, Flowers, and other Vegetables, in their full growth, shape, and colour: Shown at Christopher Whiteheads at the two wreathed Posts in Shooe-Lane, London. Written by I. H. Gent. London, Printed in the year, 1661.
Paradice Transplanted, and Restored in a most Artfull and Lively Repre∣sentation of all the Creatures, &c. BEing Importuned by some Persons of Qua∣lity; whose curiosity invited them to see the Paradice at the two wreathed Posts in Sho-Lane (where their Satisfaction could not be limi∣ted by their own eyes) to publish something con∣cerning the excellency of it, that so the deserved honour of the incomparable Artist, may be more generally known, not only to his bare Fame, but also to his profit, toward the incouragement of his worthy Labours, I have been induced to set forth this Paper, to recommend this Elegant and curi∣ous piece of Art to all Noble and Ingenuous Persons. The Design, is a Model, or Representation of that Beautifull Prospect Adam had in Paradice, when the whole Creation of Animals, were toge∣gether subjected to his imperious eye, and from his mouth received their several names, distin∣guished by them to those particular subservient Offices whereunto by Nature they were Ordain∣ed.
The Artist hath so far complied with the per∣fect and exact Original, as is possible to humane skill and industry. His researches and enquiries after Foraign, Outlandish Creatures, whose names are not so well known to these Quarters of the World (and those small and inconsider∣able ones too) was a costly Labour; but to present them to view in their natural shapes and postures to the Life, and beyond all former Fi∣gures and Descriptions of them, as that every man may be as wise as Adam, and read their names and qualities in their Aspects, is a most meritorious obliging Work. To enumerate all the Creatures (so as they seem here enlivened) by name, were a tedious and im∣pertinent task, only thus much shall suffice: what∣ever the most unbounded and comprehensive knowledge of any man since Adam did attain to in the Science of the Number and Form of Crea∣tures, is certainly outdone in this Representati∣on. For here they are placed from the greatest to the least, from the Elephant to the Mouse, from the Eagle to the Wren, from the Crocodile to the Glow-Worm; with all sorts or kinds of In∣sects, and Creeping things, to please the wander∣ing eyes of the Spectators. One would wonder upon a long and continued view, that the Creatures of different natures and antipathies to one another, as the Dog and the Bear, the Lion and the wild Boar; and those smal∣ler Animals, which exercise hostility, and among
whom, one with another there is such constant feuds, as Cocks, &c. should stand so still and quiet, and not flie one upon another; certainly, the least Mathematical motion, would breed such a War in this Commonwealth of Beasts, that would utterly undo the better deserving Artist. You must have a special care (whoever shall in∣dulge himself his innocent pleasure of seeing these Rarities) that as soon as you enter, you fix your eye first on the Basilisk, placed conveniently for that advantage, lest her venemous sight spy you out before, and so a strong conceit that she is there in life, endanger yours. You cannot without indignation of minde see the accursed Serpent putting the deadly Apple into our Grand mother Eves hand: and were it not that this malicious fraud is acted at the fur∣thest end of the Room; and out of your reach, you would put forth your hand to prevent that destruction (which ensued thereby upon Posterity) A fraud, I say, twice so (ill and well) practised, first by the Serpent, and then by this our Artist, that the one can never be remedied, nor the other mended. There is also the divertisement of Hawking, in the several Flights of the Tassel, the Lanner, the Marlyn, and that merry sport of the Hobby; but I know not by what new or ill quality, they neither come down with their Quarry, nor will they come to Lure at any hand; the Spaniels stand diligently at the retrive, eagerly expecting a share of the
Game, and would bark, but dare not for their lives, but yu would swear they meant it, and that they are abused. Here is also sundry Rarities of Trees, Slips of those beauteous bulks, which grew in the Garden of Eden, upon the fruit whereof (Zeuxis Master ship being here infinitely surmounted and excel∣led) stand Birds picking, to the envy of the La∣dy Spectators, who thinks those Delicacies were ordained for them, while their gallants are ready to hush them off the Trees with their Hat and Feathers. While we are speaking of such Personages, give me leave to mention a piece of excellent ac∣complisht Art, relating to them: On the left side of the Room, are five beautifull Ladies seated, beholding these curiosities, a person of quality standing by them, attended with three Blackmore Lacquees in rich blew Liveries: At the first en∣trance, the liveliness, beauty and gallantry of them hath struck such a kind of Reverence, that many have constantly and observantly bowed towards them, and have wondred at the non-return of their Civility. On the left side behind the opening of the door are placed a Consort of Musitians of commonly known faces. among the rest the Artist, tuning of a Lute, all so exact and to the Life, that people on a sudden glance, suppose they shall have Musick too, as in other Shows and Plays, for their money. But that which excels therein, is the draught of
the old man of the House, filling out drink to the Musicians, so proportionably and rarely Copied, that it is very hard to distinguish betwixt them, which is the livelier, Th' Old man and's Picture, both to' life, Together set to end the strife, Or both will false and feigned seem, Or both you'l true and real deem. Nay so compleatly hath the Artist done this piece, that when first he placed him in the Room, the Old man having conducted some Gentlemen thither, and while they were beholding the afore∣said Rarities gone out again; when the Show was done there; and the Artist was to shut the door, he espied, as he though, the old man, and desired his Picture instead of him to come out, that he might lock the said door, till recollecting himself, he found out his happy and almost indiscoverable Errour. When you have glutted your eyes even to satiety here, there remains yet a Collation below stairs which will amount to the just measure of a large entertainment: Tis the Representation, What do I call it? Tis the very self same Feast that luxurious Emperour Heliagabalus made for his Compani∣ons, who disappointing his Invitation, it hath been preserved in Art to this time; you are de∣sired nor to fall to, because that great Master of the Beast hath nor as yet touched one Dish of it, and  mannerly to begin before him: you may design what Oath you please to feed upon out of
all that choice variety, and keep your stomach for it, whether it be Chine of Beef, Westphalia Gam∣mon, Venison, or Daintier Viands, Hollow Birds, Pies, Tarts, &c. But if you should chance to fast over long (as I do not promise you any set Meal time) there is a remedy at hand, you may kiss the Cook Maid; but let not her smug and black eyes entice you any further. After all this comes a Banquet (tis not for a mas∣culine palate, and therefore I shall not insist upon those sweet Kickshaws) there is nothing wanting here, to serve a Ladies desire, and to keep it; for its twenty to one if her eye be not bigger then her belly. Upon a review of the whole, and second thoughts, it seems to me to be the Model of the Ark, into which all the Creatures against the approach of the Deluge entred for their preservation: The Provision in the Room below-seing like the Store Room in the Hold thereof  un∣tain and feed them. And it is most certain, that the  parable Art of this Gentlemen haht rescued many of these Creatures from the ignorance of half-the world. To conclude, he that hath seen this delightfull sight, can never see enough of it (besides the daily adons with which the rich Invention of the Artist is still fur∣nishing and replenishing this Work) and he that hath not seen it, hath in effect as good as seen nothing. — The whole is remitted to the belief of your sight, which helped with the full Relation of the several Natures, Qualities, Countries, and Contrarieties of the several Creatures, ex∣actly delivered by the Artist himself, will, without arro∣gance of saying so, improve it to your highest satisfaction. FINIS.
