I1017 R7203 12988996 96294
English coat of arms, circa 1642 HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
IRELANDS Amazement, Or the Heavens ARMADO. Being a true Relation of two strange and prodigious wonders or Apparitions, which was seene over the City of Dublin, the one Decemb. 24. and the other Decemb. 30. 1641. Which appeared in the Heavens like to an host of Ar∣med men with great Ordnance as it were giving fire, and all other furniture for warre, with other fearefull signes. Which strange Visions put the City and Inhabitants into great astonishment and feare. And may serve as a warning peece for En∣gland in these troublesome and distracted times: London, Printed for Iohn Thomas, 1641.
Dublins warning Peece, OR, The Heavens Armado, with a Spurre to Repentance. IT hath been reported from Antiquity, and our Fathers have foretold us concerning the impious and nefarious imaginations of the Children of the age to come the which being verified in these pre∣sent times, we ought to take into our serious considerati∣on the present and now imminent deuger ordained by the direfull wrath of the just and Almighty God; True it is, that we have like Icarus (scorning the Counfell of our all creating Father God) soared so high with the waxed wings of our humane and mor∣tall invention, that we are almost fallen into the sur∣ging Ocean of this our present misery, and the wings of our vaine and selfe-conceited inventions are Sun∣burnt with the hot and melting Sunne of Gods wrath. The prodigious Apparitions in the Heavens doe shew and forewarne us from proceeding into our daily vices and hainous iniquities; As lately for Example sake.
Vpon the 30. day of Decenth. last, Anno, 1641. There did appeare in the sight of the Juhabitants of the City of Dublin a prodigious Apparition in the Firmament, the similitude whereof I shall truely de∣monstrate in this present Declaration; There ap∣peared a great host of Armed men in the likenesse of horse and Foot, and according to humane suppositi∣on they seemed innumerable, when especially were notified to the eye of the aforesaid beholders of the City of Dublin, a traine of Artillery with great Ord∣nance and Field peeces, as necessary for Battell, where also was presented to the amazement of the behol∣ders, Gunners giving fire in direfull and hideous manner, that the very likenesse of the flames there∣of, strooke the beholders with great astonishment and admiration. . Oh is it not time therefore for Israell to repent and call to the Lord that he would reforme her wicked wayes? Oh it is the vengeance of the Lord, not that we are in erroneous and false Doctrinall Religion; But by reason that we forget to worship God our Creator. Did not the Lord suffer the Philistins to vanquish and overcome Israel, because they gave themselves over to all vice and carnall delights of the flesh, and running headlong after strange Gods, forgetting the Lord Almighty, that conducted them out of the Bon∣dage of Pharoah, and the slavery of the Egyptians. Oh let us with Peter mourne and lament for the de∣niall of Gods true Worship; Oh let the eyes of out Repentance, like the Rocks of Marah power forth the abundant and flowing streames of Repentance,
that our God, the God of infinite mercy, may with∣stand the hand of those mercilesse and irreligious Caitisses of the blood-sucking Rebels of Ireland, vn∣der whose Tyranny our Protestants lye groaning; Oh that the Lord would vnite our hearts in the true and fervent prayer of Manasses. Oh that we might have a David sent from the Lord to slay the vaunting Goliah of those daring Re∣bels, then should Israel see manifold blessings, the blessings of the Lord, and learne how to praise God her Maker, If the tares of blind superstition and Jdo∣latry were rooted out and clensed from the good Seed of the pure Gospell; Then should wee know, how to praise the Lord and rejoyce in his Holy Name. A strange Wonder. GReat are the wonderfull workes of God, and innumerable are the Signes and Wonders, by which he expresses & foretels his judge∣ments, striving by that meanes to deterre mankind from sinning. And that this Miracle may not be esteem'd fabu∣lous, and vaine, (too many hearts being hardned with vnbeliefe, which vainely thinke that such things are occasioned by chance, and not by divine providence)
therefore J have thought good to give you some te∣stimonies in the like nature, which have hapned on other Countries, which have sound by sad experience, the effect of those dismall, and amazing Appari∣tions. In Silesia at Trappa, Crowas fought a mortall Battell, Feb. 1625. At Hessen likewise flights of Birds fought and kild each other, March 1635. Many other Signes and Wonders I could relate which were the fore-runners of desolation and destruction. A neerer Testimony I can give you which hath lately happened at Worsop in Nottinghamshire on the 16. day of Novemb. last, 1641. A certaine Maia lay dead the space of 20. houres, afterwards she came to life againe and made a strange and wonderfull Prophecie, fore-telling strange and wonderfull alterations in these Kingdomes, without speedy repentance, declaring how neere Gods Iudgements were at hand, and ready to fall upon our heads. Likewife at Dublin on Christmas Eve last, 1641. was a true information sent to an Alderman of London frō his Factor in Ireland, of a strange wonder seen on the same day about 4. of the clock in the afternoone it growing dark, such an incredible number of Sea Guls, Ravens and Crowes assembled together, fluttering, croaking, and pewling over our heads in so strange a hideous manner, that they astonished all the Jnhabi∣tants, and thus continued till 6. at night, being an houre especially at this time of the yeare, that Fowle seldome are seene or heard abroad, nay the shooting of many Muskets, and of divers pieces from the Ca∣stle
could not affright or scarre them away, nay we in my very conscience were more affraid of them, then they of us, what it should meak: I cannot di∣vine, but the oldest man in Dublin, either English or Jrish never saw the like, but by this wee have cause to conjecture, that God by those Apparitions fore-tels his judgements in Signes and Wonders, which without speedy Repentance, wee have cause to feare will suddainly fall upon us, God I beseech him avert them, and give us penitent hearts, so that we may truely loath our sinnes and turne to the Lord our God. FINIS.
