J413A 16187141 105020
Christs Kirk on the Green. Composed (as is supposed) by King James V. Newly Corrected according to the Origi∣nal Copy. WAs never in Scotland heatd nor seen such dancing and decay; Neither at Faulkland on the Green, nor Peebles at the play, As was of Wooers as I ween at Christs Kirk on a day: For there came Kittie washen clean with her new Gown of Gray. Full gay that day. To dance these Damosels them ight, these Lasses light of laits, Their Gloves were of the Raffal right, their Shoes were of the Straits; Their Kirtles were of Lincoln light well drest with many plaits, They were so nice when men them neigh'd they squiel'd like any Gaits Full loud that day Of all these Maidens mild as meed, was none so gimp as Gillie: As any Rose her rude was red, her Lire was like the Lillie, But yellow, yellow was her Head, and she of Love so silly Though all her Kin had sworn her dead she would have none but Willie Alone that day She scorned Jack, and scripp'd at him, and geon'd him with mocks: He would have love her, she would not let him for all his yellow locks▪ He chesh her, she bad go chat him, she counted him not two clocks: So shamefully his short Jak let him, his Legs were like w Rocks, O▪ Rung that day. Tom Lutter was their Minstre meet, good Lord, how he could ance: He play'd so shril, and sang so sweet while Tousie took a Trance, Old Lightfoot there he could foreleet and counterfitted France: He held him like a Man discreet, and up the Morice dance. He took that day. Then Stephen came stepping in with stends, no rik might him arrest, Splay-foot did bob with many bends, for Masie he made request. He lap while he lay on his lends; and rising was so preast, While he did hoast at both the ends for honour of the Feast, and danc'd that day. Then Robin Roy began to revel, and Tousie to him drugged: Let be quoth Jack, and call'd him jevel, and by the Taill him rugged. Then Kensie clicked to a Kevel, God wots as they two lugged, They parted there upon a Nevel, men say their Hair was rugged Between them two With that a friend of his cry'd fy, and forth an Arrow drew. He forged it so forcefully, the Bow in slenders flew, Such was the Grace of God, trow I, for had the Tree been true: Men said, who knaw his Archery, that he had slain anew, Belyve that day. A yap young man that stood him neist, soon bent his Bow in ire. And etled the Bairn in at the Breast: the Bolt flew ov'r the Bire: And cry'd fy, he hath slain a Priest a Mile beyond the Mire: Both Bow and Bag from him he keist and fled as fast as Fire From Flint that day An hasty Kins-man called Hary that was an Archer keen, Tyed up a Tackle without tarry, I trow the man was teen: I wot not whether his hand did vary or his Foe was his Friend: But he espayr by the mights of Mary as one that nothing mean'd But good that day, Then Lawrie like a Lyon lap. and soon a flain could fedder, He height to pierce him at the Pape, thereon to wed a Wedder He hit him on the wamb a wap, it butt like any Bladder. He scaped so, such was his hap; his Doublet was of Leather, Full fine that day. The buff so boisteriously abaist him. that he to th' Earth dusht down. The other Man for dead he left him, and fled out of the Town The Wives came forth, and up they reft him and found life in the Lown. Then with three rous there they rais'd him and cur'd him out of sown, Frae hand that day The Miller was of a manly make. to meet with him it was no mowes: There durst not ten some there him take so cowed he their powes: The bushment whole about him brake, and bickered him with bows. Then traiterously behind his back. they hoch'd him on the howes Behind that day. Then Hutchen with a Hazel rice to red gan through them rummil: He muddl'd them down like any Mice, he was no betty bummil. Though he was wight he was not wise, with such jutors to jummil. For from his Thumb there flew a slice while he cry'd barlafummil. I'm slain this day. When that he saw his Blood was red to flee might no man let him: He trou'd it had been for old feed; he thought and bade have at him. He made his Feet defend his Head, the far fairer it set him: While he was past out of their plead: they must be swift that gat him. Through speed that day. Two that were headsmen of the herd, they rusht on other like Rams; The other four which were untear'd beat on with Barrow Trams, And where their Gobs were ungear'd, they got upon the Gms, While that all bloody was their Beards. as they had worried Lambs, Most like that day; They girn'd and glowred all at anes, each gossip other grieved: Some striked stings, some gathered stanes, some fled, and some relieved, The Minstrel used quiet means, that day he wisely prieved, For he came hame with unbruis'd Banes where fighters were mischieved, Full ill that day. With Forks and Flails thay lent them steps, and flew together like frigs: With bougers of Barns they pierc'd blew caps and of their bairns made Brig The rare rose rudely with their raps, then Rungs were laid on Rigs: The Wives came forth with crys and claps, see where my likeing ligs, Full low this day. The black Souter of Braith was bowden, his Wife hang at his Waist: His Body was in black all browden; he girned like a Ghaist, Her glittering hair was so bowden, her love fast from him laist, That for his sake she was unyawden while he a mile was chast, And mair that day. When they had beir'd like baited Bulls, the bone fires burnt like bails, Then they grew as meek as Mules that wearied were with mails, For those forfoughten tyred fools fell down like slaughtered Frails, Fresh men came in and hail'd the Dools, and dang them down in dails, Bedeen that da The Wives then gave a hideous yell, when all these yonkiers yoked, At fierce as flags of Fire flaughts fell, ficks to the field they flocked, The Carles with Clubs did others quel on breast while blood out boaked, So rudely rang the common Bell, that all the Steeple rocked, For dread that day. By this Tom Tailer was in his gear, when he heard the common Bell, He said he should make all on stear, when he came there himsel, He went to fight with such a fear, while to the Ground he fell, A Wife that hit him on the Ear with a great knocking Mell, Feld him that day. The Bridegroom brought a Pint of Ale, and bad the Piper drink it, Drink it, quoth he, and it so stail, ashrew me if I think it. The Bride her Maidens stood near by, and said it was not blinked, And Bartagesie the Bride so gay, upon him fast she winked, Full soon that day: When all was done, Dick with an Ax came forth to fell a Fother, Quoth he, where are you whorson smaiks; right now that hurt my Brother, His Wife bade him, go hame, Gib-Glaiks, and so did Meg his Mother, He turn'd and gave them both their palks for he durst ding no other, But them that day FINIS.
The Banishment of Poverty by J.D. of Albany: To the Tune of the Last Good Night. POx fa that pultran Poverty, Wae worth the time that I him saw Since first he laid his Fang on me My self from him I dought ne're draw: his wink to me has been a Law, He haunts me like a penny dog, Of him I stand far greater aw Than Pupil does of Pedagogue. The first time that he met with me, Was at a Clchan in the West, Its name I trow Kilbareban be; Where Habies Drons gave many a blast. There we shook hands, cald be his cast, An ill dead may that Custron die: For there he gripped me right fast When first I fell in Cautionrie. But yet in hopes to be reliev'd, And free'd from that foul Ladlie Lown, Fernʒier when Whigs were ill mischiv'd And forc'd to fling their Weapons down When we chas'd them from Glasgew Town, I with that Swinger thought to grapple, But when Indemnity came down, The Laydron caught me by the Thrple. But yet in hopes of more relief, A race I made to Arinfrew. Where they did bravely buff my Beef, And made my Body Black and Blew. At Justice Court I them pursu'd, Expecting help for their Reproof, Indemnity thought nothing due, The Devil a farthing for my Loof. But wishing that I might ride East, To trot on Foot I soon would tyre, My Page allow'd me not a Beast, I wanted Git to pay the Hyre: He and I lap o're many a Syre, I heuked him at Calder cult. But long ere I came to Clypes-myre The ragged Rogue caught me a while. By oland Bush and Bridge of Bonny We bickered down towards Bankier, We fear'd u Revers for our Money, Nor whily whaes to grip our Gear▪ My tattered Tutor took no Fear, (Though he did travel in the Mirk) But thought it fit when he drew near To filsh a Forrage at Falkirk. No Man wou'd open me the Door, Because my Comerade stood by, They dread full ill I was right poor By my forsaken Company. But Cunninghame soon me espy'd, By how and hair he hail'd me in. And swore we should not part so dry, Though I were stripped to the Skin. I baid all night but long ere day, My curst companion bade me rise, I start up soon and took the way, He needed not to bid me twice. But what to do I did advise, In Lithgw I might not sit down, On a Scots Groat we baed thrice; And in at night to Edinburgh Town. We held the Long gate to Leith Wind, Where poorest Purses use to be, And in the Caltoun iudged syne, Fit Quarters for such Companie. Yet  the High-Town fain would see, But that my Comrad did me discharge, He would me Blakns Ale to pi, And must my eard that was right large, The morn I ventured up the Wind, And sloug'd in at the Neather-Bow, Thinking that Trooker for to tyne, Who does me Damnage what he dow: His company he does bestow On me to my great grief and Pain, Ere I the Throng cou'd wrestle throw The Lown was at my Heels again. I green'd to gang on the Plain-stanes, To see if Comrades wou'd me ken; We twa gad pacing there our laines The hungery Howr wixt twelve and One, Then I knew no way how to en, My Guts ruml'd like a Hurle-borrow, I din'd with Saints and Noble Men, Ev'n sweet St. Giels and Earl of Murray; Tykes Testment take them for their Treat, For I needed not my Teeth to pick, Though I was in a cruel Sweat, He set not by say what I like. I call'd him Turk and traked Tyke; And wearied him with many a Curse, My Banes were hard like a Stane-Dyke No Rig Maria was in my Purse: Kind Widdow Caddel sent for me To dine, as she did oft forsooth, But oh alas that might not be! For her House was too near the Tolbooth; Yet God reward her for her Love, And kindness which I feckful sound, Most ready still for my behove Ere that Hells Hound took her in Hand. I slipt my Page and stour'd to Leith To try my Credit at the Wine But foul a drible fyl'd my Teeth, He catch'd me at the Coffee Sign I staw down through the Neather-Wyne, My Lady Semples House was near, To enter there was my design Where Poverty durst ne're appear. I dined there, but I baid not long, My Lady fain wou'd shelter me, But oh alas! I needs must gang And leave that comely Company. Her Lad convoy'd me with her Key Out through the Garden to the Fields, Ere I the Links could graithly see My Governour vvas at my Heels. I dought not dance to Pipe nor Mary I had no stock for Cards nor Dice, But I sure to Sir William Sharp Who never made his counsel nice▪ That little man he is right wise And sharp as any Brier can be; He bravely gave me his advice Hovv I might Poison Poverty. Quoth he there grovvs hard by the Dial In Hattons Garden bright and sheen a soveraign Herb, call'd Penny Royal Which all the year grovvs fresh and green. Could you but gather it fair and clean, Your Busines vvould not go backvvard, But let account of it be seen To the Physicians of Exchequer. Or if their Ticket ye bring vvith you Come unto me, ye need not fear For I some of that Herb can give you Which I have planted this same Year. It vvill cause your Page disappear Who vvait, on you against your vvill; To gather it I shall you lear In my ovvn Yards of Stony-hill, But vvhen I dread that vvould not vvork I over thought me of a Wile Hovv I might at my leisure lurk My Graceless Guardian to beguil. 'Tis but my galloping a Mile Through Cannongate vvith little loss, Till I have Sanctuary a vvhile Within the Girth of Abby Closs. There I vvan in and blyth vvas I When to the Inner-Court I drevv, My Governour I did defy, For joy I clapt my Wings and crevv▪ There Messengers dare not pursue, Nor vvith their Wands Mens Shoulders flee▪ There dvvels distressed Lairds anue In peace tho they have little Gear: I had not tarried an Hour or tvvo, When my blest Fortune vvas to see A sight sure by the mights of Mary Of that brave Duke of Albany. Where one blink of his Princly Eye Put that son▪ Foundring to the flight, Frae me he banish'd Poverty And made him take his last Good-night▪ FINIS.
