L1080 13013421 96524
Mr. SPEAKERS SPEECH, Before the King, in the Lords House of Parliament. July the third, 1641. Concerning the passing of three Bills. Viz. Poll-money. Star-chamber, and High Commission.
Mr. Speaker's SPEECH. THe Government of Common wealth rests in the Rules of order, and hath so much affi∣nity and consent with the Rules of Nature, in the government of the World, that the first copie and mutation of the one may seeme to be taken from the o∣riginall and first modell of the other. This contemplation (most excellent and gracious Sovereigne) casts our eyes upon your sacred Majesty, as that Celestial Orbe, which never resting without the office of perpetuall motion, to cherish the lower bodies, not enriching it self with any trea∣sures drawn from below, exhales in va∣pours from the inferiour Elements, what in due season it returns in showres.
The application makes us consider our selves, those subluninary creatures which having their essence and being from the in∣fluence of those beames (as the flowers of the field) open to receive the glory of the Sun. In this relation both contribute to the common good, your sacred Majestie as a Nursing Father designed to bestow on your people, the blessing of peace and uni∣ty, and wee as the children of obedience returne our duties and affections in Aids and Tributes. And this compacted in one body by the ligaments of Religion and Laws, hath been the object of admiration to the whole world. Amidst the distraction of forreigne Na∣tions, wee onely have sate under the sha∣dow of our Vines, and dranke the wines of our own Vintage. But your crafty adversaries, perceiving that the fervent profession of your own re∣ligion and the firme observation of our Laws, have beene the pillars of our pro∣sperity, By subtile insinuations, pretending
a politike necessity to admit of a moderati∣on in our Religion, to comply with for∣rain Princes, and suggesting it a principall in the rule of Soveraignty, to require and take into, aske and have, that it must postu∣lare by power, not petere by Laws, and keepe this misery of war and calamity, between Nation and Nation, and put us in the posture of gaze to the whole world. But when wee behold your sacred Majesty discended from the Royall loines of that glorious King, which by his wisdome and policie, first ingrafted the white Rose and the Red, upon the same stock, and sheathed the sword that had pierced the bowels of so much Nobilitie, glutted with the bloud of people, and then laid the first hopes of the happy union be∣tween the Nations. When our thoughts refresh themselves with that happy memory of that religious King your gracious Father, on whose sa∣cred Temples both diadems were placed, wrethed about with this motto, Faciam eos ingentem unam, we cannot but believe that
God and Nature (by a lineall succession from those Fathers of peace) hath ordained you that lapis Angularis upon which the whole frame settles, and put into the hands of your sacred Majestie, the possibility and power to firme and stablish this happy u∣nion between your Kingdomes, and so raise your memory a Statue of glory and wisdome from generation to generation. In all this length of time, the assurance of this Vnion and peace hath beene the chief object of our desires, Our Purses have beene as open as our hearts, both con∣tributing to this great work manifested by so many Subsidies already presented, suf∣ficient in our first hopes for the full perfe∣ction. But finding that faile, have again ad∣ventured upon your peoples property, and in an old and absolute way, new burnisht by the hand of instant necessity, expressed to the World the heart of a loyall people, and howsoever guided with a new name of tranquility & peace to your Kingdome, that with more ease the people may dis∣gest
the bitternesse of this Pill, yet still our hearts had the same aime and object. A gift sutable to the necessity of such vast extent that time cannot paralell it by a∣ny example. And by which, if your sacred Majesty vouchsafe your Royall assent, wee shall not doubt you may soone accom∣plish those happy effects that may pre∣sent your wisdome the object of wonder, and your policy to bee admired amongst the Nations. FINIS.
