L1247C 99829282 33719
The Finall Protest, and Sence of the CITIE. HAving diligently perused two printed Papers, bearing date the 14th of this instant De∣cember: The one, in form of a Proclamation concerning the summoning of a Parliament: The other, as an Order of the Common-councell, commanding the City to acquiesce in expectati∣on of that Parliament: We finde therein contained, matters so contrary to the Honour of the Nation, and to the Freedom of the City, that we stand obliged, both as Englishmen, and as Citi∣zens, to protest, against the Impositions of the Former, as Illegal, and the Concessions of the Latter, as a direct Combination against us. These two papers are Seconded by a Third: (for the Two are One, both in effect, and Design,) and that is, a Proclamation of Banishment, directing to the late Kings Par∣ty, under the notion of the Common Enemy; so that there's no love lost betwixt the Committee of Safety, and the Common Council, when the General provides for the Peace of the City; and the Mayor, for the Safety of the Army, not to argue Acts of Oblivion; and the violation of publique Faith in the case: that they conditioned for their Lives and Liberties, and compounded for their For∣tunes. This is not our concern, what they do suffer; but what we may, if we Trust those, that Keep no faith with them: And that we'll take a care of: When They are gone, Then we are the Common Enemy; So are the Laws of God, and of the Nation, and such is every Man that Loves them. What this Malignant party is, these People talk of, we neither Know, nor Meddle; the Gentry 'tis we Live by, and by the Laws of Gratitude, and Hospitality, we are Bound to Protect them, and as well resolved to do it, within our Walls, against any other power, than that of the Known Law. The short of the Design is this, a Danger is pretended to the City, from the late Kings party, and to pre∣vent the mischief, the Kind Committee Banishes the Gentlemen; with Order to the Mayor of Walling∣ford, (late of London) &c.—to make strict searches for Delinquents. Now in pursuance of this pre∣tious Order, our Houses must be Forced, and we Disarmed, and then, our Throats cut, to preserve the City. Let those that would be Chronicled for Slaves, and Fools, submit to suffer this; and after that Infamous Hour, may a Yellow coat, and a Wooden Dagger be the Badge, and Distinction of a Citi∣zen. To conclude, We our selves are that City, so much the care and cry of the Proclamation; and This is our Vnanimous sence, and Resolve. The Army proposes to Pillage, and Murther us, the May∣or, and his worthy Advisers, Ireton, &c.—are to hold our hands, whiles they give the Blow, So, that we are now to provide against Force and Treason, having One enemy within our Walls, and ano∣ther in our Councils. But withal, we have our Swords in our Hands, and our Brains in our Heads; so that only to Strike the One, and to Dis-believe the Other, is to Subdue and Disappoint them Both. We do therefore declare to the World, that we will by Violence oppose all Violence whatsoever, which is not warranted by the letter of the Established Law: and that in pursuance of this duty, both toward the Nation, and City, an insolent Souldier, and an Apostatized Magistrate shall be to us as the same thing.—Not to word it much further, as we will not be Bafled, by Affronts, so neither will we be Fooled by Flatteries.—After the loss of Trade, and Liberty, a vast expence of Blood, and Treasure, after many Injuries received, more Threatned, and none Returned; we made a sober, and regular Application, to the Authority of the City, for Redress. This they Promised, and we Ex∣pected, till at last, instead of a Reparation for past Wrongs, or a Security against worse to come, we are paid with an Expectation of a Parliament in Ianuary. This is is a Logique we understand not. It is in English, Lye still, till you have your Throats cut. It would be well to commit the disposition of our Fortunes, to those people, that are at this Instant designing an execution upon our persons, and to requite those Worthies, that have already Robb'd vs of all we have Lost, with the Offer of that little Rest they have Left. But this will not do our businesse; we will not have our Murthe∣rers, for our Iudges: not will we wait. That Parliament they Babble of so much, will not soon Vote up the City again out of Ashes, nor all the Saints in that holy Assembly, be able to bring the poor Cobler into the world again, that was Kill'd by order of his Brother Hewson. No, the cheat is too stale, and we are determined to redeem our selves; but with this caution; we do solemnly profess, that we will exercise all the tendernesse which possibly the case will bear. The Common Souldier is engaged rather out of a Heedlesse, than Malitious Interest: We do therefore protest, that such of those as shall not evidence their Malice, by their Obstinacy, shall receive a fair consideration; But, for such as Lead them, we do Resolve, not to allow Quarter to any one of them, that draws his Sword in the Quarrel: and in order to the quicker, and Gentler Dispatch of the businesse: we con∣clude with a Text. Fight neither with small nor Great, but with the King of Israel. And so God give a Blessing to the Endeavours of all Honest Men.
