L1272 16978538 105615
A Modest Plea Both for the CAVEAT, AND The AUTHOR of It. WITH SOME NOTES UPON Mr. IAMES HOWELL, AND His Sober Inspections. By ROGER L'ESTRANGE. Laudatur ab his, Culpatur ab illis. Horat. LONDON, Printed Aug. 28. 1661. For Henry Brome at the Gun in Ivy lane.
A Modest Plea. REport speaks me a Prisoner for my last Pamphlet; and if I knew who raised it, or would have it so, I would (in earnest) thank them for it. First, as the greatest honour they can do me, to bring my Innocence upon the Stage, and make me suffer in a Cause, which every honest man prefers before his Being. Next, I should thank them for assist∣ing toward the Discovery of the Kings Enemies: which beyond doubt those peo∣ple are, that will torment themselves for a Reflection that concerns no other,—I say again, there is an appearance of a Confederacy; but I sixe nothing upon Per∣sons: whoever says, There he means mee, is in the right, if he be one of the Con∣spirators; otherwise not. They know their own Affections best, and I my own meaning; which yet I take to be so plainly expressed, as that no Englishman can make a Question of it.
This General Rumour has made me call my Papers and my Thoughts to shrift, and neither in the One, nor in the Other, do I find any thing according to my judgement of my Duty that suits not with the strictest Obligation of it. So let my Soul find Comfort, as I believe the King is betrayed; and if I had the ho∣nour of His Majesties Ear, I would pre∣sent him with my particular reasons for that opinion. My expectation was that some of the Seditious Stationers, and Lecturers, of whom I have complayn'd should have been call'd to accompt; and not to have been threatned my self, effe∣ctually, for complayning of them. If there be any matter of exception, I offer up my whole Life to the Scrutiny of the whole World, and if from the first Mo∣ment of the Quarrel to this Instant, they prove me Guilty either of the least remis∣nesse toward the Kings Cause; any the least complyance with his Enemies; or the least colour of Irreverence toward his Person, I am content to lose my Head for't. I have now serv'd his Majesty in being, and his blessed Father these One and Twenty
years, without either asking or receiving any thing—Let him that charges mee make the same challenge. Tis a wise Precept, That of Machiavell: Encourage ACCUSATIONS and suppresse CALUMNIES. I ask no more, but to be either followed home, or Let alone. I come now to enquire into the Subject of the Controversie; the Caveat it self, which with great reason is by some Opposed, and with as much by mee, Defended: for Their DIANA lyes at Stake; My Repute; Safety; Freedome; and which is more then All; the Soul of every Loyal Sub∣ject. (the King himself.) But to be Thristy of my Time and Paper; where lyes the Exception? what Law does it offend, either of Honour, Conscience, or of the Nation? Does it presume to taxe the King, or his Councill? to kindle Iealousies betwixt united Bre∣thren; or to enflame the Rest, into Im∣patience and Distemper? Does it excite Revenge or Tumult? If it does any of this, I'll bind my self to be his Slave, that shews me where: That is; let it be Try'd by
Indifferent Iudges, and taken in Coherence; for to catch here and there a snap, is to destroy my meaning: and at that rate, ye may make Quidlibet, ex quolibet, Treason of the Law, and pick Blasphemy out of the Holy Bible. But Blam'd it is, and why? Not for the Preface I hope; That only advises Warynesse, and gives the Reasons for it. There's not a day that passes with∣out seditious Lectures in the City, some Openly, others more Covertly bidding the People to prepare for a Persecution; and Then; ah Lord sayes Hancock; give the King ANOTHER Heart, a NEW Heart Lord; and make him Thy Servant. Meade seconds his Fellow-Schismatick with a word of Consolation; but be of a good Heart, (says he) Ye do not know what a year, nay what aNote. MONTH may bring forth. This did he repeat so of∣ten, and with such an Accent upon MONTH, that upon my Soul, I thought it related rather to the Timing of a Plot, then to the pressing of a Duty: for the Emphasis was much stronger upon the Time, then upon the Exhortation. (This
was a little above a Fornight since, and in my own Hearing) to which Add; that the whole Crew are of the same Lea∣ven. I hope there is no harm in This; and as little in charging Tyton a Stationer, with dispersing Treason since his Majesties re∣turn, for there's a Combination betwixt the Presse and Pulpit to do mischief. Now to the Matter of the Book where∣in I shall omit nothing considerable. First, Note that to the 17. Page, 'tis a Reply upon I. H. his Cordiall. The first Two Pages are only Prologue; the Third, is Mr. Howells; the Fourth Mine, and there I begin: Telling I. H. that as the Cava∣liers have liv'd true to their Prince, upon a Rule of Honour, Loyalty, and Conscience, so are they as well dispos'd to Dye for him (if occasion require) without the Aid of borrowed CORDIALS.—In the Fifth and Sixt Pages; I fault his using of the word Reward; as not becoming a Sub∣ject to his Prince: for whether we receive any thing or nothing, our Duty is still the same.—My Seventh Page only acquits
the Cavaliers of causing the Kings wants, or pressing them, and fairly checks I. H. for being over-busy with that Argument. —In the 8 & 9. Pages, I. H. objects and answers. I deny his Twenty Cavaliers, to One of the other side, and (with due Re∣verence to His Majesties Prerogative, to bestow where and what he pleases) I af∣firm that divers unknown persons are recommended to his Royal Favour, who are very unworthy of it—Page Tenth, I blame the Authour of the Cordial for en∣tring further into the Kings Actions then becomes him.—Pag. 11. I. H. exhorts us to Patience in expectation of a Reward: and I tell him that we never serv'd for wages, but it is our Duty to be Patient.—The Twelfth age carries the best Colour for a Cavil, but first I'll recite it, and then ex∣plain it, to a Syllable. We find the Court dangerously thronged with Parasites—Knaves represented to the King for Honest men,Pag. 12. and Honest men for Villains:— a watch upon his Majesties Ear, to keep out better Information;—seditious Ministers protected, and encouraged: Libells against the Authority, and Person of the King, dispersed even by his
Majesties sworn Servants;—and to Discover Treason, is of a consequence (in some respects) more hazzardous, then to commit it. To this I explain my self; that divers persons whom I know, of dangerous prin∣ciples, and scandalous Report, are crept into Office and Preferments. These are the [Parasites] I mean, and when I am commanded, I shall name them. That many [Knaves have been represented for Honest men] is evident in several whom His Majesty hath repulsed, not to insist upon some others admitted upon mistake. [And Honest men for Villains,] I speak upon my own experience.— [A Watch upon his Majesties Ear, &c.] That is; Such is the pressing boldnesse of some people toward the King, that 'tis no easie matter without apparent im∣pudence for a poor Cavalier to interpose, and tell those Truths which the Others would have concealed.—Concerning [Seditious Ministers, and Libells] The Lectures are supplyed with the Former, and the whole Nation rings of the Other. Their businesse is to enflame the People
against the Government, under the Mask of Persecution, and Popery: They Pray for the Kings Conversion rather then his Establishment;—Bishops, they mention not at all; unlesse to call them Antichri∣stian Drones;—and Lazy Lubbers. And who are these Gospel Ministers, (as they stile themselves) but for the greater part, such as the Law has ejected, and the whole Kingdome spewed out from those Livings, which by violence, and Treason, they had ravished from Honest men? These are the men that cry the Gospell's Persecuted; The Candle-Stick's re∣moved. They Cheat the Poor to Gorge themselves, and pay their Tavern-Scores out of the very Alms-Boxe. Nor is the Press less active, or less dangerous then the Pulpit. They have their private Instruments and Combinati∣ons to disperse their Libels; and I dare undertake, there may be found among the Confederate Stationers in this Town, above a Million of Seditious Pamphlets. 'Tis the best Trade they Drive, and ba∣ting matter of Conscience, who can blame them for't? Their Gains are great, their
Hazzard little; beside the Pleasure of ac∣complishing their malice. I was my self upon a search for the Phoe∣nix (a virulent Pamplet) which with the Printer, Publisher, and Stationer I discove∣red to Master Secretary, Sir Edward Nicho∣las; who with great Honour and exact∣ness sifted the matter, and proceeded in it. I found at the same time the first two Sheets of The Year of Prodigies, an im∣posture of a most damnable Design. This Book is lately Perfected, sought for, and many Copies taken; yet let me of∣fer, that Giles Calvert, and Thomas Brew∣ster, have certainly a hand in't; and Live∣well Chapman, Probably, tho' they absent themselves. (But to the Book it self.) The Author of it ransacks several sto∣ries, for memorable Accidents and Prodigies; and for Remarques of such and such Judgments that follow'd them. These does he match with a most impudent forgery of the like wonders here, to strike the People, with a superstitious expectation of the same events. Now mark how probably the false Prophet draws the Prediction, or the Portent to his
design, and both the Factions co-operate in the Delusion. To overthrow the Government by King and Bishops is that they aime at: and this, by the influence of pretended signs from Heaven, upon the Peoples minds, (in approbation of the Project) they la∣bour to accomplish. (their Observation reaches from Aug. 1. 1660. to the end of May, 1661.) They tell us of two Suns seen near Hertford,]p. 1. but they name none that saw them.—Then in the Parallel, they point at the like in the beginning of Queen Mary; and about the time of the Persecution in Germany.] They mark also, that it portends the * fall of great men from their Power, &c.]—with an Asterisme at FALL. Again, Two Meteors, &c.]—This was seen when the Persecution waxed hot in SCOTLAND.]p. 4. In the same page, you'l, find the apotheosis of their 5 Martyrs, Scroop, Iones, and his fellows at Charing cross.] Five Naked men (forsooth) were seen in the Ayre in Hertfordshire, (by the Lord knows who) exceeding bright and glorious,
upon the day they were executed. Armies were seen in Sussex,pa. 11. &c.] This happened a while before the King of Sweden routed the Imperial Army:pa. 12.—and here in England, in 1640.] This villenous Impostour, to get him∣self more credit, gathers some Observa∣tions that predict Pestilence,pa. 18. a thing which in common reason was to be expected from the distemper of the season, so that if That succeed, he hopes it may dispose the people to believe the Rest, (But I shall be too long upon him.) Let what I have Observed, suffice, for Persecutions: and now the People are startled, see what encouragement the wretch gives them to rebell, and cast off the Yoke. Haylstones as big as Wallnuts,pa. 38.]— This happened in the LAST year of QUEEN MARY.pa. 39.]—A dreadful Whirlwind, &c.]—This happen'd in the LAST year (again) of QUEEN MARY.] This is to possess the People that the King is not long-lived. Frogs and Toads out of the Ayre,] This
happened, the year before Charles the fifth was put to flight, and hardly escaped with life.] A terrible Tempest and raging Tides,Pag. 42.]— This was observed in the LOW-COUN∣TRIES, a little before they threw off the yoke of the KING of SPAIN. A fierce and sodain shower of Rain,Pag. 43. &c.] This in the LAST year of QUEEN MA∣RY. An extraordinary Tide,Pag. 48. &c.]—The like happened a while before the late King (then rince of WALES) began his voyage toward SPAIN. A River dry'd up, &c.]—This happen∣ed in the 31. of Richard the second, and also in 1643. and the 22. of Hen 6. which was conceived to portend a Revolt and Di∣vision of the People. Several of these stories are lyes upon my knowledge; (so far as by particular enquiries from persons upon the place, where they are said to have happened, I can know any thng) but let this serve without persuing his further falshoods: This is enough to manifest a conspiracy, when both from Press and Pulpit, such
desperate impressions are stamp'd upon the credulous and superstitious Vulgar. But that which most amazes me, is, that the consequence of discovering Treason, should be so mischievous; for the very persons I complain of, scape better then I do. Now to resume the examination of my Caeveat, wherein if any syllable be found, that may be said to reflect either upon the King, or his Counsel; the Act of Indem∣dity, or the Publick Peace, my words lye open to the World; let him that hath a mind to't, pick a quarrel with them. Having passd over my answer to the Cordial, where I was under a confinement to follow Mr. Howell's wandrings, I shall dispose the rest into a little better Order. And first concerning the King. We are with reverence,The Kings Actions not to be question'd to believe that where he knows the Person he Preferrs or Saves, he knows likewise the Reason of his Bounty or Mercy: and we are not to pry into forbidden secrets.Enforma∣tion law∣ful. But where we find the King a stranger either to the Action or the Person; we may with fairness enough,
humbly acquaint his Majesty, &c.] p. 18. And there we are to acquiesce,Private persons not to ad∣vise Prn¦ces with∣out Leave. without presuming to Advise or Direct, unless our Lord and Master will have it so; for having modestly declared matter of Fact, the judge∣ment and proceeding rests in his Majesty.] Again He that sees Cromwells,A common grievance. Bradshaws, Saint Johns his Creatures, nay, and the meanest of them, laden with Offices and Honours, may give himself a second thought to understand the meaning of it:] p. 28. But to impute these incongruities to the King,His Maje∣sty vindi∣cated. were to commit a sin against Duty and Reason. So far is his Majesty from Allowing or Directing them, they are kept as much as possibly from his bare knowledge: The Plot is laid against him, and as they did before, they do but now remove his Friends, to make way to his Person.] ib. Further,The Kings Bounty is Free. Those favours which the King himself bestowed, were given by the unque∣stionable Prerogative of his own freedom; the grounds whereof, in part we know, and in the whole we reverence.] p. 29. Yet once again. So was the State of the Nation represented
to his Majesty, and such was his Royal Good∣nesse, that he thought fit to remit all; and it is our Duty not to Murmure at it. Thus far with Reverence to His Maje∣sty: which is yet more then had been needfull, had not the frivolous apology of him that wrote the Cordial drawn it from me▪ Nor do I find a Syllable that can by any Violence of comment or conject∣ure, touch the Counsel: nay to prevent all colour for such a mistake, Thus I clear my self.—[Beyond doubt,Pag. 38. there are true Con∣verts; and divers that even in the Counsells of the Kings Enemies, did his Majesty Service.] Now to the Act of Indemnity: let it be taken in the utmost Latitude; we wil∣lingly submit to't. As'tis an Act of PARDON we complain not;Pag. 37.—and as an Act of INDEMNITY; we are obliged by it; nor shall we start an Inch from the literal strictnesse of it.— As an Act of OBLIVION, which for∣bids the MALICIOUS revival of past Differences, we do not oppose it neither: but a Preventional Prudence is allow'd us:
and to defend the justice of our Cause, against the publick enemies of it. In fine;Postscript. from the strict airection of the Act of Oblivion, we must not swerve a Title. Let it be now considered, what this same Caveat may rationally effect upon the People: If any thing that looks like Tumult; or Irreverence, let me dye the Death of a Traytour for it. See first my Tendernesse for fear of misconstructions. Were all the Ills we suffer,Tyranny it self is no Discharge of Duty. (joyned with as many more as we have hitherto endured) imposed upon us by the direct Will, and Or∣der of the King.—If he should say, Hang half my Friends for their Fidelity, and Sterve the rest, for Gaping when they are Hungry;—We ought to take all this, but as a sad occasion of greater Honour; a shar∣per Tryal of our Faith: or at the worst, as an unkind requital of our Love, but no dis∣charge of Duty. Pag. 26. The Authority of Princes is Divine;Disloyalty a double Crime. and their Commission makes their Persons sa∣cred. If They transgresse, 'tis against God, (whose Officers and Deputies they
are) not against Us. If We transgresse; 'tis both against God and Them;—a double Disobedience. ibid. That Subject is guilty of his Masters Bloud,Loyalty an indispen∣sable Duty that sees the Person of his Prince in danger, and does not interpose to save him; though he be sure to Dye, himself, even by the hand of him who he preserves. Pag. 27. Not is it enough for Subjects,Loyalty extends to thought, word, and deed. to keep a Guard upon their Actions, unlesse they set a VVatch before the Doors of their Lips; their Tongues, must be Tyed, as well as their Hands; Nay, and the very Boylings of their Thoughts must be suppressed. VVe that are thus instructed in the Grounds and Terms of Duty,A due re∣spect to His Maje∣sty. even toward the worst of Kings, cannot mistake our selves sure to∣ward the Contrary; and become doubly Guil∣ty; First, by imputing our Misfortunes to a wrong Cause; and then, by an undutiful and simple men age of them. Pag. 29. Further, upon Discourse of the Cava∣liers party, which very well deserves a Thought; and of the Nations too, which is not in Condition, without some inconve∣nience to Relieve us: rather then our ne∣cessities,
shonld any way oppress the publick and consequently reflect upon the King, my Counsell's this—[Rather let us Resolve to suffer any thing for his Majesty, then cause him to suffer in the Least for us. Is this the Language of a Mutineer? Certainly, I have expressed my meaning ill, if this tends to Sedition. Once more; finding a general distast against some per∣sons whom the Kings knows only upon Recommendation;Pag. 15. what could be softer then to say that [those Blessings which his Sacred Majesty meant to shed upon his Friends, fell upon his Enemies: The VOYCE was IA∣COBS but the HANDS are ESAU's.] what does this intimate, but an Obligation still to the King; even in those benefits which fell beside us? To sum up the main scope of the Dis∣course: It is by a Prudential Modesty, and warynesse to state a right uuderstanding be∣twixt His Majesty, and his People: for no∣thing is more evident, then that ill offi∣ces are done; both to the King, to mis∣perswade him of the Royal Party; and to possess his miserable Friends, that the King
cares not for them▪ Since Discontents there are, and some unhappy mistakes, what could be more agreeable to Duty and Rea∣son, then to endevour to set all clear? Which I have laboured; first by assigning our misfortunes to their true Cause; and Then, by counselling a Fair, and humble Notice concerning matter of Fact to his Sacred Majesty. Where lyes the Crime of This, I am to seek; especially proceeding with all thats possible of Honour and Humility, to∣ward the Person, Office, Dignity, and the unquestioned wisdome of my Soveraign. It is not lawful for a Private Subject to of∣fer his Prince an Information? Nay, is he not obliged under the pain of Perjury, and Treason, (if under Oath, as I am) to the Discovery of any thing he knows or hears of, that may be Dangerous to his Majesty? If it be Criminal to tell those truths, without the Knowledge of which a Prince cannot be safe, then I'm in a mistake, otherwise not: For there I rest without prescribing; my Duty being only to discover, without presumiug to Advise or Direct. Within these Limits I contain my self:
and by This rule of Resignation, I have not only governed my Life, my Tongue, my pen; but even my Thoughts. And yet some take Exception at this following passage. Let us examine it. There are another sort also of cold Com∣forters,False Friends. that tell us, 'tis not Time yet: This, to a company of VVretches that can▪ stay no longer then they can Fast, yields little consolation. Are we such Owles, as not to see the Sun at Noon? 'Tis time Enough for some that tell us these fine things, (even before the Kings Revenue is setled) to beg their Fourty, Fifty, nay their Hundred Thousand Pound a man, and when the Nation shall be drawn so low, that every Tax runs Blood; 'tis then Prognosticated, that something shall be done for Us: That is, the Honour shall be ours, to finish the undoing of the Nation, and fur∣nish Argument for another VVar. p. 29. 'Tis a strange thing, there should be so much Venome in this Caveat, or in the Writer of it, and yet upon the search of every Period in it, and every Corner of my Soul, I should be still at so great a Losse, where to find it. Nay more then that;
the further and the longer I enquire into my self, the stronger is the Testimony my Conscience bears of my Integrity. But to approve my Heart in this parti∣cular as well as to Man, as (I blesse Hea∣ven) I can, and do to God, we'l look into the Coherence of This Section. The professed Drift of it is This. Having in the Foregoing Section, sober∣ly proposed, by Information, to give His Majesty a clear and naked view of Men, and Actions, for prevention of such mis∣takes as probably might arise from false representations, I passe forward to a Cau∣tion, lest we might mistake his MAIESTY: where the First Page, and half, is a dis∣course upon the Authority of Kings, and the Duty of Subjects, stating the Power as large as Majesty it self can wish, and tying up the Subject, by the most strict, and conscientious bonds of Duty: applying all at last to the very Person of our King, and to his Party. Toward the bottome of the Page, men∣tion is made of the Kings Proclamation a∣gainst Prophane and dissolute persons; which I advise may not be understood as any
sharpness from the King upon his Party, but as a pious and prudential zeal, against the vice of blasphemy and distemper. Yet we know very well what art is used to blast the Royal Party with that Character: and that his Majesty can onely by report, take notice of those liberties, which no man is so shameless as to practise in his Presence. I come now to that passage, which were I given to Boast, should be my Glory; but as 'tis toss'd upon the tongue of fame, tis that, which I would rather be a Beast, then be the Author of. In the Language of mistake it sounds thus much, That I should undertake to question the Kings Bounties, and tax his Sacred Majesty with giving away forty,—threescore thousand pounds in a morning, while his friends starve. With respect to the first Promoter of this Calumny, I shall be bold to blow it off; and lay before you the ground of this reproch, and thus it runs in Paraphrase There are (say I) a sort a people,p. 29. that stop the hungry Royalists mouths with telling us 'tis not time yet. 'Tis time
enough for them to beg, though not for us, even before the King himself is served, which is a little preposterous. Again, I say they beg, I do not say Obtain—great sums,— that is, the Equivalence, which if the King should grant, 'tis (as I say a little higher) but the unquestionable Prerogative of his own freedom, so I pre∣sume not to restrain his Royal goodness. Nay yet again, it may fall out so that the thing they beg, may prove worth five times more then they pretend it is; then is the Kings gift but a fift part of what they get. But to finish, In this connexion of dis∣course, the question is not what the King gives, nor what they get, nor is his Maje∣sty accountable, for their importunities: But do they deal fairly with us or no? That's the point, Is it not time for us, as well as them? Not that we murmur, but they trifle us. When we want bread, we will starve honourable, because the Publick weale will have it so: yet still we shall subject our selves to virtue, not to delusi∣ons. At last 'tis said, we shall have something
too, but have a care of that, for when the Nation is drawn low, a heavy tax upon the people would do the King more hurt, then our relief is worth. Wherefore though our necessities are great, yet still our Loyalty ought to surmount our wants: Let us not rob the King of his peoples affecti∣ons, to fill our own bellies:An honest Principle. Rather, (say I) let us resolve to suffer any thing, for his Ma∣jesty, then cause him, to suffer in the least for us. P. 29. This foregoing Caution, (not to mistake his MAJESTY, or in effect our selves, is follow'd with an enquiry into the designs, and workings of the Kings enemies, where∣in the necessity of restitution, or else of damnation, is offered to the judgment of the learned; and I do now upon my honour, engage my self to become Presbyterian, if in that most important point, (no less then Heaven or Hell,) The Casuists of the Consi∣story, will but vouchsafe me the honour of a confutation. The next and last Chapter treats how necessary it is for a Prince, to oblige the generality of the people, and of the arts the Faction uses to put his Majesty,
and his Party upon necessities to do the contrary; concluding with a saying of Barclay in his Euphornio. [Voenalis homi∣num vita est, et licitatores eapitum nostrorum publicè regnant.] —I was my self Sold by Thomas Le∣man of Linn Regis in Norfolk, a Renegado from our own Party, and now living. One of the Contractors for my Head (for virtu∣ally he was so) Doctor Mills, that sentenced me to Death without a Hearing, is now Chancellor to the Bishop of Norwich. After my condemnation, I threw a Paper among them, and told them that was my defence; since they would not hear it, they might read it. One of the Committee takes the Paper, and against the sence of the Court, burns it. Sir Edward Baynton knows whe∣ther this be so or no▪ Now to my Post-script, what can be more conducing to the King's safety, then the discovery of those, of whom his Ma∣jesty stands most in danger? That is, first, such as have actually betray'd his Majesties Counsels and Designs.pa. 46.—Secondly,
such as have received monyes, possibly for the Kings relief, and never accounted for them.] These people are upon a double ac∣count exceeding dangerous. First, they are cast out of Protection, and in hourly fear to be Detected, which makes them despe∣rate. Next, they have farther opportuni∣ties of doing mischief. They appear among us as friends, and act against us as enemies. It is in short but this, the enemy is in our Quarters, and has got the Wod. Let me look back now, or let any man now answer me; where is that syllable, to which an honest man may not set his Name? Many there are, to which a wise man would not, but want of skill may be born with, where there's good meaning. If reverence to the King's Authority, hnmble affection to his Person: If abso∣lute submission to all his Actions, be an offence, then am I guilty. My fault is only the putting those Points by which other∣wise would wound the King, (because, perhaps they prick some of his Enemies,) where is the man that presses Loyalty, that
streins the knot of Duty harder then I do? And to conclude, where have I practis'd other then I preach? Yet truly, were the subject in it self not altogether blameless, the occasion, and my first fault might excuse me. I did not lead the Dance, I. H. would needs be giving the world a cast of his cunning, and starts objections, which we must either overthrow or suffer by.I. H. [Now whereas some object hehath rewarded ROUNDHEADS, says the Author of the Cordial. This is a charge upon the Cavaliers, for to be sure, the other Party will not com∣plain. Since manifest it is, that in effect some persons are entertain'd beyond com∣mon expectation; what better office could I do, either to his Majesty or his Party; then to lay a charm upon the people, not to enquire too boldly into the actions of their Sovereign? Had I done less, the slur had stuck upon us, had I. H. done no∣thing, I had been silent.I. H. Again [whereas some except against his Majesties Lenity and Indulgence, &c.] Not Wee, say I: could I say less? and at this rate, he squanders away his Breath and
Politiques in Vindication of the King, as if we charged his Majesty. When to deal freely, his very zeal in an Abuse, and if I had a mind to blast a cause, I would engage that Gentleman to be For it. Next to this provocation, I might plead my Primum Tempus, had I not still a stron∣ger Plea; Innocence. But to evince the Partiality of my Back∣friends. Let us suppose a Fault: what is the Quality of it: and who the Offender? it is an Errour, either of Imprudence or of Sawcynesse: (for that's the worst they say of it) and the Offender is a Person that has been twenty years a faithful Servant to the Crown. Greater Crimes then This have been pardon'd, within the Memory of Man; yes, and greater Offenders too, and those that are the most advantag'd by That Pardon, are now the sharpest upon Mee. Now to the point of Prudence. I shall easily grant, that to exasperate so Keen, so Close, and Deadly a Faction, as that which Threatens mee, were a grosse and weak Oversight in any man that rates Himself above the publique; but being
Resolv'd, rather to sink my selfe for speaking, plain, Loyall, and usefull Truths, then that the King should suffer by not knowing them, I shall most readily dispose my self to act that Resignation, which I doe now but Talk of. NOTES UPON Mr. Iames Howell, &c. IF he that wrote the CAVEAT to the CAVALIERS, had been of the Gentleman's Counsel, that penned the CORDIAL; he should never have disown'd the Author, and after that, have defended the matter of it. If it was Well done, why was it disclaim'd; if Ill, why is
it justified? But to the old Epigram; He does, as Puritans at Baptism do; He is the Father, and the Witnesse too. The thing it self might have been spared; but then so solemnly to disclaim it, is not pro dignitate HISTORIOGRAPHI Regii. The Title indeed might have becom'd the Mouth of his Toledo-Captain. Some SOBER INSPECTIONS made into those Ingredients, that went to the Composition of a late Cordial, call'd A Cordial for the Cavaliers. SOBER INSPECTIONS? (with a mischief) why there was one I. H. that dedicated a dis∣course under this Title, To his Highness; The L. PROTECTOR; when he would have made himself King: wherein he compares OLI∣VER
CROMWELL to CHARLES MARTEL, and com∣plements him in these words. There is (says he) a memorable, saying of Charles Martel in that mighty Revolu∣tion in France, when he introduced the se∣cond race of Kings; that in the pursuit of all his actions he used to say, that he followed not the ambition of his heart, so much as the inspirations of his soul, and the designs of Providence. This may be apply'd to your Highness in the conduct of your great affairs, and admirable successes.—I rest, in the lowest posture of obedience At your Highness command, I. H. One passage more I remember, that is, of very pretty insinuation. Under the name of POLYAN∣DER is couch'd the Author of the Dialogue: whom you must ima∣gine to be a man of Parts, and Tra∣vailed. This Polyander gives his
opinion for a single Person against all other forms of Government. But then he says that It is requisite, that this single person, should be attended with a standing, visible, veteran Army to be paid well, and punish'd well, if there be cause to AWE, as well as to Secure the People. To give I. H. his due, the other Oliver could not have given his Name-sake better counsel. The Book indeed does mightily cry up the Royal Prerogative, and 'tis a little sharp upon the Scots, and the thing commonly call'd the Long Parliament: which yet at that time done, does but proclaim the Author of it, either a weak States∣man, or a worse Subject. For du∣ring their divisions, it was our in∣terest, still to uphold the weaker side, and hinder the other from
setling. Neither can any thing be more unseasonable, then to exalt the rights of Sovereignty, when a Traitor wields the Scepter: It does but serve to fix the Crown upon the wrong Head, to magnifie the Power of Kings, when an V∣surper manages the Office. It was an unlucky oversight in Mr. Howell, to Christen this vin∣dication of his Cordial,—SOBER INSPECTIONS. If he had call'd it any thing else, (except S. P. Q. V.) the Pamphlet might have liv'd and dyed free from that envy which commonly attends great Wits and Undertakings. Not one of forty, (I dare almost swear) but would have been content with the bare Title-page, and never have turn'd the leaf: but first to fob the poor Cavaliers with a Cordial
like a whipp'd Posset, that is all Froth; and then to mend the mat∣ter by a sad tale in favour of it, that wears a Title to give a Horse a Vomit: This is not kindly done. But that the world may not mis∣take I.H. for JAMES HOWEL, the said JAMES HOWELL, Esq (in his Survey of VENICE, dedica∣ted to the SUPREME AUTHO∣RITY of the Nation, the PARLIA∣MENT of England in 1651.) is clearly for a COMMON∣WEALTH: For (says he) were it within the reach of humane brain to prescribe rules for fixing a Society, & succession of people under the same Species of government, as long as the world lasts; the Republique of Ve∣nice were the fittest patern on earth, both for Direction and Imitation.]
And in the tender of his Repub∣lican Model to the Keepers of the Liberties; he treats the mighty men in a stile of Reverence and Honour. Most NOBLE SENATORS, he begins, and with a dignity be∣fitting both the Presenter and the Present, Thus he concludes,—Therefore most humbly under favour, the Author deem'd it a piece of Indu∣stry not altogether unworthy to be presented unto that Noble Assembly, by Their daily Orator. HOWELL. Now on the other side; I.H. in his Epistle to the PROTEC∣TOUR calls this same NOBLE ASSEMBLY a MONSTER; and his HIGHNESS, HERCULES, for Quelling of it. Yea, such a
Monster, that was like to Gourman∣dize and devour all the Three Nati∣ons. Who This I.H. was, or That JAMES HOWELL belongs not to our Enquiry; The Author of the Inspections says indeed very acutely; There are more I.H's. then one;— and so say I, there may be more Iames Howell's too. But if the person now in question, should prove to be a kin to the Other, we may be very well excu∣sed if we suspect his Cordiall, and if we rather trust our own Eyes, in our own Concern, then anothers Spectacles. In that contest betwixt One Ty∣rant and many; if the Noble Assembly had baffled the Army, then Oliver had been the Monster, but Fortune
would have it otherwise, and so the Lot fell upon the NOBLE ASSEMBLY; but not a half-penny matter to us, whether the Dragon kill'd the Saint, or the Saint the Dragon. Some Subjects are like Common-Wooers; that may safely swear that they love Twenty several Wen∣ches, Best, in Four and Twenty hours: and to such humours, no Government comes amisse; that carries either Interest or Novelty along with it. He that expects the fixing of that sort of people, might better wait, till a River should either stop its course, or run it self weary. Labitur, & Labetur, in omne vo∣lubilis aevum. Others there are who I verily
believe did take that Legislative Rabble for a Parliament; and such we must not blame for calling it so. Yet for the Cavaliers; that never were, nor are, nor ever can be of That Judgement; we should do very ill to chuse an Ad∣vocate out of that number; or to expect much good from a Phy∣sician that could not help himself. But too much time is spent in Preamble; for which, the Gentle∣man whom it concerns may thank himself: I knew at first who wrote the Cordial; but truly I had no Ambition to measure Pens with Mr. Howell; and my Remarks upon the Mistake, did not so much as glance upon the Author. No sooner were the Inspections Publick, but my Stationer comes to me by Mr.
Howell's Order, with a sleevelesse Story, how ingenious a piece that same Cordial was; how much His Majesty was pleased with it: with great Additions too, in favour of the person that composed it. Some part of This, in the second Im∣pression of my Caveat, I barely mentioned, and so left it. Upon Thursday or Friday last, out comes another miserable Pa∣per done by the same hand, and in justification of the Former; which I must needs take notice of, for divers Reasons, whereof (I swear) the Author and the thing it self are none. The Copy was pressed upon my Stationer, (a very honest and a Loyal person) as yet unfinished: who gave me notice of the propo∣sition, but without any thought
of undertaking it. With much ado, I prevailed with him to com∣ply with the good Gentleman, and out comes Gravity it self under the Form of SOBER INSPEC∣TIONS, &c. The very Title speaks the Au∣thor no Physician; and he that stands condemned to read the Text, may swear he is no Con∣jurer. He writes himself Hi∣storiographer Royal, and tells his Tale to shew his Office: Yes, and a dainty Tale it is. A Toledo Captain met Philip the Second a hunting;I.H. and taking him for a Private person, told him he was going to Court, to demand a Reward for his Services. The King asked him, if he had not received his Pay? He said, Yes: but 'twas long a Com∣ming: However, he'd to the King for an Ayúda de costas, something to drink. Well sayes the King; but in case his Majesty will
give you nothing? why then let him kisse my Mules Tail, cryes the Captain. Here∣upon, the King ask'd him his Name, and bids him bring his Certificat next day to the Council, and hee'd procure him admittance. The Captain appears,— Well Sir, saies the King, What was't you said yesterday the King should do to your Mule, if so and so? (In our Authors own words) The Captain being nothing at all danted, said; Truly Sir, My Mule is ready at the Court-gate, if there be occasion. The King for This, Orders the Captain 400. Crowns present, and 2000 Ryals Annuity. The Condition of the English Cavaliers is much more considerable; says our Histo∣rian) for the Spanish Captain had all his Arriers paid him, which our Cavaliers have not.] pag. 4. Most Logical and profound! for as Tenterden-steeple was the cause of Godwin Sands, even so Good people Love one another. But can the great Defender of our Cause, spy out no other Dif∣ference
betwixt the Captains case and Ours, then matter of Pay? That want of Modesty and Reve∣rence, though the King lik'd it never so well, ought to have been Reprov'd and Punish'd. Suppose the bluntnesse of the man hit the Kings Humour; Yet was it not the lesse below his Dignity, even to suffer so exemplary a Boldnesse, but much more, to Reward it: therein preferring his Fancy to his Honour: Not but that Monarchs are Men, as well as Subjects; and may be allowed their Appetites, and Likings; yet beyond question, This was an Oversight in Philip to lay himself so open; for when the Court had once gotten the length of his Foot; and that they found there were more waies then good, to Profit, and Prefer∣ment;
it would have been no wonder to have seen That Prince served, and attended by Tumblers, and Buffons, in stead of States∣men. The Gentleman hath many other pretty fragments of Story, which being exceedingly beside his Purpose, I reckon not much to mine; wherefore let them rest: But in good manners something we will afford him in Requital; which his INGREDIENTS, and his COMPOSITION put me in mind of. The late Lord Coring after a dear ill-dressed Dinner at Bruxells, sends for mine Host, and treats him with this Complement: Friend (says he) I do take Thee for one of the best Cooks in Christen∣dome, 'bate but two faults; The
One is; Thou hast the worst Ingredi∣ents in Nature; The Other is; Thou putt'st them the worst together. This is the Fortune of some Writers too, as well as Cooks. Touching our Authors Calcula∣tion of Twenty Cavaliers preferr'd for One Roundhead; I have already spoken what I thought fit and mo∣dest in my Caveat; but since it is Mr. Howell's pleasure to re-enforce it, rather then presse the point too far, we'l grant it: but then, Twenty of Mr. Howell's Cavaliers (recko∣ning himselfe for One) will not make half so many of Mine. In his Sixt Page, he tells us, that divers great Kings have been enforced to raise, and reward those that were once their very Ene∣mies, FOR A TIME.]
And why FOR A TIME? (if a body may ask) But this shall be discoursed at Length and Leisure. In short, he tells us what he told us before, and winds up, Thus. To conclude,I. H. he who with a sober and well-brass'd judgement will examine that Cordial, will find that there is never a Line, Word, or Syllable therein but breathes out the spirit of a perfect Cava∣lier, as above twenty other several pieces of the same Author publish'd upon Emer∣gent occasions do breathe besides, there is no fretfull drug, or the least Corrosive dram in it: but all gentle lenitifs, therefore he wonders how it should stir up such Malignant humors in any, unlesse it were in them who having something lying upon the stomach made wrong use of that Cordial to cast it up. We will allow the Gentleman to be a perfect Cavalier, a perfect Republican, (if he pleases) a perfect Protectorian, a perfect Any-thing;
rather then disagree about his Perfection: but I would he had not appealed to his Pieces. And truly if he had spared the Ma∣lignant humours, and the Queasie Stomach he talks of, it would have been never the worse for the Au∣thor of the Cordial. But now he finds himself so much deceiv'd in his Operations, I hope he'l mend. He sees his Cordials prove Vomits; and let me forget my own Name, as he has done his, if what Mr. Howell gives to move Choler, does not provoke excessive Pleasure. THE END.
