L2852Q 18368324 107414
Aleyn blazon of the City of London Mayor. A Common-Councell HOLDEN The first day of May 1660. ORdered by this Court that the Kings Majesties Letter and De∣claration directed to this Court, & now read, be forthwith printed & published. Sadler. Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honou∣rable City of London, 1660.
CHARLES R. TRusty and Wel-beloved We greet you well. In these great Revolutions which of late have hap∣pened in that Our Kingdome to the wonder and amazement of all the world, there is none that VVe have looked upon with more Comfort, then the so frequent and publick manifestations of their affections to Ʋs in the City of London, which hath exceedingly raised Our Spirits, and which, no doubt, hath proceeded from the Spirit of God and his extraordinary mercy to the Nation, which hath been encouraged by you, and your good example to assert that Government under which it hath so many hundred years enjoy∣ed
as great felicity as any Nation in Eu∣rope, and to discountenance the imagina∣tions of those, who would subject Our Sub∣jects to a Government they have not yet de∣vised; and to satisfie the pride and ambition of a few ill men, would introduce the most ar∣bitrary and Tyrannical Power that was ever yet heard of, how long we have all suf∣fered under those and the like devices, all the world takes notice, to the no small re∣proach of the English Nation, which we hope is now providing for its own security and re∣demption, and will be no longer bewitched by those Inventions: how desirous we are to contribute to the obtaining the peace and happiness of Our Subjects, without further effusion of bloud; and how farre we are from desiring to recover what belongs to Ʋs by a VVarre, if it can be otherwise done,
will appear to you by the enclosed Declara∣tion, which together with this Our Letter. VVe have entrusted Our right trusty and welbeloved Cozen the Lord Viscount Mor∣dant, and our trusty and welbeloved Ser∣vant Sir John Greenvile Knight, one of the Gentlemen of Our Bed-chamber to deliver to you, to the end that you and all the rest of Our good Subjects of that Our City of London (to whom VVe desire it should be published) may know how farre VVe are from the desire of Revenge, or that the peace, happiness, and security of the Kingdome should be raised upon any other foundation then the affection and hearts of Our Subjects, and their own consents: VVe have not the least doubt of your just sense of those Our condescentions, or of your zeal to advance and promote the same good end, by
disposing all men to meet Ʋs with the same affection and tenderness, in restoring the fun∣damental Laws to that Reverence that is due to them, and upon the preservation whereof all our happiness depends: And you will have no reason to doubt of enjoying your full share in that happiness, and of the improving it by Our particular affection to you. It is very natural for all men to doe all the good they can for their native Coun∣trey, and to advance the honour of it. And as we have that full affection for the King∣dome in general, so we would not be thought to be without some extraordinary kindness for Our native City in particular, which We shall manifest on all occasions, not only by renewing their Charter, and confirming all those priviledges which they have recei∣ved from Our Predecessors, but by adding
and granting any new favours which may advance the Trade, VVealth, and Honour of that Our native City, for which VVe will be so solicitous, that We doubt not but that it will in due time receive some Benefit and Advantage in all those respects, even from Our own observation & experience abroad: and We are most confident VVe shall never be disappointed in Our expectation of all possible service from your affections. And so VVe bid you farewell. Given at Our Court at Breda the  day of April, 1660. in the Twelfth year of Our Reign. To Our Trusty and Wel-beloved the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Com∣mon Council of Our City of London.
CHARLES R. CHARLES by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all Our loving Subjects of what degree or quality so∣ever, greeting: If the general distraction and confusion which is spread over the whole King∣dome, doth not awaken all men to a desire and longing that these wounds which have so ma∣ny years together been kept bleeding, may be bound up; all We can say will be to no pur∣pose: However after this long silence We have thought it Our duty to declare how much We desire to contribute thereunto. And that as We can never give over the hope, in good time to obtain the possession of that Right, which God & Nature hath made Our due, so We doe make it Our daily suit to the Divine Providence, that He will in compassion to Us and Our subjects, after so long misery and sufferings, remit and put Us into a quiet and peaceable possession of that Our Right, with as little blood and damage to Our people as is possible; Nor doe We desire
more to enjoy what is Ours, then that all Our subjects may enjoy what by Law is theirs, by a full and intire Administration of Justice throughout the Land; And by extending Our Mercy where it is wanted and deserved. And to the end that the fear of punishment may not engage any Conscious to themselves of what is past to a perseverance in guilt for the future, by opposing the quiet and happiness of their Coun∣try, in the Restoration both of King, Peers and People, to their just, ancient, and fundamental Rights; We doe by these presents declare: That We doe grant a free and general Par∣don, which We are ready upon demand to pass under Our Great Seal of England, to all Our sub∣jects of what degree or quality soever, Who within Forty daies after the publishing hereof, shall lay hold upon this our Grace and Favour, and shal by any publick Act declare their doing so: And that they return to the Loyalty and Obedience of good Subjects, Excepting only such persons as shall hereafter be excepted by Parliament; Those only excepted, let all Our Subjects, how faulty soever, relie upon the word of a King solemnly given by this present
Declaration, That no Crime whatsoever com∣mitted against Us or Our Royall Father, before the Publication of this, shall ever rise in Judg∣ment, or be brought in question against any of them, to the least endamagement of them, either in their Lives, Liberties, or Estates, or (as far forth as lies in Our power) so much as to the prejudice of their Reputations by any Reproach or term of distinction from the rest of Our best Subjects: We desiring and ordeyning that henceforward all Notes of discord, separation and difference of parties be utterly abolished among all Our Subjects, whom We Invite and Conjure to a perfect Union among themselves under Our Protection, for the Resettlement of Our just Rights and theirs in a Free Parlia∣ment, by which upon the word of a King, We will be advised. And because the passion and uncharitablness of the times have produced several opinions in Religion, by which men are ingaged in Parties and Animosities against each other, which when they shall hereafter unite in a Freedome of Conversation will be composed or better un∣derstood: We doe declare a liberty to tender
Consciences, and that no man shall be disquie¦ted, or called in question for differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which doe not disturbe the peace of the Kingdome: And that We shall be ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament, as upon mature deliberation shall be offered to Us, for the full granting that in∣dulgence. And because in the Continued distractions of so many years, and so many and great Revo∣lutions, many Grants and Purchases of Estates have been made to, and by many Officers, Souldiers and others, who are now possessed of the same, and who may be lyable to Actions at Law upon several titles, We are likewise willing that all such differences and all things relating to such Grants, Sales and Purchases shall be determined in Parliament which can best provide for the just satisfaction of all men who are Concerned. And We doe further declare that We will be ready to consent to any Act or Acts of Parlia∣ment to the purposes aforesaid: And for the full satisfaction of all Arears due to the Offi∣cers and Souldiers of the Army under the
Command of General Monck. And that they shall be received into Our service upon as good pay and conditions as they now enjoy. Given under our sign manuel and Privie signet at our Court at Breda this 4/14 day of April 1660. in the Twelfth year of our Reign. FINIS.
Aleyn blazon of the City of London Mayor. A Common Councell holden the First of May 1660. ORdered by this Court, that the right Honorable the Lord Mayor doe acquaint the Lord Vis∣count Mordant and Sir John Greenvile (who brought the said Letter and Declaration) That this Court doe return most humble and hearty thanks to his Majesty for his gracious Condescentions to, and owning this Court and City expressed in his Majesties said Letter and Declaration: And doe likewise return hearty thanks to the said Honorable Persons that brought the said Gracious Message: And doe declare this Courts ready submission to his Majesties Govern∣ment: And that in Testimony thereof they had now taken down the Common-wealths Armes, and Orde∣red his Majesties Arms to be set up. And further that this Court doe beg the favour of the Lord Mordant to return with an Answer in writing to his Majesty from this Court. And also that this Court doe intend very speedily to send Members of their own to wait on his Majesty. Sadler.
