L469 R230622 8963176 42115
THE Last and Best Edition OF New Songs: Such as are of the Most General ESTEEM EITHER IN TOWN or COURT. Collected with the greatest care, and printed after the most CORRECT COPIES. With Allowance, Nov. 20. 1676.ROGER L'ESTRANGE. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1677.
New Songs. In the Fool turn'd Critick. I Found my Celia one night undrest, a precious banquet for languishing love; The charming object a flame encrea'd, which never, ah never till then I prov'd; Her delicate skin and starry eye, made me a secret bliss pursue: But with her soft hand she put it by, and cry'd fie Amintor, ah what would you do. Her words and blushes so fir'd my heart, I pull'd her to me and clasp'd her around. And tho with cunning she play'd her part, yet fainter and fainter her threats I found. But I least thought or least desir'd my love a forbearance should allow: A touch of her hand my heart inspir'd, my passion was melted I know not how.
Which when fair Celia's quick eyes perceiv'd and found by my dulness my passion decay; Her fate she inwardly seem'd to grieve, that fool'd her & cool'd her so basely away. She sigh'd and look'd pale to see me dull, and in her heart this Oath she swore, She never again would slight an address; nor the critical minute refuse no more. Another. ROom, room, room for a man of the Town, that takes delight in roring; That daily rambles up and down, and spends his nights in whoring: That for the noble name of Spark does his companions rally: Commits an out-rage in the dark, then sneaks into an Ally. To every female that he meets, he swears he bears affection; Defies all Laws, arrests, or fears, by help of kind protection. Then he, intending further wrongs, by some resenting Cully, Is decently run through the Lungs, and there's an end of Bully.
Song. BY heaven! she's hard and melts no more Than does the Adamantine Shore; She's cold as Ice or Northern Air, As unconcern'd at my despair; And stops her unrelenting ears, Like storms to shipwrack'd Mariners: Such is the female I implore, By heaven she's hard ad meets no more. Poor Amintor's hapless fate, Doom'd to be unfortunate; For no other purpose born, Than to love and meet with scorn: In a sea of passions tost, Shun'd by her I value most: Still pursu'd by her I hate, Poor Amintor's hapless fate. But pox o'this whining, And idle repining, That only enjoyment opposes; For Women like Fishes, We scare from their wishes, By holding the bait to their Noses: For oblig'd by ill custom, tho backward they be, They are doubtless by Nature as forward as we.
Song. PHylander and Silvia a gentle young pair, Whose business was loving, and kissing their care, In a sweet smelling grove went smiling along Till the youth gave a vent to his heart with his tongue; Ah Silvia, said he, and sigh'd when he spoke, Your cruel resolve will you never revoke: No never, she said; how? never, he cry'd; 'Tis the damn'd that shall only that, Sentence abide. She turn'd her about to look all around, Then blush'd, and her pretty eyes cast on the ground. She kiss'd his warm cheeks, and then play'd with his neck. And urg'd that his reason his passion should check. Ah Philander, she said, 'tis a dangerous bliss; Ah never ask more, and I'll give thee a kiss. How, never! he cry'd; and then shiver'd all o're. No, never, she said, and then trip'd to a Bow'r. She stopt at the Wicket; he cry'd let me in; She answer'd I wou'd if it were not a sin: Heav'n sees, and the Gods will chastise the poor head Of Philander for this: strait trembling he said Heav'n sees 'tis confest, but no tell-tales are there; She kiss'd him and cry'd you'r an Atheist my dear.
And shou'd you prove false, I shou'd never endure; How never, he cry'd, and strait backward he threw her. Her delicate body he clasp'd in his arms, He kiss'd her, he press'd her, heap'd charms upon charms. He cry'd, shall I now? no, never, she said, Your will you shall never enjoy till I'm dead: Then as if she were dead, she slept & lay still, Yet even at death she bequeath'd him a smile, Which embolden'd the youth his charms to apply, Which he bore still about him to cure those that dye. But twice, &c. Song. TEll me, oh tell me, some powr's that are kind, Where I my dearest Astella may find. I wander all day in dark shades of despair, All night I complain to the pittiless air: Astella, Astella! is all my sad cry: Astella, Astella, the Ecchoes reply. But alas she's not there, But alas she's not there, and her lover must die.
Rural Happiness. A Song. HOw happy's the silly poor innocent Swain, That spends all his life in a Grove or a Plain; He's free from the passions that other men have, And has Cupid his Vassal, and Fortune his Slave. Whilst others ambition, entangles and thralls, With the cares of vain wealth, with disturbance and brawls His humble poor soul no sublimer thoughts keep, Then to sport with his Lambs or to play to his Sheep. When Phoebus with-draws his refulgent bright light, Then home to his Cottage he travels at night; Embraces and kisses his Nymph, while she sings; And his life's to be envy'd by the greatest of Kings. Then Silvia let's fly to the pleasant green grove, Where we may enjoy all the pleasures of Love. In a shady cool grott, where sweet Philomel's air, Shall heighten our pleasures, and banish despair. Song. I Hve languish'd too long for one who I fin Has a kindness for me as the rest of mankind This sort of false love, I cannot endure, Since mine is so fixed and hers so unsure, Therefore I have nothing to ease my sad heart But the pleasure to think how others may sin t, Therefore I have, &c.
Song in Madam Fickle. BAcchus thou mighty pow'r Divine, Great God of mirth and sprightly wine; Behold us here, that kneeling show the duty that we owe; We through thy influence rejoyce, And with free and chearful voice, The Fame and Praises sing, Of Bacchus our great God and King. Chorus. 'Tis Wine, 'tis Wine, that still controuls, And Flame, and Love, must still strike sail; There lies such Vigour in full Bowls, The fate of Princes can't prevail; The Wreaths of great Heroes his Altar shall crown Whilest the Grave and the Prudent bow down.
When Beauty darts a smiling Beam, Our souls are bid by loves extream; But one brisk Glass takes care away, And yields us back the prey; No fate of love nor piercing dart, Can wound when Wine surrounds the heart; Still guarding it with care, It battles fate, and slights the fair, Chorus. 'Tis Wine, 'tis Wine, &c. Another, LEt sorrow find those that never could love, nor never had worth to aspire, we'l harbour no care, nor trouble, nor fear, but boldly enjoy our desire; Ah! how pleasant is love's charming fire!
Song in the same. HAppy's the Man that takes delight in banquetting the senses, That drinks all day, and then at night, the height of joy commences; VVith Bottles arm'd we stand our ground, full bumpers crown our blisses; Then roar and sing the streets around, in Serenading Misses. Chorus. With Bottles arm'd, &c. Pleasures thus free and unconfin'd, no drowsie crime reproaches: No Heaven to a frolique mind, no pleasure like debauches: VVhilst rambling thus new joys we reap, in charms of love and drinking, Insipid Fops lye drown'd in sleep, and the Cuckold lyes a thinking. Chorus. Whilst rambling thus, &c.
Another. A Way with the Causes of Riches and Cares, That eat up our Spirits, and shorten our Years, No pleasure can be, In state nor degree, But it's mingled with trouble and fears, Then perish all Fops by Sobriety dull'd; While he that is merry reigns Prince of the World. The Quirks of the zealous, of Beauty and Wit, Tho' supported by power at last must submit; For he that is sad, Grows wretched or mad, Whilst mirth like a Monarch does sit, It cherishes life in the old and the young, And makes e'ry day to be happy and long.
A Song. WHile Cloe, full of harmless thought, beneath the willows lay; Kind love a comely Shepheard brought to pass the time away: She blush'd to be encounter'd so, and chid the am'rous Swain; But, as she strove to rise and go, He pul'd her down again: A suddain passion seiz'd her heart, in spight of her disdain; She found a Pulse in ev'ry part, and love in ev'ry vein: Ah! Youth, she cry'd, what charms are these that conquer and surprize? Ah! let me—for, unless you please, I have no pow'r to rise. She faintly spoke, and trembling lay, for fear he shou'd comply; But Virgins eyes their hearts betray, and give their tongues the lie; Thus she, who Princes had deny'd, with all their pompous train, Was in the lucky Minute try'd, and yielded to a Swain.
A Farewel to Dorilisa, WHoe're does doubt the pow'r of love, See but the pains it makes me prove; Think on the pleasures I refuse, And on the solitude I choose; The charms of good wine and converse I deny, And the flames to asswage That within me do rage, To the North for relief I must fly. That rig'rous Climate shall I find, More mild than this I leave behind; The Snowy breast from which I part, Her never-thawing Icy heart Has still so inur'd me to cold and disdain, That I never can fear The storms that are there, The North yields not half so much pain. Yet, since her beauty has imprest, Her Image firmly in my breast, 'Tis vain to leave her, unless I From my own self knew how to fly: And since in the West she her thousands has slain Still her Empire shall be More enlarged by me In the North Dorilissa shall Reign.
Love not Return'd. AH how unkind is the Nymph I adore? For my obedience she slights me the more; Still as she shuns me I closer pursue, So by her flight she has learnt to subdue, How endless are the pains I must endure? Since she by flying, wounds, and shuns the cure. Yet how unhappy soever I am, Still I must follow and cherrish my flame, For shou'd I struggle and break off my chain, My freedom wou'd be worse then her disdain? Therefore the Nobler fate I will prefer, It must be happy if it come from her. Then cruel fair, if my death you've decreed, Spight of compassion I beg you proceed, And look not down on my wretched estate, As neither worthy of your love nor hate: For with your frowns I wou'd rather dispence, Then languish in Luke-warm indifference.
Song. AS sad Philothea lay melting in grief, And kindly complain'd of the Amorous Thief, She a loud to the woods did her passion impart, But faintly lamented the loss of her heart: Ah cruel, unkind Dorilaus, she cry'd, Bring back the fond stray that has wandred aside. The Youth as from courting Astraea he came, Had the pleasure of hearing her sigh out his name; And softly he stole, till so nigh her he drew, Thas his arms on a suddain about her he threw; Then take back thy heart Philothaea, he cry'd, 'Tis pitty the Straggler shou'd ever be ty'd. Surpriz'd at the welcome approach of her Swain, Yet unwilling to take the fond Truant again; No Shepherd, says she, give me thine in Exchange, And I'le keep it so safe that it never shall range; No, trust me! not I, Dorilaus reply'd, Since your own you have suffer'd to wander aside.
A Rustick Song. MY gaffer and gammer were fast in their Nest, And all the young Fry of their Cribs were possest, Spot, VVhite-foot, and Puss, in the ashes were spread, And a Blinking Rush-candle stuck over their head. Sweet Ursly was washing the Trenchers and Platter, Preparing to make her good friend, the Hogg, fatter; Greaz'd up to the Elbows, and smutch'd to the Eyes, And her rich broider'd cloath's were as fat as her thighs. Like Bag-pipes her Cheeks, and her Udders chin-high, Her Nose hawking out, bended both ways awry; Her lips were as thick as her squint-eyes were blinking, And her Orient locks were most rankishly stinking. VVhile Roger the Plow-man lay close by a snoring, God Cupid was vext at his Clownish adoring; And therefore conveys to his great Logger-head, In a whisper, the news that all were a'bed, Up Roger starts then, and rubbing his eyes, To his dearest sweet Ursly with passion he flies; And lolling his Elbows on Ursly's broad back, Complains that his heart was e'n ready to crack. But Ursly displeas'd with the weight of her love, (O Cupid why dost thou thus treacherous prove?) As fast as she cou'd she turn'd her about, And with Dish-clout slopt o're the wretch'd face of our Lowt.
Now Cupid thou're fit to be kick'd out of doors, Since a Pimp thou dost prove to such fulsom amours; But Cupid is onely a hope to obtain, What is out of our reach seldome causes our pain, For Roger at Market had frequently seen, Such beauties, good Lawi, each look'd like a Queen; Yet his heart all the while did continue his own, But Ursly, ah! Ursly, but seen and it's gone. Song. HOw peaceful the days are, how pleasant the nights, How void of all trouble, how full of delights; VVhen the eyes of Dorinda, her heart does discover, VVith all the kind looks on her passionate Lover; VVhen kisses and vows loves earnest have paid, And I am assur'd my heart's not betray'd; I conclude greater blessings the Gods cannot give, And I pray, and I wish here for ever to live. Chorus. No joy to that Love where true hearts do unite, 'Tis a morning eternal that never sees night.
Song. AH Celia! what powerful charms have you, That with a look could so my heart subdue? And at first sight impose a law on me, Against my fundamental liberty: I look'd and lov'd, O fatal was the day! I look'd until I look my heart away. And yet upon your brow you wore a frown, VVhat wou'd sereness then and smiles have done? In vain, in vain we boast a freeborn soul, VVhen beauty can so easily controul: VVhen ev'ry glance does liberty expose, And with a look we native freedom lose. You bid me now resume my liberty, Alas I cannot, if I wou'd, be free: Shou'd fate the unwish'd pow'r bestow, yet still, Having that power I shou'd want the will: Where love so absolute a Monarch Reigns, They court their fetters and grow proud of chains.
A Song. LOve in fantastick Triumph sat, while bleeding heart around him flow'd, For whom fresh pains he did create, and strange tyrannick pow'r he show'd; From thy bright eyes he took his fires, which round about in sport he hurl'd: But 'twas from me he took desires, enough t'undoe the am'rous world. From me he took his sighs and tears, from thee his Pride and Cruelty: From me his languishments and fears, and ev'ry killing dart from thee: Thus thou and I the god have arm'd, and set him up a Deity: But my poor heart alone is harm'd, while thine a Victor is, and free.
Song in Tom Essence, SInce kindly you have left your heart, Although my dear thou absent art, To lodge within my breast: Not fathers frowns shall e'r remove My pleasing guest: thy pledge of love for ever there shall rest. Yet by your absence I'm inclin'd, To think thou'rt fatally unkind, And doest another love: If one more charming fair you've met, And all your vows to me forget: May grief my life remove. Then blame me not, my Celadon, Since I the want of thee bemoan, for your return I grieve: Ah quickly then my joys restore, Haste to perform those Oaths you swore, Then, then, I'le wish to live.
Song. HOw cruel do'st prove, To be alwaies in love, and never have any Relief? 'Tis the wretched'st Estate, That's allotted by fate, and a torment that's past all belief. Then Pox on his hide, Who loves Captive doth 'bide, and wears silly Cupids short chain: Whilst others do rove, And regard not vain love, he's tortur'd and wrack'd by the pain. Then women i'le leave And to wine I will cleave, God Bacchus i'le ever adore: Whilst others do whine, For a beauty, and pine, in a Tavern i'le sing and i'le Roar.
SONG. AS poor Amintas sighing sat, beneath the Mirtles green: His lovely face with tears all wet, was by fair Phillis seen. He had carv'd her name on ev'ry part, round the Bark of the Tree: But not so plain as in his heart, for wholly there reign'd she. She blush'd to see the cruel fate, the unjust Swain did bear, Occasion'd by her unjust hate, and sighing dropt a tear. I yield, great God, she cry'd, and lay close to Amintas's side: And gently wip'd his tears away, as they from's eyes did glide. The Shepheard Ravishing a kiss, from her white Snowy hand, Esteemed that a greater bliss, than all the worlds command. Ah! Nimph, he cry'd, is't true, you love, and pitty wretched me? Or if it but a ficton prove, may't last eternally.
Her Vows convinc'd the amr'ous Swain, that he's was Real Love: That she did wear God Cupid's Chain, wou'd constant always prove: Then all the joys that love can name Amintas soul inspire, Till Phaenix-like each in the flame of Constancy expire. Song. THe man that I love must not know of my pain, I must Rest in Disguise, and conceal it, Tho' I find that at length it may make me complain, It is Dangerous yet, It is Dangerous yet to Reveal it; Tho' I find that at length, &c. Honour says do not give way to thy love, and Love says I prethee persevere, And let not thy sancy distractedly move, But since thou dost love, But since thou dost love, love for ever, And let not thy fancy, &c.
Song. SEe, see, how pleasantly she lyes, With crossed Arms and clos'd Eyes, Smiling with a charming Grace, Such innocence lies in her Face, That ev'ry time she draws her breath, It wounds so deep 'twill be my death. Prithee dear Angel dream of me; By Heaven's I love none more than thee: I bleed, I bleed, and soon shall die, Phillis, ah Phillis! hear my cry: Death for a minute pray be gone, My Phillis sure will hear my moan; But if she will not, then come you And take me hence, and Phillis too. Song. HOw mighty are the Charms of Womankind And yet how soon decay'd; Scarce has a Beauty in full glory shin'd, Ere 'tis in utter ruin laid. While the blest minutes last before its fall, 'Tis made a Deity and ador'd by all; But when the glorious Lustre's gone, Th' unhappy slighted Nymph is left alone, The sad privation to bemoan.
See, see poor Phillis yonder, once the fair, Bright as the Morning Sun, Blasted and faded all her Beauties are. Alas! her killing days are done. How unregarded now she treads the plain, Pursu'd by no admiring sighing Swain; Not one charm left, not one alluring grace, Horror & wrinckles have assum'd their place. Age, age, is wrote upon her Face. Who then would be in love? and sendly prize At so unjust a rate, A pair of flattering, false, deluding eyes, That are too morrow out of date? If their first Vigour lasted to the Grave; 'Twere richly worth the while to be a slave: But since the fairest in their course must end, I will no more on the gay toy depend; But make my pleasure in my friend.
Mr. H. S. his Farewel. LOve's soft deluding charms Must now give place to Arms. Hark! hark, I hear the Trumpets fresh alarms. Mars chides me for my stay, And frowning seems to say Thy honour youth will suffer by delay. Adieu ye Sex divine, Whose all-commanding Shrine So oft has bow'd these stubborn knees of mine. Kind Females now no more Must I those charms adore; Nor court the pleasures of the Brittish Shore My Friend and I in Wars, 'Midst Armies, Wounds, and Scars, Will bid defiance to unlucky stars. No charming female darts With all their am'rous arts Shall ere disjoyn our undivided hearts. Friendship, that noble name, That kindles generous flame, Prompts us to court no Mistris now but Fame. Her we may joyntly love, And happy Rivals prove In Emulation like to those above.
Thus hand in hand we'll go, And equal danger know. Love begs in vain, when honour answers no. The Battel done at last, We'll lie so close embrac'd, And think with pleasure on the danger past. Should one of us be slain Fate's envy's spent in vain, In spight of death our friendship we'll maintain. For he that's left behind, Shall teach the World to find, Tho two in person, we're but one in mind. Song. HOw happy and free is the resolute swain, That denies to submit to the yoke of the fair; Free from excesses of pleasure and pain Neither daz'led with hope nor deprest with despair. He's safe from disturbance, and calmly enjoys All the pleasures of love without clamor or noise. Poor shepherds in vain their affection reveal To the Nymph that is peevish, proud, sullen, or coy; Vainly do Virgins their passion conceal, For they boil in their grief till themselves they destroy. And thus the poor darling lies under the curse To be check'd in the Womb or ore-laid by the Nurse.
Song. LAurinda, who did love disdain, For whom had languish'd many a swain, Leading her bleating flocks to drink, She spy'd upon the Rivers brink A Youth, whose eyes did well declare How much he lov'd, but lov'd not her. At first she laught and gaz'd a while, But soon it lessen'd to a smile; Thence to surprize and wonder came, Her breast to heave, her heart to flame. Then cry'd she out, Ah now I prove Thou art a god almighty Love. She would have spoke, but shame deny'd, And bad her first consult her pride; But soon she found that aid was gone, For Jove alas, had left her none; Ah how she burns! but 'tis too late, For in his eyes she reads her fate. Song. WHen first to Dorinda my heart I resign'd, My vows were all real, and passion unfeign'd, But she scorn'd my devoirs, and refus'd to be kind, Tho she lov'd, tho she lov'd, when she rashly disdain'd.
But alas 'twas in vain, for my cowardly zeal No sooner resisted begun to decay, And all the soft flames a fond lover doth feel, Like a Ghost that is struck at, did vanish away. Then how cruel, how cruel and harsh was the smart, When her Eyes gave me wounds, but would not discover The plot of that passion that play'd with my heart, And seem'd to contemn to secure a poor lover. Ah too too unjust to her self and to me! Thus neither obtain'd, tho we both did adore, My heart she had kept, had her passion been free, But now 'tis return'd, I can offer't no more. Yet forc'd by her Vertues, I ne'r can repent My devotion, nor court her repulse; for the fate That prov'd so ungentle and fierce to prevent Our amours, shall grow null'd, and protect me from hate.
Then far from her sight, to some grove I'll retire, Where the grief for my loss I will never remove, But sighing repeat what I once did admire, And languish for pity, tho I cannot for love. A Plea for Inconstancy. HE's a Phlegmatick Lover, In whom we dscover, A temper that never does change. A brest that's like mine, with jealousie burns, Now love and now anger possess it by turns; With fears I grow mild, and with hopes I grow tame; That passion is weak that is always the same. But the sanguine brisk Lover Can never discover How the soul of a Woman's inclin'd; He knows that her charms have conquer'd yet more, That many there are who do sigh and adore, He trusts not to merit to give him success, For Women love only by fancy and guess; Or if to desert by great chance they prove kind, The fair still are fickle, and oft change their mind,
O the starts of a lover Do plainly discover The passion he feels is extream; For he that loves well and does not possess, Must either be jealous, or else love you less; Then say not my fears or my doubts do you wrong, He cannot be quiet whose passion is strong; Small fires do but glow, and are alwayes the same, But the greater will rage and scatter their flame. Song. WHile I anatomize my heart, you Celia must look on; Turn not aside your face nor start, at what your Eyes have done. See how the gaping wound doth bleed afresh, now you are by; See by the poyson'd arrows head, in torture how I lie. This wound you made, now take my heart and view it all around; See, if in any other part there can one flaw be found. There's faith and troth, and constancy, a great and noble love, Heal t'other side by sympathy, and leave the rest to Jove.
A Song. AS Amoret with Phillis sat, one evening on the Plain, And saw the charming Strephon wait, to tell the Nymph his pain; The threatning dangers to remove, he whisper'd in her Ear, Ah Phillis! If you will not love, this Shepheard do not hear. This Shepherd, &c. None ever had so strange an art, his passion to convey Into a listning Virgins heart, and steal her soul away; Fly, fly betimes, for fear you give occasion for your fate; In vain, said she, in vain I strive, alas! 'tis now too late. Alas! 'tis now, &c. Song. I Lik'd, but never lov'd before I saw thy charming face; Now ev'ry feature I adore, and doat on ev'ry grace; She ne'r shall know the kind desire, which her cold look denies, Ʋnless my heart that's all on fire, should sparkle through mine eyes.
Then if no gentle glance return, a silnt leave to speak; My heart, which would for ever burn, must sigh alas! and break. Mock-Song. WAs it a Queen, or else a Cowlady, so lovely, brisk, and gay? ha! Or a dandling sun-beam that we see, in the milk-white eye of the Month of May. No, 'twas no Queen, nor yet no Cow-lady, all in the month of May, stay; But a sorrowful Nymph upon the green, whose eyes had thrown her heart away. Was it a Prince or yet a Butter-flye, she gave her heart unto you! Or a sparkling ship-jack of the Sky, that tumbles down like a lump of glew. No 'twas no Prince, nor yet no Butter-fly, that took her heart away: stay. But a pretty little Cherubin so high, whose eyes do shine like the dew of May.
A Pastoral Song By Dorinda, lamenting her Amintas. ADieu to the pleasures and follies of love, For a passion more noble my fancy does move, My Shepheard is dead, yet I live to proclaim In sorrowful notes my Amintas his name. The Wood-nymphs reply when they hear me complain, Thou never shalt see thy Amintas again. For death hath befriended him, Fate hath defended him, None, none alive, is so happy a swain. You Shepherds and Nymphs that have danc'd to his lays, Come help me to sing my Amintas his praise, No swain for the Garland durst with him dispute, So sweet were his notes while he sung to his lute. Then come to his grave, and your kindness pursue, To weave him a Garland of cypress and yow; For life hath forsaken him, Death hath o'r-taken him, No swain agen will be ever so true.
Then leave me alone to my wretched estate, I lost him too soon, and I lov'd him too late, You ecchoes and fountains, my witnesses prove How deeply I sigh for the loss of my love; And now of God Pan whom we chiefly adore, This favour I never will cease to implore; That I may go above, And there enjoy my love, Then, then, I never will part with him more. Song. TEll me no more you love, Ʋnless you will grant my desire, E'ry thing else will prove, but fuel to my fire. 'Tis not for Kisses alone, so long I have made my address, There's something else to be done, which you cannot chuse but guess. 'Tis not a charming smile, that brings me the perfect Joys, Nor can you me beguile, with sighs and with languishing eyes: There is an Essence within, Kind nature hath clear'd the doubt, Such bliss can never be sin, and therefore I'll find it out.
The way to Rule a Wife. THe two noblest creatures that live on the land, a woman I mean and a horse, By fair means admit, Of the Rider and bit, But disdain to be manag'd by force. He s a slave that marries, and great Owls are they Who think any Woman can be brought to obey. Slaves in fetters must lie still, Or they'l feel, The cold steel, Cornode the flesh and bone, Be quiet and make no moan, And then you shall suffer no ill. The haughty Leviathan, king of the main, when he sports in his native soil, And throws water so high, He makes Seas in the Sky, is caught by address, not by toyl. When the spear has got hold, then let him alone, Tho' he thinks he is gone, he is surely thy own, he is not free that drags a chain. Give him Rope, And there's hope, If you shorten your Clue, To the bottom go you, or your dart returns empty again.
Long have I liv'd, and have had many Wives, Since I first put my hand to the Plough; while I tampered by force, to rule, they grew worse, and there rose a hard knob in my brow: We bit, and we scratcht, and we led hellish lives, Till I found out the way to make excellent wives. This is the result of my Skill: Give 'em line, and they are thine, and you rule them with ease, Let them do what they please, And then they shall do what you will. Song. PEace Cupid, take thy Bow in hand, I'th' gloomy shade in ambush stand To watch a cruel Nymph frequents this Bow'r; Cold as the streams, but sweeter than each hour: There, there she is, direct thy dart, Into that stony Marble heart, Draw, Quickly, Draw, and shew thy art: Woe's me, thou'rt blind indeed, thou hast shot me, While she scapes in the grove, and laughs at thee.
The Dream. THe weary'd Sun had done its work and light, Fled to the bosome of the night, When to my kindest friend my bed, I yielded up my thoughtful head. Midnight so soft came stealing by, As time had been asleep as well as I. In pity then my fancy to me brought, A kind and beauteous thought; Loe a fair garden did appear, I know not how, I know not where. A murmuring stream such musick kept, That in my very dream again I slept. The dimpled waters smil'd, Phillis I spy'd. A gentle blast did turn aside, Her careless silken clouds, and loe Methoughts her breasts were pav'd with snow. Ah fair and pittiless, said I, That snow when flames invade it soon will die. A wild blush stains her face and idly seeks, 'Testablish vertue surer in her cheeks, I reach'd that story with mine eye, And strait a vocal tear let fly, Of mercy then I found a sign, For strait in tears her eyes did eccho mine.
Ah! then I ran and clasping her I lov'd, Through the complying air we mov'd, Some one methought did fiercely call, I ran to see and down I fall, While she flew up and I fell down, I wake and find my self in tears alone. Aurelia. BEneath Aurelia's feet I sate, Expecting at her hands a kinder fate; Making new vows, repeating old, Yet still Aurelia still was cold, and laugh'd while I my mournful story told. With folded arms, and pensive head. In doubled sighs I spoke what e'r I said. Ah scornful Shepherdess, said I, What pleasure is't to see your servants dye? Shou'd all your Votaries be slain, What honour would your tyrant-beauty gain? The cruel Nymph in scorns reply'd, Go swain be thou the first that ever try'd. I then may pity what I now deride.
Against Constancy. TEll me no more of constancy, that frivolous pretence, Of old age, narrow jealousie, disease and want of sence. Let duller fools, or whom kind chance some easie heart has thrown, Despairing higher to advance, ben od one alone. Old men and weak, whose idle flame, their own defects discovers, Since changing can but spread their shame, ought to be constant lovers; But we, whose hearts do justly swell with no vain-glorious pride, Who know how we in love excell, long to be often try'd. Then bring my Bath, and strow my bed, as each kind night returns, Ile change a Mistress till i'me dead, and fate change me for worms, Then bring my Bath, &c.
Constancy after Death. THe Nymph to whom my heart I gave, Is gone, she's gone into the Grave: Ye Gods! why were you so unkind, To leave me languishing behind? What had she done? or what have I, You life or death to both deny? If this be kindness, O my fate! Such pitty wounds me more than hate. Ye angry sisters shew your power, d hast the happy fatal hour; he hour when we shall meet again, And laugh away each others pain; Then arm in arm shall we partake, Of joys that keep us still awake; Thrice welcome deah! when thus it proves The kind niter of our loves. To Celia. OF all the dear joys that the world has in store, If Celia prove onstant i'le ask for no more, If she prove but as kind as her vows do declare, Ile laugh at the Jealous and triumph o're care: To clasp my soft dear all the night in my arms, To kiss and to press, and dissolve with her charms; And to think that the joys everlasting shall be, Makes revelling Princes less happy than we.
Song WHile on those lovely looks I gaze, you see a wretch pursuing, In raptures of a sweet amaze a pleasing happy ruin: 'Tis not for pitty that I move, his fate is too aspiring, Whose heart broke with a load of love, dyes wishing and admiri But if this murder you'd f your slave from death removing, Let me your art of charming know, or learn you mine of loving: Thus, whether life, or death betide, in love 'tis equal measure, The victors live in empty pride, the vanquish'd dye with pleasure. At last you'l force me to confess, you need no arts to vanquish; Such charms by nature you possess, 'twere dullness not to languish; But spare a heart you may surprize and give my tongue the glory, To scorn, while my unfaithful eyes, betray a kinder story.
The Threat. PRoceed if you dare, To foment my despaire, So much beauty was never design'd to ensnare; Kind nature who gave You the features you have, Does improw'r you to conquer not torture your slave He deservedly dyes, Who subjection denies, To the glances, And lances, You dart from your Eyes. But so proudly you reign, That when e're we complain, How we languish, In anguish, You laugh at our pain. This folly give o're, And be cruel no more, To the wretched that wait for relief at your door, For without your remorse, At the last you'l enforce, The despis'd and oppress'd to turn Rebels of course. By experience we find, The obliging and kind, Their Abetters in fetters, Eternally bind. While the proud and the coy, Who refuse to enjoy, By denying, And flying, Their Empire destroy.
Song. AH how sweet are loves soft charms! that Virgins freely tender; Whence the sense of charming bliss, has forc'd em to surrender; For the joys whic passion brings, the soul does so endeavour, They no longer count them lost, but wish they'd last for ever. Sighs and smiles are Lovers food, and eyes the scenes to languish, Tears the precious, chiefest good, though shed with pain and anguish; Yet the trilling Recompence, Elizium so discovers, None ever felt the joys of sence, but kind immortal Lovers. Against Jealousie. SƲch perfect bliss, fair Cloris, we, in our enjoyments prove; 'Tis pitty restless jealousie, shou'd mingle with our love. Let us, since wit has taught us how, raise pleasure to the top:
You rival bottle must allow, I suffer Rival fop. Think not in this that I design, treason against Love's Charms, When following the God of Wine, I leave my Cloris arms. Since you have that, for all your haste, (at which I'll ne'r repine) Will take its liquor off as fast, as I do take off mine. There's not a brisk insipid spark, that flatters in the Town, But, with your wanton eyes you mark him out to be your own. Nor do you think it worth your care, how empty and how dull, The heads of your admirers are, so that their bags be full. All this you freely may confess, yet we'd ne'r disagree; For, did you love your pleasure less, you were no mate for me, &c.
Ungrateful after Enjoyment. NO moro, silly Cupid, will I pine and complain; What Slave is so stupid, To suffer the plague Of an amorous league, to be laught at in vain? No more, silly Cupid, I'll court a coy Mistris no more; he's a sot, and more blind, who to one is confin'd, when there's hope for a score. When I meet with a Beauty that's loving and kind, I'll pay her my duty, but when I've enjoy'd her, O then I'll recruit me, with love and brisk wine; No more I'll adore her, when once I have got my desire, then let her refuse me, she cannot abase me, for then I defie her.
Secret Love. NO, no, 'tis in vain, Though I sigh and complain, Yet the secret I'll never reveal, The wrack shall not tear it, From my breast, but I'll bear it To the Grave, where it ever shall dwell. Oh! would that the gods had created her low, and plac'd the poor Hylas above; Then, then, I a present might freely bestow, of a heart that is all over love. Like the damn'd in the fire, I may gaze and admire, But I never can hope to be blest, O the pangs of a lover, That dares not discover, The poison that's lodg'd in his breast; Like a deer that is wounded, I bleeding run on, and fain I my torture would hide; But, oh 'tis in vain, for where ever I run, still the bloody dart sticks in my side.
Song. LIve and love you peevish Harlot, While your lips and cheeks are scarlot, While your skin is soft and tender, Wisely think of a surrender, Lest when age or sickness grieve ye, Those deride that shou'd relieve ye; When your face grows pale and meager, Lovers whose assaults were eager, Faintly will the Fort beleaguer. Think upon it, and prevent it, Else in time you may repent it; When your Lovers once desert you, You'll grow weary of your vertue: Which for want of an Employment, Will be lost without enjoyment; Traders thus when over-wary, While for greater gains they tarry, With the loss of all, miscarry.
Long Vacation. HOw quiet's the Town? now the Tumult is gone, Now the Bullies and Punks to retirement are flown: The nights are all peace, and the Mornings serene, Our Windows are safe, and our bodies are clean. The Nights are all peace, &c. The Woman of Honour, the Bulker and Ranger Disturb not our selves nor inveigle the stranger: Our joys are our own, spight of Empty Gallants Who Cuckold the Town to supply their own wants. Our joys are our own, &c.
Since the Town then's our own, and the sweets it affords, Tho' indeed we are Rogues, We'll be drunk as the Lords; Opportunity short is, for Term-time will come, When our Wives will be Rambling, and we must keep home. Song. SInce Celia's my Foe, To a Desart I'll go, Where some River, for ever, Shall eccho my woe. The Trees will appear More relenting than her, In the morning, adorning, Each leaf with a tear, When I make my sad moan, To the Rocks all alone, From each hollow, will follow, A pitiful groan.
Yet with silent disdain, She requites all my pain, To my mourning, returning, No answer again. O Celia adieu When I cease to pursue, you'll discover, no lover, Was ever so true. Your sad Shepheard flies, From those, dear, cruel eyes, Which not seeing his being, Decays and he dies. Yet 'tis better to run To the fate we can't shun, then for ever t'endeavour What cannot be won. What, ye gods! have I done? That Amintor alone, is thus treated, and hated, For loving but one.
The Penitent. Forgive me Jove, Or if there be a kinder God above, Forgive a Rebel to the power of love: Here me kind Cupid and accept my Vow, Mine who devoutly at thine Altar bow, O hear me now, Dorinda hear, and what i've done amiss, Pardon and seal that pardon with a Kiss. Stay methinks the melting saint, Kindly ecchoes my complaint, Look, I fancy, I descry, Pitty dropping from her eye, Hark! she says, Philander live, All thy errours I forgve. And now, ah me! to repent I begin, That against so much goodness I ever shoul'd sin, But never again, oh never will I Offend my Dorinda; far sooner i'le dye.
Merry after Death. WHen I shall leave this clod of clay, When I shall see that happy day, That a cold bed, a winding sheet shall end my cares, my grief, and tears, And lay me silent at my Conqu'rors feet. When a dear friend shall say he's gone, Alas! h'has left us all alone: I saw him gasping, and I saw Him striving, in vain, amidst his pain, His eye-strings breaking and his falling jaw. Then shall no tears bedew my hearse, No sad uncomfortable Verse, My unlamented death shall have; He who alive, did never grieve, How can he be less merry in the grave. Then friends for a while be merry without me, And fast as you dye come flocking about me; In gardens and groves our day-revels we'l keep, And at night my Theorbo shall rock you asleep; So happy we'l prove, that Mortals above, Shall envy our Musique, shall envy our Love.
A Rant. MAke a Noise, Pull it out, and drink about, Brave boys T'other cup, Fill the glass, You sober ass turn up, Why so sad? we'l have more, upon the score, My Lad, Let the Rabble prate and babble, Foutre Diable We will all be mad. Sing a Catch, Serenade, In Masquerade, The Watch. Prittle Prattle, Tittle Tattle, Give'em battail, They shall find their match. See they come, stave and Pikes, Whoever strikes, Strike home. Come boys draw, Fairly meet 'Em in the street, Saw, Saw! Bravely done, Cut and slash, The weapons clash, They run. How they wollow, Let us follow, Hoop and hollow, for the day is won. All's our own, Every crack, Must on her back, Lye down, Let us muster In a cluster, Huff and bluster, For we rule the Town.
Play along. sing and chant, A merry Rant Among. Lay about, look the Whores, shut all the doors, And flout, All prepare. See the Sluts, draw up the shuts: Beware. Batts and Cinders, Break the windows, nothing hinders, Let 'em have a care. 'Tother clash. in they go, at every throw, Dash, dash. Hark they tumble, How they jumble, Rumble, rumble, Now the Whores are quash. Boys dispatch, 'tis enough, that we can huff The Watch. Back again, To the Sun, Come let us run Amain. There we'l stay, roar and drink, and never think Of day. Time with lasses, Pots and Glasses, Sweetly passes, how it slides away. Let the fool He that thinks, and sleeps and drinks, By rule. by a measure, at his leasure, take his pleasure, And grow wisely dull. FINIS.
