L971 99828270 32697
A Leicester-shire Frolick; Or, The valiant Cook-Maid. Being a merry composed Jest of Five Taylors that had been at work till their Wages came to 5 pounds, likewise a merry conceited Cook-maid that lived in the house, went to her Master and desired him to lend her a horse, and she would venture her skill to take the 5-pound from these five Taylors, without either Sword or Pistol, in a jesting way, to make her Master some sport and to show her valour: her Master loving mirth more then sadness, agreed to it: so a Horse was sadled, and other things to disguise her self, because she might not be known: away she went (it being in the Evening) and met them before they got home, with nothing in her hand but a black pudding, the faint-hearted Taylors delivered her their money very quietly, for fear they should a been shot through with a Black pudding, and what followed after is expressed in this following Ditty. Tune is, Ragged and torn. With Allowance. I'Le tell you a pretty fine jest, if that you do please it to hear, For the truth on't I do protest, I'm sure that you need not to fear: It is of a valiant Cook-maid, that lived at a Noblemans place, And five Taylors that once was afraid, when as they lookt her in the face, O this was the valiant cook-maid, without either Pistol or Gun, But with a Black-pudding did fright, five Taylors, and put them to'th run. This Noble-man upon a time, had great store of work for to do, But to bring every thing into rhime, 'twill study my brains you must know, Five Taylors that lived hard by, That worked for fourpence a day, For Beef and for Pudding at night, they'd better do so then to play: O this, &c. These Taylors a great while did work, two Masters, and their three men, They laboured as hard as a Turk, with Stitching both too and agen, And when that their work it was done, their money unto them was told, Full five good pounds it is known, of Silver, but not of red Gold: O this, &c. And when as their money they'd got, then who was so jocond as they Each Man of the best drank his pot, and homewards they straight took their way A Cook-maid there was in the house, that us'd full merry to be, Who went to her Master in haste, and these words unto him did say, O thi, &c. Master if that you please, some pastime I for you will make, But to lend me a horse then (quoth she) and this money I from them will take, Her Master then hearing the jest, would try what this Cook-maid could do Some mirth he did think it the best, as Gentlemen will do you know, O this, &c. A horse then was sadled with speed, and boots and Spurs she put on, And other materials most fit, because that she would not be known, A horse-back she straight got astride, with a Hogs-Pudding in her hand, And meeting these Taylors in haster she presently bid them to stand, O this, &c.
Deliver your Money (quoth she) or else your manhoods now try, Or by this same thing in my hand, every man of you shall dye, Then out her Black-pudding she pull'd, which sore did the Taylors affright, They thought it had been a pistol well charg'd because 'twas late in the night, O this, &c. They beg'd their lives she might save, we are but poor taylors (quoth they) And truly no money we have, for we work but for four-pence a day, You lye like all Rogues (quoth she) and do not my patience provoke, For 5 pounds you have tane for your work. so presant that word did them choak, O this, &c. That money deliver with speed, if that you think well on your Lives, Or by this same thing you shall bleed, the which will go farther then Knives, Then out of their pockets their money they took with many a sorrowful tear, And gave it into her hand, here's all on't each Taylor did swear. O this, &c. And when she their money had got, she set Spurs and away she did run, The Davil go with you (quoth they) for i'me sure that we are undone: But when that this Cook-maid came home, strait unto her Master she told, And show'd him his money again, how passages went she did unfold, O this, &c. But here comes the cream of the jest, those Taylors which was such Men, After they'd stood pausing a while, then back they returned again, They came with a pittiful tone, their hair stood like men bewitcht To'th Gentleman they made their moan, for their mony their fingers it itcht, O this, &c. The Gentleman laugh'd in conceit, how many was there said he, Sure you were all men sufficient to a beaten above wo or three; Truly we saw but one man the which took our money away, But we feared he had partakers in store, or else he should never a carried the day, O this, &c. He was well mounted upon a good steed, and a Pistol that put us to studying, You lye like all fools (quoth she) it was but a black Hogs-Pudding: Thus they the poor Taylors did jeer and the Cook-maid laugh'd in conceit, That with nothing but a black Pudding, and that five Taylors should beat, O this, &c. Then straightway the Gentleman spoke, what will you give then (said he) To have all your money again, and the face on't once more to see: Quoth the Taylors we'l give the ton half, and that's very fair you do know, Altho' that we were such fools, to part with our good silver so. O this, &c. Then straitways he call'd for the Cook, then the Taylors did laugh in their sleeve And set her to cunjuring strait, which made the poor Taylors believe That she by her art had it found, and show'd them the place where it lay, Which made the poor Taylors to smile, so merry and jocand was they. O this; &c. Here take half the money said they, the which we did promise to you, And for you we ever will pray, for such Cook-Maids there is but a few, I'le have none of your money she said, as sure as i'me hear alive, One may know what Cowards you are, to let a Hogs-Pudding to fright you all▪ O this, &c. And thus the old Proverb is true, nine Taylors do make but one man And now it doth plainly appear, let them all do what they can, For had they been stout hearted Lads, they need not callad for aid, Nor afraid to tast of a Pudding, nor yet be'n out-brav'd by a Maid. O this, &c. FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, in Pye-Corner, near West-smithfield.
