M1050 99862547 114710
THREE NEW PLAYES; VIZ. The Bashful Lover, The Guardian, The Very Woman. As they have been often Acted at the Private-House in Black-Friers, by His late MAJESTIES Servants, with great Applause. WRITTEN BY PHILIP MASSENGER, Gent. Never Printed before. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1655
Vera ac Viva Effigies PHILIPPI MASSINGER. Gen
THE BASHFUL LOVER. A TRAGI-COMEDY. As it hath been often Acted at the Private-House in Black-Friers, by His late MAIESTIES Servants, with great Applause. WRITTEN By PHILIP MASSENGER, Gent. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1655.
PROLOGUE. This from our Author, far from all offence, To abler writers, or the Audience Met here to judge his Poem. He by me Presents his service, with such modesty As well becomes his weakness. 'Tis no crime He hopes as we do in this curious time, To be a little diffident, when we are To please so many with one Bill of Fare. Let others, building on their merit, say Y'are in the wrong, if you move not that way Which they prescribe you, as you were bound to learn Their maximes, but uncapable to discern 'Twixt truth and falshood Ours had rather be Censur'd by some, for too much obsequy, Then tax'd of self-opinion: If he hear That his endeavors thriv'd, and did appear Worthy your view though made so by your grace, With some desert) he in another place Will thankfully report, one Leaf of Bays Truly confer'd upon this work, will raise More pleasure in him, you the givers free, Then Garland ravisht from the Virgin-Tree.
Dramatis Personae. Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua Lorrenzo, Duke of Tuscany uberti, Prince of Parma Farneze, Cousin to Gonzaga Alonso, Cousin to Lorrenzo Manfroy, a Lord of Mantua Octavio, General once to Gonzaga, now exil'd Gothrio, his Servant Galeazzo, a Nobleman disguised Julio, his Man Pisano, a Tuscan Lord Martinio, a Captain Two Captains more Ambassadors Soldiers Matilda, Daughter to Gonzaga Beatrice, her waiting Gentlewoman Two Women
THE Bashful Lover. Act. I. Scaen. I. Enter Gateazzo and Julio. Jul. I Dare not cross you sir, but I would gladly (Provided you allow it) render you My personal attendance. Gal. You shall better Discharge the duty of an honest servant, In following my instructions which you have Receiv'd already, then in questioning What my intents are, or upon what motives My stay's resolv'd in Mantua: Believe me,
That servant overdoes, that's too officious; And in presuming to direct your master, You argue him of weakness, and your self Of arrogance and impertinence. Jul. I have done sir; but what my ends are Gal. Honest ones, I know it: I have my bills of exchange, and all provisions Entrusted to you; you have shewn your self Just and discreet, what would you more? and yet To satisfie in some part your curious care, Hear this, and leave me: I desire to be Obscur'd; and as I have demean'd my self These six moneths past in Mantua, I'll continue Unnoted and unknown, and at the best Appear no more then a Gentleman, and a stranger, That travails for his pleasure: Jul. With your pardon, This hardly will hold weight, though I should swear it, With your noble friends and brother. Gal. You may tell'em, Since you will be my Tutor, there's a rumor (Almost cry'd up into a certainty) Of wars with Florence, and that I am determin'd To see the service: Whatere I went forth, (Heaven prospering my intents) I would come home A Soldier, and a good one. Jul. Should you get A Captains place, nay Colonels, 'twould add little To what you are; few of your rank will follow That dangerous profession Gal. 'Tis the noblest, and Monarchs honor'd in it: But no more on my displeasure. Jul. Saints and Angels guard you. Exit. Gal. A war indeed is threatned, nay expected From Florence; but it is 'gainst me already Proclaim'd in Mantua: I find it here,
No forein, but intestine war: I have Defied my self, in giving up my reason A slave to passion, and am led captive Before the battel's fought; I fainted when I only saw mine enemy, and yielded Before that I was charg'd: And though defeated, I dare not sue for mercy; like Ixion I look on Juno, feel my heart turn cinders With an invisible fire: And yet should she Daign to appear cloth'd in a various cloud, The majesty of the substance is so facred, I durst not clasp the shadow: I behold her With adoration, feast my eye, while all My other senses starve; and oft frequenting The place which she makes happy with her presence, I never yet had power with tongue or pen To move her to compassion, or make known What 'tis I languish for; yet I must gaze still, Though it increase my flame: however I Much more then fear I am observ'd and censur'd For bold intrusion. Walks sadly Enter Beatrix and Ascanio. Bea. Know you, boy, that Gentleman? Asc. Who, Monsieur Melancholy? hath not your Honor Marked him before? Bea. I have seen him often wait About the Princess lodgings, but ne'r ghess'd What his designs were. Asc. No? what a sigh he breath'd now! Many such will blow up the roof; on my small credit There's gunpowder in 'em. Bea. How Crack! gunpowder? He's flesh and blood, and devils only carry
Such roaring stuff about 'em: you cannot prove He is or Spirit or Conjurer. Asc. That I grant; but he's a Lover, and that's as bad; their sighs Are like petards, and blow all up: Bea. A Lover! I have been in love my self, but never found yet That it could work such strange effects. Asc. True, Madam, In women it cannot; for when they miss th'enjoying Of their full wishes, all their sighs and heigh-hoes At the worst breed timpanies, and these are cur'd too With a kiss or two of their Saint, when he appears Between a pair of sheets: but with us men The case is otherwise. Bea. You will be breech'd, boy, For your physical maxims: But how are you assur'd He is a Lover? Asc. Who, I? I know with whom too, But that is to be whisper'd. Whispers Bea. How? the Princess! th'unparallel'd Matilda! Some proof of it; I'll pay for my intelligence. Gives him gold. Asc. Let me kiss Your Honors hand; 'twas ever fair, but now Beyond comparison. Bea. I ghess the reason; A giving hand is still fair to the receiver. Asc. Your Ladiship's in the right: but to the pur∣pose, He is my Client, and pays his fees as duly As ever Usurer did in a bad cause To his man of law; and yet I get, and take 'em Both easily and honestly: All the service I do him, is to give him notice when And where the Princess will appear; and that I hope's no treason: If you miss him when
She goes to the Vesper or the Mattins, hang me; Or when she takes the air, be sure to find him Near her coach; at her going forth, or coming back: But if she walk, he's ravisht; I have seen him smel out Her footing like a Lime-hound, and knows it From all the rest of her train. Bea. Yet I ne'r saw him present her a petition, Asc. Nore'r shall: He only sees her, sighs, and sacrifices A tear or two; then vanishes. Bea. 'Tis most strange: What a sad aspect he wears! but I'll make use of't. The Princess is much troubled with the threats That come from Florence; I will bring her to him, The novelty may afford her sport, and help To purge deep melancholy. Boy, can you stay Your Client here for the third part of an hour? I have some ends in't. Asc. Stay him, Madam; fear not: The present receipt of a round sum of crowns, And that will draw most Gallants from their prayers, Cannot drag him from me. Bea. See you do. Asc. Ne'r doubt me, I'll put him out of his dream. Good morrow Signior. Gal. My little friend, good morrow: Hath the Princess Slept well to night? Asc. I hear not from her women One murmur to the contrary. Gal. Heaven be prais'd for't: Does she go to Church this morning? Asc. Troth I know not; I keep no key of her de∣votion, Signior. Gal. Goes she abroad? pray tell me. Asc. 'Tis thought rather She is resolv'd to keep her chamber. Gal. Ay me!
Asca. Why do you sigh? If that you have a business To be dispatch'd in Court, shew ready mony, You shall find those that will prefer it for you. Gal. Business! can any man have business, but To see her, then admire her, and pray for her, She being compos'd of goodness? For my self, I find it a degree of happiness But to be near her; and I think I pay A strict religious vow, when I behold her, And that's all my ambition. Asca. I believe you: Yet she being absent, you may spend some hours With profit and delight too. After dinner The Duke gives audience to a rough Ambassador, Whom yet I never saw, nor heard his title, Imploy'd from Florence: I'll help you to a place Where you shall see and hear all. Gal. Tis not worth my observation. Asca. What think you of An excellent Comedy to be presented For his entertainment? He that penn'd it, is The Poet of the time; and all the Ladies (I mean the amorous and learned ones) Except the Princess, will be there to grace it. Gal. What's that to me? without her all is no∣thing, The light that shines in Court, Cimerian darkness: I will to bed agen, and there contemplate On her perfections. Enter Matilda, Beatrix, and two Women. Asca. Stay sir! see the Princess, Beyond our hopes. Gal. Take that, as Moors salute
The rising Sun with joyful superstition: I could fall down and worship. O my heart! aside Like Phoebe breaking through an envious cloud, Or something which no simile can express, She shews to me; a reverend fear, but blended With wonder and amazement, does possess me; Now glut thy self, my famish'd eye. Bea. That's he, an't please your Excellence. 1 Wo. Observe his posture, But with a quarter-look. 2 Wo. Your eye fix'd on him, will breed astonish∣ment. Matil. A comely Gentleman! I would not que∣stion your relation, Lady, Yet faintly can believe it: How he eyes me! Will he not speak? Bea. Your Excellence hath depriv'd him Of speech and motion. Mat. 'Tis most strange. Asc. These fits are usual with him. Mat. Is it not, Ascanio, A personated folly? or he a statue? If it be, it is a master-piece; for man I cannot think him. Bea. For your sport vouchsafe him a little con∣ference. Mat. In compassion rather: For should he love me as you say (though hopeless) It should not be return'd with scorn; that were An inhumanity, which my birth nor honor Could priviledge, were they greater. Now I perceive He has life and motion in him; to whom, Lady, Pays he that duty?Galeaz. bowing, offers to go off. Bea. Sans doubt to your self. Mat. And whither goes he now? Asc. To his private lodging,
But to what end I know not; this is all I ever noted in him. Mat. Call him back: In pitty I stand bound to counsel him, Howe'r I am denied, though I were willing To ease his sufferings. Asc. Signior, the Princess commands you to attend her. Gal. How? the Princess! am I betraid? Asc. What a lump of flesh is this? You are betraid, sir, to a better fortune Then you durst ever hope for: What a Tantalus Do you make your self? the flying fruit stays for you, And the water that you long'd for, rising up Above your lip, do you refuse to taste it? Move faster, sluggish Camel, or I will thrust This goad in your breech: Had I such a promising beard, I should need the reins, not spurs. Mat. You may come nearer; Why do you shake, sir? If I flatter not My self, there's no deformity about me, Nor any part so monstrous to beget An ague in you. Gal. It proceeds not, Madam, from guilt, but re∣verence. Mat. I believe you sir; have you a suit to me? Gal. Your Excellence is wondrous fair. Mat. I thank your good opinion. Gal. And I beseech you that I may have licence To kneel to you. Mat. A suit I cannot cross. Gal. I humbly thank your Excellence. Mat. But what, As you are prostrate on your knee before me, Is your petition?
Gal. I have none, great Princess, Mat. Do you kneel for nothing? Gal. Yes, I have a suit; But such a one, as if denied, will kill me. Mat. Take comfort; it must be of some strange nature, Unfitting you to ask, or me to grant, If I refuse it. Gal. It is, Madam, — Mat. Out with't. Gal. That I may not offend you, this is all, When I presume to look on you. Asc. A flat Eunuch! to look on her? I should desire my self. To move a little further. Mat. Only that? Gal. And I beseech you, Madam, to believe I never did yet with a wanton eye Or cherish one lascivious wish beyond it. Bea. You'll never make good Courtier, or be In grace with Ladies. 1 Woman. Or us Waiting-Women, if that be your Nil ultra. 2 Woman. He's no Gentleman, on my virginity it is apparent: My Tailor has more boldness, nay my shoo-maker Will fumble a little further, he could not have The length of my foot else. Mat. Only to look on me? ends your ambition there? Gal. It does, great Lady, And that confin'd too, and at fitting distance: The Fly that plays too neer the flame, burns in it. As I behold the sun, the stars, the Temples, I look upon you, and wish'twere no sin, Should I adore you.
Mat. Come, there's somthing more in't; And since that you will make a Goddess of me, As such a one, I'll tell you, I desire not The meanest Altar rais'd up to mine honor To be pull'd down; I can accept from you (Be your condition nere so far beneath me) One grain of incense with devotion offer'd, Beyond all perfumes or Sabean spices By one that proudly thinks he merits in it: I know you love me. Gal. Next to heaven, Madam, And with as pure a zeal. That we behold With th'eyes of contemplation, but can Arrive no nearer to it in this life; But when that is divorc'd, my soul shall serve yours, And witness my affection. Mat. Pray you rise, but wait my further pleasure. Enter Farneze and Uberti. Far. I'll present you, And give you proof I am your friend, a true one; And in my pleading for you, teach the age That cals erroniously Friendship but a name, It is a substance. Madam, I am bold To trench so far upon your privacie, As to desire my friend (Let not that wrong him, For he's a worthy one) may have the honor To kiss your hand. Mat. His own worth challengeth a greater favor. Far. Your acknowledgment Confirms it, Madam: If you look on him As he's built up a man, without addition Of fortunes liberal favors, wealth or titles, He doth deserve no usual entertainment.
But as he is a Prince, and for your service Hath left fair Parma (that acknowledges No other Lord) and uncompell'd exposes His person to the dangers of war, Ready to break in storms upon our heads; In noble thankfulness you may vouchsafe him Neerer respect, and such grace as may nourish, Not kill his amorous hopes. Mat. Cozen, you know I am not the disposer of my self, The Duke my father challengeth that power: Yet thus much I dare promise; Prince Uberti Shall find the seed of service that he sows Fals not on barren ground. Uber. For this high favor I am your creature, and profess I owe you Whatever I call mine. They walk Gal. This great Lord is A Suitor to the Princess. Asca. True, he is so: Ga. Fame gives him out too for a brave Comander Asca. And in it does him but deserved right; The Duke hath made him General of his horse On that assurance. Gal. And the Lord Farneze pleads for him, as it seems. Asca. 'Tis too apparent: And this consider'd, give me leave to ask What hope have you sir? Gal. I may still look on her, Howe'r he wear the garland. Asca. A thin diet, and will not feed you fat, sir. Uber. I rejoice, rare Princess, that you are not to be won By Carpet-courtship, but the sword: with this Steel-pen I'll write on Florence helm, how much I can, and dare do for you.
Mat. 'Tis not question'd, Some private business of mine own dispos'd of, I'll meet you in the presence. Vber. Ever your servant. Ex. Vber. Farne. Mat. Now sir to you: You have observ'd, I doubt not, (For Lovers are sharp. sighted) to what purpose This Prince sollicites me; and yet I am not So taken with his worth, but that I can Vouchsafe you further parle. The first command That I'll impose upon you, is to hear And follow my good councel: I am not Offended that you love me: persist in it, But love me vertuously, such love may spur you To noble undertakings, which atchiev'd, Will raise you into name, preferment, honor: For all which, though you ne'r enjoy my person, (For that's impossible) you are indebted To your high aims; visit me when you please, I do allow it, nor will blush to own you, (So you confine your self to what you promise) As my vertuous servant. Bea. Farewel sir, you have An unexpected Cordial. Asc. May it work well. Exeunt. manet Gal. Gal. Your love, yes, so she said, may spur you to Brave undertakings: Adding this, You may Visit me when you please. Is this allowed me, And any act within the power of man Impossible to be effected? no, I will break through all oppositions that May stop me in my full carier to honor; And borrowing strength to do, from her high favor, Add somthing to Alcides greatest labor. Exit.
Enter Gonzaga, Vberti, Farneze, Manfroy, Attendants. Gon. This is your place, and were it in our power, You should have greater honor, Prince of Parma: The rest know theirs; let some attend with care On the Ambassador, and let my Daughter Be present at his audience. Reach a chair, We'll do all fit respects; and pray you put on Your milder looks; you are in a place where frowns Are no prevailing agents. Enter (at one door) Alonzo and Attendants: Matilda, Beatrix, Ascanio, Galeazo, and Waiting-women (at the other.) Asc: I have seen More then a wolf, a Gorgon: [Swouns] Gon. What's the matter? Mat. A Page of mine is faln into a swoun, Look to him carefully. Gon. Now when you please, the cause that brought you hither? Alon. The protraction Of my dispatch forgotten, from Lorenzo The Tuscan Duke, thus much to you Gonzaga The Duke of Mantua: By me his nephew He does salute you fairly, and intreats (A word not suitable to his power and greatness) You would consent to tender that, which he Unwillingly must force, if contradicted. Ambition, in a private man a vice, Is in a Prince the vertue.
Gonza. To the purpose; these ambages are im∣pertinent. Alon. He demands The fair Matilda (for I dare not take From her perfections) in a noble way; And in creating her the comfort of His royal bed, to raise her to a height Her flattering hopes could not aspire, where she With wonder shall be gaz'd upon, and live The envy of her sex. Gonza. Suppose this granted. Uber. Or if denied, what follows? Alon. Present war, with all extremities the Con∣queror can Inflict upon the vanquish'd. Uber. Grant me licence To answer this defiance: What intelligence Holds your proud Master with the will of Heaven, That ere th'uncertain Dye of War be thrown, He dares assure himself the victory? Are his unjust invading Arms of fire? Or those we put on in defence of right, Like chaff to be consum'd in the encounter? I look on your dimensions, and find not Mine own of lesser size; the blood that fills My veins, as hot as yours; my sword as sharp, My nerves of equal strength, my heart as good, And confident we have the better cause, Why should we fear the trial? Far. You presume you are superior in numbers; we Lay hold upon the surest anchor, vertue; Which when the tempest of the war roars loudest, Must prove a strong protection. Gonza. Two main reasons (seconding those you have already heard) Gives us encouragement: The duty that
I owe my mother Country, and the love Descending to my daughter. For the first, Should I betray her liberty, I deserv'd To have my name with infamy raz'd from The catalogue of good Princes: And I should Unnaturally forget I am a father, If like a Tartar, or for fear or profit, I should consign her as a bondwoman To be dispos'd of at anothers pleasure, Her own consent or favor never su'd for, And mine by force exacted. No, Alonzo, She is my only child, my heir; and if A fathers eyes deceive me not, the hand Of prodigal nature hath given so much to her, As in the former ages Kings would rise up In her defence, and makes her cause their quarrel: Nor can she, if that any spark remain To kindle a desire to be possest Of such a beauty, in our time want swords To guard it safe from violence. Gal. I must speak, or I shall burst; now to be silent, were A kind of blasphemy. If such purity, Such innocence, an abstract of perfection, The soul of beauty, vertue, in a word, A Temple of things sacred, should groan under The burthen of opprestion, we might Accuse the Saints, and tax the Powers above us Of negligence or injustice. Pardon, sir, A strangers boldness, and in your mercy call it True zeal, not rudeness: In a cause like this, The Husbandman would change his ploughing-irons To weapons of defence, and leave the earth Untill'd, although a general dearth should follow: The Student would forswear his book; the Lawyer Put off his thriving gown, and without pay
Conclude this case is to be fought, not pleaded: The women will turn Amazons, as their sex In her were wrong'd; and boys write down their names I'th' muster-book for soldiers. Gonza. Take my hand; Whatev'r you are, I thank you: how are you call'd? Gal. Hortensio, a Millanoise. Gonza. I wish Mantua had many such. My Lord Ambassador, Some privacie if you please: Manfroy, you may Partake it, and advise us. They go aside. Uber. Do you know, friend, What this man is, or of what country? Far. Neither. Uber. I'll question him my self; what are you sir? Gal. A Gentleman. Uber. But if there be gradation In Gentry, as the Heralds say, you have Been overbold in the presence of your betters. Gal. My betters, sir? Uber. Your betters! as I take it, you are no Prince. Gal. 'Tis fortunes gift you were born one: I have not heard that glorious title crowns you As a reward of vertue; it may be The first of your house deserv'd it, yet his merits You can but faintly call your own. Mat. Well answer'd. Uber. You come up to me. Gal. I would not turn my back If you were the Duke of Florence, though you charg'd me I'th' head of our troops. Uber. Tell me in gentler language, (Your passionate speech induces me to think so) Do you love the Princess?
Gal. Were you mine enemy, Your foot upon my breast, sword at my throat, Even then I would profess it. The ascent To th'height of honor, is by arts or arms: And if such an unequall'd prize might fall On him that did deserve best in defence Of this rare Princess, in the day of battail I should lead you a way would make your Greatness Sweat drops of blood to follow. Uber. Can your Excellence Hear this without rebuke from one unknown? Is he a Rival for a Prince? Mat. My Lord, you take that liberty I never gave you: In justice you should give encouragement To him or any man that freely offers His life to do me service, not deter him; I give no suffrage to it: Grant he loves me, As he professes, how are you wrong'd in it? Would you have all men hate me but your self? No more of this I pray you: If this Gentleman Fight for my freedom, in a fit proportion To his desert and quality, I can And will reward him, yet give you no cause Of jealousie or envy. Gal. Heavenly Lady! Gonz. No peace, but on such poor and base con∣ditions? We will not buy it at that rate: Return This answer to your Master: Though we wish'd To hold fair quarter with him, on such terms As honor would give way to, we are not So thunder-struck with the loud voice of war, As to acknowledg him our Lord before His sword hath made us Vassals: we long since Have had intelligence of the unjust gripe He purpos'd to lay on us; neither are we
So unprovided as you think, my Lord, He shall not need to seek us, we will meet him And prove the fortune of a day, perhaps Sooner then he expects. Alon. And find repentance when 'tis too late. Farewell. [Exit with Farneze.] Gonza. No, my Matilda, We must not part so: Beasts and birds of prey To their last gasp defend their brood; and Florence Over thy fathers breast shall march up to thee, Before he force affection: The arms That thou must put on for us and thy self, Are prayers and pure devotion, which will Be heard, Matilda. Mansroy, to your trust We do give up the City, and my daughter; On both keep a strong guard: No tears, they are ominous. O my Octavio, my try'd Octavio In all my dangers! now I want thy service, In passion recompenc'd with banishment. Error of Princes, who hate vertue when She's present with us, and in vain admire her When she is absent! 'Tis too late to think on't: The wish'd for time is come, Princely Uberti, To shew your valour; Friends being to do, not talk. All rhetorick is fruitless, only this, Fate cannot rob you of deserv'd applause, Whether you win or lose in such a cause. Exeunt.
Act. 2. Scaen. 1. Enter Matilda, Beatrix, and two Women. NO matter for the Ring I ask'd you for: The Boy not to be found? Bea. Nor heard of, Madam: 1 Wo. He hath been sought and searcht for, house by house, Nay, every nook of the City, but to no purpose. 2 Wo. And how he should escape hence, the Lord Manfroy Being so vigilant ore the guards, appears A thing impossible. Mat. I never saw him Since he swouned in the presence, when my Father Gave audience to the Ambassador: but I feel A sad miss of him; on any slight occasion He would find out such pretty arguments To make me sport, and with such witty sweetness Deliver his opinion, that I must Ingeniously confess his harmless mirth, When I was most opprest with care, wrought more In the removing of it, then musick on me. Bea. An't please your Excellence, I have observ'd him Waggishly witty; yet sometimes on the sudden He would be very pensive, and then talk So feelingly of love, as if he had Tasted the bitter sweets of't. 1 Wo. He would tell too a pretty tale of a sister that had been
Deceiv'd by her Sweetheart; and then weeping swear He wonder'd how men could be false 2 Wo. And that when he was a Knight, he would be the Ladies Champion, And travel ore the world to kill such Lovers As durst play false with their Mistresses: Mat. I am sure I want his company Enter Manfroy (with a Letter.) There are Letters, Madam, In post come from the Duke; but I am charg'd By the careful bringer, not to open them But in your presence. Mat. Heaven preserve my Father! Good news, an't be thy will! Manf. Patience must arm you against what's ill. Mat. I'll hear 'em in my Cabinet: Exeunt. Enter Galeazo and Ascanio (with a Ring.) Gal Why have you left the safety of the City And service of the Princess, to partake The dangers of the Camp? and at a time too When the Armies are in view, and every minute The dreadful charge expected. Asc. You appear so far beyond your self, as you are now Arm'd like a soldier, (though I grant your presence Was ever gracious) that I grow enamour'd Of the profession, in the horror of it There is a kind of majesty. Gal. But too heavy to sit on thy soft shoulders, Youth; retire
To the Dukes tent that's guarded. Asc. Sir, I come To serve you: Knights adventurers are allow'd Their Pages; and I bring a will that shall Supply my want of power. Gal. To serve me, boy! I wish (believe it) that 'twere in my nerves To do thee any service; and thou shalt If I survive the fortune of this day, Be satisfied I am serious. Asc. I am not To be put off so, sir: since you do neglect My offer'd duty, I must use the power I bring along with me, that may command you: You have seen this Ring. Gal. Made rich by being worne upon the Princess finger. Asc. 'Tis a favour To you, by me sent from her: view it better; But why coy to receive it? Gal. I am unworthy Of such a blessing, I have done nothing yet That may deserve it; no Commanders blood Of th'adverse party hath yet dy'd my sword Drawn out in her defence. I must not take it. This were a triumph for me when I had Made Florence Duke my prisoner, and compell'd him To kneel for mercy at her feet. Asc. 'Twas sent, sir, To put you in mind whose cause it is you fight for; And as I am her creature, to revenge A wrong to me done. Gal. By what man? Asc. Alonzo. Gal. Th'Ambassador? Asc. The same:
Gal. Let it suffice, I know him by his armor and his horse; And if we meet — I am cut off, the Alarum Commands me hence: sweet Youth, fall off. Asc. I must not; you are too noble to receive a wound Upon your back; and following close behind you, I am secure, though I could wish my bosom Were your defence. Gal. Thy kindness will undo thee. Exeunt Enter Lorenzo, Alonzo, Pisano, Martino. Lor. We'll charge the main Battalia, fall you Upon the Van, preserve your Troops intire To force the Rear: he dies that breaks his ranks, Till all be ours and sure. Pisa. 'Tis so proclaim'd. Exeunt. Enter Galeazzo, Ascanio, and Alonzo. Gal. 'Tis he, Ascanio: Stand! Alon. I never shunn'd A single opposition; but tell me Why in the battel, of all men, thou hast Made choice of me? Gal. Look on this Youth; his cause Sits on my sword Alon. I know him not. Gal. I'll help your memory. Fight Asc. What have I done? I am doubtful To whom to wish the victory; for still My resolution wavering, I so love The enemy that wrong'd me, that I cannot Without repentance wish success to him That seeks to do me right. — Alas he's faln. Alonzo falls. As you are gentle, hold sir! or if I want
Power to perswade so far, I conjure you By her lov'd name I am sent from. Gal. 'Tis a charm Too strong to be resisted: He is yours. Yet why should you make suit to save that life Which you so late desir'd should be cut off For injuries receiv'd, begets my wonder. Asc. Alas, we foolish spleenful boys would have We know not what: I have some private reasons, But now not to be told. Gal. Shall I take him prisoner? Asc. By no means, sir; I will not save his life To rob him of his honor: when you give, Give not by halves: One short word, and I follow. Exit Galeazo. My Lord Alonzo, if you have receiv'd A benefit, and would know to whom you owe it, Remember what your entertainment was At old Octavio's house, one you call'd friend, And how you did return it. Exit. Alon. I remember I did not well; but it is now no time To think upon't; my wounded honor calls For reparation, I must quench my fury For this disgrace in blood, and some shall smart for't. Exit. Enter Vberti, Farneze(wounded.) Far. O Prince Vberti, valour cannot save us; The body of our Army's pierc'd and broken, The wings are routed, and our scattered Troops Not to be rallied up. Vber 'Tis yet some comfort, The enemy must say we were not wanting In courage or direction; and we may Accuse the powers above us partial, when
A good cause, well defended too, must suffer For want of fortune. Far. All is lost; the Duke Too far engag'd, I fear, to be brought off: Three times I did attempt his rescue, but With odds was beaten back: Only the stranger (I speak it to my shame) still follow'd him, Cutting his way; but 'tis beyond my hopes That either should return. Uber. That noble stranger, Whom I in my proud vanity of greatness As one unknown contemn'd, when I was thrown Out of my saddle by the great Dukes lance, Hors'd me again in spight of all that made Resistance; and then whisper'd in mine ear, Fight bravely Prince Uberti, there's no way else To the fair Matilda's favour. Far. 'Twas done nobly. Uber. In you, my bosom friend; I had call'd it noble: But such a courtesie from a Rival, merits The highest attribute. Enter Galeazo and Gonzaga. Far. Stand on your guard, we are pursu'd. Uber. Preserv'd! wonder on wonder. Far. The Duke in safety? Gon. Pay your thanks, Farneze, To this brave man, if I may call him so, Whose acts were more then humane: if thou art My better Angel, from my infancie Design'd to guard me, like thy self appear, For sure thou art more then mortal.
Gal. No, great sir, A weak and sinful man, though I have done you Some prosperous service, that hath found your favour, I am lost to my self; but lose not you The offer'd opportunity to delude The hot pursuing enemy: these woods Nor the dark vail of night cannot conceal you, If you dwell long here: You may rise again, But I am faln for ever. Far. Rather borne up To the supreme sphere of honor. Uber. I confess my life your gift. Gon. My liberty: You have snatch'd The wreath of conquest from the Victors head, And do alone in scorn of Lorenzo's fortune Though we are slav'd, by true heroick valour Deserve a triumph. Uber. From whence then proceeds this poor dejection? Gal: In one suit I'll tell you, Which I beseech you grant: — I lov'd your daughter, But how? as beggers in their wounded fancie Hope to be Monarchs: I long languish'd for her, But did receive no Cordial, but what Despair my rough Physitian prescrib'd me. At length her goodness and compassion found it. And whereas I expected, and with reason, The distance and disparity consider'd Between her birth and mine, she would contemn me, The Princess gave me comfort. Gon. In what measure?
Gal. She did admit me for her Knight and servant, And spurr'd me to do something in this battel Fought for her liberty, that might not blemish So fair a favour. Gonza. This you hrve perform'd to th'height of admiration. Uber. I subscribe to't, that am your Rival. Gal. You are charitable: But how short of my hopes, nay the assurance Of those atchievements which my love and youth Already held accomplisn'd, this days fortune Must sadly answer. What I did, she gave me The strength to do; her piety preserv'd Her Father; and her gratitude for the dangers You threw your self into for her defence, Protected you by me her instrument: But when I came to strike in mine own cause, And to do somthing so remarkable, That should at my return command her thanks And gracious entertainment, then alas I fainted like a coward; I made a vow too (And it is registred) ne'r to presume To come into her presence, if I brought not Her fears and dangers bound in fetters to her, Which now's impossible. — Hark, the enemy Makes his approaches: save your selves, this only Deliver to her Sweetness; I have done My poor endeavours, and pray her not repent Her goodness to me: May you live to serve her, This loss recover'd, with a happier fate, And make use of this sword: Arms I abjure, And conversation of men; I'll seek out Some unfrequented cave, and die Loves martyr. Exit Gonza. Follow him. Uber. 'Tis in vain; his nimble feet Have born him from my sight.
Gonza. I suffer for him: Far. We share in it, but must not sir forget Your means of safety. Uber. In the war I have serv'd you, And to the death will follow you. Gonz. 'Tis not fit, We must divide our selves. My daughter, if I retain yet A Soveraigns power ore thee, or friends with you, Do, and dispute not; by my example change Your habits: As I thus put off my purple, Ambition dies; this garment of a shepherd Left here by chance will serve; in lieu of it I leave this to the owner. Raise new forces, And meet me at S. Leo's Fort; my daughter, As I commanded Manfroy, there will meet us. The City cannot hold out, we must part, Farewell, thy hand — Far. You still shall have my heart. Exeunt. Enter Lorenzo, Alonzo, Pisano, Martino, Captains, Soldiers. Loren. The day is ours, though it cost dear; yet 'tis not Enough to get a victory, if we lose The true use of it. We have hitherto Held back your forward swords, and in our fear Of ambushes, deferr'd the wish'd reward Due to your bloody toil: But now give freedom, Nay, licence to your fury and revenge; Now glut your selves with prey, let not the night Nor these thick woods give sanctuary to The fear-struck Hares our Enemies: fire these trees, And force the wretches to forsake their holes, And offer their scorch'd bodies to your swords,
Or burn'em as a sacrifice to your angers. Who brings Gonzaga's head, or takes him prisoner, (Which I incline to rather) that he may Be sensible of those tortures, which I vow T'inflict upon him, for denial of His daughter to our bed) shall have a Blank With our hand and signet made authentical, In which he may write down himself, what wealth Or honors he desires Alon. The great Dukes will shall be obeyed Pisa. Put it in execution. Mar. Begirt the wood, and fire it. Sold. Follow, follow. Exeunt. Enter Farneze (with a Florentine soldiers coat.) Uberti, Prince Uberti! O my friend Dearer then life! I have lost thee. Cruel fortune, Unsatisfied with our sufferings! We no sooner Were parted from the Duke, and even then ready To make a mutual farewel, when a troop Of the enemies horse fell on us: we were forc'd To take the woods again, but in our flight Their hot pursuit divided us: we had been happy If we had died together; to survive him To me is worse then death, and therefore should not Embrace the means of my escape, though offer'd. When nature gave us life, she gave a burthen, But at our pleasure not to be cast off, Though weary of it; and my reason prompts me, This habit of a Florentine which I took From a dying soldier, may keep me unknown Till opportunity mark me out a way For flight, and with security.
Enter Uberti. Was there ever such a night of horror? Far. My friends voice! I now In part forgive thee, fortune. Uber. The wood flames, The bloody sword devours all that it meets, And death in several shapes rides here in triumph. I am like a Stag clos'd in a toil; my life As soon as found, the cruel Huntsmans prey: Why fliest thou then what is inevitable? Better to fall with manly wounds before Thy cruel Enemy, then survive thine honor: And yet to charge him, and die unreveng'd, Meer desperation. Far. Heroick spirit! Uber. Mine own life I contemn, and would not save it But for the future service of the Duke And safety of his daughter; having means, If I escape, to raise a second Army, And what is nearest to me, to enjoy My friend Farneze. Far. I am still his care: Uber. What shall I do? If I call loud, the foe That hath begirt the wood, will hear the sound. Shall I return by the same path? I cannot, The darkness of the night conceals it from me: Something I must resolve. Far. Let friendship rouze Thy sleeping soul, Farneze: wilt thou suffer Thy friend, a Prince, nay one that may set free Thy captiv'd Country, perish, when 'tis in Thy power with this disguise to save his life? Thou hast liv'd too long, therefore resolve to die;
Thou hast seen thy Country ruin'd, and thy Master Compell'd to shameful flight, the fields and woods Straw'd ore with carkasses of thy fellow-soldiers: The miseries thou art faln in, and before Thy eyes the horror of this place, and thousand Calamities to come; and after all these Can any hope remain? shake off delays, Dost thou doubt yet? To save a Citizen, The conquering Roman in a General Esteem'd the highest honor; can it be then Inglorious to preserve a Prince? thy friend? Uberti, Prince Uberti, use this means Of thy escape; conceal'd in this thou maist Pass through the enemies guards: the time denies Longer discourse; thou hast a noble end, Live therefore mindful of thy dyng friend: Exit. Uber. Farneze, stay thy hasty steps: Farneze! Thy friend Uberti cals thee: 'tis in vain, He's gone to death an Innocent, and makes life The benefit he confers on me, my guilt. Thou art too covetous of anothers safety, Too prodigal, and careless of thine own: 'Tis a deceit in friendship to enjoin me To put this garment on, and live, that he May have alone the honor to die nobly. O cruel piety, in our equal danger To rob thy self of that thou givest thy friend! It must not be, I will restore his gift And die before him. How? where shall I find him? Thou art orecome in friendship; yield Uberti To the extremity of the time, and live: A heavy ransom, but it must be paid. I will put on this habit: pittying Heaven As it loves goodness, may protect my friend, And give me means to satisfie the debt I stand engag'd for; if not, pale despair
I dare thy worst, thou canst but bid me die, And so much I'll force from an enemie. Exit. Enter Alonzo, Pisano, Farneze (bound) Soldiers (with torches) Farneze's sword in one of the Soldiers hands. Alon. I know him, he's a man of ransom. Pisa. True, but if he live 'tis to be paid to me: Alon. I forc'd him to the woods. Pisa. But my art found him, Nor will I brook a partner in the prey My fortune gave me. Alon. Render him, or expect the point of this. Pisa. Wer't lightning, I would meet it Rather then be outbrav'd. Alon. I thus decide the difference. Pisa. My sword shall plead my title. They fight Enter Lorenzo, Martino, two Captains. Lor. Ha! where learn'd you this discipline? my Commanders Oppos'd 'gainst one another? what blind fury Brings forth this brawl? Alonzo and Pisano At bloody difference! hold, or I tilt At both as enemies. Now speak, how grew This strange division? Pisa. Against all right; By force Alonzo strives to reap the harvest Sown by my labour. Alon. Sir, this is my prisoner, The purchase of my sword, which proud Pisano That hath no interest in him, would take from me. Pisa. Did not the presence of the Duke forbid me, I would say —
Alon. What? Pisa. Tis false. Lor. Before my face! Keep 'em asunder. And was this the cause Of such a mortal quarrel? this the base To raise your fury on? the tyes of blood, Of fellowship in arms, respect, obedience To me your Prince and General, no more Prevailing on you? this a price for which You would betray our victory, or wound Your reputation with mutinies? Forgetful of your selves, allegiance, honor? This is a course to throw us headlong down From that proud height of empire, upon which We were securely seared: shall division Oreturn what concord built? If you desire To bath your swords in blood, the enemy Still flies before you: Would you have spoil? the Country Lies open to you. O unheard of madness! What greater mischief could Gonzaga wish us, Then you pluck on our heads? no, my brave Leaders, Let unity dwell in our tents, and discord Be banish'd to our enemies Alon. Take the prisoner, I do give up my title. Pisa. I desire your friendship, and will buy it: He is yours. [They embrace.] Alon. No man's a faithful Judg in his own cause; Let the Duke determine of him, we are friends sir. Lor. Shew it in emulation to oretake The flying foe; this cursed wretch dispos'd of, With our whole strength we'll follow. Exe. Alonz. and Pisa, embracing. Far. Death at length Will set a period to calamity.
I see it in this Tyrants frowns haste to me. Enter Uberti like a soldier, and shuffles in among 'em. Lor. Thou machine of this mischief, look to feel Whate're the wrath of an incensed Prince Can pour upon thee: With thy blood I'll quench (But drawn forth slowly) the invisible flames Of discord, — by thy charms first fetch'd from Hell, Then forc'd into the breasts of my Commanders. — Bring forth the tortures. Vber. Hear, victorious Duke, The story of my miserable fortune, Of which this Villain (by your sacred tongue Condemn'd to die) was the immediate cause: And if my humble suit have justice in it, Vouchsafe to grant it. Lor. Soldier be brief; our anger can brook no long delay. Vber. I am the last Of three sons, by one father got, and train'd up With his best care for service in your wars: My father dyed under his fatal hand, And two of my poor brothers. Now I hear Or fancie wounded by my grief, deludes me, Their pale and mangled ghosts, crying for ven∣geance On perjury and murther. Thus the case stood. — My father (on whose face he he durst not look In equal mart) by his fraud circumvented, Became his Captive: we his sons lamenting Our old sires hard condition, freely offer'd Our utmost for his ransom. That refus'd, The subtile Tyrant for his cruel ends, (Conceiving that our piety might insnare us)
Propos'd my Fathers head to be redeem'd, If two of us would yield our selves his slaves. We upon any terms resolv'd to save him, Though with the loss of life which he gave to us; With an undaunted constancie drew lots (For each of us contented to be one) Who should preserve our Father: I was exempted, But to my more affliction; my brothers Delivered up; the perjur'd Homicide Laughing in scorn, and by his hoary locks Pulling my wretched Father on his knees, Said thus, Receive the Father you have ransom'd; And instantly struck off his head. Lor. Most barbarous! Far. I never saw this man. Lor. One murmur more, I'll have thy tongue pull'd out. Proceed. Uber. Conceive, sir, How thunder-struck we stood, being made spectators Of such an unexpected tragedy: Yet this was a beginning, not an end To his intended cruelty; for pursuing Such a revenge, as no Hircanian tigress Rob'd of her whelps durst aim at, in a moment Treading upon my Fathers trunk, he cut off My pious Brothers heads, and threw'em at me. Oh what a spectacle was this! what mountain Of sorrow overwhelm'd me! My poor heartstrings As tenter'd by his tyrannie, crack'd; my knees Beating 'gainst one another, groans and tears Blended together followed; not one passion Calamity ever yet express'd, forgotten. Now mighty sir, (bathing your feet with tears) Your suppliants suit is, that he may have leave With any cruelty revenge can fancie, To sacrifice this Monster, to appease
My Fathers ghost and Brothers. Lor. Thou hast obtain'd it; choose any torture; let the memory Of what thy Father and thy Brothers suffer'd Make thee ingenious in it, such a one As Phalaris would wish to be call'd his. Martino, guarded with your soldiers, see The execution done; but bring his head On forfeiture of your own, to us: Our presence Long since was elswhere look'd for. Ex. cum suit. Mar. Soldier to work; take any way thou wils for thy revenge, Provided that he die: his body's thine, But I must have his head. Uber. I have already Concluded of the manner: O just heaven, The instrument I wish'd for offer'd me! Mar. Why art thou rapp'd thus? Uber: In this soldiers hand I see the murtherers own sword, I know it, Yes, this is it by which my Father and My brothers were beheaded: Noble Captain Command it to my hand. Stand forth and tremble; This weapon of late drunk with innocent blood Shall now carouse thine own. Pray, if thou canst; For though the world shall not redeem thy body, I would not kill thy soul. Far. Canst thou believe There is a heaven, or hell, or soul? thou hast none. In death to rob me of my fame, my honor, With such a forged lye? tell me thou hangman, Where did I ever see thy face? or when Murder'd thy sire or brothers? look on me And make it good: thou dar'st not. Uber. Yes I will [Unbinds his arms] In one short whisper, and that told thou art dead.
I am Uberti; take thy sword, fight bravely, We'll live or die together. Mar. We are betraid. Far. And have I leave once more, brave Prince, to ease Mar. struck down, the soldiers run away. My head on thy true bosom? Uber. I glory more To be thy friend, then in the name of Prince Or any higher title. Far. My preserver! Uber. The life you gave to me, I but return; And pardon, dearest friend, the bitter language Necessity made me use. Far. O sir, I am Outdone in all; but comforted, that none But you can wear the laurel, Uber. Here's no place Or time to argue this; let us flie hence. Far. I follow. Exeunt. Mar. A thousand Furies keep you company! I was at the gate of — but now I feel My wounds not mortal; I was but astonish'd, And coming to my self, I find I am Reserv'd for the gallows: there's no looking on Th'enraged Duke, excuses will not serve, I must do something that may get my pardon: If not, I know the worst, a halter ends all. Exit.
Act. 3. Scaen. 1. Enter Octavio, (a Book in's hand.) Oct. 'TIs true, by proof I find it, humane reason Views with such dim eyes what is good or ill, That if the great Disposer of our being Should offer to our choice all worldly blessings, We knew not what to take.— When I was young, Ambition of Court-preferment fir'd me; And as there were no happiness beyond it, I labour'd for't and got it; no man stood In greater favour with his Prince, I had Honors and offices, wealth flow'd in to me, And for my service both in peace and war The general voice gave out I did deserve 'em. But oh vain confidence in subordinate greatness! When I was most secure, it was not in The power of fortune to remove me from The flat I firmly stood on: in a moment My vertues were made crimes, and popular favor (To new-rais'd men still fatal) bred suspition That I was dangerous: which no sooner entred Gonzago's breast, but straight my ruine follow'd: My offices were took from me, my state seis'd on; And had I not prevented it by flight, The jealousie of the Duke had been remov'd With the forfeiture of my head. [Within Galeaz] Or shew compassion, or I will force it.
Oct. Ha! is not poverty safe? I thought proud war that aim'd at kingdoms ruines, The sack of palaces and cities, scorn'd To look on a poor cottage. Enter Galeazo (with Ascanio in's arms) Gothrio following. Goth. What would you have? The devil sleeps in my pocket, I have no cross To drive him from it. Be you or thief, or soldier, Or such a begger as will not be denied, My scrip, my tar-box, hook and coat will prove But a thin purchase; if you turn my inside Outwards, you'll find it true. Searches his scrip. Gal. Not any food? Goth. Alas sir, I am no glutton, but an under-shepherd, The very picture of famine; judg by my cheeks else: I have my pittance by ounces, and starve my self; When I pay a pensioner, I have an antient mouse, A crum a meal. [Takes the bottle.] Gal. No drop left? Drunkard, hast thou swill'd up all? Goth. How? Drunkard, sir! I am a poor man, you mistake me sir: Drunkard's a title for the rich, my betters; A calling in repute, some sell their lands for't, And rore wines better then mony. Our poor beveridg Of buttermilk or whey allaid with water, Ne'r raise our thoughts so high. Drunk! I had never The credit to be so yet. Gal. Ascanio, look up dear youth: Ascanio, did thy sweetness Command the greedy enemy to forbear To prey upon it? and I thank my fortune
For suffering me to live, that in some part I might return thy courtesies: And now To heighten my afflictions, must I be Inforc'd, no pittying Angel near to help us, Heaven deaf to my complaints too, to behold thee Die in my arms for hunger? no means left To lengthen life a little? I will open A vein, and pour my blood, not yet corrupted With any sinful act, but pure as he is, Into his famish'd mouth. Octa. Young man forbear Thy savage pitty; I have better means To call back flying life. Goth. You may believe him, They apply them∣selves to Ascanio. It is his sucking-bottle, and confirms An old man's twice a child; his nurses milk Was ne'r so chargeable: should you put in too For sope and candles, though he sell his flock for't, The baby must have this dug: he swears 'tis ill For my complexion, but wondrous comfortable For an old man that would never die Oct. Hope well sir, A temperate heat begins to thaw his numness, The blood too by degrees takes fresh possession On his pale cheeks, his pulse beats high; stand off, Give him more air, he stirs: [Goth. steals the bottle.] Goth. And have I got thee, thou bottle of im∣mortality? Asca. Where am I? What cruel hand hath forc'd back wretched life? Is rest in death denied me? Goth. O sweet liquor! Were here enough to make me drunk, I might Write my self Gentleman, and never buy A coat of the Heralds. Oct. How now slave?
Goth. I was fainting, A clownlike qualm seis'd on me, but I am Recover'd, thanks to your bottle, and begin To feel new stirrings, gallant thoughts; one draught more Will make me a perfect Signior: Oct. A tough cudgel Will take this gentle itch off: Home to my cottage, See all things handsom. Goth. Good sir, let me have The bottle along to smell to: O rare perfume! Ex: Gal. Speak once more, dear Ascanio! How he eyes you, Then turns away his face! Look up sweet youth, The object cannot hurt you; this good man Next heaven is your preserver. Asc. Would I had perish'd Without relief, rather then live to break His good old heart with sorrow. O my shame! My shame, my never dying shame! Oct. I have been Acquainted with this voice, and know the face too: 'Tis she, 'tis too apparent; O my daugbter! I mourn'd long for thy loss; but thus to find thee, Is more to be lamented. Gal. How? your daughter! Oct. My only child: I murmur'd against heaven Because I had no more; but now I find This one too many. Is Alonzo glutted [Asc weeps] With thy embraces? Gal. At his name a shower Of tears fals from her eyes: she faints agen. Grave sir, overrule your passion, and defer The story of your fortune: On my life She is a worthy one, her innocence Might be abus'd, but mischiefs self wants power To make her guilty. Shew your self a Father
In her recovery; then as a Judge, When she hath strength to speak in her own cause, You may determine of her. Oct. I much thank you For your wise counsel: you direct me sir As one indebted more to years, and I As a pupil will obey you. Not far hence I have a homely dwelling; if you please there To make some short repose, your entertainment Though course, shall relish of a gratitude, And that's all I can pay you. Look up Girl, Thou art in thy Fathers arms. Gal. She's weak and faint still: O spare your age! I am young and strong, and this way To serve her is a pleasure, not a burthen: Pray you lead the way. Oct. The Saints reward your goodness. Exeunt. Enter Manfroy, and Matilda (disguis'd.) Mat. No hope of safety left? Manf. We are descry'd. Mat. I thought, that cover'd in this poor disguise I might have pass'd unknown: Manf. A diamond, though set in horn, is still a diamond, And sparkles as in purest gold. We are follow'd: Out of the troops that scour'd the plains, I saw Two gallant horsmen break forth, (who by their Brave furniture and habiliments for the war Seem'd to command the rest) spurring hard towards us; See with what winged speed they climb the hill Like Falcons on the stretch to seise the prey; Now they dismount, and on their hands and knees Orecome the deep ascent that guards us from him. Your beauty hath betraid you; for it can No more be night when bright Apollo shines In our Meridian, then that be conceal'd.
Mat. It is my curse, not blessing; fatal to My Country, Father, and my self: why did you Forsake the City? Manf. 'Twas the Dukes command, No time to argue that; we must descend: If undiscover'd your soft feet (unus'd To such rough travail) can but carry you Half a league hence, I know a cave which will. Yield us protection. Mat. I wish I could lend you Part of my speed; for me, I can outstrip Daphne or Atalanta. Manf. Some good Angel Defend us, and strike blind our hot pursuers. Exeunt. Enter Alonzo and Pisano. Alon. She cannot be far off; how gloriously She shew'd to us in the valley! Pisa. In my thought Like to a blazing Comet: Alon. Brighter far: Her beams of beauty made the hill all fire; From whence remov'd, 'tis cover'd with thick clouds. But we lose time; I'll take that way. Pisa. I this. Exeunt. Enter Galeazo. 'Tis a degree of comfort in my sorrow. I have done one good work in reconciling Maria, long hid in Ascanio's habit, To griev'd Octavio: what a sympathie I found in their affections! she with tears Making a free confession of her weakness In yielding up her honor to Alonzo,
Upon his vows to marry her: Octavio Prepar'd to credit her excuses, nay T'extenuate her guilt; she the Delinquent, And Judge, as 'twere, agreeing. But to me The most forlorn of men, no beam of comfort Daigns to appear; nor can I in my fancie Fashion a means to get it: To my Country I am lost for ever, and 'twere impudence To think of a return; yet this I could Endure with patience: But to be divorc'd From all my joy on earth, the happiness To look upon the excellence of nature, That is perfection in heself, and needs not Addition or epithite, Rare Matilda, Would make a Saint blaspheme. Here Galeazo In this obscure abode 'tis fit thou shouldst Consume thy youth, and grow old in lamenting Thy star crost fortune, in this shepherds habit; This hook thy best defenc, since thou couldst use (When thou didst fight in such a Princess cause) Thy sword no better. [Lies down] Enter Alonzo, Pisano, Matilda. Mat. Are you men, or monsters? Whither will you drag me? can the open ear Of heaven be deaf, when an unspotted Maid Cries out for succor! Pisa. 'Tis in vain; cast lots who shall enjoy her first. Alon. Flames rage within me, And such a spring of Nectar neer to quench 'em! My appetite shall be cloy'd first: here I stand Thy friend, or enemy; let me have precedence, I write a friends name in my heart; deny it, As an enemy I defie thee.
Pisa. Friend or foe In this alike I value, I disdain To yield priority; draw thy sword. Alon. To sheath it in thy ambitious heart. Mat. O curb this fury, And hear a wretched Maid first speak! Gal. I am marble: Mat. Where shall I seek out words, or how re∣strain My Enemies rage, or Lovers? oh the latter Is far more odious: did not your lust Provoke you, for that is its proper name, My chastity were safe; And yet I tremble more To think what dire effects lust may bring forth, Then what as enemies you can inflict, And less I fear it. Be friends to your selves, And enemies to me: Better I fall A sacrifice to your attonement, then Or one, or both should perish. I am the cause Of your division; remove it, Lords, And concord will spring up: poison this face That hath bewitch'd you; this grove cannot want Aspicks or Toads, creatures though justly call'd For their deformity the scorn of nature, More happy then my self with this false beauty (The seed and fruit of mischief) you admire so. I thus embrace your knees, and yours a suppliant, If Tigres did not nurse you, or you suck The milk of a fierce Lioness, shew compassion Unto your selves in being reconcil'd, And pitty to poor me, my honor safe, In taking loath'd life from me. Pisa. What shall we do? Or end our difference in killing her, Or fight it out?
Alon. To the last gasp. I feel The moist tears on my cheeks, and blush to find A Virgins plaints can move so. Pisa. To prevent Her flight while we contend, let's bind her fast To this Cipress-tree. Alon. Agreed. Mat. It does presage my funeral rites. Gal. I shall turn Atheist, If heaven see and suffer this: why did I Abandon my good sword? with unarm'd hands I cannot rescue her. Some Angel pluck me From the apostasie I am falling to, And by a miracle lend me a weapon To underprop falling honor. Pisa. She is fast, resume your arms. Alon. Honor, revenge, the Maid too Lie at the stake. Pisa. Which thus I draw — They fight, Pisano fals. Alon. All's mine, But bought with some blood of mine own: Pisano, Thou wert a noble Enemy; wear that laurel In death to comfort thee; for the reward, 'Tis mine now without Rival. Galeazo snatches up Pisano's sword. Gal. Thou art deceiv'd; Men will grow up like to the Dragons teeth From Cadmus helm sown in the field of Mars, To guard pure Chastity from lust and rape. Libidinous monster, Satyre, Fawn, or what Does better speak thee slave to appetite And sensual baseness; if thy profane hand But touch this virgin-temple, thou art dead. Mat. I see the aid of Heaven, though slow, is sure. Alon. A rustick swain dare to retard my plea∣sure?
Gal. No swain, Alonzo, but her knight and servant To whom the world should owe and pay obedience; One that thou hast encountred, and shrunk under His arm, that spar'd thy life in the late battel At th'intercession of the Princess page; look on me better. Mat. 'Tis my vertuous Lover, Under his guard 'twere sin to doubt my safety. Alon. I know thee, and with courage will redeem What fortune then took from me. Gal. Rather keep [Fight. Alon. fals.] Thy Compeer company in death — lie by him A prey for Crows and Vulturs; these fair arms He unbinds Matilda. Unfit for bonds, should have been chains to make A Bridegroom happy, though a Prince, and proud Of such captivity: whatsoe'r you are, I glory in the service I have done you; But I intreat you pay your vows and prayers For preservation of your life and honor, To the most vertuous Princess, chaste Matilda: I am her creature, and what good I do You truly may call hers; what's ill, mine own. Mat. You never did do ill, my vertuous servant, Nor is it in the power of poor Matilda To cancel such an obligation as With humble willingness she must subscribe to. Gal. The Prencess? ha! Mat. Give me a fitter name, Your manumissed Bondwoman, but even now In the possession of lust, from which Your more then brave heroick valor bought me; And can I then for freedom unexpected But kneel to you my Patron? Gal. Kneel to me! For heav'ns sake rise; I kiss the ground you tread on,
My eyes fix'd on the earth; for I confess I am a thing not worthy to look on you, Till you have sign'd my pardon. Mat. Do you interpret The much good you have done me, an offence? Gal. The not performing your injunctions to me, Is more then capital: Your allowance of My love and service to you, with admission To each place you made paradise with your presence, Should have inabled me to bring home Conquest. Then, as a sacrifice to offer it At the altar of your favor, had my love Answer'd your bounty or my hopes, an Army Had been as dust before me; whereas I Like a coward turn'd my back, and durst not stand The sury of the Enemy. Mat. Had you done nothing In the battel, this last act deserves more Then I, the Duke my father joining with me, Can ever recompence. But take your pleasure, Suppose you have offended in not grasping Your boundless hopes; I thus seal on your lips A full remission. Gal. Let mine touch your foot, your hand's too high a favour. Mat. Will you force me to ravish a kiss from you? Gal. I am intranc'd. Mat. So much Desert, and Bashfulness, should not march In the same file: Take comfort, when you have brought me To some place of security, you shall find You have a seat here, a heart that hath Already studied, and vow'd to be thankful. Gal. Heaven make me so! oh I am overwhelm'd With an excess of joy! Be not too prodigal,
Divinest Lady, of your grace and bounties At once, if you are pleas'd I shall enjoy 'em, Not taste 'em and expire. Mat. I'll be more sparing: Exeunt. Enter Octavio, Gothrio, and Maria. Oct. What noise of clashing swords, like armor fashion'd Upon an anvile, pierc'd mine ears? the eccho Redoubling the loud sound through all the vallies, This way the wind assures me that it came. Goth. Then with your pardon I'll take this. Oct. Why sirra? Goth. Because, sir, I will trust my heels before All winds that blow in the sky: We are wiser far Then our Grandsires were, and in this I'll prove it; They said, Haste to the beginning of a Feast, (There I am with 'em) but to the end of a Fray, That is apocryphal, 'tis more canonical Not to come there at all; after a strom There are still some drops behind. Asc. Pure fear hath made the Fool a Philosopher. Oct. See Maria, see! I did not erre; here lie two brave men weltring In their own gore. Asc. A pittiful object. Goth. I am in a swoun to look on't. Oct. They are stiff already. Goth. But are you sure they are dead? Oct. Too sure, I fear. Goth But are they stark dead? Oct. Leave prating. Goth. Then I am valiant, and dare come nearer to 'em, This fellow without a sword shall be my Patient.
Oct. Whate'r they are, humanity commands us To do our best endeavour: Run Maria To the neighbour Spring for water; you will find there A wooden dish, the beggers plate, to bring it. Exit Maria. Why dost not, dull drone, bend his body, and feel If any life remain? Goth. By your leave he shall die first, and then I'll be his Surgeon. Oct. Tear ope his doublet, And prove if his wounds be mortal, Goth. Fear not me sir; Here's large wound, how it is swoln and impostum'd!His pocket This must be cunningly drawn out; should it break, Puls out his purse. 'Twould strangle him: what a deal of foul matter's here!His little pocket. This hath been long a gathering: Here's a gash too On the reme of his belly, it may have matter in it. He was a cholerique man sure: what comes from him Gold Is yellow as gold: How troubled with the Stone too! A Diamond-Ring I'll cut you for this. Pisa. Oh, oh! Starts up and quakes Goth. He roars before I touch him. Pisa. Robb'd of my life? Goth. No sir, nor of your mony Nor jewel, I keep 'em for you; if I had been A perfect Mountebank, he had not liv'd To call for his fees again. Oct. Give me leave, there's hope of his recovery. Goth. I had rather bury him quick Then part with my purchase; let his ghost walk, I care not.
Enter Maria (with a dish of water.) Oct. Well done Maria, lend thy helping hand; He hath a deep wound in his head, wash off The clotted blood: He comes to himself. Alon. My lust! The fruit that grows upon the tree of lust! With horror now I taste it. Oct. Do you not know him? Asc. Too soon, Alonzo! oh me! though disloyal, Still dear to thy Maria. Goth. So they know not My Patient, all's cock-sure: I do not like The Romanish restitution. Oct. Rise and leave him, applaud heavens justice. Asc. 'Twill become me better T'implore its saving mercy. Oct. Hast thou no gall? no feeling of thy wrongs? Asc. Turtles have none; nor can there be such poison in her breast That truly loves, and lawfully. Oct. True, if that love Be plac'd on a worthy subject. What he is, In thy disgrace is publish'd; Heaven hath mark'd him For punishment, and 'twere rebellious madness In thee t'attempt to alter it: Revenge, A soveraign balm for injuries, is more proper To thy rob'd honor. Join with me, and thou Shalt be thy self the Goddess of revenge, This wretch the vassal of thy wrath: I'll make him While yet he lives, partake those torments which For perjur'd Lovers are prepar'd in hell, Before his curs'd ghost enter it. This oil Extracted and sublim'd from all the simples The earth when swoln with venom e'r brought forth,
Pour'd in his wounds, shall force such anguish as The Furies whips but imitate; and when Extremity of pain shall hasten death, Here is another that shall keep in life, And make him feel a perpetuity of lingring tortures. Goth. Knock'em both on the head, I say, And it be but for their skins; they are embroider'd, And will sell well i'th' market: Asc. Ill-look'd Devil, Tie up thy bloody tongue. O sir! I was slow In beating down those propositions which You urge for my revenge; my reasons being So many, and so forcible, that make Against yours, that until I had collected My scatter'd powers, I waver'd in my choice Which I should first deliver. Fate hath brought My Enemy (I can faintly call him so) Prostrate before my feet: shall I abuse The bounty of my fate, by trampling on him? He alone ruin'd me, nor can any hand But his rebuild my late demolish'd honor. If you deny me means of reparation To satisfie your spleen, you are more cruel Then ever yet Alonzo was; you stamp The name of Strumpet on my forehead, which Heavens mercy would take off; you fan the fire Ev'n ready to go out; forgetting that 'Tis truly noble, having power to punish, Nay King-like to forbear it. I would purchase My husband by such benefits, as should make him Confess himfelf my equal, and disclaim superiority. Oct. My blessing on thee! What I urg'd, was a trial; and my grant To thy desires shall now appear, if art Or long experience can do him service, Nor shall my charity to this be wanting,
Howe'r unknown: Help me Maria; You sir, Do your best to raise him. — So. Goth. He's wondrous heavy; But the Porter's paid, there's the comfort. Oct. 'Tis but a trance, and 'twill forsake both. Asc. If he live, I fear not He will redeem all, and in thankfulness Confirm he ows you for a second life, And pays the debt in making me his wife. Excunt. Act. 4. Scaen. 1. Enter Lorenzo, Captains. Lor. MAntua is ours; place a strong garrison in it To keep it so; and as a due reward To your brave service, be our Governor in it. 1 Capt: I humbly thank your Excellence. Exit. Lor. Gonzaga is yet out of our gripe; but his strong Fort St. Leo, which he holds impregnable By the aids of art, as nature, shall not long Retard our absolute conquest. The escape Of fair Matilda, my supposed Mistress, (For whole desir'd possession 'twas given out I made this war) I value not; alas Cupid's too feeble-ey'd to hit my heart, Or could he see, his arrows are too blunt To pierce it; his imagin'd torch is quench'd With a more glorious fire of my ambition T'enlarge my Empire: soft and silken amours, With Carpet-Courtship, which weak Princes stile
The happy issue of a flourishing peace, My toughness scorns: Were there an abstract made Of all the eminent and canoniz'd Beauties By truth recorded, or by Poets feign'd, I could unmov'd behold it, as a Picture Commend the workmanship, and think no more on't; I have more noble ends. Have you not heard yet Of Alonzo, or Pisano? 2 Cap My Lord, of neither. Lor. Two turbulent spirits unfit for discipline, Much less command in war; if they were lost, I shall not pine with mourning. Enter Martino, Matilda, Galeazo, and Guard. Mart. Bring 'em forward; This will make my peace, though I had kill'd his father, Besides the reward that follows. Lor. Ha! Martino? Where is Farneze's head? dost thou stare? and where The soldier that desir'd the torture of him? Mart: An't please your Excellence — Lor. It doth not please us; are our commands obey'd? Mart. Farneze's head, sir, Is a thing not worth your thought, the soldiers less sir: I have brought your Highness such a head, a head So well set on too, a fine head. Lor. Take that Strikes him For thy impertinence: what head, ye Rascal? Mart. My Lord, if they that bring such presents to you Are thus rewarded, there are few will strive To be near your Graces pleasures: but I know You will repent your choler. Here's the head, And now I draw the curtain, it hath a face too, And such a face. Lor. Ha!
Mart. View her all o're, my Lord; My company on't, she's sound of wind and limb, And will do her labour tightly, a Bona Roba: And for her face, as I said, there are five hundred City-dub'd Madams in the Dukedom, that would part with Their Jointures to have such another: Hold up your head, Maid. Lor. Of what age is the day? Mart. Sir, since Sun-rising about two hours: Lor. Thou lyest: the Sun of Beauty In modest blushes on her cheeks, but now Appear'd to me, and in her tears breaks forth As through a shower in April, every drop An orient pearl, which as it fals, congeal'd, Were Ear-rings for the Catholick King, Worn on his birth-day. Mart. Here's a sudden change. Lor. Incensed Cupid, whom even now I scorn'd, Hath took his stand, and by reflexion shines (As if he had two bodies, or indeed A brother-twin, whom sight cannot distinguish) In her fair eyes; see how they head their arrows With her bright beams, now frown, as if my heart Rebellious to their edicts, were unworthy, Should I rip up my bosom, to receive A wound from such divine artillery. Mart. I am made for ever: Mat. We are lost, dear servant. Gal. Vertue's but a word; Fortune rules all. Mat. We are her Tennis-balls. Lor. Allow her fair, her symetrie and features So well proportion'd, as the heavenly object With admiration would strike Ovid dumb, Nay force him to forget his faculty In verse, and celebrate her praise in prose:
What's this to me? I that have pass'd my youth Unscorch'd with wanton fires, my sole delight In glittering arms, my conquering sword my mistress; Neighing of barbed horfe, the cries and groans Of vanquish'd foes suing for life, my musick: And shall I in the Autumn of my age, Now when I wear the livery of time Upon my head and beard, suffer my self To be transform'd, and like a puling Lover With arms thus folded up, eccho Ay me's! And write my self a Bondman to my Vassal? It must not, nay it shall not be: Remove The object, and the effect dies. Nearer, Martino: Mart. I shall have a Regiment, Colonel Martino, I cannot go less. Lor. What thing is this thou hast brought me? Mart. What thing? Heaven bless me, are you a Florentine? Nay, the Great Duke of Florentines, and having had her So long in your power, do you now ask what she is? Take her aside and learn; I have brought you that I look to be dearly paid for. Lor. I am a Soldier; and use of women will, Mar∣tino, rob My nerves of strength. Mart. All armor, and no smock? Abominable! A little of the one with the other Is excellent: I ne'r knew General yet, Nor Prince that did deserve to be a Worthy, But he desir'd to have his sweat wash'd off By a juicie Bedfellow. Lor. But say she be unwilling to do that office? Mart. Wrastle with her, I will wager Ten to one on your Graces side. Lor. Slave, hast thou brought me
Temptation in a Beauty not to be With prayers resisted; and in place of councel To master my affections, and to guard My honor now besieg'd by lust, with the arms Of sober temperance, mark me out a way To be a ravisher? Would thou hadst shewn me Some monster, though in a more ugly form Then Nile or Africk ever bred. The Basilisk (Whose envious eye yet never brook'd a neighbour) Kills but the body; Her more potent eye Buries alive mine honor: shall I yield thus? And all brave thoughts of victory and triumphs, The spoils of Nations, the loud applauses Of happy subjects made so by my conquests; And what's the crown of all, a glorious name Insculp'd on Pyramids to posterity, Be drench'd in Lethe, and no object take me But a weak Woman, rich in colours only, Too delicate a touch, and some rare features Which age or sudden sickness will take from her, And where's then the reward of all my service? Love-soothing passions, nay idolatry I must pay to her. Hence, and with thee take This second, but more dangerous Pandora, Whose fatal box, if open'd, will pour on me All mischiefs that mankind is subject to. To the desarts with this Circe, this Calipso, This fair Inchantress; let her spels and charms Work upon beasts and thee, then whom wise nature Ne'r made a viler creature. Mat. Happy exile! Gal. Some spark of hope remains yet. Mart. Come, you are mine now; I will remove her where your Highness shall not Or see or hear more of her: what a sum Will she yield for the Turks Serraglio?
Lor. Stay, I feel A sudden alteration. Mart. Here are fine whimsies. Lor. Why should I part with her? can any foul∣ness Inhabit such a clean and gorgeous palace? The fish, the fowl, the beasts may safer leave The elements they were nourish'd in, and live, Then I endure her absence; yet her presence Is a torment to me: Why do I call it so? My sire enjoy'd a woman, I had not been else; He was a compleat Prince, and shall I blush To follow his example? Oh but my choice, Though she gave suffrage to it, is beneath me: But even now in my proud thoughts I scorn'd A Princess, fair Matilda; and is't decreed For punishment, I straight must dote on one What, or from whence I know not? Grant she be Obscure, without a Coat or family, Those I can give; and yet if she were noble, My fondness were more pardonable. Martino, Dost thou know thy prisoner? Mart. Do I know my self? I kept that for the Lenvoy; 'tis the daughter Of your enemy, Duke Gonzaga. Lor. Fair Matilda! I now call to my memory her picture, And find this is the substance; but her Painter Did her much wrong, I see it: Mart. I am sure I tugg'd hard for her, here are wounds can witness, Before I could call her mine. Lor. No matter how: Make thine own ransom, I will pay it for her. Mart. I knew it would come at last. Mat. We are lost again. Gal. Variety of afflictions!
Lor. That his knee that never yet bow'd to mor∣tality, Kneels Kisses the earth, happy to bear your weight, I know begets your wonder. Hear the reason, And cast it off, Your beauty does command it: Till now I never saw you; same hath been Too sparing in report of your perfections, Which now with admiration I gaze on. Be not afraid, fair Virgin; had you been Imploy'd to mediate your Fathers cause, My drum had been unbrac'd, my trumpet hung up, Nor had the terror of the war ere frighted His peaceful confines; your demands had been As soon as spoke, agreed to. But you'll answer, And may with reason; Words make no satisfaction For what's in fact committed. Yet take comfort, Something my pious love commands me do, Which may call down your pardon. Mat. This expression Of reverence to your person, better suits Takes him up, and kneels. With my low fortune. That you daign to love me, My weakness would perswade me to believe (Though conscious of mine own unworthiness) You being as the liberal eye of heaven Which may shine where it pleases: Let your beams Of favour warm and comfort me, not consume me; For should your love grow to excess, I dare not Deliver what I fear. Lor. Dry your fair eyes; I apprehend your doubts, and could be angry If humble love could warrant it, you should Nourish such base thoughts of me: Heaven bear witness, And if I break my vow, dart thunder at me, You are and shall be in my tent as free
From fear of violence, as a cloyster'd Nun Kneeling before the Altar. What I purpose Is yet an Embrion; but grown into form, I'll give you power to be the sweet disposer Of blessings unexpected; that your Father, Your Country, people, children yet unborn too, In holy hymns on Festivals shall sing The triumph of your beauty. On your hand Once more I swear it: O imperious Love! Look down, and as I truly do repent, Prosper the good ends of thy Penitent. Exeunt. Enter Octavio and Maria. Oct. You must not be too sudden, my Maria, In being known: I am in this Friars habit As yet conceal'd; though his recovery Be almost certain, I must work him to Repentance by degrees. When I would have you Appear in your true shape of sorrow to Move his compassion, I will stamp thus, then You know to act your part. Asc. I shall be careful. Oct. If I can cure the ulcers of his mind, As I despair not of his bodies wounds, Felicity crowns my labour. Gothrio! Goth. Here sir. [Ent Gothrio] Oct. Desire my Patients to leave their chamber, And take fresh air here: how have they slept? Goth. Very well sir, I would we were so rid of 'em. Oct. Why? Goth. I fear one hath the art of memory, and will Remember his gold and jewels: could you not mi∣nister A potion of forgetfulness? what would Gallants
That are in debt, give me for such a receipt To pour in their Creditors drink? Oct. You shall restore all, Believ't you shall: will you please to walk? Goth. Will you please to put off Your holy habit, and spic'd conscience? One I think infects the other. Exit. Oct. I have observ'd Compunction in Alonzo: he speaks little, But full of retir'd thoughts: The other is Jocund and merry, no doubt, because he hath The less accompt to make here. Enter Alonzo: Alon. Reverend sir, I come to wait your pleasure; but my friend (Your creature I should say, being so my self) Willing to take farther repose, intreats Your patience a few minutes. Oct. At his pleasure; pray you sit down, you are faint still. Alon. Growing to strength, I thank your goodness: but my mind is troubled, Very much troubled, sir; and I desire, Your pious habit giving me assurance (please Of your skill and power that way, that you would) To be my my Minds physitian. Oct. Sir, to that My order binds me, if you please to unload The burthen of your conscience, I will minister Such heavenly cordials as I can, and set you In a path that leads to comfort. Alon. I will open My bosoms secrets to you; that I am A man of blood, being brought up in the wars,
And cruel executions, my profession Admits not to be question'd: but in that Being a subject, and bound to obey Whate'r my Prince commanded, I have left Some shadow of excuse: with other crimes As pride, lust, gluttony, it must be told I am besmear'd all over. Oct. On repentance mercy will wash it off. Alon. O sir, I grant These sins are deadly ones; yet their frequencie With wicked men, make them less dreadful to us. But I am conscious of one crime, with which All ills I have committed from my youth Put in the scale weigh nothing: such a crime, So odious to heaven and man, and to My sear'd up conscience so full of horror, As penance cannot expiate. Oct. Despair not, 'Tis impious in man to prescribe limits To the divine compassion; out with it. Alonz. Hear then, good man; and when that I have given you The character of it, and confess'd my self The wretch that acted it, you must repent The charity you have extended towards me. Not long before these wars began, I had Acquaintance ('tis not fit I stile it Friendship, That being a vertue, and not to be blended With vitious breach of faith) with the Lord Octavio, The Minion of his Prince and Court, set off With all the pomp and circumstance of greatness: To this then happy man I offer'd service, And with infinuation wrought my self Into his knowledg, grew familiar with him, Ever a welcom guest. This noble Gentleman Was bless'd with one fair daughter, (so he thought
And boldly might believe so, for she was In all things excellent without a Rival) Till I (her Fathers mass of wealth before My greedy eyes, but hoodwink'd to mine honor) With far more subtle arts then perjur'd Paris Ere practis'd on poor credulous Oenone, Besieg'd her Virgin-fort, in a word took it, No vows or imprecation forgotten With speed to marry her. Oct. Perhaps she gave you just cause to break those vows. Alon. She cause! alas Her innocence knew no guilt, but too much favor To me unworthy of it: 'twas my baseness, My foul ingratitude, what shall I say more? The good Octavio no sooner fell In the displeasure of his Prince, his state Confiscated, and he forc'd to leave the Court, And she expos'd to want; but all my oaths And protestation of service to her, Like seeming flames rais'd by inchantment, vanish'd; This, this sits heavy here. Oct. He speaks as if He were acquainted with my plot: You have reason To feel compunction, for 'twas most inhumane So to betray a Maid. Alon. Most barbarous. Oct. But does your sorrow for the fact beget An aptness in you to make satisfaction For the wrong you did her? Alon. Gracious heaven! an aptness! It is my only study; since I tasted Of your compassion, these eyes ne'r were clos'd, But fearful dreams cut off my little sleep, And being awake in my imagination, Her apparition haunted me.
Oct. 'Twas meer fancie: He stamps Alon. 'Twas more, grave sir, nay 'tis, Now it appears. [Ent. Maria] Oct. Where? Alon. Do you not see there the gliding shadow Of a fair Virgin? that is she, and wears The very garments that adorn'd her when She yielded to my Crocodile tears: A cloud Of fears and diffidence then so chac'd away Her purer white and red, as it foretold That I should be disloyal. Blessed shadow! For 'twere a sin, far, far exceeding all I have committed, to hope only that Thou art a substance: look on my true sorrow, Nay, souls contrition; hear again those vows My perjury cancell'd, stamp'd in brass, and never To be worn out. [Ent. Gothrio] Asc. I can endure no more; Action, not oaths must make me reparation: I am Maria. Alon. Can this be? Oct. It is, and I Octavio. Alon. Wonder on wonder! How shall I look on you? or with what forehead Desire your pardon? Asc. You truly shall deserve it In being constant: Oct. If you fall not off, But look on her in poverty with those eyes As when she was my heir in expectation You thought her beautiful. Alon. She's in herself both Indies to me. Goth. Stay, she shall not come A begger to you, my sweet young Mistress! no, She shall not want a dower: here's white and red Will ask a jointure; but how you should make her
Being a Captain, would beget some doubt, If you should deal with a Lawyer. Alon. I have seen this purse: Goth. How the worl'ds given, I dare not say to lying, Because you are a Soldier; you may say as well This gold is mark'd too: you being to receive it, Should ne'r ask how I got it. I'll run for a Priest To dispatch the matter; you shall not want a Ring, I have one for the purpose. Now sir, I think I am honest. Exit. Alon. This Ring was Pisano's. Oct. I'll dissolve this riddle at better leisure: The wound given to my daughter, which in your honor You are bound to cure, exacts our present care. Alon. I am all yours sir. Exeunt. Enter Gonzaga, Uberti, Manfroy. Gonz. Thou hast told too much to give assurance that Her honor was too far engag'd to be By humane help redeem'd: If thou hadst given Thy sad narration this full period, She's dead; I had been happy. Uber. Sir, these tears Do well become a father; and my eyes Would keep you company as a forlorn Lover, But that the burning fire of my revenge Dries up those drops of sorrow. We once more, Our broken forces rallied up, and with Full numbers strengthen'd, stand prepar'd to endure A second trial; nor let it dismay us That we are once again to affront the fury Of a victorious Army; their abuse
Of Conquest hath disarm'd themselves, and call'd down The powers above to aid us. I have read Some piece of story, yet ne'r found but that The General that gave way to cruelty, The profanation of things sacred, rapes Of virgins, butchery of infants, and The massacre in cold blood of reverend age, Against the discipline and law of Arms, Did feel the hand of heaven lie heavy on him, When most secure: We have had a late example, And let us not despair but that in Lorenzo It will be seconded. Gonz. You argue well, And 'twere a sin in me to contradict you: Yet we must not neglect the means that's lent us To be the Ministers of Justice. Uber. No, sir: One day given to refresh our wearied Troops Tir'd with a tedious march, we'll be no longer Coop'd up, but charge the Enemy in his trenches, And force him to a battel: [Shouts within] Gonz. Ha! how's this? In such a general time of mourning, shouts And acclamations of joy? Long live the Princess! long live Matilda! Within they cry Uber. Matilda! the Princess name, Matilda, oft re-eccho'd. Enter Farneze. Gonz. What speaks thy haste? Far. More joy and happiness Then weak words can deliver, or strong faith Almost give credit to: The Princess lives, I saw her, kist her hand. Gonz. By whom deliver'd?
Far. That is not to be stall'd by my report, This only must be told: As I rode forth With some choise troops to make discovery Where the Enemy lay, and how intrench'd; a Leader Of th'adverse party, but unarm'd, and in His hand an Olive-branch, encounter'd me; He shew'd the great Dukes seal that gave him power To parly with me: his desires were, that Assurance for his safety might be granted To his royal Master, who came as a friend (And not as an enemy) to offer to you Conditions of peace. I yielded to it. This being return'd, the Dukes Pretorum open'd; When suddenly in a triumphant Chariot Drawn by such soldiers of his own as were For insolence after victory condemn'd Unto this slavish office, the fair Princess Appear'd, a wreath of Laurel on her head, Her robes majestical, their richness far Above all value, as the present age Contended that a womans pomp should dim The glittering triumphs of the Roman Caesars. I am cut off; no Canons throat now thunders, Nor Fife nor Drum beat up a charge; choise Musique Ushers the parent of security, long absent Peace. Manf. I know not what to think on't. Uber. May it poise the expectation! Enter Soldiers (unarm'd, with olive-branches) Captains; Lorenzo, Galeazo, Martino, Matilda (a wreath of laurel on her head, in her chariot drawn through them.) Gonz. Thus to meet you Great Duke of Tuscany, throws amazement on me:
But to behold my daughter, long since mourn'd for, And lost even to my hopes, thus honour'd by you, With an excess of comfort overwhelms me: And yet I cannot truly call my self Happy in this solemnity, till your Highness Vouchsafe to make me understand the motives That in this peaceful way hath brought you to us. Lor. I must crave licence first; for know, Gonzaga, I am subject to anothers will, and can Nor speak nor do without permission from her: My curled forehead, of late terrible To those that did acknowledge me their Lord, While Lor. speaks, Uberti and the rest present themselves to Matilda. Is now as smooth as rivers when no wind stirs: My frowns or smiles, that kill'd or sav'd, have lost Their potent awe, and sweetness: I am transform'd (But do not scorn the Metamorphosis) From that fierce thing men held me; I am captiv'd, And by the unresistable force of beauty Led hither as a prisoner. Is't your pleasure that I shall deliver those injunctions which Your absolute command impos'd upon me, Or daign your self to speak 'em? Mat. Sir, I am Your property, you may use me as you please; But what is in your power and breast to do, No Orator can dilate so well. Lor. I obey you. That I came hither as an enemy With hostile arms, to the utter ruine of Your Country, what I have done, makes apparent: That fortune seconded my will, the late Defeature will make good: That I resolv'd To force the scepter from your hand, and make Your Dukedom tributary, my surprizal Of Mantua your Metropolis can well witness:
And that I cannot fear the change of fate, My Army flesh'd in blood, spoil, glory, conquest Stand ready to maintain: Yet I must tell you By whom I am subdu'd, and what's the ransom I am commanded to lay down. Gonz. My Lord, you humble your self too much, 'tis fitter You should propose, and we consent. Lor. Forbear, The articles are here subscrib'd and sign'd By my obedient hand: All prisoners Without a ransom set at liberty, Mantua to be deliver'd up; the Rampires Ruin'd in the assault, to be repair'd; The loss the husbandman receiv'd, his crop Burnt up by wanton licence of the soldier To be made good; with whatsoever else You could impose on me, if you had been The Conqueror, I your Captive. Gonz, Such a change wants an example: I must owe this favour To the clemencie of the old Heroique valour, That spar'd when it had power to kill; a vertue Buried long since, but rais'd out of the grave By you to grace this latter age. Lor. Mistake not The cause that did produce this good effect, If as such you receive it: 'twas her beauty Wrought first on my rough nature; but the vertnes Of her fair soul, dilated in her converse, That did confirm it. Mat. Mighty sir, no more: You honor her too much, that is not worthy To be vour servant. Lor. I have done, and now Would gladly understand that you allow of The art cles propounded.
Gonz. Do not wrong Your benefits with such a doubt; they are So great and high, and with such reverence To be receiv'd, that if I should profess I hold my Dukedom from you as your vassal, Or offer'd up my daughter as you please To be dispos'd of, in the point of honor And a becoming gratitude, 'twould not cancel The bond I stand engag'd for: but accept Of that which I can pay, my all is yours sir, Nor is there any here (though I must grant Some have deserv'd much from me) for so far I dare presume, but will surrender up Their interest to that your Highness shall Daign to pretend a title. Uber. I subscribe not to this condition Far. The services This Prince hath done your Grace in your most danger, Are not to be so slighted. Gal. 'Tis far from me To urge my merits, yet I must maintain Howe'r my power is less, my love is more; Nor will the gracious Princess scorn to acknowledge I have been her humble servant. Lor. Smooth your brows, I'll not incroach upon your right, for that were Once more to force affection (a crime With which should I the second time be tainted, I did deserve no favour) neither will I Make use of what is offer'd by the Duke, Howe'r I thank his goodness: I'll lay by My power; and though I should not brook a Rival, (What we are, well consider'd) I'll descend To be a third Competitor; he that can With love and service best deserve the garland,
With your consent let him wear it; I despair not The trial of my fortune. Gonz. Bravely offer'd, and like your self, great Prince. Uber. I must profess I am so taken with it, that I know not Which way to express my service. Gal. Did I not build Upon the Princess grace, I could sit down, And hold it no dishonor. Mat. How I feel My soul divided! all have deserv'd so well, I know not where to fix my choice. Gon. You have Time to consider: will you please to take Possession of the Fort? then having tasted The fruits of peace, you may at leisure prove Whose plea will ptosper in the Court of Love. Exeunt.
Act. 5. Scaen. 1. Enter Alonzo, Octavio, Pisano, Maria (with a purse) Gothrio. Alon. YOu need not doubt sir, were not peace pro∣claim'd And celebrated with a general joy, The high displeasure of the Mantuan Duke, Rais'd on just grounds, not jealous suppositions. The saving of our lives (which next to heaven To you alone is proper) would force mercy For an offence though capital. Pisa. When the Conqueror Uses Intreaties, they are arm'd Commands The vanquish'd must not check at. Asc. My piety pay the forfeit, If danger come but near you. I have heard My gracious Mistress often mention you, (When I serv'd her as a Page) and feelingly Relate how much the Duke her sire repented His hasty doom of banishment, in his rage Pronounc'd against you. Oct. In a private difference, I grant that Innocence is a wall of brass, And scorns the hottest battery: but when The cause depends between the Prince and Subject, 'Tis an unequal competition; Justice Must lay her ballance by, and use her sword For his ends that protects it. I was banish'd, And till revoked from exile, to tread on My Soveraigns territories with forbidden feet,
The severe letter of the Law calls death, Which I am subject to in coming so neer His Court and person. But my onely Child Being provided for, her honor salv'd too, I thank your noble change, I shall endure Whate'r can fall with patience. Alonz. You have us'd that medicine too long; prepare your self For honor in your age, and rest secure of't. Asc. Of what is your wisdom musing? Goth. I am gazing on This gorgeous House, our Cote's a dishclout to it; It has no sign, what do you call't? Asc. The Court; I have liv'd in't a Page. Goth. Page! very pretty: May I not be a Page? I am old enough, Well timber'd too, and I have a beard to carry it: Pray you let me be your Page, I can swear already Upon your pantable. Asc. What? Goth. That I'll be true unto your smock. Asc. How, Rascal? Oct. Hence, and pimp To your Rams and Ews; such foul pollution is To be whipt from Court: I have now no more use of you, Return to your trough. Goth. Must I feed on husks, before I have plaid the prodigal? Oct. No, I'll reward Your service; live in your own element Like an honest man; all that is mine in the cottage I freely give you. Goth. Your Bottles too, that I carry for your own tooth? Oct. Full as they are.
Asc. And gold, that will replenish 'em. Goth. I am made for ever, this was done in the nick. Oct. Why in the nick? Goth. O sir, 'twas well for me that you did reward my service Before you enter'd the Court; for 'tis reported There is a drink of Forgetfulness, which once tasted, Few masters think of their servants, who grown old, Are turn'd off like lame hounds and hunting-horses, To starve on the Commons. Alonz. Bitter Knave! there's craft i'the clouted shoo. Captain! Enter Martino. Mart. I am glad to kiss Your valiant hand, and yours: but pray you take notice My title's chang'd, I am a Colonel. Pisa. A Colonel! where's your Regiment? Mart. Not rais'd yet; All the old ones are cashier'd, and we are now To have a new Militia. All is peace here, Yet I hold my title still, as many do That never saw an Enemy. Alonz. You are pleasant, And it becomes you. Is the Duke stirring? Mar. Long since, Four hours at least, but yet not ready. Pisa. How? Mart. Even so; you make a wonder of't, but leave it: Alas, he is not now (sir) in the Camp, To be up and arm'd upon the least alarum; There's something else to be thought on. Here he comes, with his Officers, new rigg'd.
Enter Lorenzo, Doctor, Gent. Page (imployed about him as from his chamber.) Alon. A looking-glass! Upon my head he saw not his own face These seven years past, but by reflexion From a bright armor. Mart. Be silent, and observe. Lor. So, have you done yet? Is your building perfect? Doct. If your Highness please, here is a water. Lor. To what use? my Barber Hath wash'd my face already. Doct. But this water Hath a strange vertue in't, beyond his art; It is a sacred Relique, part of that Most powerful Juice, which with Medea made Old AEson young. Lor. A fable; but suppose I should give credit to it, will it work The same effect on me? Doct. I'll undertake This will restore the honour'd hair that grows Upon your Highness head and chin, a little Inclining unto gray. Lor. Inclining! Doctor: Doct. Pardon me, mighty sir, I went too far, Not gray at all; I dare not flatter you, 'Tis something chang'd, but this apply'd will help it To the first amber-colour, every hair As fresh as when, your manhood in the prime, Your Grace arriv'd at thirty. Lor. Very well. Doct. Then here's a pretious oil (to which the maker
Hath not yet given a name) will soon fill up These dimples in your face and front. I grant They are terrible to your enemies, and set off Your frowns with majesty: but you may please To know (as sure you do) a smooth aspect, Softness and sweetness, in the Court of Love, Though dumb, are the prevailing Orators. Lor. Will he new create me? Doct: If you daign to taste too Of this Confection. Lor. I am in health, and need no physick. Doct. Physick sir! an Empress (If that an Empress lungs, sir, may be tainted With putrifaction) would taste of it That night on which she were to print a kiss Upon the lips of her long absent Lord, Returning home with conquest. Lor. It is predominant Over a stinking breath, is it not Doctor? Doct. Clothe the infirmity with sweeter language, 'Tis a preservative that way. Lor. You are then admitted to the Cabinets of great Ladies, And have the government of the borrowed beauties, Of such as write neer forty? Doct. True, my good Lord, and my attempts have prosper'd. Lor. Did you never minister to the Princess? Doct. Sir, not yet; She's in the April of her youth, and needs not The aids of art, my gracious Lord: but in The Autumn of her age I may be useful, And sworn her Highness Doctor, and your Grace partake Of the delight. Lor. Slave! Witch! Impostor! [Kicks him]
Mountebank! Cheater! Traitor to great Nature, In thy presumption to repair what she In her immutable decrees design'd For some few years to grow up, and then wither Or is't not crime enough thus to betray The secrets of the weaker sex, thy patients, But thou must make the honor of this age And envy of the time to come, Matilda, (Whose sacred name I bow to) guilty of A future sin in thy ill-boding thoughts, Which for a perpetuity of youth And pleasure she disdains to act, such is Her purity and innocencce? His foot on the Doctors breast. Alonz. Long since I look'd for this Lenvoy. Mart. Would I were well off! He's dangerous in these humours. Oct. Stand conceal'd. Doct. O sir, have mercy! in my thought I never Offended you. Lor. Me? most of all, thou monster: What a Mock-man property in thy intent Wouldst thou have made me? a meer Pathick to Thy devilish art, had I given suffrage to it. Are my gray hairs, the ornament of age, And held a blessing by the wiseft men, And for such warranted by holy Writ, To be conceal'd, as if they were my shame? Or plaister up these furrows in my face, As if I were a painted Bawd or Whore? By such base means if that I could ascend To the height of all my hopes, their full fruition Would not wipe off the scandal. No, thou wretch, Thy cozening Water and adulterate Oil I thus pour in thine eyes, and tread to dust Thy loth'd Confection, with thy trumperies: Vanish for ever.
Mart. You have your fee, as I take it, Dear Domine Doctor! I'll be no sharer with you. Exit Doctor. Lor. I'll court her like my self; these rich adorn∣ments And Jewels, worn by me an absolute Prince, My Order too, of which I am the Soveraign, Can meet no ill construction: yet 'tis far From my imagination to believe She can be taken with sublimed clay, The Silk-worms spoils, or rich Embroderies; Nor must I borrow helps from power or greatness, But as a loyal Lover plead my cause, If I can feelingly express my ardor, And make her sensible of the much I suffer In hopes and fears, and she vouchsafe to take Compassion on me, — Ha! compassion? The word sticks in my throat: what's here that tels me I do descend too low? rebellious spirit, I conjure thee to leave me: there is now No contradiction or declining left, I must and will go on. Mart. The tempest's laid; you may present your selves: Alon. My gracious Lord! Pisa. Your humble Vassal. Lor. Ha! both living? Alon. Sir, we owe our lives to this good Lord, and make it Our humble suit— Lor. Plead for your selves: we stand Yet unresolv'd whether your knees or prayers Can save the forfeiture of your own heads: Though we have put our armor off, your pardon For leaving the Camp without our licence Is not yet sign'd. At some more fit time wait us. Ex. Lor. and Attendants. Alon. How's this?
Mart. 'Tis well it is no worse; I met with A rougher entertainment, yet I had Good cards to shew: He's parcel mad, you'll find him Every hour in a several mood, this foolish Love Is such a shuttlecock; but all will be well When a better fit comes on him, never doubt it: Exeunt. Enter Gonzaga, Uberti, Farneze, Manfroy. Gonz. How do you find her? Uber. Thankful for my service, And yet she gives me little hope; my Rival Is too great for me. Gonz. The great Duke you mean. Uber. Who else? the Millanois (although he be A compleat Gentleman) I am sure despairs more then my self. Far. A high estate, with women, Takes place of all desert. Uber. I must stand my fortune. Enter Lorenzo and Attendants. Manf. The Duke of Florence! sir. Gonz. Your Highness presence Answers my wish. Your private ear: — I have us'd My best perswasion with a Fathers power To work my daughter to your ends; yet she Like a small Bark on a tempestuous sea Toss'd here and there by opposite winds, resolves not At which port to put in, this Prince's merits, Your grace and favor; nor is she unmindful Of the brave acts (under your pardon sir I needs must call them so) Hortensio Hath done to gain her good opinion of him: All these together tumbling in her fancie,
Do much distract her; I have spies upon her, And am assur'd this instant hour she gives Hortensio private audience; I will bring you Where we will see and hear all. Lor. You oblige me. Uber. I do not like this whispering. Gonz. Fear no foul play. Exeunt. Enter Galeazo, and two Waiting-women. 1 Wo. The Princess, sir, long since expected you; And would I beg a thanks, I could tell you that I have often mov'd her for you. Gal. I am your servant. Enter Matilda. Beat. She's come; there are others I must place to hear The conference. Exit. 1 Wo. Is't your Excellencies pleasure that we at∣tend you? Mat. No, wait me in the gallery. 1 Wo. Would each of us, Wench, had a Sweet∣heart too! To pass away the time: 2 Wo. There I join with you. Ex. Waiting-women. Mat. I fear this is the last time we shall meet. Gal. Heaven forbid! Enter (above) Beatrix, Lorenzo, Gonzaga, Uberti, Farneze. Mat. O my Hortensio! In me behold the misery of Greatness,
And that which you call Beauty: had I been Of a more low condition, I might Have call'd my will and faculties mine own, Not seeing that which was to be belov'd With others eyes: But now, ay me, most wretched And miserable Princess! in my fortune To be too much engag'd for service done me, It being impossible to make satisfaction To my so many Creditors, (all deserving) I can keep touch with none. Lor. A sad Exordiam. Mat. You lov'd me long, and without hope, (alas, I die to think on't!) Parma's Prince invited With a too partial report of what I was, and might be to him, left his Country To fight in my defence. Your brave atchievements I'the war, and what you did for me, unspoken, (Because I would not force the sweetness of Your modesty to a blush) are written here. And that there might be nothing wanting to Sum up my numerous engagements (never In my hopes to be cancell'd) the great Duke Our mortal enemy, when my Fathers Country Lay open to his fury, and the spoil Of the victorious Army, and I brought Into his power, hath shewn himself so Noble, so full of honor, temperance, And all vertues that can set off a Prince, That though I cannot render him that respect I would, I am bound in thankfulness to admire him. Gal. 'Tis acknowledg'd, and on your part to be return'd. Mat. How can I, Without the brand of foul ingratitude To you, and Prince Uberti? Gal. Hear me, Madam,
And what your servant shall with zeal deliver, As a Dedalean clew may guide you out of This labyrinth of distraction. He that loves His Mistress truly, should prefer her honor And peace of mind, above the glutting of His ravenous appetite: He should affect from her, But with a fit restraint, and not take her To give himself: He should make it the heigth Of his ambition, if it lie in His stretch'd out nerves to effect it, though she flie in An eminent place, to add strength to her wings, And mount her higher, though he fall himself Into the bottomless Abyss; or else The services he offers are not real, But counterfeit. Mat. What can Hortensio infer from this? Gal. That I stand bound in duty (Though in the act I take my last farewell Of comfort in this life) to sit down willingly, And move my suit no further. I confess, While you were in danger, and Heavens mercy made me Its instrument to preserve you, (which your goodness Priz'd far above the merit) I was bold To feed my starv'd affection with false hopes I might be worthy of you: For know, Madam, How mean soever I appear'd in Mantua, I had in expectation a fortune, Though not possess'd of't, that encourag'd me With confidence to prefer my suit, and not To fear the Prince Uberti as my Rival. Gonz: I ever thought him more then what he seem'd. Lor. Pray you forbear. Gal. But when the Duke of Florence Put in his plea, in my consideration Weighing well what he is, as you must grant him,
A Mars of men in Arms; and those put off, The great example for a Kingly Courtier To imitate: Annex to these his wealth, Of such a large extent, as other Monarchs Call him the King of Coin; and what's above all. His lawful love, with all the happiness This life can fancie, from him flowing to you; The true affection which I have ever borne you, Does not alone command me to desist, But as a faithful Councellor to advise you To meet and welcom that felicity Which hastes to crown your vertues. Mat. We must break off this parley. Something I have to say. [Exe: above] Mat. In tears I thank Your care of my advancement; but I dare not Follow your councel: Shall such piety Pass unrewarded? such a pure affection, For any ends of mine, be undervalu'd? Avert it Heaven! I will be thy Matilda, Or cease to be; No other heat but what Glows from thy purest flames, shal warm this bosom; Nor Florence, nor all Monarchs of the earth Shall keep thee from me. Enter Lorenzo, Gonzaga, Uberti, Farneze, Manfroy, two Waiting-women. Gal. I fear, gracious Lady, Our conference hath been oreheard. Mat. The better: Your part is acted; give me leave at distance To zanie it, sir, on my knees thus prostrate Before your feet. Lor. This must not be, I shall Both wrong my self and you in suffering it.
Mat. I will grow here, and weeping thus turn marble, Unless you hear and grant the first petition A virgin, and a Princess ever tendred: Nor doth the suit concern poor me alone, It hath a strong reference to you And to your honor; and if you deny it, Both ways you suffer. Remember, sir, you were not Born only for your self; Heavens liberal hand Design'd you to command a potent Nation, Gave you heroick valour, which you have Abus'd in making unjust war upon A neighbour Prince, a Christian; while the Turk, Whose scourge and terror you should be, securely Wastes the Italian Confines: 'tis in you To force him to pull in his horned Crescents, And 'tis expected from you. Lor. I have been in a dream, and now begin to wake. Mat. And will you forbear to reap the harvest of such glories, Now ripe and at full growth, for the embraces Of a flight woman? or exchange your triumphs For chamber-pleasures? melt your able nerves (That should with your victorious sword make way Through the Armies of your Enemies) in loose And wanton dalliance? Be your self, great sir, The thunderbolt of war, and scorn to sever Two hearts long since united: your example May teach the Prince Uberti to subscribe To that which you allow of. Lor. The same tongue That charm'd my sword out of my hand, and threw A frozen numness on my active spirit, Hath dis-enchanted me. Rise, fairest Princess! And that it may appear I do receive
Your councel as inspir'd from heaven, I will Obey and follow it: I am your debtor, And must confess you have lent my weakned reason New strengths once more to hold a full command Over my passions. Here to the world I freely do profess that I disclaim All interest in you, and give up my title Such as it is, to you sir: and as far As I have power, thus join your hands. Gonz. To yours I add my full consent. Uber. I am lost, Farneze. Far: Neerer to the port then you suppose: In me our laws speak, and forbid this contract. Mat. Ay me! new stops! Gat. Shall we be ever cross'd thus? Far. There is an Act upon record, confirm'd By your wise predecessors, that no Heir Of Mantua (as questionless the Princess Is the undoubted one) must be join'd in marriage, But where the match may strengthen the estate And safety of the Dukedom. Now this Gentleman, However I must stile him honorable, And of a high desert, having no power To make this good in his alliance, stands Excluded by our laws: whereas this Prince Of equal merit, brings to Mantua The power and Principality of Parma: And therefore since the great Duke hath let fall His plea, there lives no Prince that justlier can Challenge the Princess favor. Lor. Is this true, sir? Gonz. I cannot contradict it. Enter Manfroy. Manf. There's an Ambassador
From Milain, that desires a present audience; His business is of highest consequence, As he affirms: I know him for a man Of the best rank and quality. Gal. From Milain? Gonz. Admit him. — How? so low! Enter Ambassador, and Julio with a Letter, which he presents on his knee to Galeazo. Amb. I am sorry, sir, to be the bringer of this heavy news: But since it must be known — Gal. Peace rest with him, I shall find fitter time to mourn his loss. My faithful servant too, Julio! Jul. I am orejoy'd to see your Highness safe. Gal. Pray you peruse this, And there you'll find that the objection The Lord Farneze made, is fully answer'd. Gonz. The great John Galeas dead? Lor. And this his brother, the absolute Lord of Milain. Mat. I am reviv'd. Uber. There's no contending against destiny, I wish both happiness. Enter Alonzo, Maria, Octavio, Pisano, Martino. Lor: Married, Alonzo? I will salute your Lady, she's a fair one, And seal your pardon on her lips. Gonz. Octavio, welcom even to my heart! Rise, I should kneel To thee for mercy. Oct: The poor remainder of My age shall truly serve you. Mat. You resemble a Page I had, Ascanio. Asc. I am your Highness servant still.
Lor. All stand amaz'd At this unlook'd for meeting: But defer Your several stories. Fortune here hath shewn Her various power; but Vertue in the end Is crown'd with laurel: Love hath done his parts too; And mutual friendship after bloody jars, Will cure the wounds received in our wars. Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
EPILOGUE. PRay you Gentlemen keep your seats; something I would Deliver to gain favour, if I could, To us, and the still doubtful Author. He, When I desir'd an Epilogue, answer'd me, 'Twas to no purpose: He must stand his fate, Since all intreaties now would come too late; You being long since resolv'd what you would say Of him, or us, as ye rise, or of the Play. A strange old Fellow! yet this sullen mood Would quickly leave him, might it be understood You part not hence displeas'd. I am design'd To give him certain notice: If you find Things worth your liking, shew it. Hope and Fear, Though different passions, have the self-same ear.
THE GUARDIAN, A COMICAL-HISTORY. As it hath been often acted at the Private-House in Black-Friars, by his late MAJESTIES Servants, with great Applause. Written by PHILIP MASSENGER, Gent. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1655.
PROLOGUE. AFter twice putting forth to Sea, his Fame Shipwrack'd in either, and his once known Name In two years silence buried, perhaps lost I'the general opinion; at our cost (A zealous sacrifice to Neptune made For good success in his uncertain trade) Our Author weighs up anchors, and once more Forsaking the security of the shore, Resolves to prove his fortune: What 'twill be, Is not in him, or us to prophesie; You only can assure us. Yet he pray'd This little in his absence might be said, Designing me his Orator. He submits To the grave censure of those abler Wits His weakness; nor dares he profess that when The Critiques laugh, he'l laugh at them agen. (Strange self-love in a writer!) He would know His errors as you find 'em, and bestow His future, studies to reform from this What in another might be judg'd amiss. And yet despair not, Gentlemen; though he fear His strengths to please, we hope that you shall hear Some things so writ, as you may truly say He hath not quite forgot to make a Play, As 'tis with malice rumour'd: His intents Are fair; and though he want the complements Of wide-mouth'd Promisers, who still engage (Before their Works are brought upon the Stage) Their parasites to proclaim 'em: This last birth Deliver'd without noise, may yield such mirth, As ballanc'd equally, will cry down the boast Of arrogance, and regain his credit lost.
Dramatis Personae. ALphonso, King of Naples. Generall of Milain. Severino, a Nobleman banished. Monteclaro, his Brother in law, disguised. Durazzo, the Guardian. Caldoro, his Ward, in love with Caliste. Adorio, Beloved by Caliste. Camillo Neapolitan Gentlemen. Lentulo Donato Cario, Servant to Adorio. Claudio, Servant to Severino. Captains. Servants. Bandetti. Jolantre, Wife to Severino. Caliste, her Daughter. Mirtilla, Caliste's Maid. Calipso, the Confident of Jolantre.
THE GUARDIAN. Act. I. Sceen. I. Enter Durazzo, Camillo, Lentulo, and Donato; two Servants. Dur. TEll me of his expences? Which of you Stands bound for a gazet? he spends his own; And you impertinent Fools, or Knaves, make choice Of either title, which your Signiorships please, To meddle in't. Cam. Your age gives priviledge to this harsh language. Dur. My age! do not use That word agen; if you do, I shall grow young, And swinge you soundly: I would have you know,
Though I write fifty odd, I do not carry An Almanack in my bones to predeclare What weather we shall have; nor do I kneel In adoration at the Spring and Fall Before my Doctor, for a dose or two Of his Restoratives, which are things I take it You are familiar with. Cam. This is from the purpose. Dur. I cannot cut a caper, or groan like vou When I have done, nor run away so nimbly Out of the field. But bring me to a Fence-school, And crack a blade or two for exercise, Ride a barb'd horse, or take a leap after me Following my hounds or hawks, (and by your leave At a gamesom Mistress) and you shall confess I am in the May of my abilities, And you in your December. Lent. We are glad you bear your years so well. Dur. My years! No more of years; if you do, at your peril. Cam. We desire not To prove your valour. Dur. 'Tis your safest course. Cam. But as friends to your fame and reputation, Come to instruct you: Your too much indulgence To the exorbitant waste of young Caldoro Your Nephew and your Ward, hath rendred you But a bad report among wise men in Naples. Dur. Wise men? in your opinion; but to me That understand my self and them, they are Hide-bounded mony-mongers: they would have me Train up my Ward a hopeful youth, to keep A Merchants book, or at the plough, and clothe him In Canvas or course Cotton; while I fell His Woods, grant Leases, which he must make good When he comes to age, or be compell'd to marry
With a cast whore and three bastards: Let him know No more then how to cypher well, or do His tricks by the square root; grant him no pleasure But Coyts and Nine-pins; suffer him to converse With none but Clowns and Coblers, as the Turk says: Poverty, old age, and aches of all seasons Light on such heathenish Guardians: Don. You do worse To the ruine of his state, under your favour, In feeding his loose riots. Dur. Riots! what riots? He wears rich clothes, I do so; keeps horses, games, and wenches; 'Tis not amiss, so it be done with decorum: In an Heir 'tis ten times more excusable Then to be over-thrifty. Is there ought else That you can charge him with? Cam. With what we grieve for, And you will not approve. Dur. Out with it, man: Cam. His rash endeavour, without your consent, To match himself into a Family Not gracious with the times. Dur. 'Tis still the better; By this means he shall scape Court-visitants, And not be eaten out of house and home In a Summer-progress. But does he mean to marry? Cam. Yes sir, to marry. Dur. In a beardless chin 'Tis ten times worse then wenching. Family! whose family? Cam. Signior Severnio's. Dur. How? not he that kill'd The brother of his wife (as it is rumour'd) Then fled upon it; since proscrib'd, and chosen
Captain of the Banditi; the Kings pardon On no suit to be granted? Lent. The same, sir. Dur. This touches near: How is his love return'd By the Saint he worships? Don. She affects him not, but dotes upon another. Dur. Worse and worse. Cam. You know him, young Adorio. Dur. A brave Gentleman! what proof of this? Lent. I dogg'd him to the Church; Where he, not for devotion, as I ghess, But to make his approaches to his Mistress, Is often seen. Cam: And would you stand conceal'd Among these trees, for he must pass this green, The Mattins ended, as she returns home, You may observe the passages. Dur. I thank you; this torrent must be stopt. Enter Adorio, Caliste, Mirtilla, Caldoro (muffel'd.) Don. They come. Cam. Stand close. Cal. I know I wrong my modesty. Ador. And wrong me, In being so importunate for that I neither can nor must grant. Cal. A hard sentence! and to increase my misery, by you Whom fond affection hath made my Judge, Pronounc'd without compassion. Alas sir, Did I approach you with unchaste desires, A sullid reputation; were deform'd, As it may be I am, though many affirm I am something more then handsom. Dur. I dare swear it.
Calist. Or if I were no Gentlewoman, but bred coursely, You might with some pretence of reason slight What you should sue for. Dur. Were he not an Eunuch, He would, and sue agen; I am sure I should. Pray look in my collar, a flea troubles me: Hey-day! there are a legion of young Cupids At barley-break in my breeches. Calist. Hear me sir; though you continue, nay increase your scorn, Only vouchsafe to let me understand What my defects are; of which once convinc'd, I will hereafter silence my harsh plea; And spare your further trouble. Ador. I'll tell you, and bluntly, as my usual man∣ner is, Though I were a Woman-hater, which I am not, But love the sex, for my ends; take me with you: If in my thought I found one taint or blemish In the whole fabrick of your outward features, I would give my self the lye. You are a Virgin Possess'd of all your mother could wish in you: Your father Severino's dire disaster In killing of your Uncle, which I grieve for, In no part taking from you. I repeat it; A noble Virgin, for whose grace and favours Th' Italian Princes might contend as Rivals; Yet unto me a thing far, far beneath you. A noted Libertine I profess my self: In your mind there does appear one fault so gross, Nay, I might say unpardonable at your years, If justly you consider it, that I cannot As you desire, affect you. Calist. Make me know it, I'le soon reform it.
Ador. Would you would keep your word. Cal. Put me to the test. Ador. I will. You are too honest, And like your mother, too strict and religious, And talk too soon of marriage: I shall break, If at that rate I purchase you. Can I part with My uncurb'd liberty, and on my neck Wear such a heavy yoke? hazard my fortunes, With all th'expected joys my life can yield me, For one commodity before I prove it? Venus forbid on both sides; let crook'd hams, Bald heads, declining shoulders, furrow'd cheeks Be aw'd by ceremonies: If you love me I'the way young people should, I'll flie to meet it, And we'll meet merrily. Cal. 'Tis strange such a man can use such language. Ador. In my tongue my heart Speaks freely, fair one! Think upon't, a close friend Or private Mistress, is Court-rhetorick; A Wife, meer rustick Solecism. So good morrow. Cam. How like you this? Adorio offers to go, is staid by Caldoro. Dur. A well-bred Gentleman! I am now thinking if ere in the dark, Or drunk I met his mother? He must have Some drops of my blood in him; for at his years I was much of his religion. Cam. Out upon you! Don. The Colts tooth still in your mouth? Dur. What means this whispering? Ador. You may perceive I seek not to displant you, Where you desire to grow: For further thanks, 'Tis needless complement. Cal. There are some natures Which blush to owe a benefit, if not Receiv'd in corners; holding it an impairing
To their own worth, should they acknowledge it. I am made of other clay, and therefore must Trench so far on your leisure, as to win you To lend a patient ear, while I profess Before my glory, though your scorn, Calist'e, How much I am your servant. Ador. My designs are not so urgent, but they can dispence With so much time. Cam. Pray you now observe your Nephew. Dur. How he looks! like a School-boy that had plaid the Truant, And went to be breech'd. Cald. Madam! Calist. A new affliction: Your suit offends as much as his repulse, It being not to be granted. Mirt. Hear him Madam, His sorrow is not personated; he deserves Your pitty, not contempt. Dur. He has made the Maid his; And as the Master of the Art of Love Wisely affirms, it is a kind of passage To the Mistress favour. Cald. I come not to urge My merit to deserve you, since you are, Weigh'd truly to your worth, above all value: Much less to argue you of want of judgment For following one that with wing'd feet flies from you; While I, at all parts (without boast) his equal, In vain pursue you; bringing those flames with me, Those lawful flames, (for Madam know, with other I never shall approach you) which Adorio In scorn of Hymen and religious rites With atheistical impudence contemns,
And in his loose attempt to undermine The fortress of your honor, seeks to ruine All holy Altars by clear mindes erected To Virgin-honor. Dur. My Nephew is an ass, What a devil hath he to do with Virgin-honor, Altars, or lawful flames? when he should tell her They are superstitious nothings, and speak to the purpose, Of the delight to meet in the old dance Between a pair of sheets; my Grandame call'd it The peopling of the world. Calist. How, gentle sir? to vindicate my honor, that is needless; I dare not fear the worst aspersion malice Can throw upon it. Cald. Your sweet patience, Lady, and more then Dove-like innocence renders you Insensible of an injury, for which I deeply suffer. Can you undergo The scorn of being refus'd? I must confess It makes for my ends; for had he embrac'd Your gracious offers tender'd him, I had been In my own hopes forsaken; and if yet There can breathe any air of comfort in me, To his contempt I owe it: but his ill No more shall make way for my good intents, Then vertue powerful in her self, can need The aids of vice. Ador. You take that licence, sir, which yet I never granted. Cald. I'll force more, nor will I for mine own ends undertake it, As I will make apparent) but to do A justice to your sex, with mine own wrong And irrecoverable loss. To thee I turn, Thou goatish Ribaud, in whom lust is grown
Defensible, the last descent to hell, Which gapes wide for thee: Look upon this Lady, And on her fame, (if it were possible Fairer then she is) and if base desires And beastly appetite will give thee leave, Consider how she sought thee, how this Lady In a noble way desir'd thee: Was she fashion'd In an inimitable mould, (which nature broke, The great work perfected) to be made a slave To thy libidinous twines, and when commanded To be us'd as physick after drunken surfets? Mankind should rise against thee: What even now I heard with horror, shew'd like blasphemy, And as such I will punish it. He strikes Adorio, the rest make in, they all draw. Calist. Murder! Mir. Help! Dur. After a whining Prologue, who would have look'd for Such a rough Catastophre? Nay, come on, fear nothing: Never till now my Nephew. And do you hear sir, (And yet I love thee too) if you take the wench now I'll have it posted first, then chronicled, Thou wert beaten to't. Ador. You think you have shewn A memorable masterpiece of valor In doing this in publick; and it may Perhaps deserve her shoo-string for a favor: Wear it without my envy; but expect For this affront, when time serves, I shall call you To a strict accompt. Exeunt. Dur. Hook on, follow him Harpies, You may feed upon this business for a moneth, If you manage it handsomly: when two heirs quarrel, The sword-men of the City shortly after Appear in Plush, for their grave consultations In taking up the difference;
Some I know make a set living on't. Nay, let him go, Thou art master of the field; enjoy thy fortune With moderation: For a flying foe, Discreet and provident Conquerors build up A bridge of gold. To thy mistress, boy! if I were I'thy shirt, how I could nick it! Cald. You stand, Madam, as you were rooted, and I more then fear My passion hath offended: I perceive The roses frighted from your cheeks, and paleness T'usurp their room; yet you may please to ascribe it To my excess of love, and boundless ardor To do you right; for my self I have done nothing. I will not curse my stars, howere assur'd To me you are lost for ever: For suppose Adorio slain, and by my hand, my life Is forfeited to the law; which I contemn, So with a tear or two you would remember I was your martyr, and died in your service. Calist. Alas, you weep! and in my just com∣passion Of what you suffer, I were more then marble, Should I not keep you company: You have sought My favours nobly, and I am justly punish'd In wild Adorio's contempt and scorn For my ingratitude, it is no better, To your deservings: Yet such is my fate, Though I would, I cannot help it. O Caldoro! In our misplac'd affection I prove Too soon, and with dear bought experience, Cupid Is blind indeed, and hath mistook his arrows. If it be possible, learn to forget: And yet that punishment is too light; to hate A thankless Virgin, practise it; and may Your due consideration that I am so, In your imagination disperse
Lothsom deformity upon this face That hath bewitch'd you. More I cannot say, But that I truly pitty you, and wish you A better choice, which in my prayers (Caldoro) I ever will remember. Ex. Caliste, Mirtilla. Dur. 'Tis a sweet rogue: why how now? thunderstruck? Cald. I am not so happy: Oh that I were but master of my self, You soon should see me nothing. Dur. What would you do? Cald. With one stab give a fatal period To my woes and life together. Dur. For a Woman! better the kind were lost, and generation maintain'd a new way. Cald. Pray you sir forbear this profane language. Dur. Pray you be you a man, And whimper not like a girl: All shall be well, As I live it shall; this is no Hectique feaver, But a Love-sick ague easie to be cur'd, And I'll be your Physitian, so you subscribe To my directions. First you must change This City whorish air, for'tis infected, And my potions will not work here, I must have you To my Country-villa: Rise before the sun, Then make a breakfast of the morning-dew Serv'd up by nature on some grassie hill; You'll find it Nectar, and far more cordial Then Cullises, Cock-broth, or your distillations Of a hundred crowns a quart. Cald. You talk of nothing. Dur. This tane as a preparative to strengthen Your queasie stomack, vault into your saddle; With all this flesh I can do it without a stirrup: My hounds uncoupled, and my huntsmen ready, You shal hear such musick from their tunable mouths
That you will say the Viol, Harp, Theorbo, Nere made such ravishing harmony, from the groves And neighboring Woods, with frequent iterations, Enamor'd of the cry, a thousand eccho's Repeating it. Cald. What's this to me? Dur. It shall be, and you give thanks for't. In the afternoon (For we will have variety of delights) We'll to the field agen, no game shall rise But we'll be ready for't; if a Hare, my Greyhounds Shall make a course; for the Pye or Jay, a Sparhawk Flies from the Fist; the Crow so near pursu'd, Shall be compell'd to seek protection under Our Horses bellies; a Hearn put from her siege, And a Pistol shot off in her breech, shall mount So high, that to your view she'll seem to soar Above the middle Region of the Air. A cast of Haggard Falcons, by me man'd, Eying the prey at first, appear as if They did turn tayl, but with their laboring wings Getting above her, with a thought their pinions Cleaving the purer Element, make in, And by turns binde with her; the frighted Fowl, Lying at her defence upon her back, With her dreadful Beak, a while defers her death, But by degrees forc'd down, we part the fray And feast upon her. Cald. This cannot be, I grant, but pretty pastime, Dur. Pretty pastime, Nephew! 'Tis royal sport, then for an Evening flight A Tercel gentle, which I call my Masters, As he were sent a Messenger to the Moon, In such a place flies, as he seems to say, See me, or see me not, the Partridge sprung, He makes his stoop; but wanting breath, is forc'd
To cancellior, then with such speed, as if He carried Lightning in his Wings, he strikes The trembling Bird; who even in death appears Proud to be made his quarry. Cald. Yet all this, is nothing to Caliste. Dur. Thou shalt finde twenty Calistes there, for every night A fresh, and lusty one; I'll give thee a Ticket, In which my name, Durazzo's name subscrib'd, My Tenants Nutbrown daughters, wholsom Girls, At midnight shall contend to do thee service. I have bred them up to't; should their Fathers mur∣mure, Their Leases are void; for that is a main point In my Indentures: And when we make our progress There is no entertainment perfect, if This last dish be not offer'd. Cald. You make me smile. Dur. I'll make thee laugh outright. My horses, knaves! 'Tis but six short hours riding: yet ere night Thou shalt be an alter'd man. Cald. I wish I may, sir. Exeunt: Enter Jolante, Caliste, Calypso, Mirtilla. Jol. I had spies upon you Minion; the relation Of your behavionr was at home before you: My daughter to hold parley, from the Church too, With noted Libertines? her fame and favours The quarrel of their swords? Calist. 'Twas not in me to help it, Madam. Jol. No? how have I liv'd? My neighbour knows my manners have been such, That I presume I may affirm, and boldly, In no particular action of my life I can be justly censur'd.
Calyp. Censur'd, Madam? what Lord or Lady lives, worthy to sit A competent Judge on you? Calist. Yet black detraction will find faults where they are not. Calyp. Her foul mouth Is stopp'd, you being the object: Give me leave To speak my thoughts, yet still under correction; And if my young Lady and her woman here, With reverence they may be edifi'd. You are my gracious Patroness and supportress, And I your poor observer, nay your creature Fed by your bounties; and but that I know Your Honor detests flattery, I might say (And with an emphasis) You are the Lady Admir'd and envied at, far, far above All imitation of the best of women That are or ever shall be. This is truth: I dare not be obsequious; and 'twould ill Become my gravity, and wisdom glean'd From your oraculous Ladiship, to act The part of a she-parasite Jol. If you do, I never shall acknowledge you Calist. Admirable! this is no flattery. Mirt. 'Do not interrupt her: 'Tis such a pleasing itch to your Lady-mother, That she may peradventure forget us, To feed on her own praises. Jol. I am not so far in debt to age, but if I would Listen to mens bewitching sorceries, I could be courted. Calyp. Rest secure of that; all the Braveries of the City run mad for you, And yet your vertue's such, not one attempts you. Jol. I keep no mankind servant in my house, In fear my chastity may be suspected:
How is that voic'd in Naples? Calyp. With loud applause, I assure your Honor. Jol. It confirms I can command my sensual ap∣petites. Calyp. As vassals to your more then masculine reason that commands 'em: Your palace stil'd a Nunnery of pureness, In which not one lascivious thought dares enter, Your clear soul standing Sentinel. Mirt. Well said, Eccho. Jol. Yet I have tasted those delights which women So greedily long for, know their titillations; And when with danger of his head thy father Comes to give comfort to my widowed sheets, As soon as his desires are satisfied, I can with ease forget 'em. Calyp. Observe that, It being indeed remarkable: 'tis nothing For a simple Maid that never had her hand In the hony-pot of pleasure, to forbear it; But such as have lick'd there, and lick'd there often, And felt the sweetness of't. — Mirt. How her mouth runs over with rank ima∣gination! Calyp. If such can, As I urg'd before, the kickshaw being offer'd Refuse to take it, like my matchless Madam, They may be Sainted. Jol. I'll lose no more breath In fruitless reprehension; look to't, I'll have thee wear this habit of my mind, As of my body. Calyp. Seek no other president: In all the books of Amadis de Gaul, The Palmerins, and that true Spanish story The Mirror of Knighthood, which I have read often,
Read feelingly, nay more, I do believe in't My Lady has no parallel. Jol. Do not provoke me. If from this minute, thou ere stir abroad, Write Letter or receive one, or presume To look upon a man, though from a Window, I'll chain thee like a slave in some dark corner; Proscribe thy daily labor: Which omitted, Expect the usage of a Fury from me, Not an indulgent Mothers, Come Calypso. Calyp. Your Ladiships injunctions are so easie, That I dare pawn my credit, my yong Lady And her woman shall obey'em. Exeunt Jol. Calyp. Mirtil. You shall fry first For a rotten peece of dry Touchwood, and give fire To the great Fiends Nostrils, when he smokes To∣bacco. Note the injustice Madam; they would have us Being yong and hungry, keep a perpetual Lent, And the whole yeer to them a Carnivale. Easie injunctions, with a mischief to you: Suffer this, and suffer all. Caliste. Not stir abroad! The use and pleasure of our eyes deny'd us? Mirt. Insufferable. Cal. Nor write, nor yet receive an amorous Letter! Mirt: Not to be endured. Cal. Nor look upon a man out of a Windore. Mirt. Flat tyranny, insupportable tyranny To a Lady of your Blood. Cal. She is my Mother, & how I should decline it? Mirt. Run away from't, take any course, Cal. But without means Mirtilla, how shall we live? Mirt. What a question's that; as if A bucksom Lady could want maintenance
In any place in the World, where there are Men, Wine, Meat, or Money stirring. Cal. Be you more modest, Or seek some other Mistress: Rather then In a thought or dream, I will consent to ought That may take from my honor, I'll endure More then my Mother can impose upon me. Mirt. I grant your honor is a specious dressing, But without conversation of men, A kinde of nothing; I will not perswade you To disobedience: Yet my Confessor told me (And he you know is held a learned Clerk) When Parents do enjoyn unnatural things, Wise Children may evade 'em. She may as well Command when you are hungry, not to eat, Or drink, or sleep; and yet all these are easie Compar'd with the not seeing of a man, As I perswade no farther, but to you There is no such necessity; you have means To shun your Mothers rigor. Cal. Lawful means? Mirt. Lawful, and pleasing too, I will not urge Caldoro's loyal love, you being averse to't, Make tryal of Adorio. Cal. And give up my honor to his lust. Mirt. There's no such thing Intended, Madam; in few words write to him What slavish hours you spend under your Mother, That you desire not present marriage from him, But as a noble Gentleman to redeem you From the tyranny you suffer. With your Letter Present him some rich Jewel; you have one, In which the Rape of Proserpine, in little Is to the life express'd. I'll be the Messenger With any hazard, and at my return, Yeeld you a good accompt of't.
Galist. 'Tis a business to be consider'd of. Mirt. Consideration, when the converse of your Lover is in question, Is of no moment: If she would allow you A Dancer in the morning to well breathe you, A Songster in the afternoon, a Servant To air you in the evening; give you leave To see the Theater twice a week, to mark How the old Actors decay, the young sprout up, A fitting observation, you might bear it; But not to see, or talk, or touch a man, Abominable! Galist. Do not my blushes speak How willingly I would assent? Mirt: Sweet Lady, Do somthing to deserve 'em, and blush after. Exeunt. Act. 2. Scaen. 1. Enter Jolante, Calypso. Jol. ANd are these French-men, as you say, such Gallants? Calyp. Gallant and active; their free breeding knows not The Spanish and Italian preciseness Practis'd among us. What we call immodest, With them is stil'd bold Courtship: they dare fight Under a Veivet-Ensign at fourteen. Jol. A Petticoat you mean. Calyp. You are i'the right; Let a Mistress wear it under an armor of proof, They are not to be beaten off.
Jol. You are merry Neighbor. Calyp. I fool to make you so, pray you observe 'em. They are the forwardest Monsieurs; born Physitians For the malady of yong Wenches, and ne'er miss, I ow my life to one of 'em, when I was A raw yong thing, not worth the ground I trod on; And long'd to dip my Bread in Tar, my Lips As blue as Salt-water, he came up roundly to me, And cur'd me in an instant, Venus be prais'd for't. Enter Alphonso, General, Monteclaro, Attendants, and Captain. Jol. They come, leave prating. Col. I am dumb, an'c like your honor. Alph. We will not break the league confirm'd be∣tween us, And your great Master; the passage of his Army Through all our Territories, lies open to him; Onely we grieve that your design for Rome Commands such haste, as it denies us means To entertain you, as your worth deserves, And we would gladly tender. Gen. Royal Alphonso, the King my Master, your confederate, Will pay the debt he ows, in Fact, which I Want words t'express; I must remove to night, And yet, that your intended favors may not Be lost, I leave this Gentleman behinde me, To whom you may vouchsafe 'em; I dare say Without Repentance. I for bear to give Your Majesty his character; in France He was a President for Arts and Arms Alphonso receives Monteclaro Without a rival, & may prove in Naples Worthy thy imitation,
Calyp. Is he not Madam A Monsieur in print? What a garb was there? O rare! Then how he wears his clothes, and the fashion of 'em. A main assurance that he is within All excellent: By this, wise Ladies ever Make their conjectures. Jol. Peace, I have observ'd him From head to foot. Calyp. Eye him agen, all over. Monte. It cannot royal Sir, but argue me Of much presumption, if not impudence, To be a suitor to your Majesty, Before I have deserv'd a gratious grant, By some employment prosperously archiev'd. But pardon gracious Sir: when I left France I made a vow to a bosom Friend of mine (Which my Lord General, if he please, can witness) With such humility, as well becomes A poor Petitioner to desire a Boon He delivers a Petition. From your magnificence. Calyp. With what punctual form he does deliver it. Jol. I have eyes; no more. Alph. For Severino's pardon, you must excuse me, I dare not pardon murther: Monte. His fact Sir, ever submitting to your abler judgment, Merits a fairer name: He was provok'd, As by unanswerable proofs it is confirm'd, By Monteclaro's rashness; who repining That Severino, without his consent, Had married Jolante his sole sister (It being concleal'd almost for thirteen years)
Though the Gentleman, at all parts, was his equal, First challeng'd him, and that declin'd, he gave him A blow in publick. Gen. Not to be endur'd, but by a slave. Monte. This, great Sir, justly weigh'd, You may a little, if you please, take from The rigor of your Justice, and express An act of mercy. Jol. I can hear no more, This opens an old wound, and makes a new one. Would it were cicatriz'd, waite me. Calyp. As your shadow. Exeunt Jol. Calyp. Alph. We grant you these are glorious pretences, Revenge appearing in the shape of valor, Which wise Kings must distinguish. The defence Of Reputation, now made a Bawd To murther; every trifle falsly stil'd An injury, and not to be determin'd But by a bloody Duel; though this vice Hath taken root and growth beyond the Mountains (As France, and in strange fashions her Ape England can deerly witness, with the loss Of more brave spirits, then would have stood the shock Of the Turks army) while Alphonso lives It shall not here be planted: Move me no further In this. In what else suiting you to ask, And me to give, expect a gratious answer, How ever welcome to our Court, Lord General, I'll bring you out of the Ports, and then betake you To your good fortune. Gen Your Grace overwhelms me. Exeunt.
Enter Calypso, and Jolante (with a Purse and a Jewel) Calyp. You are bound to favor him: Mark you how he pleaded For my Lords pardon. Jol. That's indeed a tye; but I have a stronger on me. Calyp. Say you love His person, be not asham'd of't, he's a man; For whose embraces though Endimion Lay sleeping by, Cinthia would leave her orb, And exchange kisses with him. Jol. Do not Fan A fire that burns already to hot in me, I am in my honor sick, sick to the death, Never to be recovered. Calyp. What a coyl's here For loving a man? It is no Africk wonder, If like Pasiphae you doted on a Bull, Indeed't were monstrous: but in this you have A thousand thousand presidents to excuse you. A Sea-mans wife may ask relief of her Neighbor When her husbands bound to the Indies, and not blam'd for't; And many more besides of higher calling, Though I forbear to name'em: You have a husband, But as the case stands with my Lord, he is A kinde of no husband; and your Ladiship As free as a widow can be. I confess If Ladies should seek change, that have their husbands At Boord and Bed, to pay their marriage duties, The surest bond of concord, 'twere a fault, Indeed it were: But for your honor that Do lie alone so often, Body of me, I am zealous in your cause; let me take breath
Jol. I apprehend what thou wouldst say: I want all As means to quench the spurious fire that burns here. Calyp. Want means while I your Creature live? I dare not Be so unthankful. Jol. Wilt thou undertake it, And as an earnest of much more to come Receive this Jewel, and Purse cramn'd full of Crowns, How dearly I am forc'd to buy dishonor. Calyp. I would do it gratis, but 'twould ill become My breeding to refuse your honors bounty, Nay, say no more, all Rhetorick in this Is comprehended; let me alone to work him, He shall be yours; that's poor, he is already At your devotion I will not boast My faculties this way, but suppose he were Coy as Adonis, or Hippolitus, And your desires more hot then Citherea's, Or wanton Phedras, I will bring him chain'd To your embraces, glorying in his Fetters. I have said it. Jol. Go and prosper, and imagine a salary beyond thy hopes. Calyp. Sleep you Secure on either ear, the burthens yours To entertain him, mine to bring him hither. Exeunt. Enter Adorio, Camillo, Lentulo, Donato. Don. Your wrong's beyond a challenge, and you deal To fairly with him, if you take that way To right your self. Lent. The least that you can do I'th' terms of honor is, when next you neet him
To give him the bastinado. Cam. And that done, Draw out his Sword to cut your own throat. No, Be rul'd by me, shew your self an Italian, And having received one injury, do not put off Your Hat for a second; there are fellows that For a few crowns will make him sure, and so With your revenge, you prevent future misthief. Ador. I thank you Gentlemen for your studied care In what concerns my honor; but in that I'll steer mine own course, yet that you may know You are still my Cabinet Counsellers, my bosom Lies open to you. I begin to feel A weariness, nay, satiety of looseness, And something tells me here, I should repent My harshneis to Caliste. Enter Cario (in haste.) Cam. When you please, you may remove that scruple. Ador. I shall think on't. Car. Sir, Sir, are you ready? Ador. To do what? I am sure 'tis not yet dinner time. Car. True; but I usher Such an unexpected dainty bit for breakfast, As yet I never cook'd? 'tis not Potargo, Fride Frogs, Potato's Marrow'd, Cavear, Carps Tongues, the Pith of an English Chine of Beef, Nor our Italian delicate Oyl'd Mushrooms, And yet a drawer on too; and if you shew not An appetite, and a strong one; I'll not say To eat it, but devour it, without grace too,
For it will not stay a Preface. I am sham'd, And all my past provocatives will be jeer'd at. Ador. Art thou in thy wits? what new found rarity Hast thou discover'd? Car. No such matter Sir; it grows in our own Country. Don. Serve it up, I feel a kinde of stomach. Cam. I could feed too. Car. Not a bit upon a march; there's other Lettice For your course Lips; this is peculiar onely For my Masters palate, I would give my whole years wages With all my vails, and fees due to the Kitchin, But to be his Carver. Ador. Leave your fooling Sirrah, and bring in your dainty. Car. I will bring in it self, It has life and spirit in it, and for proof, Behold: Now fall to boldly, my life on't It comes to be tasted. Enter Mirtilla (with Letter and Jewel.) Cam. Ha! Calistes Woman. Lent. A handsom one by Venus. Ador. Pray you for bear, You are welcome fair one. Don. How that blush becomes her. Ador. Aim your designs at me? Mirt: I'em trusted Sir With a business of near consequence, which I would To your private ear deliver: Car. I told you so.
Give her audience on your Couch, it is fit state To a she Ambassador. Ador. Pray you Gentlemen For a while dispose of your selves, I'll strait attend you. Exit. Car. Dispatch her first for your honor, the quick∣ly doing, You know what follows. Ador. Will you please to vanish Exit Cario. Now pretty one, your pleasure; you shall finde me Ready to serve you, if you'll put me to My Oath, I'll take it on this Book. Mirt. O Sir, the favor is too great, and far above My poor ambition, I must kiss your hand In sign of humble thankfulness. Ador. So mo dest. Mirt. It well becomes a Maid, Sir, spare those blessings For my noble Mistress, upon whom with Justice, And with your good allowance, I might adde With a due gratitude: you may confer 'em, But this will better speak her chast desires Delivers the Letter. Then I can fancy what they are, much less With moving language to their fair deserts Aptly express 'em. Pray you read, but with Compassion, I beseech you: if you finde The Paper blur'd with tears faln from her eyes, While she endeavor'd to set down that truth Her Soul did dictate to her, it must challenge A gratious answer. Ador. O the powerful charms! By that fair hand writ down here; not like those Which dreadfully pronounc'd by Circe, chang'd Ulysses followers into Beasts; these have An opposite working, I already feel
But reading 'em, their saving operations, And all those sensual, loose, and base desires Which have too long usurped, and tyranniz'd Over my Reason, of themselves fall of Most happy Metamorphosis! in which The film of Error that did blinde my Judgment And seduc'd Understanding, is remov'd: What Sacrifice of Thanks can I return Her pious Charity, that not alone Redeems me from the worst of slavery, The tyranny of my beastly appetites; To which, I long obsequiously have bow'd, But addes a marchless favor to receive A benefit from me, nay, puts her Goodness In my protection. Mirt. Transform'd? it is Aside. A blessed Metamorphosis, and works I know not how on me: Ador. My joys are boundless, Curb'd with no limits; for her sake, Mirtilla, Instruct me how I presently may seal To those strong bonds of loyal love, and service Which never shall be cancell'd. Mirt. She'll become your debter Sir, if you vouch∣safe to answer Her pure affection. Ador. Answer it Mirtilla; with more then ado∣ration I kneel to it. Tell her I'll rather die a thousand deaths, Then fail with punctuality to perform All her commands. Mirt. I am lost on this assurance, (Which if 'twere made to me, I should have faith in't, Aside. As in an Oracle. Ah me) she presents you This Jewel, her dead Grandsirs gift, in which,
As by a true Egyptian Herogliphick, (For so I think she call'd it) you may be Instructed what her suit is, you should do, And she with joy will suffer. Ador. Heaven be pleas'd to qualifie this excess of happiness With some disafter, or I shall expire With a surfeit of Felicity, with what art The cunning Lapidary hath here express'd The rape of Proserpine, I apprehend Her purpose, and obey it, yet not as A helping Friend, but a Husband, I will meet Her chast desires with lawful heat, and warm Our Hymenaeal sheets with such delights As leave no sting behinde 'em. Mirt. I despair then. Aside. Ador. At the time appointed, say wench, I'll at∣tend her, And guard her from the fury of her Mother, And all that dare disturb her. Mirt. You speak well, and I believe you. Ador. Would you ought else. Mirt. I would carry some love sign to her; and now I think on't, The kinde salute you offer'd at my entrance, Hold it not impudence that I desire it, I'll faithfully deliver it. Ador. O a kiss, you must excuse me, I was then mine own, Now wholly hers: The touch of other Lips I do abjure for ever; but there's Gold To binde thee still my advocate. Exit. Mirt Not a kiss? I was coy when it was offered, and now justly When I beg one am deni'd, what scortching fires
My loose hopes kindle in me? Shall I be False to my Ladies trust? and from a servant Rise up her rival? His words have bewitch'd me, And something I must do, but what? 'tis yet An embrion, and how to give it form Alas I know not, pardon me, Caliste, I am nearest to my self, and time will teach me To perfect that which yet is undetermined. Exit. Enter Claudio and Severino. Claud. You are Master of your self, yet if I may As a tri'd Friend in my love and affection, And a servant in my duty speak my thoughts, Without offence? i'th' way of counsel to you, I could alleage, and truly that your purpose For Naples cover'd with a thin disguise Is full of danger. Sever. Danger Claudio? 'Tis here, and every where our forc'd companion, The rising and the setting Sun, beholds us Inviron'd with it; our whole life a journey Ending in certain ruine. Claud. Yet we should not, howev'r besieg'd, deli∣ver up our Fort Of life, till it be forc'd. Sever. 'Tis so indeed by wisest men concluded, which we should Obey as Christians; but when I consider How different the progress of our actions Are from Religion, nay, Morality, I cannot finde in Reason, why we should Be scrupulous that way onely, or like Meteors Blaze forth prodigious terrors, till our stuff Be utterly consum'd, which once put out,
Would bring security unto our selves, And safety unto those we prey upon. O Claudio: since by this fatal hand The brother of my wife, bold Monteclaro, Was left dead in the field, and I proscrib'd After my flight, by the justice of the King, My being hath been but a living death With a continued torture. Claud. Yet in that you do delude their bloody violence That do pursue your life. Sever. While I by rapines live terrible to others as my self, What one hour can we challenge as our own (Unhappy as we are) yielding a beam Of comfort to us? Quiet night that brings Rest to the labourer, is the Outlaws day, In which he rises early to do wrong, And when his work is ended, dares not sleep: Our time is spent in watches to intrap Such as would shun us, and to hide our selves From the Ministers of Justice, that would brihg us To the correction of the Law. O Claudio, Is this a life to be preserv'd? and at So dear a rate? But why hold I discourse On this sad subject? since it is a burthen We are mark'd to bear, and not to be shook off But with our humane frailty. In the change Of dangers there is some delight, and therefore I am resolv'd for Naples. Claud. May you meet there All comforts that so fair and chaste a wife (As fame proclaims her without parallel) Can yield to ease your sorrows. Sever. I much thank you; Yet you may spare those wishes, which with joy
I have prov'd certainties, and from their want Her excellencies take lustre. Claud. Ere you go yet, Some charge unto your Squires not to flie out Beyond their bounds, were not impertinent: For though that with a look you can command 'em, In your absence they'll be headstrong Sever. 'Tis well thought on, I'll touch my horn, they know my call, Blows his horn. Claud. And will, as soon as heard, make in to't from all quarters, As the flock to the shepherds whistle. Enter six Banditi. 1: What's your will? 2. Hail Soveraign of these Woods. 3. We lay our lives at your Highness feet. 4. And will confess no King, Nor Laws, but what come from your mouth; and those We gladly will subscribe to: Sever. Make this good In my absence to my substitute, to whom Pay all obedience as to my self: The breach of this in one particular I will severely punish; on your lives Remember upon whom with our allowance You may securely prey, with such as are Exempted from your fury. Claud. 'Twere not amiss, If you please, to help their memory; besides, Here are some newly initiated. Sever. To these read you the Articles: I must be gone; Claudio, farewell,
Claud. May your return be speedy. Ex. Sever 1. Silence; out with your Table-books. 2. And observe. Claud. The Cormorant that lives in expectation Of a long wish'd for dearth, and smiling grindes The faces of the poor, you may make spoil of; Even theft to such is Justice. 3. He's in my Tables. Claud. The grand Incloser of the Commons, for His private profit, or delight, withal His Herds that graze upon't are lawful prize, 4. And we will bring'em in, although the devil Stood roaring by, to guard'em. Claud. If a Usurer, Greedy at his own price, to make a purchase, Taking advantage upon Bond, or Morgage, From a Prodigal, pass through our Territories, I'the way of custom, or of tribute to us, You may ease him of his burthen. 2. Wholsome doctrine. Claud Builders of Iron Mills, that grub up Forests, With Timber Trees for shipping. 1. May we not have a touch at Lawyers: Claud. By no means; they may To soon have a gripe at us; they are angry Hornets, Not to be jested with. 3. This is not so well: Claud. The owners of dark shops that vent their wares With Perjuries; cheating Vintners not contented With half in half in their reckonings, yet cry out When they finde their ghests want coyn, 'tis late, and Bed-time; These ransack at your pleasures. 3. How shall we know'em. Claud. If they walk on foot by their Rat-colour'd stockings,
And shining shooes. If Horsmen by short Boots, And riding furniture of several Counties. 2. Not one of the List escapes us. Claud. But for Schollars, Whose wealth lies in their heads, & not their pockets, Soldiers that have bled in their Countries service, The Rent-rack'd Farmer, needy Market folks, The sweaty Laborer; Carriers that transport The goods of other men, are priviledg'd; But above all, let none presume to offer Violence to women, for our King hath sworn, Who that way's a Delinquent; without mercy Hangs for't by Marshal law. Omnes. Long live Severino. And perish all such cullions as repine at his new Mo∣narchy. Claud. About your business, That he may finde at his return good cause To praise your care and discipline. Omnes. We'll not fail Sir. Exeunt. Enter Monteclaro and Calypso. Mont. Thou art sure mistaken, 'tis not possible That I can be the man thou art employ'd too. Calyp. Not you the man? you are the man of men, And such another in my Ladies eye, Never to be discover'd. Mont. A meer stranger newly arriv'd? Calyp. Still the more probable, Since Ladies, as you know, affect strange dainties, And brought far to 'em. This is not an age In which Saints live; but women, knowing women, That understand their Summum bonum, is Variety of pleasures in the touch, Deriv'd from several Nations; and if men Would be wise by their example. Mont. As most are. 'Tis a coupling age!
Calyp. Why sir, do Gallants travel? Answer that question; but at their return With wonder to the hearers, to discourse of The garb and difference in foreign Females. As the lusty Girle of France, the sober German, The plump Dutch Fro, the stately Dame of Spain, The Roman Libertine, and spriteful Tuscan, The merry Greek, Venetian Courtesan, The English fair Companion, that learns something From every Nation, and will flie at all. I say again the difference betwixt these And their own Country Gamesters. Mont. Aptly urg'd. Some make that their main end; but may I ask Without offence to your gravity, By what title Your Lady that invites me to her favors, Is known in the City. Galyp. If you were a true born Monsieur, You would do the business first, and ask that after. If you onely truck with her title, I shall hardly Deserve thanks for my travel; she is Sir No single Duccat trader, nor a Beldam So frozen up, that a Fever cannot thaw her. No Lioness by her breath. Mont. Leave these impertinencies, and come to the matter. Calyp. Would you woo'd be as forward When you draw for the upshot, she is Sir a Lady, A rich, fair, well-complexioned, and what is Not frequent among Venus Votaries, Upon my credit, which good men have trusted; A sound and wholedom Lady, and her name is Madona Jolante. Mont. Jolante. I have heard of her, for chastity, and beauty; The wonder of the age.
Calyp. Pray you not too much, Of chastity, fair, and free I do subscribe too, And so you'll finde her. Mont. Come y'are a base Creature, And covering your foul ends with her fair name, Give me just reason, to suspect you have A plot upon my life. Calyp. A plot! Very fine! Nay, 'tis a dangerous one, pray you beware of't, 'Tis cunningly contriv'd, I plot to bring you A foot with the travel of some forty paces, To those delights, which a man not made of Snow, Would ride a thousand miles for. You shall be Receiv'd at a Postern door, if you be not cautious, By one whose touch would make old Nestor yong, And cure his Hernia? A terrible plot! A kiss then ravished from you by such Lips As flow with Nectar, a Juicy-palm more pretious Then the fam'd Sibilla's Bough to guide you safe Through Mists of perfumes to a glorious room, Where Jove might feast his Juno, a dire plot, A Banquet I'll not mention, that is common; But I must not forget to make the plot More horrid to you. The retiring bower So furnish'd, as might force the Persians envy, The Silver bathing Tub, the Cambrick rubbers, Th'embroider'd Quilt, a Bed of Gossamire, And Damask Roses, a meer Powder plot To blow you up; and last, a Bed-fellow, To whose rare entertainment all these are But foils, and settings off. Mont. No more, her breath would warm an Euenuch. Calyp. I knew I should heat you; now he begins to glow. Mont. I am flesh and blood,
And I were not man, if I should not run the hazard, Had I no other ends in't, I have consider'd Your motion, Matron. Calyp. My Plot Sir on your life, For which, I am deservedly suspected For a base and dangerous woman. Fare you well Sir, I'll be bold to take my leave. Mont: I will along too. Come pardon my suspition, I confess My Error; and eying you better, I perceive There's nothing that is ill that can flow from you. I am serious, and for proof of it I'll purchase Your good opinion. Calyp. I am gently natur'd, And can forget a greater wrong upon Such terms of satisfaction. Mont. What's the hour. Calyp. Twelve. Mont. I'll not miss a minute. Calyp. I shall finde you at your lodging? Mont. Certainly, return my service, And for me kiss your Ladies hands. Calyp. At twelve, I'll be your convoy. Mont. I desire no better. Exeunt. Act. 3. Scaen. 1. Enter Durazzo, Caldoro, Servant. Dur. WAlk the Horses down the Hill, I have a little To speak in private.
Cald. Good Sir, no more anger. Duraz. Love do you call it? Madness, wilful Madness; And since I cannot cure it, I would have you Exactly mad. You are a lover already, Be a drunkard too, and after turn small Poet, And then you are mad Katexikene, the Madman. Cald. Such as are safe on shore, may smile at tem∣pests, But I that am embarqu'd, and every minute Expect a shipwrack, rellish not your mirthe; To me it is unseasonable. Duraz Pleasing Viands, are made sharp by sick palats. I affect A handsom Mistress in my grey Beard, as well As any Boy of you all; and on good terms Will venture as far i'th' fire, so she be willing To entertain me; but ere I would dote As you do, where there is no flattering hope Ever t'enjoy her, I would forswear Wine, And kill this letcherous Itch with drinking Water, Or live like a Carthusian on Poor-John, Then bathe my self, night by night, in marble dew, And use no Soap but Camphir-Balls. Cald. You may (and I must suffer it) like a rough Surgeon, Apply these burning costicks to my wounds Already gangreen'd, when soft unguents would Better express an Uncle, with some feeling Of his Nephews torments. Duraz. I shall melt, and cannot Hold out if he whimper. O that this yong fellow, Who on my knowledge is able to beat a man, Should be baffel'd by this blinde imagin'd-Boy, Or fear his Bird-bolts. Cald. Y'have put your self already
To too much trouble in bringing me thus far: Now if you please, with your good wishes leave me To my hard fortunes. Dur. I'll forsake my self first. Leave thee? I cannot, will not; thou shalt have No cause to be weary of my company, For I'll be useful, and ere I see thee perish, Dispensing with my dignity and candor, I will do something for thee, though it savour Of the old Squire of Troy. As we ride, we will Consult of the means: Bear up. Cal. I cannot sink, Having your noble aids to buoy me up; There was never such such a Guardian. Dur. How's this? stale complements to me? when my work's done, Commend th'artificer, and then be thankful. Exeunt. Enter Caliste (richly habited) and Mirtilla (in her first gown.) Cal. How doest thou like my gown? Mirt. 'Tis rich and Courtlike. Cal. The dressings too are suitable? Mir. I must say so, or you might blame my want of care. Cal. My mother Little dreams of my intended flight, or that These are my nuptial ornaments. Mir. I hope so. Cal. How dully thou repliest! thou dost not envy Adorio's noble change, or the good fortune That it brings to me? Mir. My endeavours that way can answer for me. Cal True, you have discharged
A faithful Servants duty, and it is By me rewarded like a liberal Mistress: I speak it not to upbraid you with my bounties, Though they deserve more thanks and ceremony Then you have yet express'd. Mir. The miseries which from your happiness I am sure to suffer, Restrain my forward tongue; and gentle Madam, Excuse my weakness, though I do appear A little daunted with the heavy burthen I am to undergo: when you are safe, My dangers like to roaring torrents will Gush in upon me; yet I would endure Your mothers cruelty; but how to bear Your absence, in the very thought confounds me: Since we were children, I have lov'd and serv'd you; I willingly learn'd to obey, as you Grew up to knowledg, that you might command me; And now to be divorc'd from all my comforts, Can this be borne with patience? Cal. The necessity of my strange fate commands it; but I vow By my Adorio's love, I pitty thee. Cal. Pitty me, Madam! a cold charity; You must do more, and help me. Cal. Ha! what said you? I must? is this fit language for a servant? Mir. For one that would continue your poor servant, And cannot live that day in which she is Deni'd to be so: Can Mirtilla sit Mourning alone, imagining those pleasures Which you this blessed Hymeneal night Enjoy in the embraces of your Lord, And my Lord too in being yours, (already As such I love and honor him) shall a stranger Sew you in a sheet to guard that maidenhead
You must pretend to keep, (and 'twill become you.) Shall another do those bridal offices Which time will not permit me to remember, And I pine here with envy? Pardon me, I must and will be pardon'd, for my passions Are in extreams, and use some speedy means That I may go along with you, and share In those delights, but with becoming distance; Or by his life, which as a Saint you swear by, I will discover all. Calist. Thou canst not be So treacherous and cruel, in destroying The building thou hast rais'd, Mirt. Pray you do not tempt me, for 'tis re∣solv'd. Calist. I know not what to think of't. In the discovery of my secrets to her, I have made my slave my Mistress, I must sooth her, There's no evasion else. Prethee Mirtilla, Be not so violent, I am strangely taken With thy affection to me, 'twas my purpose To have thee sent for. Mirt. When? Calist. This very night, and I vow deeply I shall be no sooner In the desir'd possession of my Lord; But by some of his servants I will have thee Convey'd unto us. Mirt. Should you break? Calist. I dare not: Come, clear thy looks, for instantly we'll prepare For our departure. Mirt. Pray you forgive my boldness, Growing from my excess of zeal to serve you. Calist. I thank thee for't. Mirt. You'll keep your word.
Calist. Still doubtful? Mirt. 'Twas this I aim'd at, and leave the rest to Fortune. Exeunt. Enter Adorio, Camillo, Lentulo, Donato, Cario, Servants. Ador. Haste you unto my Villa, and take all Provision along with you; and for use, And ornament, the shortness of the time Can furnish you; let my best Plate be set out, And costliest Hangings, and if't be possible With a merry dance to entertain the Bride, Provide an Epithaiamium. Car. Trust me for belly timber, and for a song I have A Paper blurrer; who on all occasions, For all times, and all seasons, hath such trinckets Ready i'th' deck. It is but altering The names, and they will serve for any Bride, Or Bridegroom in the Kingdom. Ador. But for the dance? Car. I will make one my self, and foot it finely, And summoning your Tenants at my Dresser, Which is indeed my Drum. Make a rare choice Of th'able youth, such as shall sweat sufficiently, And smell too, but not of Amber, which you know is The grace of the Country-hall. Ador. About it Cario, and look you be careful. Car. For mine own credit Sir. Exit. Ador. Now noble friends confirm your loves, and think not Of the penalty of the Law, that does forbid The stealing away an Heir. I will secure you, And pay the breach of't.
Cam. Tell us what we shall do, we'll talk of that hereafter. Ador. Pray you be carefull To keep the West-gate of the City open, That our passage may be free, and bribe the Watch With any sum; this is all. Don. A dangerous business. Cam. I'll make the Constable, Watch, and Porter drunk, Under a Crown. Lent. And then you may pass while they snore. Though you had done a murther. Cam. Get but your Mistress, And leave the rest to us. Ador. You much engage me, But I forget my self: Cam. Pray you in what, Sir? Ador. Yielding too much to my affection, Though lawful now; my wounded reputation And honor suffer: The disgrace in taking A blow in publike from Caldoro, branded With the infamous mark of Coward, in delaying To right my self, upon my cheek grows fresher, That's first to be consider'd Cam. If you dare Trust my opinion, (yet I have had Some practice and experience in duels) You are too tender that way: Can you answer The debt you owe your honor, till you meet Your Enemy from whom you may exact it? Hath he not left the City, and in fear Conceal'd himself, for ought I can imagine? What would you more? Ador. I should do. Cam. Never think on' Till fitter time and place invite you to it. I have read Caranza, and find not in his Grammar
Of Quarrels, that the injur'd man is bound To seek for reparation at an hour; But may, and without loss, till he hath setled More serious occasions that import him, For a day or two defer it. Ador. You'll subscribe Your hand to this? Cam. And justifie't with my life, Presume upon't. Ador. On then, you shall overrule me. Exeunt. Enter Jolante and Calypso. Jol I'll give thee a golden tongue, and have it hung up Ore thy tomb for a monument. Cal. I am not prepar'd yet To leave the world; there are many good pranks I must dispatch in this kind before I die: And I had rather, if your Honor please, Have the crowns in my purse. Jol. Take that. Cal. Magnificent Lady! May you live long, and every Moon love change, That I may have fresh imployment, You know what Remains to be done. Jol. Yes, yes, I will command My daughter and Mirtilla to their chamber: Cal. And lock'em up: Such liquorish Kitlings are not To be trusted with our cream. Ere I go, I'll help you To set forth the banquet, and place the candid Erin∣go's Where he may be sure to taste 'em. Then undress you, For these things are cumbersom, when you should be active:
A thine night mantle to hide part of your Smock, With your Pearl embroider'd Pantophles on your Feet, And then you are arm'd for service; nay, no tri∣fling, We are alone, and you know 'tis a point of folly To be coy to eat, when meat is set before you. Exeunt: Enter Adorio, and Servant. Ador. 'Tis eleveu by my Watch, the hour ap∣pointed. Listen at the door; hears't thou any stirring? Serv. No Sir, all's silent here. Ador. Some cursed business keeps Her mother up. I'll walk a little circle, And shew where you shall wait us with the horses, And then return. This short delay afflicts me, And I presume, to her it is not pleasing. Exeunt. Enter Durazzo, Caldoro. Dur. What's now to be done? prethee let's to Bed, I am sleep. And here's my hand on't without more ado, By fair or foul play, we'll have her to morrow In thy possession. Cald. Good Sir give me leave To taste a little comfort in beholding The place by her sweet presence sanctifi'd. She may perhaps to take air, ope the Casement, And looking out, a new Star to be gaz'd on By me with adoration, bless these eyes. Ne'er happy but when she is made the Object. Dur. Is not here fine fooling.
Caldo. Thou great Queen of Love, Or real or imagin'd, be propitious To me thy faithful Votary; and I vow T'erect a statue to thee, equal to Thy picture by Apelles skilful hand Left as the great example of his art; And on thy thigh I'll hang a golden Cupid, His torches flaming, and his quiver full, For further honour. Dur. End this waking dream, and let's away Mirtilla! Enter Caliste and Mirtilla. Cald. 'Tis her voice. Cal. You heard the horses footing. Mirt. Certainly. Cal. Speak low, my Lord Adorio: Cald. I am dumb. Dur. The darkness friend us too, most honour'd Madam, Adorio your servant. Cal. As you are so, I do command your silence till we are Further remov'd; and let this kiss assure you, (I thank the sable night that hides my blushes) I am wholly yours. Dur. Forward you micher. Mirt. Madam, think on Mirtilla. [Goes in] Dur. I'll not now enquire The mysterie of this, but bless kind Fortune Favoring us beyond our hopes: yet now I think on't, I had ever a lucky hand in such smock night-work. Exeunt.
Enter Adorio and Servant. Ador. This slowness does amaze me; she's not alter'd In her late resolution. [Within jolant.] Get you to bed, And stir not on your life, till I command you. Ador. Her mothers voice! listen. Serv. Here comes the daughter. Enter Mirtilla. Mirt. Whither shall I flie for succor? Ador. To these arms, your castle of defence, im∣pregnable, And not to be blown up. How your heart beats! Take comfort, dear Caliste, you are now In his protection that will nere forsake you, Adorio: Your chang'd Adorio swears By your best self, an oath he dares not break, He loves you, loves you in a noble way, His constancie firm as the poles of heaven. I will urge no reply, silence becomes you, And I'll defer the musick of your voice Till we are in a place of safety. Mirt. O blest error! Exeunt. Enter Severino. 'Tis midnight: how my fears of certain death Being surpris'd, combat with my strong hopes Rais'd on my chaste wifes goodness! I am grown A stranger in this City, and no wonder, I have too long been so unto my self: Grant me a little truce, my troubled soul, I hear some footing, ha? Enter Monteclaro and Calypso. Calyp. That is the house,
And there's the key; you'll find my Lady ready To entertain you: 'tis not fit I should Stand gaping by while you bill: I have brought you on, Charge home, and come off with honor. Exit. Sever. It makes this way. Mont. I am much troubled, and know not what to think Of this design. Sever. It still comes on. Mont. The Watch! I am betraid. Sever. Should I now appear fearful, It would discover me; there is no retiring, My confidence must protect me, I'll appear As if I walk'd the round. Stand. Mont. I: am lost. Sever. The word? Mont. Pray you forbear; I am a stranger, And missing this dark stormy night my way To my lodging, you shall do a courteous office To guide me to't. Sever Do you think I stand here for a page or a porter? Mont. Good sir grow not so high, I can justifie my being abroad; I am No pilfering vagabond, and what you are Stands yet in supposition; and I charge you If you are an Officer, bring me before your Captain; For if you do assault me, though not in fear Of what you can do alone, I will cry murther And raise the streets. Sever. Before my Captain, ha? And bring my head to the block. Would we were parted, I have greater cause to fear the Watch then he. Mont. Will you do your duty? Sever. I must close with him: Truth sir, whatere you are, (yet by your language I ghess you a Gentleman) I'll not use the rigor
Of my place upon you; only quit this street, For your stay here will be dangerous, and good night. Mont. The like to you sir; I'll grope out my way As well as I can. O damn'd Bawd! fare you well sir. Exit Monteclaro. Sever. I am glad he's gone; there is a secret passage Unknown to my wife, through which this key will guide me To her desired imbraces, which must be, My presence being beyond her hopes, most welcom. Exit. Enter Jolante (with a rich banquet, and tapers) (in a chair, behind a curtain.) Jol. I am full of perplexed thoughts: Imperious Blood, Thou only art a tyrant; Judgment, Reason, To whatsoever thy Edicts proclaim, With vassal fear subscribe against themselves, I am yet safe in the port, and see before me, If I put off, a rough tempestuous sea, The raging winds of infamy from all quarters Assuring my destruction; yet my lust Swelling the wanton sails, (my understanding (Stow'd under hatches) like a desperate Pilot Commands me to urge on: My pride, my pride, Self-love, and over-value of my self Are justly punish'd: I that did deny My daughters youth allow'd and lawful pleasures, And would not suffer in her those desires She suck'd in with my milk, now in my waning Am scorcht and burnt up with libidinous fire That must consume my fame; yet still I throw More fuel on it. Enter Severino. Sever. 'Tis her voice, poor Turtle;
She's now at her devotions praying for Her banished Mate: alas, that for my guilt Her innocence should suffer! But I do Commit a second sin in my deferring The extasie of joy that will transport her Beyond herself, when she flies to my lips, And seals my welcom. Jolante! Jol. Ha? good Angels guard me. Sever. What do I behold? Some sudden flash of lightning strike me blind, Or cleave the center of the earth, that I May living find a sepulchre to swallow Me and my shame together. Jol. Guilt and horror Confound me in one instant; thus surpris'd, The subtlety of all Wantons, though abstracted, Can shew no seeming colour of excuse To plead in my defence. Sever. Is this her mourning? O killing object! the imprison'd vapours Of rage and sorrow make an earthquake in me; This little world, like to a tottering tower, Not to be underpropp'd; yet in my fall I'll crush thee with my ruines. Draws a poniard, she kneels. Jol. Good sir, hold: For, my defence unheard, you wrong your justice, If you proceed to execution, And will too late repent it. Sever. Thy defence? To move it, adds (could it receive addition) Ugliness to the loathsom leprosie That in thy being a Strumpet hath already Infected every vein, and spreads it self Over this carrion, which would poison Vulturs and dogs, should they devour it. Yet to stamp The seal of Reprobation on thy soul,
I'll hear thy impudent lyes borrow'd from hell And prompted by the Devil thy tutor, Whore, Then send thee to him. Speak. Jol. Your Gorgon looks Turn me to stone, and a dead palsie seises My silenc'd tongue. Sever. O fate, that the disease Were general in women; what a calm Should wretched men enjoy! Speak, and be brief, Or thou shalt suddenly feel me. Jol. Be appeas'd sir, Until I have deliver'd reasons for This solemn preparation. Sever. On, I hear thee. Jol. With patience ask your memory; 'twill in∣struct you, This very day of the moneth 17 years since You married me. Sever. Grant it, what canst thou urge from this? Jol. That day since your proscription sir, In the rembrance of it annually, The garments of my sorrow laid aside, I have with pomp observ'd. Sever. Alone! Jol. The thoughts of my felicity then, my misery now, Were the invited guests; Imagination Teaching me to believe that you were present And a partner in it. Sever. Rare! this real banquet To feast your fancie: Fiend, could Fancie drink off These flagons to my health? or th'idol Thought Like Baal devour-these delicates? the room Perfum'd to take his nostrils? this loose habit Which Messalina would not wear, put on To fire his lustful eyes? Wretch, am I grown So weak in thy opinion, that it can
Flatter credulity that these gross tricks May be foisted on me? Where's my daughter? where The Bawd your woman? answer me, Caliste, Mirtilla! they are dispos'd of, if not murther'd, To make all sure; and yet methinks your neighbour, Your whistle, agent, parasite Calypso, Should be within: Call when you hem to usher in The close Adulterer. Jol. What will you do? Sever. Not kill thee, do not hope it, I am not So near to reconcilement. Ha! this scarf Th'intended favor to your Stallion, now Is useful: do not strive; thus bound expect All studied tortures, my assurance, not My jealousie thou art false, can pour upon thee. In darkness howl thy mischiefs; and if rankness Of thy imagination can conjure The Ribaud, glut thy self with him: I will cry aim, and in another room Determine of my vengeance. Oh my heart-strings! Exit (with tapers.) Jol. Most miserable woman! and yet sitting A Judge in mine own cause upon my self, I could not mitigate the heavy doom My incens'd husband must pronounce upon me. In my intents I am guilty, and for them Must suffer the same punishment, as if I had in fact offended. [Calypso speaks at the door.] Bore my eyes out If you prove me faulty: I'll but tell my Lady What caus'd your stay, and instantly present you. How's this? no lights? what new device? will she play At Blindman buff Madam?
Jol. Upon thy life speak in a lower key: Calyp. The mysterie Of this sweet Lady; where are you? Jol. Here fast bound. Calyp. By whom? Jol. I'll whisper that into thine ear, and then fare∣well for ever. Calyp. How? my Lord, I am in a fever: Horns upon horns grow on him. Could he pick no hour but this to break a bargain Almost made up? Jol. What shall we do? Calyp. Betray him: I'll instantly raise the Watch. Jol. And so make me for ever infamous. Calyp. The Gentleman, the rarest Gentleman is at the door, Shall he lose his labour? since that you must perish, 'T will shew a womans spleen in you to fall Deservedly: give him his answer, Madam. I have on the sudden in my head a strange whimsie, But I will first unbind you. Jol. Now what follows? Cal. I will supply your place; and bound, give me Your mantle, take my night-gown, send away The Gentleman satisfied. I know my Lord Wants power to hurt you: I perhaps may get A kiss by the bargain, and all this may prove But some neat love-trick: If he should grow furious And question me, I am resolv'd to put on An obstinate silence. Pray you dispatch the Gent. His courage may cool. Jol. I'll speak with him; but if To any base or lustful end, may mercy At my last gasp forsake me. Exit. Calyp. I was too rash, And have done what I wish undone: say he should kill me.
I have run my head in a fine nooze, and I smell The pickle I am in: 'las how I shudder Still more and more! would I were a she Priapus. Stuck up in a garden to fright away the Crows, So I were out of the house; she's at her pleasure Whatere she said, and I must endure the torture. He comes; I cannot pray, my fear will kill me. Enter Severino (throwing open the doors violently) having a knife. Sev. It is a deed of darkness, and I need No light to guide me: there is something tels me I am too slow pac'd in my wreak, and trifle In my revenge. All hush'd? no sigh nor groan To witness her compunction? can guilt sleep, And innocence be open-ey'd? Even now Perhaps she dreams of the Adulterer, And in her fancie hugs him: Wake thou strumpet, And instantly give up unto my vengeance The villain that defiles my bed; discover Both what and where he is, and suddenly That I may bind you face to face, then sew you Into one sack, and from some steep rock hurl you Into the sea together: Do not play with The lightning of my rage; break stubborn silence. And answer my demands, will it not be? I'll talk no longer; thus I mark thee for A common strumpet. Calyp. Oh! Sever. Thus stab these arms That have stretch'd out themselves to grasp a stranger. Calyp. Oh! Sever. This is but an induction; I'll draw The curtains of the Tragedy hereafter: Howl on, 'tis musick to me. Exit Severino.
Calyp. He is gone, A kiss and love-tricks; he hath villainous teeth, May sublim'd Mercury draw 'em. If all dealers In my profession were paid thus, there would be A dearth of Cuckolds. Oh my nose! I had one, My arms, my arms! I dare not cry for fear: Cursed desire of gold, how art thou punish'd? Enter Jolante. Jol. Till now I never truly knew my self, Nor by all principles and lectures read In Chastities cold school was so instructed As by her contrary. How base and deform'd Loose appetite is! as in a few short minutes This stranger hath, and feelingly, deliver'd. Oh that I could recall my bad intentions, And be as I was yesterday untainted In my desires, as I am still in fact (I thank his temperance) I could look undanted Upon my husbands rage, and smile at it; So strong the guards, and sure defences are Of armed Innocence; but I will endure The penance of my sin, the onely means, Is left to purge it. The day breaks, Calypso. Calyp. Here Madam, here: Jol. Hath my Lord visited thee? Calyp. Hell take such visits; these stab'd arms, and loss Of my nose, you left fast on, may give you a rellish What a night I have had of't, and what you had suffered, Had I not supplied your place. Jol. I truly grieve for't; did not my husband speak to thee? Calyp. Yes, I heard him
And felt him ecce signum, with a mischief. But he knew not me; like a true bred Spartan Fox With silence I endured it, he could not get One syllable from me. Jol. Something may be fashion'd From this invention: Help me, I must be sudden, Thou art free, exchange, quick, quick, now binde me sure, And leave me to my fortune. Calyp. Pray you consider, The loss of my nose; had I been but carted for you, Though wash'd with Mire and Chamber-ly, I had Examples to excuse me; but my nose, my nose dear Lady. Exit. Jol. Get off, I'll send to thee. If so, it may take; if it fail, I must Suffer what ever follows. Enter Severino (with a Taper.) Sever. I have searched In every corner of the house, yet finde not My daughter, nor her Maid, nor any print Of a mans footing, which this wet night would Be easily discern'd, the ground being soft, At his coming in or going out. Jol. 'Tis he, and I am within hearing; Heaven forgive this feigning, I being forc'd to't to preserve my life, To be better spent hereafter. Sever. I begin to stagger, and my love if it knew how, Her piety heretofore, and same remembred, Would plead in her excuse.
Jol. You blessed Guardians Of matrimonial faith, and just revengers Of such as do in fact offend against Your sacred rites and ceremonies; by all titles And holy attributes you do vouchsafe To be invok'd, look down with saving pitty Upon my matchless sufferings. Sever. At her devotions, affliction makes her re∣pent. Jol. Look down upon a wretched woman; and as I Have kept the knot of wedlock, in the Temple By the Priest fasten'd firm, (though in loose wishes I yield I have offended) to strike blind The eyes of Jealousie that see a crime I never yet committed, and to free me From the unjust suspition of my Lord, Restore my martyr'd face and wounded arms To their late strength and beauty. Sever. Does she hope to be cur'd by miracle? Jol. This minute I Perceive with joy my orisons heard and granted: You ministers of mercy, who unseen, And by a supernatural means have done This work of heavenly charity, be ever canoniz'd for't. Sever. I did not dream, I heard her, And I have eyes too, they cannot deceive me. If I have no belief in their assurance, I must turn sceptick. Ha? this is the hand? And this the fatal instrument? these drops Of blood, that gush'd forth from her face and arms, Still fresh upon the floor: This is something more Then wonder or amazement, I profess I am a∣stonish'd: Jol. Be incredulous still,
And go on in your barbarous rage, led to it By your false guide Suspition, have no faith In my so long try'd loyalty, nor believe That which you see; and for your satisfaction, My doubted innocence cleared by miracle, Proceed, these Veins have now new blood, if you Resolve to let it out. Sever. I would not be fool'd With easiness of belief, and faintly give Aside. Credit to this strange wonder? 'tis now thought on In a fitter place and time, I'll sound this fur∣ther. Unties her. How can I expect my sin? or hope, Though now I write my self thy slave, the service Of my whole life can win thee to pronounce Despair'd of pardon? shall I kneel? that's poor, Thy mercy must urge more in my defence, Then I can fancy; wil't thou have revenge? My heart lies open to thee. Jol. This is needless to me, who in the duty of a wife, Know I must suffer. Sever. Thou art made up of goodness, And from my confidence that I am alone, The object of thy pleasures, until death Divorce us, we will know no separation Without inquiring why (as sure thou wilt not, Such is thy meek obedience) thy Jewels And choicest ornaments pack'd up, thou shalt Along with me; and as a Queen be honor'd. By such a stile me Soveraign, already My banishment is repeal'd, thou being present: The Neapolitan Court a place of exile When thou art absent; my stay here is mortal Of which thou art to sensible, I perceive it. Come dearest Jolante, with this breath
All jealousie is blown away: Jol. Be constant. Exeunt. Act. 4. Scaen. 1. A noyse within, as the fall of a Horse, — then Enter Durazzo, Caldoro, Caliste, Servant. Duraz. HEll take the stumbling Jade. Cald. Heaven help the Lady. Serv. The Horse hath broke his neck. Duraz. Would thine were crack'd too So the Lady had no harm. Give her fresh air, 'Tis but a swoun. Cald. 'Tis more, she's dead: Duraz. Examine Her limbs if they be whole: not too high, not too high You Ferrit, this is no Cunniborough for you. How do you finde her? Cald No breath of comfort sir, too cruel fate! Had I still pin'd away, and lingred under The modesty of just and honest hopes After a long consumption, sleep and death, To me had been the same, but now as 'twere Possess'd of all my wishes, in a moment To have 'em ravished from me? suffer shipwrack In view of the Port? and like a half starv'd begger, No sooner in compassion cloath'd, but coffin'd? Malevolent destinies, too cunning in
Wretched Caldoro's tortures. O Caliste, If thy immortal part hath not already Left this fair pallace, let a beam of light Dawn from thine eye, in this Cimmerian darkness, To guide my shaking hand to touch the anchor Of hope in thy recovery. Caliste. Oh. Duraz. She lives, disturb her not, she is no right bred woman If she die with one fall; some of my acquaintance Have took a thousand merrily, and are still Excellent wrestlers at the close hug. Cald. Good Sir. Duraz. Prethee be not angry, I should speak thus if My Mother were in her place. Cald. But had you heard The musick of the language which she us'd To me, believ'd Adorio, as she rode Behinde me; little thinking that she did Embrace Caldoro. Caliste. Ah Adorio! Duraz. Leave talking, I conceive it. Caliste. Are you safe? Cald. And rais'd like you from death to life to hear you. Calist. Hear my defence then, ere I take my vail off. A simple maids defence, which looking on you, I faintly could deliver; willingly I am become your prize, and therefore use Your victory nobly; Heavens bright eye, the Sun, Draws up the grossest vapors, and I hope I ne'er shall prove an envious cloud to darken The splendor of your merits. I could urge With what disdain, nay scorn, I have declin'd The shadows of insinuating pleasures
Tender'd by all men else, you onely being The object of my hopes: That cruel Prince To whom the Olive branch of Peace is offer'd, Is not a conqueror, but a bloody tyrant, If he refuse it; nor should you wish a triumph, Because Caliste's humble; I have said And now expect your sentence. Duraz. What a throng Of Clients would be in the Court of Love, Were there many such she Advocates: Art thou dumb? Canst thou say nothing for thy self. Cald. Dear Lady open your eyes, and look upon the man, The man you have elected for your Judge, Kneeling to you for mercy. Cal. I should know this voice, and something more then fear I am Deceiv'd, but now I look upon his face, I am assur'd I am wretched. Duraz. Why good Lady? Hold her up, she'll fall agen, before her time else, The youth's a well timbred youth, look on his ma∣king; His Hair curl'd naturally, he's whole chested too, And will do his work as well, and go through stitch with't, As any Adorio in the world; my slate on't, A Chicken of the right kinde; and if he prove not A Cock of the Game, cuckold him first, and after Make a Capon of him. Caliste. I'll cry out a Rape, If thou unhand me not; would I had died In my late trance, and never liv'd to know I am betray'd. Duraz. To a yong and active husband,
Call you that trechery; there are a shole of Yong wenches i'th' City, would vow a pilgrimage Beyond Jerusalem, to be so cheated. To her agen you milk-sop, violent storms Are soon blown over. Caliste. How could'st thou Caldoro With such a frontless impudence, arm thy hopes So far, as to believe I might consent To this leud practise? have I not often told thee How, ere I pitied thy misplaced affection, I could not answer it? and that there was A strong antipathy between our Passions, Not to be reconcil'd. Cald. Vouchsafe to hear me With an impartial ear, and it will take from The rigor of your censure. Man was mark'd A friend in his Creation to himself, And may with fit ambition conceive The greatest blessings, and the highest honors Appointed for him, if he can atchieve'em The right and noble way: I grant you were The end of my design, but still pursu'd With a becoming modesty, Heaven at length Being pleas'd, and not my arts to further it. Duraz. Now he comes to her: On boy. Cald. I have serv'd you With a religious zeal, and borne the burthen Of your neglect (if I may call it so) Beyond the patience of a man, to prove this. I have seen those eyes with pleasant glances play Upon Adorio's, like Phoebe's shine Guilding a Chrystal River, and your Lip Rise up in civil courtship to meet his, While I bit mine with envy: Yet these favors (How ere my passions rag'd) could not provoke me To one act of rebellion against
My loyalty to you; the soveraign To whom I ow obedience. Calist. My blushes confefs this for a truth. Duraz. A flag of truce is Hung out in this acknowledgment. Cald. I could adde, But that you may interpret what I speak, The malice of a rival, rather then My due respect to your deserts. How faintly Adorio hath return'd thanks to the bounty Of your affection, ascribing it As a tribute to his worth, and not in you An act of mercy: Could he else invited (As by your words I understood) to take you To his protection, grosly neglect So gratious an offer? or give power To fate it self to cross him? O dear Madam, We are all the Balls of time, toss'd to and fro, From the Plough unto the Throne, and back agen, Under the swinge of destinie mankinde suffers; And it appears by an unchang'd decree You were appointed mine; wise nature always Aiming at due proportion, and if so, I may believe with confidence, Heaven in pity Of my sincere affection, and long patience, Directed you by a most blessed error To your vow'd servants bosom. Duraz. By my holidame Tickling-Philosophy. Calist. I am Sir, too weak To argue with you; but my Stars have better (I hope) provided for me. Cald. If there be Disparity between us, 'tis in your Compassion to level it. Duraz. Give fire to the Mine, and blow her up. Caliste. I am sensible
Of what you have endured, but on the sudden, With my unusual travel, and late bruise, I am exceeding weary; in you grove, While I repose my self, be you my guard: My spirits with some little rest reviv'd, We will consider further: For my part You shall receive modest and gentle answers To your demands, though short perhaps to make you Full satisfaction. Cald. I am exalted in the employment, sleep se∣cure, I'll be Your vigilant Sentinel. Calist. But I command you, And as you hope for future grace obey me, Presume not with one stoln kiss to disturb The quiet of my slumbers; let your temperance And not your lust, watch over me. Cald. My desires Are frozen, till your pitty shall dissolve'em. Duraz. Frozen! think not of Frost fool in the Dog-days, Remember the old adage, and make use of't, Occasion's bald behinde. Calist. Is this your Uncle? Cald. And Guardian, Madam; at your better leisure, When I have deserv'd it, you may give him thanks For his many favours to me. Calist. He appears a pleasant Gentleman. Ex. Caldoro and Caliste. Dur. You should find me so, But that I do hate incest. I grow heavy, Sirra provide fresh horses; I'll seek out Some hollow tree, and dream till you return, Which I charge you to hasten. Serv. With all care sir. Exeunt.
Enter Cario and Country-men, (for the Dance and Song.) Car. Let your eyes be rivetted to my heels, and miss not A hairs breadth of my footing; our Dance has A most melodious note, and I command you To have ears like hares this night for my Lords honor, And something for my Worship: your reward is To be drunk blind like Moles in the Wine-cellar, And though you ne'r see after, 'tis the better, You were born for this nights service: And do you hear, Wire-string and Cats-guts men, and strong-breath'd Hoboys, For the credit of your calling, have not your Instru∣ments To tune, when you should strike up; but twang sit perfectly, As you would read your Neckverse; and you Warbler Keep your Wind-pipe moist, that you may not spit and hem, When you should make division. How I sweat! Authority is troublesom. — They are come, I know it by the Cornet that I plac'd On the hill to give me notice: Marshal your selves I'the Rear, the Van is yours. Now chant it spritely. Enter Adorio, Mirtilla, Camillo, Lentulo, Donato Ador. A well-penn'd Ditty. [Song] Cam. Not ill sung. Ador. What follows? Car. Use your eyes; if ever, now your master∣piece [Dance] Ador. 'Tis well perform'd, take that, but not from me, 'Tis your new Ladies bounty, thank her for't, All that I have is hers.
Car. I must have three shares For my pains and properties, the rest shall be Divided equally. Ex. Cario & Rastici. Mirt. My real fears Begin, and soon my painted comforts vanish In my discovery. Ador. Welcome to your own: You have (a wonder in a woman) kept Three long hours silence; and the greater, holding Your own choice in your arms, a blessing for which I will be thankfull to you, nay unmask And let mine eye and ears together feast, Too long by you kept empty: Oh you want Your womans help, I'll do her office for you. Puls off her mask. Mirtilla! Cam. It is she, and wears the habit In which Caliste three days since appeared As she came from the Temple. Lent. All this trouble for a poor Waiting-maid? Don. We are grossly gull'd. Ador. Thou child of impudence, answer me, and truly, Or though the tongues of Angels pleaded mercy, Tortures shall force it from thee. Mirt. Innocence is free and open. breasted; of what crime Stand I accus'd, my Lord? Ador. What crime? no language Can speak it to the height, I shall become Discourse for fools, and drunkards. How was this Contriv'd? who help'd thee in the plot? discover. Were not Caliste's aydes in't? Mirt. No on my life; nor am I faulty. Ador. No: what may games this. Didst thou treat with me for thy Mistriss favors, To make sale of thine own?
Mirt. With her and you I have dealt faithfully: you had her Letter With the Jewel I presented; she receiv'd Your courteous answer, and prepar'd herself To be remov'd by you: And howsoever You take delight to hear what you have done, From my simplicity, and make my weakness The subject of your mirth, as it suits well With my condition, I know you have her In your possession. Ador. How! has she left her mothers house? Mirt. You drive this nail too far; Indeed she deeply vow'd at her departure To send some of your Lordships servants for me, (Though you were pleas'd to take the pains your self) That I might still be near her, as a shadow To follow her the substance. Ador. She is gone then? Mirt. This is too much; but good my Lord for∣give me, I come a Virgin hither to attend My noble Mistress, though I must confess I look with sore eyes upon her good fortune, And wish it were mine own: Ador. Then as it seems you do yourself affect me? Mirt. Should she hear me, And in her sudden fury kill me for't, I durst not, Sir, deny it; since you are A man so form'd, that not poor I alone, But all our sex like me I think stand bound To be enamour'd of you. Ador. O my fate! how justly am I punish'd? in thee punish'd For my defended wantonness? I that scorn'd The Mistress when she sought me, now I would
Upon my knees receive her, am become A prey unto her Bondwoman, My honor too neglected for this purchase. Art thou one of those Ambitious Serving-women, who contemning Th'embraces of their Equals, aim to be The wrong way Ladifi'd by a Lord? was there No sorward Page or Footman in the City To do the feat, that in thy lust I am chosen To be the executioner? dar'st thou hope I can descend so low? Mirt. Great Lords sometimes For change leave calvert Sammon, and eat Sprats, In modesty I dare speak no more. Cam. If 'twere a Fish-day, though you like it not, I could say I have a stomach, and would content my self With this pretty Whiting-mop. Ador. Discover yet how thou cam'st to my hands. Mirt. My Lady gone, Fear of her mothers rage, she being found absent, Mov'd me to flie; and quitting of the house, You were pleas'd unask'd to comfort me, I us'd No sorceries to bewitch you; then vouchsaf'd (Thanks ever to the darkness of the night) To hug me in your arms, and I had wrong'd My breeding near the Court, had I refus'd it. Ador. This is still more bitter; canst thou ghess to whom Thy Lady did commit herself? Mirt. They were horsemen, as you are. Ador. In the name of wonder, How could they pass the Port, where you expected My coming? Cam. Now I think upon't, there came Three mounted by, and behind one a woman
Embracing fast the man that rode before her. Lent. I knew the men, but she was vail'd. Ador. What were they? Lent. The first the Lord Durazzo, and the second Your rival yong Caldoro; it was he That carried the wench behinde him. Donat. The last a servant that spur'd fast after 'em Ador. Worse and worse! 'twas she! Too much assurance of her love undid me; Why did you not stay 'em? Donat. We had no such commission. Camil. Or say we had? who durst lay fingers on The angry old Russian. Lent. For my part I had rather Take a baited Bull by the Horns. Ador. You are sure friends for a man to build on. Camil. They are not far off, Their horses appeared spent too; lets take fresh ones And coast the Countrey, ten to one we finde 'em. Ador. I will not eat nor sleep, until I have 'em. Moppet you shall along too. Mirt. So you please, I may keep my place be∣hinde you; I'll sit fast, and ride with you all the world over. Camil. A good Girle. Exeunt: Enter Monteclaro and Calypso. Mont. Her husband Severino? Calyp. You may see His handy-work by my flat face; no bridge Left to support my Organ. If I had one, The comfort is I am now secure from the Grincomes, I can loose nothing that way. Monte. Doest thou not know what became of the Lady?
Calyp. A nose was enough to part with I think, in the service; I durst stay no longer, But I am full assur'd the house is empty, Neither poor Lady, daughter, servant left there: I only ghess he hath fore'd 'em to go with him To the dangerous Forrest where he lives like a King Among the Banditi, and how there he hath us'd them, Is more then to be fear'd. Mont. I have plaid the fool, And kept my self too long conceal'd, sans question With the danger of her life. Leave me — The King! Enter Alphonso and Captain. Cal. The Surgeon must be paid. Mont. Take that. Cal. I thank you, I have got enough by my trade, and I will build An Hospital only for noseless Bawds, 'Twill speak my charity, and be my self The Governess of the Sisterhood. Exit. Alph. I may forget this in your vigilance hereafter; But as I am a King, if you provoke me The second time with negligence of this kind, You shall deeply smart for't. Mont. The King's mov'd. Alph. To suffer a murtherer by us proscrib'd, at his pleasure To pass and repass through our guards? Capt. Your pardon For this, my gracious Lord, binds me to be More circumspect hereafter. Alph. Look you be so: Monsieur Laval, you were a suiter to me For Severino's pardon.
Mont. I was so, my good Lord. Alph. You might have met him here to have thank'd You for't, as now I understand. Mont. So it is rumour'd; And hearing in the City of his boldness, (I would not say contempt of your Decrees) As then I pleaded mercy, (under pardon) I now as much admire the slowness of Your justice (though it force you to some trouble) In fetching him in. Alph. I have consider'd it. Mont. He hath of late, as 'tis suspected, done An outrage on his wife forgetting nature To his own daughter, in whom sir I have Some nearer interest then I stand bound to In my humanity, which I gladly would Make known unto your Highness. Alph. Go along, you shall have opportunity as we walk: See you what I committed to your charge, In readiness, and without noise. Capt. I shall sir. Exeunt.
Act. 5. Scaen. 1. Enter Claudio, and all the Banditi (making a guard) Severino and Jolante (with Oaken leav'd garlands) and Singers. Sever. HEre, as a Queen, share in my sove∣raignty: The iron toils pitch'd by the Law to take The forfeiture of my life, I have broke through, And secure in the guards of these few subjects Smile at Alphonsus fury, though I grieve for The fatal cause in your good brothers loss That does compell me to his course. Jol. Revive not A sorrow long since dead, and so diminish The full fruition of those joys, which now I stand possess'd of: Womanish fear of danger That may pursue us, I shake off, and with A masculine spirit. Sev. 'Tis well said. Jol. In you sir I live; and when, or by the course of nature, Or violence you must fall, the end of my Devotions is, that one and the same hour May make us fit for heaven. Sev. I join with you In my votes that way: But how, Jolante, You that have spent your past days slembring in The doun of quiet, can endure the hardness
And rough condition of our present being, Does much disturb me. Jol. These woods, Severino, Shall more then seem to me a populous City; You being present, here are no allurements To tempt my frailty, nor the conversation Of such, whose choice behaviour or discourse May nourish iealous thoughts. Sev. True, Jolante, Nor shall suspected chastity stand in need here To be clear'd by miracle. Jol. Still on that string? it yields harsh discord. Sev. I had forgot my self, And wish I might no more remember it. The day wears, sirs, without one prize brought in As tribute to your Queen. Claudio, divide Our Squadron in small parties, let 'em watch All passages, that none escape without The payment of our Customs Claud. Shall we bring in the persons with the pillage? Sev. By all means, Without reply about it, we'll retire Ex. Claudio and the rest. Into my Cave, and there at large dis∣course Our fortunes past, and study some apt means To find our daughter; since she well dispos'd of, Our happiness were perfect. Jol. We must wait with patience Heavens plea∣sure. Sev. 'Tis my purpose. Exeunt. Enter Lentulo and Camillo. Lent. Let the horses graze, they are spent,
I am sure I am sleepy, And nodded as I rode: here was a jaunt I'th' dark through thick and thin, and all to no pur∣pose: What a dulness grows upon me. [They sit down] Lent. I can hardly Hold ope mine eyes to say so. How did we lose A∣dorio? Cam. He, Donato, and the Wench That cleaves to him like bird-lime, took the right hand, But this place is our rendevouz. Lent. No matter, we'll talk of that anon, — heigh ho. [Sleeps] Cam He's fast already, Lentuio; I'll take a nap too. [Sleeps] Enter Adorio, Mirtilla, Donato. Ador. Was ever man so crost? 1 Wom. So blest. This is the finest Wild-goose chase. Ador. What's that you mutter? Mirt. A short prayer, that you may find Your wish'd for love, though I am lost for ever. Don. Pretty fool, who have we here? Ador. This is Camillo. Mirt. This Signior Lentulo Ador. Wake 'em. Don. They'll not stir, Their eye-lids are glu'd, and mine too; by your favour, I'll follow their example. [Lies down] Ador. Are you not weary?
Mirt. I know not what the word means, while I travel To do you service. Ador. Y ue ect to reap The harvest of your flattery; but your hopes Will be blasted, I assure you. Mirt. So you give leave To sow it as in me a sign of duty, Though you deny your beams of gratious favor To ripen it with patience I shall suffer. Ador. No more; my resolution to finde Caliste, by what accident lost, I know not, Binds me not to deny my self what nature Exacteth from me. To walk alone a foot (For my Horse is tir'd) were madness, I must sleep; You could lie down too. Mirt. Willingly; so you please to use me. Ador. Use thee? Mirt. As your pillow Sir, I dare presume no fareuer, noble Sir. Do not too much condemn me; generous feet, Spurn not a fawning Spaniel. Ador. Well! sit down. Mirt. I am ready Sir. Ador. So nimble? Mirt. Love is active; Nor would I be a slow thing: Rest secure Sir On my maiden-head, I'll not ravish you. Ador. For once, so far I'll trust you. Lies down on her Lap. Mirt. All the joys of rest Dwell on your eye-lids; let no dream disturb Your soft and gentle slumbers I cannot sing, But I'll talk you asleep: And I beseech you Be not offended, though I glory in
My being thus employ'd; a happiness That stands for more then ample satisfaction For all I have, or can endure. He snores, And does not hear me; would his sense of feeling Were bound up too: I should — I am all fire. Such heaps of treasure offer'd as a prey, Would tempt a modest theef; I can no longer Forbear. I'll gently touch his Lips, and leave Kisses him. No print of mine. Ah! I have heard of Nectar; But till now never tasted it: These Rubies Are not clouded by my breath. If once agen I steal, from such a full Exchequer, trifles Kisses agen. Will not be miss'd, I am entranc'd: our fancy Some say in sleep works stronger, I will prove How far my — Sleeps. Enter Durazzo. Dur. My bones ake, I am exceeding cold too, I must seek out A more convenient Truckle-bed. Ha! Do I dream? No, no, I wake, Camillo, Lentulo, Donato this; and as I live, Adorio In a handsom wenches lap, a whoreson; you are The best accommodated, I will call My Nephew, and his Mistris to this Pageant. The object may perhaps do more upon her, Then all Caldoro's rhetorick. With what Security they sleep! sure Mercury Hath travel'd this way with his charming rod. Nephew, Caliste. Madam.
Enter Caldoro and Caliste. Cald. Here Sir, is your man return'd with Horses. Dur. No Boy, no; but here are some you thought not of. Calist. Adorio. Dur. The Idol that you worshipped. Calist. This Mirtilla? I am made a stale: Dur. I knew 'twould take. Calist. False man; But much more treacherous woman, 'tis apparent, They joyntly did conspire against my weakness, And credulous simplicity, and have Prevail'd against it. Cald. I'll not kill 'em sleeping; But if you please, I'll wake 'em first, and after Offer them as a fatal sacrifice, to your just anger. Dur. You are a fool, reserve your blood for bet∣ter uses. Calist. My fond love, is chang'd to an extremity of hate, His very sight is odious. Dur. I have thought of A pretty punishment for him, and his Comrades, Then leave him to his harlotry: If she prove not Torture enough, hold me an Ass Their horses Are not far off, I'll cut the Girts and Bridles, Then turn 'em into the Wood; if they can run Let 'em follow us as footmen. Wilt thou fight For what's thine own already? Calist. In his Hat He wears a Jewel, which this faithless Strumpet As a salary of her Lust, deceiv'd me of, He shall not keep't to my disgrace, nor will I
Stir till I have it. Dur. I am not good at niming; And yet that shall not hinder us, by your leave Sir, 'Tis restitution, pray you all bear witness I do not steal it; here 'tis. Calist. Take it not As a Mistris favor, but a strong assurance I am your wife. Cald O Heaven. Duraz. Pray i'th' Church. Let us away, Nephew a word: have you not Been billing in the brakes? Ha, and so deserv'd This unexpected favor. Cald. You are pleasant. Exeunt Durazzo, Caldoro, Caliste. Ador. As thou art a Gentle∣man, kill me not basely, Starts up; the rest wake. Give me leave to draw my Sword. Camil. Ha? what's the matter? Lent. He talk'd of's Sword. Donat. I see no enemy near us, That threatens danger. Mirt. Sure 'twas but a dream. Ador. A fearful one. Me thought Caldoro's sword Was at my throat, Caliste frowning by, Commanding him, as he desir'd her favor, To strike my head off. Camil. Meer imagination of a disturbed fancy: Mirt. Here's your Hat Sir. Ador. But where my Jewel? Camil. By all likelihood lost, this troublesome night. Donat. I saw it when we came unto this place. Mirt. I look't upon't my self, when you re∣pos'd.
Ador. What is become of it? Restore it, for thou hast it, do not put me To the trouble to search you. Mirt. Search me? Ador. You have been Before your Lady gave you entertainment, A night-walker in the streets. Mirt. How, my good Lord? Ador. Traded in picking pockets, when tame gulls Charm'd with your prostituted flatteries, Dain'd to embrace you. Mirt. Love give place to anger. Charge me with theft, and prostituted baseness? Were you a Judge, nay more, the King; thus urg'd, To your teeth I would say, 'Tis false. Ador. This will not do. Camil. Deliver it in private. Mirt. You shall be In publick hang'd first, and the whole gang of you. I steal what I presented. Lent. Do not strive. Ador. Though thou hast swallow'd it, I'll rip thy entrail, But I'll recover it. Mirt. Help, help. Ador. A new plot. Enter Claudio, and two Banditi, (presenting their Pistols.) Claud. Forbear, libidinous Monsters; if you offer The least resistance, you are dead: if one But lay his hand upon his sword, shoot all. Ador. Let us fight for what we have, and if you can Win it, enjoy it.
Claud We come not to try Your valor, but for your money; throw down your sword, Or I'll begin with you: So if you will Walk quietly without bonds, you may, if not We'll force you; thou shalt have no wrong, But justice against these. 1. Bandit. We'll teach your Sir To meddle with wenches in our walks. 2. Bandit. It being against our Canons. Camil. Whether will you lead us? Claud. You shall know that hereafter: Guard 'em sure. Exeunt: Enter Alphonso, Monteclaro, Captain. Alpho. Are all the passages stopp'd? Gap And strongly man'd, They must use wings, and flie, if they escape us. Monte. But why, great Sir, you should expose your person To such apparent danger, when you may Have'em brought bound before you; is beyond My apprehension. Alpho. I am better arm'd Then you suppose: besides it is confirm'd By all that have been robb'd, since Severino Commanded these Banditi; though it be Unusual in Italy, imitating The courteous English Theeves, for so they call 'em, They have not done one murther: I must adde too, That from a strange relation I have heard Of Severino's Justice, in disposing
The preys brought in, I would be an eye-witness Of what I take up now but on report: And therefore 'tis my pleasure that we should As soon as they encounter us, without A shew of opposition yield. Mont. Your will is not to be disputed. Alph. You have plac'd Your ambush so, that if there be occasion They suddenly may break in. Capt. My life upon't. Alph. We cannot travail far, but we shall meet With some of these good fellows; and be sure You do as I command you. Mont. Without fear, sir. Exeunt. Enter Severino and Jolante. Sev. 'Tis true, I did command Caliste should not Without my knowledg and consent, assisted By your advice, be married: but your Restraint, as you deliver it, denying A grown up Maid the modest conversation Of Men, and warrantable pleasures, relish'd Of too much rigor, which no doubt hath driven her To take some desperate course: Jol. What then I did, was in my care thought best. Sev. I so conceive it; But where was your discretion to forbid Access and fit approaches, when you knew Her Suiters noble, either of which I would Have wish'd my son in law? Adorio, However wild, a young man of good parts, But better fortunes: his Competitor Caldoro, for his sweetness of behaviour, Staidness and temperance, holding the first place Among the Gallants most observ'd in Naples;
His own revenues of a large extent, But in the expectation of his Uncles And Guardians entrata's, by the course Of nature to descend on him, a Match For the best Subjects blood, I except none Of eminence in Italy. Jol. Your wishes, Howe'r a while delaid, are not I hope Impossibilities. Sev. Though it prove so, Yet 'tis not good to give a check to Fortune When she comes smiling to us.— [Cornet within] Hark, this Cornet Assures us of a prize; there sit in state, 'Tis thy first tribute. Jol. Would we might enjoy our own as Subjects: Sev. What's got by the sword, Is better then inheritance: All those Kingdoms Subdu'd by Alexander, were by force extorted, Though gilded ore with glorious stiles of conquest; His victories but royal robberies, And his true definition a Thief; When circled with huge Navies to the terror Of such as plough'd the Ocean, as the Pirate Who from a narrow Creek puts off for prey In a small Pinace, from a second place New spoil brought in, — from a third party, brave! This shall be registred a day of triumph Design'd by fate to honor thee.— — Welcome Claudio; Good booty, ha?
Enter Claudio, Banditi, Adorio, Lentulo, Donato, Camillo, Mirtilla, (at one door) Banditi, Durazo, Caldoro, Caliste, (at another;) Alphonso, Mon∣teclaro, Captain, and Banditi. Clau. Their outsides promise so, But yet they have not made discovery Of what they stand possest of. Sev. Welcome all Good boys; you have done bravely, if no blood Be shed in the service. 1 Band. On our lives no drop sir. Sev. 'Tis to my wish. Jol My Lord! Sev. No more, I know 'em: Jol. My daughter and her woman too! Sev. Conceal your joys. Dur. Faln in the Devils mouth. Cal. My father, And mother! to what fate am I reserv'd? Cald. Continue masqu'd; or grant that you be known, From whom can you expect a gentle sentence, If you despair a Fathers? Ador. Now I perceive which way I lost my Jewel. Mirt. I rejoice I am clear'd from theft; you have done me wrong, But I unask'd forgive you. Dur. 'Tis some comfort yet The rivals, men and women, friends and foes, are Together in one toil. Sev. You all look pale,
And by your private whisperings and soft murmurs Express a general fear: pray you shake it off; For understand you are not faln into The hands of a Busiris or a Cacus, Delighted more in blood then spoil; but given up To the power of an unfortunate Gentleman, Not born to these low courses, howsoere My fate, and just displeasure of the King Design'd me to it: you need not to doubt A sad captivity here, and much less fear For profit to be sold for slaves, then ship'd Into another Country; in a word, You know the proscrib'd Severino, he Not unacquainted, but familiar with The most of you: Want in my self I know not, But for the pay of these my Squires, who eat Their bread with danger purchas'd, and must be With others fleeces cloth'd, or live expos'd To the summers scorching heat and winters cold; To these before you be compell'd, (a word I speak with much unwillingness) deliver Such coin as you are furnish'd with. Duraz. A fine method! This is neither begging, borrowing, nor robbery, Yet it hath a twang of all of them. But one word Sir. Sever. Your pleasure. Duzar. When we have thrown down our Muck, what follows? Sever. Liberty, with a safe convoy, to any place you chuse. Duraz. By this hand you are A fair fraternity; for once I'll be The first example to relieve your Covent. There's a thousand crowns, my Vintage, Harvest, Profits
Arising from my Herds, bound in one Bag, Share it among you. Sever. You are still the jovial, and good Durazzo. Duraz. To the Offering, nay, No hanging an arse, this is their wedding day. What you must do spight of your hearts, do freely For your own sakes. Camil. There's mine. They all throw down their purses. Lent. Mine. Donat. All that I have. Cald. This to preserve my Jewel. Ador. Which I challenge; Let me have justice, for my coin I care not; Mont. I will not weep for mine. Capt. Would it were more. Sev. Nay you are priviledg'd; but why old father Art thou so slow? thou hast one foot in the grave; And if desire of gold do not increase With thy expiring lease of life, thou shouldst Be forwardest. Alph. In what concerns my self, I do acknowledge it, and I should lie, (A vice I have detested from my youth) If I deny'd my present store, since what I have about me now, weighs down in value Almost a hundred sold, what ever these Have laid before you, see I do groan under Throws down three bags. The burthen of my treasure; nay 'tis Gold, And if your hunger of it be not sated With what already I have shewn unto you, Here's that shall glut it. In this Casket are Inestimable Jewels, Diamonds Of such a piercing lustre, as struck blinde Th'amazed Lapidary, while he labor'd
To honor his own art in setting 'em. Opens the Casket. Some orient Pearls too, which the Queen of Spain Might wear as Earings, in remembrance of The day that she was crown'd. Sever. The spoils I think of both the Indies. Duraz. The great Sultans poor, If parallel'd with this Craessus. Sever. Why dost thou weep? Alpho. From a most fit consideration of My poverty, this though restor'd, will not Serve my occasions. Sever. Impossible. Duraz. May be he would buy his pasport up to Heaven, And then this too little, though in the journey It were a good Viaticum. Alpho. I would make it A means to help me thither; not to wrong you With tedious expectation, I'll discover What my wants are, and yield my reasons for 'em: I have two sons, twins, the true images Of what I was at their years; never father Had fairer, or more promising hopes in his Posterity: But alas, these sons ambitious Of glittering honor, and an after-name Atchiev'd by glorious, and yet pious actions, (For such were their intentions) put to sea: They had a well rigg'd Bottom, fully mann'd, An old experienc'd Master, lusty Sailers, Stout Land-men, and what's something more then rare, They did agree, had one design, and that was In charity to redeem the Christian slaves Chain'd to the Turkish servitude. Sev. A brave aim.
Dur. A most heroique enterprise; I languish To hear how they succeeded. Alph. Prosperously At first, and to their wishes: divers Gallies They boarded, and some strong Forts near the shore They suddenly surpriz'd, a thousand Captives Redeem'd from th'oar, paid their glad vows & prayrs For their deliverance, their ends acquir'd; And making homeward in triumphant manner, (For sure the cause deserv'd it.) Dur. Pray you end here, The best I fear is told, and that which follows Must conclude ill. Alph. Your fears are true, and yet I must with grief relate it; prodigal fame In every place with her loud trump proclaiming The greatness of the action; the Pyrates Of Tunis and Argiers laid wait for 'em At their return: To tell you what resistance They made, and how my poor sons fought, would but Increase my sorrow, and perhaps grieve you To hear it passionately describ'd unto you In brief they were taken, and for the great loss The enemy did sustain their victory, Being with much blood bought, they do endure The heaviest captivity, wretched men Did ever suffer, O my sons? my sons? To me for ever lost, lost, lost for ever. Sever. Will not these heaps of Gold added to thine, Suffice for ransome? Alpho. For my sons it would, But they refuse their liberty, if all That were engaged with them, have not their Irons With theirs struck off, and set at liberty with them, Which these heaps cannot purchase. Sever. Ha? the toughness
Of my heart melts? be comforted old Father I have some hidden treasure, and if all, I and my Squires, these three years have laid up, Can make the sum up, freely take it. Duraz. I'll sell my self to my shirt, lands, move∣ables, and thou Shalt part with thine too Nephew, rather then Such brave men shall live slaves. 2. Bandit. We will not yeeld to't: 3. Bandit. Nor loose our parts. Sever. How's this? 2: Bandit. You are fitter far To be a Churchman, then to have command over good-fellows. [Strikes 'em down.] Sever. Thus I ever use Such saucy Rascals, second me Claudio. Rebellious? do you grumble? I'll not leave One rouge of 'em alive. [He discovers himself.] Alpho. Hold, give the sign All. The King. Sever. Then I am lost. Claud. The Woods are full of armed men. Alpho. No hope of your escape Can flatter you. Sever. Mercy dread Sir. Alpho. Thy carriage in this unlawful course ap∣pears so noble, Especially in this last tryal, which I put upon you, that I wish the mercy You kneel in vain for, might fall gently on you. But when the holy Oyl was pour'd upon My head, and I anointed King, I swore Never to pardon murther, I could wink at Your robberies, though our Laws call 'em death; But to dispense with Monteclaro's blood Would ill become a King, in him I lost
A worthy subject, and must take from you A strict accompt of't; 'tis in vain to move, My doom's irrevocable. Monte. Not dread Sir, if Monteclaro live. Alpho. If? good Laval. Monte. He lives in him Sir, that you though Laval. Three years have not so altered me, but you may Remember Monteclaro. Dur. How. Jol. My Brother. Calist. Uncle. Monte. Give me leave, I was Left dead in the field, but by the Duke Montpensier, Now General at Millain, taken up, And with much care recovered. Alpho. Why liv'd you so long conceal'd? Monte. Confounded with the wrong I did my Brother, in provoking him To fight. I spent the time in France that I Was absent from the Court, making my exise The punishment impos'd upon my self For my offence. Jol. Now Sir, I dare confess all This was the ghest invited to the Banquet, That drew on your suspition. Sever. Your intent, Though it was ill in you, I do forgive, The rest I'll hear at leisure, Sir, your sentence. Alpho. It is a general pardon unto all Upon my hopes, in your fair lives hereafter You will deserve it. Sever. Claud. &c. Long live great Alphonso. Dur. Your mercy shewn in this, now if you please Decide these lovers difference Alpho. That is easie.
I'll put it to the womens choice, the men Consenting to it. Calist. Here I fix them, never to be remov'd. Cald. 'Tis my nil ultra Sir. Mirt. O that I had the happiness to say So much to you, I dare maintain my love Is equal to my Ladies. Ador. But my minde A pitch above yours. Marry with a servant Of no descent or fortune: Sever. You are deceiv'd, How ere she has been train'd up as a servant, She is the daughter of a noble Captain, Who in his voyage to the Persian Gulph, Perish'd by shipwrack, one I dearly lov'd. He to my care intrusted her, having taken My word, if he return'd not like himself, I never should discover what she was, But it being for her good, I will dispense with it. So much Sir for her blood, now for her portion. So dear I hold the memory of my friend, It shall rank with my daughters: Ador. This made good I will not be perverse. Duraz. With a kiss confirm it. Ador. I sign all concord here, but must to you Sir For reparation of my wounded honor, The justice of the King consenting to it, Denounce a lawful war. Alpho. This in our presence: Ador. The cause dread Sir commands it, though your Edicts Call private Combats, Murthers, rather then Sit down with a disgrace, arising from A blow; the Bonds of my obedience shook of,
Ill right my self. Cald. I do confess the wrong, Forgetting the occasion, and desire Remission from you, and upon such terms As by his sacred Majesty shall be judged Equal on both parts. Ador. I desire no more. Alpho. All then are pleas'd, it is the glory of A King to make, and keep his subjects happy; For us we do approve the Roman Maxim, To save one Citizen is a greater prize, Then to have kill'd in War ten Enemies. Exeunt.
I. SONG. Between Juno and Hymen. Juno to the Bride. ENter a Maid, but made a Bride: Be bold, and freely taste. The Marriage Banquet ne'er deny'd To such as sit down chaste. Though he unloose thy Virgin Zone, Presum'd against thy will: Those joys reserv'd to him alone, Thou art a Virgin still. Hymen to the Bridegroom. Hail Bridegroom, hail, thy choice thus made. As thou wouldst have her true Thou must give o'r thy wanton trade, And bid loose fires adieu: That Husband who would have his Wife To him continue chaste, In her embraces spends his life, And makes abroad no waste. Hymen and Juno. Sport then like Turtels, and bring forth Such pledges as may be Assurance of the Fathers worth, And Mothers purity. Juno doth bless the Nuptial Bed, Thus Hymens Torches burn. Live long, and may, when both are dead, Your Ashes fill one Vrn.
II. SONG. Enteratinment of the Forests Queen. WElcome, thrice welcome to this shady Green, Our long wish'd Cinthia, the Forests Queen, The Trees begin to bud the glad Birds sing, In Winter chang'd by her into the Spring. We know no night, Perpetual light Dawns from your eye. You being near, We cannot fear, Though death stood by. From you our Swords take edge, our Hearts grow bold. From you in Fee, their lives your Liegemen hold. These Groves your Kingdom, and our Law your will; Smile, and we spare; but if you frown, we kill. Bless then the hour That gives the power In which you may, At Bed and Board Embrace your Lord Both night and day. Welcome, thrice welcome to this shady Green, Our long wish'd Cinthia, the Forests Queen.
EPILOGUE. IAm left to enquire, then to relate To the still doubtful Author, at what rate His marchandise are valued. If they prove Staple Commodities in your Grace and love, To this last birth of his Minerva, he Vows, and we do believe him seriously, Sloth cast of, and all pleasures else declin'd, He'll search with his best care, until he finde New ways, and make good in some labor'd Song, Though he grow old, Apollo still is yong. Cherish his good intentions, and declare By any sign of favor, that you are Well pleas'd, and with a general consent, And he desires no more encouragement. FINIS
A Very Woman, Or the PRINCE of TARENT. A TRAGI-COMEDY. As it hath been often acted at the Private-House in Black-Friars, by his late MAJESTIES Servants, with great Applause. Written by PHILIP MASSENGER, Gent. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1655.
PROLOGUE. To such (and some there are, no question here,) Who happy in their memories do bear This Subject long since acted, and can say Truly, we have seen something like this Play. Our Author with becoming Modesty (For in this kinde he ne'er was bold) by me, In his defence, thus answers, By command He undertook this task, nor could it stand With his love Fortune to refuse to do; What by his Patron he was call'd unto. For whose delight and yours, we hope, with care He hath review'd it; and with him we dare Maintain to any man, that did allow 'T was good before, it is much better'd now; Nor is it sure against the Proclamation, To raise new Piles upon an old Foundation, So much to them deliver'd; to the rest, To whom each scene is fresh, he doth protest, Should his Muse fail now a fair flight to make, He cannot fancy what will please, or take.
VIceroy of Sicily Pedro his Son Duke of Messina Don Martinto Cardenes his Son Don John Antonlo, Prince of Tarent Doctor Paulo, A Physitian Cuculo, A Sicilian Apothecary Citizen Master Man Captain Page Servants Slaves Moors Pyrates Guard. Almira, The Viceroys Daughter Leonora, Duke of Messina's Neece Borachia, Wife to Cuculo Two Women. The Scene SICILY.
A Very VVoman. Act. I. Scaen. I. Enter Pedro and Leonora: Ped. MY worthiest Mistress! this day cannot end But prosperous to Pedro, that begins With this so wish'd encounter. Leo. Only, Servant, To give you thanks in your own Courtly language, Would argue me more ceremonious Then heartily affected; and you are Too well assur'd, or I am miserable, Our equal loves have kept one rank too long To stand at distance now.
Ped. You make me happy In this so wise reproof, which I receive As a chaste favor from you, and will ever Hold such a strong command o're my desires, That though my Blood turn Rebel to my Reason, I never shall presume to seek ought from you, But what (your honor safe) you well may grant me, And Vertue sign the Warrant. Leo. Your love to me So limited, will still preserve your Mistress Worthy her servant, and in your restraint Of loose affections, bind me faster to you: But there will be a time when we may welcome Those wish'd for pleasures, as Heavens greatest blessings; When that the Vice-roy your most noble father, And the Duke my uncle, and to that, my Guardian, Shall by their free consent confirm them lawful. Ped. You ever shall direct, and I obey you: Is my sister stirring yet? Leo. Long since. Ped. Some business With her, join'd to my service to your felf, Hath brought me hither; pray you vouchsafe the favor T'acquaint her with so much. Leo. I am prevented. Enter Almira and two women. Alm. Do the rest here; my Cabinet is too hot, This room is cooler. Brother! Ped. Morrow sister, Do I not come unseasonably? Al. Why good brother?
Ped. Because you are not yet fully made up, Nor fit for visitation. There are Ladies And great ones, that will hardly grant access On any terms to their own Fathers, as They are themselves, nor willingly be seen Before they have ask'd councel of their Doctor, How the Cervize will appear, newly laid on When they ask blessing. Al. Such indeed there are That would be still young, in despight of time, That in the wrinkled winter of their age Would force a seeming April of fresh beauty, As if it were within the power of art To frame a second nature: But for me, And for your Mistress, I dare say as much; The faces, and the teeth you see, we slept with. Ped. Which is not frequent, sister, with some Ladies. Al. You spie no sign of any night, — Mask here, (Tie on my Carkanet) nor does your nosthril Take in the scent of strong perfumes, to stifle The sourness of our breaths as we are fasting: You are in a Ladies chamber, gentle Brother, And not in your Apothecaries shop. We use the women, you perceive, that serve us, Like servants, not like such as do create us: 'Faith search our pockets, and if you find there Comfits of Amber-greece to help our kisses, Conclude us faulty. Ped. You are pleasant, sister, And I am glad to find you so dispos'd, You will the better hear me. Al. What you please, Sir. Ped. I am entreated by the Prince of Tarent Don John Antonio.
Al. Would you would choose Some other subject. Ped. Pray you give me leave, For his desires are fit for you to hear, As for me to prefer. This Prince of Tarent (Let it not wrong him, that I call him friend) Finding your choice of Don Cardenes lik'd of By both your fathers, and his hopes cut off, Resolves to leave Palermo. Al. He does well, That I hear gladly. Ped. How this Prince came hither, How bravely furnish'd, how attended on, How he hath borne himself here, with what charge He hath continued; his magnificence In costly Banquets, curious Masques, rare Presents, And of all sorts, you cannot but remember. Al. Give me my Gloves. Ped. Now, for reward of all His cost, his travel, and his dutious service, He does intreat that you will please he may Take his leave of you, and receive the favor Of kissing of your hands. Al. You are his friend, And shall discharge the part of one to tell him That he may spare the trouble; I desire not To see, or hear more of him. Ped. Yet grant this, Which a meer stranger in the way of Courtship Might challenge from you. Al. And obtain it sooner. Ped. One reason for this would do well. Al. My will Shall now stand for a thousand; shall I lose The priviledge of my sex, which is my Will, To yield a Reason like a man? or you
Deny your Sister that which all true women Claim as their first prerogative, which Nature Gave to them for a law? and should I break it, I were no more a woman. Ped. Sure a good one You cannot be, if you put off that vertue Which best adorns a good one, Courtesie And affable behaviour. Do not flatter Yourself with the opinion that your birth, Your beauty, or whatever false ground else You raise your pride upon, will stand against The censure of just men. Al. Why let it fall then, I still shall be unmov'd. Leo. And pray you be you so. Al. What Jewel's that? Wo. That which the Prince of Tarent — Al. Left here, and you receiv'd without my know∣ledge; I have use of't now. Does the Page wait without, My Lord Cardenes sent t'enquire my health? Wo. Yes Madam. Al. Give it him, and with it pray him To return my service to his Lord, and mine. Ped. Will you so undervalue one that has So truly lov'd you, to bestow the pledge Of his affection (being a Prince) upon The servant of his Rival? Leo. 'Tis not well, 'Faith, were it Lady? send gold to the Boy. 'Twill please him better. Al. Do as I command you, I will keep nothing that may put me in mind Don John Antonio ever lov'd, or was, Being wholly now Cardenes. Ped. In another
This were meer barbarism, sister, and in you (For I'll not sooth you) at the best 'tis rudeness. Al. Rudeness? Ped. Yes rudeness, and what's worse, the want Of civil manners, nay ingratitude Unto the many and so fair deservings Of Don Antonio: does this express Your breeding in the Court, or that you call The Vice-roy father? A poor peasants daughter That ne'r had conversation but with beasts (Or men bred like them) would not so far shame Her education. Al. Pray you leave my chamber; I know you for a Brother, not a Tutor. Leo: You are too violent, Madam. Al. Were my Father Here to command me, (as you take upon you Almost to play his part) I would refuse it. Where I love, I profess it; where I hate, In every circumstance I dare proclaim it: Of all that wear the shapes of men, I loath That Prince you plead for; no antipathie Between things most averse in nature, hold A stronger enmity then his with mine: With which rest satisfied; if not, your anger May wrong your self, not me. Leo. My Lord Cardenes! Ped. Go; in soft terms, If you persist thus, You will be one. Al. What one? pray you out with it: Ped. Why, one that I shall wish a stranger to me, That I might curse you: but— Enter Martino. Mar. Whence grows this heat?
Ped. Be yet advis'd, and entertain him fairly, For I will send him to you, or no more Know me a Brother. Al. As you please. Ped. Good morrow. Exit. Mar. Good morrow, and part thus? you seem mov'd too: What desperate sool durst raise a tempest here To sink himself? Al Good sir, have patience; The cause (though I confess I am not pleas'd) No way deserves your anger: Mar. Not mine, Madam? As if the least offence could point at you, And I not feel it: 'As you have vouchsaf'd me The promise of your heart, conceal it not, Whomsoever it concerns. Al. It is not worth So serious an enquiry: My kind Brother Had a desire to learn me some new Courtship Which I distasted, that was all. Mar. Your Brother, In being yours, with more security He might provoke you; yet if he hath past A Brothers bounds— Leo. What then, my Lord? Mar. Believe it, I'll call him to accompt for't. Leo. Tell him so. Al. No more. Leo. Yes, thus much; though my modesty Be call'd in question for it, in his absence I will defend him: He hath said nor done But what Don Pedro well might say or do. Mark me, Don Pedro! in which understand As worthy, and as well as can be hop'd for
Of those that love him best, from Don Gardenes. Mar. This to me Cousin? Al. You forget your self. Leo. No, nor the cause, in (which you did so Lady) Which is so just, that it needs no concealing On Pedro's part. Al. What mean you. Leo. I dare speak it, If you dare hear it, Sir: He did perswade Almira, your Almira, to vouchsafe Some little conference with the Prince of Tarent Before he left the Court; and that the world Might take some notice, thoūgh he prosper'd not In his so lov'd design, he was not scorn'd, He did desire the kissing of her hand, And then to leave her; this was much: Mar. 'Twas more Then should have been urg'd by him, well deni'd On your part, Madam, and I thank you for't. Antonio had his answer, I your grant: And why your Brother should prepare for him An after enterview, or private favor, I can finde little reason. Leo. None at all. Why you should be displeas'd with't. Mar His respect To me, as things now are, should have weigh'd down His former friendship, 'twas done indiscreetly, I would be loth to say maliciously, To build up the demolish'd hopes of him That was my Rival: What had he to do (If he view not my happiness in your favor, With wounded eies) to take upon himself An office so distasteful? Leo. You may ask As well, what, any Gentleman has to do With civil courtesie
Al. Or you with that, Which at no part concerns you: Good my Lord Rest satisfied, that I saw him not, nor will. And that, nor Father, Brother, nor the world Can work me unto any thing, but what You give allowance too; in which assurance With this, I leave you. Leo. Nay take me along, You are not angry too? Al. Presume on that. Exeunt: Mar: Am I assur'd of her, and shall again Be tortur'd with suspition to loose her, Before I have enjoy'd her? the next Sun Shall see her mine; why should I doubt then? yet To doubt is safer, then to be secure But one short day: Great Empires in less time Have suffer'd change; she's constant, but a woman, And what a lovers vows, perswasions, tears, May in a minute work upon such frailty. There are too many, and too sad examples. The Prince of Tarent gone, all were in safety; Or not admitted to solicite her, My fears would quit me; 'tis my fault, if I Give way to that, and let him ne'er desire To own what's hard, that dares not guard it. Who waits there? Enter Servants and Page. Serv. Would your Lordship might? Mar. 'Tis well You are so neer. Enter Don John, and Servant. John. Take care all things be ready For my remove.
Serv. They are. Mar. We meet like Friends, No more like Rivals now: my emulation Puts on the shape of love and service to you. John. It is return'd: Mar. 'Twas rumor'd in the Court You were to leave the City, and that wan me To find you out: Your Excellence may wonder That I that never saw you till this hour, But that I wish'd you dead, so willingly Should come to wait upon you to the Ports, And there, with hope you never will look back, Take my last farewell of you. John. Never look back? Mar. I said so, neither is it fit you should; And may I prevail with you as a friend, You never shall, nor while you live hereafter Think of the Viceroy's Court, or of Palermo, But as a grave, in which the Prince of Tarent Buried his honor. John. You speak in a language I do not understand. Mar. No? I'll be plainer. What mad-man, that came hither with that pomp Don John Antonio did, that exact Courtier Don John Antonio, with whose brave fame only Great Princesses have faln in love, and dy'd; That came with such assurance as young Paris Did to fetch Helen, being sent back, contemn'd, Disgrac'd and scorn'd, his large expence laugh'd at, His bravery scoff'd, the Lady that he courted Left quietly in possession of another (Not to be nam'd that day a Courtier Where he was mention'd, the scarce known Cardenes, And he to bear her from him) that would ever Be seen again (having got fairly off)
By such as will live ready witnesses Of his repulse, and scandal? John. The grief of it, Believe me, will not kill me. All mans honor Depends not on the most uncertain favor Of a fair Mistris. Mar. Troth, you bear it well. You should have seen some that were sensible Of a disgrace, that would have rag'd, and sought To cure their honor, with some strange revenge: But you are better temper'd; and they wrong The Neapolitans in their report, That say they are fiery spirits, uncapable Of the least injury, dangerous to be talk'd with After a loss, where nothing can move you. But, like a Stoick, with a constancy, Words nor affronts, can shake, you still go on And smile when men abuse you. John. If they wrong Themselves, I can: yet I would have you know, I dare be angry. Mar. 'Tis not possible. A taste of't would do well: And I'd make tryal What may be done. Come hither Boy, you have seen This Jewel, as I take it. John. Yes, 'tis that I gave Almira. Mar. And in what esteem She held it, coming from your worthy self, You may perceive, that freely hath bestowed it Upon my Page. John. When I presented it, I did not indent with her, to what use She should employ it. See the kindness of
A loving soul; who, after this neglect, Nay gross contempt, will look again upon her, And not be frighted from it. John. No indeed Sir, Nor give way longer: Give way, do you mark, To your loose wit, to run the Wilde-goose chace, Six syllables further: I will see the Lady, That Lady, that dotes on you, from whose hate My love increases, though you stand elected Her Porter, to deny me. Mar. Sure you will not. John. Yes, instantly: Your prosperous success Hath made you insolent; and for her sake I have thus long forborne you; and can yet Forget it, and forgive it, ever provided, That you end here, and for what is past recalling, That she make intercession for your pardon, Which at her suit, I'll grant. Mar. I am much unwilling To move her for a triffle; bear that too, And then she shall speak to you. John. Men and Angels, Take witness for me, that I have endur'd More then a man:— O do not fall so soon, Stand up; take my hand, so: When I have printed For ever contumelious word, a wound here, Then sink for ever. Mar. O! I suffer justly. Serv. Murther, murther, murther. Exe. Servants. 2. Serv. Apprehend him. 3. Serv. We'll all joyn with you. John. I do wish you more, My fury will be lost else, if it meet not Matter to work on; one life is too little For so much injury.
Enter Almira, Leonora, Servants. Al. O my Cardenes, Thou dead, still my Cardenes: Villains, cowards, What do ye check at? can one arm, and that A murtherers, so long guard the curs'd Master, Against so many swords, made sharp with Justice? 1. Serv. Sure he will kill us all; he is a devil. 2. Serv. He is invulnerable. Al. Your base fears Beget such fancies in you: Give me a sword, This my weak arm, made strong in my revenge, Shall force a way to't. John. Would it were deeper Madam, The thrust; which I would not put by, being yours Of greater force, to have peirc'd through that heart Which still retains your figure: Weep still Lady, For every tear that flows from those griev'd eyes, Some part of that which maintains life, goes from me. And so to die, were in a gentle slumber To pass to Paradise; but you envy me So quiet a departure from my world, My world of miseries; therefore take my sword, And having kill'd me with it, cure the wounds It gave Cardenes. Enter Pedro. Ped. 'Tis too true: Was ever Valor so ill employ'd? John. Why stay you Lady? Let not soft pity work on your hard nature: You cannot do a better office to The dead Cardenes, and I willingly Shall fall a ready sacrifice, to appease him, Your fair hand offering it.
Al. Thou couldst ask nothing But this, which I would grant: Lev. Flint-hearted Lady! Ped. Are you a woman, Sister? Al. Thou art not A Brother, I renounce that title to thee: Thy hand is in this bloody act; 'twas this For which that savage homicide was sent hither. Thou equal Judge of all things, if that blood, And innocent blood — Al. Oh Cardenes, How is my soul rent between rage and sorrow, That it can be, that such an upright Cedar Should violently be torn up by the roots, Without an earthquake in that very moment To swallow them that did it. John. The hurt's nothing, But the deep wound is in my conscience, friend, Which sorrow in death only can recover. Ped. Have better hopes. Enter Viceroy, Messina, Captain, Guard, and Servants. Mess. My son, is this the marriage I came to celebrate? false hopes of man, I come to find a grave here. Al. I have wasted My stock of Tears, and now just Anger help me To pay in my Revenge the other part Of duty which I owe thee. O great Sir, Not as a Daughter now, but a poor Widow, Made so before she was a Bride, I flie To your impartial justice; the offence Is death, and death in his most horrid form: Let not then title, or a Princes name
(Since a great crime is in a great man greater) Secure the Offender. Mess. Give me life for life, As thou wilt answer it to the great King Whose Deputy thou art here. Al. And speedy Justice. Mess. Put the damn'd wretch to torture. Al. Force him to Reveal his curs'd Confederates, which spare not, Although you find a Son among them. Vice. How? Mess. Why bring you not the Rack forth? Al. Wherefore stands the Murtherer unbound? Vice. Shall I have hearing? Mess. Excellent Lady, in this you express Your true love to the dead. Al. All love to mankind from me, ends with him. Vice. Will you hear me yet? And first to you; you do confess the fact With which you stand charg'd? John. I will not make worse What is already ill, with vain denial. Vice. Then understand, though you are Prince of Tarent, Yet being a Subject to the King of Spain, No priviledge of Sicily can free you Being convict by a just form of Law, From the municipal Statutes of that Kingdom, But as a common man, being found guilty, Must suffer for it. John. I prize not my life So much, as to appeal from any thing You shall determine of me. Vice. Yet despair not To have an equal hearing; the exclaims Of this g iev'd Father, nor my Daughters tears
Shall sway me from my self; and where they urge To have you tortur'd, or led bound to prison, I must not grant it. Mess. No? Vice. I cannot sir; For men of his rank are to be distinguish'd From other men, before they are condemn'd, From which (his cause not heard) he yet stands free: So take him to your charge, and as your life See he be safe. Capt. Let me die for him else. Exe. Ped. John, Cap. & guard. Mess. The guard of him should have been given to me. Al. Or unto me. Mess. Bribes may corrupt the Captain. Al. And our just wreak, by force or cunning practice, With scorn prevented Mar. Oh! Al. What groan is that? Vice. They'r apparent signs of life yet in him. Al. Oh that there were! that I could pour my blood Into his veins! Mar. Oh, oh! Vice. Take him up gently. Mess. Run for Physitians. Al. Surgeons. Mess. All helps else. Vice. This care of his recovery, timely practis'd, Would have express'd more of a Father in you, Then your impetuous clamors for revenge. But I shall find fit time to urge that further Hereafter to you; 'tis not fit for me To add weight to oppress'd calamitie. Exeunt.
Act. 2. Scaen. 1. Enter Pedro, Don John, Captain. John. WHy should your love to me, having al∣ready So oft endur'd the test, be put unto A needless trial? have you not long since In every circumstance and rite of friendship Outgone all presidents the Antients boast of, And will you yet move further? Ped. Hitherto I have done nothing (howsoe'r you value My weak endeavours) that may justly claim A title to your friendship, and much less Laid down the debt, which as a tribute due To your deservings, not I, but mankind Stands bound to tender. John. Do not make an Idol Of him that should, and without superstition, To you build up an Altar. O my Pedro, When I am to expire, to call you mine Assures a future happiness: Give me leave To argue with you, and the fondness of Affection struck blind, with justice hear me. Why should you, being innocent, fling your life Into the furnace of your fathers anger For my offence? Or take it granted, (yet 'Tis more then supposition) you prefer
My safety 'fore your own, (so prodigally You waste your favors) wherfore should this Captain His blood and sweat rewarded in the favor Of his great Master, falsifie the trust Which from true judgment he reposes in him, For me a stranger? Ped. Let him answer that, He needs no prompter: Speak your thoughts, and freely. Capt. I ever lov'd to do so, and it shames not The bluntness of my breeding; from my youth I was train'd up a Soldier, one of those That in their natures love the dangers more Then the rewards of danger. I could add, My life, when forfeited, the Viceroy pardon'd, But by his intercession; and therefore It being lent by him, I were ungrateful (Which I will never be) if I refus'd To pay that debt at any time demanded. Ped. I hope, friend, this will satisfie you. John. No, it raises More doubts within me. Shall I from the school Of gratitude, in which this Captain reads The text so plainly, learn to be unthankful? Or viewing in your actions the Idea Of perfect Friendship, when it does point to me How brave a thing it is to be a Friend, Turn from the object? Had I never lov'd The fair Almira for her outward features, Nay, were the beauties of her mind suspected, And her contempt and scorn painted before me, The being your Sister would anew inflame me With much more impotence to dote upon her: No, dear friend, let me in my death confirm (Though you in all things else have the precedence) I'll die ten times, ere one of Pedro's hairs Shall suffer in my cause.
Ped. If you so love me, In love to that part of my soul dwels in you, (For though two bodies, friends have but one soul.) Loose not both life and me. Enter a Servant. 1. Serv. The Prince is dead. Exit. John. If so, shall I leave Pedro here to answer For my escape? As thus I clasp thee, let The Vice-roys sentence finde me. Ped. Flie for Heavens sake, Consider the necessity; though now We part Anthonio we, may meet again; But death's division is for ever, friend. Enter another Servant. 2. Serv. The rumor spread Sir, of Martino's death, Is check'd, there's hope of his recovery. John. Why should I flie then? when I may enjoy With mine own life, my friend. Ped. That's still uncertain, He may have a relapse; for once be rul'd friend. He's a good debtor that pays when 'tis due; A prodigal, that before it is requir'd, Makes tender of it. Enter three or four Sailors. 1. Sail. The Bark, Sir, is ready. 2. Sail. The wind sits fair. Whistles within. 3. Sail. Heaven favors your escape. Cap. Hark how the Boatswain whistles you aboard. Will nothing move you? John. Can I leave my friend?
Pedro. I must delay no longer, force him home. Capt. I'll run the hazard of my fortunes with you, John. What violence is this? hear but my Reasons. Pedro. Poor friendship that is cool'd with Argu∣ments. Away, away. Capt. For Malta. Pedro. You shall hear All our events. John. I may sail round the world, But never meet thy like. Pedro. Pedro. Anthonio. John. I breathe my soul back to thee. Pedro. In exchange Bear mine along with thee. Gapt. Cheerly my hearts. Exeunt. Ped. He's gone. May pittying-Heaven his Pilot be, And then I weigh not what becomes of me. Exit. Enter Viceroy, Messina, and Attendants. Vice. I tell you right Sir. Mes. Yes, like a rough Surgeon, Without a feeling in your self, you search My wounds unto the quick, then pray declare The tediousness, and danger of the cure, Never remembring what the Patient suffers. But you preach this Philosophy to a man That does pertake of passion, and not To a dull Stoick. Vice. I confess you have Just cause to mourn your Son; and yet if reason Cannot yeeld comfort, let example cure. I am a Father too, my onely daughter As dear in my esteem, perhaps as worthy As your Martino, in her love to him
As desperately ill, either's loss equal, And yet I bear it with a better temper. Enter Pedro. Pedro. Which if you please to imitate 'twill not wrong Your pietie, nor your judgment. Mes. We were fashion'd in different moulds, I weep with mine own eyes Sir, pursue my ends too, Pitie to you's a Cordial, Revenge to me, and that I must, and will have If my Martino die. Pedro. Your must, and will, Shall in your full sail'd confidence deceive you. Lord Hear's Doctor Paulo Sir. Enter Doctor Paulo, two Surgeons. Mes. My hand? you rather Deserve my knee, and it shall bend as to A second Father, if your saving aids Restore my son. Vice. 'Rise thou bright star of knowledge, The honor of thy art, thou help of nature, Thou glory of our Academies. Doct. If I blush Sir To hear these attributes ill plac'd on me, It is excusable, I am no God Sir, Nor holy Saint that can do miracles, But a weak sinful man: Yet that I may In some proportion deserve these favors, Your excellencies please to grace me with, I promise all the skill I have acquir'd In simples, or the careful observation Of the superior Bodies, with my judgment
Deriv'd from long experience, stand ready To do you service. Mes. Modestly repli'd. Vice How is it with you princely Patient? Mes. Speak, But speak some comfort Sir. Doct. I must speak truth, His wounds, though many, Heaven so guided yet Anthonio's sword, it pierc'd no part was mortal. These Gentlemen who worthily deserve The names of surgeons have done their duties. The means they practis'd, not ridiculous charms To stop the blood; no Oyls, nor Balsoms bought Of cheating Quack-salvers, or Montebanks, By them appli'd: The rules by Chiron taught, And AEsculapius, which drew upon him, The thunderers envy, they with care pursu'd, Heav'n prospering their endeavors. Mes. There is hope then Of his recovery? Doct. But no assurance; I must not flatter you. That little air Of comfort that breathes towards us (for I dare not Rob these t'inrich my self) you ow their care; For yet I have done nothing. Mes. Still more modest, I will begin with them, to either give Three thousand crowns. Vice. I'll double your reward; See 'em paid presently. 1. Surg. This magnificence With equity, cannot be confer'd on us; 'Tis due unto the Doctor. 2. Surg True; we were But his subordinate ministers, and did onely Follow your grave directions.
Doct. 'Tis your own, I challenge no part in it. Vice Brave on both sides. Doct. Deserve this, with the honor that will follow In your attendance. 2. Surg. If both sleep at once, 'Tis justice both should die. Exeunt Surgeons: Mes For you grave Doctor, We will not in such petty sums consider Your high desarts. Our treasury lies open, Command it as your own. Vice Choose any Castle, Nay City, in our Government, and be Lord of't. Doct. Of neither Sir, I am not so ambitious; Nor would I have your Highnesses secure. We have but faintly yet begun our journey, A thousand difficulties and dangers must be Encountred, ere we end it. Though his hurts, I mean his outward ones, do promise fair, There is a deeper one, and in his minde Must be with care provided for. Melancholy, And at the height, too near of kin to madness, Possesses him; his senses are distracted, Not one, but all; and if I can collect 'em With all the various ways, invention, Or industry ever practis'd, I shall write it My master-piece. Mes. You more and more engage me. Vice. May we not visit him? Doct. By no means Sir, As he is now, such courtesies come untimely, I'll yeeld you reason for't. Should he look on you, It will renew the memory of that Which I would have forgotten. Your good prayers (And those I do presume, shall not be wanting To my endeavors) are the utmost aids
I yet desire your Excellencies should grant me. So with my humblest service. Mes. Go and prosper. Exit Doctor. Vice. Observe his piety I have heard, how true I know not, most Physitians as they grow Greater in skill, grow less in their Religion. Attributing so much to natural causes, That they have little faith in that they cannot Deliver Reason for: This Doctor steers Another course; but let this pass, if you please. Your company to my Daughter. Mes. I wait on you. Exeunt. Enter Leonora, and two Women. Leon. Took she no rest to night? 1. Wom. Not any Madam, I am sure she slept not. If she slumbred strait, As if some dreadful vision had appear'd, She started up, her hair unbound, and with Distracted looks, staring about the Chamber, She asks aloud; where is Martino? where Have you conceal'd him? sometimes names Anthonio, Trembling in every joynt, her brows contracted: Her fair face as 'twere chang'd into a curse, Her hands held up thus, and as if her words Were too big to finde passage through her mouth. She groans, then throws her self upon her Bed, Beating her Brest. Leon. 'Tis wondrous strange. 2. Wom. Nay more, She that of late vouchsafed not to be seen, But so adorn'd, as if she were to rival Nero's Poppea, or the Egyptian Queen, Now careless of her beauties; when we offer Our service, she contemns it. Leon. Does she not
Sometimes forsake her Chamber? 2. Wom. Much about This hour, then with a strange unsetled gate She measures twice, or thrice the Gallery, Silent, and frowning (we dare not speak to her) And then returns. She's come, pray you now ob∣serve her. Enter Almira in black, carelesly habited. Al. Why are my eyes fix'd on the ground, and not Bent upwards? Ha! that which was mortal of My dear Martino, as a debt to nature, I know this mother Earth hath sepulchred: But his diviner part, his Soul, o'r which The tyrant death, nor yet the fatal sword Of curs'd Anthonio, his Instrument, Had the least power, borne upon Angels wings, Appointed to that office, mounted far Above the Firmament. Leon. Strange imagination! Dear Cousin your Martino lives. Al. I know you, And that in this you flatter me. He's dead, As much as could die of him: But look yonder Amongst a million of glorious lights That deck the heavenly Canopy; I have Discern'd his soul transform'd into a star. Do you not see it? Leon. Lady. Al. Look with my eyes. What splendor circles it! the heavenly Archer Not far off distant, appears dim with envy, Viewing himself out-shin'd. Bright Constellation Dart down thy beams of pity on Almira; And since thou findst such grace where now thou art, As I did truly love thee on the Earth,
Like a kinde Harbinger, prepare my lodging, And place me near thee. Leon. I much more then fear, She'll grow into a phrensie. Al. How! what's this? A dismal sound! Come nerer Cousin, lay Your ear close to the ground, closer I pray you. Do you howl? are you there Anthonio? Leon. Where sweet Lady? Al. I'th' Vault, in Hell, on the infernal rack, Where murtherers are tormented: Yirk him soundly. 'T was Rhadamanths sentence; Do your office Furies. How he rores! what plead to me to mediate for you? I am deaf, I cannot hear you. Leon. 'Tis but fancy, Collect your self. Al. Leave babling; 'tis rare Musick. Rhamnusia plays on a pair of tongs Red hot; and Proserpine dances to the confort; Pluto sits laughing by too. So, enough, I do begin to pitie him. Leon I wish, Madam, You would shew it to your self. 2. Wom. Her fit begins To leave her. Al. O my brains! are you there Cousin? Leon. Now she speaks temperately. I am ever ready To do you service: How do you? Al. Very much troubled. I have had the strangest waking dream of Hell And Heaven, I know not what. Leon. My Lord your Father
Is come to visit you. As ye would not grieve him That is so tender of you, entertain him With a becoming dutie. Enter Viceroy, Messinae, Pedro, Attendants: Vice. Still forlorn? No comfort my Almira? Mes. In your sorrow, For my Martino, Madam, you have express'd All possible love and tenderness. Too much of it Will wrong your self, and him. He may live Lady (For we are not past hope) with his future ser∣vice, In some part to deserve it. Al. If Heaven please To be so gratious to me, I'll serve him With such obedience, love, and humbleness, That I will rise up an example for Good wives to follow: But until I have Assurance what fate will determine of me, Thus like a desolate Widow, give me leave To weep for him; for should he die, I have vow'd Not to out-live him; and my humble suit is, One Monument may cover us, and Anthonio In justice you must grant me that be offer'd A Sacrifice to our Ashes. Vice. Prethee put off These sad thoughts, both shall live (I doubt it not) A happy pair.
Enter Viceroy, Cuculo, and Borachia, Cuc. O Sir, the foulest treason That ever was discovered. Vice. Speak it, that We may prevent it. Cuc. Nay 'tis past prevention, Though you allow me wise (in modesty, I will not say oraculous) I cannot help it. I am a Statesman, and some say a wise one, But I could never conjure, nor divine Of things to come. Vice. Leave fooling; to the point, What treason? Cuc. The false Prince Don John Anthonio Is fled. Vice. It is not possible. Ped. Peace, Scriech-owl. Cuc. I must speak, and it shall out, sir; the Captain You trusted with the Fort, is run away too. Alm. O miserable woman, I defie All comfort, cheated too of my revenge! As you are my Father sir, and you my Brother, I will not curse you; but I dare, and will say You are unjust and treacherous. If there be A way to death, I'll find it. Exeunt Almira, Leonora, women. Vice. Follow her, She'll do some violent act upon herself: Till she be better temper'd, bind her hands, And fetch the Doctor to her. Had not you A hand in this? Ped. I sir, I never knew Such disobedience. Vice. My honor's touch'd in't:
Let Gallies be mann'd forth in his pursuit, Search every Port and Harbor; if I live, He shall not 'scape thus. Mess. Fine hypocrisie! Away dissemblers, 'tis confederacie Betwixt thy son and self, and the false Captain, He could not thus have vanish'd else. Ye have mur∣ther'd My Son amongst you, and now murther Justice. You know it most impossible he should live, Howe'r the Doctor for your ends dissembled, And you have shifted hence Anthonio. Vice: Messina, thou art a craz'd and griev'd old man, And being in my Court protected by The law of hospitality, or I should Give you a sharper answer: May I perish, If I knew of his flight. Mess. Fire then the Castle, Hang up the Captains wife and children. Vice. Fie sir. Ped. My Lord, you are uncharitable; capital treasons Exact not so much. Mess. Thanks most noble Signior, We ever had your good word and your love Cuc. Sir, I dare pass my word, my Lords are clear Of any imputation in this case You seem to load. 'em with. Mess. Impertinent fool; No, no, the loving faces you put on Have been but grinning vizors: you have juggled me Out of my son, and out of justice too. But Spain shall do me right; believe me Viceroy, There I will force it from thee by the King, He shall nor eat nor sleep in peace for me
Till I am righted for this treacherie. Vice Thy worse Messina, since no reason can Qualifie thy intemperance, the corruption Of my subordinate Ministers cannot wrong My true integrity, let privy searches Examine all the Land. Ped. Fair fall Anthonio. Ex. Viceroy, Ped. Attend. Cuc. This is my wife, my Lord; troth speak your conscience, Is't not a goodly Dame? Mess. She is no less Sir, I will make use of these; may I intreat you To call my Neece. Bor. With speed sir. Ex. Borachia! Cuc. You may my Lord Suspect me as an Agent in these State conveyances. Let Signior Cuculo then be never more, For all his place, wit, and authority, Held a most worthy honeit Gentleman. Enter Borachia with Leonora. Mes. I do acquit you Signior. Neece you see To what extreams I am driven, the cunning Vice∣roy And his son Pedro, having express'd too plainly Their cold affections to my son Martino; And therefore I conjure thee Leonora, By all thy hopes from me, which is my Dukedom, If my son fail, however all thy fortunes, Though heretofore some love hath past betwixt Don Pedro, and thy self, Abjure him now. And as thou keep'st Almira company, In this her desolation, so in hate To this yong Pedro for thy Cousins love, Be her associate; or assure thy self,
I cast thee like a stranger from my blood. If I do ever hear, thou seest, or send'st Token, or receive message by you Heaven, I never more will own thee. Leon. O dear Uncle, You have put a tyrannous yoke upon my heart, And it will break it. Exit Leonard. Mes. Gravest Lady; you May be a great assister in my ends. I buy your diligence thus: Divide this couple, Hinder their enterviews; fain 'tis her will To give him no admittance, if he crave it, And thy rewards shalll be thine own desires. Whereto good Sir, but adde your friendly aids, And use me to my uttermost. Cuculo. My Lord, If my wife please, I dare not contradict. Borachia, what do you say? Bor I say, my Lord, I know my place, and be assur'd I will Keep fire and toe a sunder. Mes. You in this Shall much deserve me. Exit Messina. Cuc. We have took upon us A heavy charge. I hope you'll now forbear Th'excess of Wine. Bor. I will do what I please. This day the markets kept for slaves, go you And buy me a fine timber'd one to assist me. I must be better waited on. Cuc. Any thing. Ped. So you'll leave Wine. Bor. Still prating? Cuc. I am gone Duck. Exit Cuculo. Bor. Pedro! so hot upon the scent, I'll fit him.
Enter Pedro. Ped. Donna Borachia, you most happily Are met to pleasure me. Bor. It may be so, I use to pleasure many. Here lies my way, I do beseech you Sir, keep on your voyage. Ped. Be not so short, sweet Lady, I must with you. Bor. With me Sir, I beseech you Sir; why, what Sir See you in me? Ped. Do not mistake me Lady, Nothing but honesty. Bor. Hang honesty; Trump me not up with honesty. Do you mark Sir, I have a charge Sir, and a special charge Sir; And 'tis not honesty can win on me Sir. Ped. Prethee conceive me rightly. Bor. I conceive ye? Ped. But understand. Bor. I will not understand sir, I cannot, nor I do not understand sir. Ped. Prethree Borachia, let me see my Mistress; But look upon her, stand you by. Bor. How's this? Shall I stand by? what do you think of me. Now by the vertue of the place I hold, You are a Paltry Lord to tempt my trust thus. I am no Hellen, nor no Heccuba, To be deflowred of my loyaltie With your fair language. Ped. Thou mistak'st me still. Bor. It may be so; my place will bear me out in't;
And will mistake you still, make you your best on't, Ped. A Pox upon thee, let me but behold her. Bor. A Plague upon you, you shall never see her: Ped. This is a croan in grain! Thou art so testie, Prethee take breath, and know thy friends. Bor. I will not, I have no friends, nor I will have none this way. And now I think on't better, why will you see her? Ped. Because she loves me dearly, I her equally. Bor. She hates you damnably, most wickedly, (Build that upon my word) most wickedly; And swears her eies are sick when they behold ye. How fearfully have I heard her rail upon ye, And cast, and rail again, and cast again; Call for hot Waters, and then rail again. Ped. How? 'tis not possible. Bor. I have heard her swear (How justly, you best know, and where the cause lies) That ye are (I shame to tell it) but it must out. Fie, fie, why, how have you deserv'd it? Ped. I am what? Bor. The beastliest man; why what a grief must this be, Sir-reverence of the company, a rank whoremaster: Ten livery whores, she assur'd me on her credit, With weeping eies she spake it, and seven Citizens, Beside all voluntaries that serve under ye, And of all Countries. Ped. This must needs be a lie. Bor. Besides ye are so careless of your body, Which is a foul fault in ye. Ped. Leave your fooling, For this shall be a fable. Happily My Sisters anger may grow strong against me, Which thou mistak'st.
Bor. She hates you very well too, But your Mistress hates you heartily; look upon ye? Upon my conscience, she would see the divel first, With eies as big as sawcers. When I but nam'd ye, She has leapt back thirty foot: If once she smell ye, For certainly ye are rank, she says extream rank, And the wind stand with ye too, she is gone for ever. Pedro. For all this I would see her. Bor. That's all one. Have you new eyes when those are scratch'd out? or a nose To clap on warm? Have you proof against a Piss∣pot; Which if they bid me, I must fling upon you? Ped. I shall not see her, then you say? Bor. It seems so. Ped. Prethree be thus far friend, then good Bora∣chia, To give her but this Letter, and this Ring, And leave thy pleasant lying, which I pardon; But leave it in her pocket, there's no harm in't. I'll take thee up a Petticoat, will that please thee? Bor. Take up my Petticoat? I scorn the motion, I scorn it with my heels; take up my Petticoat? Ped. And why thus hot? Bor. Sir, you shall finde me hotter If you take up my Petticoat. Ped. I'll give thee a new Petticoat: Bor. I scorn the gift: Take up my Petticoat? Alas my Lord, you are to yong, my Lord; To yong my Lord to circumcise me that way. Take up my Petticoat? I am a woman, A woman of another way, my Lord; A Gentlewoman. He that takes up my Petticoat, Shall have enough to do, I warrant him.
I would fain see the proudest of you all so lusty: Ped. Thou art dispos'd still to mistake me. Bor. Petticoat. You show now what you are, but do your worst, Sir. Ped. A wild-fire take thee. Bor. I ask no favor of ye, And so I leave ye; and withal I charge ye In my own name, for sir I would have ye know it, In this place I present your fathers person: Upon your life, not dare to follow me; For if you do Exit Borachia. Ped. Go, and the Pox go with thee, If thou hast so much moisture to receive 'em. For thou wilt have 'em, though a Horse bestow 'em, I must devise a way, for I must see her, And very suddenly; and Madam Petticoat, If all the wit I have, and this can do, I'll make you break your charge, and your hope too. Exit.
Act. 3. Scaen. 1. Enter Master, Man, Don John, Captain, with divers Slaves. Mast. COme rank your selves, and stand out hand∣somly. Now ring the Bell, that they may know my Market. Stand you two here, you are personable men, And apt to yeeld good sums, if women cheapen: Put me that Pig-complexion'd fellow behinde, He will spoil my sale else, the slave looks like famine: Sure he was got in a Cheese-press, the whay runs out on's Nose yet. He will not yeeld above a peck of Oysters, If I can get a quart of wine in too, ye are gone Sir: Why sure, thou hadst no father. Slave. Sure I know not. Mast: No certainly, a March Frog kept thy mother; Thou art but a monster Paddock. Look who comes, Sirrah. Exit Man. And next prepare the Song, and do it lively. Your tricks too Sirrah; they are ways to catch the buyer, And if you do 'em well, they'll prove good Dowries, How now? Enter Man. Man. They come Sir, with their bags full loaden. Mast. Reach me my stool. O! here they come:
Enter Doctor, Apothecary, Cuculo, and Citizens. Cuc. That's he. He never fails monethly to sell his slaves here, He buys 'em presently upon their taking, And so disperses 'em to every Market. Mast. Begin the song, and chaunt it merrily — Well done. Doct. Good morrow. Mast. Morrow to you Signiors: Doct. We come to look upon your slaves, and buy too, If we can like the persons, and the prices. Cuc. They show fine active fellows. Mast. They are no less Sir, And people of strong labors. Doct. That's i'th' proof Sir. Apo. Pray what's the price of this Red-bearded fellow? If his Call be good, I have certain uses for him. Mast. My Sorrel slaves are of a lower price, Because the colours faint. Fifty Chekeens Sir. Apo. What be his vertues? Mast. He will poyson Rats, Make him but angry, and his eyes kill Spiders; Let him but fasting, spit upon a Tode, And presently it bursts, and dies; his dreams kill; He'll run you in a wheel, and draw up water; But if his Nose drop in't, 'twill kill an army. When ye have worn him to the Bones with uses, Thrust him into an Oven, luted well, Dry him, and beat him, flesh and bone to powder; And that kills Scabs and Aches of all clymates. Apo. Pray at what distance may I talk to him? Mast. Give him but Sage and Butter in a morn∣ing,
And there's no fear: But keep him from all wo∣men, For there his poyson swells most. Apo. I will have him. Cannot he breed a plague too? Mast. Yes, yes, yes. Feed him with Fogs probatum. Now to you Sir, Do you like this slave? Cuc. Yes, if I like his price well. Mast. The price is full an hundred, nothing bated. Sirrah, sell the Moors there; feel, he's high and lusty, And of a gamesom nature; bold, and secret, Apt to win favor of the man that owns him, By diligence, and duty: Look upon him. Doct. Do ye hear Sir? Mast. I'll be with you presently. Mark but his limbs, that slave will cost ye fourscore. An easie price, turn him about, and view him. For these two Sir? why they are the finest chil∣dren, Twins on my credit sir. Do you see this Boy, sir, He will run as far from ye in an hour. Cit. Will he so sir? Mast. Conceive me rightly, if upon an errand, As any horse you have. Cit. What will this Girl do? Mast. Sure no harm at all sir, For she sleeps most an end. Cit. An excellent house-wife. Of what Religion are they? Mast. What you will sir, So there be meat, and drink in't; they'll do little That shall offend ye; for their chief desire Is to do nothing at all sir.
Cuc. A hundred is too much. Mast. Not a doit bated, He's a brave slave; his eye shows activeness, Fire, and the mettle of a man, dwells in him. Here's one you shall have. Cuc. For what? Mast. For nothing, And thank ye too. Doct. What can he do? Mast. Why, any thing that's ill, And never blush at it: He's so true a theef, That he will steal from himself, and think he has got by it. He stole out of his Mothers belly, being an Infant, And from a lousie Nurse he stole his nature; From a Dog his look, and from an Ape his nimble∣ness; He will look in your face, and pick your pockets, Rob ye the most wise Rat of a Cheese-paring; There where a Cat will go in, he will follow, His body has no backbone. In to my company He stole, for I never bought him, and will steal in to yours, And ye stay a little longer. Now if any of ye Be given to the excellent art of lying, Behold, before ye here the master-piece; He will out-lie him that taught him, Monsieur De∣vil, Offer to swear he has eaten nothing in a twelve moneth, When his mouth's full of Meat. Cuc. Pray keep him, he's Jewel, And here's your money for this fellow. Mast. He's yours sir? Cuc. Come follow me. Exit with Don John.
Cit. Twenty Chekeens for these two. Mast. For five and twenty take 'em. Cit. There's your money; I'll have 'em, if it be to sing in Cages. Mast. Give 'em hard Eggs, you never had such Black birds. Cit. Is she a Maid, do'st think? Mast. I dare not swear Sir, She is nine year old, at ten you shall finde few here: Cit. A merry fellow, thou say'st true. Come chil∣dren. Exit with the Moors. Doct. Here tell your money; if his life but answer. His ontward promises, I have bought him cheap Sir. Mast. Too cheap a conscience, he's a pregnant Knave. Full of fine thoughts, I warrant him. Doct. He's but weak timber'd. Mast 'Tis the better, He will turn Gentleman a great deal sooner. Doct. Very weak Legs. Mast. Strong as the time allows Sir. Doct. What's that fellow? Mast. Who this? The finest thing in all the world Sir, The punctuallest, and the perfitest, an English mettle, But coyn'd in France; your servants servant Sir, Do you understand that? or your shadows servant. Will you buy him to carry in a Box! Kiss your hand sirrah; Let fall your cloak on one shoulder; face to your left hand; Fether your Hat; slope your Hat; now charge your honor. What think you of this fellow? Doct. Indeed I know not, I never saw such an Ape before. But hark you,
Are these things serious in his nature? Mast. Yes, yes; Part of his Creed: come do some more devices. Quarrel a little, and take him for your enemy, Do it in dumb show. Now observe him nearly. Doct. This fellow's mad, stark mad. Mast. Believe they are all so. I have sold a hundred of'em. Doct. A strange Nation: What may the women be? Mast. As mad as they; And as I have heard for truth, a great deal madder. Yet you may finde some civil things amongst 'em; But they are not respected. Nay never wonder, They have a City Sir, I have been in't, And therefore dare affirm it; where, if you saw With what a load of vanity 'tis fraughted, How like an everlasting Morris-dance it looks; Nothing but Hobby-horse, and Maid-marrian; You would start indeed: Doct. They are handsom men. Mast. Yes: If they would thank their Maker, And seek no further; but they have new Creators God Tailor, and God Mercer, a kinde of Jews Sir, But faln into Idolatry, for they worship Nothing with so much service, as the Cow-calfs. Doct. What do mean you by Cow-calfs? Mast. Why their women. Will you see him do any more tricks? Doct. 'Tis enough, I thank ye; But yet I'fl buy him, for the rareness of him, He may make my princely patient mirth, and that done, I'll claim him in my study, that at void hours I may run o'r the story of his Country. Mast. His price is forty.
Doct. Hold, I'll once be foolish, And buy a lump of levity to laugh at. Apo. Will your worship walk? Doct. How now Apothecary, Have you been buying too? Apo A little Sir; A dose or two of mischief. Doct. Fare ye well Sir, As these prove, we shall look the next wind for ye. Mast. I shall be with ye Sir. Doct. Who bought this fellow? 2. Cit. Not I. Apo. Nor I. Doct. Why do's he follow us then? Mast. Did not I tell ye he would steal to ye? 2. Cit. Sirrah. You mouldy chops, know you crib, I would wish you And get from whence you came. Slave. I came from no place. Doct. Wilt thou be my fool, for fools they say, will tell truth. Sla. Yes, if you will give me leave Sir to abuse you, For I can do that naturally. Doct. And I can beat ye. Slave. I should be sorry else, Sir. Mast. He looks for that, as duly as his victuals, And will be extream sick when he is not beaten. He will be as wanton, when he has a bone broken, As a Cat in a bowl on the water. Doct. You will part with him? Mast. To such a friend as you Sir. Doct. And without money? Mast. Not a peny Signior; And would he were better for ye. Doct. Follow me then, The Knave may teach me something.
Slave. Something, that You dearly may repent, howe'r you scorn me, The slave may prove your Master. Doct. Farewel once more. Mast. Farewel, and when the wind serves next, expect me. Exeunt. Enter Cuculo, and Don John. Cuc. Come Sir, you are mine, Sir, now; you serve a man Sir, That when you know more, you will finde. John. I hope so Cuc. What do'st thou hope? John. To finde ye a kinde master. Cuc. Finde you your self a diligent true servant, And take the precept of the wise before ye, And then you may hope Sirrah. Uuderstand: You serve me. What is me? a man of credit. John. Yes Sir. Cuc. Of special credit, special office. Hear first, and understand again, of special office. A man that nods upon the thing he meets, And that thing bows. John. 'Tis fit it should be so Sir. Cuc. It shall do so. A man neer all importance. Do'st thou digest this truly? John. I hope I shall Sir. Cuc. Besides, thou art to serve a noble Mistress, Of equal place and trust. Serve usefully, Serve all with diligence, but her delights, There make your stop. She is a woman sirrah; And though a cull'd out vertue, yet a woman Thou art not troubled with the strength of blood, And stirring faculties, for she will show a fair one? John. As I am a man, I may; but as I am your man, Your trusty, useful man, those thoughts shall perish.
Cuc: 'Tis apt, and well distinguish'd. The next precept, And then observe me, you have all your duty: Keep as thou wouldst keep thine eye-sight, all Wine from her, All talk of Wine. John. Wine is a comfort, Sir. Cuc. A Devil, Sir; let her not dream of Wine, Make her believe there neither is, nor was Wine, Swear it. John. Will you have me lye? Cuc. To my end, Sir; For if one drop of Wine but creep into her, She is the wisest woman in the world straight, And all the women in the world together Are but a whisper to her; a thousand Iron-mills Can be heard no further then a pair of Nut-crackers: Keep her from Wine, Wine makes her dangerous. Fall back; my Lord Don Pedro! Enter Pedro. Ped. Now Mr. Office: What is the reason that your vigilant greatness, And your wives wonderful wiseness have lock'd up from me The way to see my Mistress? whose Dog's dead now, That you observe these Vigils? Cuc. Very well, my Lord; Belike we observe no law then, nor no order, Nor feel no power, nor will of him that made 'em, When State-commands thus slightly are disputed: Ped. What State-command? dost thou think any State Would give thee any thing but Eggs to keep, Or trust thee with a secret above lousing?
Cuc. No, no, my Lord I am not passionate, You cannot work me that way to betray me. A point there is in't, that you must not see sir, A secret and a serious point of State too; And do not urge it further, do not Lord, It will not take; you deal with them that wink not: You try'd my wife, alas you thought she was foolish, Won with an empty word; you have not found it. Ped. I have found a pair of Coxcombs, that I am sure on. Cuc. Your Lordship may say three; I am not passionate. Ped. How's that? Cuc. Your Lordship found a faithful Gentle∣woman, Strong, and inscrutable as the Viceroy's heart, A woman of another making, Lord: And lest she might partake with womans weakness, I have purchas'd her a rib to make her perfect, A rib that will not shrink, nor break i'th' bending: This trouble we are put to, to prevent things, Which your good Lordship holds but necessary. Ped A fellow of a handsom and free promise, And much methinks I am taken with his countenance. Do you serve this Yeoman, Porter? Cuc. Not a word Basta, your Lordship may discourse your freedom; He is a slave of State sir, so of silence. Ped. You are very punctual State-cut; fare ye well, I shall find time to fit you too, I fear not. Exit Pedro. Cuc. And I shall fit you Lord; you would be billing; You are too hot, sweet Lord, too hot: Go you home, And there observe these lessons I first taught you,
Look to your charge abundantly; be wary, Trusty and wary: much weight hangs upon me, Watchful and wary too! this Lord is dangerous, Take courage and resist; for other uses Your Mistress will inform ye. Go, be faithful, And do ye hear? no wine. John. I shall observe Sir. Exeunt. Enter Doctor and Surgeons: Doct. He must take air. 1 Sur. Sir, under your correction, The violence of motion may make His wounds bleed fresh. 2 Sur. And he hath lost already Too much blood, in my judgment. Doct. I allow that; But to choak up his spirits in a dark room, Is far more dangerous. He comes; no questions. Enter Martino. Mar: Certain we have no reason, nor that soul Created of that pureness books perswade us: We understand not sure; nor feel that sweetness That men call Vertues chain to link our actions. Our imperfections form, and flatter us; A will to rash and rude things; is our reason, And that we glory in, that makes us guilty. Why did I wrong this man, unmanly wrong him, Unmannerly? He gave me no occasion; In all my heat how noble was his temper? And when I had forgot both man and manhood, With what a gentle bravery did he chide me? And say he had kill'd me, whither had I travell'd? Kill'd me in all my rage, oh how it shakes me!
Why didst thou do this, fool? a woman taught me, The Devil and his Angel woman bid me. I am a beast, the wildest of all beasts, And like a beast I make my blood my master: Farewell, farewell for ever name of Mistress, Out of my heart I cross thee; love and women Out of my thoughts. Doct. I, now you shew your manhood. Mar: Doctor believe me, I have bought my knowledge, And dearly, Doctor; they are dangerous creatures, They sting at both ends, Doctor; worthless creatures, And all their loves and favors end in ruines. Doct. To man indeed. Mar. Why now thou tak'st me rightly: What can they shew, or be? what act deserve us While we have vertue, and pursue her beauties? Doct. And yet I have heard Of many vertuous women. Mar. Not many, Doctor, there your reading fails you: Would there were more, and in their loves less dangers. Doct. Love is a noble thing without all doubt sir. Mar Yes, and an excellent to cure the itch. Ex. 1 Sur. Strange melancholy! Doct. By degrees 'twill lessen, Provide your things. 2 Sur. Our care shall not be wanting. Exeunt. Enter Leonora and Almira. Leon. Good Madam, for your healths sake cleer those clouds up, That feed upon your beauties like diseases: Times hand will turn again, and what he ruines Gently restore, and wipe off all your sorrows
Believe ye are to blame, much to blame Lady; You tempt his loving care whose eye has numbred All our afflictions, and the time to cure 'em: You rather with this torrent choak his mercies Then gently slide in to his providence. Sorrows are well allow'd, and sweeten Nature, Where they express no more then drops on lillies; But when they fall in storms, they bruise our hopes, Make us unable (though our comforts meet us) To hold our heads up: Come, you shall take com∣fort; This is a sullen grief becomes condemn'd men, That feel a weight of sorrow through their souls: Do but look up: Why so? is not this better Then hanging down your head still like a Violet, And dropping out those sweet eyes for a wager? Pray ye speak a little. Al Pray ye desire no more, And if ye love me, say no more. Leon. How fain (If I would be as wilful, and partake in't) Would you destroy your self? how often, Lady, Ev'n of the same disease have you curd me, And shook me out on't; chid me, tumbled me, And forc'd my hands thus? Al. By these tears no more. Leo. You are too prodigal of 'em. Well, I will not, For though my love bids me transgress your will, I have a service to your sorrows still. Exeunt. Enter Pedro and Don John. John. Indeed my Lord, my place is not so neer; I wait below stairs, and there sit, and wait Who comes to seek accesses; nor is it fit Sir My rudeness should intrude so neer their lodgings.
Ped. Thou maist invent a way, 'tis but a tryal; But carrying up this Letter, and this token, And giving 'em discreetly to my Mistress, The Lady Leonora; there's my Purse, Or any thing thou wilt ask me: if thou knew'st me, And what I may be to thee for this courtesie. John. Your Lordship speaks so honestly, and freely, That by my troth I'll venture. Ped. I deerly thank thee. John. And it shall cost me hard; nay, keep your purse Sir: For though my bodies bought, my minde was never. Though I am bound, my courtesies are no slaves. Ped. Thou shouldst be truly gentle. John. If I were so, The state I am in, bids you not believe it. But to the purpose Sir, Give me your Letter, And next your counsel, for I serve a crafty Mistress. Ped. And she must be remov'd, thou wilt else ne'er do it. John. I, there's the plague. Think, and I'll think a while too. Ped. Her husbands suddenly faln sick. John. She cares not If he were dead, indeed it would do better: Ped. Would he were hang'd. John. Then she would run for joy, Sir. Ped. Some Lady crying out. John. She has two already. Ped. Her house is a fire. John. Let the fool, my husband, quench it. This will be her answer: This may take, it will sure! Your Lordship must go presently, and send me Two or three bottles of your best Greek Wine; The strongest, and sweetest.
Ped. Instantly; But will that do? Exit Pedro. John. Let me alone to work it; Wine I was charg'd to keep by all means from her, All secret locks it opens, and all counsels, That I am sure, and gives men all accesses. Pray Heaven she be not loving, when she's drunk now; For drunk she shall be, though my pate pay for it; She'll turn my stomach then abominably, She has a most wicked face, and that leud face, Being a drunken face, what face will there be? She cannot ravish me. Now if my Master Should take her so, and know I minister'd, What will his wisdom do? I hope be drunk too, And then all's right. Well Lord, to do the service, Above these Puppit-plays, I keep a life yet. Here come the executioners: You are welcome, Give me your load, and tell my Lord, I am at it: Enter Servant with Bottles. Serv. I will sir, speed you sir. Exit John. Good speed on all sides. 'Tis mon-strong, strong Wine: O the yauns that she'll make! Look to your stern deer Mistress, and steer right, Here's that will work, as high as the Bay of Portugal: Stay, let me see; I'll try her by the Nose first, For if she be a right Sowe, sure she'll finde it. Enter Borachia. She is yonder by her self, the Lady's from her. Now to begin my sacrifice, she stirs, and vents it. O how she holds her nose up like a Jennet I'th' wind of a Grass-mare! She has it full now, And now she comes. I'll stand aside a while.
Bor: 'Tis wine; I sure 'tis wine! excellent strong wine! I'th must I take it: Very wine: this way too. John. How true she hunts? I'll make the train a little longer. Bor. Stronger, and stronger still! still blessed wine! John. Now she hunts hot. Bor. All that I can make for this wine, This way it went sure. John. Now she is at a cold scent. Make out your doubles Mistress. O well hunted, That's she, that's she. Bor. O, if I could but see it! O what a pretious scent it has! but handle it! John. Now I'll untappice. Bor. What's that? still 'tis stronger. Why how now sirrah? what's that? answer quickly, And to the point. John. 'Tis wine forsooth, good wine, Excellent Candi-wine. Bor. 'Tis well forsooth: Is this a drink for slaves? Why sawcy sirrah, Excellent Candi-wine; draw nearer to me, Reach in me bottle, Why thou most debauch'd slave, John. Pray be not angry Mistress, for with all my service And pains, I purchas'd this for you, I dare not drink it; For you a present, onely for your pleasure, To shew in little, what a thanks I owe The hourly courtesies, your goodness gives me. Bor. And I will give thee more; there kiss my hand on't. John. I thank you deerly for your durty favor, How ranck it smells!
Bor. By thy leave sweet Bottle, And Sugar-candi-wine, I now come to thee; Hold your hand under. John. How does your Worship like it? Bor. Under again, again; and now come kiss me, I'll be a mother to thee, Come, drink to me. John. I do beseech your pardon. Bor. Here's to thee then, I am easily intreated for thy good, 'Tis naught for thee indeed, 'twill make thee break out; Thou hast a pure complexion: now for me 'Tis excellent, 'tis excellent for me. Son slave I have a cold stomach, and the wind. John. Blows out a cry at your both ends. Bor. Kiss again, Cherish thy Lips, for thou shalt kiss fair Ladies: Son slave I have them for thee; I'll shew thee all. John. Heav'n bless mine eyes! Bor. Ev'n all the secrets, Son slave, In my dominion. John. Oh here come the Ladies, Now to my business. Enter Almira and Leonora. Leon. This air will much refresh you: Al: I must sit down. Leon. Do, and take freer thoughts; The place invites you, and I walk by, like your Sen∣tinel. Bor. And thou shalt be my Heir, I'll leave thee all, Heav'n knows to what 'twill mount to; but abun∣dance: I'll leave thee two yong Ladies, what think you of that Boy?
Where is the Bottle? Two delicate yong Ladies: But first you shall commit with me. Do you mark son, And shew your self a Gentleman, that's the truth son: John. Excellent Lady, kissing your fair hand, And humbly craving pardon for intruding This Letter, and this Ring. Leon. From whom, I pray you sir? John. From the most noble, loving Lord, Don Pedro, The servant of your Vertues. Bor. And prethee, good son slave, be wise and cir∣cumspect, And take heed of being overtaken with too much drink; For it is a lamentable sin, and spoils all: Why 'tis the damnablest thing to be drunk son, Heav'n cannot endure it. And hark you, one thing I would have done: Knock my husband on the head, as soon as may be, For he is an arrant Puppy, and cannot perform — Why, where the devil is this foolish Bottle? Leon. I much thank you, and this sir for your pains. John. No, gentle Lady, That I can do him service; is my merit, My faith, my full reward. Leon. Once more I thank you. Since I have met so true a friend to goodness, I dare deliver to your charge, my answer: Pray you tell him Sir, this night I do invite him To meet me in the Garden. Means he may finde, For love, they say, wants no abilities. John. Nor shall he, Madam, if my help may pro∣sper.
So everlasting Love, and Sweetness, bless ye. She's at it still, I dare not now appear to her. Al. What fellows that? Leon. Indeed I know not, Madam, It seems of some strange Countrey by his habit; Nor can I shew you by what mystery He wrought himself into this place, prohibited. Al. A handsom man. Leon. But of a minde more handsom. Al. Was his business to you? Leon. Yes, from a friend you woot of. Al. A very handsom fellow, And well demean'd. Leon. Exceeding well, and speaks well. Al. And speaks well too? Leon. I passing well, and freely, And as he promises of a most clear nature, Brought up sure far above his show: Al. It seems so: I would I had heard him, friend. Comes he again? Leon. Indeed I know not if he do. Al. 'Tis no matter. Come let's walk in. Leon. I am glad you have found your tongue yet. Borachia sings. Enter Cuculo. Cuc. My wife is very merry; sure 'twas her voice, Pray Heav'n there be no drink in't, then I allow it. John. 'Tis sure my Master, now the game begins; Here will be spitting of fire a both sides present∣ly, Send me but safe deliver'd. Cuc. O my heart aks!
My head aks too: Mercy, O me she's perish'd! She has gotten wine! she is gone for ever. Bor. Come hither Ladies, carry your bodies swimming; Do your three duties then, then fall behinde me. Cuc. O thou pernitious Raschal! What hast thou done? John. I done alas Sir, I have done nothing. Cuc. Sirrah, How came she by this wine? John. Alas, I know not. Bor. Who's that, that talks of wine there? John. Forsooth, my Master? Bor. Bring him before me, son slave. Cuc. I will know it. This Bottle? how this Bottle? Bor. Do not stir it; For if you do, by this good wine, I'll knock ye, I'll beat ye damnable, yea, and nay, I'll beat you; And when I have broke it 'bout your head, do you mark me? Then will I tie it to your Worship's tail, And all the dogs i'th' Town shall follow you. No question I would avise you how I came by it. I will have none of these points handled now. Cuc. She'll never be well again, while the world stands. John. I hope so. Cuc. How doest thou Lamb? Bor. Well, God-a-mercy Bell-wether, how doest thou? Stand out: Son slave, sit you here, and before this Worshipful Audience Propound a doubtful question: See who's drunk now: Cuc. Now, now, it works, the devil now dwells in her.
Bor. Whether the Heav'n, or the Earth, be neer∣er the Moon? Or what's the natural Reason, why a woman longs To make her husband Cuckold? Bring me your Cousin The Curate now, that great Philosopher; He that found out a Pudding had two ends; That learned Clerk, that notable Gymnosophist, And let him with his Jacobs-Staff discover What is the third part of Three farthings, three Half pence, being the half, and I am satisfied. Cuc. You see she hath Learning enough, if she could dispose it. Bor. Too much for thee, thou Logger-head, thou Bull-head. Cuc. Nay good Borachia Bor. Thou a sufficient States-man? A Gentleman of Learning, hang thee Dog-whelp; Thou shadow of a man of action; Thou scab o'th' Court, go sleep you drunken Ras∣cal; Ye debauch'd Puppy, get you home, and sleep sirrah, And so will I son slave, thou shalt sleep with me. Cuc. Prethee look to her tenderly. Bor No words sirrah Of any wine, or any thing like wine, Or any thing concerning wine, or by wine, Or from, or with wine: Come lead me like a Countess. Cuc. Thus must we bear, poor men! There is a trick in't, But when she is well again, I'll trick her for it. Exeunt.
Act. 4. Scaen. 1. Enter Pedro: Ped. NOw if this honest fellow do but prosper, I hope I shall make fair return. I wonder I hear not from the Prince of Tarent, yet I hope he's landed well, and to his safety, The winds have stood most gently to his purpose. My honest friend! Enter Don John. John. Your Lordships poorest servant. Ped. How hast thou sped? John. My Lord, as well as wishes, My way hath reach'd your Mistress, and delivered Your Letter-love, and Token, who with all joy, And vertuous constancy, desires to see you, Commands you this night, by her loving power, To meet her in the Garden, Ped. Thou hast made me, Redeem'd me, man, again from all my sorrows; Done above wonder for me. Is it so? John. I should be now too old to learn to lie sir, And as I live, I never was good flatterer. Ped. I do see some thing in this fellows face still,
That ties my heart fast to him: Let me love thee, Nay, let me honor thee for this fair service, And if I ere forget it. John. Good my Lord, The onely knowledge of me, is too much bounty. My service, and my life sir. Ped. I shall think on't; But how for me to get access? John. 'Tis easie, I'll be your guide sir, all my care shall lead you; My credits better then you think. Ped. I thank ye, And soon I'll wait your promise. John. With all my duty. Exeunt. Enter Viceroy, Messina, Doctor, and Cuculo. Doct. All's as I tell you Princes, you shall here Be witness to his fancies, melancholly, And strong imagination of the wrongs. His inhumanity to Don Anthonio Hath rent his minde into so many pieces Of various imaginations, that Like the Celestial Bowe, this colour now The object, then another, till all vanish. He says a man might watch to death, or fast, Or think his spirit out; to all which humors, I do apply my self, checking the bad, And cherishing the good. For these, I have Prepar'd my Instruments, fitting his Chamber With trap-doors, and descents; sometimes presenting Good spirits of the air, bad of the earth, To pull down, or advance his fair intentions. He's of a noble nature, yet sometimes
Thinks that which by confederacie I do, Is by some skill in Magick. Here he comes. A bed drawn forth, Martino upon it, a book in's hand. Unsent I do beseech you. What do you read Sir? Mar. A strange position which doth much per∣plex me: That every Soul's alike, a musical Instrument, The Faculties in all men equal Strings, Well, or ill handled; and those sweet, or harsh. Exit Doct. How like a Fidler I have plaid on mine then! Declin'd the high pitch of my birth and breeding, Like the most barbarous Peasant; read my pride Upon Anthonio's meek humility, Wherein he was far valianter then I. Meekness, thou wait'st upon couragious spirits, Enabling sufferance past inflictions: In patience Tarent overcame me more Then in my wounds. Live then no more to men, Shut day-light from thine eyes, here cast thee down, And with a sullen sigh breath forth thy soul. What art? an Apparition, or a Man? Enter Doctor like a Frier. Doct. A man, and sent to counsel thee. Mar. Despair Has stopt mine ears; thou seem'st a holy Friar? Doct. I am, by Doctor Paulo sent to tell thee: Thou art too cruel to thy self in seeking To lend compassion and aid to others. My Order bids me comfort thee: I have heard all Thy various, troubled passions. Hear but my story. In way of youth I did enjoy one friend, As good and perfect as Heaven e're made man: This friend was plighted to a beauteous woman, (Nature proud of her workmanship) mutual love
Possest 'em both; her heart in his breast lodg'd, And his in hers. Mar. No more of love, good father; It was my surfeit, and I loath it now, As men in Feavers meat they fell sick on. Doct. Howe're 'tis worth your hearing. This be∣troth'd Lady (The ties and duties of a friend forgotten) Spurr'd on by lust, I treacherously pursu'd: Contemn'd by her, and by my friend reprov'd, Despis'd by honest men, my consclence sear'd up, Love I converted into frantick rage; And by that false guide led, I summon'd him In this bad cause, his sword 'gainst mine to prove, If he or I might claim most right in love. But fortune (that does seld' or never give Success to right and vertue) made him fall Under my sword. Blood, blood, a friends dear blood, A vertuous friends shed by a Villain, me, In such a monstrous and unequal cause, Lies on my conscience. Mar. And durst thou live After this to be so old? 'tis an illusion Rais'd up by my charms: A man would not have liv'd; Art quiet in thy bosom? Doct. As the sleep Of Infants. Mar. My fault did not equal this; Yet I have emptied my heart of joy, Only to store sighs up. What were the arts That made thee live so long in rest? Doct. Repentance Hearty, that cleans'd me; Reason then confirm'd me I was forgiven, and took me to my Beads. Exit Doctor:
Mar. I am i'th' wrong path; tender conscience Makes me forget mine honor: I have done No evil like this, yet I pine, whilst he, A few tears of his true contrition tender'd, Securely sleeps. Ha, where keeps peace of conscience, That I may buy her? No where, not in life. 'Tis feign'd that Jupiter two Vessels plac'd, The one with honey fill'd, the other gall, At th'entry of Olympus: Destinie There brewing these together, suffers not One man to pass before he drinks this mixture. Hence is it we have not an hour of life In which our pleasures relish not some pain, Our sowrs some sweetness. Love doth taste of both. Revenge, that thirsty Dropsie of our souls, Which makes us covet that which hurts us most, Is not alone sweet, but partakes of tartness: Mess. Is't not a strange effect? Vice. Past president. Cuc. His Brain-pan's perish'd with his wounds: Go to, I knew 'twould come to this. Vice. Peace, man of wisdom. Mar. Pleasure's the hook of evil, ease of care, And so the general object of the Court: Yet some delights are lawful. Honor is Vertue's allow'd ascent: Honor that clasps All perfect Justice in her arms; that craves No more respect then what she gives; that does Nothing but what she'll suffer. This distracts me, But I have found the right. Had Don Anthonio Done that to me, I did to him, I should have kill'd him; The injury so foul, and done in publique, My Footman would not bear it. Then in honor Wronging him so, I'll right him on my self:
There's honor, justice, and full satisfaction Equally tender'd; 'tis resolv'd, I'll do't. Enter Doctor (like a Soldier) and the English Slave (like a Courtier:) Slave. They take all weapons from me Mess. Bless my son. Vice The careful Doctor's come again. Mess. Rare man! How shall I pay this debt? Cuc. He that is with him, Is one of the slaves he lately bought, he said T'accommodate his cure. He's English born, But French in his behaviour; a delicate slave. Vice. The slave is very fine. Cuc. Your English slaves Are ever so; I have seen an English slave Far finer then his master. There's a State-point Worthy your observation. Doct. On thy life Be perfect in thy lesson. Fewer legs, slave. Mar. My thoughts are search'd and answer'd; for I did Desire a Soldier and a Courtier To yield me satisfaction in some doubts Not yet concluded of. Doct. Your Doctor did Admit us Sir. En. Slave. And we are at your service; whate'r it be, command it. Mar. You appear A Courtier in the race of Love; how far In honor are you bound to run? E. Sl. I'll tell you, You must not spare expence, but wear gay cloaths,
And you may be too prodigal of oaths To win a Mistress favor; not afraid To pass unto her through her Chamber-maid, You may present her gifts, and of all sorts, Feast, dance, and revel; they are lawful sports: The choice of Suiters you must not deny her, Nor quarrel though you find a Rival by her: Build on your own deserts, and ever be A stranger to Loves enemy, Jealousie, For that draws on — Mar. No more; this points at me, I ne'r observ'd these rules. Now speak old Soldier, The height of honor? [Ex. Slave] Doct. No man to offend, Ne'r to reveal the secrets of a friend; Rather to suffer, then to do a wrong; To make the heart no stranger to the tongue; Provok'd, not to betray an Enemy, Nor eat his meat I choak with flattery; Blushless to tell wherefore I wear my scars, Or for my conscience, or my Countries wars; To aim at just things; if we have wildly run Into offences, wish 'em all undone. 'Tis poor in grief for a wrong done to die, Honor to dare to live, and satisfie. Vice. Mark how he winds him. Mess. Excellent man. Doct. Who fights With passions, and orecomes 'em, is indu'd With the best vertue, passive fortitude Ex. Doctor. Mar. Thou hast touch'd me Soldier; oh this Honor bears The right stamp; would all Soldiers did profess Thy good religion. he discords of my soul Are tun'd, and make a heavenly harmony: Musick What sweet peace feel I now? I am ravish'd with it.
Vice. How still he sits! Cuc. Hark, Musique. Mess. How divinely This Artist gathers scatter'd sense; with cunning Composing the fair Jewel of his mind, Broken in peeces, and nigh lost before. Enter Doctor, like a Philosopher: A good, an ill Genius presented. Their Song. While it's singing, the Doctor goes off, and returns in his own shape. Vice. See Protean Paulo in another shape. Doct. Away I'll bring him shortly perfect, doubt not. Mess. Master of thy great Art! Vice. As such we'll hold thee. Mess. And study honors for him. Cuc. I'll be sick On purpose to take physick of this Doctor. Exeunt. Mar. Doctor, thou hast perfected a Bodies cure T'amaze the world; and almost cur'd a Mind Neer phrensie. With delight I now perceive You for my recreation have invented The several Objects, which my Melancholy Sometimes did think you conjur'd, otherwhiles Imagin'd 'em Chimera's. You have been My Friar, Soldier, my Philosopher, My Poet, Architect, my Physitian; Labor'd for me more then your slaves for you In their assistance: In your moral Song Of my good Genius, and my bad, you have won me A chearful heart, and banish'd discontent; There being nothing wanting to my wishes, But once more, were it possible, to behold Don John Anthonio.
Doct. There shall be Letters sent Into all parts of Christendom, to inform him Of your recovery, which now Sir I doubt not. Mar. What honors, what rewards can I heap on you? Doct. That my endeavours have so well succeeded, Is a sufficient recompence. Pray you retire Sir, Not too much air so soon. Mar. I am obedient. Exeunt. Enter Almira and Leonota. Leon. How strangely this Fellow runs in her mind! Al. Do you hear Cousin? Leon. Her sadness clean forsaken: Al. A poor slave Bought for my Governess, say you? Leon. I fear so. Al. And do you think a Turk? Leon. His habit shews it, At least bought for a Turk. Al. I, that may be so. Leon. What if he were one naturally? Al. Nay 'tis nothing, Nothing to the purpose; and yet methinks 'tis strange Such handsomness of mind and civil outside Should spring from those rude Countries. Leon. If it be no more, I'll call our Governess, and she can shew you. Al. Why do you think it is? Leon. I do not think so. Al. Fie! no, no, by no means; and to tell thee truth Wench, I am truly glad he is here, be what he will; Let him be still the same he makes a shew of, For now we shall see something to delight us,
Leon. And Heav'n knows, we have need on't. Al. Heigh ho! my heart aks. Prethee call in our Governess. Pox o'this fel∣low — Exit Leonora. Why do I think so much of him? how the devil Creep'd he in to my head? and yet beshrew me, Me thinks I have not seen, I lie, I have seen A thousand handsomer, a thousand sweeter. But say this fellow were adorn'd as they are, Set-off to shew, and glory. What's that to me? Fie, what a fool am I? what idle fancies Buz in my brains? Enter Borachia, and Leonora. Bor. And how doth my sweet Lady? Leon. She wants your company to make her merry. Bor. And how does Master Bug, I pray you Madam? Leon. Do you mean her little dog? Bor. I mean his Worship. Leon. Troubled with Fleas a little. Bor. Alas poor Chicken: Leon. She is here, and drunk, very fine drunk, I take it, I found her with a Bottle for her Boulster, Lying along, and making love. Al. Borachia, Why, where hast thou been Wench? she looks not well, friend. Art not not with childe? Bor. I promise ye, I know not, I am sure my Bellies full, and that's a shrewd sign: Besides I am shrewdly troubled with a Tiego Here in my head, Madam; often with this Tiego, It takes me very often
Leon. I believe thee. Al. You must drink wine. Bor. A little would do no harm sure. Al. 'Tis a raw humor blows into your head; Which good, strong wine will temper. Bor. I thank your Highness, I will be rul'd, though much against my nature: For wine, I ever hated from my Cradle, Yet for my good. Leon. I for your good, by all means. Al. Borachia, what new fellows that thou hast gotten? (Now she will sure be free) that handsom stranger? Bor. How much wine must I drink, an't please your Ladiship? Al. She's finely greaz'd. Why two or three round draughts Wench. Bor. Fasting. Al. At any time. Bor. I shall hardly do it: But, yet I'll try good Madam. Leon. Do 'twill work well. Al. But prethee answer me, what is this fellow? Bor. I'll tell you two: But let it go no further. Leon. No, no, by no means. Bor. May I not drink before bed too? Leon. At any hour. Bor. And say i'th' night it take me? Al. Drink then. But what this man? Bor. I'll tell ye Madam, But pray ye be secret. He's the great Turks son, for certain, And a fine Christian; my husband bought him for me. He's circumsing'd, Leon. He's circumcis'd, thou wouldst say.
Al. How doest thou know? Bor: I had an eye upon him; But ev'n as sweet a Turk, an't like your Ladiship, And speaks ye as pure Pagan. I'll assure ye, My husband had a notable peni-worth of him. And found me but the Turks own son, his own son By father and mother, Madam. Leon. She's mad drunk. Al. Prethee Borachia call him, I would see him, And tell thee how I like him. Bor. As fine a Turk, Madam, For that which appertains to a true Turk: Al. Prethee call him. Bor. He waits here at the stairs; son slave come hither. Enter Don John. Pray ye give me leave a little to instruct him, He's raw yet in the way of entertainment, Son slave, where's the other bottle? John. In the bed-straw, I hid it there. Bor. Go up and make your honors. Madam, the Tiego takes me now, now Madam, I must needs be unmannerly. Al. Pray ye be so Leon. You know your cure. Bor. I'th' bed-straw? John. There you'll finde it. Exit Borachia. Al. Come hither sir: How long have you serv'd here? John. A poor time, Madam, yet, to shew my ser∣vice. Al. I see thou art diligent:
John. I would be, Madam, 'Tis all the portion left me, that and truth. Al. Thou art but yong? John. Had Fortune meant me so, Excellent Lady, Time had not much wronged me. Al. Wilt thou serve me? John. In all my prayers, Madam, Else such a misery as mine but blasts ye. Al. Beshrew my heart he speaks well, wondrous honestly. Aside. John. Madam, your loving Lord stays for ye. Leon. I thank ye. Your pardon for an hour deer friend. Al. Your pleasure. Leon. I deerly thank ye sir. Exit Leonora. John. My humblest service. She views me narrowly, yet sure she knows me not: I dare not trust the time yet, nor I must not. Al. Ye are not as your habit shews? John. No Madam. His hand, that for my sins lies heavy on me, I hope will keep me from being a slave to the de∣vil. Al. A brave cleer minde he has, and nobly sea∣son'd. What Country are ye of? John. A Biscan, Lady. Al. No doubt, a Gentleman. John. My father thought so. Alm. I, and I warrant thee a right fair wo∣man Thy mother was; he blushes, that confirms it. Upon my soul, I have not seen such sweetness, I prethee blush again. John. 'Tis a weakness, Madam,
I am easily this way woo'd too. Al. I thank ye; Of all that ere I saw, thou art the perfittest. Aside. Now you must tell me sir, for now I long for't. John: What would she have? Al. The story of your fortune; The hard, and cruel fortune brought you hither. John. That makes me stagger; yet I hope I am hid still, Aside. That I came hither, Madam, was the fairest. Al. But how this misery ye bear, fell on ye? John. Infandum regina jubes renovare dolorem. Al. Come, I will have it; I command ye tell it, For such a speaker I would hear for ever. John. Sure, Madam, 'twil but make you sad and heavy. Because I know your goodness full of pity, And 'tis so poor a subject too, and to your ears, That are acquainted with things, sweet and easie, So harsh a harmony. Al. I prethee speak it. John. I ever knew Obedience the best Sacri∣fice, Honor of Ladies, then first passing over Some few years of my youth, that are imperti∣nent; Let me begin the sadness of my story, Where I began to loose my self, to love first. Al. 'Tis well, go forward. Some rare peece I look for. John. Not far from, where my Father lives, a Lady, A neighbor by, blest with as great a beauty, As nature durst bestow without undoing; Dwelt, and most happily, as I thought then, And blest the house a thousand times she dwelt in.
This beauty in the blossom of my youth, When my first fire knew no adulterate Incense, Nor I no way to flatter, but my fondness. In all the bravery, my friends could shew me, In all the faith my innocence could give me, In the best language my true Tongue could tell me, And all the broken sighs my sick heart lend me, I su'd, and serv'd. Long did I love this Lady, Long was my travel, long my trade to win her, With all the duty of my Soul, I serv'd her. Al. How feelingly he speaks! and she lov'd you too; It must be so. John. I would it had deer Lady, This story had been needless, and this place I think unknown to me, Al. Were your bloods equal? John Yes, and I thought our hearts too. Al. Then she must love. John. She did, but never me, she could not love me, She would not love, she hated, more she scorn'd me, And in so poor, and base a way abus'd me; For all my services, for all my bounties, So bold neglects flung on me. Al. An ill woman! Be-like you found some Rival in your love then? John. Aside. How perfectly she points me to my story. Madam, I did, and one whose pride, and anger, Ill manners, and worse man she doted on; Doted to my undoing, and my ruine.
And but for honor to your sacred beauty, And reverence to the noble Sex, though she fall, As she must fall, that durst be so unnoble, I should say something unbeseeming me. What out of love, and worthy love, I gave her (Shame to her most unworthy minde) to fools, To girls, and fidlers, to her boys she flung, And in disdain of me. Al. Pray ye take me with ye. Of what complexion was she? John. But that I dare not Commit so great a sacriledge 'gainst vertue, She look'd not much unlikely though far, far short. Some thing I see appears, your pardon, Madam, Her eyes would smile so, but her eyes would cousin, And so she would look sad, but yours is pity, A noble Chorus to my wretched story, Hers was disdain and cruelty. Al. Pray Heaven Mine be no worse: he has told me, a strange story, Aside. And said 'twould make me sad! he is no lier. But where begins this poor state? I will have all, For it concerns me truly. John. Last to blot me From all remembrance, what I have been to her, And how, how honestly, how nobly serv'd her, 'Twas thought she set her gallant to dispatch me. 'Tis true, he quarrell'd, without place, or reason. We fought, I kill'd him, Heav'ns strong hand was with me; For which I lost my Countrey, Friends, acquaint∣ance, And put my self to Sea, where a Pirate took me, Forcing this habit of a Turk upon me, And sold me here.
Al. Stop there a while, but stay still. In this mans story, how I look? how monstrous? How poor and naked? now I shew what Don John In all the vertue of his life, but aim'd at This thing hath conquer'd with a tale, and carried. Forgive me thou that guid'st me! Never Consci∣ence Touch'd me till now, nor true love: Let me keep it. Leon. She is there, speak to her, you will finde her altered. Enter Pedro and Leonora. Ped. Sister, I am glad to see you, but far gladder, To see you entertain your health so well. Al. I am glad to see you too sir, and shall be gladder Shortly to see you all. Ped. Now she speaks heartily, What do ye want? Al. Onely an hour of privateness, I have a few thoughts. Ped. Take your full contentment, We'll walk aside again; but first to you friend, Or I shall much forget my self. My best friend, Command me ever, ever, you have won it; John. Your Lordship overflows me. Leon. 'Tis but due sir. Exeunt. Al. He's there still. Come sir, to your last part now, Which onely is your name, and I dismiss you. Why, whether go ye? John. Give me leave, good Madam, Or I must be so seeming rude to take it. Al. You shall not go, I swear, you shall not go: I ask ye nothing but your name, ye have one,
And why should that thus fright you? John. Gentle Madam, I cannot speak; pray pardon me, a sickness That takes me often, ties my tongue: Go from me, My fit's infectious, Lady. Alm. Were it death In all his horrors, I must ask, and know it. Your sickness is unwillingness. Hard heart, To let a Lady of my youth and place Beg thus long for a trifle. John. Worthiest Lady, Be wise and let me go: you'll bless me for't, Beg not that poison from me that will kill ye. Alm. I only beg your name sir. John. That will choak you, I do beseech you pardon me. Alm. I will not. John. You'll curse me when you hear it. Alm. Rather kiss thee, Why shouldst thou think so? John. Why, I bear that name, And most unluckily, as now it happens, (Though I be innocent of all occasion) That since my coming hither people tell me You hate beyond forgiveness. Now heaven knows, So much respect, (although I am a stranger) Duty, and humble zeal I bear your sweetness, That for the world I would not grieve your good∣ness: I'll change my name, dear Madam. Alm. People lye, and wrong thy name; thy name may save all others, And make that holy to me, that I hated: Prethee what is't? John. Don John Anthonio. What will this woman do? what thousand changes
Run through her heart and hands? no fixt thought in her; She loves for certain now, but now I dare not, Heav'n guide me right. Alm. I am not angry, Sir, With you, nor with your name; I love it rather, And shall respect ye, ye deserve. For this time I licence you to go; be not far from me, I shall call for you often. John. I shall wait, Madam. Exit Iohn. Enter Cuculo. Alm. Now what's the news with you? Cuc. My Lord your father Sent me to tell your Honor, Prince Martino Is well recover'd, and in strength. Alm. Why let him, The stories and the names so well agreeing. Aside: And both so noble Gentlemen. Cuc. And more, an't please you. Alm. It doth not please me neither more nor less on't. Cuc They'll come to visit you. Alm. They shall break through the dores then. Ex. Almira: Cuc. Here's a new trick of State; this shews foul weather; But let her make it when she please, I'll gain by it. Exit:
Act. 5. Scaen. 1. Enter Sea-Firate, one Slave, and Sailors. Pirate. SOld for a slave, saist thou? Slave. Twas not so well: Though I am bad enough, I personated Such base behavior, barbarism of manners, With other pranks, that might deter the buyer; That the market yeelded not one man that would Vouchsafe to own me. Pir. What was thy end in't? Slav. To be giv'n away for nothing, as I was To the Vice-roys Doctor; with him I have con∣tinued In such contempt, a slave unto his slaves; His horse, and dog of more esteem, and from That villainous carriage of my self, as if I had been a lump of flesh, without a soul; I drew such scorn upon me, that I pass'd, And pride in every place without observance. For which, if you desire to be made men, And by one undertaking, and that easie, Ye are bound to Sacrifice unto my suffrings. The seed I sow'd, and from which you shall reap A plentiful harvest. Pir. To the point, I like not These castles built in the air. Slav. I'll make 'em real, And you the Neptunes of the Sea, you shall No more be Sea-rats.
Pir. Art not mad? Slav. Ye have seen The star of Sicilie, the fair Almira, The Vice-roys daughter, and the beauteous Ward Of the Duke of Messina? Pir. Madam Leonora. Slav. What will you say, if both these Princesses This very night, for I will not delay you, Be put in your possession? Pir. Now I dare swear Thou hast Magots in thy brains, thou wouldst not else Talk of impossibilities. Slav. Be still Incredulous. Pir. Why canst thou think we are able To force the Court? Slav. Are we able to force two women, And a poor Turkish slave, where lies your Pinnace? Pir. In a Creek not half a league hence. Slav. Can you fetch Ladders To mount a Garden wall? 1. Sail. They shall be ready: Slav. No more words then, but follow me, and if I do not make this good, let my throat pay for't. Pir. What heaps of Gold, these beauties would bring to us From the great Turk. if it were possible That this could be effected. Slav. If it be not I know the price on't. Pir. And be sure to pay it. Exeunt. Enter Don John with a Letter in his hand. John. Her fair hand threw this from the window to me, And as I took it up, she said, Peruse it,
And entertain a fortune offer'd to thee. What may the inside speak — for satisfaction. Breaks it open, and reads. If the contempt I shew'd Don John Anthonio, Whose name thou bear'st, and, in that dearer to me, I do profess I love thee. How! 'tis so, I love thee, this night wait me i'th' Garden, There thou shalt know more, subscrib'd Thy Almira— Can it be possible such levitie Should wait on her perfections? when I was My self, set off withal the grace of greatness, Pomp, bravery, circumstance, she hated me, And did profess it openly; yet now Being a slave, a thing she should in reason Disdain to look upon. In this base shape, And since I wore it, never did her service, To dote thus fondly? And yet I should glory: In her revolt from constancy, not accuse it, Since it makes for me. But ere I go further, Or make discovery of my self, I'll put her To th'utmost tryal, i'th' Garden: Well, There I shall learn more. Women! Giddy women, In her the blemish of your sex, you prove There is no reason for your hate or love. Exit. Enter Almira, Leonora, and two Women. Leon. At this unseasonable time to be thus brave, No visitants expected? you amaze me. Al. Are these Jewels set forth to the best advantage To take the eye? 1. Wom. With our best care. 2. Wom. We never Better discharge our duties.
Al. In my sorrows, A Princess name (I could perceive it) strook A kinde of reverence in him, and my beauty As then neglected, forc'd him to look on me With some sparks of affection; but now When I would fan them to a glorious flame, I cannot be too curious, I wonder He stays so long. Leon. These are strange fancies. Al. Go Intreat, I do forget my self, command My Governess, Gentleman, her Slave, I should say, To wait me instantly; and yet already He's here. His figure graven on my heart, Never to be raz'd out. [Ex. Wom. Enter Slave, Pirate, and Sailors. Slav. There is the prize, Is it so rich, that you dare not seise upon it? Here I begin: Al. Help Villain: Pir. You are mine. Sail. Though somewhat course, you'll serve after a storm, To bid fair wether welcome. Leon. Ravisher, Defend me Heaven. Al: No aid neer? Wom. Help. Slav. Dispatch. No glory, nor handkercher to stop their mouths? Their cries will reach the guard, and then we are lost.
Enter Don John and Woman. John. What shrieks are these? from whence? O blessed Saints! What sacrilege to beauty? Do I talk, When 'tis almost too late to do. Take that. Forces a sword. Slave. All set upon him. Pyrate. Kill him. John. You shall buy My life at a dear rate, you Rogues. Enter Pedro, Cuculo, Borachia, and Guard. Cuc. Down with 'em. Ped. Unheard of treason. Bor. Make in Loggerhead; My son Slave fights like a dragon: Take my bottle, Drink courage out on't. John. Madam, you are free. Ped. Take comfort, dearest Mistress. Cuc. O you Micher, Have you a hand in this? Slave. My aims were high, Fortune's my enemy: To dy's the worst, And that I look for. Pyr. Vengeance on your plots. Ped. The rack at better leisure shall force from 'em A full discovery: Away with 'em. Cuc. Load 'em with irons. Bor. Let 'em have no wine To comfort their cold heart. The Guard take the Pyrate and the rest. Ped. Thou man of men. Leon. A second Hercules. Al. An Angel thus disguis'd. Ped. What thanks?
Leon. What service? Bor. He shall serve me by your leave, no service else. John. I have done nothing but my duty, Madam; And if the little you have seen exceed it, The thank due for it pay my watchful Master, And this my sober Mistress. Bor. He speaks truth, Madam, I am very sober. Ped. Far beyond thy hopes Expect reward. Al. We'll straight to Court, and there It is resolv'd what I will say and do. I am faint, support me. Ped. This strange accident Will be heard with astonishment. Come friend, You have made your self a fortune, and deserve it. Exeunt. Enter Viceroy, Messina, Doctor. Mess. Perfectly cur'd? Doct. As such I will present him, The thanks be given to Heaven. Mess. Thrice reverend man, What thanks but will come short of thy desert? Or bounty, though all we possess were given thee, Can pay thy merit? I will have thy Statue Set up in Brass. Vice. Thy name made the sweet subject Of our best Poems; thy unequall'd Cures Recorded to posterity. Doct. Such false glories (Though the desire of fame be the last weakness Wise men put off) are not the marks I shoot at: But if I have done any thing that may challenge
Your favors (mighty Princes) my request is, That for the good of such as shall succeed me, A Colledge for Physitians may be With care and cost erected, in which no man May be admitted to a Fellowship, But such as by their vigilant studies shall Deserve a place there; this magnificence, Posterity shall thank you for. Vice. Rest assur'd In this, or any boon you please to ask, You shall have no repulse: Doct. My humblest service Shall ne'r be wanting. Now if you so please, I'll fetch my Princely Patient, and present him. Exit Doctor. Mess. Do, and imagine in what I may serve you, And by my honor with a willing hand I will subscribe to't. Enter Pedro, Almira, Leonora, Don John, Cuculo, Borachia. Cuc. Make way there: Vice. My daughter! How's this? a Slave crown'd with a Civick garland! The mysterie of this? Ped. It will deserve Your hearing and attention. Such a truth Needs not rhetorical flourishes, and therefore With all the brevity and plainness that I can, I will deliver it. If the old Romans, When of most power and wisdom, did decree A Wreath like this to any common Soldier That sav'd a Citizens life, the bravery And valor of this man may justly challenge Triumphant Laurel. This last night a crew
Of Pirates brake in Signior Cuculo's house, With violent rudeness, ceasing on my sister, And my fair Mistress, both were in their power, And ready to be forc'd hence; when this man Unarm'd, came to their rescue, but his courage Soon furnish'd him with weapons: In a word, The lives and liberties of these sweet Ladies, You ow him, for the Rovers are in hold, And ready when you please, for punishment. Vice. As an induction of more to come, Receive this favor. Mes With my self, my son Shall pay his real thanks. He comes, observe now Their amorous meeting. Enter Doctor, and Martina. Mart. I am glad you are well Lady: Al. I grieve not your recovery. Vice. So coldly. Mes. Why fall you off? Mart. To shun captivity sir I was too long a slave, I'll now be free. Al. 'Tis my desire you should. Sir my affection To him was but a trifle, which I play'd with I'th' childhood of my love; which now grown elder, I cannot like of. Vice. Strange inconstancy! Mart. 'Tis judgement sir in me, or a true debt Tender'd to Justice rather. My first life Loaden with all the follies of a man, Or what could take addition from a woman, Was by my head strong passions (which o'errul'd My understanding (forteited to death:
But this new being, this my second life, Begun in serious contemplation of What best becomes a perfect man, shall never Sink under such weak frailties. Mess. Most unlook'd for. Doct. It does transcend all wonders. Mar. 'Tis a blessing I owe your wisdom, which I'll not abuse: But if you envy your own gift, and will Make me that wretched creature which I was, You then again shall see me passionate, A lover of poor trifles, confident In mans deceiving strength, or falser fortune; Jealous, revengeful, in unjust things daring, Injurious, quarrelsom, stor'd with all diseases The beastly part of man infects his soul with; And to remember what's the worst, once more, To love a woman, but till that time never. Exit. Vice. Stand you affected so to men, Almira? Al. No Sir; if so, I could not well discharge What I stand bound to pay you, and to nature. Though Prince Martino does profess a hate To womankind, 'twere a poor world for women Were there no other choice, or all should follow The example of this new Hippolitus: There are men, Sir, that can love, and have lov'd truly; Nor am I desperate but I may deserve One that both can and will so. Vice. My allowance Shall rank with your good liking, still provided Your choice be worthy. Alm. In it I have us'd The judgment of my mind, and that made clearer With calling oft to heaven it might be so. I have not sought a living comfort from
The reverend ashes of old Ancestors; Nor given my self to the meer name and titles Of such a man, that being himself nothing, Derives his substance from his Grandsires tomb: For wealth, it is beneath my birth to think on't, Since that must wait upon me, being your daughter, No Sir, the man I love, though he wants all The setting forth of fortune, gloss, and greatness, Has in himself such true and real goodness, His parts so far above his low condition, That he will prove an ornament, not a blemish, Both to your name and family. Ped. What strange creature Hath she found out? Leon. I dare not ghess. Alm. To hold you No longer in suspence, this matchless man That sav'd my life and honor, is my husband, Whom I will serve with duty. Bor: My son Slave! Vice. Have you your wits? Bor. I'll not part with him so. Cuc. This I foresaw too. Vice. Do not jest thy self Into the danger of a Fathers anger. Alm. Jest, Sir? by all my hope of comfort in him I am most serious. Good Sir look upon him, But let it be with my eyes, and the care You should owe to your daughters life and safety, Of which without him she's uncapable, And you'll approve him worthy. Vice. O thou shame Of women! thy sad Fathers curse, and scandal: With what an impious violence thou tak'st from him His few short hours of breathing!
Doct. Do not add, Sir, Weight to your sorrow in th'ill bearing of it. Vice. From whom, degenerate Monster, flow these low And base affections in thee? what strange philters Hast thou receiv'd? what Witch with damned spels Depriv'd thee of thy reason? Look on me, (Since thou art lost unto thy self) and learn From what I suffer for thee, what strange tortures Thou do'st prepare thy self. Mess. Good Sir, take comfort; The councel you bestow'd on me, make use of. Doct. This Villain, (for such practises in that Nation Are very frequent) it may be hath forc'd By cunning potions and by sorcerous charms This phrensie in her. Vice. Sever 'em. Alm. I grow to him. Vice. Carry the Slave to torture, and wrest from him By the most cruel means, a free confession Of his impostures. Alm. I will follow him, And with him take the Rack. Bor. No, hear me speak, I can speak wisely: Hurt not my son slave, But rack or hang my husband, and I care not; For I'll be bound body to body with him: He's very honest, that's his fault. Vice. Take hence This drunken beast. Bor. Drunk! am I drunk? Bear witness. Cuc. She is indeed distemper'd. Vice. Hang 'em both, If ere more they come near the Court.
Cuc. Good sir, You can recover dead men; can you cure A living drunkenness? Doct. 'Tis the harder task; Go home with her, I'll send you something that Shall once again bring her to better temper, Or make her sleep for ever. Cuc. Which you please, sir. Exeunt Cuc. Bor. Vice. Why linger you? rack him first, and after break him Upon the wheel. Ped. Sir, this is more then justice. John. Is't death in Sicily, to be lov'd Of a fair Lady? Leon. Though he be a slave, Remember yet he is a man. Vice. I am deaf To all perswasions: Drag him hence. The Guard take Don John off. Alm. Do Tyrant, No more a Father; feast thy cruelty Upon thy Daughter: but Hell's plagues fall on me, If I inflict not on my self whatever He can endure for me. Vice Will none restrain her. Alm. Death hath a thousand dores to let out life, I shall find one. If Portia's burning coals, The Knife of Lucrece, Cleopatra's Aspicks, Famine, deep waters have the power to free me From a loath'd life, I'll not an hour outlive him. Ped. Sister. Leon. Dear Cousin. Ex. Alm. Ped. Leon. Vice. Let her perish. Doct. Hear me; Th effects of violent love are desperate: And therefore in the execution of
The Slave be not too sudden. I was present When he was bought, and at that time my self Made purchase of another. He that sold'em Said that they were companions of one Country. Something may rise from this to ease your sorrows: By circumstance I'll learn what's his condition, I'th' mean time use all fair and gentle means To pacifie the Lady. Vice. I'll endeavour As far as grief and anger will give leave, To do as you direct me. Mess. I'll assist you. Exeunt. Enter Pedro and Keeper. Ped. Hath he been visited already? Keeper. Yes sir, Like one of better fortune; and t'increase My wonder of it, such as repair to him, In their behavior rather appear Servants, then friends to comfort him. Ped. Go fetch him. Exit Keeper. I am bound in gratitude to do more then wish The life and safety of a man that hath So well deserv'd me. Enter Keeper, Don John, Servant. Keeper. Here he is, my Lord. Ped. Who's here? thou art no Conjurer to raise A spirit in the best shape man ere appear'd in. My friend, the Prince of Tarent! doubts forsake me, I must and will embrace him. John: Pedro holds One that loves life for nothing, but to live To do him service.
Ped. You are he most certain, Heaven ever make me thankful for this bounty: Run to the Viceroy, let him know this rarity. Ex K. But how you came here thus? yet since I have you, Is't not enough I bless the prosperous means That brought you hither? John. Dear friend, you shall know all; And though in thankfulness I should begin Where you deliver'd me — Ped. Pray you pass that over, That's not worth the relation. John. You confirm True friends love, to do courtesies, not to hear'em. But I'll obey you. In our tedious passage Towards Malta, I may call it so, for hardly We had lost the ken of Sicily, but we were Becalm'd, and hull'd so up and down twelve hours, When to our more misfortune we descri'd Eight well mann'd Gallies making amain for us, Of which th'Arch Turkish Pyrate cruel Dragnt Was Admiral. I'll not speak what I did In our defence; but never man did more Then the brave Captain that you sent forth with me, All would not do; Courage opprest with number, We were boarded, pillag'd to the skin, and after Twice sold for slaves; by the Pyrate first, and after By a Maltese to Signior Cuculo: Which I repent not, since there 'twas my fortune To be to you my best friend some ways useful. I thought to cheer you up with this short story, But you grow sad on't. Ped. Have I not just cause, When I consider I could be so stupid As not to see a friend through all disguises; Or he so far to question my true love, To keep himself conceal'd?
John. 'Twas fit to do so, And not to grieve you with the knowledge of What then I was; where now I appear to you, Your sister loving me, and Martino safe, Like to myself and birth. Ped. May you live long so. How doest thou honest friend? your trustiest servant. Give me thy hand. I now can ghess by whom You are thus furnish'd. John. Troth he met with me As I was sent to prison, and there brought me Such things as I had use of. Ped. Let's to Court, My father never saw a man so welcome, As you'll be to him. John. May it prove so friend. Exeunt: Enter Viceroy, Messtna, Martino, Doctor, Captain, Almira, Leonora, Waiting Women, Attendants. Vice. The slave chang'd to the Prince of Tarent, says he? Capt. Yes sir, and I the Captain of the Fort, Worthy of your displeasure, and th'effect of t, For my deceiving of that trust your Excellency Repos'd in me. Doct. Yet since all hath faln out Beyond your hopes, let me become a suiter, And a prevailing one to get his pardon. Al. O dearest Leonora, with what forehead Dare I look on him now? Too powerful love, The best strength of thy unconfined Empire Lies in weak womens hearts Thou art fain'd blinde, And yet we borrow our best sight from thee. Could it be else, the person still the same Affection over me, such power should have
To make me scorn a Prince, and love a slave. Mart. But art thou sure'tis he? Capt. Most certain sir. Mart. Is he in health, strong, vigorous, and as able As when he left me dead? Capt. Your own eyes sir Shall make good my report. Mart. I am glad of it, And take you comfort in it sir, there's hope, Fair hope left for me, to repair mine honor. Mes. What's that? Mart. I will do something that shall speak me Messina's son. Mes. I like not this one word sir. Vice. We'll prevent it. Nay, look up my Almira, now I approve Thy happy choice. I have forgot my anger, I freely do forgive thee. Al. May I finde Such easiness in the wrong'd Prince of Tarent, I then were happy. Leon. Rest assur'd you shall. Enter Don John, Pedro, Servant. Vice. We all with open arms hast to embrace you. Mes. Welcome, most welcome. Mart. Stay. Mes. 'T was this I fear'd. Mart. Sir, 'tis best known to you, on what strict terms The reputation of mens fame, and honors Depend in this so punctual age, in which, A word that may receive a harsh construction, Is answer'd, and defended by the sword.
And you that know so much, will I presume, Be sensibly tender of anothers credit, As you would guard your own. John. I were unjust else. Mart. I have received from your hands, wounds; and deep ones, My honor in the general report Tainted and soil'd, for which I will demand This satisfaction, That you would forgive My contumelious words, and blow, my rash And unadvised wildness first threw on you. Thus I would teach the world a better way, For the recovery of a wounded honor, Then with a savage fury, not true courage, Still to run headlong on. John. Can this be serious? Mart. I'll adde this, He that does wrong, not a∣lone, Draws, but makes sharp his enemies sword against His own life, and his honor. I have paid for't, And wish that they, who dare most, would learn from me, Not to maintain a wrong, but to repent it. Doct. Why this is like your self. Mart. For farther proof, Here sir, with all my interest, I give up This Lady to you. Vice. Which I make more strong; With my free grant. Al. I bring mine own consent, Which will not weaken it. All. All joy confirm it. John. Your unexpected courtesies amaze me, Which I will study with all love and service To appear worthy of. Doct. Pray you understand Sir,
There are a pair of Suiters more, that gladly Would hear from you as much, as the pleas'd Vice∣roy Hath said unto the Prince of Tarent. Mes. Take her, Her dowry shall be answerable to Her birth, and your desert. Ped. You make both happy. John. One onely suit remains, That you would please To take again into your Highness favor This honest Captain: Let him have your grace. What's due to his much merit, shall from me Meet liberal rewards. Vice. Have your desire. John. Now may all here that love, as they are friends To our good fortunes, find like prosperous ends. Exeunt.
EPILOGUE. CUstom, and that a Law we must obey I'th' way of Epilogue, bids me something say. Howe'r to little purpose, since we know, If you are pleas'd, unbeg'd, you will bestow A gentle censure: On the other side, If that this Play deserve to be decri'd In your opinions, all that I can say, Will never turn the stream the other way. Your gratious smiles, will render us secure. Your frowns without despair, we must endure. FINIS
