M1871 27648875 110156
A Merry nevv Dialogue, BETWEEN A Courteous young Knight, and a gallant Milk-Maid. Expressing in a discourse of their happy meeting, and the words the Milk-Maid answered the Knight, and how at last the Knight married the Milk Maid and of the portion her father the Black-smith gave her to the admiration of all other Black-smiths. You merry Milk-Maids that dabbles in the dew Between the Knight and's Milk-Maid pray you view And here you'l find there discourse was very rare Which may a pattrn be to Virgins fair. To the Tune called Adams fall, or Jocky and Jenny, or where are thou going my pritty Maid. AS I walked forth one Summers day By a gréen Meadow I took my way, I met with a bonny lass fresh and gay, with a fa la la la la le ro, This bonny Lass was of a handsome glée I askt her questions above two or thry, VVord for word she answered me, with a fa &c. VVhere art thou going my pritty Maid A milking good sir she said Shall I go with thee my pritty Maid with a fa, &c. VVhat will you do with me sir she said Talk of old stories my pritty Maid You'r kindly welcome sir she said, But what if I kiss thée my pritty Maid I hope you'l not hurt me sir she said I of a man yet ne're was afraid, with a fa, &c. How if I get thée with child my pritty Maid I'l give you the bearing on't sir she said Thou art to be commended my pritty Maid, with a fa, &c. But what if I unto the wars do go My prity Maiden then what wilt thou do I'l put on Armor and travel with you with a fa, &c. Alas pritty Maiden that must not be The bloody wars is not fitting for thée Yet I commend thée for thy constancy, with a fa, &c.
The Second Part to the same Tune. Hast thou any Parents my pritty Maid Yes I have some good sir she said, My fathers a Black-smith by his Trade, with a fa la la la la le ro, Has he any means or Lands by the year Or what portion can he give thée my dear My portion good sir in my fore-head I bear with a fa la &c. But what if I marry thée my pritty Maid VVhat u will good sir she said, Thy wit and thy beauty my heart hath betraid with a fa &c. I' make thée a Lady of high degrée, If thou my love and my wife will be Lo yonders fine Bower is mine thou dost sée with a fa &c. Then let us walk to it my dearest quoth he Nay pray you stay sir that must not be My father and Mother first let us go sée with a fa &c. But when they came there this courteous young Knight The old coupl in him did take such delight They made him so welcome he tarried all night with a fa &c. And in their discourse the Knight was so kind Vnto this old couple he told his mind VVhere he much love and respect did find with a fa &c. The old man replyed sir Knight quoth he My aughters not fitting-your bride to be Yet the wait of her in Gold i'l give to thée with a fa &c. Then wed her and bed her and take her away And if you can love her by night and by day Thrée thousand more i'le be bound you to pay with a fa &c. The courteous Knight then strait he replyed Your pritty Milk-Maid shall be my Bride, She'st ne're carry pale more what e're betide with a fa, &c. The black-smith his daughter he cloathed in Go The Knight was most rich and brave to behold Shey séem like two saints cut out of one mould with a fa, &c. Thus unto the church they strait took their wa And joyn'd both thei loves in one night and da where he made this Milk-Maid a Lady so ga with a fa, &c. So fairwel to Mary, to Peg, and to Sue And all pritty Maidens that dabbles i'th dew, Sée that in your Loves you ever prove true, with a fa, &c. No credit you‘l get if scornful you be For this pritty Milk-Maid did humble ye sée VVhich made this young Knight & her to agr with a fa la la la la le ro. Printed for W. Thackeray at the Golden Sugar-loaf in Duck-lane.
