M2425 13025182 96684
A SPEECH MADE IN THE HOUSE OF PEERES, By the Right Honourable the Earle of MONMOUTH, on Thursday the 13. of Ianuary. 1641. Upon the occasion of the present di∣stractions, and of his Majesties removall from White-hall. printer's or publisher's device Printed at London, for I. Benson, 1641.
A Speech made in the House of Peeres, by the Right Honourable Earle of Monmouth on Thursday the 13. of Ianuary, 1641. My Lords, I Shall desire to bee heard speak a few words, which I would much ra∣ther have heard spoken by any of your Lord∣ships,
that so they might have a happier and a more hand∣some expression; though with a better heart, and clearer in∣tentions they could not have beene spoken. The sad condition wee are now in (my Lords) is such as is too apparent to any man, who hath but halfe an eye: the City of London is full of jealou∣sies and apprehensions, wee sit not here free from feares; the King hath with-drawne him∣self from hence, together with his Queene and Children, out of a beliefe, (as I con∣ceive) that his Maiesties Per∣son was not safe here. While
things continue in this posture (my Lords) wee may well feare an impairing, wee can hardly hope for the bettering of affaires: God hath plac'd us (my Lords) in the Medium be∣twixt the King and his people; let us play our parts (my Lords) let us doe our duties, and discharge our consciences; let us really prove, what wee are by Name, Noblemen; let us endevour to work a perfect and a true understanding, be∣tweene the King and his peo∣ple: let us freely unbosome our selves to his Maiestie; and de∣sire that his Maiestie will bee pleased to doe so to us; and to this end, (my Lords) which is
the end of my motion, if it shall be approved of by your Lord∣ships, I do humbly move, that by way of conference, or any other way, wee may desire the house of Commons to ioyne with us; first in an humble pe∣tition to his Maiestie that hee would be graciously pleased to returne to his good City of London, as the safest place we conceive for his sacred Person in these distemper'd times; and then that they will likewise ioyne with us in a Profession or Protestation, that we will doe what in us lies to free his Ma∣iestie from his feares; to take from the Citizens of London, and his Maiesties other sub∣iects
their jealousies and ap∣prehensions; and that we will live and dye his Maiesties faithfull Advisors, Counsel∣lors and Loyall Subiects. FINIS.
