M2744 12593661 63985
THE WELCHMENS IVBILEE: TO THE HONOVR OF St. DAVID. SHEWING, THE MANNER OF THAT SOLEMN Celebration, which the Welshmen annually hold in houour of St. DAVID. DESCRIBING, LIKEWISE THE TRVE AND REA Cause, why they wear that day a Leek on their Hats. With an excellent merry Sonnet, annexed unto it. Composed by T. MORGAN, Gent. LONDON. Printed for I. Harrison.
THE WELCHMENS JVBILEE, In Honour of St. DAVID. FAme, the Vice-gerent of the Universe, is most to be ap∣plauded for her future indul∣gencie to her sons: for whom she cherisheth alive, she will not permit to lie in the odious Sepulchre of Oblivion, nor suffer their names to be raced out of the rolles of honour, but in an annual progression rather to blow their names abroad with the trump of never dy∣ing glory. The explication of my meaning, includes the customary observation of the Welchmen, who yearly celebrate one day to the honour of St. David (once their Grand-Signior of Chivalry) in great solemnitie. He
that was once the Pillar of their hopes, the Glory and sole Fame of their Country, is now honoured (although long since interred) in the memory of his meritorious Name: He that esteemed not his dearest bloud sufficient to accomodate his Country, is eternized, or at least solemnized by the same, and hath more∣over a respective remuneration for his mag∣nanimous puissance: He lastly, that once greatly honoured Wales, is now himselfe greatly honoured by the same. To memorize any man, signifies not only the generall good opinion, and affection towards the same per∣son, but likewise declares his deserving ver∣tues. Among the Greeks it was called a worthy thing to be solemnized after death: The Romans likewise acknowledged it to be gloriosum quid, a glorious thing to cele∣brate any day to the Honour of the dead. And I ingenuously confesse I cannot but highly extoll the indulgent sedulity of the Welch∣men, in remembring their Saint with such annuall devotion. Polemon when he dyed at Athens was once in three yeares honoured with a solemn Celebraeion, and that was ac∣ledged to be a most famous deed. It was like∣wise accounted an eminent act, when Cassio∣dorus was twice remembred solemnly after
his Funerall. But neither of these can be re∣puted to be so glorious, as that of S. David; for his day is not only once every year duely observed, to the memory of his immortall Fame: but successively continueth without any praetermission. Yet one thing I cannot o∣mit, viz. their custome in wearing a green Leek on their hats hn that day likewise: and here (Gentle Reader) give me leave to expa∣tiate my self a while, to see whether I can scrutably, and in a credible probability search out the meaning, and cause of the same: Some report, that they wear this Leek, because of their generall affection unto it: others af∣firm the cause to be, because of the numerous multitude of Leekes that grow in their: but either of these are fallible; for it is more credibly declared, that S. David when hee al∣ways went into the field, in Martiall exer∣cise, he carried a Leek with him; and once being almost faint to death, he immediately remembred himself of the Leek, and by that means not onely preserved his life, but also became victorious: hence is the Mythologie of the Leek derived, and hence it was that they ever since continued respectively the investigation of the same, to the sempiternal
honour of their Champion St. David. There is also a common Proverb in Wales, that St. David is as bright as the Moon; yet I con∣fesse, I have oftentimes presumed to wonder at their similitude in comparing him to the Moon, unlesse be the cause thereof, that the Moon was made of green Cheefe, at whose bright splendor perhaps, they may have the curtesie to toste it. But be more clement Reader, whosoever thou beest, and think not that I speak this in a ludibrious jeer, or abuse to the Countrie, for I speak altogether in praise and commendation of it: yet howe∣ver according to the Poet: Interpone tuis, interdum gaudia curis. If I have been barren in expressions for the honour of St. David, you must excuse the brevitie of time, wherein it was composed: and what remaines, I will consummate in a merry Hymn, or Panygerick. COme quaffe off your Sherry, and let us be merry, All you that look to be saved: Then tsse of your bowles, and be merry souls For this is the day of St. David.
This is a good week, when we wear a Leek, And carouse in Bacchus fountains: We had better be here, thou in poor small beer, Or in our Country Mountains. Then be merry boyes, and leave off your toyes And care not for drossie wealth, We'll swagger in Sack, till our purse-strings crack To St. David Ile drink a health. Let those that are civill, now go to the Devill, Let us be as busie as Bees: Those Rebels we'l beat, that offer to eat Our Leekes, or tosted Cheese. A pox of all  cheeks pale, Come let's be For that's very  the blood, And for to strengthen the back. Drink you to him, till both your brains swim, In this Nectarian Liquor: Let him drink to me, and Ile drink to thee, 'Twill make all our tongues run the quicker.
Come cast away grief, we need no relief, We'll drink, we'll be merry, and play: We'll sing, and we'll laugh, we'll our liquor quaffe; For this is St. Davids day. FINIS.
