m904 12353357 60048
AN Historical Relation OF THE CONSPIRACY OF John Lewis Count de Fieschi, AGAINST The CITY and REPUBLICK OF GENOUA, In the YEAR 1547. Written in Italian by Augustin Mas∣cardi, Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber to Pope Ʋrban the Eighth. Done into English by the Honourable Hugh Hare Esq Conjura vere Cives Nobilissimi Patriam incendere. Gallo∣rum gentem, insestissimam Nomini Romano, ad be'lum arces∣sunt; dux stium cum exercitu supra caput oft. Vos cuncta∣mini etiam nunc. & dubitatis, quid, inra moenia deprehensis hostibus faciatis? Cato, in Salust. Bell. Catilin. London, Printed for John Newton at the Three Pigeons over-against the Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet-street, 1693.
Novemb. 8th, 1692. Imprimatur, Edmund Bohun.
TO The QUEEN's Most Excellent Majesty. MADAM, IT is so high a Pre∣sumption in me to beg Your Majesty's Acceptance of the ensuing Translation, that were not Your Royal Clemency as extensive as Your Power, I could not hope for Pardon. There
are but few Authors, whose Writings can with∣out Arrogance intrude upon those small porti∣ons of Time, which the weighty Cares of Your Royal Station permit Your Majesty to call Your own. Nevertheless the consideration of Your Majesty's Indulgence to all Your Subjects induced me to think that, as the Almighty Being, whose Vice-gerent You are, re∣gards not so much the value of the Sacrifice, as
the sincerity of him that offers it, so Your Maje∣sty will be graciously pleas'd to forgive this Of∣ficious submission of one, who hath nothing to re∣commend himself, or what he Addresses to Your Great Name but an unfeign'd Loyalty. The same Motive that first incourag'd me to at∣tempt the Translating this Historical Tract, inspir'd me likewise, in a great measure, with the Ambi∣tion of laying it at Your
Majesty's Feet: Not on∣ly because it was written by an Author of an esta∣blish'd Reputation, but also because it bears so visible a Resemblance to the late Happy Revolu∣tion, that plac'd Your Sa∣cred Majesty on the Throne of these King∣doms. The Parallel, I must confess, agrees not in all particulars. Genoua bears no proportion to England, nor Doria to His present Majesty, whether we consider his Character
or the Actions he per∣form'd. And besides, Eng∣land hath receiv'd a far more signal and valuable Deliverance by His Ma∣jesty's Arrival, than Genoua did by the means of her Great Benefactor. Their Civil Liberties were for a while under an Eclipse, & their Constitution was very much alter'd by that Faction that sided with the French: but their Religi∣on was still the same with that of their Oppressors; nor had they the dismal
Prospect, that we had continually before our Eyes, of the sad Choice of being either Martyrs or Apostates. And our Ingratitude, as well as Folly, is far worse than that of those Genoueses, who were so fatally blind∣ed by Avarice, Ambition, or Revenge, as to mistake the Traytor for the Pa∣triot, and lend Fieschi their Assistance to destroy Do∣ria, and enslave them∣selves. But herein our side of the Parallel falls very
short of that Conspiracy. For, to our great Comfort, the Enemies of Your Ma∣sty's Government are not likely to bring their De∣signs to so dangerous an Issue: They have not a Fieschi to lead them, nor a French Army so near at hand to second them, nor are they in them∣selves so numerous and powerful. May the Great God of Heaven and Earth every day lessen their Number,
and their Power, and their Malice, and still preserve those Sacred Lives on which the Glory, Hap∣piness, and Security of England does depend, from all Dangers, and from all Treacherous At∣tempts: May the Con∣stant Care of Heaven de∣fend Your Majesties Go∣vernment against all Op∣position and Designs, Prosper Your Arms with Victory, and Your Coun∣sels with Success, and long continue to us the Bles∣sings
we now enjoy by the Addition of many Periods of Years to Your Majesties Happy and Auspicious Reign: May all Your Subjects endea∣vour to express their Sin∣cere and Loyal Affecti∣ons with as much Zeal and Vigour, as shall be always shew'd in Your Majesties Service by, MADAM, Your Majesties most Humble, most Obedient, and most Faithful Subject and Servant, H. Hare.
THE AUTHOR's PREFACE. READER, I have resolv'd to give the World an Historical Account of the Affairs and Transactions of Ita∣ly in the last Century; what my Reasons are for setting my self such a Task, thou art not to expect I shou'd at present impart to thee. How able I am to perform the Work I have undertaken, must be lest to thy Judgment: But as to the Can∣dor and Sincerity which are indispen∣ably requisite to a Good Historian, those, I promise thee, shall be faith∣fully and diligently observ'd. Truth, free from the Blemishes of irregular
Passions, is the darling Object of my Pen, and shall be my first and great∣est Care. Hatred, I know, too ge∣nerally attends it, because Vitious Persons dread an Enterview with this Beautiful Virgin, no less than weak Eyes avoid the Sun shine. But how∣ever, Wise Men, and Princes especi∣ally, (who are much the properer Judges) would not have the Pub∣lick impos'd upon, nor Posterity de∣luded by the Artificial Lyes of a Mer∣cenary or byass'd Historian. And if any of their Ancestors, or Kindred's Faults are transmitted to After Ages, 'tis not the Writer that Records them, but the Persons who commit them, that are to be blam'd: And let those, who have any hard thoughts of such a Writer, remem∣ber, that the Evangelists who were guided by an infallible Spirit, and who are the best Patterns we can fol∣low, have not concealed from us ei∣ther St. Peter's Denial of his Master, or the Unbelief of St. Thomas, tho' they were both of them Apostles.
But of this I shall treat more at length on See Trat∣tato Secundo dell' Arte Hi∣storica cap. 6. pag. 194. Scrit∣ta di Agost. Mascardi. E∣dit. Venet. 1635. Octavo. another oc∣casion. Among the Remarka∣ble Accidents which are to be taken notice of, as happening within the pe∣riod of time, I propose to write of, I have pitch∣ed upon the Conspiracy of John Lewis Count de Fieschi, that by this short Essay, the World may know what Judgment to make of the rest of the Work. For having never yet set my self to write History I shou'd be very unwilling to be guilty either in my Stile, or Method, of any thing that might distast the Reader, and so render my Pains useless and in∣effectual. 'Tis true, this short Essay in History, though now Publish'd, was never design'd for the Press, be∣ing begun by Chance, and writ in haste: And consequently not so free from Errors as I could wish it. I took it in hand more for my own di∣version, than the Publick View, and
therefore the Criticks must excuse it, if it falls short of an Exact Histo∣ry. But the Work I am a bout is of a larger Extent: 'Tis design'd for the Publick Good: Its end is to instruct as well as delight the Readers: It preserves the Memories of Brave Men from Oblivion: And is an Au∣thentick Record of past Transacti∣ons: Therefore it must be manag'd in all its parts with Judgment and Discretion. However, as I am not so vain as to despise the Censures of so Learn'd an Age as is the present; so neither shall I be so inconsiderate as to Publish my own Composures till they have undergone the Examinati∣on of those, whose Opinions I can more safely relie on. Fieschi's Conspiracy now appears in Publick: And as Apelles stood be∣hind his Picture, Anxiously expect∣ing what Sentence should be past on it by the Judges of Painting, so am I
no less desirous to know what the Learned World thinks of this Essay of mine. And I plainly and ingenu∣ously declare, That I shall not only think my self extremely oblig'd to any Person who will impart freely to me his real Sentiments of this Tract; but also that whosoever finds any re∣markable Error either in my Stile or Method, and does not communicate to me his Animadversions on it, will be very unkind to the Publick: For after such a Friendly Challenge, if the History I am about be tainted with those Blemishes, the World, I hope, will be so Just as to impute them to my want of due informati∣on, and not my unwillingness to re∣ceive it. Some perhaps will be of Opini∣on, that so small a part of an intire History shou'd not have been Pub∣lish'd by its self. To these, I Answer, that Fieschi's Conspiracy, as I have related it, is to be look'd on as an Historical Tract not at all depending
on the larger Volume; For in that it will appear under another Figure. Many of the particular Accidents, which I have here enlarg'd on, being there to be omitted, and the most Remarkable of them being only to be hinted at. 'Tis at present my in∣tention, in this short Essay, to de∣scribe the Rise, Progress, and Con∣clusion of one Action, with all the Circumstances attending it: Which will give me occasion of trying how I can draw in Mignature, those Beauties, which a compleat Body of History represents in their full pro∣portions. Nor do I herein proceed without the Authority of very great Examples. I shall not insist on the Ancients, especially Salust, since the present Age assords me a Pattern of equal Value. His Eminency Cardi∣nal Bentivoglio hath writ some Histo∣rical Tracts in our Tongue with so much Eloquence and so Judicious an Exactness, that I desire no better a Precedent: His Stile is always strong and noble, and yet it wants not a
Copious and Harmonious Fluency: His Thoughts are always well link'd together, and properly adapted to the Subject: His Observations shew how throughly he Consider'd what he writ, and how clear a View he had of the Consequences of Things: His Sentences, whether Moral, or Poli∣tical, are so weighty in themselves, and so seasonably brought in, that they are always welcome to the Rea∣der: His Speeches are full of Life and Energy: In a word, whatever he has writ, shews us 'tis possible, that a Poetical Fancy, a Rhetorical Vein, and a Solid Judgment, may meet in one Person. In imitation of his Works, especially his Historical Essays, I have endeavour'd to ma∣nage Fieschi's Conspiracy; though I must acknowledge after all, that my Writings are but a faint and ill drawn Copy of so Excellent and Perfect an Original. Perhaps some may think the Speeches in this small Tract are too long and too many: To these, I
Answer, That were it seasonable, much might be alledg'd in See this point fully discust in Mas∣cardi's Trattato Secondo dell Arte Historica, cap. 4. pag. 159, &c. Ed. Ven. 1655. defence of them, but at present, though I have Consider'd what Objections may be urg'd, yet I think there is no need of defending my self, till I know what is laid to my charge. Let it suffice, if I repeat, what I have already told my Reader, that being desirous in this short Essay to touch upon all the parts of a Compleat History, I was forc'd to Embrace those Occasions of enlarging, especially in the Speeches, which otherwise I should have let slip. Besides, let it be Consider'd, that when an Affair of this Moment comes to be debated, when the Per∣sons that are to deliberate on it are of different Opinions, and when all the Reasons Pro and Con are to be se∣riously and maturely weigh'd, 'twill not be found so easie, as some may imagine, to end the dispute in Six Words. Nevertheless I submissively
referr my self to the Judgment of the ingenious Reader: Which I shall ea∣gerly expect to be inform'd of. As likewise I must earnestly intreat all Persons who are willing to forward the design I have in hand, to furnish me with such Memoirs as they are Masters of, and they may think I have not seen. For these will also be extreamly useful to me. And the more exact and particular the Notices are which I shall receive, so much the less will the Reader be disappointed in the Matter and Method of my History. But if the Learned World, who I think have no small Interest in Works of this Nature, shall neglect to give me the Assistance I have begg'd of them, they must blame themselves, and not me, if my Histo∣ry falls short of their Expectation. Augustin Mascardi.
The Life of the Author, as it is Recorded in the Book of the Glories of the Academy Degli Incogniti at Venice. AUgustin Mascardi de∣rives his Original from a very Noble Family, which about Four Hundred Years ago began to flourish in Liguria: He was Born in the Castle Del∣la Specie, a Place sufficiently remarkable, and situate on the Confines of Lunigia. He was hardly arriv'd to those Years, when others just begin to know that they are alive, before he shew'd himself wonderfully in∣clin'd to Learning: And this
Natural Propensity of his being improv'd by a Liberal Educati∣on, his Youth prov'd very fruitful of excellent Composures both in Latin and Italian, wherewith he so oblig'd his Native Country, (being equally Master of both those Languages) that the Wits of that Time could not forbear vying with one another in the delightful Employment of giving him his due Encomiums. Here∣upon the Great Cardinal Alexan∣der d' Estè, and all that Illu∣strious Family, took him into their particular Favour and Pro∣tection; which he gratefully ac∣knowledg'd by transmitting their Glorious Actions to Posterity in several of his Writings. About the same time the several Ora∣tions
he occasionally made in Praise of See Pros. Volg. Parte Se∣cunda, p. 367, 396, 536. Great Princes then Living, and Aug. Mas∣cardi's Pros. Volg. Parte Se∣cunda, p. 271, 298, 325, 349. Persons de∣ceased who had been Eminent for their Pi∣ety, and Pros. Volg. Parte Se∣cunda, p. 414, 433, 456, 478. Canoniz'd for their Zeal to the Catholick Religion, gain'd him the Glorious Chara∣cter of the Tully of his Age, not only in Italy his Native Country, but also in all Foreign Parts, where the Italian Tongue was at all esteem'd. After this he went to Rome, where his Merits were quickly taken notice of, and rewarded with the Gene∣ral Applause due to a Person of so extraordinary Wit and Learn∣ing. Put some unlucky Acci∣dent
in his Affairs forcing him to remove to Genoua, he had there an opportunity to display his Eloquence in that famous Aca∣demy; which he did to the ex∣treme satisfaction of the Learn'd Nobility of that City, in his ex∣cellent Discourses on Cebes's Ta∣ble. From hence after a while he came back to Rome, where be∣ing entertain'd in the Palace of Prince Maurice Cardinal of Sa∣voy, he writ on the occasion of Pope Urban the 8th's Coronati∣on, a description of the Solemni∣ty, and a Panegyrical Discourse on that Pope, Entituled, The Pomps of the Campidoglio, when His Holiness Pope Urban the 8th took Possession of the Church of St. John Lateran. This Dis∣course
was so full of fine thoughts elegantly exprest, that all Italy admir'd it, and Mascardi's Fame receiv'd from it so great an in∣crease, that he was rank'd among the best Writers of the Age. Here∣upon the Pope advanc'd him to the Dignity of Gentleman of his Bed-Chamber, and he likewise was made Rhetorick Professor in the Publick Schools of Rome. These Employments were indeed of no inconsiderable value, but yet below his great Merit, For∣tune always declaring her self an Enemy to Worth and Vertue. Some few Years after this Mas∣cardi came to Venice, to take care of the Impression of his Works, and honour'd our Acade∣my so far as to be admitted a
Member of it. But after a short stay with us, his Employments call'd him back to Rome, where his Ingenuity and Learning a∣gain exerted it self, no less to his own immortal honour, than to the enriching and beautifying our Language: For in all his Wri∣tings he shew'd himself a Man well skill'd in all useful and gen∣teel sorts of Learning, of a sound Judgment, pure Eloquence, fruit∣ful Fancy, and a noble way of Expression peculiar to himself. The Conspiracy of John Lewis Count de Fieschi is a clear proof how well he would have succeed∣ed in his design of Writing a general History of the Transacti∣ons of Italy in the last Century; since by this he hath made it e∣vident,
vident, that he was Master in the highest degree of all those perfe∣ctions, without the concurrence of which, as he proves in his incom∣parable Tract of the Art of Wri∣ting History, no Man deserves the Name of a Compleat Historian. At last when he had arriv'd to a very high pitch of Glory and Re∣nown, Death robb'd the Learn'd World of this inestimable Trea∣sure; so great a loss was univer∣sally regretted: But his Memory still lives, his Reputation grows e∣very day more and more Illustrious, and our Posterity many Ages hence will envy our happiness in having had for our Contemporary a person of so conspicuous and real Merits.
THE TRANSLATOR's PREFACE. PRefaces, as they are generally manag'd, are a direct Contra∣diction to Horace's Rule, and prove neither Diverting nor Profitable to the Reader. For they u∣sually consist of little besides the Com∣mon Excuses that Authors suspicious of their Fame, and distrustful of their A∣bilities (or at least desirous to seem so) are pleas'd to make for their exposing themselves to the Publick View and ensure of the Age: Vainly conceiting that Three or Four Pages spent in such Apologies will either hide or attone for aults, or add fresh Lustre to the Real
Beauties of the Books they Publssh. For my part I always look'd upon such Introductions as tedious and imperti∣nent; and I am the more consin'd in that Sentiment, When I consider the Practice of those Writers who are worth imitating, the Intrinsick Value of whose Works daily gains an nnask'd Applause, and will doubtless effectually recommend them to the deserv'd Esteem and Admiration of future Ages. A∣mong these I cannot but reckon Mascar∣di, the Author of the ensuing Tract; the present scarcity of whose Writings, after so many Editions, is a sufficient Evidence how Ʋniversal an Applause they have met with in the Learn'd World. The short Character of him, which I have prefix'd to the following Translation, fully informs us how high∣ly he was Esteem'd by the most Emi∣nent Persons in Italy; nay, even by that Great Judge and Patron of Wit and Learning Pope Urban the Eighth, whose Poems probably will live when his Pontificate is forgotten. Nor will the Illustrious Character given of Mas∣cardi
by that Famous Ʋt inge∣nio atque Na∣tura praestanti nemini conce∣dit, ita multa insuper obtinet variae Lectionis & scientiarum praesidia eruditissimus eloquentiae Professor Augustinus Mascar∣dus: queis adjutus non secus in ejusmodi Tractatione [nempe de Historicâ methode] quam in caeteris facere consuevit: —Se quo{que} possit Tollere humo victor{que} virum volitare per ora Gabr. Naudaei Bibliogr. Polit. Naudaeus, contribute less to the E∣ternizing his Memory, and Establishing his Reputa∣tion. As for the Historical Account of Fi∣eschi's Conspiracy, which I have here Translated, it found so kind a reception, that in less than Twenty Tears, Two Impressions in Venet. 1629. Bologna. 1639. Quarto being sold off, it was Printed the Third time in a Venet. 1647. in 240. lesser Vo∣lume with the same success. Nor was it long confin'd to the Italian Language; for it appeard in French in the Year 1639, being Translated by the Sieur Bouchard Fontenay, and Printed by the Famous Camusat Printer and Book∣seller to the French Academy then new∣ly Erected by Cardinal Richelieu. 'Tis
highly probable this Translation was not much inferior to the Original, when we consider the station that Camusat was placed in by that ingenious Society, and the Great Character that is given of him by Monsieur Pelisson; Hist. de L'Academie Francoise, p. 12, 13. Impr. à La Haye, 1688. in 120. who tells us, That he was not only the most Excellent and Accurate in that Art, of any that then practic'd it, but that he was a Man of very good Sense, and never Printed any Books, but such as were of an in∣trinsick Value: Insomuch that it was reckon'd almost an infallible Mark of the Excellency of any Treatise to be Pub∣lish'd by Camusat. Thus bath the en∣suing Tract found its deserv'd Applause both in France nnd Italy, and there∣fore I cannot think those Hours misem∣ploy'd that I spent in Translating it: However had I known that it had al∣ready appear'd in our Language, which I did not till after I had finish'd my Translation, I should hardly have be∣gun the Attempt. But after I had per∣us'd the Two former Versions of it, I
found my self, out of Justice to my Au∣thor, rather oblig'd to proceed in the Publication of these Papers, then to desist from it. The First English Translation of this piece of Mascardi's, that I know of, makes up the Fifth part of the Third Book of Ibrahim, or the Illustrious Bassa, a Romance written by Monsieur Scudery, and English'd in the Year 1674. Scudery is indeed so in∣genuons as to acknowledg that he is ob∣lig'd to Mascardi for that part of his Story; and it were to be wish'd that he had been so just to our Author, as to have given us only a Translation of him. But instead of that he hath foisted in so many Fictions of his own, as degrade Mascardi from the Majesty of an Histo∣rian, and bring him down to his own Level of a tedious Romancer. And be∣sides this, Mascardi hath been much a∣bus'd by the Translator of Ibrahim, who exposes himself in almost every Page to his just Censure, That he was neither Master of his own Language, nor of the French; and consequently might have employ'd his time much better, then in
troubling the World with an ill Transla∣tion of a Book tedious by its length, uselese in its design, and therefore on very good grounds dislik'd (as such Ro∣mancers generally are) by the present Age. Nay even the Fair Sex have now left these vain Amusements, of which they formerly were Zealous Ad∣mirers for the more delightful and profi∣table Study of True History: Being justly sensible that one of the strongest Motives to Virtue must be drawn from the Real Examples of it. And these a good Historian never fails to repre∣sent in their true Light, with the hap∣py Consequences and great Rewards at∣tending it. Whereas the Subject of our Modern Romancers is generally the blameable excess of all Humane Passi∣ons and Desires, as an ungovernable Anger, an exorbitant and boundless Ambition, and insatiable Revenge, an inconsiderate and blind Rashness, and a foolish and irregular Love. These, and such like are the shining Accomplish∣ments of the Fictitious Heroes and Heroines: And 'tis no wonder that
when an Author of Wit and Fancy em∣ploys all his Art in representing Vice in so lovely a Dress, the unwary Rea∣ders are taken with its borrow'd Charms, and are seduced into these fatal, tho' pleasing, Errors. As for the other Taanslation of Fies∣chi's Conspiracy, which I saw not till after the first Sheet of mine was Print∣ed, it came out in the Year 1678, a∣mong other select Discourses Translated from those Celebrated Wits of France, Pelisson, Sarasin, and Voiture. I ex∣pected in this to have found the faults of the former Translation, so well mend∣ed, that the Publishing of mine, would rather injure Mascardi's Reputation, than, in any measure, do him Justice. But upon perusing this Version, and comparing it with the Original, I found that besides the roughness of his Eng∣lish Stile, and sevaral very obvious Errors, the Gentleman had allow'd him∣self the extravagant Liberty of Omit∣ting, where he pleas'd, several mate∣rial passages of it: Whereby those Beauties that sbine through a regular
and well connected History are quite lost; and Mascardi hath suffer'd no less by the Injudicious and Arbitrary Abbreviatures of this Translator, than by that barren superfluity, for which Scudery is so justly censur'd by Monsieur Abon∣dance Sterile Boileau L' Art Poetiqae Chant. premier. Boileau. These Considerations induced me to believe, that this Third Translation wou'd not be unacceptable to the World, nor much derogatory to the Fame of so Great an Author. How I have per∣form'd my Part in it, I freely leave to the Judgment of those who understand the Idioms of both Languages: Which though not so different from each other, as the English is from the French, yet are not so nearly alike, as to admit of a Translation too nicely and exactly Lite∣ral. For this Reason I have all along chang'd Mascardi's Expressions where I found them not sutable to the English Dialect: And where, I thought the turn of that requir'd it, I have in some
places abridg'd the length of his Peri∣ods, in others I have enlarg'd upon his thoughts, as I believe he himself would have done, had he been to write in English. But I have not at all, (as I know of) by either of these Methods, varied from my Author's Sense, or gone beyond the Liberty which he Mascar∣di's Trattato Secundo dell' Arte Historica, p. 165. Edit. Venet. 1655. in 120. himself allows, the Rules of Translation require, and all who have been successful in perfor∣mances of this kind, ei∣ther in Prose or Verse, have without scruple indulg'd them∣selves in, even where they pretend not to a Paraphrase, or an Allusion. Having said thus much concerning the ensuing Tract, and the several Translations of it, it will not I suppose be improper to take some notice of the subject it treats of. Fieschi's Conspira∣cy was a Transaction as remarkable as any that happen'd in the last Century: Whether we Consider the crafty and well dispos'd Methods by which it was carried on, the Foreign Force that was
to have seconded the Attempt, or the Wonderful Providence of God in de∣feating so Egregious a Villany, just as it was upon the point of being put in execution. The Copiousness of the sub∣ject might perhaps be some inducement to Mascardi to chuse it for his first Hi∣storical Essay; but I suppose his main design in it was to encourage the Ge∣noueses in a vigorous and resolute de∣fence of their Liberties, by represent∣ing the good success that had in the last Age attended the supporters of that Noble Cause, and the shameful defeats and disappointments that blasted all the Projects of the Enemies of the Re∣publick. And if we reflect on the Cir∣cumstances of those times, it was a ve∣ry seasonable and necessary piece of Ser∣vice not only to Genoua, but also to all Italy. For it was not long be∣fore the Venet. 1629. first Impression of this Tract, that a Dion. Petav. Ration. Temp. p. 1. l. 9. p. 654. Ed. Franc. 1665. Octavo. French Army was sent a∣gainst Genoua under the Command of the Constable
Les Diguieres, for the Assistance, as was pretended, of the Duke of Savoy. Though had the design succeeded, 'tis highly probable, the benefit of the Con∣quest would have accrued to the French King; who now began under the Con∣duct of Cardinal Richelieu to aspire at an Ʋniversal Monarchy to be founded on the Ruins of the House of Austria, which was then visibly declining. In order to this end it was necessary he shou'd first Conquer Italy: Which, (as Monsieur de Memoires de Monsieur de Brantome, T. 2. p. 39. Imp. à Leyd. 1666. in 12. Bran∣tome told Charles the Ninth,) it was impossible he should ever compass till he could recover Genoua, and be Master at Sea. Both these Advantages Francis the First lost by disobliging Doria; and the Genoueses have ever since had the greatest reason to be Jealous of a Crown that hath so often endeavour'd, some∣times by open force, but much more fre∣quently by secret Conspiracies, to Re∣duce them to a State of Slavery. The Irruption therefore of the French
Forces into those Parts, and the daily encrease of their Power, very probably induced Mascardi to employ his Pen for the safety of Genoua, and the re∣pose of Italy, by exciting in them a just and seasonable apprehension of so Formidable a Neighbour. And 'tis ve∣ry great pity that this excellent Histo∣rical Tract is not again Reprinted in its Original Language, for the better In∣formation of those Genoueses who may be apt to be wheedled by Monsieur Re∣benac's smooth Harangues into a vain Opinion, that the French King really designs their Repose and Prosperity; and therefore desires their Friendship and Alliance, whom about Eight Years ago he treated like the Vilest and most Despicable Slaves. But the Circum∣stances of Affairs are not a little changed from what they were: And Louis the XIVth who then laid his pe∣remptory Commands on this Republick, to Restore the Fieschi's to those Digni∣ties and Possessions that their Ancestors had justly forfeited by this Execrable Conspiracy, and upon their Wise Refu∣sal,
exprest his Resentments of it, (as all Europe knows) with an unheard of Insolence, is now fain to sue to them for a Neutrality: And that in Terms but little sutable to those Pompous and Swelling Titles his Flatterers have forged for him. It would be no difficult matter to draw a Parallel between the Genoueses of Fieschi's Party in the last Age, and the English Male-Contents in this. Their Forgetfulness of their late Mise∣rable Servitude, their Ingratitude to Doria the Restorer of their Liberty, their Fondness of a French Govern∣ment, the Fickleness and Instability of their Resolutions, their easie Credulity in being more than once deluded by the same fair Pretences and specious Pro∣mises, and the wonderful Defeat of all their Designs, should methinks make the Application Obvious enough to the most Bigotted Enemy of our present Settlement, But perhaps this Obsti∣nate Sect will be as regardless of the Examples drawn from History, as they have hitherto been of all the Argu∣ments
that have been urg'd from Rea∣son, to Convince them of their Error: However, let them consult their own Experience, and that may sufficiently inform them, that Providence seldom (I might say, never) fails even at the last Critical Instant, to rescue an Establish'd and well Administred Go∣vernment from the Tyrannical Yoke of a Foreign Invader, or a Rebellious Sub∣ject. They might likewise for their farther discouragement remember what a constant Series of ill Success has at∣tended all their Projects; that their Plots have been still disappointed, their most Cunning Designs unravell'd; and that after their incessant and restless Endeavours for almost Four Years, Their Majesties Sacred Persons are yet safe, and their Government stands se∣cure. So that unless this discontented Party continue under the same change, Infatuation that hath so long possest them, they must certainly now despair of ever seeing Popery and Arbitrary Power again Triumphant in England. And this, if any thing, will perhaps
induce them out of a tender regard to their own safety to desist from their un∣natural Conspiracies and Barbarous At∣tempts against the Religion and Liber∣ties of Providence of God hath fix'd on so firm a Basis, that, I doubt not but, the final Consequence of all their Malicious Projects, how subtilly soever they may be contriv'd and carri'd on, will be the destruction of their Cause, and their own unpitied Ruine. H. Hare.
A RELATION OF THE Conspiracy OF John Lewis Count de Fieschi. IT pleased the Divine Providence to grant to the Republick of Ge∣noua, a respite from the Miseries under which they had lately Groaned: For the Citizens being wea∣ed out as well by their Civil Dissenti∣ns, as by the Oppression of a Foreign ower, were at last made sensible by hese their Misfortunes, how necessary
it was for them to Agree. They pre∣sently found the good effects of a set∣tled Government, every Man's private Stock daily encreasing even beyond expectation, when instead of misap∣plying their Industry, and weakning their strength, he fomenting different Factions, they wisely studied to im∣prove their own Estates; and when that Money which was before consum∣ed in providing for an Army, and im∣feeding the insatiable Lusts of the Fo∣reign Governors, was far better em∣ployed in Traffick and Merchandice. This Happiness the Republick enjoyed when, of a suddain, there happened a most unfortunate accident, which had like to have deprived the Genoueses, of the Liberty they had so lately regain∣ed, by the intended Subversion of the Established Government: I men the horrid Conspiracy of John Lewis Count de Fieschi, the Original where of is so necessary to be known, that shall derive it from its first Source. During the heat of those never to be forgotten Wars in Italy between
the Emperor Charles the 5th. and Fran∣cis the first King of France; Andrew Doria, a General very Famous both for Courage and Skill in Maritime Affairs, fought under the French Colours; his conduct wonderfully kept up the Re∣putation and promoted the Interests of that Crown: While at the same time that he faithfully discharged the Trust reposed in him he took a severe Re∣venge of the Spaniards, for those Cru∣elties they exercised at the sacking of Genoua in the Year 1522. But Princes are very often so satally unhappy as to disesteem their bravest Subjects, while they are ready and willing to serve them with Faithful∣ness and Diligence. Thus did Francis the first, who by these indiscreet Me∣thods exasperated the mind of Andrew Doria, though he was at that time so absolutely necessary to the carrying on the French Designs. The Pay assigned him, was not returned to him; Phili∣bert de Chalons Prince of Orange, whom Doria had made a Prisoner of War, was set at Liberty by King Francis,
without paying the Ransom due to Doria; the King did likewise with great importunity, and (when that was denied) with high words, demand the Marquess del Vasto, and Ascan Colonna, who had been taken in Battle by Philippin Doria Vice-Admiral to Andrew. But that which afflicted this good old Man far beyond the Consi∣derations of his own private Interest was to find that the King wou'd not perform those his Promises, which re∣garded the profit and the reputation of the Republick of Genoua; whereof this was an eminent Instance. The City of Savona having transferr'd there Obedience from the Republick of Ge∣noua to the Crown of France, propo∣sed to themselves great advantage from the Conveniency of their Ha∣ven, which brought them in a vas profit, to the irreparable damage to the Trade of Genoua. This Andrew Doria frequently complain'd of to the King, earnestly desiring, that as a ∣compence for his past Services, h Majesty wou'd restore to the Republic
that which by all the Rules of Justice entirely belonged to her. The King was so well satisfied of the reasonable∣ness of this Petition, that he promi∣sed it shou'd be granted: But when he had balanc'd in his Mind on the one side the Obligations he was under to be Just to his Word, and on the other side the hopes of improving his Inter∣est, he rosolved (contrary to his pro∣mises,) to keep the City in his posses∣sion. He had found by experience how instable the Genoueses were in their Re∣solutions, and how little he cou'd relie upon the assistance of the Republick for the advancing the Interests of his Crown in Italy. For the City of Ge∣noua, being sometimes oppressed by a action of the Nobility, and sometimes objected to the Caprices of the giddy Mobile, did, without due consideration, lter the Form of its Government ac∣cording to the Temper of the pre∣vailing Party. Therefore the King thinking it so necessary for the furthe∣rance of his designs in Lombardy, to ave at his command a convenient
Port, he made choice of Savona, and gave the charge of it to Monseigneur de Montmorancy. By this stratagem the King assured himself, that he had both put a check to the inconstancy of the Genoueses, and made his own undertakings more easie to be accom∣plished: For the City of Savona ly∣ing near to Piedmont, Montferrat and Lombardy, was by its situation no less proper for War, than for Commerce; which gave the Genoueses occasion to fear, that its increase in Wealth and Reputation wou'd in a few Years spoil the Traffick of the Port of Genoua, and thereby enable Savona to claim an equal share with them in the Domini∣on of the adjacent Seas. All these matters had been frequently represent∣ed to the King, but without any good effect, so that at last Doria was neces∣sitated out of his sincere Love to his Country to abandon the French Inter∣ests. He being now throughly exaspe∣rated by the many Contempts before related, grew every day less and less exact in the furthering the King's de∣signs
and it happening luckily about this time, (1528,) that the City of Naples was besieged by the French un∣der the Command of Lautrech Vice-Roy of Milan, Philippin Doria in pursuance of the directions given him by Andrew, did by his voluntary neg∣ligence suffer the French King's Affairs to receive an irreparable damage. For he, who but a little before had with in∣credible Valor, obtained a remarkable Victory over the Emperor's Fleet in the Gulph of Salernum, (in which Fight the Imperalists lost Don Hugh de Moncada Vice-Roy of Sicily, their Ad∣miral,) was now pleased to permit, without any opposition, some small Vessels laden with Provisions, to sail by his Fleet into Naples: And this Relief coming so seasonably to the Be∣sieged, proved the ruin of this Enter∣prize. As soon as Pope Clement the Seventh had received notice that Doria began to fall off from the Interests of France, he dispatch'd orders to Cardi∣nal Salviati his Nuncio in that Court, to represent to the King, how necessa∣ry
it was for him by just and satisfa∣ctory Concessions, to regain to the ser∣vice of his Crown a Person of so ap∣proved Courage and Skill in Maritime Affairs; since it was highly probable, that Doria, if he were throughly exa∣sperated, would shelter himself, and the Interests of the Republick, under the Emperor's Protection; which cou'd not fail to defeat the Expectations the French then had of the Conquest of Naples. At the same time that these friendly intimations were posted away to the Court of France, the Pope dis∣patch'd Sanga his Secretary to Cajole Doria into his Service, with the offer of a large Pension. The Court of Rome was at that time justly appre∣hensive, that Doria's Interest and Re∣putation might probably over-balance the Affairs of Italy to the advantage of the Emperor, if he shou'd be in∣duced to comply with the honourable proposals offer'd him by his Imperial Majesty: Therefore that this foreseen accident might be effectually provided against, and not (as was falsly pre∣tended)
for any occasion the Pope then had of Doria's commanding his Fleet, this Crafty Embassy was re∣solved on as the most likely method to prevail. When this important affair came to be debated in the French King's Privy Council, some that were Ene∣mies to Doria, took this occasion to represent him as a Person so excessive∣ly haughty in the exercise of his Au∣thority, and so throughly disgusted at the King's Usage of him, that it wou'd be impossible ever to regain him to the French Interests; therefore that a sudden stroke might frustrate those de∣signs, which cou'd not without vast difficulties (if at all) be diverted by an amicable accommodation; and that the Emperor might want so necessary an Assistant in this juncture of Affairs, it was thought advisable that Doria should be Assassinated. This advice was not rejected, but in pursuance of it, (as was generally reported,) ne∣cessary Instructions were privately gi∣ven to Monsieur de Barbezieux who was then Sailing for Italy, with the
French Fleet, of which he had been created Admiral a little before. Doria in the mean time received private in∣telligence of these designs; and being throughly exasperated with so ungrate∣ful and perfidious a return for his for∣mer Services, he immediately entred into a close correspondence with the Marquess del Vasto his Prisoner of War, by whom he offer'd his Service to the Emperor, which was very readily and kindly accepted. And now Doria made a publick Renunciation of his Friendship with the French King, by sending him back the Collar and the Instrument of his Admission to the Order of St. Michael. The Articles that Doria made with the Emperor when he first entred into his Service, were such as the Republick might reasonably promise themselves from a sincere Patriot. He wholly neglected this advantageous occasion of increasing the Honours and Revenues of his Family, contenting himself that he had effectually secured the Liberty of Genoua, and restored to them their Do∣minion
over Savona, by the Protecti∣on and Assistance of his Imperial Ma∣jesty. This Resolution of Doria so throughly awakened the French King out of the slumber into which the false Policy of his Ministers had cast him, that being desirous to repair his past negligence, by his present sedulity, he thought it advisable to endeavour to regain Doria to his Interests by honou∣rable and advantageous Proposals: But the King's Repentance began so late that it proved absolutely fruitless. For Doria being now throughly bent upon the delivering his Country from the power of Foreigners, wou'd not admit of any offers that might delay the ex∣ecution of these his generous designs. Nevertheless the French King who had been so careless to keep in the friend∣ship of Doria, became now so eagerly impatient to recover that without con∣sidering how great respect was due to a Crowned Head, he stoop'd so low as voluntarily to offer a full satisfaction in all those particulars, which Doria had often Petitioned for, and had been
as often denied: Nay, with so great indiscretion was this affair managed, that, by making these Proposals to Do∣ria, before some other person had pri∣vately sounded his Intentions in it, the King exposed his Royal Dignity to the disgrace, and himself to the shame and vexation, of receiving a peremptory repulse. Accidents of this nature are often observed to happen in the Courts of Princes; who being puffed up with insolent thoughts of their own power, believe that their Fortune needs not the assistance of any one to establish or support it. And sometimes brave Men, who are constantly in the Camp, or at Court, miss of that esteem which is due to their Merits, and which is daily bestowed on far less deserving persons, if they have but the advan∣tageous Character of being Foreigners: It being too Natural to Princes, as well as the rest of Mankind, to under∣value their present Enjoyments, and hanker after unexperienced Novelties, no less in the Publick, than in the Pri∣vate, Circumstances of their Lives.
Doria having for these reasons, set∣tled himself, and the Twelve Gallies under his Command, in the Empe∣ror's Service, he presently applied his Mind to the deliverance of his Coun∣try from the Dominion of France; for, like a true Patriot, the Liberty of his Country had always been the only Object of his Thoughts. The Repub∣lick was at this time overpowered by a Popular Faction, who under the pre∣tence of the publick safety, fomented with Arms and Tumults the unwarran∣table Passions of Private Families; not making a due difference between the Liberty of the Common-Wealth, and the Licentiousness of some of the Members of it. Hence it came to pass, that whenever any Faction found that their own Forces were too weak to desend them in their Irregularities, they reinforced themselves with Fo∣reign Auxiliaries, and thereby brought into the City a new Model of Govern∣ment. One while the Faction of the Adorni Expelled that of the Fregosi; a while after the Fregosi overpower'd
the Adorni: Sometimes they gave themselves into the Protection of the Duke of Milan, then again they re∣moved the Governors he sent them Next they chose to be under the Go∣vernment of the French, by and by they shook off that Yoke, and then were again willing to receive it. So that by the frequent change of Appli∣cations the dangerous wounds that had so long afflicted the Republick, (and that ought to have been once for all throughly healed by a general Con∣cord,) were still kept open: All this Doria was sensible of, and therefore, that he might encourage the good in∣tentions of those persons who joined with him in their earnest Wishes for the Publick Safety, he approach'd with his Gallies near the City of Genoua. Nor was a prosperous success want∣ing to these his generous designs. For many of the Citizens, being throughly wearied out with the Calamities of their past Dissentions, and being affli∣cted with the Plague, returned to more sober Thoughts, and heartily
Prayed for a safe and lasting Concord. At this time the City was Governed in the French King's Name by Monsieur Theodore de Trivalce, a person whose signal behaviour in those Martial Em∣ployments wherewith he had been in∣trusted, had acquired him the Chara∣cter of a Prudent as well as a Coura∣geous Commander. Nevertheless his Conduct was at this time such as was greatly wondred at by those that knew him, and the rather because it did not seem to answer those former Actions by which he had so deservedly establish'd his Reputation. For although he ve∣ry well knew that the discourse and the designs of the Genoueses tended strong∣ly to a mutual agreement among them∣selves; yet he was very negligent in the thwarting these their Inclinations: Either because he thought, the end of it wou'd only be a Reconciliation of the private Animosities between the Fa∣milies of the Nobility and of the Com∣monalty: Or because, he cou'd hard∣ly think it possible that the Govern∣ment of Genoun, which was put in the
French King's Hands meerly by their intestine divisions, cou'd be taken from him by the united strength of the Ci∣tizens; he presumptuously conceited that to be much too weak to resist the King's Forces, when headed by so Va∣liant a Leader as himself: Doria find∣ing the Citizens so well disposed, and being throughly apprehensive of the vast Advantages so unexpectedly given him by Monsieur de Trivulce's over∣sight, immediately applied himself to the bringing this his Enterprize to a conclusion; which succeeded so well, that without the shedding of any blood he took the City, and drave out of it the French Garrison. The Genoueses re∣ceived him with all the marks of an in∣credible Joy, and many of them per∣suaded him to accept of the Principali∣ty of Liguria, now that Fortune had so kindly offered it him: But he gene∣rously refused it, his Mind being far above the dazling splendor of a Crown. The next thing he did was to exhort the Citizens in a well weigh∣ed Speech, (fitly becoming the Father
of his Country,) to repent of their past Errors, to know their true Inter∣est, and for the future to maintain their Liberty, (which he now freely presented to them,) by laying aside all those Dissentions, which had for so ma∣ny Years kept their Country in conti∣nual Miseries. The City being thus restor'd to its Ancient Liberty, it prov'd no difficult matter for them, either to gain the Castle, into which Monsieur de Trivulce presently retreat∣ed, or by force of Arms to Conquer Savona: As a punishment of whose Rebellion, its Harbour was made use∣less Two Vessels of the largest size be∣ing sunk just at the mouth of it to choak the passage. The City of Ge∣noua being thus vastly oblig'd to Doria for so many signal Kindnesses to them, they were desirous to give effectual de∣monstrations of their Real Gratitude to himself and his Family; hereupon they granted to him and to his descen∣dents very large and noble Privileges, and erected to his Immortal Memory a Statue of Lunigian Marble, in the
base whereof an Inscription was Engra∣ven, which declar'd him to be the Author of the Publick Liberty. Then, for their better security, the Genoueses, with the advice of Doria their Deli∣verer, Constituted a Form of Govern∣ment answerable to a Free State, un∣der which their Ancient Splendor be∣gan to revive: And this renown'd Pa∣triot having Atchiev'd many Glorious Enterprizes, and growing decrepit with the Infirmities of Old Age, retir'd from the hurry of the World to a plea∣sing Repose in his own Country, them enjoying in his own Mind the fruit of those Victories, and that Quiet, which he had been the happy Instrument of He kept with him in his Family Janne∣tin Doria, the Son of Thomas, his Cousin-German: This Jannetin was a young Man of a very ready Wit, and of approv'd Courage; of which he had given so many signal demonstrati∣ons in those Employments which he manag'd under Andrew, that he was deservedly adopted for his Son, and by the Emperor's consent design'd to
succeed him in his supreme Command of the Maritime Affairs. Hence it came to pass that Doria, being highly esteem'd by all the Princes of Europe for his excellent Endowments, being reverenc'd by the Genoueses as their common Benefactor, and having gain∣ed a large Stock both of Reputation and Wealth, his House was frequented more like the Palace of a Prince, than the Residence of a private Citizen. These things, (which I have here re∣lated in as few words as the matter will allow,) were the true occasion of the Conspiracy so cunningly and deli∣berately contrived by John Lewis Count de Fieschi: And by this Me∣morable Example all free Cities may perceive, how vastly prejudicial it is to their Publick Affairs, to advance any of their Members, (though ne∣ver so Eminent for Vertue, Valour and Conduct,) to a great degree of Ho∣nour, Riches, or Power, above their Fellow-Subjects: The necessity of pre∣venting which dangers, induc'd the Athenians wisely to Publish their Law of Ostracism.
This happy settlement of the Pub∣lick Affairs of Genoua, and of Doria's private concerns, was much envied by Pope Paul the Third, (of the House of Farnese,) Successor to Clement the Se∣venth, (of the Family of Medici,) and by the King of France. For the City of Genoua having thrown off the French Yoke, and being shelter'd un∣der the Emperor's Protection, prov'd the occasion of very great hindrances to the French King in his designs upon the Dutchy of Milan, wherein the Pope was very desirous he shou'd be successful; that the Emperor's Power, which was now grown Formidable to all Europe, might be a little check'd; and that he might be reveng'd of the Emperor for his putting by one of the Farneses from the Acquisition of that Dutchy, in which transaction the Am∣bitious Self-Interested Pope shew'd himself very Zealous. These considerations so exasperated both the Pope and the French King that they cou'd not endure that Doria the only Adviser and Promoter of
those Measures, shou'd be so safely fix'd in an Honourable Repose, as to be on∣ly an unconcern'd Spectator of their Misfortunes. Besides this, Paul the Third had an Animosity against him upon another account: And this made the more lasting Impression upon his Mind, because it was occasion'd by some private Injuries which had mutu∣ally past between them; the Original whereof I think it necessary to relate, as serving to my present purpose. Imperial Doria, Bishop of A City in the Isle of Corfica. Sagona, having by the kindness and as∣sistance of his Counsin Andrew, got together a great Summ of Money, he Purchased with it an Estate in the Kingdom of Naples, which up∣on his Death-Bed he bequeath'd to An∣drew; on this condition, That he shou'd take care to Relieve the Necessi∣ties of some of his Relations who were ow in the World. But the Pope's Offi∣cers, pretending that the Inheritance of this Estate was wholly devolv'd to the Apostolick See by the Ancient Cu∣stoms of the Church, took possession
of it immediately; and executed their Commission with so much insolence and extortion, that they seem'd rather to be common High-way-men, than Collectors deputed to enter upon the Lands and receive the Rents. Doria represented to the Pope the ill usage he had suffer'd from his Officers, and made out his claim to the Estate; which, though it was not allowed by the Officers of the Pope's Exchequer, yet it proved an inducement to Cardi∣nal Alexander Farnese the Pope's Ne∣phew, to offer him civilly to resign his pretended interest in it, on condition he would receive it as his free gift. Do∣ria being irritated with Scorn and An∣ger at the Cardinal's unseasonable Li∣berality, in giving him what was his own, (though the Cardinal's covetous temper did seldom permit him to be guilty even of that seeming Generosi∣ty) and thinking the usage he had met with to be directly contrary to the measures of Justice, as well as unpardo∣nable affronts offer'd to a Person of his Rank, he resolv'd, notwithstanding the
apparent dangers of such an Enterprize, to lay aside for a while his wonted re∣spect to the Roman See, and the usual calmness of his Temper, that he might gain Satisfaction by those me∣thods, which best become a Soldier, sensible of injuries and desirous to re∣venge them. Hereupon he imparted his Intentions to Jannetin Doria his Cousin, and gave him orders to seize the Pope's Galleys and bring them into the Port of Genoua, which was accor∣dingly done. After he had detain'd them for some days, he released them of his own accord; being very well pleas'd to let the World see, that tho he wanted neither Power nor Courage to shew his resentments of the Indig∣nities put upon him, yet he had so much respect for the head of the Church, as to restrain himself, (tho he had these great advantages) from taking a compleate Revenge. The most judicious Politicians commended Doria's Prudence in this Action for these two Reasons: First, that he did it at the in∣stance of the Genoueses, upon whom
the Pope had taken reprizals in his own Territories, using them withall very ill, since the Seisure of his Gal∣lies: And next (which they suppos'd the chief reason) that enjoying so high a Command under the Emperor, he would not make use of his Princes Au∣thority to revenge his own private In∣juries; knowing better how to make the due distinction between Publick and Private concerns, whereby he preven∣ted a Flame from bursting out, which though kindled at first upon a trisling Quarrel, might not perhaps have been extinguisht without much Bloodshed. The Pope and the French King being throughly vext to find their Affairs both Publick and Private in so ill a Po∣sture, appli'd their minds with the ut∣most intention, to cause such alterati∣ons in Genoua, as might give them a fair opportunity to open the Scene they had laid for the Execution of their Designs. The King had twice tho' ve∣ry unsuccessfully, attempted by Arms to recover Genoua, wherein he first em∣ploy'd the Count de St. Paul, and
then Caesar Fregose: This alarm'd the Genoueses to stand upon their Guard with Vigour and Diligence, for the preservation of their Liberty, fully con∣fiding that their City would victorious∣ly repel the attacks of a Foregin Pow∣er, unless it should be betray'd by the intestine discord of the Citizens. How∣ever (it being beyond the reach of hu∣mane Wisdom to foresce all Accidents, or to discover Conspiracies so secretly laid, and cunningly carried on) For∣tune, which was not yet entirely re∣concil'd to the interests of Genoua, of∣fer'd her Enemies a prospect of unex∣pected success, by the methods I am now going to relate. John Lewis de Fieschi a young Man of a Haughty and Turbulent Spirit, was about this time almost distracted with ambitious Thoughts, how he might ad∣vance his Title and Reputation. He descended from the noble Family of the Lords of the Territory of Lavagna, and as his Estate was large, so his Interest was very great, being attended by his Friends and Adherents, (who were sub∣stantial
Men) and served in great Splen∣dor by many of his own Vassals. Never∣theless he was not contented with these happy and honourable Circumstances, deriv'd to him by Inheritance from his Ancestors; but suffer'd himself to be carried away by the impetuous heat of his Youth, and the pernicious dictates of Ambition (the too common Sedu∣cer of noble Persons) to aspire at a height of Power and Dignity, no less dangerous to be obtain'd than difficult to be kept. Even from his very Child∣hood there was observ'd in several of his Actions a Fierceness and Arrogance hardly to be found in any of so tender an Age: From whence several conside∣rate Persons were induced to suspect, that his riper Years might push him on to endeavour the Disturbance of his Country's Peace. These his natural inclinations (pernicious enough of themselves) grew more prevalent by an ill Education, that pestilent distemper which too often infects young Men beyond a possibility of cure. For al∣tho Paul Pansa a Man of Eminent
Learning and Vertue, was appointed to instruct him in the Liberal Arts, yet those with whom he most inti∣mately convers'd, being very lewd and profligate Fellows, made it their endea∣vour to cherish and propagate, in the mind of the young Count, the wicked de∣sign of subverting the Republick, ap∣plauding these propos'd Enterprizes as worthy of the most noble and generous Spirits. To this new kindl'd and in∣creasing Flame his Mother continually added a supply of Fuel: For being ve∣ry Ambitious, and not having Discre∣tion enough to foresee the dismal con∣sequences of her Proceedings, she often excited her Son, who was of an aspi∣ring Temper with sharp reproofs; as if by enjoying his own Estate and li∣ving upon it, he sunk into the despica∣ble Character of a private Country Gentleman, and degenerated from the Reputation of his Ancestors, who al∣ways maintain'd a considerable interest both in their own Country and in the Courts of Foreign Princes. And that nothing might be wanting to force this
falling weight to the bottom of the precipice from whence he had slipt by his wild Ambition, his Friends advis'd to peruse diligently the life of Nero, the History of Cataline's Conspiracy, and Nicholas Machiavell's little Book, Entitul'd the Prince: By reading these Authors, his mind was by degrees tin∣ctur'd with Cruelty, Perfidiousness, and a love so great to his private Inter∣ests, as to banish all Apprehensions of Divine and Humane Laws. These vi∣ces he first admir'd, and though the innate Sense of good and evil was some∣times so prevalent, as to suggest to him that he ought to detest and abhor such Practices as unworthy of a Man of Honour, yet at length yielding to his corrupt Inclinations, he excus'd them by the Actions of these great Men, recorded by Historians, and too much imitated by the most Politick Statesmen. So powersully are the Acti∣ons of our lives insluenc'd either to Vertue or Vice, and our wills insensibly chang'd by reading the Works of elo∣quent Authors; whose charming way
of Writing seldom fails to over-balance the sober Dictates of our own Reason, which rather ought to be our Guide. These qualifications of the young Count were quickly found out by those who diligently watcht for all opportu∣nities of raising their own Fortunes by the Ruin of Genoua. Upon several ac∣counts they thought him the most pro∣per Instrument that cou'd be, to carry on this their important Design; and there∣fore they fail'd not very often to excite him to it, by proposing to him very great Honours and Advantages. The first who by the French King's Order held a correspondence with him to this end, where Caesar Fregose and Cagnino Conzaga, as was discover'd not long af∣ter by some Papers, which fell into the hands of the Marquess del Vasto, Go∣vernour of Milan by the Emperors Commission. He being desirous by a provident Caution to prevent the Dis∣orders which might hereby interrupt the Peace of Italy, acquainted Doria with his Suspicions: But the good old Man gave no credit to them, being over∣sway'd
by the Affection he bore to the Count, and by the Observations he had made of the indiscretion of altering his measures upon a bare conjecture. Af∣terwards William Bellay the King's Principal Minister of State, manag'd this business by the assistance of Peter Luke Fieschi; and as the report went, the Pope was as zealous in it as the French King. For the Count having taken a journey to Piacenza, the Re∣sidence of Peter Lewis Farnese, the Pope's Natural Son, who assum'd the Title of Duke of that State; he bought of him four Gallies at a moderate Price, on this express Condition that the Count should receive out of the Pope's Exchequer a sufficient allowance for the Manning, Arming, and Main∣taining of them. For the Ratifi∣cation of this Bargain, the Count de Fieschi continu'd his Journey to Rome, where he was receiv'd by the Pope, with all the signs of an extraordinary love and an entire confidence; and ob∣tain'd of him without any difficulty the incouragement he had so earnestly
wisht for. It was the conjecture of some Persons that the Story of the Count's buying the Gallies of the Duke of Piacenza, was invented to save the Pope's credit, he being unwilling to afford his assistance to Fieschi's enter∣prize in so publick a manner, as it must have been, had he declar'd that they were fitted out by his Order. I know that some Writers are very sollicitous to acquit the Pope and his Son from the scandal of having stirr'd up the Count to so black a design against his Country, by the Testimony of Apollo∣nio the Duke's Secretary and intimate Friend; who being kept Prisoner at Milan, and being put to the Torture to force from him a satisfactory answer to this Question propos'd by Don Fer∣rante Gonzaga, did even in the extre∣mity of his Suffering, constantly deny that either the Duke or the Pope had any hand in Fieschi's Conspiracy. Nor do I think it worth my while to con∣tradict them herein, but shall leave these conjectures on both sides to be sifted by those whose copious Writings
may adinit of a longer digression. This is beyond dispute, that the general Opinion at that time was that the Count's final resolutions were determi∣ned by the advice and incouragements he receiv'd from Rome: And the Em∣perors Ministers of State thought it was so manifest, that when the Pope sent Camillo Ʋrsino to the Emperor, af∣ter the Duke's death, to desire the re∣stitution of Piacenza, they very freely and sharply reproacht his Master the Pope, with the favouring and forwar∣ding so infamous a design. That this was likewise the Opinion of Andrew Doria, may appear by the following Circumstance. The Pope sent him a Letter of Condoleance upon the Janu. 2. 1547. death of his Cousin Jannetin, to which he return'd no answer, slighting it as a piece of ill tim'd Ceremony: But a while after when the Duke of Pia∣cenza was Sep. 28. 1547. killed by several Conspirators, Doria took the Pope's Letter, and having alter'd some expressions in it as he thought ne∣cessary,
he sent it back to the Pope by vay of Condoleance for the Duke's Death Besides this, it is most certain that while the Count de Fieschi staid in Rome, the French King's Ministers did again sollicite him to put those designs in Execution, to which they perceiv'd him very much inclin'd. To this end Cardinal Augustine Trivulce Protector of the Affairs of France, being sensible how much diligence had been used by the other Ministers of that Crown, and particularly a little before by Pe∣tter Strozzi when he pass'd over the Alpes with his Army into Piedmont) resol∣ved not to be behind any of them, in manifesting his zeal for the King's In∣terests. Therefore he fixt a time for meeting the Count, and knowing him to be excessively ambitious of Fame and Glory, he appli'd himself to him in this manner. Were Fortune propitious to your vertue (most noble Youth) I should then have just occasion to rejoice with you, whom I should now behold exal∣ted far above that middle State of life
enjoy'd by trading Citizens. But since the Iniquity of the times denies you a reward suitable to your Merit, I desire you kindly to accept my affection, by which I Sympathize with you in your Misfortunes, and from my heart wish you (as all good Men do) a concur∣rence of more happy Events. Your Birth is so noble, and your Endowments are so Rare, that the general voice of the World calls you to a higher Stati∣on, that you may be the better able to promote their common good. Among the rest of your Admirers, I, who upon the account of my Employments have a nearer view of Publick Trans∣actions, do heartily wish to see your Valour display'd to the eyes of Europe, on a Theatre more stately than that whereon you now so well act your part. You were born in such an un∣happy juncture of time, that the pre∣sent constitution of your own Country makes it unlawful and dangerous for you to aspire to any very eminent Dig∣nity; for the Genoueses having disclaim∣ed their Obedience to the King of
France, and brought all to a common equality, will by no means permit you to enjoy any Character above the or∣dinary level of a Citizen. Besides this, Andrew Doria and his Cousin Jannetin, under the specious pretence of resto∣ring to Genoua its ancient Liberty, have so firmly establisht their own Power, that the most universal Concord of the Genoueses consists in their being willing to enslave themselves to the Arbitrary commands of that Family. Thus by a servile Subjection to the Tyranny of two private Persons, do this foolish People sufficiently punish themselves, for having rashly executed their blind Resolution of withdrawing themselves from the Protection of a most power∣ful Prince. These Doria's being thus Bolster'd up by the assistance of the Emperor's Army, (to whose affairs the late turn in Genoua has been very ad∣vantageous) and growing more formi∣dable by their numerous Fleet which al∣most fills the Port, you may be sure will never permit any noble and reso∣lute mind to exert its self: For if any
of the Citizens should give Proofs of a remarkable Courage, they would pre∣sently be jealous of it, fearing least it should portend danger to the increa∣sing Fortune of their Family; and would under the pretence of securing the publick Safety, abuse those ambi∣tious Titles granted to Andrew, of Fa∣thers of their Country, and Restorers of its lost Freedom to the oppression of Persons more Valiant and Deserving than themselves. Hence it is that any so well Born and Accomplisht as your self, cannot fail while their Power is so great to be continually disturb'd with Injuries, besides the danger that their lives are daily expos'd to. 'Tis true, none of the Disorders I have hinted at have hitherto appear'd; but the rea∣son of that is to be ascrib'd partly to the distrust, the Doria's have of their new gotten and yet unsettled Power, and in a great measure to the modera∣tion of Andrew, who curbs Jannetin in his rash and ill advis'd Designs. Can you think that this Young Man, whose haughty Temper, and impetuous Pas∣sions,
know no limits, will be hindr'd by any consideration of the unlawful∣ness of the Action, from executing those designs his Fancy may prompt him to? Since he finds himself guarded by Soldiers whom he can trust, and is upon the account of the important office he bears, every day address'd to with vast respect by the young Nobi∣lity of the City? Can you think that so high a Spirit will suffer it self to be confin'd within the bounds of a reason∣able Power? Or that his thirst of Em∣pire, which encreases daily by the near view he has of it, will be satisfi'd with∣out the Blood of many innocent Per∣sons? Can you think that that additi∣on of Honour and Authority which Fortune partial in his Favour, and the Genoueses blinded with an excessive love to Andrew have fixt upon him, will content him? Or can you believe that he does not aspire after the acquisition of a more pompous Title, than that of Jannetin Doria? As for my part, I can∣not give credit to a supposition so im∣probable. For he has not Moderation
enough, either to know how, or to be willing to give a check to so fierce torrent of extraordinary Felicity. These his Projects are for a while retarded (as far as I can guess) by his expectati∣on of Andrew's Death, which cannot be very far off; and then you will see him assume to himself an absolute Pow∣er: Altho' by so villainous an Invasion he casts indelible stain on all the bene∣fits done by Andrew to his Country To this end being already possest of the hearts of the Nobility and the Po∣pulace, he encourages the one in Idle∣ness and Luxury, and takes care to give the other full imployment by the pro∣fits of Merchandise, that being disus'd to any bold Enterprizes; nay, even to the handling their Weapons, neither of them may dare to make any Opposition to his Designs. Thus under the appearance of a settled Peace, he cunningly con∣ceals his intended Parricide. But sup∣posing that the Divine Providence, (which has hitherto preserv'd the Re∣publick) should cut off all possibility of his succeeding in these his attempts:
How great a reproach to their Birth ought the rest of the Citizens who de∣scend from as noble a Parentage, to think it, that Jannetin Doria their equal, continues in the secure enjoyment of a Power and Dignity so far above theirs? What colour of Reason can be alledg'd for it, that in a Free State (where so many no ways inferior to him, either for Birth or Valour, are contented to live privately) he only should keep up the magnificent Port of a Sovereign Prince, treating the rest of the Nobili∣ty as if they depended upon him like his Menial Servants? By what Law of any well constituted Republick? By what custom of any Nation not alto∣gether Barbarous? In what History of any civiliz'd People is such a Prece∣dent to be met with? And if you have not hitherto been sensible of the con∣temptuous behaviour of this insolent Man towards your own Person, it must rather be abscrib'd to the inadvertency of your tender Years, than to Janne∣tin's Affability.
However, you will be greatly de∣ceiv'd, if hereafter you expect to be exempted from the common Miseries that attend your Country. You must, believe me, Sir, you must join with o∣thers of the Nobility, in offering him your Attendance and your Service: And Jannetin may then reekon it a∣mong the chief Trophies of his insuffe∣rable Arrogance, that he is caress'd, re∣verenc'd, and humbly bow'd to by John Lewis de Fieschi, Count of Lavag∣na, the Proprietor of a large and well peopled Territory. How much more eligible therefore would it be for you to awaken your mind to such Resolutions as are worthy of your Country, your Family, and your own Personal Endow∣ments? And immediately to apply your utmost endeavours to free your self and your Country-Men from so fordid an Infamy? Perhaps you may object, that tho' you should be willing to undertake this Enterprise, yet you want a sufficient force and seasonable Opportunities to bring it to perfecti∣on. But I hope these difficulties will
be clear'd, when I assure you that be∣fore your departure from Rome, you shall receive all necessary Instructions and Succors for the furthering this De∣sign; in which, when it is ripe for Execution, I am impower'd by my Master the King of France to promise you the assistance of his Forces. You will likewise find these further incou∣ragements even in Genoua it self. The Populace (urged by their irreconcila∣ble hatred to the Nobility,) will not only be as a Sword to fight for you, but as a Shield to defend you. Janne∣tin's prosperous Fortune will enchant him to so great a degree of Stupidity, that he will fall an casie Prey to your Artifices. Your own Subjects and those of the Duke of Piacenza will be pow∣erful enough to guard you from the attacks of any that shall dare to op∣pose you. In a word, all things invite you to a certain Victory: Nothing is now wanting but your own final Reso∣lution, not to Fight, but to Conquer and Triumph. Therefore consider well the necessity that lies upon you,
either to be a Prince or a Slave, either to make your self formidable to your Enemies, or to live under continual ap∣prehensions of their Malice. Cardinal Trivulce could not have toucht Fieschi's Soul in a more sensible part: For his envy was excited to so high a degree by this representation of Doria's Grandeur, that he lookt upon it as a continual Reproach to himself; as if he were inferior to Jannetin in any sort of Accomplishments. Thus Fies∣chi's inclinations being so strongly dis∣pos'd towards this desperate Design, it was no difficult matter for the Cardi∣nal to kindle the Flame, when he made use of so proper an incentive, as fallaci∣ous Arguments eloquently express'd. And the Count hereupon grew very desirous to know what Proposals the King had empower'd Cardinal Trivulce to offer him; and when the Cardinal had ac∣cordingly inform'd him, he thought the Conditions were too valuable to be de∣spis'd. The Particulars of them are as follow.
That he should forthwith enter into the King's Pay, and receive a sufficient Allowance for the Maintenance of six Gallies. That there should be secured to him the full Pay for 200 Men to be put in Garrison in the Castle of Mon∣tobbio. That he should be declared Captain of the Horse, and that 12000 Crowns a year should be assigned him for his own Allowance. These Arti∣cles were quickly after ratifi'd on the King's part at a little distance from Naples, by John Caracciolo Prince of Melsi; Fieschi nevertheless deferr'd his final Resolution in this matter, till his return to Genoua; having satisfi'd the Cardinal both by the Alteration of his Countenance, and by some Words that dropt from him, after this Interview that he would follow the Measures di∣rected by the Crown of France. This his delay it is thought proceeded from one of these Reasons, either because he was not yet fully satisfied in his mind of the justice or the feasibleness of this at∣tempt; or because he desir'd to have leisure for a free Conference with his
friends by whose advice he might the bet∣ter know what Methods to follow in the design he had undertaken. When he came to Genoua, he made it his Bust∣ness to observe Jannetin's conduct with more than usual Diligence: For altho' the spendor of the Doria's Family was principally deriv'd from Andrew, yet it being too generally the Practice of the World to worship the rising Sun, the Citizens of Genoua follow'd that Maxim, and paid their Court to Jan∣netin, as the chief object of their hopes. Jannetin's Temper was naturally haugh∣ty, which added to his Military Educa∣tion, and the respect that was paid him as the Commander of 20 Gallies, and as design'd by the Emperor to be his Uncle's Successor in the office of Admiral, increas'd his Pride to a high degree. He was likewise so far exalted in his own Opinion, upon the ac∣count of some signal Proofs he had gi∣ven of his Valour, that his Spirit seem∣ed to aim at a higher Condition, than the equality of the Subjects of a Free State could allow of. This made him
neglect to gain by affability the affe∣ctions of those Persons whom he thought would be oblig'd to adhere to him, for the sake of their own Interest; seeming to think himself safer and greater in a vain ostentation of his Pow∣er, than in being really belov'd and e∣steemed by his Country. For these causes he was hated by the popular Fa∣ction: But the young Nobility who attended him, had a greater regard to the profitable Employments they ho∣ped to receive from him, than to the imperious manner in which he beha∣v'd himself towards all. Sometimes he treated the Count Fieschi with haughty and arrogant Language; at which he was so exasperated, that in∣stead of endeavouring to gain his Friendship by the servile Submissions then generally practis'd, he rather wanted Caution and Temper to hide his Resentments; but gave him plain∣ly enough to understand by his deport∣ment, how little he car'd to see him. And that Jannetin might want no Demonstrations, that Fieschi resolv'd
to have no dependance on him, even in the maritime concerns, which made him so much respected, he bought of the Duke of Piacenza the 4 Gallies, (as I before related) to the infinite dissa∣tisfaction of Jannetin. In the mean time Cardinal Trivulce fearing least if he shou'd abate of his former Diligence, his hopes of fixing Fieschi in the French Interests might be disappointed, and well knowing that in all Resolutions of importance, Young Men must be brought to a Determination while their Temper and Fancy are warm with the Project, to prevent any Luke-warmness which serious thoughts might suggest; he dispatcht Nicholas Foderato, a Gen∣tleman of Savona, one of the Count's Relations, to him at Genoua. This Per∣son by frequently representing the Car∣dinal's Demands, and vastly magnify∣ing his Promises, at last brought the Count to an express Declaration that he wou'd assist the French Forces in re∣ducing the Republick to its former sub∣jection; on condition that the King wou'd fully make good the offers that
had been formerly propos'd to him to encrease his Grandeur and inlarge his Power. Hereupon Foderato rid Post for Rome, to get the Capitulation rati∣fi'd by the subscriptions of those Mini∣sters, whom the King had Authoriz'd for that purpose: As soon as Foderato had begun his Journey, Count Fieschi imparted the whole Affair, to some few of his confidents, and having ask'd their Advice concerning it, they very freely blam'd him, not for the design it self, but for the Methods he inten∣ded to take for the putting it in Exe∣cution. For this reason he sent in all hast to recall Foderato; from whom having receiv'd the Packet of Letters, and dispatches he had entrusted him with-all, he propos'd in a few words his In∣tentions to be deliberately canvassed by his Friends. The Persons whom he thought worthy to be of this pri∣vate Consult, were these three: Vincen∣tio Calcagno of Varese, a Servant en∣tirely faithful to Count Fieschi, who sincerely endeavour'd to preserve his
Master's Life and Honour: Raphael Sac∣co a Lawyer of Savona, whom Fieschi made use of as the Judge and Auditor of the concerns of his Territory: And John Baptist Verrina a Citizen of Ge∣noua: Verrina having the advantage of living very near Fieschi's Palace, he by degrees insinuated himself into the Count's Familiarity, cunningly pre∣tending a great zeal for his Interests that he might by Fieschi's assistance prop up his own decaying Fortunes; and herein the sly Hypocrite succeeded so well, that he soon gain'd the Ascendant over him, having engag'd him to lend him several Summs of Money, and (which is far more considerable) to communicate to him his most impor∣tant Secrets. His Ambition was large, and promp∣ted him to form great Designs; for the effecting whereof, his natural Ingenui∣ty never fail'd to suggest to him, the likeliest Methods: His inveterate ha∣tred to the Nobility, procceded partly from the resentment of private Inju∣ries, and partly from a Factious dislike
of the present Constitution; wherein, by Andrew Doria's Advice, the Nobi∣ity were restor'd to the Administrati∣on of Affairs which they had formerly enjoyed, and from which they had been so long unjustly excluded. This frustrated Verrina's Expectations, of having any share in the management of the Government: Which, together with the uneasie consideration of ap∣proaching Poverty, (his Debts every day increasing, and his Estate decay∣ing,) prov'd an irresistible incitement to him (his mind being exasperated with the disappointment of Honour and Wealth) as it generally does to Per∣sons involv'd in the like Difficulties, esperately to engage in this rash De∣ign; hoping it might give him some prospect of being deliver'd from the in∣conveniences of his present Circum∣stances, and of being reinstated in that happiness and those advantages, which his disturbing Memory told him he formerly possess'd. Thus Verrina being sensible, that he you'd no longer conceal his Misfortunes,
while the Publick Tranquility lasted, made it his endeavour to bury the remembrance of them under the ruins of his native Country. For if the de∣sign'd Villainy prov'd successful, he as∣sur'd himself, that his Circumstances wou'd be every way vastly improv'd; but if it should not (as was a very great hazard) he buoy'd up his mind against all ominous fears of future Ca∣lamities, with the prospect he had that his name should live, tho' under a Cha∣racter remarkably infamous; for de∣ring to be crusht under the weight of so bold an attempt, and to expose him∣self to a destruction almost certain, for the gratifying his Revenge, by invol∣ing his Enemies under the same fate So stupid and heedless are Men anima∣ted with Ambition, that, tho' it is their chief aim to advance and eterni their Reputation, yet it is equal to the by what Methods they acquire it, whe∣ther by the noble pursuits of Vertue, or the mean and inglorious Practices of Vice.—But Calcagno was a Man of a very solid and mature Judgment; and
having been long accustom'd to the delights and the plenty of a wealthy Family, abhorr'd the very thoughts of those Dangers into which he foresaw the Count wou'd precipitate himself: But, besides this, he acted upon the generous Principles of Sincerity and Gratitude: For having been bred up in the Fieschi's Family from his Infan∣cy, he had a real affection for the Count's Person, without any selfish regard to the advantages he might reap from his Estate; whereby those who have di∣stinct Interests of their own to pursue are (too generally) influenc'd to expose their Patrons to the utmost hazards, that they may accomplish their cove∣tous Designs.—Sacco perceiving that the prosecution of this affair wou'd be liable to great Hazards, stood Neuter, that he might have the better opportu∣nity to declare his Sentiments in fa∣vour of those measures that Fieschi should resolve to follow. The Count imparted his mind to them, in a short but very pathetick Speech: Telling them that he was positively resolv'd to
endeavour some considerable Alteration in the present Constitution of Genona, and that he therefore desir'd them to give their Opinions what Methods would be the likeliest to accomplish it. Nevertheless Calcagno, whose cordial Affection to his Patron, and many years Domestick dependance on him had inspir'd him with the greater con∣fidence, took the freedom to speak to him to this purpose, If (Sir) you are so unalterably re∣solv'd to proceed in your attempts a∣gainst the Government of Genoua, as your expressions seem to declare to us; it will then be in vain for me to think that my contradicting you in it can produce any good Effect, or prevent those common Calamities which I hear∣tily deplore: But if the dictates of Prudence, and your good Genius can induce you to admit of second thoughts, (which usually are the wisest and the safest) I shall on this occasion give you as great a proof of my Fidelity, by my freedom in speaking, as I have done all the rest of my life by my diligent
and industrious management of your concerns. You have hitherto enjoyed a constant course of Felicity; Fortune hath never yet made you the object of her frowns: Hence it comes to pass that your mind is not accustom'd to entertain any impressions but what re∣present all your designs crown'd with Victory, your Dignity advanc'd, and your Dominions enlarg'd. These (Sir) are generally the Dreams of those who have long been the Favourites of For∣tune. But I am very apprehensive that some cross accident will dissipate these pleasing Shadows, and then your disappointment will be much more gre∣vious to you, because you did not in the least foresee or expect it. To ef∣fect an alteration of the Government of the Republick, is at this time a work liable to so many difficulties, and ex∣pos'd to so evident dangers, that shou'd I represent it to you safe and easie, I shou'd offer the greatest violence to my own Reason. For you can propose to your self but these two Methods to ac∣complish your design; either to make
use of a Foreign Force, or to preva by a secret correspondence with some of the Citizens: As for the former, do not yet see any Preparations made towards it; and if there were, 'tis im∣possible that an Army can March either so fast or so privately, but that it must give an Alarm to the Emperor, to Doria, and to the Genoueses. All Italy is at this time to our great Misfortune in such a Ferment, that the eyes of Europe are vigilant in watching our Motions; and Genoua, being the only Maritime Frontier of this Province, is you know suspected, and therefore strongly guarded and jealously obser∣v'd. And since the Dutchy of Milan is already become the Seat of the War, and is destin'd to be at last a Prey ei∣ther to the Italians or the French Forces, you must needs think that, in common Policy the Emperor will take the greater care of Genoua, which he esteems as the main Bulwark of his Power in Italy: Doria will herein, at∣tend him not only with his twenty Gallies, but also (which is much more
considerable) with the sincere affection of the Citizens (whom he has so much befriended) and with the assistance of the whole Fleet bound for the Levant, which is entirely devoted to his Service. The City of Genoua is now so exaspe∣rated at the Tyrannical proceedings of the Dukes of Milan and the French Kings, that the very mention of a Fo∣reign Force is become odious and de∣testable to them. Therefore unless your Army is very numerous, you can only discover your Intentions, but ne∣ver bring them to any effect; and that you may be sensible how irreparable a damage this would prove to you, you must consider that nothing but a con∣clusion unexpectedly successful can e∣ver obtain applause, or even, justifie an undertaking of this Nature. And how or from whom you can expect to be suppli'd with such an Army I can∣not imagine; for supposing that the French King (on whose Protection you so much rely) is desirous to raise new Tumults in Italy, yet his own preten∣sions to the Kingdom of Naples and the
Dutchy of Milan, will keep the best part of his Army (whose present Busi∣ness is to secure their own Frontiers) so fully employ'd, that the Auxiliaries he sends you, must be very few and inconsiderable. Or if I could so far im∣pose on my own Reason, as to believe that either he or any other Potentate would supply you with Forces propor∣tionable to your design, yet ev'n then you must expect to be oppos'd with perhaps a greater, to be sure an equal force, by his Imperial Majesty who has taken the Genoueses into his Protection. So that at last your Happiness or Mi∣sery will entirely depend on so great a hazard, as the uncertain event of a Bat∣tel: And whether it goes against or for you, you must be contented to accept of such Terms as the Conqueror shall Prescribe, and the only reward firmly entail'd on you will be the indelible in∣famy, of having ungratefully robb'd your Country of her Liberty, and put her under the Yoke of a Barbarous E∣nemy. Perhaps you may expect to receive a nearer and speedier assistance
from those Citizens who are of your Faction; but I am sure if I am at all acquainted with the Temper and In∣clinations of the Genoueses, you build your hopes on a very crazie and tot∣tering Foundation. From which order of them, pray, Sir, is it that you ex∣pect these Succors? Is it from the No∣bility; These you know are already of Doria's Party, to whom they are en∣gag'd by many Obligations, and to whom they owe their share in the Ad∣ministration of the Government, and the happiness of an honourable Peace: And how can you think that they, who run the risk of worsting their For∣tunes by every slight alteration, should now, out of Complaisance to you, help forward a turbulent Revolution, which must precipitate them into greater and more inextricable difficulties than they have yet been involv'd in? Will they to comply with your Ambition forget all the Obligations they lie under to their Country, their Liberty, their Fa∣milies and their Estates? Can you be∣lieve that they will preferr your Friend∣ship
before Doria's Protection, whom on many accounts both Private and Publick they have for a long time re∣verenc'd as their Father? Nor can you reasonably suppose that the inclinations of the Populace are a whit more favou∣rable to your designs; for how much the greater their Aversion is to the ve∣ry name of the Nobility, so much the less (you may be sure) will they trust you, who being the chief of them, make it your endeavour to destroy your own order, without a reasonable pre∣tence or Provocation. And if some few of the Mob should give credit to your Proposals, their Leaders will ne∣ver sink their own Reputation so low as to accept of a Deliverance obtained for them by you. If your design be to set up your self as Prince or absolute Governour of Genoua, what Action can be less agreeable to the Populace than this? What can be farther from meri∣ting a general Applause? But perhaps you will tell me, your intentious are only to re-establish the Ancient De∣mocratick Constitution, which Genoua
till Doria subverted it by force of Arms; and such a Declaration as this you think will so charm the Com∣monalty, that they will presently take up Arms in your Favour. For my part I am so far from obstinately maintain∣ing the contrary Opinion, that I veri∣ly believe, those who are dissatisfied at the present State of Affairs, will gree∣dily embrace so fair an occasion of act∣ing over again their former Tragedies. The more readiness and vigour they ex∣ert in Prosecuting this Cause, so much the more do they advance their own Interest, and this consideration will not suffer them to be Idle; but you will find when the Spoils come to be divided, your share will only be the in∣famy of having begun the Insurrecti∣on; unless you can be so credulous as to suppose that the Families of the A∣dorni and the Fregosi, will resign to a Nobleman that Power and Pre-emi∣nence, in the management of the De∣mocracy, for which they have for so many years had mutual contests. They will give to your Rashness the honour∣able
Character of Valour; they will follow your Standards, because they shall be thereby free'd from their Sub∣jection; they will rejoyce to see the Nobility pull'd down by a Nobleman; to see the Bowels of your Native Coun∣try pierc'd by your Weapons; the Pub∣lick Tranquillity disturb'd by your Mad∣ness; and their own Tyranny once more set up by your folly: And while they preserve in a great measure their Reputation from being tainted with the infamy of promoting your wicked designs, (Pardon me, Sir, that I am so free as to call every thing by its true name) they will only wait at a due di∣stance till the times invite them to share with you in the reward of your Labours, the glory of your Boldness, and the Triumphs of your Victory. And how deplorable would your cir∣cumstances then be? Or to what Par∣ty could you without shame and blushes apply your self? The Nobility will hate you for betraying them: The po∣pulace will deride you, and laugh at those Policies, whereby they only reap
so great advantages; your Country will detest you for having been the occasion of the loss of her Liberty: The Empe∣rour who has taken the Republick into his Protection, will be your declar'd Ene∣my: Nor can you with a secure confi∣dence rely on the Friendship of the French King, who has himself aim'd at an absolute command over Genoua. In a word, you will be odious to the whole World; for all Mankind do on very reasonable grounds detest treache∣rous Practices. I am indeed very un∣willing to speak, what it is absolutely necessary you should hearken to and seriously consider; but the constant fi∣delity I have always shew'd in your Service, and the sincere affection I bear to your Person, inspire me with a bold∣ness suitable to this occasion. I am a∣fraid (may Heaven avert the ill Omens my mind portends,) I tell you, Sir, I am more than ordinarily apprehensive, that these turbulent and unquiet thoughts are suggested by your evil Genius, which has destin'd you to the loss of your Reputation, your Life, and your
Estate. You are sensible that Jannetin Doria looks on you with an envious Eye, and you have sometimes com∣plain'd to me, that you did not think your self secure from his treacherous de∣signs: Why then, (Sir) will you fur∣nish him with Arms to destroy you e∣ven by the Rules of Justice? How gladly will he embrace this opportuni∣ty of gratifying his private Revenge, under the colour of preserving his Country from Ruine and Confusion? How greatly will he rejoyce within himself, when he shall hear that you have precipitately engag'd your self in such Resolutions, as will on very good grounds justifie him and his Party in the forcible opposition he will openly make you? You will be declar'd the Distur∣ber of the Publick Peace, an Enemy to the common Liberty, the betrayer of your Country, a rebel to the Repub∣lick, and (in a word) the Catiline of Genoua. I am struck with so much horror at the thoughts of it, that I have not the power to represent to you, how many Enemies, this odious Cha∣racter
publickly given of you, will arm for your destruction; and these not only the Nobility, the Tradesmen, the Labourers, and the Mob of Genoua, (whose resistance perhaps you may think despicable) but also Foreign Princes and their Subjects, will oppose you with so unanimous a vigour, that the sad conclusion of the whole will be your sinking under the violence of this part of the World join'd together in a Confederacy, to punish your dangerous attempts by the infamous death of a Malefactor. Your territories will be forfeited to the Publick Bank: Your memory will be Scandalous and De∣testable in the Annals of Genoua: Jan∣netin will be acknowledg'd as the second deliverer of his Country, and the re∣storer of her Liberties, and all his glo∣ry will be built upon your Ruines? Perhaps the gratitude of the Genoueses will induce them to set up near Andrew Doria's Statue, another equally mag∣nificent, to the Honour of Jannetin, in the Pedestal whereof shall be inscrib'd: John Lewis de 'Fieschi the Publick Ene∣my
my subdu'd by Jannetin Doria, the Pub∣lick Benefactor. Therefore let not the impetuous rashness of your age, and the violence of your resentments, hur∣ry you into designs of so hazardous a Consequence; but let the considerati∣on of your Self, your Family, and your Vassals, lay some restraint on these blind and unruly Passions: Remember (Sir) what you owe to God, to your Country, to your Reputation, and to your Birth: Reflect with a generous compassion on the Miseries in which you will involve your Mother and your Wife: And by abandoning your pre∣sent thoughts, free the minds of all that love you, from these just and ne∣cessary apprehensions. Your blooming Youth, and your early Valour are too rich a treasure, to be so prodigally Sa∣crific'd to the Mercy of Fortune. Therefore (your faithful Servant once more intreats you) enjoy with a con∣tented mind the affluent Patrimony your Ancestors have left you, for you are yet in a station every way so emi∣nent, that you may (if you please) live
the object of Jannetin's envy, and be∣yond the reach of his Malice or his Treachery? This discourse of Calcagno, founded on so many powerful reasons, and co∣ming from a Person who had given ma∣ny undoubted Testimonies of his zea∣lous affection, made so good an impres∣sion on Fieschi's mind, that his resolu∣tions seem'd to be pretty well inclin'd to the safer side: But Verrina, foresee∣ing that the whole design might yet be left unattempted, if he should suf∣fer the Count calmly to consider of what had been alledg'd, he made this detestably impious, tho' plausible op∣position, to the solid Arguments pro∣duced by Calcagno. Would to God the affairs of the Re∣publick were in those happy circum∣stances, that the Citizens might quiet∣ly enjoy their Estates; then (Sir) there would be no reason for you (as there is at present) to desire a Reformation: For, as Calcagno has well observ'd, there s no one at this time in Genoua, who s equal to you either in the extent of
Territories, the Nobility of Birth, or a Treasury well furnish'd with ready Cash; and therefore (I am of his mind) it is not the part of a Wise Man when he is in Prosperity, to tempt his For∣tune, which generally changes to his disadvantage. But Destiny, the cruel Enemy of your Repose, hath so entan∣gled the affairs of the Republick, tha unless you undertake some great, tho hazardous design, you must inevitably Perish. Jannetin Doria, who for so ma∣ny years has gratifi'd his ambition thoughts, with the expectation of be∣ing Master of Genoua, cannot endure you who are so able to cope with him, and to ruin these his vast Projects. The implacable hatred this Proud Man beam to you, you may plainly discover by his imperious Looks, and his contemp∣tuous Behaviour: If you think these Testimonies fallible, surely you cannot but conclude, that since your purchase of the Gallics, you are (as a Nail struck through and dencht in his heart) an insupportable Torment to him. His Arrogance aims at the free and ab∣solute
Dominion of the Sea, nor will he suffer any one to presume to disturb him in his possession, or to share the power of it. How then can you sup∣pose, that since Princes very often Sa∣crifice their Brethren, Children, and even Parents, to a groundless Jealou∣sie that they weaken the security of their Empire, Jannetin should suffer you to partake with him in his Maritime Dominion? His stubborn Nature, which will not bend, must therefore be forc'd to a compliance. And you must either tamely resign your Gallies, and by a shameful Retirement to your own Pa∣laces, yield him all that his Ambition craves; or you must by the Arts of Policy, and an unwearied Industry, excite against your Rival a sufficient number of Enemies to curb and restrain him. However if you resolve to pur∣chase your safety from the dangers now imminent, with the loss of your Re∣putation, and to accept of your Life as granted you by Jannetin; God forbid I should be too importunate an opposer of those Dictates of Self-preservation;
tho' even his inveterate hatred cannot (I am sure) prompt him to wish you in circumstances more despicable and wretched. But the greatness of your mind checks my unworthy Suspicions of your Conduct, and promises that I shall see the Vanity and Pride of this Arrogant Man pull'd down and crusht by your Courage. Therefore (Sir) pro∣pose to your self, and that with an in∣flexible resolution, the undertaking this Enterprise, which is so brave, as even Jannetin himself will envy you for it Fortune has placed between you two, the absolute Command of all Liguria, and it is impossible for either of you to acquire so great a Dignity, till he has (like Tullia) driven the Wheels of his Triumphant Chariot over the breast of his Competitour. He will be the surest of the Victory, who can by the most expedite Methods dispatch his E∣nemy out of the World. There is an equal necessity lies on both of you, to take care of your safety; therefore he will be the wisest of you, who by a swift and resolute Stroke, shall ruin his
Adversaries slow Projects before they are half ripe. You must either be the Aggressor, or you must expect to be Attack'd; you must either fall in∣to your Enemies Snares, or catch him in yours; in a word you must either Kill or be Kill'd. Perhaps Calcagno may think my ex∣pressions are too sharp; but Necessity, which in desperate Cases gives an edge to Fortitude, in Villainous Attempts shields the Innocent from Danger and Infamy. Therefore let him blame Ja∣netin's Folly, your Countrey's Ingrati∣tude, and the Injustice of your Partial Destiny, which have plung'd you in these inevitable Difficulties. While you stand upon your own defence, you injure none, but only obey the Dictates of Nature. And when you see a Tempest of ill Accidents threat∣ning your Ruin, Prudence will direct you, to throw them (if you can) on your Enemy's Head: If this carries along with it some colour of Injustice, who can blame you for it, when Pro∣vidence has left you no other means to
secure your own Life, but by the death of your Rival, nor permits you to defend your Innocence and exerts your Courage in any other Methods, but those of Villainy? But why do  give it so undeserv'd an Epithete That Term you have learn'd (Friend Calcagno,) from the Trivial Notions of some Pedant, whose humble studies never gave him an insight into Machi∣avel's Rules of Policy. These reproach∣ful Characters are (I grant you,) fix'd on the Actions of Private Men, when for their Covetous Ends they in∣croach on their Neighbours: But shou'd you by this Rule involve under the same Odium the Gallant Underta∣kings of Princes, all the Empires and Principalities of the World wou'd be founded on Villainy, for they all at first began, and have since increas'd, by Oppression; the weaker being still crush'd by the power of the stronger. By Nature all Men are on a Level; 'tis Boldness and Courage only, that in fa∣vour of some particular Men destroys this equality. Hence those who by
subtlety or force cou'd possess them∣elves of the Supreme Power, have as∣um'd the Magnificent Stile of Empe∣rors, Kings, and Princes. Perhaps some few (like Calvagno) may, be∣cause they distrust the success, blame your Resolution: For hazardous At∣tempts are never prais'd, till they are compleatly executed: Then the hap∣py Event, makes the Undertaking ap∣pear not only Lawful but Honourable; and what before was censur'd as Rash∣ness, shall then receive the Encomium of Valour and Conduct. Thus while Julius Caesar the Dictator was at the head of his Army striving for the Ro∣man Empire, not only Pompey, but the greatest part of the Senate, stuck ob∣stinately to the defence of their Privi∣leges, and declar'd themselves his Ene∣mies; but when the Battle of Pharsa∣lia had decided the Controversie, by the Total Rout of Pompey's Forces, and he had taken upon him the Go∣vernment of the Republick, those Ha∣treds and Prejudices were quite extin∣guish'd, and how sincerely the Romans
loved him, their Remarkable Zeal in Prosecuting and Punishing his Murthe∣rers will sufficiently inform you. Let the Genoueses then for a while call you Tyrant and Usurper, and trouble not your self at these Reproaches, which will only be the impertinent expressi∣ons of their Malice, and the last groans of their expiring Liberty. By degrees they will accustom themselves to ac∣knowledge and respect you as their Lawful Prince. You see (Sir,) how firmly I relie on your good Fortune; since I call this Principality yours, even before I see any preparations made for the acquiring of it. But the present posture of affairs is such, that Genoua must be yours if you are not wanting to your self: For though there are (as Calcagno thinks) some obstacles in your way, yet how easily may they be surmounted by your Forces, which are so much superior to them? And suppose there were such Hazards and Difficulties in this Enterprise as have been represented, 'tis no more than has been the Fate of all Ancient and Mo∣dern
Hero's, as History will inform you. Great Undertakings are always accompanied with great Dangers; as (you see) the highest Hills border on the steepest Precipices. And what Man of a daring Spirit, and aspiring Thoughts, wou'd ever, for the uncer∣tain fear of some eminent Misfortunes, yield himself a willing Prey to Cala∣mities that must unavoidably fall upon him? 'Tis indeed the best Counsel can be given to private Men, to rest satisfi∣ed with a competent Fortune; but in affairs of State these trimming Coun∣sels are pernicious, especially where the execution of the grand design opens the Scene: For then 'tis so far out of our power, either to retrieve past Er∣rors, or politickly to regulate each step of future proceedings, that we must either gain the utmost point we aim at, or meet our Ruin in the prosecution of it. But let us not suppose so sad an Event of our Undertaking: 'Tis a ne∣cessary piece of Sagacity to have a prospect of distant Misfortunes; not that we shou'd torment our selves with
the daily expectation of them, but that prudent Considerations may pull out their sting, and make them more tolerable; 'tis fit, indeed, that we shou'd proceed cautiously, but then we must take care that an excess of Cau∣tion do not abate our Courage, or slacken our Resolution. Something after all, must be left to the disposal of Providence, and the direction of your good Genius, which having chosen you to be the Deliver of Genoua, and the Restorer of the Ancient Renown of Italy, will certainly find a way to ex∣tricate you out of all your Difficulties: Therefore why shou'd you refuse to ac∣cept the Monopoly of these Favours which Fortune liberally offers you? To what end shou'd you call in the French to share with you both your Fame and your Conquest? They have lost their own Reputation, as well as their Territories on this side of the Alpes; and their Spirits are no less sunk than their Credit, since King Fran∣cis's Imprisonment, so that they are hardly able to secure their own Fron∣tiers
from the Emperor's Forces, whose Triumphs have already reach'd to the bordering parts of Germany. Besides this, I beg you wou'd look back on their inveterate Hatred to the Italian Nation; and let their Usage of An∣drew Doria, be a warning to you; who after he had serv'd that Crown, with so much Honour and Success, met with such unworthy Treatment, by the influence of the Nobility (for they cou'd not allow even him so high a place in the King's Favour, till his Gold had purchas'd their Intercession in order to it,) that he was fore'd to accept the Emperor's Protection, and to serve under him. 'Tis true, the French King has many Accomplish∣ments truly Royal, but yet he suffers (as almost all great Princes do) the Inconveniences of being impos'd upon by his Ministers of State; of whose worth and integrity he has so excessive an esteem deeply impress'd on his Mind, that there is no Prince more li∣able to be ensnar'd by the Artifices of his Courtiers, nor any less sensible of
his Infirmity, and of the ill Conse∣quences of it. You must either there∣fore be a Slave to these Ambitious and Covetous Men, or else you may assu∣redly expect to lose (as Doria has al∣ready done,) both the King's Favour, and the uncertain Rewards of your past Services. But what Recompence can the French make you, suitable to the Hazards and Fatigues you will un∣dergo, for them? Perhaps they will entrust you with the Government of Genoua, encumbred with the vile de∣pendences I told you of: But this wou'd be to abase your self to the in∣ferior quality of a mercenary Officer in that Country, wherein Nature has already given you so large a share of Power, and seems to promise you the absolute Command. And if the Empe∣ror, or the City, should make a vigo∣rous opposition to your designs, with what Succours can the French assist you, whose Territories are at so vast a di∣stance, and who are themselves strange∣ly disorder'd by intestine Jealousies and Animosities? 'Tis undoubtedly certain
that you must rely on the Loyalty of your own Subjects and the sincerity of your Friends and Allies; and why shou'd you not make use of these Forces (so properly your own) to set on your own head a Crown so fit for you, and which you so justly deserve? Then, when your Power over Genoua is through∣ly settled, and you have in your pos∣session the Keys of the Maritime Gate into Italy, the greatest Kings in Chri∣stendom will be Ambitious to be your Friends and Confederates. Then the Envy of your Competitors being Con∣quer'd, we shall see the Family of Fi∣eschi rais'd to a higher Dignity than any Family of Genoua ever yet arriv'd to. Then your Enemies, who have de∣spis'd and ridicul'd your Youth, being crush'd under your Feet, you will have it in your power to satiate your Re∣venge in their Blood. Jannetin, even Jannetin Doria himself, your Treache∣rous Enemy, in spight of his Pride, and notwithstanding his Nobility, the station he so much boasts of, will fall a suppliant at your Feet, will Reve∣rence
you as his Lord, and Obey you as his Prince; by your Nods he will Regulate his Actions, your Will shall give Law to his Desires, and he shall acknowledg that he holds his Life only during your pleasure. Therefore let the French keep at home, and there let them hear the Echoes of your re∣sounding Triumphs. It is your part (Sir) Vigorously to oppose and surmount all Obstacles, which may make the Execution of your Project seem difficult: Perform it (I beseech you) with a Courage and Boldness worthy of your Birth. Let the Merit of your own Exploits pur∣chase that Renown which Heaven has decreed you: Let the World see that you owe your Advancement only to your self: And though the hopes I have entertain'd of you are vastly large, yet let your Actions exceed them: In short, do not sheath your Sword till you have entail'd this Princely Dignity on your Family, and thereby secur'd to your own Name an Immortal Reputation.
Fieschi, till now, never thought of acquiring the Principality of Genoua for himself, but for the French King; being content to reduce the excessive Power of the Doria's into narrower Limits, and to better his own Conditi∣on by calling in the French: But be∣ing desirous of Glory, and naturally inclin'd to attempt hazardous Under∣takings, it prov'd no difficult matter for Verriua to disswade him from his Affection to the French, by proposing to him these methods of setting up himself: Which having over-balanc'd the weight of Calcagne's Reasons, hur∣ried him on to the execution of a Pro∣ject both Villainous and Dangerous in the highest degree. However he was much shock'd at the apprehension of the difficulties which wou'd attend his design, without the assistance of the French Forces: And Raphael Sacco made it his endeavour to confirm him in these Perplexities, out of a partial Affection to France his Native Coun∣trey: he advis'd him to accept of the Conditions propos'd to him in the
King's Name by Cardinal Trivulce, and to Act by that Model, till a silent and leisurely progress, shou'd open a Path towards the compleating his grand de∣sign. But Verrina, who look'd upon all Moderation extreamly prejudicial in an affair which required an inflexible Re∣solution, appli'd himself to remove those difficultics which made Fieschi grow luke-warm in it. He repli'd with great vehemence, that to be ter∣rifi'd with Fantasms, was below the Spirit of a Nobleman: That the Gar∣rison in Genoua consisted not of above Two Hundred Men: That Doria's Gallies, though many in number, were not now in a posture of defence; the Season of the Year obliging them to be laid up in their Harbours; that Andrew and Jannetin were so far from suspecting any Violence, that both their Persons and their Houses were without a Guard: That the Count might quickly bring in a good number of the likeliest Men that the Neigh∣bouring Countrey and Villages wou'd
afford, and that these shou'd Kill the Two Doria's in their own House: That it wou'd be easie at the same time to send another party of Men by Sea to seize Doria's Gallies: That the re∣maining part of the design wou'd ef∣fect it self, the Populace bearing such an Inveterate hatred to the Nobility, that a slender invitation wou'd be suf∣ficient to make them espouse his Quar∣rel: And that he himself had already dispos'd their Minds for it, and wou'd take care they shou'd not fail to rise when their Assistance shou'd be requi∣site. These and several other things sub∣tilly aggravated by Verrina, who knew how great an influence he had over Fi∣eschi, dissipated all his Doubts, and fix∣ed his Resolution to proceed according as Verrina had perswaded him. Here∣upon he set his thoughts to devise a Method how to bring this affair to a happy conclusion. The first and un∣animous Resolution of all the Conspira∣tors was, That since the safety of the present Government depended so en∣tirely
on the lives of the Doria's, 'twas absolutely necessary in order to a change of the constitution, that they two should be kill'd: And to make sure of a com∣plete Revenge, it was likewise resolv'd that Adam Centurio Father-in-Law to Jannetin, and several of the Prime of the Nobility should be us'd in the same manner. As soon as Count Fieschi be∣gan to entertain thoughts of this Pro∣ject, and after he had bought the Gal∣lies, he retir'd into his own Territo∣ries; where he spent his time chiefly in training and reviewing the Militia of those Countries, pretending that he apprehended an Invasion from his Neighbour the Duke of Piacenza, whereas his real design was to make his Subjects capable of serving him in his undertaking against the Republick towards the latter end of the Autumn he return'd to Genoua, where he us'd great Artifice to obtain the Friendship of those Senators who were of the Popu∣lar Faction: He insinuated himself into their acquaintance with a wonderful Affability: To some of them he made
liberal Presents: Others he assisted both in paying their Debts, and in making a party for them to gain the prefer∣ments they desir'd: To every one of them he appli'd himself with all possi∣ble demonstrations of a sincere Friend∣ship. And being of a very quick wit, and naturally very easie and complai∣sant, 'tis hardly credible how soon he gain'd an entire Considence with them, and thereby secur'd himself of the as∣sistance of their dependents. When he sound that he had won their Affecti∣ons, and could relie upon their Secrecy, he began as opportunities were offer'd, to speak of the Tyrannical Govern∣ment of the Nobility, sometimes shew∣ing by his Speeches (which were of∣ten interrupted by dissembled sighs) how much he piti'd the sad Estare of the Populace; sometimes hinting that, if they would not be wanting to them∣selves, some effectual remedy might be found out, to repress the Arrogance of the Nobility; at other times he ad∣vis'd them with the sharpest Ironies to Passive Obedience under their Slave∣ry
leaving always in their minds a greater Propension to Discontents, by his perplex'd and dubious Expressions: But above all, if any accident hapen'd which cross'd the Inclinations of the Po∣pular Faction, he took occasion from thence to discourse largely to them of the Male-Administration of Af∣fairs, under the present Government. Nor did he disdain to seek with dili∣gence the good opinion of the meanest Plebeians, but was always ready to court them, with smiles and affable dis∣course, and he took care to please their eyes with the dazling splendor of his Cloaths. These Artificial Advantages were much set off by a graceful Person and a face adorn'd with all the charms of a healthy Youth: Youth, Beauty, graceful Acti∣on seldom fail. His Air and his Behaviour were so extremely genteel and easie, that he fail'd not to gain the Peoples affections as soon as he shew'd himself in Publick to them; Dryden's Misc. Poems. 1. part P. 59. which he often did for the ends, and according to the Methods 2 Sam. 14.25 unhappy
deluded Absolom formerly pursued. Besides this he delighted frequently to exercise his skill in Martial Disci∣pline and Horsemanship, for the excel∣lent performance of both which, his body was so proportionably fram'd, that in this posture especially he al∣ways appear'd a most lovely object to the Spectators. But because the reputation of Libera∣lity is the certainst Snare to entangle the Mobile, Count Fieschi (as is re∣ported) called to him one day il Console. the Warden of the Silk-weavers Company, of whom there is in Genoua a very great number. He askt him very civilly concerning the circumstances of his Associates, and understanding that they were reduc'd to extreme want (their Trade in Ge∣noua being much decay'd by the exces∣sive increase of it in other Places) he express'd a most tender compassion to∣wards the poor Sufferers, saying, he would not abandon them at a time of so great necessity; and therefore or∣der'd that those whose Poverty was
known to be most pressing, should be secretly sent to his House to be reliev'd. The next day a great number of these Wretches flockt together to visit their Benefactor; who to signalize his Li∣berality, caus'd a large quantity of Corn to be divided among them, telling them, that as the relieving the needy and the afflicted, had always been the Character of his Family, so he would never by any means degenerate from his Ancestors, therefore whenever they wanted sustenance for their Families, they might confidently expect it from him, and (tho' their modesty should restrain them from the importunity of Beggars) they might at any time find at his House all necessaries ready pro∣vided for them. Thus did he add a greater lustre to his Bounty, by seem∣ing desirous to conceal from the view of the World, both that and the mise∣ries of the persons reliev'd: Who went home no less chear'd by the assistance, than astonish'd at the liberality of Count Fieschi, who they thought de∣serv'd as a reward from Heaven, the
highest dignities and the happiest suc∣cess. However being apprehensive that the Nobility would suspect his designs, if he made it his whole business to gain the affections of the Mobile, his next study was how to poize the Balance so even, as to secure himself of a con∣fidence and friendship with both. To this end he perfected himself in the art of Dissimulation: He went oftner than usual to visit the Doria's, and not only made many professions of an af∣fectionate esteem for Andrew, (to whom he openly declar'd himself to be under many obligations) but also disguising the inveterate hatred he bore to Janne∣tin, he treated him with the intimacy of a Friend, asking his advice and praying his assistance in the manage∣ment of his concerns. And because there had formerly been some quarrels between them, which had imbitter'd their Spirits towards one another, he begg'd of Jannetin, with the promises of a sincere kindness for the future, that he would absolutely forget what was past.
By the secret League between the Duke of Piacenza and Count Fieschi, the Duke agreed to send him two thou∣sand Men, which, with two thousand more rais'd in the Count's Territories, were thought sufficient to quell the risings of the Citizens if any should oppose him; and to this end, he sent one of his Gallies to the coasts of Genoua, under the pretence of fitting and manning it for a Maritime Expedition against the Algierines and other Infidels in their own Seas. Nor was Verrina wanting to forward these designs; for he made it his business to gain over to Fieschi as great a party as he could; and being expert in the Artifices of Popularity, he in a little time engag'd some hundreds of the Populace under a promise, to stand by him in a great undertaking that was then carrying on for their advantage. By these preparatory Methods they thought they had laid a sufficient Foun∣dation for their Project, and therefore held another consult to determine in what manner they should attempt the
final Execution of it. Their first Opi∣nion was that there should be notice given of the Solemnity of una Messa nova. an extraordinary Mass to be celebrated in St. Andrew's Church, unto which the two Doria's, and those of the Nobility, whose lives they aim'd at, should be invited. But this reso∣lution appear'd no less uncertain as to the success of it than Inhumane and Sacrilegious; for they thought it was very probable Andrew Doria would ex∣cuse his absence on the account of his Age, and send in his stead Philippea or some other near Relation with his accustom'd offering. And it shockt them not a little to consider how hor∣rid a thing it would be, to begin their enterprise with so unparallell'd a Pro∣phanation of the Church, and of the highest Mysteries of Religion. This proposal therefore was absolutely reject∣ed; altho' Verrina, as he was promp∣ted by the violence of his Temper, as∣sur'd them he would at that very in∣stant dispatch Andrew, under the plau∣sible disguise of a friendly visit. But as
Men when once they have broke through the Restraints of Vertue, fall headlong into all manner of Wicked∣ness, so these slender remains of a mo∣dest Scrupulosity, which checkt them in their former resolution, a little after prov'd too weak to hinder them from projecting a more destable piece of Villany. For it hapning about this time, that the Marriage was to be celebrated be∣tween Julius Cibo Marquiss of Massa, re∣lated to Fieschi, and one of Jannetin Doria's Sister; it was resolv'd that Fi∣eschi should invite the Bride and several Ladies to Supper, and with them not only the two Doria's, but also those of the Nobility whom they thought the most dangerous Enemies to their Pro∣ject, all of whom were to be Murther∣ed barbarously, by hir'd Ruffians, con∣ceal'd in the House for that purpose, Inter sacra men∣sae. Thuanus in Anno 1547. against the sacred Laws of Hospitality and Converse. That immediately af∣ter the commission of this unparallell'd Treachery, Fieschi attended with his
Guards should ride about the Streets of Genoua, calling upon the Mob to assist him in the recovery of their Liberty: That during these Tumults, some of the Count's Party should possess them∣selves of the Town-Hall, where Verri∣na in a plausible Harangue should dis∣cover to the Populace, Fieschi's inten∣tion to change the state of Genoua into an absolute Monarchy, and having re∣presented to them how necessary it was to reform the Government, which had been so much corrupted by the in∣solence and selfishness of the Nobility, should Crown the Count Fieschi Duke of Genoua, and force the Plebians, whom they before hand brib'd to it, to swear Allegiance to him; and if any Man either by his Words or Actions should testifie his dislike, he should be present∣ly kill'd. To compleat this design the more easily, it was order'd that the ablest Soldiers the Count had, shou'd in the least suspected manner they cou'd, lodge themselves in Genoua, and the Duke of Piacenza was again sollicited
to hasten the promised Succours. These Transactions (especially the raising of Soldiers) cou'd not be manag'd so se∣cretly, but Don Ferrand Gonzaga, whom the Emperour had appointed Gover∣nour of the Dutchy of Milan, in the room of the Marquess del Vasto, had very shrewd suspicions of what was intended: For watching carefully, for the security of his own Government, over every Motion of his Neighbours, and receiving constant intelligence concerning the Actions of those Prin∣ces whom he mistrusted, by able and faithful Persons employ'd by him in that Office, he quickly came to be in∣form'd, that there were Two Thou∣sand Men raising in the Dutchy of Pi∣acenza with great hast for the Service of Count Fieschi. And guessing by the silent Methods of their Proceedure, that there was a Private Treaty be∣tween Fieschi and that Duke, he pre∣sently dispatches a Courier to Genoua with Advice to Doria, and to Don Go∣mez Suarez the Emperour's Resident there, that they shou'd be watchful,
and stand on their Guard, for that the young Count Fieschi was underhand contriving some great design. Andrew Doria was nevertheless so far deceiv'd by the flattering shews of Affection, and by the serenity of Countenance which he constantly observ'd in Fies∣chi, and finding all things in the City in the same quiet posture they were be∣fore, that he again refus'd to give Credit to these likely Symptoms of the Conspiracy. It hapned, that while Doria and the Resident were discour∣sing of this Affair, Fieschi unexpect∣edly came into the Room, with so pleasing and chearful a Look, and while he staid there discours'd with them so solidly concerning several mat∣ters, that Doria being charm'd with his Conversation, whisper'd the Resi∣dent, and ask'd him, How he cou'd suppose, that a Mind so well Accom∣plish'd, and a Person of so Angelical a Beauty wou'd attempt so cruel a piece of Villany? Nor did he change his Opinion when Gonzaga having from the Court of France receiv'd some Con∣firmation
of his former suspicions, sent another Message to him, seriously ad∣vising him to search to the bottom of the design; informing him likewise, that the Pope's Gallies were ready at Civita Vecchia, and the French Gallies in the Port of Marseilles, to support and assist, if occasion were, the For∣tune of Fieschi. And certainly, did not History men∣tion several very eminent Persons, who on light grounds were incredulous to what they heard concerning Designs against themselves, Andrew Doria's ex∣cessive good Nature wou'd deserve a sharp Censure: For that when he had such assurances given him, that his own Life, and, through that, the Con∣stitution of the Republick was aim'd at, he gave greater Credit to Fieschi's dissembled Looks and Actions, than to the pregnant Evidences of so foul a Conspiracy; as if it were not usual for those who have such designs in hand, to dissemble, for a while, their intended Mischief under a smooth Countenance; or as if any Care and
Vigilance were too much to preserve one's own Life in Safety, and one's Countrey from Ruin. But since Anci∣ent Histories afford us several Examples of very Wise Men, who have suffer'd themselves to be deluded by a fatal In∣credulity in matters of the greatest im∣portance, we may reasonably affirm, that these Events preordain'd, or ine∣vitably permitted, by an over-ruling Providence, cou'd not be compleated, but by these Momentary Mistakes of the wisest Politicians, (as an Epidemi∣cal Distemper may somtimes seize on the soundest Body) that we may not attribute too much to Worldly Wis∣dom, when we find it so defective in matters of the greatest moment. But certainly Paul Pansa was much more overseen, who viewing Fieschi's Actions with a careful and friendly Eye, from the time that he bought the Gallies, cou'd not but suspect there was some extraordinary design in hand, and yet did not then give that Check to it which his Station and Dignity allow∣ed. The Transactions which he every
Day saw and heard were just occasion for the increase of these suspicions. For Fieschi, whose usual custom it had been to impart to Pansa his most secret af∣fairs and designs, now became very close and reserv'd to him, and very fre∣quent in his Consultations with his o∣ther ill chosen Confidents, whose Cha∣racters I have before represented. For although, while he entertain'd his Friends, or appear'd on Horse back in the streets of Genoua, he wonderfully disguis'd his thoughts from the publick view, by a dissembled chearfulness in his countenance and behaviour, yet when he return'd home the Scene was quite chang'd, and the perplexing agi∣tations of his Soul plainly discover'd themselves by a profound Melancholy, and a wild distracted Look. His aim in concealing his designs from Pansa's knowledge, was only because he knew for certain, a Man so well principl'd in Piety and Morality, wou'd use his utmost endeavour to deterr him from so wicked an Enterprize: Or at least he suspected that Pansa, who had been
bred up at a distance from the warlike sound of Drums and Trumpets, under the Peaceful Influence of the Muses, (who always chuse a quiet retreat from Noise and Tumult) wou'd examine e∣very Circumstance of the Project with an excessive Caution, and disswade him from proceeding in it beyond the limits of security; which in under∣takings of this Nature no Man ought to flatter himself with, because 'tis ut∣terly impossible. One Day, it so happen'd that Count Fieschi being after his return home, more than ordinarily disturb'd with Melancholy Thoughts, and Pansa per∣ceiving by the apparent uneasiness in his Looks and Behaviour, that his Mind was strangely distemper'd, he re∣solv'd immediately to discourse with him concerning it, least if he shou'd delay any longer, the Disease might grow incurable, before any Remedy were administred. Finding him there∣fore retired into a private Apartment, he accosted him in this manner.
As it is very unbesitting a well-bred Person to pry into the secrets of others, so it is on the other hand very lauda∣ble to conceal what is so imparted; and as I have not given you my pro∣mise of Secrecy, because I hope all my Actions have sufficiently demonstrated my Fidelity, so I have hitherto forborn enquiring into your Concerns, least I shou'd be guilty of any thing that might incur your displeasure. Never∣theless your unaccustom'd reservedness plainly declares to me, that the Project you are now designing, is of the high∣est moment, since you take such pains to hide it from your Friends. Your Looks, so full of disturbance and in∣quietude, give me occasion to share with you in your sollicitous Apprehensi∣ons; and though I know not the rea∣son, yet I am full of fears for your safety. This proceeds from no other cause, (Sir) but the excess of my Love to your Person, and my sincere and ardent Wishes (as is my duty) for your Prosperity. For how can I perswade my self that what you aim
at is really desirable, since the thoughts of it do so violently shock the usual Se∣renity of your Mind? Certainly the conclusion of that affair, which, though yet in Embryo, gives you these disturbances, cannot be so tran∣quil as a wise Man wou'd wish: And this mighty Inquietude and Commoti∣on of your Soul, is But an unhappy Omen of the unsuccessful Event of your Enterprize. I will not pretend to dive into the Secret which you have thought fit to conceal from me: (though what Service am I able to do you, if you at all suspect my Truth and Faithfulness?) but (pray Sir con∣sider) whither can their perswasions lead you, whose Conversation always leaves you oppress'd with a Load of Cares and Discontents? And (if you will allow me to probe your Wound, that it may the more easily be cur'd,) I do more than doubt, that these your secret Conferences with crafty and ill designing Persons, will by degrees alie∣nate your Mind from the Rules of Ver∣tue and True Honour. Their Piety is
not so sincere, nor their Moral Princi∣ples so well founded, that I can expect they shou'd give you any advice con∣sistent with your Honour or Religion. Perhaps they impose on the Candour of your Nature, and the small experi∣ence of your Years, thinking, that be∣cause your Temper is inclinable to the pursuit of Glorious Actions, you will the more easily join with them in any rash Project, which they shall disguise under those colours. Shut not your Eyes (I beg you Sir) against these dangers, but rather exert your utmost and most diligent Attention: For one Mad Man may push you into a preci∣pice, from whence a Thousand Wise Men with all their Arts cannot retrieve you. 'Tis an easie matter to set your own, or your Neighbour's House on Fire, but how much Toil and Labour and Sweat will it cost to stop and ex∣tinguish it? Therefore (pray Sir) take good heed that these Fellows do not make you their Property to bring about their own Ends; and by their
deceiving you into an irreparable loss, do not from thence build up their own Fortunes. There are but few Coun∣sellors (too few alas!) so honest, as without the prospect of Self-Interest, to promote and aim at what is Just and Honourable; therefore it is abso∣lutely necessary for you to try them by this Touch-stone. For my part I cannot perswade my self, that those, whose Lives are a continued Scene of Flagitious Crimes, will ever instill or advance the progress of Vertue in any other Person. For although a Man's Discourse and his Actions may be sepa∣rately consider'd, revertheless, Expe∣rience informs us, that a good Exam∣ple preaches Reformation more effe∣ctually than the most Eloquent Dis∣courses; for these grow contemptible when the daily practice of him that gives the Advice contradicts his Ex∣hortations. Therefore (Sir) what unreasonable things do your importu∣nate Confidents demand of you? Into what new and dangerous designs doe they endeavour to wheedle you? Your
Circumstances cannot be better'd by any publick Confusions, though their's may. Fortune, which has so long smil'd on your Family, may very pro∣bably alter her Countenance to an An∣gry Frown, shou'd you be so impru∣dent as to irritate her; and (I almost dare assure you) every alteration that may happen, will be much less desira∣ble than your present Condition. En∣vy has a long time been endeavouring to canker your Happiness, and when your Mind and your Affairs are once in a disorder, that unlucky Fury will quickly force her entrance, by the means of several Persons, now much your inferiours both in Honour and E∣state, who make it their business to find some reasonable grounds, on which, to found their Calumnies a∣gainst you. 'Tis true, the chief delights of Youth flow from the Prospect their large Hopes afford them: But 'tis as true, no state is more dangerous than a secure Prosperity. Therefore, pray Sir, take care that (according to the
Fable of our Ancient Mythologist) you lose not the real Substance which you now possess, by catching at a di∣stant and uncertain, though perhaps, a very tempting Shadow. They (a∣las!) who fill your Head with these designs, have nothing of their own to lose: Tumults, Seditions, and a pub∣lick Anarchy, assord such Wretches, Shelter, Maintenance, and, too often, an increase of Honour and Riches; for those whose Fortunes are low built, cannot fear, as the great ones do, any shock in their easie descent to Ruin and Beggary. But (Sir) for you it is absolutely necessary to order your steps with Caution; for Fame expects it from you, that your Actions, if they do not exceed (as I hope they will) yet at least shall not come behind, the performances of your Ancestors. Fieschi heard this discourse with great uneasiness and impatience; for his resolutions were unalterably fix'd on the design from which Pansa tri'd to disswade him; nevertheless with some marks of Confusion in his Looks
and Gesture, he returned him this An∣swer in few words, That he propos'd no Aims to himself but those that were Ge∣nerous and Worthy of his Birth, which in due time he wou'd be sure to acquaint him withal. While the Conspirators were in great expectations of the Day ap∣pointed for the Feast, (which was to be the Fourth of January,) there hap∣pen'd an Accident which forc'd them to hasten the execution of their Pro∣ject, though to their unspeakble re∣gret, because it deprived them of the opportunity of cutting off a great part of the Nobility, whom otherwise they might have surpriz'd all together, they being then to assemble for the chusing a new Duke of that Republick. For Andrew Doria being seiz'd with a vi∣olent Fit of the Gout, which with its excessive Torments threw him into a dangerous Fever, he cou'd not meet according to his promise; and Janne∣tin was oblig'd by some urgent busi∣ness to leave Genoua. So that Fieschi, and his Confidents, considering that
Conspiracies have often been ruin'd, but hardly ever forwarded by unneces∣sary delays, resolv'd that on the Se∣cond of January, very early in the Morning, or as soon as they cou'd pos∣sibly get ready the preceding Night, they wou'd put their great design in execution. Hereupon Fieschi began to give out, that he wou'd send out one of his Gallies to molest the Corsaires, for the Pope allowing him but just e∣nough to maintain Three, he was desi∣rous to supply his Fourth Galley with all Necessaries, by the Prizes she shou'd take from the Infidels. By this speci∣ous and well disguis'd Artifice he brought in several of the Men sent him from Piacenza, and some of hisown Vas∣sals, pretending he wou'd chuse out the likeliest of them for his Expedition: And least the number of those that came from Piacenza shou'd seem to exceed what was requisite for the Manning a Galley, and thereby give some suspici∣on of a farther design in it, he caused some of them to be chain'd together, and so led like Men design'd for the
Oar: Others he caus'd to be disarm∣ed, and to come into the City by se∣veral of the Gates, and he afterwards took care to furnish them with Arms. Then for the more easie deceiving of Jannetin, he first imparted this his Pro∣ject to him as a Token of his Friend∣ship, requesting him earnestly to inter∣ceed with Andrew Doria, that there might be no Obstacle put to his Enter∣prize; for, as he pretended, he was under some apprehensions, least in pur∣suance of the Truce between Solyman the Grand Seignior, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, he might be stop'd in his intentions of Privateering. On the First of January, (the Day preceding that Night which had like to have been Fatal to Genoua) Count Fi∣eschi sent for certain Soldiers of the City Guards to his Palace, some of whom were his own Subjects, others had by his means obtain'd their Freedoms of the City of Genoua; having done this, he went to Andrew Doria's House, where he staid till it grew late, expres∣sing all the Marks of a Cordial Love
and True Respect for him and his Fa∣mily: And it so happening, that John Adorea, and Pagano, Two Young Children of Jannetin's, as they were playing about the House met Fieschi, he took them in his Arms and kiss'd them several times in the presence of their Father. Just as he was going, he again desir'd Jannetin, to order his Soldiers not to stop his Galley, which was that Night to begin its Voyage to∣wards the Aegran Sea, and earnestly in∣treated him not to be disturb'd if he shou'd hear the discharging of Guns, or any other Noise; for those Enter∣prizes (as he very well knew) cou'd not be manag'd without some sort of Tumult. When Day was quite shut in, Count Fieschi caus'd all those Arm∣ed Men, whose assistance he thought requisite, to come into his Palace: Those, of whose Courage and Fidelity he had, had the greatest experience, he posted at all the Gates and Avenues, giving 'em strict Orders to let all en∣ter that wou'd, but to suffer none to go out again.
Count Fieschi's Palace was situated in that higher part of Genoua, which is call'd Carignan, a place, as it were, divided from the rest of the City. For as two sides of it are bounded by the Walls of Genoua, so from the East it views the delightful Villa's of Albaro, and the pleasant Valley of Bisagne, and its front is towards the Sea. Thus by its lofty situation it is in a manner separated from, and proudly seems to domineer over the City that lies at its Feet. On this Ascent, and in an Island, stood Fieschi's Palace: So that 'twas as conveniently plac'd, as cou'd be, for carrying on such a design; for none of the adjacent Houses cou'd be at all Alarm'd by the Tumultuous Noise of Military preparations. When they came to set the Watch in the Castle of Genona, Gigante Corso the Governour (whose Integrity was equal to his Valour) found several of his Soldiers missing: And having en∣quir'd diligently at their several Quar∣ters, he receiv'd information, that Count Fieschi had entic'd them to fol∣low
him to Carignan. The Novelty of the thing made him suspect some dan∣gerous design; so that he immediate∣ly imparted, what he had observ'd, to Doria, and to the Senators that kept their Residence in the Ducal Palace. Now began to appear the Fatal Ef∣fects of Fieschi's cautious Hypocrisie; for Jannetin Doria, being prepossess'd with the Count's pretended design of fitting out a Galley, dissipated these Suspicions, by declaring to them (what he thought was real) that Fi∣eschi had recall'd these Soldiers, his Subjects and Dependants, to serve him in Privateering towards the Levant. Thus short sighted are the Appre∣hensions of us Mortals, who too often think our selves secure, when our Ene∣my hath not only design'd, but is just upon the point, of compleating our Ruin. Count Fieschi, after he had staid a while in his own Palace to give neces∣sary Orders, he went out again to visit some of the Merry LeVeglie. Meetings, which in the depth of Win∣ter
the Nobility use to keep by turns in their several Houses. About Four Hours after he had began his Rounds, he came to Thomas Assereto's House, where he found got together, by the contrivance of Verrina, Three and Twenty Young Gentlemen who fa∣vour'd the Popular Faction. He staid there with them a while, entertaining them with great Civility, and then invited them to Sup with him at Ca∣rignan; towards which he urg'd this as a great inducement, that the Night was calm, and the Moon shone clear. As soon as they came to Carignan, he carri'd them into some of the farthest Apartments, and order'd Pansa to keep his Wife Lemora at the other end of the House, till he came to her, which should be in a little time. This Lady was of the illustrious Family of Cibo, Sister to Julius, Marquiss of Massa, and to Aubrey, who after he had liv'd to see a Century of Years compleated, and had enjoy'd a Prosperous, though decrepit, Old Age, Died in the Year 1623, being Honour'd and Lamented by all Italy.
While these things were transacting in Fieschi's Palace, Verrina very cun∣ningly went into the City as a Scout to spy, whether there was any motion or disturbance in the Ducal, or at Do∣ria's Palace, or in any other part of Genoua. In the mean time Fieschi's Guests look'd on one another, being mightily Amaz'd to see the House more than u∣sually full of Arms and Arm'd Men: But at last the Count himself, whose Countenance was quite chang'd, (whe∣ther by the Apprehensions of the Par∣ricide he was just going to commit, or by the excess of his Rage and Malice against Jannetin, which having been hitherto stifled within his Breast, began now plainly to shew it self in his Looks and Words, leaning upon the Table, and having struck it with great Vehemence, spoke to them in this manner. Gentlemen, Matters are now come to that pass, that no one who has a drop of noble Blood in his Veins, can any longer
tamely bear these Oppressions. My patience and constancy have long since been shockt, by the dreadful prospect of my Country's Ruine, and my Coun∣trymen's falling under the Tyranny design'd for them by an ungrateful Vil∣lain. Were it possible that these dan∣gerous Distempers, which have alrea∣dy attackt the vitals of the Republick, could receive any remedy by our de∣lays, I for my part would be very willing to consent to any Truce which might secure our common Safety: But since our affairs are driven to the last Extremity, there lies a necessity upon us to exert our utmost force for the preservation of our Country from Ruin. Dangers, such as ours are to be con∣quer'd by a bold Resistance, for nothing increases the weight of them more than a lazy expectation of Events. Janne∣tin Doria hath long since been surfeited with a series of prosperous successes at∣tending him: Now he is become a Vassal to Ambition, that tormenting extravagancy of the Mind, and is got so near to the conclusion of his wicked
designs, that neither fear nor mo∣desty restrain him from threatn∣ing (more by Actions than by words) Genoua with Servitude, and me with Death. Was it not enough for this Villain to, behold the Genouese Po∣pulace, who but a little while agoe possest the Sovereignty of all Ligu∣ria, now depriv'd of that power and dignity, and subjected to the inso∣lent scorn of the Nobility; but must he aim at enslaving us to an absolute Monarchy, wherewith he is design∣ing to invest himself? To this pur∣pose he grows uneasie at his pre∣sent condition, and in his own Country (which yet enjoys the hap∣piness of being a free State) he puts on the barbarity of a Foreign Inva∣der; his Pride and Stubbornness are so great, that they cannot be mollisied by our humble and modest compliance, nor can we by any Me∣thods, how cautious soever, escape the fatal consequences of being sus∣pected and hated by him. You see how strongly he has environed our
Maritime Coasts, with his twenty Gallies; you see how proudly he passes through the City, attended by such of the Nobility, who having by the means of Andrew Doria usur∣ped that Dignity which was lately yours, now pay Jannetin for it the price of a servile obsequiousness; but that which most sensibly affects me is the invincible reasons I have to think, that he designs to oppress the publick Liberty by the assistance of the Emperour his too powerful Patron. And because I alone, out of a sense of the duty I owe to my Country, and of the particular obligations I have to your Party, would never consent (as several others of the Nobility have done) to the unjust depredations that have been made on the rights of the People, Jannetin is employing all his Engines for my destruction. Why therefore, Gentlemen, do we yet continue care∣less and cowardly Spectators of our approaching Calamities? For what enterprise do we reserve our Strength
and Courage, if we now unhappily abandon our own and our Countries safety, when there is need of our ut∣most force to preseve it from De∣solation? 'Tis now the time for us to punish, if we can, these Villain∣ous Conspiracies, and not to lament and deplore them: Tears, Sighs, and querulous Language, are Weapons proper only for Women, but who∣soever deserves the nobler Character of a Man, ought to revenge his in∣juries in such vigorous Methods as are worthy that Sex, which Nature has honour'd with so large Preroga∣tives. We have all of us too long patiently endur'd the insolence of those, who impute this our good Nature, to a servile and base Tem∣per. And the impunity with which their former Crimes have escap'd, do only encourage these oppressors to increase the grievances which we have till now disguis'd under a forc'd silence and a dissembled contented∣ness. And what further are we yet to expect from these Villaine? Perhaps
when you are wholly depriv'd of the small share you now have in the Ad∣ministration of affairs, their cruel mercy may induce them to spare some of your lives; but how much wish'd for will Death be by those who will daily be entertain'd with the dismal prospect of the ruin of Estates, the destruction of Fami∣lies, Murthers treacherously perpe∣trated under the pretence of Law and Justice, Matrons and Virgins ravish'd, and many more Villainies committed, by Jannetin Doria's Sol∣diers, and by his approbation? These and many more Calamities are the unavoidable consequences of a Ty∣ranny, which owes its Birth to the ruin of a flourishing State, and can∣not be establish'd but by the Death of all brave and worthy Patriots. Therefore (my Friends; are our Souls so degenerated? Is our Blood so spiritless and chill? Are our Wea∣pons so very dull and blunted, that we cannot exert a vigorous Revenge, and put an end to the infamous life
of him, who glories in that he hath reduc'd us to this unfortunate and despicable condition? Shall we not pierce every fibre of that Heart that hath harbour'd projects so villainous and cruel? Shall we suffer one, who at the best, is but our equal, impe∣riously to trample upon us, and to have the same absolute power of Life and Death over us, as if we had been born his Slaves? For my own part I declare, I had much rather purchase my liberty with the utmost toil and hazard, than to slide with ease and sloth into the state of Servitude; and as I may (without arrogance) believe that our common Enemies, design my death as well as the sub∣version of the Republick, so do I with the most chearful willingness Sacrifice my life for the preservation of our National Liberty, which if I should not much preferr before the safety of my own Person, I were unwor∣thy to live a moment longer. But however, I would fain see in you, those vigorous Emotions of mind,
which not only your Quality and Educattion, but even those great dan∣gers which at this time threaten your ruin, require from you. And whe∣ther you would have me act the part of your Leader, or of a com∣mon Soldier in so just a cause, I am ready according to your Orders, ei∣ther to Command, or to obey. I here consign my self to you with an assurance, that as my Person shall be always in your Power, so my Soul shall be undaunted, and unshaken under whatsoever event may attend our undertaking. But, Gentlemen, whether your honour or your safety is dear to you, you must be of good Courage, and take up Arms with me: For this resolution is absolutely necessary to you all, to those of you who are inspir'd with a forward valour 'tis exceeding glorious, and to those with whom a cautious abhorrence of War is more prevalent, self-preservation makes it indispensably requisite. Nor do I invite you to join with me in a
rash, and inconsiderate enterprize, for 'tis many Months since I not on∣ly projected all the methods to ef∣fect it, but made it my business to provide a sufficient number of Soldi∣ers; who being now conveniently posted about the City, seem to give us full assurance of an easie and cer∣tain victory, almost without the ha∣zard of a Battel. So that when you call to mind the contemptuous beha∣viour of our governing Nobility, and the excessive pride of Jannetin Doria, I am sure these Reflections must a∣waken in you a desire of an honour∣able revenge: And this will inspire you with so vigorous a courage in the use of your Weapons, that our Ene∣mies will, to their loss and shame, admire the courage of us whom they have so much despis'd, and on the other side we shall know by experi∣ence, whether their fortitude in War is any ways equal to their Arrogance and Luxury in times of Peace. Thus far, my Friends, I have laid before you my thoughts of the present state
of affairs: 'Tis time now to put an end to my discourse, that we may proceed in our successful enterprize. Let us march into the City, where multitudes are ready to joyn with us in our honourable undertaking. The Gates and Avenues are in the power of such Soldiers as I have brought over to my Interests; and when I give the signal, the Genouse Gallies will fall into the possession of some stout Seamen, who will with their lives defend their Prize, and annoy the Enemy. In the City fifteen hundred Trades∣men and Artificers wait ready arm'd for our coming: By this time two thousand of the Infantry of Piacenza, and as many of my own Subjects are got into the Suburbs, and are calling upon the Populace to assist them in restoring the Liberty, resettling the ancient Government of Genoua, and extirpating the insolent Tyranny and Usurpation of Jannetin Doria, and his confederate Nobility.
Therefore rouse up your Courage, and march with me; that this Night (which in Brightness Rivals the clear∣est Day) may put an end to the Me∣mory of our past Servitude, by re∣storing to the despis'd Populace their Just Dignities and Rightful Privi∣leges. And if, after what I have said, there is any one of you, who shall be so Obstinate and Self-conceited, as to make any Objection or Opposition to an Exploit so Noble and Generous, as is the preserving our Country from imminent Servitude, let him look up∣on this Dreadful Scene of Warlike Preparations, and assure himself, that where there are so many Swords, his Breast shall not escape unpierc'd. I must freely and plainly declare to you, that 'tis absolutely necessary for us all to Fight, or to Die: And his Blood who shall refuse to Succour his Country in this time of Danger, shall be shed in this very place to wash out the stain of his Ingratitude and Perfi∣diousness: And this Hand of mine
shall Slay the first Victim, which Consecrates this Night to the Love of our Country, if any one dares be so untimely scrupulous as to make any Resistance. This Threatning Speech, together with such a number of Arm'd Men appearing in their view ready to ex∣ecute these Menaces, so much Asto∣nish'd the Imprison'd Guests, that for some time they remain'd silent: But at last being more affected with the Apprehensions of their present Dan∣ger, (being on all sides hem'd in by Count Fieschi's Soldiers) then with the Horrour of the Impious Action they were going about, express'd their readiness to Obey the Count's Orders, and to sollow him as their Leader. Two only of the whole Company dissembling a Cowardise, (Honourable on such an occasion) Petition'd Fieschi not to engage them in an Affair so far distant from their Profession; least (being surpriz'd with excessive Fear in the heat of the Fight) they shou'd rather be a hin∣drance
than a help to his Enterprize. And so exquisitely did they feign this unusual Torrour, that the Count, af∣ter he had a while discours'd with them, supposing as they pretended, their Company might be prejudicial to him, was well satisfi'd that they shou'd continue in an Apartment of his Palace confin'd under a strong Guard. These were John Baptist Cat∣taneo Bava, and John Baptist Justini∣ano, the Son of Ʋrban; who volun∣tarily Acting the Cowards at such a seasonable Juncture, to keep them∣selves from being the Infamous parta∣kers in this Publick Parricide, deserve for it much greater Praise, than Junius Brutus for counterfeiting the Madman: For by that dissimulation he only secur'd himself from the Jea∣lousie of the Proud Tyrant Tarquin, but these Worthies by their pretend∣ed Timorousness, did what in them lay, for the common safety of the Republick. Fieschi's Servants had by this time furnish'd a Table with several Dishes
of Meat, as a Collation rather than a Supper; of which hasty Banquet while some few of his Guests without sitting down just tasted, the Count himself went into his Wife's Apart∣ment, where he found her discoursing with Pansa, and in a few words im∣parted to her the design he was go∣ing about. This Lady being strange∣ly surpriz'd at the horridness of the Fact, and the consideration of the Dangers her Husband expos'd himself to in the prosecution of it, fell at his Feet in the manner of a Suppliant, and accompanying her Words with Sighs and Tears, and all the Marks of a real and intense Sorrow, spake to him to this effect. I beg you (my Dearest Lord) by the sincere and ardent Love I bear you, and by whatever in the World you value at the highest Rate, take care of your Life, and do not by so base an Act Blemish the Honour of your Family. By these Tears I shed, and by these Knees of yours which I now embrace, do not, I intreat you,
so far forget the Duty you owe to God, to your Countrey, to me, and to your self: Why will my Fieschi precipitate himself and me into Ca∣lamities which he may so easily a∣void? How shall I be able to under∣go the weight, of expecting every Minute, (with the Ominous Presa∣ges of a Trembling Heart) the pier∣cing News of your Death; which will be but the beginning of my Dis∣consolate and Disgraceful Widow∣hood; for how can I expect better Usage (though the Calamities of that State seldom fail to move Com∣passion) than to be pointed at, and taken notice of, as the Partner of your Bed, and the Concealer, if not Sharer, of your Treason. Can you be so Cruel as to abandon me for a Prey to the Lust of the Soldiers, and the Fury of the Populace, who (I fear) will e're it be long come to pillage and destroy this House, as part of the Just Punishment due for your Rebellion; and in that Lamen∣table Outrage how can I expect to be
free from their Violence and Rude∣ness? Therefore, my Dear Lord, alter yet your Resolutions, and pro∣ceed no further in this. She wou'd have proceeded, but her Grief interrupted her, and Fies∣chi perceiving that Panla was prepa∣red to second the Countesses Request with Arguments to disswade him from so Flagitious an Enterprize, put an end to their intended Debate by this Answer. Let not my Leonora presage so un∣happy a conclusion to my Enterprize, but rather entertain her Mind, du∣ring my absence, with the pleasing hopes of a Fortunate Event. My Destiny has engag'd me in this De∣sign, and my Affairs are now in that posture, that whether I will or no, I must proceed; therefore (my Dear∣est) compose your Mind to that tem∣per, as not to be surpriz'd with ex∣cessive Joy at my good Success, nor with too intense a Grief, if the con∣trary should happen. Within a sew Hours you will hear either of my
Death or Victory. And so Fare∣well. About this time Verrina return'd to the Palace, and assur'd Count Fi∣eschi, that there was no reason for him to apprehend any manner of op∣position in any part of the City: that his Galley well Mann'd and Arm'd stood ready for a Signal to block up the entrance of the Darsen∣ne, and shut up (as it were) Doria's Vessels which were then in that Har∣bour. Fieschi upon this distributes Arms to those whom he had got to∣gether, and about Ten at Night be∣gan his Expedition, having Marshal'd his Men in this order. His Van-Guard consisted of One Hundred and Fifty Chosen Men, whose Courage and Skill in these Affairs he had frequent Experience of. Next March'd the Count himself (attended by the No∣bles of his Party,) and, as it became a careful General, he made it his bu∣siness to see that his Soldiers observ'd the necessary Discipline of keeping in their Ranks and Files. When they
were come near to the Suburbs, Fi∣eschi dispatch'd his Natural Brother Cornelius to seize the Gate del Arco; which he took without great difficul∣ty, the Garrison-Soldiers who were but few, not expecting to find them∣selves in a time of Peace to be so fiercely Attack'd from without, and at the same time betray'd from with∣in their Walls by the Treachery of Fieschi's Adherents. The Count be∣ing flushed with this good Success, sends away presently his Two Bro∣thers Jerome and Ottobuoni, together with Vincentio Calcagno, to possess themselves of the Gate of St. Tho∣mas. Just at this time the Galley discharg'd their Cannon, which was the Signal agreed on to give them no∣tice of its arrival to the place ap∣pointed. As soon as Fieschi heard this, he and the Soldiers that attend∣ed him hasten'd their March to the Bridge of Cattani, having in their way thither pass'd through St. Andrew's Arch to St. Donate's, and from thence all along the Street call'd Pi∣azza
de i Salvaghi. When they came to the Bridge of Cattani, Verrina be∣ing got on board the Galley, Thomas Assereto endeavour'd to make sure of the entrance into the Darsenne; who at first had a free admittance granted him by those who guarded this Port, because when he told them his Name they knew him to be a Servant of Jannetin's; but as soon as they saw how many Soldiers follow'd him, they suspected his design, and by main force thrust him out again, and put themselves vigorously on the de∣fensive. So that this Stratagem fail∣ing, and it being very necessary that some Body shou'd get in at that pas∣sage, and open the Gate for Fieschi's entrance, it was resolv'd that Scipio Borgognoni, one of the Count's Sub∣jects, fam'd for his Courage and Con∣duct, shou'd Arm and Man some of the smallest Vessels, with which, thus provided against all Exigences, he shou'd by Sea force his passage into the Darsenne, and open a way for the Conspirators Irruption at the
place, where the Imposts upon Wines are assessed and paid. And thus was the design successfully executed: For although there were some Contrasts before the Soldiers in Garrison wou'd quit their Post; yet the Assailants be∣ing more in number, and of a more daring Courage, than the Besieged, they quickly forc'd them to abandon their Fort. By this time Fieschi arriv'd by Land to the Darsenne, and waited e∣very Moment for the Signal which was to give notice that his Galley was got safely thither: But it hap∣pen'd that she came some time later than had been agreed on; for, the Water being shallow, she ran aground, and it cost them full half an Hour to Lanch her out again into the Deep. These tumultuous motions by this time had rais'd a Hurly Burly in the Darsenne; but before the Genoueses could be throughly alarm'd with it, Count Fieschi hearing the Signal gi∣ven, order'd his Soldiers to fall upon
Doria's Gallies with all imaginable vigour and fury, which was accor∣dingly executed, he himself perfor∣ming his part in this Assault. This unexpected violence, and the sight of such a number of arm'd Men in pos∣session of the Port, quickly alarm'd both the Seamen and the Galley Slaves; and now the Air was fill'd with a confus'd and dreadful noise, the Slaves joining together in the common cry of Liberty, and endea∣vouring to burst their Chains, the detestable Badges of their Villainy and Servitude. But Count Fieschi never intended (nor would it have much forwarded his design) to be Master only of so many empty Ves∣sels; therefore to prevent the da∣mage that would accrue to him by the flight of these Slaves; he made all possible hast to get on Board the Admiral Galley which made no great hast either to escape or to return the violence the Enemies had offer'd its Commander and Soldiers,La Capitana being startled at these
unexpected disorders. Fieschi being eager to accomplish this design, or∣der'd a plank to be laid for his Pas∣sage, one end of it resting on the shore, and the other on the ladder in the poup of the Vessel; this move∣able Bridge prov'd the ruin of the whole Project; for neither end of it being fasten'd, and the Galley hapning, by some accident or other, to thrust farther from the shore, Fi∣eschi and the Bridge he so rashly tru∣sted with his life, were of a sudden plung'd in the Waves. He was arm'd at all points, and with the weight of this he was so opprest, that he could not save him∣self by swimming back to the Shore; and the darkness of the Night, and the tumultuous Noises of so great a concourse of People, hindred his Friends from perceiving the fatal Ac∣cident, or hearing the cries and shrieks of their Leader in this despe∣rate Extremity, which quickly put an end to his life; he being rather stifled in a puddle of Muddy Water,
than drown'd in the clear Ocean, and being clogg'd and weigh'd down by that Armour, in which he had pla∣c'd his greatest security. Thus the Almighty by his uner∣ring Providence derides and frustrates those Cobweb Policies and vain Pro∣jects, wherewith unhappy short-sigh∣ted Mortals amuse themselves, for this formidable Conspiracy, which had been fram'd and carried on at the ex∣pence of so much time, and so many cunning Artifices, which was now secur'd and strengthen'd by a compe∣tent Army, and was just ripe for Ex∣ecution, was at this very instant shatter'd and destroy'd, by an event sudden, unexpected, and in all appear∣ance purely casual: Divine Justice in∣volving the Conspirators in those dreadful Calamities, to which their Treacherous cruelty had design'd to sacrifice their Native Countrey. In the mean time (notwithstanding this Accident) the Conspirators boar∣ded Doria's Gallies, and maun'd them with a sufficient number of their own
Soldiers, of whose fidelity they had had the greatest experience. Nor were Fieschi's two Brothers Jerome and Ottobuoni any ways wan∣ting in the Execution of their Com∣mission; for as soon as they heard the Cannon discharg'd, (which was the signal agreed on) they attackt the Gate of St. Thomas with 600 Men; intending when this was in their Pow∣er, to march from hence directly to Doria's Palace (which was situated without the City Walls, and at a small distance from this Gate) and there barbarously to assassinate An∣drew Doria and his Nephew Jannetin. The Garrison that was posted at this Gate, made an honourable resistance for some time, and had not Fieschi corrupted some of the Soldiers with Bribes, it is not a little probable that this attempt had prov'd unsuccessful. For Sebastiani Lerearo and his Brother, one of them being Captain, and the other Ensign of that party, coming in at that instance to their assistance, held the Conspirators to a sharp and
bloody Combate, till at last the Cap∣tain being taken Prisoner and the En∣sign kill'd in the Skirmish, the de∣fendants being betray'd by some of their fellow Soldiers, and briskly as∣saulted by their Enemies, were at last put to flight, and so lost that Gate they had so well defended; and which the Conspirators rather bought with their Money than acquir'd by their valour. The Shouts of the Soldiers, the Clashing of Weapons, and the Noise of the tumult grew so loud that it was heard to Doria's Pa∣lace. The old Man was at this time confin'd to his Bed by a violent fit of the Gout; but however was mighti∣ly alarm'd at these unaccountable Confusions; as was also Jannetin's Wife, who being wak'd by them presently, told her Husband she ap∣prehended the Galley Slaves were in a Mutiny. He presently got up, and perswading himself that he should on∣ly find his own Seamen engag'd in some una rissa ac∣cesa per cagione dignoco. jocu∣lar quarrel, or some acci∣dental
squabble easily reconcilable, he marcht towards the Gate of St. Thomas. And as if sate had hurried him on to his certain destruction, he took no Arms with him but a Sword, nor any attendants but one Servant, and a Page, who carri'd a Torch be∣fore him; although his Uncle, pru∣dently considering that the danger might be greater than it at first ap∣pear'd, had advis'd him to take with him a sufficient number of Men and Arms to defend himself against any Violence that might be offer'd him; and his Wife had with the most ten∣der and affectionate Entreaties endea∣vour'd to perswade him not to stir a∣broad till Morning: But he was deaf to her Prayers, and regardless of his Uncle's Advice. Jannetin, when he came to the Gate, supposing it was still Guarded by those Soldiers of his own Party, whose Charge it us'd to be, being vex'd at this unseasonable Distur∣bance, and not finding so ready an admittance as he expected, call'd out
to them aloud con Pusata alterezza. in an im∣perious manner (as was his custom) and com∣manded them to open the Gate to him; which the Conspirators very joyfully did, as soon as they knew by his voice, that it was Jannetin Doria, whom they hated and fear'd as one of the greatest Obstacles to their wick∣ed designs. Having thus a fair opportunity for executing their Malice, they lost no time; but as soon as ever Jannet in had put his head within the Wicket, they fell upon him with all the Wea∣pons they had at command, and bar∣barously Murther'd him leaving hard∣ly any part of his body free from the bloody Characters of their Cruelty. But Divine Justice signaliz'd it self in the revenge of this Murther, for at the same instant that unhappy Doria sell a Sacrifice to the fury of his Ene∣mies, Count Fieschi (as some Writers observe) who was the chief contriver of this Murther, and by whose par∣ticular order his Soldiers perpetrated
it, ended his life in the wretch'd man∣ner above related. Jannetin Doria was a Person wor∣thy of a longer life, for he was a true lover of his Country, and a Scourge and Terror to the Corsaires of Barbary and other Pirates, who cruis'd about the Coasts of Genoua, and interrupted the freedom of Com∣merce: Therefore (if Genoua must have lost him in the Flower of his Age) his Death would have been much more glorious, had he expir'd in the heat of Battel, fighting against the common Enemy, than to perish (as he did) by the inhumane Malice of Seditious Assassines and Traitors, who had set their Country in a Flame and were just upon the point of com∣pleting its ruine. It was a thing to be wonder'd at that those who murther'd Jannetin did not, as was at first resolv'd, run presently to Andrew Doria's Palace, and at the same time (as would have been no difficult matter) have secu∣red themselves (by acting the same
Villainy on the Uncle which they had lately done on the Nephew) from the possibility of another Revo∣lution, under the Conduct of that Patriot, who had once before, and might again restore the liberty of Genuoa. Nor had they reason to ex∣pect any thing at his hands in case he should furvive their Malice and overthrow their Designs, but to be made memorable examples of Pub∣lick Justice, both for their bold Re∣bellion and their many Murthers, especially that of Jannetin which they might be sure would most nearly af∣fect him. But this Flagitious Act they forbore; whether it were that the horrour of what they had alrea∣dy done rais'd such a tumult in their minds, as is usual with wicked Men that they knew not for a while, what to resolve on next. Or whe∣ther they were stopt in the violence of their Carcer by Jerome Fieschi the Count's Brother, who had no great apprehensions of any ill Consequences from the life of Andrew Doria, a Man
of Fourscore years Old, and very in∣firm in his Body, left without guards and very thinly attended; now that he had dispatcht Jannetin a bold and resolute Young Man, and that Do∣ria's Gallies and those of the Repub∣lick were (as he believ'd) in the pos∣session of his own adherents, and that he had subdu'd his Enemies with∣in the City, and taken their most considerable Fortresses, so that he thought himself secure of the Con∣quest: Or lastly, whether he fear'd that while the Soldiers greedy of Ra∣pine where wholly intent upon the Plunder of so rich a Palace as Doria's, their Enemies might surprize them and cut them in pieces; or were de∣sirous (as is probable enough) to re∣serve that magnificent furniture, (which the rudeness of the Soldiers would not have spar'd) whole and entire, as it then stood, to grace the Triumphs of his Brother at his Victo∣rious Entry.
In the mean time the Noise and Tumults increasing, and Andrew Do∣ria not knowing the occasion of them, enquir'd often what was be∣come of Jannetin, but cou'd hear no Tidings at all of him, nor receive a∣ny satisfactory Information about the Dreadful Confusions that reign'd in all Quarters of the City: At last he sent Louis Julia, one of his Dome∣sticks, into the City to learn the cause of these Disorders, who brought him word in a very little time, that Count Fieschi was become Master of the City; that the Circumstances of the Republick were extreamly dangerous; that the Galleys were in the possessi∣on of the Conspirators; that the Po∣pulace were in so high a Sedition, as to declare openly for Liberty, and to wish Success to the Arms of Fieschi whom they look'd upon as their De∣liverer; that Arm'd Men outragious∣ly Violent were to be met with in e∣very Street, who like Mad Men threatned Destruction, and a general Plunder to all the Houses of Rich
Men; that there was nothing to be seen but Quarrels, Bloodshed, and Murther; and that in all parts Op∣probrious and Reproachful Language, with the bitterest Curses and Execra∣tions against the Nobility were to be heard; and lastly, that himself was in a particular manner destin'd a Sa∣crifice to their Rage and Malice. This News, though it did not at all affrighten the good Old Man, yet it touch'd his Soul with so sensible a Grief, to see his Countrey, which he had always lov'd with the tenderest Affection, just upon the brink of Ruin, that he resolv'd without ma∣king any resistance to yield himself a Prey to the Impetuous Fury of the Conspirators: Saying, that he ought not to live after the Subversion of the Republick; and that he was now willing and desirous that the small and unhappy remainder of his Life, shou'd have the same Period with the expiring Liberty of Genoua.
But the earnest Requests and Tears of his Wife, together with the ob∣liging Violence of his Servants, o∣ver-ruled his former Resolutions, and prevail'd with him to hasten his de∣parture; which, they told him, was now become necessary: Representing to him withall, that since the Annals of his Life were full of so many ge∣nerous and publick spirited Actions, he ought to reserve the close of it for the Common Good of his Coun∣trey: That therefore he ought to be willing to Live, that he might see his own Glory and Reputation redoubl'd, by restoring Genoua once more to her Liberty, and repelling that Tyranny which was now imminent, but under his Auspicious Conduct might yet be Crush'd: That now was the time for him to render his former Conduct the more illustrious, by supporting these Misfortunes with a calm Forti∣tude, and by consulting the Dictates of his own Mind, which he us'd to preserve serene and free from the sur∣prize of sudden Accidents, or the op∣pression
of Despair: That Genoua had now nothing to rely on for her Reco∣very, but the safety of his Person: That though the Republick were for a while Oppress'd by the Arbitrary Sway of the most Egregious Villains, yet she could not despair of a Resur∣rection to her former Glorious State, while she knew her Deliverer to be safe: That on all these Considerati∣ons he should retire to some more se∣cure place, and there prepare those Remedies for the Publick Distempers, which the present state of affairs made it impossible for him to do while he continued in the City, (besides the extreme danger his Life was in every Minute) that he must not look upon his Retreat, as a timorous flight from the Perils and Disorders of his Coun∣trey, but as an Embassy in which at this Exigency Afflicted Genoua em∣ploy'd him, for her own Safety and Benefit. Thus by the united perswasions and entreaties of his whole Family, the good Old Man, (who bent be∣neath
the weight of so many Years, and was no less afflicted in his Mind with the sad prospect of the Miseries of his Countrey, than in his Body with the tormenting pains of the Gout) was prevail'd with to suffer himself to be carri'd on his Servants Shoulders, and by them set on his Mule, which convey'd him to Ma∣zone a Fortifi'd Castle belonging to the Family of Spinola, and Fifteen Miles distant from Genoua; in his way thither he stop'd at Sestri, and there heard the afflicting News of his Nephew Jannet in's Death. While such a series of good Suc∣cess attended the Arms of the Con∣spirators, they at last began to miss Count Fieschi their Leader, and seve∣ral of them were detach'd to make a narrow search and enquiry after him. At last, when no news at all cou'd be heard of him, they grew suspicious of the Fatal Accident that had ended his Life: However, the Governing Party among them smother'd these rising Jealousies as well as they could,
least if it shou'd be nois'd among the Soldiers, they shou'd desert their Co∣lours, and through despair throw up a Conquest already so far advanc'd. They loft a strong Guard at every Gate, Ottobuoni Fieschi was entrusted with the Galleys, and Two Hundred of the most Valiant of the whole Army, under the Command of Je∣rome Fieschi, were detach'd according to their first Resolutions, to March through the Streets of Genoua and excite the Mobile to take up Arms and join them. But this design did not succeed according to their expe∣ctation, for although a vast num∣ber of the Scum of the People fell in with the Conspirators, when they first Proclaim'd a General Liberty to be obtain'd for them by the means of Count Fieschi, and that under his Protection they should continue in the secure enjoyment of it, yet not one Trades-Man of any Wealth or Reputation stirr'd a Finger in their behalf. Whether it were that they abhorr'd and dreaded these Tumults
and Confusions, out of a sincere de∣sire for the continuance of the Pub∣lick Tranquillity; or that they thought it a Precedent too dangerous to be allow'd of, that one of the No∣bility shou'd make use of the Popu∣lace only as Tools, for the gratify∣ing his own private Ambition, Ava∣rice, or Vanity: Or whether they thought themselves slighted by Count Fieschi, in that he undertook an Af∣fair of so publick an Importance, without communicating his designs and intentions to them from the ve∣ry first: Or lastly, whether the re∣membrance of those excessive Grie∣vances under which they had been formerly Oppress'd, made them hate the Democratick Form of Govern∣ment. For the Sovereign Power be∣ing plac'd in the hands of the most despicable of the Populace, Publick Affairs were manag'd without any respect either to Discretion, or De∣cency, and the determination of the most difficult matters falling to the share of Fellows that had neither
Sense, Virtue, Education, nor Expe∣rience, their Resolutions were conse∣quently Indeliberate, Violent, and Dangerous. 'Tis hardly to be express'd what a disorder these Tumultuous Transacti∣ons had put the whole City into. The People run about as if they had been distracted, without knowing wither they had best to go; they ask'd one another what was the cause of these Dreadful Con∣fusions, but they were all struck with such a Panick Fear, that they had not the power to return an Answer. Wo∣men of all Qualities appear'd at their Windows, and with the moving Elo∣quence of Sighs and Tears, Lament∣ed the Dangers to which their Hus∣bands, Brothers, and Sons, were forc'd in this Exigency to expose themselves for the necessary defence of their Countrey. The Nobility were so Amaz'd, that they knew not whether it were best for them, to as∣semble in a Body at the Doge's Palace,
or to stay at their several Houses, and defend them, as well as they cou'd, from being Pillag'd. The Emperor's Embassador being surpriz'd at this un∣expected Accident, was preparing to leave Genoua, that his Master's Digni∣ty might not receive any Affront, or Outrage, by the Insolence which the Enrag'd Mobile might offer to his Mi∣nister; but being over-perswaded by Paul Lasagna, a Man who had a great influence over the Populace, he went to his House and staid there. This Lasagna during these Distractions, got together a considerable number of his Friends and Dependants; and having an inveterate Pique and Emu∣lation with the Family of Spinola on the account of their vast Riches and powerful Alliances, he staid at home expecting the upshot of Fieschi's Re∣bellion; that he might accordingly take such Measures as would best pro∣mote his own Interests. For he ho∣ped that by this Revolution there would be a way open'd for the rein∣stating the Family of the Adorni in
their Ancient Possession of the Prin∣cipality of Genoua; several of those who now declar'd for Fieschi, being sincere and affectionate Friends to the Adorni. The Emperor's Embassador being resolv'd to stay in Genoua, and to give what Assistance he could to a Republick so entirely devoted to the Interests of the House of Austria, went with all speed to the Ducal-Pa∣lace, where he found Jerome Doria the Cardinal, Adam Centurio, and o∣thers of the Nobility, who met the rest of the Senate, and consulted with them, Nicholas Franco being President of the Assembly, for at this time there was no Or Duke. Doge of Genoua. The result of their Delibe∣rations, was, that Boniface Lomelli∣no, Christopher Pallavicino, and An∣thony Calva, with a Cornet of the Guards, and Fifty Soldiers, shou'd march to the defence of the Gate of St. Thomas; but in the way thither meeting with a Squadron of Fies∣chi's Party, they Engag'd with it, and being deserted and betray'd by se∣veral
of their own Men, were forc'd to retreat for shelter to the Palace of Adam Centurio: There having rein∣forc'd themselves with several fresh Men, and being join'd by Francis Gri∣maldi, and Dominic Doria, they went boldly by another way towards the Gate, to enquire what was become of Andrew Doria. But finding the Gate strongly Guarded, and Lomelli∣no (who had bravely attempted to break through their Ranks) being taken Prisoner by the Conspirators, they were again put to slight, and were quickly follow'd by Lomellino, who had had the good Luck to make his Escape. The Conspirators had not yet heard any Tidings of Count Fieschi, and Verrina, who foresaw that with∣out him their whole Project, though so far advanc'd, was in an extream hazard of being totally frustrated, and having in vain search'd all places where he thought he might find him, began to grow desperate, and betook himself to his Galley: For by secu∣ring
this he thought himself, safe, what Event soever shou'd happen. If Fieschi's Design succeeded well, then he shou'd be Master of the Darsenne, and preserve the strength and flower of the Count's Army for other neces∣sary Services: If the Attempt shou'd fail, as the present Circumstances of Affairs seem'd to Threaten, he cou'd then save himself from the danger of being taken and punish'd as a Re∣bel, by Rowing as fast as he cou'd towards Marseilles. Nevertheless his keeping at such a distance prov'd a very great inconvenience to Jerome Fieschi: For that Party of the Con∣spirators which were on Land, seeing themselves, as it were, abandon'd, both by Count Fieschi their Leader, and by Verrina the Adviser and Con∣triver of this Design, and both of them being Instruments absolutely necessary for the carrying of it on, they cou'd not entirely confide in the Conduct of Jerome Fieschi. Who being very Young, had neither Ex∣perience nor Prudence, but in all his
Management show'd himself to be hurried on by an Impetuous Rashness, without considering himself, or hark∣ning to the Reasons that others offer'd him. Besides this, the Soldiers cou'd not have that Esteem and Reverence for him, which they generally bear towards Persons of an approv'd Va∣lour, and an establish'd Reputation; which are the surest Methods to gain an Ascendant over the Hearts of the People. So that they did not only begin to fall of from their first Ar∣dor, but also took all occasions that they cou'd to desert the Service. Of so great Moment is the Esteem Soldi∣ers have of their General, towards the good or bad Success of any En∣terprize. But one Accident, which on all accounts shou'd much rather have abated the Heat and Rashness of Jerome Fieschi, helped rather to in∣crease it, and to puff him up with that senseless Ambition which after∣wards prov'd his Ruin. By this time the certain News of Count Fieschi's Death was confidently reported a∣mong
his Adherents: And his Bro∣ther Jerome looking upon himself as now the absolute Master of all these Forces, and thinking that the prose∣cution of his Brother's Ambitious De∣signs was devolv'd to him as part of his Inheritance, he flatter'd himself with the Prospect of obtaining for himself that Principality, for which he had hitherto Fought in his Bro∣ther's behalf. These deluding hopes, and the near view which he thought he had of their Accomplishment, made him exert his utmost Vigour to compleat his Victory; for the In∣ducements are vastly greater when we know that we our selves shall reap the Fruit of our Toil and Hazard, than when we only Act, as Engines, for the Profit and Advancement of others. In the mean time the Senators, and the other Citizens, who were as∣sembl'd in the Palace, were not want∣ing in their Assistance to their Coun∣trey, now in all appearance reduc'd to the last Extremity; but not ha∣ving
a sufficient number of Forces to Cope with the Conspirators, and be∣ing Ignorant of Count Fieschi's de∣signs, they could not after all fix on any certain Resolutions. They thought fit however to dispatch Jerome Fiesco, and Benedict Canavale, as Commissi∣oners from the Republick to Count Fieschi, to demand of him what his pretences were for raising these Com∣motions, and what End he design'd by them. And quickly after Cardi∣nal Jerome Doria, a near Relation of Count Fieschi, accompani'd by John Baptist Lercaro, and Bernard Castagna, two Senators, was preparing to go at the entreaty of the Senate, to desire a Personal Conference with the Count himself; that so he might try whe∣ther the dignity of his Character, which sometimes hath greater power than the Ties of Blood, or the Force of Eloquence, would be sufficient to restrain him from making any farther progress in so dangerous an Affair. But several Wise Men disswaded the Cardinal from exposing the Reve∣rence
of his Order to the Insults and Affronts of the Populace, who at the best are Rude and Inconsiderate, but were now in a very high Ferment. Hereupon he turn'd back again, thinking it safer and better to deferr the interposing the Authority of his Office, till he should have an oppor∣tunity to discourse privately with Count Fieschi. So that the Senate proceeded to a new Choice of some Gentlemen who were sent to know the Count's demands. Their Names were, Augustin Lomellino, Hector Fi∣esco, Ansald Justiniano, Ambrose Spi∣nola, and John Balliano. These stopt at (the Church of the Theatins) St. Cy∣ro, and there waited for Count Fies∣chi, whom they saw coming towards them, as they thought, with his Friends, Guards and Attendants. As soon as the two Parties were come pretty near to one another, Thomas Assereto, and others of the Conspira∣tors, drew their Weapons and begun to Assault the Genouese Commissioners so fircely, that Lomellino and Hector
Fiesco being not prepar'd for so rude a Treatment, got back into the City with great hazard of their Lives. When this Tumult was a little ap∣peas'd, Ansald Justiniano went up to Jerome Fieschi, and demanded of him where he might find the Count, that he might impart to him the Message wherewith the Senate had entrusted him. To this Jerome Fieschi return'd a surly Answer, telling him, That he need not enquire any farther for Count Fieschi, that he himself was possess'd of that Dignity, and that therefore he expected they should presently yield up to him the Senate House, with all other Publick Build∣ings and Fortifications which they were yet Masters of. By this unadvis'd and ill tim'd Answer, the Genoueses concluded, that John Lewis Count Fi∣eschi was Dead. This inspir'd them with a new Life; for after these Pub∣lick Commissioners were return'd to the Senate, and had acquainted them with the certain News of the Elder Fieschi's Death, and with the Arro∣gance
of the Younger Brother, they Order'd that Twelve of their Num∣ber, shou'd get together as many of the Guards and the Populace, as be∣ing well Arm'd, would be sufficient either to drive Fieschi's Vanguard out of the City, or to cut them off if they shou'd make a stubborn Resi∣stance. But however, upon second thoughts, they found it was not requi¦site to run the hazard of a Battel. For those of the Mobile who, at the gene∣ral cry of Liberty, went out and join'd with the Conspirators, chiefly out of a desire to plunder the Palaces of the Nobility, now finding their expecta∣tions frustrated, and repenting of the Sedition they had rais'd, fell off by little and little, and return'd to their own homes. For the Morning coming on apace, none of them were willing to be discover'd to be Accomplices of the Conspiracy. And several of their own Men were inclin'd to follow this Example, thinking it better worth their while, to contrive a secure re∣treat for themselves, than with the
hazard of their Lives to obtain a compleat Victory, the profitable Con∣sequences whereof would fall only to the share of their Leader. So that Jerome Fieschi being arriv'd to St. Laurence's Church, (which is the Me∣tropolitical Church, and not far di∣stant from the Palace, whither he was marching in order to possess him∣self of it) and being startl'd no less at the thinness of his own Troops, and their unwillingness to engage the Genoueses than at the Number of Men which had been got together by the order of the Senate, he was at a plunge what course he should take. But at last, out of extream caution for his own security, he went back by St. Donate's, marching slowly to the Gate del Arco. On the other side the Senators and chief Citizens of Genoua, who were assembled at the Palace, receiv'd new Life and Vigour by this unexpected turn of their Affairs: Insomuch that some of them were of Opinion, that, since Fieschi's Troops were in such a
disorder and consternation, it wou'd be rather advisable that those Genouese Soldiers, whom they had got toge∣ther, shou'd make a brisk Assault up∣on them, than that the dignity of the Senate shou'd descend so low, as to Treat with their Rebellious Sub∣jects on a Capitulation for Peace. But those whose Age entituled them to the Character of Prudent and Ex∣perienc'd Persons, were against this Proposal; as thinking it less Politick, though more specious than the other: For, by avoiding a Battle, they should save the Lives of many Citi∣zens, who must have perish'd in it, (and how Laudable is this Avarice, if I may so call it, in Governours and Generals!) as also by the same caution prevent any sudden Acci∣dent, that might turn the Scale of Affairs, and again involve the Com∣monwealth in those Miseries and Dan∣gers, which, like a Ship that has escap'd the Perils of a Tempestuous Sea, and is now almost got within sight of her desir'd Haven, having
lately felt, she had reason to be cau∣tious of those Methods that perhaps might again reduce her to the same Calamitous State. For the City be∣ing already in a great Ferment, and it being in the Night time, and several Eminent Citizens being dissatisfi'd at the present Constitution, and several others of them being already declar'd Rebels, 'twou'd have been as great an Error in Politicks for the Govern∣ment of Genoua to have trusted them with Arms, as it wou'd be ill ma∣nagement in a Physician to perplex his Patient with such Medicines as wou'd stir the Humours of his Body, and set them on working, when he is so extreamly Weak, that nothing but a quiet and gentle course of Phy∣sick can possibly keep him alive. The Glory therefore of healing these Pub∣lick Distempers is to be attributed to the Prudent Advice of Paul Pansa, who had before try'd, but in vain, by the most reasonable disswasives, to prevent them, and to preserve Fies∣chi's Family from the sad Fate that
attends Perfidiousness and Rebellion. He was call'd into their Assembly, where having given them a satisfa∣ctory account of the Reasons of his Conduct, he was order'd to go to Je∣rome, now Count Fieschi, and com∣mand him from the Senate to quit the City, and to disband his Forces: Which if he would comply with, the Republick promis'd an Act of Oblivion for what was past, and a General Pardon to all the Conspira∣tors. Hereupon, and by Pansa's per∣swasions, and the Advice of Nicholas Doria his near Kinsman, who went with Pansa to make up this Accommo∣dation, Fieschi having left the City, an Instrument was drawn up sign'd by Ambrose Senarega Secretary to the Senate, whereby the Publick Faith was given as a Security, that the Government wou'd make good what they had promis'd. So that Fieschi quietly retreated to Montobbio with his Guards and Adherents. His Bro∣ther Ottobuoni, with Verrina, Calcag∣no, and Sacco, who secur'd themselves
on board the late Count Fieschi's best Galley, when they saw their Affairs entirely ruin'd, they steer'd their course to Marseilles, carrying with them in Chains Sebastian Lercaro, Manfred Centurio, and Vincent Vacca∣ro, who were taken Prisoners at the beginning of the Tumult, between the Darsenne and the Gate of St. Tho∣mas: But these Gentlemen they af∣terwards releas'd, setting them on shoar at the Mouth of the River Va∣ro. Thus Fieschi's best Galley Sail∣ing with all possible hast towards France, and the Galliots being like∣wise dispers'd, the Haven of Genoua was again open, and a free passage left for all Vessels to come in and go out without opposition. Hence it came to pass that about Three Hun∣dred Turkish Slaves, Su lospun∣tar dell' Alba. who were Cruising about the Island An Isle of Tuscany. Elba, took the opportunity offer'd them by the general Confusion; and having Arm'd and Mann'd Doria's Galley, call'd the
Temperance, they presently turn'd her Prow towards Africk, and made such hast, that, though Don Bernardin Mendozza's Two Galleys pursu'd her with great Expedition and indefatiga∣ble Diligence, they cou'd not over∣take her. To this considerable loss of Andrew Doria's, we may also add the slight of the Galliots boarded by Fieschi, which were rowed off by the Slaves that Manag'd them, and the plundering the other Galleys that remain'd, of all their Arms and Fur∣niture. 'Twas Four Days before the Body of John Lewis Count Fieschi was found: So that the Populace were inclin'd to believe he, with the others, had escap'd to Marseilles. This made several Apprehensive that the War was rather deferr'd than ended, and that after Count Fieschi had openly thrown off the Allegiance of a Sub∣ject, and beg'd the Assistance of the French, for compleating his Ambiti∣ous Designs, he wou'd at his return prosecute the War with greater Vi∣gour,
and with a Cruelty suitable to his Perfidiousness. But this suspicion lasted not long; for in a little time Fieschi's Body was found and taken up; and after it had for a while been expos'd to the Publick View, near the place where he fell in, it was, by the order of Andrew Doria, carri'd to the Main Ocean, and there Buried in the Waves, though some indeed falsly gave out, that it was hang'd on a Gibbet, which Ignominy, though the Person deceas'd had very well de∣serv'd, yet it wou'd have look'd more like the Vain Efforts of an Impotent Malice, in Executing a Dead Man, than the Just Punishment of a Cri∣minal. Now were the Genoueses perfectly free from all Fears and Apprehensi∣ons; and the Morning after the Se∣nate being Assembled, sent Benedict Centurio, and Dominic Doria, to Con∣dole with Andrew on the loss of his Nephew Jannetin, and to conduct him back to the City; where, all Tumults being appeas'd, Benedict
Gentile a Person of known Prudence and Integrity, and much belov'd for his Candid and Affable Behaviour, was chosen Duke of the Republick of Genoua. As soon as the Genoueses found themselves releas'd from those excessive Fears which had lately pos∣sess'd them, and saw their Publick Affairs again restor'd to their former Channel, of an undisturb'd Tran∣quility, they began to reflect on the greatness of their past Dangers; which appearing much more Formi∣dable now that they were calmly de∣bated and consider'd, than when the General Confusion hindred them from thinking of any thing, but how to escape or surmount the particular Danger that at that instant Threat∣ned them, they were inclin'd to be of Opinion, that the Terms of Ac∣commodation lately granted by the Republick, were not only too gentle, but also might be unsafe and disho∣nourable. This occasion'd a long Debate in the Senate, many of them being of the contrary Opinion, but
at last all Doubts were so throughly clear'd, and all Objections so fully answer'd, that it being put to the Vote, it was Resolv'd, Nemine Con∣tradicente, That the Publick Faith gi∣ven to the Conspirators ought not to retard the Executing on them the Pu∣nishment due to their Villainy. This their Resolution was grounded on the following Reasons: That the Pardon lately granted had passed in an Assembly, where there was not the Number of Senators requisite by the Constitutions of Genoua, to give this or any other Publick Act a sufficient Validity: That a Promise extorted from any Man by Fear or Necessity was not at all Obligatory: And what greater and juster Fears cou'd any on ebe sensible of, than those they had lately felt, when they saw the Republick in such extream dan∣ger of an irrecoverable Ruin? That the Crime of High-Treason was in all respects so Hainous, that no Plea could be allow'd of for the mitigati∣on of its Punishment: That 'tis
hardly possible to invent Tortures se∣vere enough for the Betrayers of their Countrey to suffer: And that so remarkable an Example of Impunity, when the Villainy had been so hor∣rid, and the Consequences of it had like to have been so Fatal, wou'd pro∣bably encourage others in the like Attempts. On these Grounds they declar'd their Capitulation with the Conspirators to be ipso facto invalid, and that being thus set aside, they form'd Processes against the chief of those who were concern'd in the Trea∣son and Rebellion. The Palaces of John Lewis Count Fieschi were Con∣fiscated, and by the Emperour's con∣sent divided into several Houses for Merchants, and other Private Men, and Leas'd out as the Senate thought most proper for the increasing their Revenue: Fieschi's La casa de Fieschi all In∣violata. Palace in the Street call'd L'Inviolata, a large, Princely, and Magnificent Stucture, was demolish'd and rais'd even to the very Foundations: Fieschi's Three
Brothers, and Verrina, who were look'd upon as the Prime Contrivers and Managers of the Conspiracy, were declar'd Traytors and Rebels: As for other Persons concern'd in it, they being adjudg'd only Accessaries and Abettors of the Fact, were seve∣ral of them by Name Condemn'd to Banishment for Fifty Years. But Ottobuoni Fieschi, not content with the secure retreat he enjoy'd at Marseilles, came back a while after to Mirandola, and by his frequent Jour∣neys from the French Army, which then lay Encamp'd thereabouts, into France, and his returns thither again, gave the Republick just occasion to suspect that there was some new de∣sign carrying on against them. Je∣rome Fieschi having Lodg'd himself in Montobbio, and Verrina being come back to him with several others of his Adherents, he made it his business to Fortifie the Castle, and to lay in vast Stores of Ammunition and Provision. This gave so great an Alarm to the Senate, that having consulted the Em∣perour,
they were all of Opinion (as he was likewise) that it was absolute∣ly necessary for them to possess them∣selves of that Fort. It stands just at the back of the City, and besides o∣ther Natural Advantages for strength, its high situation made it formidable to the Genoueses, as being a place able to do them a great deal of Mischief, if that Nest of Traytors that had shelter'd themselves there, should pre∣vail with the French to make use of it, towards the recovery of their former Power in Genoua; which could not be compassed without the Ruin of their present Constitution. For these Reasons therefore the Senate sent Pansa again to Count Jerome Fieschi, to try if he could perswade him, and those of his Family who had any Interest in the Reversion, to sell it to the Genoueses on such Terms as shou'd be agreed on at a Treaty between both Parties. But Fieschi having but a small stock of Prudence, and perhaps being puffed up with a vain Opinion of Success from the Liberal Promises wherewith
the French had buoy'd him up, he did not only deny to comply with the Se∣nate's Proposal, but also, as if he had studi'd to increase the Jealousies they had of him, and to hasten his own Ruin, he told Pausa, That he kept the Fort for the Service of a far greater Prince than himself, meaning the French King. This Answer so surpriz'd the Genoueses, that after many threat∣ning Messages sent to Fieschi, and Pub∣lick Declarations against his Proceed∣ings, they resolv'd to try if they could out him by force. In order hereunto they sent several Companies of Sol∣diers, with a good Train of Artille∣ry, under the Command of August in Spinola, an Experienc'd Captain, to besiege the Fort, which, after having hold out for some time, was forc'd to Capitulate, but could obtain no better Terms, than that Jerome Fieschi and his Adherents shou'd surrender them∣selves at discretion. This dedition of theirs occasion'd many Disputes in Ge∣noua, which were at first whisper'd a∣bout, till being debated in the Senate,
both sides of the Question found its resolute Assertors both in that Assem∣bly, and in all Publick Meetings. When it was propos'd in the Senate, what should be done with Jerome Fi∣eschi, and the rest of the Prisoners, the House divided upon it, some were for Pardoning, and others were for Execut∣ing the Conspirators. And, (as it com∣monly happens when any thing is de∣bated by Men that are bigotted to their Opinions,) every one defended his own Sentiments with so much Zeal, and Animosity, that laying aside all thoughts of Moderation between both, some aggravated the Fact as the most Execrable Parricide that ever was com∣mitted, and others represented it as the consequences of Juvenile Rashness and Levity, severely enough punish'd by the Death of Count Fieschi, and the other Penalties I have already menti∣on'd, and therefore not deserving any farther Censure. This Party had so well exerted their Eloquence, in prai∣sing Clemency even to an excess, sti∣ling it a Quality absolutely necessary
for those that sit at the Helm of Go∣vernment, and in extenuating the Crimes of the Conspirators, calling their design the effects of the late Count Fieschi's Ambitious and Re∣vengeful Temper, and the Inconside∣rateness of his Brothers who were very Young, that they had almost gain'd their Point, and got it resov'd that they shou'd be acquitted. But Andrew Doria hearing of what Vote was like to pass, and being extream∣ly griev'd, that the Traytors had so strong a Party even in the Senate-House, who seem'd rather Betrayers of their Countrey, than such Patri∣ots as deserv'd a place in that Assem∣bly, he came thither, and discours'd to them so excellently on the Sub∣ject, that he turn'd the Scales to the Juster side: And without any De∣bate, it was Resolv'd Nemine Contra∣dicente, That Jerome Fieschi, and the rest of the Prisoners, should be put to Death: Which was accordingly Executed upon them.
Thus the Conspiracy of John Lewis Count Fieschi, which had so much Affrighted and Disturb'd Ge∣noua, ended at last in the Ruin of himself, his Family, and his Adhe∣rents. Had it prov'd Successful, and Advanc'd him to the Power he so much aim'd at, of being absolute Prince of Genoua, yet it is my Opi∣nion, that he could not have long enjoy'd the Fruits of his Prosperous Villainy. For (to say nothing of the Interests of several Princes in Eu∣rope, and particularly of the Empe∣rour) the Genoueses cannot bear the heavy Yoke of Servitude. There∣fore although some Rich Men, of the inferiour Rank of Citizens, growing Proud and Turbulent, have always had a Pique against the Nobility, and have been ready to join with any Se∣ditious Tumult, or Foreign Force, that pretended to divest them of their Authority; nevertheless the Po∣pulace in general, who Enjoy the Ease and Tranquillity of Living un∣der a Moderate Government, cannot
hanker after so great Change as is that of a Free Republick, into a Despotick Monarchy. 'Tis true, the Plebeians of Genoua have sometimes Revolted out of their Natural Incon∣stancy; sometimes out of Covetous∣ness and Envy at the Wealth of some particular Men; sometimes out of an insatiable desire of Revenge on some Person, Family, or Party, whom they Hated: Yet nevertheless I can∣not find by their Annals, that any of these Revolts ever ended in the loss and extinction of their Liberty, but only in changing their Governours, and in making some small alterations in the Form of their Government. As for Example, the Governours whom they receiv'd from France, and from the Dukes of Milan, never pre∣tended to Act as Absolute Princes, or to be Obey'd without Reserve. And when at any time they stretch'd their Authority beyond its due Limits, the same Genoueses, whose Discord had first given them Footing, began to grow Jealous that their Liberty was
struct at, and form'd an Association for the Expelling the Foreigners. Nor did the French King's Entry into Genoua with a Victorious Army, or his Building Fortresses almost inex∣pugnable, accomplish his Design of Governing the Republick after the French manner. For the innate Love of Freedom, always inspir'd this Na∣tion with an undaunted Courage and irresistible Vigour, in opposing any Foreign Force whenever they grew Jealous of it; and besides this, those few Eminent Citizens that were Male∣contents, had so slender grounds for their Dissatisfaction, that 'twas a ve∣ry easie matter, in times of common danger, to sweeten their Tempers in∣to a Mutual Reconciliation with each other, and an entire Affection to their Fundamental Constitution. For although the being excluded from the Honours and Dignities of the Repub∣lick, (whereunto nevertheless by a Law peculiar to Gennua, call'd The Law of Ascription, there is a way left open for Deserving Men,) and
the being sometimes subjected to the Insolences of a Proud and Indiscreet Senator, may seem a great Hardship and Misfortune, yet if with this are balanc'd the many Advantages flowing from a freedom and security of Com∣merce, and the many Privileges and Liberties enjoy'd in the Chief City of so Wealthy a Republick, the cause of Complaint, if there be any, is extreamly Minute and Inconsidera∣ble. For in Genoua there is not only an Impartial Administration of Ju∣stice exactly observ'd in all Cases with∣out respect of Persons, the Nobility themselves, notwithstanding their Su∣periority over others, as to Birth, Fortune, or Quality, being Punisha∣ble for the Injuries and Oppressions they are guilty of towards the mean∣est Complainant; but also every one is absolute Master of his own Estate, which under an Arbitrary and Despo∣tick Government, must (together with his Life, and the Honour of his Family) lie expos'd to the unbridled Passions of a Flatter'd and Abus'd Ty∣rant
These Reasons incline me to believe, that Count Fieschi, with the Assistance of those few Villains whom Verrina had procur'd for him, might have Plunder'd the City, and Inrich'd himself with the Spoils of so many Wealthy Families, and besides all this, taken a full Revenge on his Ene∣mies; but I can hardly perswade my self that he could ever have Op∣press'd their Liberties, and Establish'd himself their Prince, unless the Ge∣noueses had so far lost their Senses as to think to Cure some small Malady, by applying a Remedy much more Sharp and Violent than the Distem∣per, which instead of healing the Disease, must unavoidably destroy the Patient. FINIS.
ERRATA. IN the Translator's Preface, P. 2. l. 4. r. con∣firm'd. P. 3. l. 1. r. the famous. P. 14. l. 22. r. same strange. In the Book, P. 2. l. 7. r. in fomenting. P. 21. l. 13. r. Imperial Doria in Italick Letters. P. 29. l. 17. r. were. P. 38. l. 10. r. an indelible. P. 44. l. 7. r. splendor. P. 53. l. r. grievous. P. 77. l. 25. r. and the station. P. 80. l. 13. r. such Fan∣tasms. P. 82. l. 6. r. Adam Centurtone. P. 84. l. 15. r. with the attractive splendor of his Dress and Equipage. P. 89. l. 12. r. Phillippin. P. 90. l. 14. r. Sisters. P. 91. l. 25. r. in the Margin alla Sfi∣lata singly, or not in a Body. P. 107. l. 12. r. Aege∣an. P. 111. l. 20. r. words. P. 122. l. 17. r. they express'd. P. 126. l. 4. r. this. P. 137. in Mar∣gin, r. con L' Ʋsata alterezza. P. 135. in the Marg. r. di givoco. P. 159. l. 5. r. arrived at. P. 163. l. 21. r. Turkish Slaves at break of day took the Oportu∣nity. l. 32. dele who were Crusing about the Island Elba. In Marg. dele (b) an Isle of Tuscany. P. 164. l. 2. r. toward the Coast of Africk. P. 167. l. 20. r. any one. Books Printed for John Newton at the Three Pigeons against the Temple-Gate in Fleet-street. A Discourse of Natural and Re∣veal'd Religion in several Essays, or the Light of Nature a Guide to Divine Truth, by Mr. Tim. Nourse, in Octavo. A Charge given at the general
Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County of Surrey holden at Darking the 5th of April 1692, by the Ho∣nourable Hugh Hare Esq one of their Majesties Justices of the Peace for that County. The History of Don Quixot of San∣cha, and his Trusty Squire Sancha Pan∣cha, now made English, according to the humour of our Modern Language, and Adorn'd with several Copper-Cuts, By J. P. The Historical Relation of Count de Fieschi's Conspiracy against the City and Republick of Genoua, done into English by the Honourable Hugh Hare Esq The Ghost of the Emperor Charles the Fifth appearing to Volcart the Porter, be∣ing a comparison between the said Empe∣ror, and the present King of France, in a Dialogue concerning the times. A Memorial for the Learned, or Mis∣cellany of Choice Collections from most Eminent Authors in Philosophy, Physick, History, and Heraldry. A Sermon Preach'd at St. Hilary's in the Isle of Jersey before the Garrison, A∣pril the 10th, 1692. By Phillip Falle, M. A. Rector of St. Saviours in the said Island.
