N1007 R36614 15743983 104593
News from the East-Indies. THE Committee of the East-India Company and their Abettors having made so great a noise on the Exchange last Week, of the advantageous Peace they had obtain'd of the Great Mogul, by which the Notional Stock was raised from 112. to 150. per Cent. And it being declared at the East-India House, That the Articles by the new Phirmaund (or Patent) should be Printed for General Satisfaction; It was with great Earnest∣ness expected; in hopes it would appear for the Honour and Advantage of the English Nation. But in lieu thereof, there only appears in the Mondays Gazette a simple Intimation, That a Peace is made, and that we enjoy the same, yea and greater Privileges than formerly. Now, That the Nation may be fully informed of the true State of the Mat∣ter, and that Widows and other honest and well-meaning Persons, Strangers to the Management of the Company's Affairs may not be misled, and for the general Good and Service of all; An Exact Copy of the Phirmaund for the Bay of Bengale, which is one of the principal Ports in the Mogul's Dominions, is here presented; as the Translation is sent to the Company from Surrat in the following Words. ['Tis directed to Ibrahim Chaune, who is one of the Mogul's great Governours, Dated the 27th. of April, in the 33d. Year of his Reign.] IBRAHIM CHAUNE, KNow this, That the Good Fortune of the English hath directed them the Right way to end their Faults, they are sorry and ashamed for what they have done, therefore have sent their Vakeels [Factors] to our noble Court, with a Petition for a gracious Phirmaund to pardon their Faults; which the King, out of his great Favour and Mercy, always ready to pardon, doth freely forgive them; therefore his clear and un∣spotted Order is such, which you are to observe as you do his that you pray to, That so soon as this gracious Phirmaund reaches your hands, you suffer no body in your Jurisdi∣ction to molest, hurt, or hinder the English Nation in their Business, but suffer them to carry it on in the same manner as formerly. This understand, and act accordingly. THis is the Instrument that stands upon Record in the Court of that Great Prince, to the Eternal Infamy of the English Nation; as the Effect of our most unjust and unaccountable War, whereby not only the Honour of the English (before in the highest Esteem,) but the Interest of the Company in particular, hath suffered an Immense, and irreparable Damage; tho some few Managers) by unwarrantable and indirect Means, have gain'd prodigious Estates. For, as to the Nation and Company, after the loss of six years Trade, and the destruction of many considerable Ships, and the death of many hun∣dreds of our best Seamen: The Condition on which we are now re-admitted to Trade, is, That full Restitution be made to the Mogul's Subjects for all the Ships and Goods the Company have taken, according to the Accounts which shall be given in by the Crannies [or Pursers] of the Ships taken by the English; And tho we cannot yet tell the certain Sum which must be made good, We may shrewdly ghess at it from the Evidence given in the Cause now depend∣ing
between Their Majesties and the Company, on account of those Prizes, wherein a great number of Witnesses have deposed to the value of above One Million Sterling; Besides which, they are likewise indebted in India, at no small Interest, above Three hundred thousand Pounds more, and no less a Sum here at Home, on Bond, and for Freight and Demurrage: Whilst all their Stock in England will not extend to discharge their late made Dividend; nor all their Effects abroad, to load home one Third of the Shipping, now in India, besides the great Sums they owe to those Ships for their Service and Demurrage; which is not only manifest by the Liberty and Encouragement they give to private Men to return their particular Estates on those Bottoms, but especially by the general Letter which accompanied the Phirmaund, written to the Company by their Factors at Surrat, whereby they earnestly press for a large and speedy Supply to support and carry on the Trade. In consideration of these exorbitant Impositions on the Nation, and from a true Affection to their Country, there are some Gentlemen and Merchants who have long applied their Thoughts to the restoring this so considerable a Trade, and in order thereto are prepared to lay before our Honourable Representatives in Parliament at their next Session, a clear and ample Account by what ways and means the Credit and Interest of the English Nation in India, hath been reduc'd to so miserable a Condition, and in the interim they hope it may not be an unac∣ceptable Service to the Publick, That they offer this brief Advertisement for Caution against the presumptuous Impositions of daring and arbitrary Men, who have of late Years encreased their Estates by the Ruin of their Fellow-Sub∣jects, and have been the Instruments of this great Dishonour and Detriment to their Country. London, May 12 1691.
