N1157A 27707518 110189
The Nightingales Song, Or, the Souldiers Rare musick, And maids Recreation. This Song adviseth Maidens to have a care, And of Souldiers Snapscks to beware. The Tuneis, No, no, no, not I; Or, Pegg and the Souldier. AS I went forth, one Sun-shining day, A dainty young couple were gathering May: The one a fair Damosel, of beauty most clear, The other a Souldier, as it both appear. With kisses and complements, to her he said, G-mrow sweet Honey, thou well-favour'd Maid, I think my self happy, I met with you here, As you are a Virgin, and I a Souldier. And now if you pleased be, I will you bring, Whereas you shall hear, the sweet Nightingale sin With other late pastimes, my sll shall be try'd, Sweet sir said the Damosel) if you will do so, Then hand in hand with you, along I will go; It is Recreation, for Maids in the Spring, To see Flowers grow, and hear Nightingals sig. And having thus spoken, together they went Unto a merry green-wood where some time they spent; I  walking and talking of many aodd thing But yet could not hear, the Nightingale sing; A dainty clear was A The Maid séem'd unwilling, and said she'd be gone, And yet she was-oath for to leave him alone, At lost she resolved, her self to this thing, To stay till they heard, the sweet Nightingale sing. Amongst the sweet Flowers, they straight way sat down, The young man in kindness, gave her a green gewn: He also presented to her a Gold Ring, Cause she should stay there, till the sweet Nightingale sing. thus done, middle, THen now said the souldier, 'tis time to give o're, Nay prethee (woth she) play me one  more: I like  the setting, and tuning the string, Far better then hearing, the Nightingale sing. He struck up his Musick unto a high strain, And plaid the Tune over, again and again: Gramercy brave Souldier, quoth she, that didst-bring, Me hither, to hear the rare Nightingale sing. Their sport being ended, then homeward they went, Each one thought the time, to be very well spent: It was (quoth the Damosel) a very rare thing, Whilt thou plaid'st thy part, to hear the Nightingale sing. At last with a deep sigh, se words seake she, Souldier, Else my hassy pleasure, sweet sorrows will bring, And I may repent I heard, the Nightingale sing. Oh no, quoth the Souldier, I may not do so, Along with my Captain, to morrow I must go: But if I come this way, again the next Spring, We'l walk once more to hear, the Nightingale sing. You Maids of the City; and Country, that be, Addicted to pleasure, take warning by me, Let no slattering Young-men, tempt y to this thing, To go to the wood to hear, the Nightingale sing. Make bargaia beforehand, for fear you miscarry, Know whether or no they are minded to Marry: If I had been wise, and had done such
