N3 13111151 97642
A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN in the CITY TO A GENTLEMAN in the COUNTRY, ABOUT THE Odiousness of Persecution. WHEREIN The Rise and End of the Penal Laws for Religion in this Kingdom, are con∣sider'd. Occasioned by the late Rigorous Proceedings against Sober Dissenters, by certain Angry Justices IN THE COUNTRY. It is the Part of the Christian-Religion to Suffer, and not to make People Suffer for Religion, Tertul. Apol. Printed in the YEAR, 1687.
THE LETTER. SIR, THE News of a Persecution meerly for a matter of Religion, at this time a day, when the whole Na∣tion appears professedly to dislike it; and the giving countenance to Informers (who are the Pest of every Nation, and the common Enemies of Pro∣perty) to the Prejudice of Peaceable and Trading People, makes your Friends, who have had notice of your late Trou∣bles, suspect that there is something in your case more than ordinary. Had this fallen out in some remote Country, where no In∣former had ever yet appeared, we might have conceived, that through Ignorance that sort of Devil might have been mista∣ken for an Angel of Light; and that upon his bare Averrment, some well-meaning Persons, even against their own Experience, might have been induced to mistake their Peaceable Neigh∣bours for Dangerous Incendiaries, and unworthy to enjoy their own proper Goods. But to see that sort of Creature concerned
a Country so near London and Westminster, as not to be capable of knowing what Informers are, how detestable their Trade, how inconsiderable their Power, how generally indigent and dissolute, how mean their Skill, how little they know more than to subborn Witnesses to commit Perjuries, which are dis∣covered to their Confusion, is that which raised Wonder in some of your Friends, to so great an height, that they generally request from your own hand the true state of your Case in all its Circumstances, to the end they may know, whether there be any thing which can differ it from the common Cases of Persecution meerly for Religion; from which the generality of the Country-Gentlemen of England (and particularly those of the Country where you live) do commonly profess to have as great an abhorrency, as they have from Depopulating of Coun∣tries, which is the Effect that such Persecutions must of ne∣cessity produce. In the mean time, do not I pray take me to be one, who think it strange to hear of Troubles; what hath been formerly, may happen again without Astonishment; and you are too well known to be thought to be surprized or afraid. Well did that Person consider the Creature Man, who distin∣guished him into two parts, viz. the Man, and the Beast: But it were happy for Mankind, if the Beast were less imperious and cruel: In truth, it is rare to find where the Man is allowed to have any power in Acting; every thing seems too much to be governed by the Beast, and by the Tyranny of its inordinate Pas∣sions and Senses. And yet where shall one find a single Person in the World, who calls himself a Christian, or that Party of Men who desire to be esteemed Christians, but he and they will readily grant that Principle, Mat. 7. 12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets? and that other Principle, Rom. 3. 8. Let us not do Evil that Good may come, to be Gospel-Principles, and obliging to all Mankind? There is not a Politician or States-man, nor a Government any where, that owns Christianity to be the true Religion, but con∣fesseth,
That in the Council of the Jews, which was assembled in order to the Persecuting of the Apostles for matters of meer Religion, Gamaliel advised prudently, and according to the Prin∣ciples of true Religion, Acts 5. Let them alone, for if this Counsel or this work be of Men, it will come to nought; but if it be of God, we cannot overthrow it, least happily we be found even to Fight against God. They will all confess readily, when pressed with these cha∣ritable and peaceable Principles; that the Spirit of Persecuting for meer Religion, is a Spirit of Injustice, as not doing to others as our selves would be done unto; and a Spirit of Diffidence and Incredulity, refusing to trust God, and his Providence, with the Defence and Justification of what is Professed to be of God: And yet it is hard to find that single Person, and much more to name, tha Community or Government amongst Christians, now in being, whose practice, when they have opportunity and power, are not contrary to their Principles. And not only so, but they will take upon them to justifie such practices to be consistent with, nay, even duties, unto which they are obliged by that pure Religi∣on, which they take upon them to profess to the whole World. But to the end I may not be esteemed presumptuous, or uncha∣ritable in what I here assert, and in regard it is impossible to pro∣duce evident proofs for what I say, as touching single Persons; let us a little examine the matter, as to Parties and Governments, ta∣king this for granted, that every particular Party calls it self a true Church, or the true Church of Christ. If what is here urged of differing Churches shall be proved true, the presumption will stand very strong as to single Persons; there being no single Person, who would be esteemed a Christian, but he is in communion or fellow∣ship with some Church, which he owns to be the true Church of Christ, and by whose Judgment he is willing to be concluded, as being a professed Member of it; and as taking it for his Principle, that every Member of the true Church of Christ ought to be of her Judgment, because the Scripture says, She is the Pillar and Ground of Truth: And though some boggle at this, yet nothing is truer than that every Christian Society daily practiseth it. Now, the better to prepare the way for this intended Tryal, we will crave the Liberty first, to consider Christianity in the World
in general, in its first Ages, when it was under Persecution for meer matter of Religion, and before it gained any civil Power and Dominion; From them we shall know what the true Christi∣anity did teach: We will then consider Christianity in England, when divided only into two distinct Parties, viz. The Protestants, and the Papists: And in the last place, We will consider Christianity in England, when the Protestants were sub-divided into several Parties, viz. The Episcopal, or Church of England Protestants, the Presbyterians, the Independants, the Anabaptists, and the Qua∣kers: and when the Papists were become so small, that they were upon the matter inconsiderable; and I suppose, from these differing times, we may hope for a reasonable Information. First then, Suppose the question put to the Christians of the first and Primitive Times, in those first and greatest Persecuti∣ons, under which Christianity then suffered. Is it lawful to Per∣secute, and to make and Execute Laws for the Inflicting of Pains and Penalties upon quiet and peaceable People, for Matters meerly of Religion; and in particular, For meeting together meerly for mat∣ter of Religion? Doubtless, their Answer would have been given with one general Voice: That it was not Lawful; and that it was against the Rule of Christ, and the Law of Nature, Quod Tibi non vis fieri, Alteri non feceris, Do not unto another, what thou wouldst not have done unto thy self: And that true it is, the Jews, who Persecuted the Lord of Life, and put him to Death for matter of meer Religion, did alledge for their Justification, That they had a Law, and that by their Law he ought to Dye: But that that Law, and all Laws of that Nature, were against the Law of God: And that the Christians had no such custom, nor the Churches of Christ, is I think, a most undeniable thing. These Ages (by the Agreement of all) were esteemed the purest Ages of Christianity; Religion being then most Pure, when the Professors of it were most Poor. And if any one shall conceive, that the Christians of those Ages would have given any other Answer, contrary to what I have here framed for them, and shall give a convincing Reason for such his Appre∣hension, I shall confess my mistake. In the mean time I must say, That I cannot see what other answer they could have given
but what must have justified the Persecutions against themselves to have been innocent, on the part of the Persecutors, who be∣lieved those first Christians to Err in Religion, and to be Disturbers of the Peace, and Government of their Countries, and their Meetings to be unlawful Assemblies: And much more Innocent on the part of the inferiour Magistrates, who took care to put those Laws in Execution; they being as much obliged in all civil Respects, to put in Execution the Laws of their Supe∣riours, as our Inferiour Magistrates are obliged to the Executi∣on of our Laws; and they gave the same Reasons. And the same is to be said in the Case of the Persecution of our Lord Christ, as seems very clear from that Prayer, which he offered for his Per∣secutors: Father, forgive them, they know not what they do; here then is a Principle of Christianity undivided. In the next place, We are to consider Christianity in England, when divided only into two distinct Parties, viz. Protestants and Papists, and when the Protestants had made a Sub division amongst themselves here. This I take to be in the times of K. Hen. 8. K. Edw. 6. Q. Mary, and part of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth; for though there were diversities of Opinions amongst Protestants, as well here as in other Countries, even in the first beginnings; yet they were not divided into Parties, being every-where upon the Defensive. In the time of K. Hen. 8. which I intend to in∣stance in, both Parties were persecuted. The Case stands thus: That King at his coming to the Crown, found the whole Nation in a quiet possession of Popery, and holding it as an Article of their Faith, and the Principle whereon they be∣lieved the Unity of their Faith depended, that, The Pope was the Supream Pastor, and visible Head of Government next under Christ, of the Catholick Church of Christ, of which the then National-Church of England was a Member: The King had defended this Article by Writing so vigorously against M. Luther, that the Pope had for that very work conferred upon him the Title of Defender of the Faith, to be enjoyed and used by him, and his Successors for ever. After this, by Act of Parliament, this Su∣pream Pastor, this Visible Head was thrown off, and this King put in his place, so far as concerned the Church of England, by
the Title of Supream Head of the Church of England, annexed to the Crown; and this by a Law, 26 Hen. 8. C. 1. And then by another Law, 26 Hen. 8. C. 13. it was Enacted, That if any by Word or Writing, should attempt to Deprive the King of the Title of His Royal Estate, he should be adjudged a Traytor: This change of the Headship of the Church, was, and is truly (at least in England) a Protestant Doctrine; and undoubtedly there is no Protestant whatsoever, but approves the casting off the Popes Headship, as conformable with the Doctrine of Protestants. And upon the latter of these two Laws, divers suffered Death for their denying the Kings Supremacy. This was the first step made in England, from Popery towards Protestancy. And the Vigorous Execution of this latter Law, encouraged several Protestants from Forreign parts to come into England, not doubting but to have a Liberty to Exercise their Religion here; and it gave confidence to many of the Subjects of England to re∣ceive and to others, to entertain good thoughts of Protestancy; being perswaded, that after the shedding of so much Blood, as had been shed here upon that Occasion, England would never any more admit of the Article of the Popes Supremacy; and conse∣quently, would every day make greater steps from that Church, of which the Pope was owned to be the Supream Pastor. And certain it is, that Protestancy upon this Occasion also made its entrance into England, and gained Ground here, and such (if not by open application to the King for that purpose, yet) at least in their Hearts desired a Toleration, and to be admitted to Preach, and Exercise their Religion here, without being Persecuted for their so doing; so that their Principle was at that time (at least) against Persecution for meer Religion. But Protestancy being now taken notice of to grow, another Law was made, 31 Hen. 8. for set∣ling unity of Opinion in the six Articles therein named, by which the denyal of Transubstantiation, and several other Doctrines therein named, are Enacted to be punished with Death. And now Persecution in England, for matters of meer Reli∣gion, grew sharp and high▪ so that it is observed by our Histori∣ans, that upon one and the same day, some who were Professed Papists, were put to Death for denying the Kings Supremacy
which was a Protestant Article: And some who were professed Protestants, were put to death for denying Transubstantiation, which was an Article of the Papists: So that at this time, the Government could neither be said to be Popish, nor Protestant, but both Parties were Persecuted most severely for matters of meer Religion: And he who should then have said to either Party, in justification of the Proceedings of the Magistrate in the Execution of either of those Laws, That that Party did not then suffer for any matter of meer Religion, but for breaking of the Peace, in breaking of the King's Laws, would certainly have been taken not to have understood those Laws, or the cause of their then Suffering. And now, suppose each of these Parties separately interrogated, when thus under Persecution (for Afflictio dat intellectum,) Is it lawful to Persecute, and to make and Execute Laws, for the In∣flicting of Pains and Penalties upon quiet and peaceable People, for matters of meer Religion? (for it seemed a time to teach both Parties an Eternal temperance and moderation) most certainly each Party in their then present Circumstances, would have an∣swered in the Negative, That it was not lawful: They would not have fallen into the debate to consider what Religion their Perse∣cutors were of, whether of the Popish or Protestant, to the end, to have fixt the Cruelty and Injustice of Persecuting for a matter of meer Religion, upon that Party, as a Principle of their Religi∣on, which their Fancies should have perswaded them to have been the Religion of their Persecutors. The Papists would not have then stood formalizing that, be∣cause the first Persecution was occasioned upon the denyal of the King's Headship over the Church of England, which was a Prote∣stant Doctrine, in opposition to the Pope's Headship, which was the Popish Doctrine; therefore the Protestants were the Aggressors in the Persecution; and therefore the Principle of Persecution was a Protestant Principle; and the Persecution of the Protestants after∣wards, was no other than a just Judgment of God drawn upon the Protestants by themselves, as a Consequence of that Principle of Persecution, which gave them the first occasion of introducing their Religion nationally into England. Nor would the Protestants,
by way of Recrimination, have charged the Papists then, that be∣cause that King and the then Government were of the Popish Reli∣gion in every point, save only in the Article touching the Suprema∣cy; therefore the Principle of Persecution must necessarily be a Popish Principle: No, they would most certainly, each Party, have disclaimed the Principle, as unwarranted by the Principles of true Christianity, which each of them claimed to be theirs, and each of them would have agreed, that it was their common Principle, To do unto others as they desired others should do unto them. Here we see the Principle of Christianity in England, when divided. The Persecutions before mentioned, being quieted by the Death of K. Henry the Eighth, and the Crown descending unto K. Edward the Sixth, an Infant of such tender Years, as made him uncapable of Exercising the Government in his own Person, not being come to the use of right Reason; the Duke of Somerset took upon him the Administration of all things, under the Title of Protector, and with him the Protestant Party had their sole Interest. Several Penal Laws were made in this King's Reign, for the In∣flicting Pains and Penalties for matters of meer Religion, which gave occasion to the Papists to charge upon Protestants the Prin∣ciple of Persecution for matters of meer Religion, as their Princi∣ple. It is true, the Papists were at that time Sufferers, and were actually Persecuted by the then Government for matters of meer Religion: But true Charity might easily have found other Rea∣sons, unto which those Persecutions might warrantably have been Assigned; and there was certainly no necessity of Assigning them to any Principle of the Protestants. The first Law which was made, relating to these matters, was 1. Edw. 6. C. 1. touching the Lord's Supper, Entituled, The Penal∣ties for speaking against the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, or against the receiving thereof in both kinds. This seems to have no other tendency than barely to keep both Parties from falling to∣gether by the Ears, and the Protestants were more likely to fall un∣der the Punishment of this Law, than the Papists: None could say, That it was the effect of Intemperate Spirits; for though it directed Communion in both kinds, to such as defired to Communicate; yet it compelled not any person to communicate. And it had a
Clause of great Temperance in the very close of it, in these words; Not condemning hereby the usage of any Church out of the King's Majesties Dominions. The next Law of this Nature, was made in the same Parlia∣ment, viz. 1. Edw. 6. C. 12. it is Entituled thus, viz. Statutes con∣cerning Treasons, &c. repealed: and this cannot be denyed to be sharp against the Papists. It makes it highly Penal to affirm, That the King is not, or ought not to be Supream Head on Earth of the Church of England and Ireland, or any of them immediately under God, or that the Bishop of Rome, or any other Person or Persons, other than the King of England for the time being, is, or ought to be, by the Laws of God, Supream Head of the same Churches, or any of them: But there is no necessity or reason of ascribing this neither to any Protestant Principle, though it is supposed to be made in affir∣mance of a Protestant Principle. Another penal Law was made 1. and 3. Edw. 6. Entituled, The Penalty for not using Vniformity of Service and Administration of Sa∣craments. And in 3. and 4. Edw. 6. C. 10. was made an Act, For the abolishing and putting away of divers Books and Images. Both which were severe against the Papists in matters of meer Religion; yet do I not find any necessity, why the Persecutions, which these Statutes occasioned, should be imputed to any Protestant Principle. During the whole Reign of this Infant King, it is clear, that the Papists in some degree suffered Persecution from the Hands of the Protestants, for matters of meer Religion: And without doubt, had it been then demanded of the Papists, Whether such Persecutions and such Laws Enacting such Persecutions, were lawful, and agree∣able with the Principles of true Christianity, which they pretended to maintain? their Answer would have been in the Negative: And they would then with one accord have readily agreed, That Per∣secution for matters of meer Religion, was no more consistent with the Rule of Christ, requiring us, To do unto others, as we would that others should do unto us, than Murder and Robbery. But the Persecutions Inflicted upon the Papists, by the Law made in the time of King Edward the Sixth, did not last long; they en∣ded with his Life; and by the descending of the Crown to Queen Mary, the Papists were rescued from all their Sufferings. All the Laws made against them in the Times of Hen. 8. and Edw. 6.
were Repealed. But the case was altered with the poor Prote∣stants, whose Sufferings were so great, and are so sharply and just∣ly reflected on, even to this day, that I, who love not to aggravate any thing, especially that carries its own aggravation with it, will say no more of them, but beg of our good God, to fill us with mercy in place of revenge, and to forgive them as we would be forgiven. Sure I am, had any Protestant been asked his Judgment in that Age, touching the Principle of Persecuting for matters of meer Religion, he would have disclaimed it, as absolutely con∣trary to the Principles of his Religion, which is the point that I am labouring to Evince. And after all this, shall any one take it ill, if upon a Principle of Charity I shall profess, that I could never as yet see any thing offered, which in my poor apprehension did ne∣cessarily Evince; That Persecution for meer Religion, was even an avowed Principle of either side. The Bloody Fury of Persecution, under which the Protestants suf∣fered so miserably in Q. Maries time, did end with her Reign, which was but short. And after that, the Protestants never suffer∣ed more from the Papists. But upon the death of Q. Mary, the Crown coming to Q. Elizabeth; and she thereupon declaring her self a firm, a zealous, and to all intents, religiously a Protestant, the Edge was turned against the Papists, before any differences were discerned to be among the Protestants. Several of the Po∣pish Clergy suffered Persecution, some even unto Death in seve∣ral parts of the Kingdom: And new Laws were from time to time framed and multiplyed for those purposes. And if now we ask the Opinion of the Papists, as to Penal Laws, either Sanguina∣ry or others, and Persecutions, for meer matter of Religion; they will tell you, (and they continue in that protestation even unto this day) That all such Laws and Persecutions are unlawful, and a∣gainst the Principles of the Gospel. And though the Protestants un∣der several changes, have been in the possession of those Laws, and have at times more or less Executed them; yet (so far as I can find) they do not own Persecution for matters meerly of Religion to be their Principle, or so much as lawful. After the Papists had some time continued the alone-Perse∣cuted Party for Matters of Religion, several Differences, in Matters meerly of Religion, happened to divide the Protestants
into distinct and separate Parties, during some part of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and also during the several and successive Reigns of King James, and King Charles the First: And about the beginning of the Reign of King James, some few despe∣rate Male-contents, professedly of the Popish Religion, being found Guilty of a wicked Plot, whereby they had designed the Destruction both of that King, and of his Parliament, by Gun-Powder (for which they were deservedly Executed) seve∣ral new and more severe Laws were then, and at several times af∣ter, made against the Papists in general, by which several Punish∣ments were Inflicted on them for Matters of meer Religion; and several Penal Laws were also made, by which the then Governing Protestant Party, (then, and still distinguished by the Name of the Church of England, or the Episcopal Party) persecuted Them. The Dissenting Protestants of all sorts were Prosecuted under the general Name of Non-conformists, who cryed aloud for Liber∣ty of Conscience, and declared it absolutely Unlawful to Punish any, for Matters of meer Religion: The refusal of which, bred bad Blood in the Kingdom, and we all know what followed. During the continuance of the War, and after King Charles the First was not able to make Head against the Non-conformists, the Non-conformists Retaliated the Church of England, and not a little crusht the Popish Party, both having engaged on t'other side, and being of other Religions, esteemed themselves Perse∣cuted for matter of Religion. That War being ended with the Death of King Charles the First, and the expelling of our late King out of his Dominions, and the Ruine of Episcopacy, and the Suppression of the Papists, and the total Change of the Government; the Non-con∣formists under the several Forms, took upon them and kept the Government, until the late King was by the Divine Hand of Pro∣vidence restored to his Crown: During all which time, the Epis∣copal Party and the Papists Suffered, more or less, for matters (at least in their Apprehension) meerly of Religion. But these two Parties were not alone in their Sufferings; for during those Bloody contests, there appeared another Party, which from its very first rise in this Kingdom, hath been severely Per∣secuted,
and that only for Matters of Religion. This Party was the People called Quakers. They did at their first shew∣ing themselves in the World, go under the name of the Children of Light, because they assert, as their main and first Principle, That Christ is the True Light that Enlightens every Man and Wo∣man with a measure of saving Light; which all ough to obey on pain of Damnaion; but by one Bennit, an Officer, in 1650. were nick named Quakers. They Professed themselves to ad∣here to the plain Principles of the first Christians, and particularly to hold it as their Principle, That all Persecution whatsoever, a∣gainst any Party, People or Person whatsoever, for matters meerly of Religion, is absolutely Vnlawful, Vnrighteous, and against the Spirit and Will of God, and Doctrine of true Christianity. And to give them their due, they have been true Contenders for their Principle, both by their frequent Apologies and Remonstrances on the one hand, and Invincible Patience in Suffering on the o∣ther hand Upon the Restauration of the King, the Episcopal Party was also Restored. The Presbyterians, Independants and Anabaptists, expected a general Toleration in matters of Religion, according to some of the King's Gracious Letters, as a Reward for their helping or not opposing His Restauration. The Papists also expected the same thing, as a reward for their Loyalty in adhering to the Crown. The Quakers, now a great People, grew confident of the like Freedom, because of their Inoffensive∣ness to Government. But instead of this expected Liberty; all the former Penal Laws made in the time of Q. Elizabeth, K. James, and K Charles the First, were Revived, and ordered to be put in Execution, as well against all Non-conformists, who were Protestants, as against the Papists. And new and more severe Laws were made against them all: And by these respective Pra∣ctices we see, what all these Parties have done when they had Power. I think such as understand the Transactions of our Country, will clear me from having made any mistake as to matters of Fact, in any thing that I have here said, touching past Persecutions; though I believe there will not want some, who will either think me mis∣taken
in the point of Charity, when I profess to believe that I do not think there is any one Party now in England, who holds it as a Principle of their Religion, That it is Lawful to Persecute, or to make or Execute Laws for the Inflicting of Pains or Penalties for any matters of meer Religion: Or else they will supect, I do not in Truth believe what I here profess to believe in this point, since even what I have said as to matters of Fact before urged by my self; it plainly appears, that there is not one Par∣ty now in England (the People called Quakers only excepted) who profess themselves Christians, but have been notoriously Guilty (more or less) of the very Fact, or (at least) of a publick allowing, if not abetting of it: And every Party will be apt to censure me of Singularity (at least,) since each Party thinks that they have Arguments drawn from Facts, sufficient to six this ugly Doctrine, as a Principle, upon that Religion which they hate most. O that the Man could prevail against the Beast! and that we would permit our Passions to give way to our Reason, to consider things nakedly, and as they truly are, Si satis est accusasse, Quis erit Innocens? If to accuse be a suf∣ficient Conviction, what Party shall be able to clear it self? And who knows not, that 'tis a Christians part to Suffer, but never to Persecute? I very well know, That the Protestants in general, who look upon the Papists as their common Enemies, do in their Pulpits, in their Writings, and in all their Addresses to the People, charge them with those Rivers of Blood which streamed in the times of Q. Mary, and with the Bloody Intentions which those il Men had in their Hearts, who were engaged in the wicked powder-Plot: That the first was done by Authority, and chiefly by the Popish Bishops: That the other, though the Fact but of private Persons, was never condemned by Authority; and Silence is an implyed consent and approbation. Do we well consider, what the Papists offer by way of Extenuation in answer to these Char∣ges? they justifie none of these Facts: But as to the first, they recommend to us to be considered, the circumstances that Q. Mary was in, when she came to the Crown. All the chief Heads of the Protestant Party, had set up and Proclaimed the Lady June
duly Queen, in opposition to Q. Mary, their Lawful Soveraign. They had raised an Army against her: She was compelled to gain her Right by Force: She was a Conqueror: And if we will believe them, she had not given any Articles, which might have obliged her to Pardon any who were guilty of this Usurpation, and Treason: She was told, It was a Confedracy of the whole Party of the Protestants, which gave her a ground to suspect, that the Protestants held it for a principle, That it was lawful for them to take up Arms against, and Depose their Lawful Soveraign, if of a Religion contrary to him. She might, by the Laws then in being, (the same which we have to this day in force amongst us) have taken away the Lives of all who were any ways Guilty of endeavouring to Depose her: She did not make any one new Persecuting Law (which is considerable) by which any of those were taken off who were put to Death. But being put into fears by her Council; that without making great Examples of Justice in all parts of the Kingdom, she would be in danger of having new Insurrections made by the Protestants against her; she was perswaded that the only way to prevent the sheding of more Blood for the Future, was to punish considerable numbers of those who had then actually broken the old Laws of her King∣dom. Her Bishops (and that is the chief and justest ground of the charge) had their Fears and Revenge also, in particular: They were newly restored to their Bishopricks, and Religion, of which they had been dispossessed in the Time of King Edward the Sixth; They were afraid of being again disturbed; and these fears and passions made them take wrong measures. They perswaded the Queen, that she might as well make Examples of Justice, and prevent future Insurrections, by punishing those for their Reli∣gion, who had been Guilty of Treason, as if she had punished them for Treason: And they urged, that by this way she should do her self the greater right: and give a proof to the World, that she was more offended with Treason committed against Heaven, (for so they esteemed Protestant Religion) than with Treason committed against her self, which might be interpreted Revenge. They had forgotten the Principles of the true Christian Re∣ligion, which required to leave unto God to Revenge whatso∣ever
Injuries are done to him, and to leave it to God to judge, what Injuries were done to him; They did not now think of doing unto others as they would that others should do unto them: They did not remember the wise advice of Gamaliel, before mention'd, but giving Ear only to their own Fears, and preferring Humane Policies before Gospel-Rules, they misled the Queen, and took away the Lives of vast numbers of such, against whom nothing could be charged, but what was matter of meer Religion; thereby giving a Just occasion to charge upon their own Re∣ligion the Principle of Persecution for meer Religion, which those who now profess that Religion here, do pretend to dis∣own and abominate. And as to the business of the Powder-Plot, they pray us to observe, that it was the Treason, not of the Papists of England, but of a few, particular persons of Desperate Fortunes and worse Consciences, and not without suspition of being drawn into the Snare by their Enemies: That upon the most severe Scrutiny which could be made into that business, it clearly ap∣pear'd, that the number of the Offenders was not greater than what happens sometimes to be engag'd in a particular Burglary, and not so many as make up the fourth part of a Foot Company of Souldiers: That the Villany of that design hath been as fully and generally, yea, and as publickly decry'd, condemn'd and reprobated by the whole party of English Papists of that Age, and of all succeeding Ages, as any thing can be by a Party in Persecution, who have not ever had any opportunities or allow∣ances to act in any case otherwise then each person of the party only in his private Capacity might do: and they Appeal to the Justice of those who profess to have the greatest Aversion of all others against the Religion of the Papists, whether they will admit it as a rule, that the Villanies of some private persons, who profess themselves to be in Fellowship or Communion with any Church or people, calling themselves Christians, may in Justice, and ought in Reason to be charged as proceeding from the Principles, Doctrines, or Religion of that Church or people with which private persons profess to be in Communion or Fellowship! They cry out, God forbid any such Rule should have credit in the World.
On the other side, I am not ignorant, that the Papists who Esteem the Protestants in general as their mortal Enemies, by whom they apprehend themselves to have been depriv'd of what is most dear unto them, from the time that the Protestant Religion first gain'd a Preheminency in England, are as highly Uncharitable towards the Protestants, as these are severe in their Censures towards them. They have almost look'd upon the Protestants, as the Israelites did upon the Egyptians; They charg'd upon them the guilt of all Blood that hath been shed, of all the Persecutions which have hap'ned for matters of meer Religion, since the first Act of Parliament of that nature, made by King Henry the VIII unto this hour: Insmuating, that what was so Cruelly Acted by Q. Mary's Bishops, was occasion'd by the Provocations given in the time of King Edward the VI. and warranted (as far as ill Acts can be warranted,) First, by the Non-conformists Retaliations towards the Church of England, when subdu'd by them upon the Death of King Charles the I. and then by the Retaliation made to the Non-conformists by those of the Church of England, since the Restoration of our present Soveraign. In short, as the Protestants in general, to excuse and justifie themselves, labour to cast Persecution for matters of meer Re∣ligion upon the Papists, as a Principle of Popery; so the Papists are as Industrious to perswade the World, that it is a Principle of Protestancy. I might here by way of Apology and Extenuation refer the Papists, as they do the Protestants, to consider of Circumstances of times and things which occasion'd their Severities against them, as the unruliness which might probably be amongst the people in the time of K. Edw. the VI. to see their Religion alter'd as they conceiv'd, by the Protector. And in Q. Elizabeth's time, besides the rensentment which the Protestants had of the Cruel∣ties which were exercis'd against them in Q. Mary's time, It is certain, the Papists did not look upon Q. Elizabeth to have any Right to the Crown; she having been declar'd by the Judi∣cial Sentence, and judgement of Arch-Bishop Cranmer to be Ille∣gitimate; and the Marriage between K. Henry VIII. and Anne of Bullen her Mother, being by the same Sentence declar'd ab∣solutely
void ab Initio, and that Sentence confirm'd by Act of Parliament, 28 Hen. 8. c. 7. So that the Papists took Q. Mary of Scotland to be the Rightful Heir to the Crown, and Rightful Queen, and Q. Elizabeth was constrain'd by great necessity to keep them under; but Apologies are not proper to be made on the behalf of those, who have the Authority towards those who are subjected. And as the Protestants in general, and the Papists, reproach'd each other, reciprocally charging upon each other, that Perse∣cution for matters of meer Religion was a Principle of each o∣thers Religion; so did the Episcopal Protestants, and the Non-Conformists: The Episcopal Party, who first Persecuted the Non-conformists under the general Name of Puritans, or Pres∣byterians, affirm'd, That their first beginners in Scotland, from whence they deriv'd themselves, did more than any Party upon Earth Persecute others for matters of meer Religion, and had gain'd a Power by their Vsurpation, Oppression and Persecution; being a sort of people who wanted the very Essentials (as they said) of Reli∣gion, viz. A Right Ordination, without which (as they alleadged) there could be no True Church, no True Ministery, or True Sacra∣ments: And that, therefore they ought by Penal Laws, timely made, to be prevented from making Disturbances in England. The Puritans to justify themselves, denying Persecution for matters of meer Religion to be their Principle, or to be lawful, la∣bour'd to fix it upon the Church of England as their Princi∣ple, and as taken up by them from the Papists. And as to the particulars charg'd upon those of Scotland, they said, That whatsoever those of the Reformation had done in Scotland, was approv'd and abetted by Queen Elizabeth and the Protestants of England, without whose Advice nothing in Scotland had been Transacted, and without whose Assistance things had not been so Effected: They further said, as to the point of Ordination, That the Church of England ought not in Reason, to account Epis∣copal Ordination to be such an Essential of Religion as they charged, for that if no Ordination could be valid but by Bishops, that then it would follow, that no Ordination could be valid but from True and Rightful Bishops of the True Church of Christ; and then the Ordination of the Church of England would be as invalid as
the Ordination of those of Scotland; for the Church of England could make out no Succession of Bishops, but through the Popish Church, which both parties (as well those of the Church of England, as those of Scotland) had condemned and agreed to be a False Church, and no True Church of Christ, but an Har∣lot and Anti-christian. Thus the Episcopal Protestants and the Puritans charged and recriminated each other; the Episcopal Party nevertheless ma∣king good their ground, so long as they had the Civil Power to support them; but when upon the Death of K. Charles the I, the Non-conformists gain'd the Civil Power into their Hands, the Church of England Party (like all Parties oppress'd) being under Persecution, together with the Papists, for matters of meer Reli∣gion, Did absolutely condemn all such Persecutions as Vnlawful. And then the Non-conformists (who were at that time sub-divi∣ded, and branch'd out into several other Parties) gave occasion to charge them with the Principle of Persecution for meer Reli∣gion, and put them to use the same Arguments to clear them∣selves, as the Episcopel Party and Papists had respectively before made use of, when the Government was in them, to prevail with the World to believe that they abhorr'd the Principle of Persecution for meer Religion; and that the Persecutions us'd by them, were not for any matters of meer Religion, nor in Truth Persecutions, but purely Acts of Prudence, and doing right to themselves by a just care to keep the Episcopal Party and the Pa∣pists out of all possibility of Persecuting them any more for the future. But none of them could find any reason of that Nature to ex∣cuse the Persecutions, which they us'd towards the people called Quakers, they could not charge them with ever having Persecu∣ted any Party or Person: Yet in Fact, both the Non-conformists and the Episcopal Party did Persecute them in their turns; and therefore to prevent being charged for persecuting a quiet Peo∣ple for matters of meer Religion, They pretended sometimes, that the Quakers were all Mad-men, and that they Imprison'd them only to keep them out of the way, and to preserve them in peace: And those who had gotten the Government, would upon that Title claim the right of judging what persons were Mad, as
they did always of judging what was Truth and what Errour. At other times they pretended to punish the Quakers as Blas∣phemers, and the Persecutors being the only Judges of what was Blasphemy under their Government, they might make what they pleas'd Blasphemy. When they grew asham'd of this Charge, they then pretended, that the Quakers were con∣ceal'd Papists, and that every one who spoke or utter'd any thing in their Meetings (whether Man or Woman) was a Je∣suit Disguis'd. It was clear, that the Quakers suffer'd highly, and it was as clear, there could not with any shew of Truth be any thing charg'd against them, but what was matter of meer Religion. Now upon the whole Business, what shall such a person judge of these matters, who esteems himself in danger of being judg∣ed by God, if he shall make any rash Judgment? Shall we take for a sufficient solid Proof, the Charge of an Exasperated Ene∣my, against an Enemy who hath provoked him, and this in a matter of so great a Concernment, as to render not a single Per∣son, but a whole Party unworthy to live? This were to judge against the Rules of common Justice and Righteousness, as well as to Sin against Charity: And this way of judging would render each Party (the Quakers only excepted) to be Guilty, and to give a just Title to each Party, where it hath the possession of Power and Government to put to Death all of the other Parties. For though we in England should refuse to admit the Charge of the Papists here to be a sufficient proof against the Protestants in so great a matter; yet let us not deceive our selves so far, as to suppose that in Popish Countries, the Charge of Papists against Protestants would not be taken to be at the least as valid, as the Charge of Protestants will be taken to be against Papists here. Shall we go another way, and say, that in regard every Party takes it self to be the only good and true Christian, and in re∣gard we see every Party, when in Power, practising this thing, and persecuting the other (when in their Power) for matters of meer Religion, that therefore every Party agrees in this? That it is Lawful for those who are the true Christians, to Make and Execute Penal Laws against such as are Erroneous Christians, and to Inflict Pains and Penalties upon them for matters of meer Religion,
that is, for Errors held by them as Doctrines of Religion: But nei∣ther will this be reasonable or convenient; for this will also give Title to those who have the Actual Power, and are in the possession of each respective Government in the Christian World, to put to Death, and destroy all within their respective Juris∣dictions, whom they judge to be Erroneous Christians: And this will be also to Entitle the Civil Magistrate in every Christian Country, to the absolute and uncontroulable right of judging be∣tween Truth and Error, so as to have no appeal from his defini∣tive Judgment; and to entail against common Sense an Infalli∣bility in the Civil Magistrate of every Country of determining in matters of Faith and Religion: I say, against common Sense; for Christianity teacheth us, that there can be but one true Faith; and if this Power of judging should be allow'd to the Civil Magistrate, there would be as many Faiths as there are Governments amongst Christians: That would be true Faith in one Country, and the denyal of it punishable with Death; which in another Country would be an Error and a False Faith, and the affirming of it punishable with Death. It would also be to justify not only what the Papists in Eng∣land, but what both the Papists and Protestants in all other parts cast as a Charge upon our Nation, That the only Rule of Faith in England, is the Parliament of England; that nothing is true Christian Doctrine in England, nor any Translation or Sense, or In∣terpretation of Scripture, a true Translation or Sense, or Interpreta∣tion of Scripture in England, but what is judg'd so to be by the Par∣liament of England. Whereas, though in the Statute made 2, 3 Edw. 6. c. 1 Entituled, An Act for the Vniformity of Ser∣vice and Administration of the Sacraments throughout the Realm: It was affirm'd by that Parliament, That the Book of Common-Prayer enjoyn'd by that Statute to be us'd, was made by the Aid of the Holy Ghost: Yet that very Book was by that very Parliament alter'd and amended, as appears by Statute 5 Edw. 6. C. 1. And it hath received several Reformations and Amendments since, and was in and by a Parliament in Q. Marys days, judged to be Heretical. As to my own Judgment in this particular Affair, it leads me to another way of reasoning and discoursing; I do, and I think I
am bound in Charity to believe that every Person and Party who professeth Christianity, do at least intend to be what they profess, and that they do all in their Hearts fully give consent unto all those common Doctrines of Christianity, which, as standing Prin∣ciples of that pure Religion, were never question'd or deny'd by any sort of Christians, such as are those which I have before ob∣serv'd, Of doing unto others, as we would have others do unto us, and of not doing Evil, that Good may come of it; and those others of Loving our Neighbours as our selves; yea, and of Loving our very Enemies, and doing good to them that who hate us and use us de∣spightfully: All which, when soberly consider'd, without Pas∣sion or Humane Interest, are expresly against all Persecutions for matters of meer Religion, and do not only tye up Protestants from destroying of Protestants, but even from Persecuting of any sort for any matters of meer Religion: as those Commands, Thou shalt do no Murther, Thou shalt not Steal, Thou shalt not commit Adultery, and against and tye up all Christians from shedding of Blood Unlawfully and Malitiously, and against Rapine and Vncleanness. And such do also in their Hearts believe, that what∣ever Counsel or work is of man, will fall of it self; and that what is of God will stand Maugre all the Persecutions and Oppo∣sitions of man; and that there is none of them do intend to fight against God, or would willingly be found so doing. All this be∣ing taken by me in my own Thoughts, to be most certainly true, when ever I come to enquire, How then can these things be? How can all these Parties (among which there are great numbers of Good, Sober, Judicious and Sincere persons) offend against these common Principles of the common Faith of all Christians, by making and Executing Penal Laws for matters of meer Reli∣gion? Immediately adjoyning to this another Question, which is, And how can so many persons, professing to be Christians, take revenge by Blood, usurp the Goods of their Neighours, and commit the Sin of Vncleanness! Yet all these were once done by that great and good King, and Prophet, who was a Man after God's own Heart. That which to me Answers this latter Question, seems clearly to solve the former; That the Beast gets the better of the Man; The Passions commit a force upon Reason; And Humane Frailty, being too weak, brings the best of men
sometimes (though but for a time) and careless men oftentimes to contradict their Faith by their Practice, until by Afflictions they gain understanding, and come to Repentance for the Saving of their Souls. This to me seems so evident a Truth, that, until something more evident shall convince me of my being mistaken in this, I should think it as great a Sin against Charity, for me to charge it as a Principle of the Religion of any Party (profes∣sing to be Christians) That Persecution for meer Religion is Lawful, because I see it practis'd by those who have Power amongst that Party, as to charge the same Party, to hold it as a Principle of their Religion, that Murther, Theft and Adultery are Lawful, because great numbers of that Party, are too often guilty of the practice of those Sins. If this way of considering things be not found unreasonable, but upon due reflection, shall appear to be conformable to the true Principles of Christianity, and the Holy Rules and Doctrines of Christ, I hope those who are publick persons, will forgive me when I wish they would lay it to their Hearts, and think well, whether it would not be of use to preserve this poor Nation, from the further guilt of those additional Injustices, and Cruelties, which the contrary way of rash Judging must involve, and daily do involve us in. Is it not more calm Judgment to say, That the Disordinate Pas∣sions of K. Henry the VIII. hurried him into those Cruelties which he committed, than to impute them to the Principles of any Religion which he profess'd? Is it not more becoming us to say, that an over-zealous Passion of Fears which our first Reformers had in the time of K. Edw. the sixth, made them apprehend, that they could not put Popery out of its Possession otherwise than by force, and consequently led them unwarily into practices, which were contrary to their True Faith, then to admit the Charge laid on them by the then Persecuted Papists, That Persecution for meer Religion, was the first Protestant Principle, upon which Pro∣testancy laid its first Politick Foundation in England? Were it not more Ingenious, to attribute the Cruelties, which were in∣flicted in Q. Mary's time, to the Passion of Fear in that Queen, and of Fear and Covetousness in her Bishops, that nothing could secure her against New Rebellions from the Protestants, nor
fix the Bishops in their re-gain'd Possessions, but Examples of the utmost rigour, then to labour to fix those Barbarous Cru∣elties as a Principle upon the Religion of the Queen? Is it not more Charitable to assign all the harsh Laws made and exe∣cuted in the times of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and in the several succeeding times since by the Government avowedly Pro∣testant, to the Fear, Ambition, Revenge, or other frail Passions, cover'd generally under the specious Titles of Reason of State, then to give the World a just Ground to charge those Crueltie; upon a Principle of Protestancy. This we must do, or (which is as much to our Dishonour) we must give a just Ground to the most Civiliz'd Nations of the World, to charge those past Bar∣barities, exercis'd so long in England, upon the People of our Nation, to the Cruelties of our English Natures: For what other thing can Forreign Nations impute it unto, when they shall observe the same Persecution continued for near one hundred and forty years, under all the various Forms of Religion which we have had, each Party renouncing the Cruelties to proceed from any Principle of the Religion own'd by that Party, yet exercising in Fact, what they renounce to be their Faith. But my Charity doth not rest here, it compels me to make yet one step further; and since it is not to the Dishonour of our Na∣tion, I hope none will be displeas'd with it. As I am verily per∣swaded, that all those Penal Laws, which have been made in this our Nation for the inflicting of Pains and Penalties for matters of meer Religion, have not had their Original from any Prin∣ciple of any of those Religions which have been profess'd by any of those Powers or Governments by which they were made, but ought to be imputed to the Passions of those who made, and caus'd them to be put in Execution: And that a false Reason of State, or zeal in Church-men, gave those Passions leave to work even against the Religion which every Party Persecuting, Profess'd; so do I most confidently believe, that the True Prin∣ciples of the common Christianity, which every Party own'd, and true Reason of State grounded upon those true and com∣monly own'd Principles, restrain'd all and every the respective Parties, by whom those Laws were made, from all Intentions of having all, or any of those Laws rigidly Executed; so that
those who had from time to time, and who still have the Exe∣cutive and Interpretative Power of those Laws vested in them, have always understood, and do still continue to understand those Laws not to have been intended by the Legislative Power to be strictly and rigidly or constantly executed: My Reason is, that had this been otherwise, All of All Parties, except one, who at some time had been in Power, must have been e're this totally Butcher'd or destroy'd, and our poor Country so far Depopu∣lated as to have become a Prey to some of our Potent Neigh∣bours: For even in Queen Mary's times, thousandes escaped that never sled; and had private Meetings, but the most Eminent were Cruelly used. I know some there are who have imputed the remiss Executi∣on of these unkind Laws to the Generous Good Nature which is found in the generality of our Nation, which abhors Cruelty, and hath always a compassion for those who are under Persecu∣tion; and which well appears to any who reflect upon the ten∣derness of our Courts of Justice, and of the generality both of our Magistrates, and our Juries in all the Countries in England, and how they have comported themselves under the several Cir∣cumstances of past Times, when they have been call'd upon, and Provok'd, yea Threatn'd, and endeavour'd to have been forc'd into a Spirit of Persecuting. Others there are, who have taken the great unwillingness in all sorts of persons to be active in the Execution of these Laws to proceed from the innate zeal that is in every English man to preserve the Liberties and Properties of their Fellow Subjects, as well as their own; and that they have observ'd, that Liberty and Property were never any way so much Entrench'd upon, violated and destroyed, as by these Cruel Laws of Persecution for meer Religion: So that every man considering when he sees his Neighbour (though differing in Judgement from himself) Persecuted and destroyed for what ought to be call'd rather his mistake then his Fault (for no man can believe against his Judgement, or take an Oath against his Conscience without sin) that though this be his Neighbours turn this year, it may be his own turn the next year, or next Reign; and no mans Life, Li∣berty or Property can be secure in case such Laws be Executed;
but only such men, who have a Conscience fitted for all Changes of Government, and for every Religion that is uppermost, and who for that reason are as unfit to be Trusted by their Neigh∣bours as by the Government. But though I take it to be very true that this natural incli∣nation to Mercy and pity, and this real zeal which all men have for the preserving of Liberty and Property, may have been great helps to keep off, or mitigate the severe Execution of these Laws of Persecution for meer Religion; yet when I well consider the great power and Influences which the Supreme Authority always hath upon the Subjects; and particularly upon all the Magistrates in general, who are always persons nominated and appointed by the Supreme Authority; and must be therefore suppos'd to be such in whom the Supreme Authority always Confides, as to the due Execution of what the Supreme Authority intends to have Executed; I think it will Naturally follow, that a forbearance of the rigid Execution of these Laws, ought to be chiefly imputed to the Religion and true Christian policy of the Supreme Authority; and we ought to believe, that though a false Reason of State did sometimes permit Humane Frailty, to make such Laws as were contradictory to the true Laws and Principles of that very Religion which those persons professed, by whom those Laws were made; yet true Religion, and true reason of state always kept those persons from intend∣ing to have those Laws rigidly and severely Executed. I will confirm this by one single Instance of the highest Na∣ture, and that not in the best of times. The last Popish Priest that was put to Death in England for being a Priest of the Romish Church, was put to Death in the time of Cromwel; I suppose, we are not to doubt of the Pas∣sionate heat which inflam'd those who were then in Authority against the Papists and Popery; they look'd on the Papists as mortal Enemies to their Government, and as fast Friends, and devoted Servants to the Crown and Royal Family: Notwith∣standing which, when the said Priest came upon his Tryal at the Sessions-house in the Old-Baily in London, and upon his Arraign∣ment, Pleaded that he was not Guilty of Treason, but acknow∣ledg'd himself to be a Priest of the Roman Church: It clearly ap∣pear'd,
that those who were his Judges, did their utmost to preserve his Life, and to prevent the Execution against him of those Laws upon which he stood Indicted: For they did for many hours suspend the Recording of his Confession, making it their endeavour to prevail with him to Plead not Gluilty to the Indictment: They pressed him to this in the publick Court, assuring him, that if he would so Plead, his Life should be safe; and that they had no Evidence which could prove him to be a Priest. And when the Old Man (Aged about seventy two years) would not be drawn to deny himself to be a Priest; (taking it to be a denying of his Religion) and that the Court was compell'd to give Judgment against him; the Magistrate who gave the Sentence, was so drown'd in Tears upon that sad occasion, that it was long before he could pronounce the Sen∣tence, which the Law compell'd (as he profess'd) to give. Now I ask, can it be presum'd that in those severe times against Po∣pery, those who then sate upon the Seat of Justice, would, or durst have proceeded thus in a publick (out, and made it their business so openly, so avowedly to have sav'd the Life of a Priest of that Party, if they had not well consider'd that the Makers of those Laws, and even Cromwel, who had then taken upon him the Government of these Nations, did not in Truth intend a rigid and severe Execution of those Laws, which were for Inflicting Pains and Penalties for matter of meer Religion? But I think, I need give no further Instances for the proof of this my Opinion: Whosoever shall reflect upon the present Genius of our whole Nation, and consider in what detestation all men have the Execution of Persecuting Laws of matters of meer Religion, how publickly Informers are Abhorr'd and Discountenanced, when they labour to Persecute any upon any such Law, will easily see that the whole Nation in general is Convinc'd, that those Laws were never any of them made, with intention to have them rigidly Executed. I have been told, (and it seems to be grounded upon Reason) that it is a Principle of our Laws, That even an Act of Parliament, which is against the Law of God, or against Reason, is void in it self; If this be true (as methinks it ought to be) I think we are very near the time, wherein all our present Laws of this Nature, by which
any are subject to be in any measure Persecuted for matters of meer Religion, will be Repealed by the general Voice of the whole Nation, and that when the particular Persons, of which the great Body of this Nation is compos'd, shall have considered something more deliberately, than their Passions have yet per∣mitted all to do, that every Law of this Nature is against the Liberty and Property of the Subjects of England; Unjust and Cruel, in punishing men for not proceeding against their Con∣sciences; Expresly against the very Principles and Rules of the Gospel of Christ, and Principles of that true Religion which every one of us pretends to own; Destructive to the Trade and Well-being of our Nation, by Oppressing and driving away the most Industrious Working Hands of our Nation, and De∣populating, and thereby Impoverishing our Country, which is capable of imploying three times the number of People which we now have: Contradictory to the Rule of Justice, grounded upon common Reason, as well as Religion, which requires, That no man should do unto another, what he would not have done unto himself, And consequently void in it self by the Rule of the Laws of our Country: There will not be found a Magistrate, nay, a common Subject in England, who will not as positively re∣nounce the putting in execution, or being accessary to the exe∣cuting of any Law of this Nature, as he will renounce the be∣coming guilty of those detestable Sins of Murder or Theft. But until Men are a little further convinc'd of these Truths, you (Sir) ought not to be angry with, but rather pity those Ma∣gistrates from whose Hands you have lately suffer'd for a Matter meerly of Religion: Peradventure they did not fully consider that the Matter with which you were charged, was a thing of meer Religion, but took your Meeting in an Assembly meerly for the Worship of God, to be an unlawful Assembly, because pro∣hibited by a present Law, as the poor Magistrates in the Apo∣stles times took their Meetings in their Assemblies meerly for the Worship of God, to be unlawful Assemblies, and Breaches of the Peace, because they were prohibited by their Laws: Or perhaps their fear that they should themselves be subject to a Forfeiture, in case they should have deny'd their Warrant to the Informer, made them fall under that Humane Frailty for se∣curing
of themselves. However it was, I suppose you have no just Ground to believe the thing to be any effect of Malice against you or your Friends; and if it be not, then the same Magistrates, now their fear is over, may yet be instrumental to do you and themselves Right. It is Odds but upon a strict Reflection upon what the Informer hath sworn, the Devil may have prevailed with him to swear something which may be proved untrue; for Informers are not squeamish in swearing for their own profit, as it hath appear'd in London and Middlesex, and one point of Perjury proved, will invalidate all his Testimony, and re∣verse all that is done: At which I am very confident no Man (besides the Informer) will be displeased. And this is in plain Truth the great Reason why your Friends here desire to know all the Circumstances of your Case; the certifying of which, may be an Advantage to your self and your Friends there, and will be particularly very welcome unto Sir, Your Old True Friend And Humble Servant, A. N.
Postscript. I Have here-omitted many of those great Arguments, both which others have used, and which may yet be advanced from the Na∣ture of this Subject, partly because there are so many Discourses ex∣tant, and partly because English mankind begins to be satisfied in the Matter. Yet this give me leave to add in general, That Force upon Conscience, and Corporal Penalties about Matters of Religion, have not only no President or Example from Christ or his Apostles, but are expresly against both their Precepts and Examples. This Coercion is the old Disturber of States, the Destroyer of Property, the Depopulator of Kingdoms, the Enemy of Humane Nature, of Kind Neighbourhood, and of Conscientious Religion. At best it either maketh men Religious by Rote, which is no Reli∣gion, or Conformable for Fear and Interest, which is Ir-religion, and base Hypocrisy. But besides all this, it corrupteth and di∣stracteth the Nature of all Civil Government, by making the mea∣sure of Loyalty, nor Love, Honour and Obedience to Caesar, but Conformity to the Clergy and Religion in Fashion; which destroys the true Dependence and Obligation in Government, and subjects the Lives, Liberties and Estates of the People to the frequent Revo∣lutions of Religion; which ought to stand fixed and Sacred upon the common and undeniable Principles of Civil and Just Government. I hope I shall be excus'd for this Conception, since of all others, This renders to Caesar the things that are Caesar's: And would to God, all the Caesars of the World saw the Truth of this Notion: They would not then suffer themselves to be grown upon, not only by another Power then Caesar's, but by a Power contrary to Caesar's and which in the tendency of it leaves Caesar nothing but His Name. Let Him be felt King of all His People, by His Goodness, as well as by His Power. Optimus went before Maximus among Infi∣dels; and shall Pretenders to the best of Religions (Christianity I mean) decline it? All Creatures Nourish and Defend their Young: We are the Children of the Government, and should be Conforted and
Defended under the Magistrates Wing of Just Power and Favour: He should Endeavour our Encrease, Encourage our Industry, and thereby Enrich and Replenish the Kingdom, not Impoverish and De∣populate it. For the Glory of a Prince is in the multitude of his People: Not Beggars, but Men of Industry. But who dares to be Industrious, that would not have his Labours made the Forfeit of his Sober Conscience? VNHAPPY AGE! Come! 'tis time for Humane Nature to remember from whence she came, for Man∣kind to Love, for Caesar to be kind to all His People; To let his Rain fall upon all, his Sun-shine upon all, that he may justly render Himself Master of the Affections of all; and not serve Factions nor Interest, nor imbroile his Government with the Opinionary Differences about Religion, which doth not Enlarge, but Narrow His Empire: And those that put him upon such Measures, let their Pretences be what it will, they are too narrow for his Glory, and do Ill Offices in the great Family of the Kingdom. They set the Father against the Son, and excite him to Dis-inherit his Children, and those Virtuous too, meerly for the sober Exercise of a Dissenting Conscience, about matters relating to t'other World: This is Practi∣sing Reprobation for Opinion, and sacrificing Nature and Mo∣rality to Modes of Religion: Nay, this is to Engross Caesar by a Party, and to Monopolize Him from the rest of His People; A sin against the very Nature and end of Government. God grant us all more Wisdom, more Honesty, and more Charity, and that we may yet live to see all Industry encouraged, the Poor employed, the Kingdom in Love with its own Growths, Virtue only re∣warded, Vice only punished, that Righteousness, Peace and Plenty may yet vouchsafe to dwell amongst us. So be it to Caesar and His people, while the Sun and Moon endures. THE END.
