N541 R38883 18185817 106947
A New and Exact DESCRIPTION OF MOSCOVY. (1.) Containing its State Antient and Modern, Situation, Extent, Latitude, Division into Provinces, Rivers, Soile, Sterility, and Fertility, with the Commoditys, and Observations on the Extreamitys of Weather Hot and Cold. (2.) Of the Citys and Towns, Fortification and manner of Building. The first Discovery made by the English; Populousness of the Country, Wild Beasts, and Disposition of the Natives. (3.) Of their Religion, Marriages, Obedience of the Wome to their Husbands, Divorce, Burials, and other Cerimonies. Their Diet, Liquors, Stoves, Hot-houses, Habits, &c. (4.) Of the Government of the Provinces and Shires, their Courts of Justice, holding Parliaments, &c. (5.) Their Millitary Affairs, Degrees and Order in it, Arms, Discipline, with other matters. (6.) The Revenues of the CZAR, Coins, Weights, Measurs, Trade∣ing, and of the Raritys of Moscovy. (7.) The Succession of the Royal House of Moscovy to the present CZAR, being a Historical ccount of all the Material Transact∣ions happening for 1600 years. The manner of the CZAR's Coronation, Arms of Moscovy, and Degrees of the Nobility, &c. The whole containing all tht is necessary to be known concerning that VAST EMPIRE. LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, and Sold by mo Booksellers, 1698.
THE PREFACE. Reader, THe following Sheets will Accomodate you with the Plea∣sure of surveying the Fam'd and Spacious Dominions of the Renowned CZAR of Moscovy, in which you may rightly Inform your self of all that is Rare or Admirable in that Northern Track, which for many Ages has been the Theatre of great Actions, and undergone divers notable Revolutions; a Country every where spoken of by Travellers, and a Trade or Commerce sought with it eagerly by distant Nations. Here you have the State of things so Compact and Lively represented that these few Sheets cannot miss of their end, in being exceeding Satisfactory, because I may be bold to say, I have not omitted whatever can be reasonably requir'd in such an undertaking, even in the Minutest matters the Curious searchers after the Know∣ledge of Remote Regions are apt to pry into, and thereby satiate their Curiosity with variety, I shall not trouble you with my Reasons (as many too formally do on the like occasions) for this undertaking, but rather leave you to your own Conjectures; yet one thing I cannot pass over in silence, which is, that it may not prove only pleasant in Reading, but very profitable and advantageous to such as Trade, or may happen to Travel, in so large a part of the World, because it contains something of History as well as discription, inter∣weaving Antiquity with Modern speculation, costing no small pains to produce so fair a birth, when such slender accounts were to be had (from those that have resided there) to form it. It is true many Splendid Embassyes have been sent and return'd in precedent Reigns; The understanding Men of our
Nation have Travell'd there, and seen the face of that Earth Glaz'd with Snow in Winter, and in Summer found it Fruitful to Admiration, yet their enquiry has been but little into the State of Affairs, or the Produce of divers kinds, as not being sufficiently Sedulous to inform themselves and others; But here you will find the curtain drawn, and what lay long in obscurity presented by a larger Industry than what has before been undertaken, and so banishing all Scruples that may arise to prejudice yours or my Expation in the Success of this Book; I am, Your Friend and Servant, The Author.
A New and Exact DESCRIPTION OF Moscovy, &c. CHAP. I. Of Moscovy Antient and Modern: Its Situation, Extent, Division into Provinces, Rivers, Soile, Latitude, Sterility and Fertility of the Fruits, Corn, and other Commodities it produces, with Observations on the Extream Cold and Heat Incident to this spacious Country, &c. WE find by Experience, that God in his Infinite Wisdom has Framed and Posited the Globe of Earth and Wa∣ters, with the Dependant Elements, so Admirable in every part, that Man cannot but be surpriz'd with wonder when he considers the Harmony in all the spacious Mass, and his Curiosity would be tired with a too tedious search into every particular. Let it suffice then that Modern Discoveries have brought to light, what former Ages knew little (or were altogether Ignorant) of. I shall not insist on the American, or New World (so termed by many) That, but a few Ages past, all Europe, and, I may with reason say, the then two other Divisions of the Suppos'd Total Universe were strangers to; for, my bu∣siness at present not lying that way, I shall bend it on the vast Northern Track of Country, antiently hinted at, and now so well discover'd by the Name of Russia; but more properly, to follow the Modern Writers Mscovy, as the far nobler, and most ac∣cepted Name of that part of Earth, producing great advantages to such as Trade with it, and an Improvement of Knowledge to those that Travel its Spacious Limits. The Famed Country of Muscovy, or as some will have it Rus∣sia, is bounded on the East with the River Ob, or Oby, and the
Negayan Tartars; on the West with Lithuania, Livonia and Po∣and; on the North with Lapland and the Ocean; on the South with a part of Tartary, called the Crimee: It was formerly cal∣led Sarmatia, and, as most suppose, changed its Name (because it was divided into divers small, but Absolute Governments) to that of Russia; for, in their Language the Word signifies a Part∣ing, or Dividing. VVhen this Country was called Sarmatia, it was divided into Two Principal Parts, the VVhite and Black. The first of these contain'd all that lyeth towards the North, and on the part of Liefland, viz. (as now the Provinces are nam'd) Vagha, Duyna, Vologda, Ʋstio, Carga, Polia, Novogrodia, and some others of lesser note. As for the Black Sarmatia of the Antients, It comprehended the Southern part, toward the Euxine, or Black Sea, viz. The Dukedomes of Mosco, Volodemar, Rezan, and some others. Since this it has been enlarg'd by Addition and Con∣quest, and is at present under a single Government, notwithstand∣ing all the Efforts the Tartars, and other bordering Countrys have made to hinder the flourishing of it, and to share the Frontires amongst them; to which end they have made Cruel Wars and Inroads, shedding much Blood, Plundering, Burning, and committing many othet Outrages. The Principal Provinces of Moscovy (for so I must properly call it) are Volodemar, Moscow, Plesco, Nisnovogrod, Smolensco, Novogrod-velica (or Novogrod of the Lower Country) Moschora, Rostove, Ghaletsa, Ʋstuga, Vagha, Cargapolia, Yaruslave, Bealo, Ze∣ra, Bezan, and Duyna. These, with their Dependancies, are ve∣ry Large, far exceeding our Shires in England; and though they are termed the Natural Provinces, there yet remain others gain∣ed by Enlarging their Borders, viz. Twerra, Youghoria, Condora, Permia, Abdoria, Vedska, Boulghoria, Cheringo, Oudoria, comprehen∣ding Siberia, Cazan and Astracan, with some others now Depen∣dant on the Government of Moscovy: So that this spacious Country, from North to South, Measur'd from Cola to Astra∣can, which bends somewhat Eastward, is in Length a∣bout 4260 Verst, a Verst being something more than 3 quarters of an English Mile; and Northward beyond Cola are other Ter∣ritories, but the Extream Cold is there very Oppressive, so that they are not much Fertil when their Coat of Snow is dissolv'd by the Sun in the Four Hot Summer Months. The Breadth from that part which lyeth the farthest West from the Narve side to the part of Siberia Eastward, is, in a manner, equal to the Length.
Moscovy is Water'd by many large Rivers, most of them, when the Weather is open being Navigable, some by lesser and some by larger Vessels that procure a considerable Trade, but in the Ridged Season they are frozen over so that Sleads and Carriages pass on them from place to place, they abound in Fish, and the Volga is famous for the great quantity of Sturgeon taken in it. It is about 2800 Verst in length, an English Mile in most places over, and empties its Waters into the Caspian Sea, running by Astracan, and other Towns of Note, to which it brings a con∣siderable Trade. The other Rivers of Note, are the Boristhenes, that divideth the Country from Lithuania, and falleth into the Euxine Sea. The Tanais, or Don, the Antient boundary be∣tween Europe and Asia, falling into the great Lake of Moeotis, by the City of Azou, Duyna falling unto the Bay of St. Nicholas, Northward, and to be brief, a great many more, as Moscow running thorough the City of that Name, and about ten others very large, besides smaller Streams, the least for length and breadth comparable to the River of Thames; and from these proceed many Branches; so that take the Country in general, it is as well Watered as can be desired, and accomodated with several good Ports and Havens. The Soile of this Spacious Country cannot be reasonably ex∣pected, no more than others, Fertil in all places alike, and in some parts particularly, by reason of its Northern Situation, lying from 33 to 69 degrees and some Minutes North Latititude: Yet is it wonderful to see how God has ordered things here to the Advantage and for the Subsistance of the Inhabitants. The Earth, for the most part, is of a slight Sandy Mould, but not a∣like for producing such things as spring up Northwards, towards St. Nicholas and Cola, and North-East towards Siberia, there is an indifferent Sterility, the Country there being full of Desarts and vast Forrests, by reason of the extreamety of the Climate in the colder Season; but from the Volga, which lyes almost 1700 verst from the Port of St. Nicholas, down towards Moscow, and so the Southern parts that border on the Crimee, that contains near the like space, the Country is very Fruitful in the proper Season, yeilding Pasture, Corn, Flowers, pleasant Fruits, and Woods in great plenty; and so it is between Rezan and Novogrod that lyes South-East from Moscow and other parts, as between Moscow and Smolensko, that lyes South-West towards Littuania; insomuch that one would wonder to see the great alteration be∣tween
Winter and Summer in Moscovy. In the former the whole Country is cover'd by a continual falling Snow, that is some∣times a yard or two in deepness in the Southern parts, but more excessive in the North; and the Cold is so extream, that the Rivers and other Waters are Frozen to a vast thickness, and this usually continues for five Months, viz. from the beginning of November till towards the end of March, at what time the Suns warm beams returning, the Snow begins to melt away, which makes the face of the Country look very frightful, and the Ways on the Thaw, for a time unpracticable. But then, as it were, on a suddain, the face of Nature is chang'd (for though a little before Water thrown up in the Air would descend in Ice drops, and any Mettal grasped fast in ones hand stick to the Skin and make it blister if taken abroad, and many People venturing too far were frozen to death in the Streets, and on their Jorneys in the Sleads.) Now the Woods (that are mostly of Birch and Firr) give a pleasing sight, the Meddows and Pastures look green and grow apace, variety of Flowers appear in the Fields, and the Birds make a pleasing Harmony, the Nightingals there in a∣bundance have a clearer Note than with us, and this suddain growth of things proceeds from the Benefit of the Snow which lying so long keeps off the Rigour of the Frost, and disolving so thoroughly, drenches and soaks the Earth, that the Sun coming hot as it were on a suddain into a cold Climate, the Plants and Herbs, &c. find such a Norishment that they sooner shoot forth than in warmer Countrys; and indeed, considering the past cold, the heat is greater than usually with us in June, July and August which produces store of Aples, Pears, Plums, Cherrys Black and Red, a Fruit like a Musk-Mellion but more pleasant in tast; Cucumbers, Gowrds, Rasps, Strawberrys, Hurtle-berrys and many o∣ther Berrys; also Wheat, Rye, Barley, Pease, Buskway, Psnytha, tasting somewhat like Rice, and sometimes they have such plenty that Wheat is sold at two English Pence a Bushel, the Rye is sow'd before the Frost, all other Grain for the most part the beginning of May, but the Northern parts are usually served in a great de∣gree by the Southern with Corn as being more Steril. This Country above others is noted for Rich Furs which they get by hunting divers creatures, as also Hides, Tallow, Wax, Honey, Flax, Hemp, Tar, and other valuable Commoditys.
CHAP. II. Of the Cities and Towns of Moscovy, their Situation, Fortificati∣on, Manner of Building. The Discovery of the North-east Pas∣sage by the English, their Factory Setled at Arch-Angel, &c. The Populousness of the Country, considering the Wasts in it: The Danger of Wild Beasts, and the Disposition of the Na∣tives. OF the Creatures of this Country I shall Treat particu∣larly in due place; But now pursuing the Method I propose to lay down, The next thing that offers is the Cities, Towns, and the like, that Adorn and Beautify the Coun∣try, and those of Note are, Moscow the Metropolis, from which the Country at pre∣sent seems to take its Name, as that City does from the Ri∣ver, on whose Bounds it stands: It is about 12 Miles in com∣pass, and may contain about 41500 Families, Convents, Chur∣ches, and Chappels: The Houses in general are built with VVood, Plaister'd with Mortar and Straw, done over with Lime brought from Smolensko, &c. and then covered over with Boards and Bark of Trees, which renders them cooler in Summer, and warmer in VVinter, but subjects them more to Fire, of which they have had many Fatal Experiments; for An. 1571. The Tartars Burnt it, and in it destroy'd about 80000 Persons. Anno 1611. the Polanders Fir'd it. Anno 1676. an Accidental Fire happen'd, and sunk 5000 Houses in the Conflagration: But since care has been taken to Re∣build those Devastations, for the most part, and at present 'tis reckon'd among the Flourishing Cities of Europe, and Guards are appointed to prevent the Progress of that Raging Element as much as lies in them, for the future preserving the Building. The Churches and Houses of the Persons of Quality are Built with Stone and Brick; some of the Principal Churches Cover'd with Guilt Copper, or Tin, and Adorn'd with many Large Globes of the same Mettal. There is a Bell Raised on a Tower, I conceive the Largest in the World,
for it is held to Weigh 176 Tun, though it has been Clip∣ped, and some Tuns of Mettal taken from it to make it sound the better, it is 24 Foot in height, and the Clapper 21 Foot. By pulling the Clapper, and striking against the sides it is Rung on particular occasions. The Form of this Great City is in a manner Round, with Three Strong Walls Circling the one within the other, the Streets lying between, whereof the Inmost Inclosure in the Heart of the City, is all accounted the CZAR, or Great Duke's Castle; and the River Accommodates it with a Sufficiency of Water, store of Fish, and other Provisions. The Castle is Four-square, Situate on a Hill Two Miles about, with Brick-walls very high, and a vast Thickness; it has Sixteen Gates, and as many Bulwarks: The Chief Markets are kept here, and on the River, when it is Glaz'd with Ice, this River encloses the Castle on the South-west-side, and in it are Nine Fair Chur∣ches with Guilt Spires. The next City of Note is Novograde, but not so Stately as Moscow. The Houses are Built with Timber Layed-in, and Fasten'd with Dents, or Notches; and so fasten'd together holds well. The Streets, in stead of Paving, are Planked with Firr, and other Timber very neatly, of which Provi∣dence has plentifully stor'd them, so that a House may be Built for a very little matter, as 20 or 30 Rubbles. This City Boasts of the Fam'd Story of the Scythian Bondmen, who Rebelling against their Masters, and Seazing the City, their Effects, Wives, &c. in their Absence, and Overthrowing them on their Return, in a Bloody Battel; were, at length, never∣theless Discomfited and brought under by their Masters coming upon them only with Horse-whips, which put them in Mind of the Chain of Servitude they had so lately broken, and consequently Terrifi'd them into Obedience; and, upon this Account they have a Coine bearing the Impression of a Horseman, shaking a VVhip at a Flying Slave, Currant all over Moscovy. The other Citys of great note are Rostove, Volodomar, Smolen∣sko, Plesco, Yaruslave, Vologda, Perislave, Nisnovogrod, Astracan, Cargapolia, Columna, Vstiue, Cazan, Golmigreo, and of these Astra∣can, Yaruslave, and Cazan, have the precedency by reason of their convenient Situation on the borders so commodiously near the Volga. Yaruslave exceeds the rest for (besides the plenty of
Pasture and Corn the Soile yeilds) it has a great Trade by the River, being plesantly Situated on a high Bank overlooking it, and from its Situation it seems to take its Name, for that in the Russ Language signifies a fair Bank, though they boast it from Vlademira Surnamed Yaruslave, who Marry'd the Daughter of Harold King of England, by the Mediation of Sueno the Dane, An. 1067. To these of Note I may add Vobsko and Smolenko, which in some measure, stand in competition with them; Vologda is a pretty large City taking its Name from the River that passes through it. It has a Castle in it walled with Brick and Stone and many Churches but mostly built of Wood, and whereas there are two for a Parish, one is so contriv'd that it may be heated with Stoves in the Winter, it is a Town of much Trade though lying far from any Sea port. There are many considerable Towns, as Colmogro standing on the River Duyna, which is a great Town though without Walls, the Building is somewhat scattering, and near the Bay of St. Nicholas (so called from an Abby seated there when the English made a discovery of this Country) stands Arch-Angel, where they have a Factory and convenient Buildings, which lyes in about 64 degrees North-Latitude, and on the Banks of the River Duyna stands the Castle; the English have likewise Lands hereabouts asign'd them, and in this Cold part (so pleasant is the Country when the Snow is cleared, which it is doing 2 Months, and then the Ground in 14 days is dry) the Grass is soon knee deep; and in an Island in St. Nicholas Bay 7 or 8 Miles in Circuit, called Rose Island, grow Damask and Red Rose, Violets, Wild Rosemary and other pleasant things, so that to be brief I cannot but conceive this Country as to its many Wasts and Barren places, has been Misrepresented, and perhaps by some envious Neighbours because the English had the Honour and Advantage first to discover the North-East Passage by Sea, which was done by one Chancelour an Englishman, Anno. 1553 Sir Hugh Willoughby and others miscarrying in that tedious and painful Search; but since it has been easiy and Practicable, not only to us but other Nations: The English above others have found Encouragement upon the account of their being the first discoverers, for before the trade lay thorough Poland and o∣ther Hostil Territories. But not to make any long digression I shall proceed in my intended Brevetie.
This Country considering its largeness is well Peopled, where the huge Lakes and Desarts take not up the spaces, and Woods render it Impracticable, yet these are advantageous to them in afoarding store of Fish, Fowl and wild Beasts, that yeild the Natives great advantage, their Flesh for Food, and their Skins, Feathers, Tallow, &c. for Merchandise; the Lakes are very large, most of them Navigable, but not very commodious to live near by reason of great Fogs and Damps that arise from them, and as for Towns and Villages near the great Forrests and Woods, the Inhabitants must be in some apprehension of danger from the great number of Wolves and Bears that Rove about for Prey, which Ravenous Creatures pinch'd in the ex∣cessive rigour of Winter with cold and hunger, contemning the fear of Dogs or Fire-Arms, will come out in Troops, and make a fearful havock among the People and their Cattle. The Natives of this Country are very industrious and Patient of Hunger, yeilding a profound Homage and Respect to their Prince, paying their Taxes with a willing and chearful obedience, and run readily to the Wars on the first command or summons; where it is strange to see what hardship they will endure, for when the ground is cover'd with Snow frozen very thick, the common Soldier will lye in the Field without a Tent or cover∣ing over his head, only he hangs up his Mantle against that part from whence the Weather drives, and kindling a little Fire lyes down before it, his Food Oatmeal or Pulse, and his Drink the cold Stream, his Horse feeding on green Wood and Bark, and yet do the Service of the War, or Travel as well as those that are Pamper'd in Stables with more convenient Provender, tho the Horse has no other Covering than the Canopy of Heaven; and those Soldiers that bear hardship the best, and deserve well by Memorable Exploits, are rewarded sometimes with Money, and at others with certain Lands Assigned them during Life, which the CZAR of Moscovy always has in his Donation in one part or other of his Country for this purpose.
CHAP. III. Of their Religion, Wooing, Marriages. The Moscovit Womens Obedience to their Husbands. Divorce, Burial of the Dead, and other Ceremonies. Their Feeding, Diet, Liquors, Stoves, Hot∣houses, Habits of Men and Women, &c. THeir Religion properly is that of the Greek Church, dif∣fering in many things from the Roman and Reformed Churches; their Service is in their own Language; they Receive the Eucharist in both Kinds, observe Four Lents, and have Service Daily in their Churches. They have many Monasteries Possess'd by Monks and Fryars, which have considerable Reve∣nues in Land and Houses belonging to them, and likewise deal in Merchandise: When two Friends meet in the Easter Holy Days, they, in a Solemn manner, joyn Hands, one of them there∣upon saying, The Lord is Risen: Then the other Answers, It is so of a Truth, and then they Kiss. They have a Metropolitan, or Patriarch, who is in High Estimation among them, and Reve∣renc'd as the Pope among the Roman Catholicks; they have a Ve∣neration for our Lady, St. Nicholas, and other Saints. Their manner of Wooing is but short; for when they make Love, the Man sends Presents to the Woman, and she Accept∣ing them, the Match is soon Agreed; but if they are return'd, it is a sign she likes not the Party that makes the Proffer; and among other Presents sometimes a Whip is sent, to let the Woman know what she has to trust to if she be disobedient, or break her Marriage Vows; and for the generality, they are so far from resenting it as an Affront, that when Marry'd, the Wife Loves her Husband the better if sometimes he Corrects her; and concludes, he Loves her not, if he altogether declines it: But this prov'd fatal once to an English Shoo∣maker, who Marrying a Russ Woman, and settling in that Country, thinking to gain her Love to a high pitch this way, upon being inform'd that her peevishness proceeded from the want of it, he so Over-loaded her with his Kindness, that she dy∣ed, for which he lost his own Life by the hand of an Executio∣oner. The Women indeed are very Obedient to their Husbands, and the better sort especially seldom stir abroad but on parti∣cular
occasions— And now as to their Marriages, because the Ceremony is Novel to us, I shall mention the most parti∣cular matters relating to it. The Day being come, the Bride puts on her Head a kind of a Hood made of fine Lawn, or Knit-work, that Veiles her to the Middle, and so with her Friends and the Bridegroom with his, they go to the Church on Horse-back, though it be near at hand. They Marry with a Ring, and the words of Contract and Cere∣mony much agrees with ours. The Ring put on, and the Con∣tract Pronounc'd, the Brides hand is deliver'd into the hand of the Bridegroom, standing this while on one side of the Altar, or Table, and the Bride on the other. The Knot being thus Knit by the Priest, she comes about with the Bridegroom to the end of the Table, and falling down at his Feet, knocks her head up∣on his Shoo, in token of Subjection and Obedience; then the Bridegroom casts the Lap of his Gown over her, signifying his Duty to Protect and Cherish her. Then the Brides Father and Friends Bow to the Bridegroom, and his to the Bride, in token of Love and Affinity between the Two Kindreds. This done, the Bridegroom's Father delivers the Priest a Loaf of Bread, who presently returns it, upon a Solemn Promise that the Dowry shall be deliver'd at the Day Appointed, and that Friendship shall continue between one Kindred and another: so the Bread is broken, and they eat it amongst them, to testifie their True and sincere Meaning for performing the Charge and Promise, and thenceforth to become as Crums of one Loaf, or Men of one Table. They use Divorce among them, and it is often practic'd on slen∣der pretences. For a Man may go to a Monastery and shave him∣self a Friar, in a Pretended Devotion, and Quit himself of his Wife, and leave her to her Shifts. Yet this is mostly among the Vulgar, the Women of Quality are held in more Esteem, yet without distinction they are very obedient, and pay a profound Respect to their Husbands. As for the Burials of their Dead, it is done with much Cere∣mony. They put them on New Shooes, and put a Letter in their Hands Directed to St. Nicholas, intimating the Party to be a Russ-Man, or Woman, dying in the True Faith: when the Ground is Frozen that no Spade can enter it, they lay up their Dead in Houses, which they call God's Houses, and when the Ground is practicable, they bury them in their Cloaths, causing Prayers to be said over them; and beside the Rela∣tions
there are other Women Mourners, who are employ'd to that purpose. They have Great Veneration for the Cross, Ima∣ges, and Holy Water; once a year the Rivers are Hollow'd with much Ceremony by the Bishops, and then there is Great Strugling among the People for the Water, and some leap into it, though in a bitter Season, and Women Dip their Tender Infants, conclu∣ding there is now a Great Vertue in it; and often it is Given to the Sick in order to recover them, or cleanse them. They keep many Vigils, and other days set apart, and are very Zealous in their way of Worship; their Patriarch wears a Globe on his Mitre, seeming to signifie his Universality over the Church. In their Religious Worship, &c. They use a great many Cere∣monies, too many here to enumerate; The vulgar sort little affect Learning, and are not much knowing in the Affairs of other Countrys, bending their Studyes or Industry on Tillage, Handicrafts, and other Inferiour Offices, little affecting Travel, though their Merchants Journey and Trade in divers Countrys of Europe and Asia, having great advantage in the Latter by reason of the Commodious Situation of the Caspian Sea, into which the River Volga carrys them, falling with such violence that it keeps its stream for some Leagues in the Salt Water. The Moscovits are generally very Burley, much affecting a Plump Fleshy Corpulency, and this may happen by reason of their feed∣ing, which they do very plentifully among the better sort, and such as are able to keep Good Tables, though their Diet is rather much, than over-curious. They commonly begin with a Chark, or Small-Cup of Aquavitae, which they call Russ-wine, and after that drink not till toward the end of Meals, and then they are not sparing. They have variety of Dishes, the first are their Bak'd Meats, for Roast-meat they little affect, and then their Brothes or Pottage; After Dinner they usually sleep on Benches The Drink of the Better sort is Mead, but the poorer  content with a thin Drink, call'd Quas, not exceeding our Small Beer, which many Drink. The Women are mostly of Gross Bo∣dies, and not so comely as in many European Countrys; Where∣fore knowing their Natural Defect, to be the more Blov'd of their Husbands, they use Art to mend their Coexions, but their Paint and Washes are easily discern'd, bu  being the Fashion, it is rather Commended than Reprov'd, d the Husbands Allow their Wives and Daughters a comp to buy Red and White Colours to this purpose; but th
the heat of their Stoves, which are almost in every House, much drys and wrinkles them, making them look old before they arrive to it; and for their Health, or rather to preserve it, they use Bath-stoves, or Hot-Houses commonly twice a week. Their Houses, by heating their Peaches, which are made like German Bath-stoves, and their Potlads, like Ovens, are never without a considerable heat, though many times they will come out of them Sweating, and sometimes plundge into the Wa∣ter when they are foaming-hot, which would certainly kill any but those that have Innur'd their Bodies to the two ex∣treameties of Heat and Cold, which few or no other Nations do, equal to them. As for their Habits, they are generally after the Greek Fashion. The better sort go decently and very Richly clad, and their Habit in some measure shows a distinction of degrees by some or other little variation. They shave their heads close, unless fallen under the Princes displeasure, and then let the hair grow as a Mark of dejectedness or Sorrow so to have offended as to be out of favour; but their Garments differ in Stuffs, though little in fashion; the Women affect Rich ones as well as the Men, as Cloath, Rich Furs, Silks, Cloath of Gold, or Interwoven with it, and usually down to their Ancles or Heels, though their Summer Garments are much lighter than those they wear in Winter, the latter being always well lin'd with costly Furs, as Black Fox, Ermin, Martin, Grey, Squirel, &c. of which Creatures, and many others yeilding Furs, they have abundance in the several Provinces. But the Mousic and his Wife go meanly clad, yet will not be out of Court Fashion as near as may be; their upper Garments are Course Cloath, and their under ones perhaps Sheeps Skin with the Wool on, though so dress'd that they are very warm and plyable; but this is for Winter, for in the Summer the Man goes in his Shirt and the Woman in a Linnen Garment, called two Shirts. Thus as I hope having given a Satisfatory account of this matter I proceed to others—
CHAP. IV. Of the Goverment of the Provinces and Shires. The Courts of Judicature. Their Jurisdictions, and the manner of Proceeding in them. Of the Chief Assembly, or Parliament. Their Ju∣stice, &c. HAving proceeded thus far in Generals and Particulars Relateing to Moscovy, I now come more closely to the latter, as to what remains more Materialy to be dis∣cover'd; and first of the Government of the Provinces and Shires, of this large Dominion. They are properly divided into four parts, which they call Chetfirds, or Tetrearchies, every part contains divers Shires, and is anex'd to the several Offices from whence it derives the Name. The First beareth the name of Pososkoy Chetfird, or the Jurisdiction of the Office of Ambassages, and the standing Salary to the Officer is yearly 100 Rubbles or Marks, beside great ad∣vantages accruing. The Second is called Roseradney Chetfird, because it is proper to the Roserade, or High Constable, who has a like Sallary with the former. The Third is Pomeslenoy Chetfird, as appartaining to that Office; and here is kept a Register of all the Lands given by the Prince for service to his Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others. This Office giveth out and taketh in all the Assurances for them, and the Chief Officer has 500 Rubbles per Annum. The Fourth is called Cassanskoy-deworets, as being apropriated to the Office which has the Jurisdiction of the Kingdoms of Astracan and Cazan, with the Cities and Towns lying on the Volga, and is stipen'd at 150 Rubbles per Annum, and from the Jurisdiction of th Offices, but a very few places are priveledg'd, or exempted, except the CZAR's Inheritance, or Vochin, as they call it; for that it pertained from antient time to the
House of Beala. This standeth of 36 Towns, with their Bounds or Teritories, and some other particular Royaltie: These great Officers reside at Court, and carry their Offices with them where∣ever they go: They receive all Complaints and Actions that are brought out of the several Chetfirds, and Quarters, to exhibit them to the CZAR's Council and send back, and to send direction to those that officiate under them in the Provinces for all matters given in charge by the Prince, or his Council, to be done or put in Execution within their precincts; and each of the Dukes of lower Nobility in head Towns, hath in Commission with him a Dyack or Secretary to assist and advise him the better to Regulate and order matters as they fall out, and are directed, and their Commission is to this Effect, viz. (1.) To Hear and determine all Civil matters between Man and Man, and to that purpose have under them many Substitute Officers. (2.) They have Cognizance of all Criminal matters, as Theft, Murther, Treason, &c. but there lyes an Appeal from them to the CZAR's Council; and though they take the Evidence in this case, they must draw up the Evidence and Information of the cause, and send it ready digested to the Officer of the Chetfird whereunto the Province belongs, by whom it is prefered and pro∣pounded to the Council; for they are not to determine Criminal matters, or do Execution on the offender without the Councils order. (3.) If within the Province there be any publick Service re∣quir'd, as the Publishing of a Law, or Common Order, by way of Proclamation, Mustering Soldiers, Collecting Taxes or Impositi∣ons, &c. it is proper to them. These Dukes and Dyacks are appointed by the CZAR but for a year, and then at his pleasure he may change them; which is usually done, unless by Merrit or Intercession any are continu'd Longer; and though their highest Sallary is but 100 Rubbles per Annum, yet coming bare into these places, in one year they very much inrich themselves. For ordinary matters, there are many other fficers that hold Inferiour Courts, and otherways look after e affair, not much differing in the main from what is practic'd in England, so that the Provinces are carefully regarded, and known Bribery is sever∣ly punished.
As for the Courts of Civil Justice in Moscovy for matters of Contract, and others of like sort, beside the former they are of three kinds, and by way of Appeal one is subjected to the other; the lowest of these appointed for the Ease of the Subject, is the Office of the Gubnoy Starust, which signifies in their Language an Alderman, and of the Solsky Starust, or Baylif of the Soak, or Hun∣dred; these have power to determine matters within their Soaks or Hundreds under the Dukes and Dyacks of the Province before whom the Causes may be remov'd if not agreed or determin'd. The second is held in the head Towns of the Provinces, Shires, before the Deputies of the Lords of the Chetfirds, and from these they have a Priviledge to Appeal or remove their Causes to the Third or Chief Court held at Moscow, where usually reside the Officers of the Chetfrids. These are the Chief Justices or Judges, every one of them in Civil Matters, that arise within their several Chetfird or Quarter; and may be either commenc'd originaly be∣fore them, or prosecuted out of the Inferiour Courts of the Shires by way of Appeal. Their Commencing and Proceeding in Civil Actions is in this wise; The Plantif delivers his Supplycation, wherein he sets forth the Merrit of his Cause, or wrong done to him; then, if alow'd, a Reepis or Warrant is granted, which he delivers to the Prestave or Serjeant, who hereupon Arrests the Defendant who must put in Suretie to Answer or else be kept in Custody, and often on this account loaden with Irons; when they come before the Judg, the Plantif pleads his own Cause, and the Defendant make his Defence; as for Attorneys and Councellours they are not known in these Courts, when the Evidence, if they have any, is heard, Judgment is given, but if the matter remains doubtful, then the Judge demandeth of either party, whom he thinks sit, whether he will kiss the Cross upon that which he denyeth or a∣voucheth; and he who consents to do it is carry'd by an Officer to the Church, where he does it in a devout manner, and this is held a very Sacred Oath; and hereupon if it be the Defendant he is declar'd free of the Debt, paying 20 pence charges; but if both demand this priveledg, then they draw Lots, and he that has the best is only alowed it; and thus by short proceeding with a little charge the Controversy is ended; but if the Defendant be condem'd and not able to pay, his case is miserable. Notwithstanding all I have say'd of these Courts, there is yet another superiour to them; and this is call'd Zabore, or the Publick Assembly, which properly is term'd a Parliament. The States and Degrees of Persons that are present, are, 1. The CZAR.
2. The Nobility of Council. 3. The Clergy, for I do not find the Commons have any peculiar Representatives in this Zabore, or Parliament, which is held briefly after this manner. The Prince causes the Nobility to be summon'd together, with the Patriarch, who Convocates his Clergy, viz. the two Metropo∣lites, or Arch-Bishops, with other Bishops, Abbots and Friers, as are most Learned, and of best repute: These assemble in the Court at Moscow, and then the day is appointed when the Sessions shall begin. The day being come, the Clergy Assemble before, sitting at a place call'd the Stollie, and when the CZAR approaches with his Nobility then all the Clergy arise, and bowing themselves, pass on with their Patriarch to meet him. Then the Patriarch blesseth him with his two Fingers, laying them on his Forehead, and the sides of his Face, then he Kisses him on the Right-side of his Breast. These Ceremonies ended, they pass to the Parliament-house, which is not very stately, and there they place themselves in this order, The CZAR Seats him in a Throne on one side the Cham∣ber, and not far from him is a little square Table, and at it sit the Patriarch with the Chief of his Clergy, and Principal Nobility of the Council; also two Dyacks, or Secretaries, call'd Dumnoy Dyacks, who write down what passes, or is to be Enacted. The rest take their places on Benches that Encompass the Chamber. Being plac'd in this order, one of the Dumnoy Dyacks, who represents a Speaker, declares the cause of the Assembly, and Propounds, as he has it in Writing, the Principal Matters they are to proceed on, and the points being open'd, the Patriarch and his Clergy have the Priority of speaking, and giving their Opinions or Advice; but they usualy, out of a kind of Modesty, refuse it, and desire, these things, being matters of State, and other ad∣vantage to the Common-wealth, that the CZAR and his Nobles, who are more knowing and learned therein, would order these weighty Affairs, whilst they that are Church-men would assist them with their Prayers, and so one by one they answer to that Effect. After this, the matters propounded are agreed to some∣times entire, and at others with little variation; for without much difficulty every one gives his consent. Then the Clergy take their leaves, blessing the CZAR, who conducts the Patriarch to the next Room, and then returns to his Seat, till things are prepar'd for his return to his Pallace. The Acts that pass in this manner, the Dyacks, or Secretaries draw up into form of Proclamation, which are sent, and directed to be Publish'd in the Provinces and head Towns by the Dukes
and Dyacks or Secretarys of those places, and so the Sessions ended, after a Splendid Entertainment, every one has leave to depart. CHAP. V. Of the Millitary Affairs of Moscovy, the Degrees and Order of the Soldiers, Officers. Their Abilities and Warlike Discipline, and o∣ther things at Large relating to Martial Enterprizes, &c. THe next thing I shall Treat of is the Millitary Affairs of Moscovy, which is a thing very well worth noting; and first of their Forces for the War, and Chief Officers. The Soldiers are call'd Sinabojarsky, or the Sons of Gentlemen, being all, or mostly of that Degree, by virtue of their Military Profession; for when they are of years to bear Arms, they come to the Reserade, or Great Constable, who, at their request, enters their Names, alotting them a Maintainance to support their Charge, there being Lands Assigned for this purpose, annexed to this Office, which cannot be Alienated, so that there is, as I may term it, a Succession of Soldiers, and usually the whole number in continual Pay is as followeth. First. The Dworany, or Pensionary-Guards of the Princes Per∣son, who are 15000 Horsemen, with their proper Officers, and are always in Readiness; but of these there are Three Degrees, who differ as well in Estimation, as Wages, viz. The Dworany-Bulshey, or Head-Pensioners. The Serendany Dworany, or the Middle-Rank of Pensioners. The Dyta Boiarsky, or the Lower Rank. These have from 100 to 20 Rubbles per Annum, lessening according to their Station; one half is payed at Mosco, and the other by the General in the Field; besides this, they have pro∣portionable Lands Alloted them, from the greatest to the least. There are other Horsemen, to the number of 110, much like the Roman Praetorian Soldiers, who have the more immediate care of the CZAR's Person when he goes the Wars, all of special Ac∣count for their Trust and Nobility, which he chuses himself, and causes their Names to be Registred; and for their Large Reve∣nues in Pension-places, they are to bring to the Wars 65000 Horsemen, with their Furniture and other Necessaries; and once a Year, if there be no Wars, they are to make their Appearance on the Tartar Frontiers, so there seldom fails of being 80000,
a few more or less, when they are requir'd to take the Field; and greater Forces are speedily Raised on any occasion out of the supernumerary Sinabojarsky, that are not in Pay till call'd upon necessary occasions, and all willingly flock to the Regal Stan∣dard, upon the first Notice; and if a competent number be want∣ing, the Noblemen that hold Lands of the Crown, are to make them up with their Servants and Tenants, call'd Colophey, which when the Service is over, lay down their Weapons, and return to their Servil Occupations. Over and above the Horsemen menti∣on'd, there are seldom less than 12000 Foot in Pay, that bear Fire-Arms, or Gunners, called Strelseys, and these are appointed to their several Posts, some to Guard the City of Mosco, and the Pallace, others are dispos'd of in Garrisons till there be further occasion for them. There are likewise in his Service a compe∣tent number of Strangers, and these are Europeans of divers Na∣tions, being chiefly employ'd against the Tartars. The Commanders in Chief of these Great Forces are the Voya∣vod Bulshaia, Great Captain, or Lieutenant-General under the CZAR, usually chosen out of the Four Houses of the Chief Nobi∣lity; he has joyn'd with him Lieutenant Generals of great Ex∣perience. Beside, there are Four Officers that have the Marshal∣ing of the Army divided among them, call'd Marshals of the Field, every one hath his Quarters or fourth part. The first is call'd Prava Polskoy, or the Right-wing, the second is Levoy Pol∣skoy, or the Left-wing. The third Rusnoy Polskoy, or the broken Band, because there are Detachments made from it on any neces∣sary occasion. The fourth Storeshovoy, or the Warding Band; These have each Two Marshals under them, who are to Muster and Train the Soldiers, and do Justice on Offendors; and these are commonly chosen out of the 110 I have before mention'd. They receive and deliver Pay to the Army; under them are the Gulavoy, or Captains of Thousands, Five hundreds, and Hundreds. The Petydesetskoy, or Captains of Fifty, and the Decetskiss, or Cap∣tains of Tens. There are, beside the Lieutenant-General, two other Voiavods, one Master of the Ordinance, who hath divers under-Officers ne∣cessary for the Service, and the Walking-Captain, or Scouts-Master, who has under him 1000 Expert Horsemen to go out on Parties, and Spy the Enemy; so that a Moscovite Army appears very Formidable: And indeed they have done many brave. Ex∣ploits, they have lately taken Asoph, a very Important place, and the last Year, in a Set-Battel, Overthrown and Ruin'd a Great Army of Turks and Tartars, going compleatly Armed, and
well understanding the use of Fire-Arms; Whereas formerly their Weapons were but slight, mostly Bows and Arrows, Marching in good Order more than ever, as having learn'd the Art of War more perfectly from the Poles, and other Neighbour∣ing Nations. They also Encamp, Entrench and Lodg Advanta∣geously, being very patient of Hunger, Thirst and Cold, Obedi∣ent to their Officers, and Ready to Charge the Enemy on all occasions. They had in use a Moving Castle, as they call it, which mainly defended them against the Tartars Arrows, and gave them a more secure Opportunity to Offend their Enemies. This was Fram'd Wood, carry'd on Numerous Carts, which, up∣on Occasion, was easily put together, and made a Standing Wall of Seven Miles, or as few as they thought fit, with Loopholes in it, to discharge their Shot, or dart their Arrows; but I am not well assur'd, whether they have so cumbersome a Machin now in use or not, for it is little or no defence against Great Artillery, which the Turks, Assisting the Tartars, use. The Muscovites are very Expert at Defending Garrisons, and are accounted there better Soldiers than in the Field; however by their Wars they have greatly Enlarg'd their Borders, almost on all sides them; Especially since they have entertain'd Expert Officers of divers Warlike Nations, who have, by their Experience and Valorous Examples, Cultivated and Animated the Soldiery; but not too tediously to dwell on this Particular. I'll now proceed to other Matters, as worthy of Note, so that taking altogether, I can∣not doubt but I shall give the Reader all the Reasonable Satis∣faction he can desire of a Country, that but a few Ages past we were in a manner Ingorant of. CHAP. VI. Some Account of the Vast Revenues of the CZAR, by Customs, and other ways arising. The Coine, Weights, Measures, and other matters Relating to Trade. The strange sorts of Fish, Beasts, Fowl, and other Rarities of Moscovy. THe Customs and Revenues that Maintain so Great a Charge in War and Peace, are very considerable; and, by a few, one may guess at the rest. That at Moscow amounted to 12000 Rubbles Yearly; Smolensko 8000; Vobsko 12000; Novogrod-Veli∣ca
6000; Sturrarouse, by Salt, and other Commodities, 18000; Torshock 800; Otfer 700; Yaruslave 1200; Costrome 1800; Nis∣na Novogrod 7000; Casa 11000; Vologda 12000: A Rubble is a Mark English. And thus stands the Antient Account, since the stating of which Trade is greatly encreas'd. Besides this, the Province of Volsko pays yearly for Tagla and Podat 18000 Rub∣bles; Novogrod 35000; Torshock and Otser 8000; Razan 3000; Morum 12000; Colmigroe and Duyna 8000; Vologda 12000; Cuzan 28000; Ʋstiuga 30000; Rostove 50000. The City of Mosco 40000; Siberskoy 20000; Castrome 12000. The former in the Citys are for Custom, and these latter, viz. The Tagla is a Yearly Imposition, raised on every Wite or Measure of Grain within the Provinces, gather'd by Shozen-men; a Wite contains 60 Chetfrids, every Chetfrid is Three Bushels En∣glish, or little less. The Podat is an ordinary Rent, impos'd on every Hundred. There comes in a Vast Sum Yearly by the Vo∣chin, or Crown-lands. The CZAR's Inheritance containing 36 Large Towns, with their Territories, or Hundreds belonging, and a vast quantity of other Lands, that bring great Incomes to the Crown. The Tithes of Furs, and Customs on Goods, of Strangers by Navigation, or otherways, very much Encrease the Revenue, beside other things and ways to Raise Money, too Nu∣merous to mention; and for these there are Offices and Officers respectively appointed, who have considerable Salarys, so that the Riches of this Large Northern Kingdom appears very great, and the Princes Vast Revenues very difficult to be Summ'd up: And since I am come to this part of Relation, I shall speak briefly of the Coine, Weights and Measures, that are so necessary in Trade, and vary so much from ours, that so Merchants and Travellers may the better understand them, when their Occasi∣ons, or Curiosity shall make them useful. The Merchants Accounts are kept at Moscow the chief City divers ways, as by those of England, in Rubbles and Pence, call'd by the Moscovites Muscofskins, two hundred of them going to a Rubble. The Duthby Grevens and Muscofskins, 20 of the latter going to the former, so 10 Grevens make the Rubble, which is held an im∣aginary Coine; for the Currant Mony is the Capeck worth a Stiver Flemish, and something more in value than an English Peney, 10 of them make a Greven, 3 Capecks are call, d an Altine, by which Contracts and Bargains are usually made; 33 Altines and one Capeck make a Rubble.
At Arch-Angel there is an Exchange practic'd, and the Price of Russ Mony bears as the scarcety or plenty will allow. The Re∣ceipts begin in August to return in London about the latter end of December. The Weights chiefly in use, are the Pood, by which all fine Goods are weighed, as Beaver, Silk, Wool, &c. but for gross Goods they have a Weight call'd the Berzovet, accounted 10 Poods, or the Russship-Pound, computed to be 360 Pound Averdupois; so that all Goods bought by this Weight are accounted to be 10 Per cent profit; so that many have recon'd Goods so bought to pay the Freight with over-weight, and all Goods bought by the Pood to be 10 Per cent less. The Measure of length is call'd the Archin, and is accounted 28 English Inches, so that 100 Archins are supposed to produce Incirca, 78 yards of London Measure, Oyle, mostly Fish-Oyle, they sell by the Barrel, each Barrel accounted half a Hogshead. Con∣cave Measures are little us'd in Trade; As for their Furs, of which they have many sorts, as Bever, Otter, White, Red Black and Dun Fox, Sables, Martins, Minever, &c. they are usually sold by the Timber Weight, or Tale, and much coveted by Merchant Strangers who purchase them at dear rates, and send them into most Countrys of Europe, and Asia, and into the other parts of the World. They take upon the Coast abundance of Seals, which is done in this manner; they carry their Boats over the Ice to open Water, and finding their haunts where they lye basking on huge Flakes of Ice, in a Sunshiney day coming out of the Sea for that purpose, they hem them in, with their Boats, and with great Clubs, strik∣ing them on the Nose quickly kill them; their Skins are good Merchandice, and of their Fat they make a sort of Redish Oyle. There is another Sea-Creature called a Morse, who has Teeth about a foot long, by the help of which he clambers up Rocks to seek for Prey, and for the sake of his Teeth they take him, which exceeds Ivory, and are of great esteem among them. They have in some parts of the Country White Fox, Grey and Red Squirrils, a large Water-Rat, whose Skin smells naturaly like Muske. They have also Wulberins: They have likewise a Beast called Losh or Buff, whose Skin turns to very good account. They have a Fish called Ribzuba, whose Teeth are as fine as Ivory, and used for heads of Knives, Sword-hafts, &c. Like∣wise some use the Powder to Antedote Poison, as the Ʋnicorns
horne; this I hold to be the same with the Morse: The word Ribzuba in their Language rather signifieing the Tooth than the Fish, for it is caught about Pecliora, or Petzora, some of them have been found with their Teeth of 2 foot long, weighing 11 Pound, or more. They have in the Woods and Mountains many wild Horses, also flying Squirils, having Tufts of hair growing to their Shouldiers, like Wings, which makes them seem to fly when they take vast leaps from one Tree to another; their Tails are much broader than others, which shakes and spreads as they leap, and so facilitates them in their Agillity. They have Hares the colour of ours in Summer, but in Winter they change their Coats into Milk-white, and the Squirils the like, from a Redish unto a Grey, whereof cometh the Calaber. They have store of Deer, Roe-Bucks and Goats, in some parts Elks on which the Semoids on their borders Ride, and cause their Sleads to be drawn by Harts, or Ollins large Dogs, &c. Their Horses and Sheep are but small, yet both good in their kind. As for Fowl, they have great plenty, as the Egle-Hawks of several kinds, The Swan Wild and Tame, the Stork and Crane, the Tedder of the colour of a Phesant, but much biger, living in the Firr-woods: of Phesant and Partridge they have great plenty. The Owls in Moscovy are exceeding large, their Ears as big as a Man's, and much like them. They have many River-Fish common with ours, as Pike, Carp, Roaeh, Tench, &c. but others altogether strange to us, as the Behlouga or Bellougiva, 4 or 5 Ells long. The Severinga or Sterledy, somewhat in fashion and tast like a Sturgeon, but not so thick nor long. The Ribela or White Salmon, these are found in great plenty in the River Volga, and other Rivers; in a River near the Town of Perislave they take a Fish, like our Herring, but not so big. They have abundance of Salt-wells turning to great advantage in making Salt, and near Astracan the Sea-Water being thrown up among the Rocks in the hot weather, the Sun makes it into Hills of Salt; they have in this Country a Lucid Slate cut out of a Rock, which being split into thin slivers serves as Trasparent Glass, and in the Rivers near the Bay of St. Nicholas, several Rocks of Alablaster; but not to wade too far in matters that to some may seem Trival, I intend to close with what may yet seem more worthy of Note.
CHAP. VII. The Succession of the Royal Houses of Moscovy for about 1600 years, to the present CZAR, giving an Historical account of their Victo∣rys, Enlarging their Dominions, the Revolutions that have happen'd in the State. The manner of the Corronation, and other things of the like nature. The CZAR or great Duke of Moscovys Honour∣able Titles. The Impress of the Broad Seal. Degrees of Nobility, &c. THe Succession of the Government of that vast Country now call'd Moscovy, in part, and in the whole has been of Antient standing, as will appear in the following brief History, brought down to the present CZAR, Peter Alexo∣witz. The Dukes of Moscovy are held, though it may be thought some∣thing doubtful, from Augustus Caesar the second Roman Emperour; however according to other Historians Writing of this matter, I shall trace it from hence to an undoubted certainty, as the times came nearer to us, and briefly touch on what memorably happen'd by the way. They tell us that Augustus Caesar sent some of his near Kindred to be Governours in these Parts; and amongst them one Prussus, who Named his Province or Government Prussia, which lay on the Eastern Baltic Shoar, by the River Wixel; of whom Rurek Si∣rianus, and Truvrio decending, by the fourth Generation, were by the Russians, then living without Civil Government, sent for Anno. Dom. 573 to bear Rule over them, at the perswasion of Gostomislius, chief Magistrate of Novogrod; and taking with them Olechus their Kinsman, they had by common Consent, the Government of those Countrys divided amongst them, and all but Rurek dying without Issue, Vorson his Son succeeded him in the whole Government, as it had been Agreed amongst them, who took to Wife Olba Daughter to a Citizen of Plesco, who brought him a Son call'd Stoslaus, who succeeded him, and was slain in Battel. He left be∣hind him 3 Sons, to wit Teropolehus, Olega and Volodimir. The latter supplanted the two first, and took the whole Government upon him, and Marry'd Anna Sister to Basilius the Eastern Em∣perour;
and with all his People, in the year 988. was Baptiz'd, as Historians say, upon a Miracle perform'd by a Greek Bishop, viz. his throwing the Book of the Gospel into the Fire, and its re∣maining there a considerable time untouch'd by the force of that consuming Element. Volodimir left behind him 11 Sons, among whom he divided his Dominions; but Jaroslaus one of them, by reason of a division among them got the sole Government into his hands; and Volodimir his Son succeeded him, holding his Court at Kiow on the River Boristhenes, and had great Wars much enlargeing his Borders, and was the first that had the Title of CZAR, or Caesar confer'd on him by Constan the Greek Emperour, who sent him many Rich Gifts. After him in descent, were Vuszevolodus, George, Demetrius. Then George his Son, who in the year 1237 by Bathy a Tartar Prince, brought Moscovy under his Subjection, making it Tributary to him; and the Russ say this Bathy was Father to Tamerlain, whom they call Temirkutla. Then succeeded Iaroslaus Brother of George; and to him Alexander his Son. Then Daniel his Son, who first made Moscow his Royal Seat, builded the Castle, and took on him the Title of great Duke, and was succeeded by John his Son Sirnam'd Kaleta or Scrip, as the word signifies, because he usually carryed one about him and dealt his Alms out of it to the poor. He left the Govern∣ment to John his Brother, and John left it to Demetrius his Son; who had two Sons Basilius and George. The first Reigning had a Son, but doubting his Legitimacy, by reason of his Wives Incon∣tinency, he left his Brother to succeed him. But George dying pre∣fered his Nephew, whose Name was Basilius, before his own Sons Andrew and Demetrius, which occasion'd much disturbance in the State, for they wared on their Couzen, took him and put out his Eyes; yet the Nobles kept their Allegiance; and John Vasilwich his Son succeeded him. This was he who by his Prudence and Valour first brought the Name of his Country out of obscurity, and made it Renown'd in Europe and Asia; Stileing himself great Duke of Volodimir, Moscovy, Novogrod and CZAR of all Russia; he won Plosco, the then only Wall'd City in all Moscovy, and shook off the Tartar Yoke, doing many other brave Exploits; so that the Poles, and bordering Nations on either side courted his Friendship. Gabriel his Son succeeded him, who changed his Name to Basilius, he recover'd a great part of Moscovy from Vitoldus Duke of Lithuania; won Smolensko and many other Citys, Anno. 1514.
Iuan Vasiliwich his Son, a Child, succeeded him; but growing up, he stript the Tartars out of the Kingdoms of Cazan and Astracan, and took the Princes Captive; he made vigorous Wars in Livonia pretending a Right to that Country by In∣heritance; and did many other admirable things, but enclining much to oppress his Nobles, they conspir'd and call'd in the Cri n Tartars, who committed great Outrages, Besieged and burnt the City of Moscow, and in it about 80000 people perish'd, mostly by the Flames. This Prince Reign'd 54 years, he had 3 Sons; in his Reign the English came the first time by Sea into the North parts of Russia; his Eldest Son dyed before him. Pheodor his Second Son succeeding, he was, being a Minor, left under the Tuition of Boris, Brother to the Empress, and Boris by the Deceased's Will adopted third Son to him; and here once for all it will not be amiss to give a brief account of the Ceremony in Crowning this great CZAR. Forty days Mourning for his Father expir'd, he came from his Pallace, attended by his Clergy and Nobility, to the Church of Blaueshin, or Blessedness, and hearing Service there, proceeded to the Church of St Michael, then to that of our Lady, being the Cathedral. There he was plac'd in a Chair of State, his Robe of Gold-Smiths Work, all Gold, set with Pretious Stones and Pearl. The Imperial Crown was then plac'd on his head by the Metropolitan, who, in doing it, Read Exhortations to him of Ju∣stice and Peaceable Government. Then rising he was Invested with another Robe much Richer than the former; his Train born up by 6 Dukes, the Staff he held was of a Ʋnicorns-horn, 3 foot and a half long, curiously Polish'd, and set with Precious Stones; a Globe and 6 Crowns were carry'd before him by Princes of the Blood; His Horse waited at the Church door, covered with an Embrodery of Pearl, and the Saddle suitable, to the value of 3000 Rubbles There was a kind of Bridge made 3 ways, 150 Fathom in length, 3 foot high and 2 Fathom broad, whereon the CZAR, with his Train passed from one Church to another above the vast throng of People. The Churches were spread with Cloath of Gold, and the Porches with Red Velvet. The Bridges with Scarlet, and Flannel Cloath, which the People got among them, when the CZAR had passed, and a great many new Coins of Gold and Silver were thrown among them, from the Church; the Cerimony ended, he return'd to the Parliament-House, where a stately Banquet, after the Russ manner was served up by Noblemen in Plate of Gold and Silver, 2 standing on either side his Chair with Battle Axes of Gold. This Triumph lasted a
Week with many Shows and Pastimes; after which Election was made of the Nobles to new Offices and Dignities, and all con∣cluded with a peal of 170 Brass Ordinance, and 20000 Harqui∣busses twice discharged, as he pass'd with a Train of about 50000 to his Pallace. This CZAR Conquer'd the large Country of Siberia, and took the King Prisoner, overawing the Tartars, and doing many o∣ther great matters: But Boris his Guardian aspiring to the Throne by Treatchery, first made away Demetrius, the CZAR's Brother, and then the CZAR himself, and usurp'd the Royal Seat. But a Counterfit Demetrius, set up by the Poles Invading Moscovy and every where prevailing, Boris, as 'tis thought, Poisoned him∣self; for after a full Meal he dyed suddainly in his Pallace; and his Wife drinking Poison made her Son and Daughter pledge her, of which she and the former dyed, but the latter only lightly sipping recover'd. Demetrius Evonowich hereupon was Proclaim'd and Crown'd, and kept about him Polish-Guards for his securety, but had a short and troublesome Reign, for being suspected an Im∣posture, the Moscovites Conspired against him, rushed into his Pallace before break of day, draged him out of his Bed, and Slew him, with many of his Guards and Favorits. To him Succeeded Vasily Evanowich Shusky, who had been mainly Instrumental in his destruction, and had not long be∣fore been at the Block for reporting to have seen the True De∣metrius Bury'd; but he was recall'd by him he depos'd, and ad∣vanc'd to be the Instrument of his Ruin: It's reported the Im∣postor's True Name was Gryfcha, the Son of a mean Gentleman. Nor did the New CZAR long hold the Throne, for the Poles raised up another Demetrius, who Besieg'd him in the Castle of Moscow, and wrought him Great Troubles; so that being hardly press'd, he betook him to a Monastery, and so the Polish Army became Master of the City; who having got the Spoil, Quarrel'd with their Upstart Demetrius, and he flying to seek Shelter, was slain by a Tartar's Shusk, who was carry'd into Poland, and there di∣ed miserably in Prison. Yet the Poles were soon after Starved, and driven out of all the places they had Garrison'd in Moscovy, and much Confusion happen'd in this Interregnum, till at length ta∣king Advice to settle matters, Michalowich, or Michael Pheodoro∣wich was Chosen CZAR, a Youth whom Shusky much feared, and had put several of the Name to Death, upon a Presage one of that Name should Succeed him; and having been Raised by the Valour of Pozarsky, and Boris Licin, he made them the Generals
of his Forces, and Joyn'd with them another Great Commander of the Cossacks, who had very much Assisted him, and rais'd to Honour many other of his Friends, so that soon after a Peace was Concluded between the Muscovites and Poles, partly by the Mediation of King James the First of England, he was Elected Anno 1615. and Manag'd his Dominions in a more constant way of Peace with the Turks, Tartars, Polanders and Swedes, than any of his Predecessors had done before him. Feodor Alexowitz, or Alexis, Succeeded him, who did ma∣ny brave Actions, and secur'd his Borders against Invaders, and Reign'd to the Year 1682. Who then dying left Two Sons behind, John and Peter, who were Joynt-CZARS of Muscovy till the first dying, the Whole Government devolved on the Latter, who now Reigns Successfully and Victoriously, being a Wise and Judicious Prince, of a sound discerning Judgement, Cur∣teous and Affable, having Enlarg'd his Territories by the taking Asoph, and giving the Turks and Tartars many Overthrows; his Understanding Refin'd, and much Improv'd by Learning and Travel; The Delight of Princes, and the Joy and Safety of his own People. THIS Princes Style is very Magnificent, viz. CZAR and Great DƲKE of all the Great and Lesser White Russia, Moscovy, Kiovia, Volodomir, Novogrod; CZAR of Casan; CZAR of Astracan; CZAR of Siberia, LORD of Plesko; Great DUKE of Smolensko, Twer, Inhor, Permo, Westquia, Bul∣garia and others; LORD and Great DUKE of the Infe∣riour Novogrod, of Tzerni, Kiovia, Resens, Rostof, Jeroslaw, Bielejezorvedor, Obdor, Condomir, and of all the Northern Part; LORD of Iberia; CZAR of Cartalania, Garsinea; DUKE of Cababadin; DUKE of the Dukes of Circassia and Georgia, and of several other Oriental, Septentrional, and Occidental Lordships and Estates; PATERNAL, Great PATERNAL Heir, SUCCESSOR, LORD aad RU∣LER. The Great Seal of Moscovy is an Eagle displayed Sable in a Field, Or, bearing on its Breast a Shield the Field being Gules, Charged with a St. George Argent, holding a Lance piercing a Dragon; between the
Heads of the Eagle are 3 Crowns placed, one over another, which are said to signifie Moscovy, and the two Kingdoms of Cazan and Astracan. The Nobility of Moscovy are of different Ranks, those of the Antient Nobility, and such as have been raised by Favour or o∣therways for their Noble Attchievements, viz. of four sorts, The Chief for Birth Authority and Revenue are call'd Ʋdelney Knazey, that is, the Exempt or Priveledged Dukes. The second, the Bojarens Rais'd to Honour by the CZAR, beside their Nobility, with the Title of Counselers. The Third are the Voyavodey, such as have been Generals of Armys under their Prince. The Fourth are such as bear the Name of Knazey, or Dukes, but come of the younger Brothers of the Chief Houses through many de∣scents. And thus I doubt not but I have given a Satisfactory Account of this Fam'd Country.
FINIS.
