P3304A 12359955 60192
Plenitudo Fontis: OR, Christ's Fulnesse, and Man's Emptinesse. A Sermon Preached by IOHN PRESTON, &c. 1 Cor. 4. 7. What hast thou, that thou hast not re∣ceived? if thou hast received it, why dost thou boast, as though thou hadst not received it? LONDON, Printed for Iohn Stafford, and are to be sold in Bracke Horse Alley, 1645.
❧To the Anti-Arminian: OR, To every good Christian Reader. Good Reader, PLiny the great Naturalist, taxeth some of Plin. Pre∣far. Hist. Natural. the Greeke, and Latin Writers in his time, of folly at the least, for sending a∣broad their empty and worthlesse Pam∣phlets with an over-praise in the Title, promising much at the first sight, but utterly deceiving the Rea∣der in his further search: But he that shal with judg∣ment reade this Sermon, will finde somewhat more then a naked title to commend it. Sometimes the work∣man graceth the worke: Sometimes the Worke the Worke-man; but behold in this Treatise they kisse each other, and are joyned together as a white Rose & a red Rose in one sweete Posie. But, that both have beene abused in the first Impression hereof, it appea∣reth as clearely (by the Manuscript) as the splendant Sun within Earths spangled Canopy: for al those Passages, which will make the Arminians to stumble and (without doubt) to fall in some measure, are (by
the Imprimatur-ist) deleted; as if Arminianisine D. W. 2 Leaves in some places. were Englands true Doctrine. But now for thy com∣fort (Dear Christian) thou hast the Author's Sermon as it was preached before King Iames, without the least diminution; And I send it out with that prayer, or benediction that Iacob sent with his sonnes into Aegypt; God Almighty give thee mercy in the Gen. 3. 14. sight of the man: In the sight of the great man, that thou maist make him humble: Of the poore man, that thou maist make him content: Of the stubborne man, that thou maist hammer, and supple him: Of the peni∣tent man, that thou maist bind up his wounds & sores. Of every man, that thou maist touch his conscience, and wound his soule. Amen. Thine in the Lord Iesus, P. B.
Christ's Fulnesse, and Man's Emptinesse, &c. JOHN 1. 16. Of his Fullnesse we have all received Grace for Grace. SAint Augustine in his booke De Cvitate De seemes to stand amazed at the Majesty which appeares in this first of Iohn, above all other passages of Holy writ. And Calvine saith, he doth in this Chap: Deto∣nare ab alto, giving it the chiefest instance wherein a divine upendious authority appeares beyond all the writing of men Iunius saith, that he was uever strucken with an apprehensi∣on of the Diety, till he read this first Chapter, affirming it to be the first and chiefest cause of his conversion from Atheisme to a sincere imbracing of Christianity, you may see it in his life written by him∣selfe. And in all this Chapter, I finde not a richer and fuller sentence then this which describesto us the fullnesse of Christ. The parts of it are three. First▪ here is a Fulnesse attributed to Christ. Secondly, this is not a respective but a diffusive Fulnesse, that is, Fulnesse not shut up in its owne Bankes, but running over for our benefit and use. Of his Fulnesse we have all received, that is, all that ever had a∣ny Grace took it from this heap, drew it from this fountaine. Thirdly, these receits are amplified by the variety of them, Grace for Grace. That is, Christ hath given to us for all the Graces which he received of his father for us; Graces answerable, as the Seal is said to give to the Waxe print for print, Character for Character, or as a father is said to give to the sonne lymbe for lymbe, member for member, though not of the same bignesse and measure. In the same sense Christ is said to give to us Grace for Grace. So that now you see here a full shop, many Buyers or Receivers, choise of wares, or rather to use the Scriptures similitude: A full Table, ma∣ny Guests, Variety of dishes: Of his fulnesse we have all received The first part. Grace for Grace.
We begin with the first. This Fulnesse is attributed to Christ in 4. respects. 1. In regard of his person: So hee was full. 1. with an increate Fulnesse: for as the glory of God filled the Temple that 1. In regard of his pson. Moses could not enter in: so the humanity of Christ which answe∣red to that type, was filled not only with the effects of the Diety as then, but with the Diety it selfe, which is therefore said to dwell in him corporally or essentially. 2. Hee was moreover filled with a Created Fulnesse, and so hee was said to be full of all divine good things, which Iohn reduces to two heads, Grace and Truth. Truth which comprehendeth all the vertues of understanding; And Grace which comprizeth all beauties and perfections of the will. Secondly, this Fulnesse is attributed to Christ in regard of his of∣fices 1. as a Prophet. He was full of all the Treasures of wisedom 2. In regard of his Offices. and knowledge? So that all the Light which the World ever had came from him as a Prophet. All the Revelations which Adam, Abraham, and Noah ever had; All the Visions which Esaias, Ieremy, and the rest of the Pro∣phets ever saw; All the mysteries which ever were declared to Paul and Iohn, came from him, they all received their light from this Sun, which from the first morning of time shone to the darke world, without setting more or lesse, though the darkenesse comprehended it not. Secondly, hee was ful as a Priest, full of fauour with God, whence he hath audience, alwais full of Compassion to man, whence he is ready to entertaine any suits or Suitors; full of merit, whence sure to prevaile in all his requests and Intercessions 3. He was full as a King, full of authority, all power was given him, in Heaven & in Earth, full of strength and might to desend his Servants, and to resist his enemies till he hath made them his soot-stoole. Lastly, full of royall Munificence, whence ready to supply the wants of his Ser∣vants, and to give them in the end a large recompence of reward. Thirdly, this Fulnesse is attributed unto Christ in regard of righ∣teousnesse,   o his Rhteousnesse. hee was full of all righteousnesse originall & actuall, a∣ctive and passive generall and particular, whence we have these b∣nifits, following, |1. That hee who was so full himselfe is able to make us full, if we want faith or love, or any other grace. |2. By this we know what a Mediator we have to deale withal even with one full of love, full of patience, full of tender compassion which may invite us to come to him. | Lastly, we have this comfort that
though our Righteousnesse be very weake and small, yet in him we are compleate, Coloss. 2. Fourthly, this Fullnes is attributed to him in regard of his Ef∣fects. 4. In regard of his Effect. Scarce was there ever any action that Christ did, but you shall see a Fulnes in it. At the first Miracle that ever he wrought, he filled 6 water-pots with wine, afterwards he filled 5 000 guests with 5 loaves and 2 fishes, so that twelve Baskets full of broken meates were taken up; So he filled the Netts with fishes till they were ready to breake againe, and which was the best Fulnes of all, he filled the Disciples with the holy Ghost in the day of Pente∣cost, and often afterwards, whence they are said to be full of Joy, and the Holy Ghost. If we would know the Reasons; It is partly in regard of Christ 1. Reasons from Christ. himselfe, hee was the Corner Stone, therefore there is reason hee should be the fairest in all the Building. He was the Prince of our Salvation therefore it was meet he should be like Saul higher than all the people by head and shoulders, farre exalted above all Prin∣cipalities and Powers. But chiefely it was in regard of us and out emptinesse, that with 2. From our selves his Fulnes hee might replenish our Vacuity, otherwise wee could neither have seen him nor received of him. Not have seene him, for the glorious Beauty of his Godhead was too bright for our eyes to behold. It was therefore reason that it should be put into the Lan∣thorne, or Vaile of Christs Humanity, that in that we might behold it. Nor could we have received of it, for the Diety is an Inacces sible Fountaine; It was reason therefore that Christs Humanity should be the Cesterne or Conduit-Head to receive it for our mo∣dell and use. But here one Question must bee answered. Steven and other Qst. Saints are said in Scripture to be full of the Holy Ghost, and how differs this from the Fulnesse of Christ? I answer, first they were said to be full according to their mea∣sure, Answ. Christ out of measure, as a little Dish may be said to be full as well as the Ocean. So they were said to be full, because filled accor∣ding to the narrownes of their present Capacity. But Christ wa full according to all densions, length, breadth, and depth of Ful∣nesse. Secondly, in them there was Plenitudo Vasis; In Christ, Plenitu∣do
fontis, that is, there was in them a derived participated Ful∣nesse, but in Christ there was a Fulnes like the Fulnes of a Foun∣taine springing from himself, which is well expressed by the School∣men, when they say, that the Fulnes of the Saints and of Christ dif∣fer, as Ignis and Ignita, the one like Torches kindled, the other like Fire it selfe, for the Fulnes of the Ocean is too little to expresse this; For if you take a drop or two from it, it is so much lessened, rather the fulnes of the fire, which lights a thousand Torches, yet is not it selfe diminished. Thirdly, in them there was a Comparative Fulnes. Steven was said to bee Full in regard of other lesser Saints, But in him there was an absolute Fulnes without all limits, without all comparison. What shall we now deduce hence for Application to our selves? First, that which is also the Scope of the Evangelist in this place; This should invite us to come to Christ, and to take of this full heape. This Incentive Paul often uses to inflame the desires of the Gentiles to come to Christ, even the Riches of that fulnes which is in him, which in the fulnesse of time began to be exposed to all Commers, as he saith, hidden before, but now fully revealed; seen before but in Types and Shadowes, now with open face; before preached but to a few, now to every Creature under Heaven; be∣fore the Spirit was given but by drops, but now he that hath as∣cended on high, and led Captivity Captive, hath so given gifts to men, that he hath filled all things. Let us therefore be exhorted when we heare of such a fulnesse, not to take the Grace of God in vaine, but labour we to have our part in it, that as those Corinthians, we may be made rich in Christ filled with all knowledge and every grace. Content not your selves therefore to know this onely, for that is our common fault to con∣tent our selves with the Notions of such things without practise. But go to Christ as Bees to a meadow that is ful of slowers, as Merchants to the Indies that have full Mines, that you may expe∣rimentally find your selves returning from  full fraught wth the Treasures of Truth and Grace. In other things fullnes invites us much; Ioseph's full Barnes in Aegypt drew Iacob and his Sons thither: Canaan was a Land Ful owng with milke and honey, and that invited the Israelites to seeke it: Solomons abundance and fulnesse of wisedome, caused the
Queene of Sheba to come out of the South to his Court. In every thing fulnes doth much allure and affect us. The Covetous man though he spend but little, yet he desires to take it from a full heape, as he saies De pleno tollere acervo. How much more then should this fulnes of Christ worke on us, especially since there is in hi not onely a repletive but a diffusive fulnes; not onely plenty, but also bounty? But alas, if we looke upon the waies and actions of men, we shall find that men seeke a fullnesse in every thing else, al∣most, a fulnesse in pleasure and delights, a fulnesse in honour and preferments; But this full Honey Combe is almost every where despised, but happy hee, the bent of whose heart God hath turned the right way to seeke a fullnes of Faith and Wisedome, and a fullnesse of the Holy Ghost, who cares not though he be empty of any thing else, so hee bee full of these? though a looser in other things, so a Gainer in these. Such a one hath chosen the better part which shall never be taken from him. Secondly, If there be a Fulnes in Christ, we should answer it with ulnes of affection on our parts, fully beleeve and trust in him, fully love and adore him, fully delight in him, for it is reason the affecti∣on should be answerable to the Object. A little excellency desires little love and esteeme; more excellency more love, but wher there is a fulnesse of al excellencies, that we shold procecute with fulnes of ll our affections. All the excellency in the Creature in comparison of this, is but as a drop to the Ocean, and a sparke to the whole Ele∣ment of fire. Therefore if we propotion our affections to the object, which ought to be the Rule and square of them, we should bestow on the Creature but a drop of love and delight, but the full streame of our affections should be carried to him, in whom is the fullnesse of all perfection. It is true indeed, that as men hide treasure from theeves under straw or baser covering, so God hides this ful excel∣lencie from the world under a bse outside, that his secret ones only might find it out, and others seeing, might not see, but stumble at it. Thus he hid Christ himselfe under a Carpenters sonne, so hee hides Divine Misteries under the meane Elements of Bread and Wine, so the wisedom of God is hidden under the foolishnesse of preaching: and under Sheep-skins and Goat-skins, as the Apostle speakes, were hidden, and such as the world is not worthy of, yet there is such a fulnes of excellency notwithstanding: for if ever wee saw
beauty in Sun, Moone, Stars, men, women, &c. Or if ever we found delight in musicke, meates, drinks, friends, &c. All mu needs be more abundantly in God, who is the Author, Maker, & giver of all these; As Solomon reasons; He that made the eye, shal not he see, so he that made all these things, shall he not have them eminently in himselfe, for as the worth of many peeces of silver is comprized in one piece of gold, so all the petty excellencies which are scattered abroad in the Creatures, are all united in God, yea the whole volume of perfections, which is spread through heaven and earth, is epitomized in him; Why do we not then with Paul, tram∣ple upon the Pompe and Glory of the world, for the excellent knowledg of Christ? Why do we not with David turn away our eyes, hearts, and affections from beholding vanity, and pitch them all on him? Why do we not re-collect our selves, and gather up out affections and thoughts, which are scattered and busied about a thousand tristes, and bestow them all on him, in whom is the ful∣nesse of all excellency beauty, and perfection? Thirdly, if there be a fulnesse in Christ, then let us be content with him, having our hearts filled and satisfied with him. First, in regard of spiritual things. Goe we not to the brookes of Teman, the broken , and Peers packs of Rome, as Saints, Merrits, Churches Treasury, &c. For if there be a fulnes in Christ that needs not for in him we are all compleat. Secondly, for Temporal things let us be content with him alone, for he is our fullnesse even in them a so for the better conceiving of this we must know that the first Adam brought a generall Epti∣nesse through all the world, for though the world be full of pmp and pleasures, as Iohn calls them, Lust of the flesh Lust of th ye &c. yet it is properly empty, because not full of that it should bee: even as we say a well is empty, though it be full of ayre, because it is not full of water which should be in it: for Emonesse is not so much, Absontia Entitatis a absenti Entitatis debitae. Hence ther∣fore not only the hearts of men, but the creatures are said to bee empty, hence Solomon saith Ecclesiastes the 1. Chapter, Vanity of Vanities,  is but vanity, that is emtinesse: and Rom. 8. The Crea∣ture is subject to vanity: that is emptinesse: through him that sub jecteth it. Hence the hearts of men are not satisfied with the world, but as the Prophet speaks: They eat and are not filled, they drink
and behold their soule is empty, because the Creature is now but as the huske without the graine, the shell without the kernell, full of nothing but emptinesse, and being empty in it selfe, cannot give us satisfaction; But Christ the second Adam hath filled all things againe, Epes. 1. last verse. He fils all in all things, that is, not on∣ly the hearts of en, but the things also. It is the Newter Gender. . Hence we may observe, that many finde a want in the midst of plenty, their hearts finde no rest or satisfaction in al they enjoy, but with the holy Regenerate man it is much other∣wise, though he have but a little wealth, a little food and rayment, yet there is a secret fulnesse put into that little which makes it fit to give him satisfaction, which is the meaning of that of the Psalmist, Psal. 37, 16. A little thing to the Righteous, is better then great riches to the wicked, because in that little it being filled with the blessing of the second Adam, they finde a fulnesse, whereas the wicked finde an emptinesse in the midst of their greatest aboun∣dance. If there be a fulnesse in Christ, then what though there be a ful∣nes Vse 4. of sin and guilt in us, yet there is a fulnes of Grace in him able to remove it, and take it away. A fulnes of mercy to receive our Supplications, a fulnes of merit to make an Attonement for our foulest sins, a fulnes of Favour to prevaile with his Father in a∣ny requests. If therefore there be a fulnes of grace in Christ, as there is, be not discouraged, though thy sins abound, yet his Grae abounds much more, they cannot be so out of measure sin∣ful, as he is out of measure merciful. Remember but the two Meta∣phors used in Scripture, I wil scatter your sins as a mist, and they shal be drowned in the bottom of the Sea. Now the Sun by reason of its great force can scatter the thickest mist, aswel as the least va∣pour: The Sea by reason of its great Vastnes can drowne moun∣taines, aswel as molehils; So Christ by reason of that Vast Ful∣nes of Grace which is in him, is as able, yea as forward and wil∣ling to forgive the greatest sins aswel as the least, I say as forward and willing for mercy, though it be a quality in us, yet it is a na∣ture in God: Now what is natural, there is no unwillingnesse or wearinesse in deing that, as the eye is net weary with seeing, nor the eare weary with hearing; Therefore though our sins be ne∣ver so great and many, yet if this condition be observed, that wee
lie in no knowne sin, that we have a ful and resolute purpose, God bearing witnesse to our consciences not to doe the least evil, nor  the least good, in a word that wee make out hearts per∣fect to God in al things, for without this condition there is no re∣mission of sins. But if this condition be observed, I say that al∣though out nes be never so great any many, yet they are not gone beyond the price which hath beene paid for them, nor be∣yond the Grace of him wi whom we have to doe, for there is a fulnes in him. Now I beseech you take not this Exhortation in vaine, for there is nothing more effectual to heale a rebellious disposition, to instil saving Grace, to cause a sinner to change his course, then to be fully perswaded that he shal be received to mercy, and that his sins shalbe forgiven in Christ: Even as the Theese, while the Hue and Cry is after him, never returnes willingly: Rebels Simile. and Pyraes whiles the Proclamation of Rebellion is out against them, never come in: But if there be a Proclamation of pardon, yea and of some great Advancement, if that be beleived once, that, and noting else causeth them to come in, and to become faithfull and loyall Subjects. Therefore let this fulnesse of mercy in Christ be an effectuall motive to us all, to come in to lay down the armes of Rebellion, to choose God for our good, and to give up our selves wholly to him, to serve him with perfect hearts & willing minds, all our dayes. So much for the first part. The second part I wil as briefely dispatch, and not meddle with the third, lest I be tedious. Of his Fulnes wee have al received WHence the second Point is [That al Grace is received] For as al Stars shine in the light of the Sun; So doe al the Saints through grace received. What else distinguished Iohn from Iudas, Simon Peter, from Simon Magus? but onely Christ, who shone upon one, and not upon another, when they sate both alike in darknesse, and in the shadow of death. The Scripture is evident for this, Phil. 2. 13. The Deed is wrought in us by God, and not the deed onely, but the Wil also
which produces that deed, nor that onely, but the thought also which begat that wil. For we are not able so much as to thinke a good thought of our selves. 2 Cor. 3 5. So  grace, yea  preparation to grace, and ab to accept grace are al from God: contrary to what Arminians affirmeth: and not of our selves, and that for the reasons. Because nothing can worke beyond th Spheare of its owne , the effct exceedth not the Cause, therefore it is impossible for cor∣rupt nature either to beget Supernatural grace or to  any Acti∣on preparing, or bending, or inclining the wil to it: For as the water cannot heate (which is an Act  above the nature of it) until an higher principle of heat be first infused into it; no more can meere nature doe any thing tending to saving grace, having no principle in it selfe whence it can raise it. Object. And if it e objected (as it is by the Arminians) that though Grace doe al, yet to accept or reject it, to wil or nil it, is natural to man as a free Agent. I answer: that to wil, is natural, but to wil wel, is supernatural, and must rise from a higher wel-head than nature is. For as an hatchet wil cut when handled but with a common hand, but not make a chaire, or stoole, or any Artificial thing except it have In∣fluentiam Artificis quatenus Artifex, the influence of a Artifi∣cer as he is an Artificer; So though to wil be natural, yet, to wi wel, to doe a supernatural worke in a supernatural and holy man∣ner, it cannot except it have the influence of a supernatural Agent to direct and guide it. If a man might accept Grace or refuse it, as he would. God were no God, because he might be crossed by his creature, and his own wil should not absolutely beare rule, especially in that great mat∣ter of beleiving, and not beleeving, and in putting difference be∣twixt man and man in the matter of Salvation and Damnation: For according to Arminius, though God did heartily desire the conversion of such a man, and offered him al the meanes of Grace that could be, yet it is stil in the fice choise of his wil to convert, or not to convert; Their onely answer here is, that seeing God hath made a Decree, that man shal be a free Agent, though he doe most earnestly desire the conversion of such and such men, yet because he cannot disaul his Decree, he doth, and must leave it to the li∣berty
of the Creature to doe contrary to even that himselfe desires. But what is this else but to put God into such streights as Darius was in, who would faine have saved Daniel, but because of his Decree he could not? And if griefe in Spirits and Angels be but Reisus voluntatis, a reluctancy of the wil, as the Schoolemen af∣firme, what is this else but to attribute griefe unto God, and so to detract from his Blessednesse. Thirdly, if all Grace be not received, but a man may accept it or reject it as he will, how can it be solved, but that a man must re∣joyce and boast partly in himselfe, contrary to Paul's rule, and not wholly in the Lord, for aske the question of all that are saved, what is the reason that you are saved rather then another, their answer must needs be; I out of the liberty of my owne will, did receive and use well the Grace offered, when another did not. So that according to Arminius, the Saints in heaven are not a jot more beholding to God then the damned in hel, for the offering of Grace on Gods part, was a like common to both, only he that is in heaven, may thank his own wil that he chose it, when onother re∣fused it. They have nothing here to answer, but onely that the meanes of Grace are dispenced by God with some disparity; But what is that when they maintaine such freedome of wil, that he who hath the greatest meanes may reject grace, and he who hath the least, may accept it? Other reasons there are, but that I hasten: as that Grace is not Grace without being received, no more then a man can be a man without reason, or a gift can be a gift without being given, for no lesse doth it imply contradiction to suppose it to be a grace, & yet not to be freely bestowed by God and received by us. Secondly, bowing of the will is an effect of grace, and grace is an effect of the spirit. Now the spirit breaths, when, where, & in what measure it listeth. Againe, if grace should spring out of our soile it should be but a flower of grasse, for all flesh is grasse, but the grace of the mediator is of a more durable nature, a flower that ades not, and a spring which is not dryed up. Hence 2. Correlaries. One to rectifie our judgment. The other to direct our practise.
The first shewes us the errors of Arminius, who hath but refyned the old Pelagianisme, a dangerous errour: for Arrianisme was like a land flood that overflowed the whole world, but was soone day∣ed up againe, because it had not a spring to maintaine it, but the best ages of the Church had in them as he called. Multas fibras virulentiae Pelagianae, because it is an errour agreeable to nature & reason, so that we have a sprng within our own breast to nourish and mainine it. Bnow to keep close to the point in hand, this point sheweth the eor of Arminius and Pelagius, who ascribe the beginning preparations and ability of accepting grace to our own free will, although the complement to God. Whereas you see by what hath been said, that not only the fuller streames, but every drop of grace is received from his fulnes. This errour proceedes from  not distinguishing a right betwixt acquisite habits and infused, indeed in the acqute, the acts goe before the habits, and prepare for them, but with infused habits it is clean contrary; It is with them as it is with the naturall powers of the soule, wee have first the faculty of seeig beore we doe see, and the faculty of hearing before wee doe heare, so it is in infused habits, we have first the habits before we exercise the orations of them, for even as the wheele doth not run that it may be made round, but it is first made round that it may run so the heart doth not first do the actions, whereby it is put into a right frame, but it is first fa shioned and made a new Creature by grace, and then it doth a∣ctions, and brings forth fruits wothy amendment of life, for what is said of the soule is as truly said of Grace, it doth, Fabrica Sibi Domicilium, prepareth a room for it selfe, useth no Harbnger, for nothing can prepare for grace but grace. And if it be objected, as Arminius doth in his book upon the 7. Object. to the Romans, that such as Seneca and Socrates, were much en∣lightned, did approve the law of God according to the inward man, and had a kind of universall common grace. I answer, that this priviledg cannot be denyed to many among Answ. the Heathen, that as Alchmists, though they misse the end, yet they finde many excellent things by the way. So though they fai∣led of the right end, the glory of God, yet they were not destitute of many excellent common gifts, wherein though one did go faire beyond another, as Seneca beyond Nero, and so others, yet as they
say of sins, they do all alike passe therule of rectitute, though some goe further beyond than others, so were they al alike destitute of o∣rginal Righteousnesse, although some more elongated from t than others, al are alike dead in sins, though some (as dead bo∣dies) more corrupted and putrified than others. And if it be objected, as it is by Arminius, to what end then Object. are Exhortations and Threatnings, the propounding of Punish∣ments, and Rewards, if it be not in our power to accept Grace, & refuse it as we wil. I answer, that as the raine although it fal aswel upon Rockes and Heathes, as upon V and Fruitfull places, yet no man as∣keth Answ. to what end is the first and latter raine; So Exhortations & Admonitions though they fal aswel upon the Reprobates, and those that are desperately wicked, as uon those that are docible and capable of better things, it is to no see folly to aske to what end they are, seeing as the raine, so they are to many beneficial and useful. So much for the first Corollary, which serves to rectifie Judge∣ments. The next is for Practise. If al grace be received, then deferre not repentance, for no repentance is accepted, but what proceeds Corol. 2. from a Sanctifying grace, and that as you see is received, that is given by God as he wil. It is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but he hath compassion on whom he wil have com∣passion, and whom he wil, he hardeneth, Rom. 9. 15. As I said before, the Spirit breatheth where, and when it listeth. Therefore we should as Millers, and Mariners are went to doe, who take the Gale when it commeth, because they know the winds are not at their command: Suppose a man were to passe the Seas within 20 das upon pain of death, if the wind should blow the second day, third day, or fourth day, no wise man would omit the op∣portunity, because he knowes the winds are not in his power; So, if the spirit shal breath into our hearts good motions of turning to God unfainedly in our youth, at 16. 17. or when over, it is the greatest wisedome in the world to take the opportunity, and not to put it off, who knoweth whether they wilbe had againe  no: How many thousand are now in Hel who thoght to ha repented, and did not because they neglected those breathings
the Spirit where they were offered? For there are certaine accep∣table times, after which God offers Grace no more: happy he that knowes that day of his visitation, and as our Saviour speaketh, the things which belong to his Peace, in that his day, which Ierusa∣lem did not, which made Christ to weep over it, and which Saul did not: and the Jewes in Ieremiah's time did not, when God forbad Ieremy to pray for them. For as there were certaine times when the Angell moved the waters in the poole of Bethesda, and he that then stepped in, was healed; so there are certaine accepta∣ble times, wherein God troubles the hearts of men by his spirit. Happy is he who then steps into a good course, that he may be hea∣led to Salvation. I say there are certaine times, wherein God doth (as it were) thaw and soften the frozen hearts of men. And it is wisedome then with the husband-man to put in the plough, while the ground is soft: for the heart in such a case is like iron in the fur∣nace easily fashioned, but stay till it be cold, and it will not be wrought upon. I beseech you therefore let us be exhorted to take the opportunity, and not be like to those whom Isayah complaines of, who like bulrushes how down their heads for a day, while some storme of inward or outward trouble is upon them, but when a faire Sun-shine day comes to dry it up againe, lift up their heads as upright as ever before. If a man would sit downe and call his thoughts together but for one half hour, and consider this seriously, I have but a little time to live here, it is another place where I must live for all eternity, and it shall be with e for all this eternty, as I spend this short time. I say if this were thoroughly considered, I wonder that a∣ny thing else should take up the intentions and thoughts of a mans heart, but only how to make sure his salvation. But alas we are robbed of our selves through worldly delights, and doe magno conat, magnas gas agere, and so we spend our lives. But if we would not have with the Merchant, Forturam rudentibus apam, that is, an estate hanging upon ropes, and depending upon uncertaineties, especially seeing grace whence repentance pro∣ceedeth, is as you see received, and not in our power. But wee mistake repentance, and that is the cave we defer it, it is not as it is commonly thought, a sorrow for our sinnes onely, nor a cere leaving of sinnes out of feare of hell, and desire to be saved, which
a man may doe out of the strength of naturall wisedome, provi∣ding for his owne safety, but it is a much different thing, viz. putting life into a dead man: Ephesians 2. 1. Making a man a new Creature, 2 Corinthtant 5. 17. A change of the whole frame of the heart. As if another soule dwelt in the same body, as he saith; Ego non ego. In a word, when a man is cleane another man, then he was serving of God out of an inward propensnesse and having the whole bent of his disposition turn'd to delight in the Law of God without these by-respects. And that this may yet be made clearer, and put out of all doubt, I would aske but this question; That repentance which men take up in age, or in times of extreamity, whence proceedeth it, if from selfe love, as it u∣sually doth in such cases, because the soule is then strongly pos∣sessed with an apprehension of death and hell, and another life, then there is no more then nature in it, for the streame riseth not higher then the fountaine. A beast would doe as much, which sinking into danger, would struggle to save it selfe. But if it pro∣ceed from love to God, why was it not done sooner, why not in the flowre of our youth, yea when it is done soonest, would we not be heartily sorry that it was not done sooner, if it procee∣ded out of love to him. And if it thus proceed out of an holy love to God, it cannot arise but from his holy spirit: the breathings of which spirit as they are most free, so are they most pretious. Therefore when such a sparke is kindled in our hearts, let us bee carefull to put fuell to it, and not suffer it to goe out againe. Al the Creatures in Heaven and Earth cannot helpe us againe to them, yea the best Ordinances are but as pens without inke, or empty Conduit-pipes which give not a drop of true Grace. except Christ who is the Fountaine please to conveigh it by them. You know the Famous Story of Francis Spira, what bitter cryes hee used upon his Death bed: O that I had but one drop of Faith▪ One of the mottons which I have beene wont to have, but yet could not have them! But died with those desperate words in his mouth, I am Dmned. Therefore let us take heed how we let such motions rise up like bubbles in us, and breake againe; or goe our like sparkes upon wet under, lest often checking, and snibbing, and quenching the Spirit, in the end we be guilty of resisting the Holy Ghost, and God shal swears in
his wrath that we shal not enter into his rest. [Where by the way observe, that this Doctrine teacheth us not to be idle, and leave al to God, as they slander it] but as Paul maketh the Conse∣quence, because God worketh in you both the wil and the deed, therefore worke out your Salvation with feare and trembling. Armins contrarily, our selves worke in our selves the Wil, and the deed; Therefore we need not worke out our Salvation with any such feare and solicitude, since we may doe it at our owne pleasure and leisure. But it wil be said this is a hard case, although a man would repent, yet he cannot? though he desire to serve God, yet it is impossible. Therefore to take away this Scruple, we must know that God is exceeding free and open-handed in giving grace (if it may be taken in time) and if we wil not believe it, Iohn commeth here and telleth you, I have received of his Fulnesse, and not onely I, but al we have received, that is, al other Saints that either are, or have beene: and since Iohn's time, many thousand thousands: And shal not such a Cloud of Wit∣nesses perswade us? If a Beggar doe but heare of an open House kept, or a great Dole, it affects him, and invites him to goe: But when he sees many come from it with armes-ful, and laps∣ful, and baskets-ful, then he is confident: that addeth wings to him; So if a sick man doe but heare of a Famous Physitian, or a healing Wel, it stirs him up to goe and try: But when he meets with 100 and 1000 comming from the Wel, and telling him, I have beene there and am healed, I have beene there, and am made whole, then he maketh no question; So doth Iohn here, Al we have received of his Fulnesse: Like a Bird that hath found out a ful heape and calls his fellowes to it. Say not therefore, on my sinnes are so great, and my wants are so many: But rather thinke thus with your selves, if there was grace inough for so ma∣ny, there is surely inough for me: Onely you must receive when it is offered in the acceptable time, lest often grving the Spirit, God suffers his Spirit to strive no longer. Gen. 6. 3. But (as I said before) sireare in his wrath that you shal not enter into his rest. 2 If al grace be received, then let us be affected as Receivers [1 In thankfulnes towards God] the most gracious are the most grateful, [2 In Humility towards men] For what have wee that
wee have not received? And shal our Purse or Vessel boast  selfe against another, because the Owner hath put more Gold, or more precious Liquor into it, than into another, it may be of the same, or a better worth? Or shal the wl which glistereth with the Sun beames exalt it selfe against another which stands in the shadow, as if it had Lustre from it selfe, and not borrowed from the Sun. 3. Let us be affected as Receivers, in begging grace at Gods hands by Prayer. Therefore it is said to be the Bcket of grace, and it is a true observation that a man of much Prayer, is a man of much Grace. Now Prayer is either Private, or Publique: [Private, is that wherein we expresse our private and particular occasions to God every day, wherein we renew Repentance & Covenants with God, of abstayning from the sinnes we are most proue to, and of doing the duties to which we are most unapt, in a word, that wherein we doe every day set our hearts streight before God in al things. This is the very Life of Religion, and in this we must be very frequent and servent, binding our selves with an inviolable resolution to keep a constant course in it, but of this there is no doubt. [The next is Publique Prayer, of which because it is more questioned and not received by all with that Reverence it should, I wil adde a word or two of it, and conclude. That a set Forme of Prayer is Lawful, much need not to be said, the very newnesse of the contrary opinion is enough to shew the vanity and falsenesse of it: It being contrary to the Judgment of approved Councells, Learned Fathers, and the continual Practise of the Church. Tertullian, who lived not much above an hundred yeares after the Apostles death, saith in his Booke de Oratione, Pre∣missa Legitima & ordinaria Oratione, Ius est superstruendi Petitiones, &c. which sheweth that they had some ordinary set allowed Prayers, to which, afterwards some were added at more Liberty. In Origen's time, who lived very neere Ter∣tullian's time: It is evident that there were set Formes of Prayer used in the Church: for in his 11th Homily upon Ieremy, he repeateth and expoundeth some passages of them, upon which occasion Illiricus saith. Tune temporis certas quasdam foro∣las
orationum se dubio habuerunt. Basil in his 63. Epistle saith, that in his time there were Letanies used in the Neocesa∣rean Churches, and Ambrose in his time affirmeth: Vsum Lae∣taniarum ubique sse frequentem. Constantine the Great prescri∣bed a set Forme of Prayer to his Souldiers, set downe by Eusebius in his fourth Booke. And Calvin in his 83. Epistle to the Protect of England saith, that he doth greatly allow a set Forme of Ecclesiasticall Prayers, which the Ministers should be bound to observe. But as I said before of the lawfulnesse, there is little question. That which is chiefely to b prehended, is of a secret disesteem of publique prayers? By  of which, many neglect to come to them, and they  doe it in a perfunctory and over∣ly manner, which is an extreame fault. Better were it, that men would came to this disjunction; either it is lawfull to use them or ; if not, why doe they not wholly abstaine, and if they lawfull, why doe they not use them constantly, and in a reverent and holy manner. One thing there is, which if it were well considered, would breed in the hearts of men another esteem of our publique prayers then there is. And that is, that besides the end of obteyning the things we want (wherein yet publique prayer hath the promise) there is another end in praying, and that is to worship God, and to performe a service to him, for pre∣ving of which, there are two places of Scripture un-answerable, Luke 2. 37. Hannals worshipped God by fasting and prayers, the word used is , which is the proper word for worship, Acts 13. 2. They ministred to the Lord and fasted, the word u∣sed is , whence the word Liturgy is derived. This me thinkes should breed in the hearts of men a reverend esteeme of this duty. Besides, how straight is that which is objected against the law∣fulnesse of it, as that the Spirit is stinted, when wee are settered with words appointed. Answ. The freedome of the Spirit stands not so much in the extent of the words, as the intensnesse of the zeale wherewith they are uttered. Besides if this argument were good, it would swell against conceived prayer, for if he that heareth, hath a lar∣ger spirit then he that prayeth, there is to him the same stinting o restraint.
Againe it is objected, that we cannot pray for occasionall neces∣sities. Therefore we bind not only to a set forme: but men may, and ought to use besides, private prayer, wherein we may expresse our private, accidentall, and particuler occasions. And if they be more publique, there are prayers before and after Sermon, where∣in the Minister is left at more liberty? And if it be yet more ge∣nerall belonging to the State or Church, we adde it to the publike prayers, as it is in the Gun-powder-treason, times of War, dearth, &c. But there needs not much be said to convince the judgement: that which is chiefely to be desired, is, that they may be better ob∣served, and more esteemed, especially seeing our publique prayers be holy and good, (and which should be a greater inducement) the Church hath commanded them: And if the Church be to be obeyed in indifferent things, as it is, much more in appointing of Gods owne Ordinances. And if a set forme of prayer bee lawfull, then the Lords Prayer must needes excell, being dedicated by Christ him∣selfe, and is therefore to bee more frequently used, and withall Reverence both in minde and gesture. Nor doth this want the practise and approbation of the Auncient, it is Cyprians speech. Quanto efficacius impetramus quod peti∣mus Christi nominae si ipsius Oratione petamus. And Saint Augustine. Disce et retinete orationem Do∣minicam, et inter omnes sanctos Consono ore pro∣feratis. Thus if we shal shew our selves affe∣cted as Receivers, in using both publicke and private praier, we shall find that successe which Iohn and the rest found, who of his fulnesse received Grace for Grace. FINIS.
