R1582 12653018 65313
THE CHRISTIANS ADVANTAGE BOTH BY Life and Death. Discovered in a SERMON PREACHED At the Funeral of that Faithful and Eminent Servant of the LORD, JOSEPH JACKSON, late Esq and Alderman of the City of Bristol, On the 17. day of January, An. Dom. 1661. By Fran. Roberts D. D. Rector of the Church at Wrington in the County of Somerset. Phil. 1.21. — To me to Live, is CHRIST: and to Die, is GAIN. Hieronym. ad Eustoch, in Epitaph. Paulae, tom. 1. Non moeremus, quòd talem amisimus: Sed gratias agimus, quòd habuimus, imò habemus. Deo enim vivunt omnia: & quicquid revertitur ad Dominum, in familiae numero computatur. Hieronym. ad Theodor. in Epitaph. Lucinii, tom. 1. Nos dolendi magis, qui quotidie stamus in praelio peccatorum, vitiis sordi∣damur, accipimus vulnera, & de otioso verbo reddituri sumus rationem. LONDON, Printed by Edw. Mottershed. 1662.
TO My much Honored, and entirely beloved Friends, in the LORD, The Children, Brethren, Sisters, and others in near and dear Relation to JOSEPH JACKSON, late Esq and Alderman of the City of Bristol, now sleeping in Jesus, yea living and triumphing in bliss with IJSUS: Grace, mercy and peace in this life, and eternal glory in the life to come. My dear Christian Friends, HOw brittle, frail and fading is the most flourish∣ing Life of Man here on Earth! The Holy Scriptures compute it, By 70 or 80 years, Psal. 90.10. by a few years, Job 16.22. by moneths, Job 14.5. by dayes, Job 14.5. by a few dayes, Job 14.1. by one day, Job 14.6. by all, denoting the extreme brevity of it. And they compare his life and time of abode here below, To a vanishing vapour, Jam. 4.14. to a transient wind, Job 7.7. to a perishing puff of breath, Psal. 146.4. Isa. 2.22. to a fading flower, Psal. 103.15, 16. Job 14.2. to a momentary medi∣tation, thought, or tale told, Psal. 90.9. to withering grass, Psal. 90.5, 6.1 Pet. 1.24. to a speedy irrevocable flood, Psal. 90.5. to yesterday, when past and gone, Psal. 90.4.
to an hastening Post, Job. 9.25. to a swift Weavers shuttle, Job 7.6. to short handbreadths, Psal. 39.5. to a Weavers web, soon brought to the thrum to be cut off, Isa. 38.12. to a Watch in the night, but three hours long, Psal. 90.4. to a vanishing shadow, Job 4.2. & 8.9. Psal. 102.11. to crumbling dust, Psal. 103.14. to a sleep, insensibly pas∣sing, Psal. 90.5. to an Apparition, or image, Psal. 39.6. And (as if all these reached not home,) to meer Nothing,These Re∣semblances I am wont to ex∣press in this en∣suing Memorial: Vita, vapor, ventus, flatus, flos, fabula, faenum, Flumen, heri, cursor, radius, palmaria, tex∣tum, Excubiae, um∣bra, cinis, som∣nus, imago, nihil. Psal. 39.5. By all these emphatically describing the extreme lubricity, uncertainty, and vanity of Man's life. VVhere∣upon we may with the Psalmist justly conclude; Surely, every man, at his best state, is altogether vanity. Selah. Psal. 39.5. Not only man, but every man: not in some state only, as of childhood, sickness, old age, &c. but at his best state, Heb. when setled: Is not only vain, but vanity it self: Not only vanity in part, or in some regard, but in whole, altogether vanity: And all this with a [Surely] prefixed, for the more undoubted certainty; And with a [Selah] suf∣fixed, for the greater observableness. It is not long since his late dear Yokefellow was by Na∣tures dissolution divorced from him: And now Himself  by Death separated and removed from you. Oh what is man! Little did I think to have preached at the Funeral of either: And lo, so hath the LORD disposed things, that I have (not without much reluctancie and grief) performed this last office for them both, not many years interposing.Mary his late wife de∣ceased April 24. and was buried May 5. 1657. Joseph Jackson himself slept in the Lord Jan. 5. and was inter∣red Jan. 17. 1661. They have prevented both you, and me: Our work is to prepare to follow after. The good Lord teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, Psal. 90.12. To true spiritual wisdom; To wisdom for our selves, for our souls, for our eternal estate with our dearest Saviour IESUS CHRIST in Heaven. We have here no continuing City: Let us diligently seek one to come; A City that hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God,
Heb. 13.14. & 11.10. Let us so manage our Earthly Pil∣grimage, that we may make sure of the Heavenly Heritage: Let us so improve this Mortality, as not to miss of that Im∣mortality: And so live on Earth a while, that we may un∣doubtedly live in Heaven for ever. As for you that are surviving, My Conscience and Af∣fection (I cannot but affectionately love those that belong'd to him, whom I so intensively affected for Christ in him,) prompt me to present a few requests unto you by way of Ad∣vice: And I hope you will resent them with Christian ac∣ceptation. 1. Be pleased to peruse and practise those Ten In∣structions or Practical Directions, published in my In∣structive and Hortatory Epistle prefixed to my Sermon The Sermon is entituled, The Checquer∣work of Gods Providences towards his own people.— London, 1657. preached at the Funeral of Mary Jackson, his late religious Yokefellow. You have the printed Books and Directions: I need not mention any Particulars, but compendiously refer you to them. I heartily recommend them to your faithful practice; beseeching the God of all wisdom to give you sal∣vifical understanding in all things. 2. Endeavour to comfort your selves in this your great loss of him, and deep affliction for him, by Christian con∣siderations. And what Consolatory Arguments may you not readily suggest unto your selves? His Life was so Christian, that his Death must needs be comfortable. Qualis vita, finis ita. Of a good life there cannot come a bad death; As of a bad life seldom comes a good death. Life and Death were his, for all manner of spiritual advantages. He liv'd to the Lord, and died to the Lord: both living and dying, he was and is the Lords, Rom. 14.8. His body (as Hierom said of Nepotianus) is returned to the earth; but his soul is restored to Christ. Corpus ter∣ra suscepit: A∣nima Chisto reddita st. Hiron, in Epi∣taph. Npotian. p 29. B. tom. 1. His Sins and Sorrows are all ended; his Graces are perfected; and his eternal Joyes are begun. VVhile you are lamenting in black, He is triumphing in white. Are we born (that I
may use Hierom's words to Paula upon the death of her daughter Blesilla,) that we should here abide eternally? Abraham, Moses, Isaiah, Peter, James, John, Paul the chosen Vessel, and above all, the Son of God, died: And are we grieved, that one depart the body, whose soul was so accepted of God, as to be snatched out of the midst of iniquity and error? Let that dead person be lamented, whom Hell receives, whom the Infernal pit devours, for whose punishment everlasting fire doth burn. As for us whose End the Angels accompany, whom Christ meets, let us rather grieve, that we are kept so long in this taber∣nacle of Death, [and may not meet Christ sōoner:] seeing while we are present in this body, we are absent from the Lord. Ad hoc enim nati su∣mus, ut mane∣amus aeterni? Abraham, Moy∣ses, Esaias▪ Pe∣trus, Jacobus, Joannes, Pau∣lus electionis vas, & super omnia filius Dei, moritur: Et nos indig∣namur aliquem exire de corpo∣re, qui ad hoc forsitan raptus est, ne malitia mutaret intel∣lectum ejus? Placita v. Deo erat anima e∣jus. Propter hoc properavit educere eam de media ini∣quitate, ne lon∣go vitae itinere, deviis oberra∣ret aufractibus. Lugeatur mo∣tuus, sed ille, luem gehenna suscipit, luem tartarus devo∣rat, in cujus poenam aeter∣nus ignis aestu at. Nos quo∣rum exitum Angelorum turba comitatur, quibus obviam Christus occurrit; gravemur magis, si diutiùs in tabernaculo isto mortis habitemus; qia quamdi hie moramur, peregrinamu à Domino. Hioym. ad Paulam super obitu Blesille filiae, p. 158. D. Tom. 1. Basil. 1553. Let Faith, Hope, and Love be your comforters: (as Augustine Consoltur autem te Fides, & Spetua, & ipsa Charitas.—Non enim te desolatam pu∣tae debes, cui in interiore homine habeas praesentem Christum per fidem in corde tuo. Aut sic te contristari oporter quemadmodum Gentes quae spem non habent, cùm veracissima pro∣missione speremus nos de hac vita, unde migraturi quosdam nostros migrantes non amisimus, sed prmisimus.— Aug. Ilicae. vid. Epist. 6. ad init. tom. 2. sometimes advised an Italian widow, up∣on the death of her Husband.) Faith; For you are not de∣solate, so long as Christ dwells in your hearts by Faith. Hope; For you cannot but confidently hope, That he is not lost, but only sent before you; That he is in Heáven with Christ, which is far best of all, Phil. 1.23. That at the last day his body shall rise again, to be glorified together with his soul for ever. And, The Dead's Resurrection, is the Christians confidence and consolation. Fiducia Christianorum, Resurrectio Mortuorum. Tortul. de Resur. carnis. c. 1. Love; For the more entirely you loved him while he was with you, the more exceedingly should you rejoyce at his happiness, now he is with the Lord. And the time is hastening apace, when all that are Christ's shall meet again, and never part more.
3. Turn all your Lamentation for him,(i) Egregiae virtutis exem∣pla, veluti lu∣men, in edito ponenda sunt, ut omnibus praeluceant, multosque ad sui emulati∣onem accen∣dant. Erasm. in Epist. ad Archi. Tolet. praefix. Augu∣stini operibus, p. ult. into Imitation of him. He was a fair Copy to write after: Follow him, as he follow'd Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. I have laid down here after my Sermon, a short touch at his Exemplary vertues: both you and I know more of his true Christian worth. Strive to be like him in Grace, that you may be like him in Glory. And you, that are sharers in his plentiful earthly Estate left behind him, you especially are to be put in remembrance of his great Charity, Bounty and Liberality, which with that Estate he was wont to exert upon all good Occasions; that you may tread in his steps. The backs and bellies of many and many poor distressed Creatures, had long and frequent oc∣casions of blessing him: Let them have like causes of bles∣sing you, and God for you. So shall they say; Our Almner is not lost, but changed, for the stream of charity is still continued. His Alms-deeds were doubtless one eminent way of sanctifying all his great Enjoyments on earth, Luk. 11.41. and of augmenting his Reward in Heaven, 1 Tim. 6.17, 18, 19. Luk. 16.9. And like charitable courses in you, shall doubtless be crowned with like happy advantages. 4. Endeavour, I beseech you, with all faithful care, the right Christian and gracious education of his Son and Daughter, his two small Orphans, left in trust among you. You are Trustees of the Dead, and you are intrusted with his choisest jewels, his Children; and that not only with their Estates and Bodies▪ but especially with their souls: Oh study to be faithful to the uttermost, Engage them in the true knowledge of God, Jesus Christ, and Christianity; as also in the right religious Practice of Godliness, betimes; That when they are old, they may never depart from it. Quo semel est imbura re∣cens, servabit odorem, Testa diu.—Horat. 1 Chron. 28.9. Eccles. 12.1. Prov. 22.6. Ephes. 6.4. God hath, by his Providence, made you Pro-parents to them: Oh still express a Christian Parental affection towards them. That so at last, in this young Joseph the Son, old Joseph
the Father may in a sort remain alive, by inheriting and exerting his Fathers vertues. 5. Finally, Vouchsafe, in reference to your selves, to reduce this ensuing Sermon into Practice. As here both Life and Death are discovered to be theirs, that are Christs: So in every point endeavour you, that both may be yours, as being Christ's. For particulars, I refer you to the Sermon it self. It was preached under some inevitable confinement to time, because the Assembly was very great: Therefore here and there I have interposed some few passages for the necessary illustration of what was then spoken briefly and more ob∣scurely. Love, Hope, and Fear, have at last inclined me to consent to the Publication of it. Love, to many Christian Friends; whose importunities herein I could not well with∣stand: Hope, That being made publique, it may possibly, by Directing, Comforting, and Quickening in some measure, help some poor Souls onward in their Heavenly journey, even after my Decease: And Fear, lest by the help of some im∣perfect Notes taken at the preaching of it, it should have been (as was suggested to me) sent abroad into the world imma∣turely in an extraneous dress, to my prejudice, and others dis∣service. And now, such as it is, I present and dedicate it to you more especially, as a peculiar token of my great respect and love, both to Him that is departed, and to His that do remain. That his blessed Memory may yet live a little among you in these my ensuing Lines: Illum nostra pagella decan∣ter; Illum no∣strae literae so∣nent. Quem corpore non valemus, re∣cordatione te∣neamus: Et cum quo loqui non possumus, de eo loqui nunquam desi∣namus. Hieron. in Epitaph. Nepot. p. 27. in fin. tom. 1. And that you may yet further be incited so to Live and Die, as that after Death you may live with CHRIST▪ and with him, and with all that are Christ's eternally. Which is the earnest desire and prayer of— Wrington, from my Study there, Feb. 2. 1661. Your affectionate Brother, Friend and Servant in the LORD, for the furtherance of your hah and Joy, FRAN. ROBERTS.
A TRUE CHRISTIAN'S Manifold Advantage in CHRIST, Both by LIFE and DEATH. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. — —For all things are yours: Whether Paul, — or the World, or LIFE, or DEATH, or things present, or things to come; All are yours: And ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. OF whom speaks the Apostle these high things? Of them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints. For, to such he wrote this excellent Epistle, 1 Cor. 1.2. What? Are all things theirs: whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the VVorld, or LIFE, or DEATH, or things present, or things to come, Are all theirs? and they Christs? and Christ God's? Happy are the People that are in such a case! yea, thrice happy is that people, whose God in Christ is the LORD. Psal. 144.15. Some think, and say, That they are rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: who yet know not
that they are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.Rev. 3.17. But here they that are Christ's, are decla∣red to be rich indeed by Christ; forasmuch as in Christ, and through Christ, All things are theirs. The words are very emphatical, and comprehensive, and mysterious. Let us view them in their 1. Connexion, 2. Contents, and 3. Propositions thence resulting. The Connexion of these words with the Context, is hinted in the particle [, for] ver. 21. This particle [, for,] is of various use in the New Testament. It is 1. Sometimes Expletive, denoting the meer Emphasis of any expression or phrase: As in Matth. 1.18. 2 Tim. 2.7. 2. Sometimes Declarative, setting forth some matter or thing more fully: As in Luk. 2.10. 1 Thess. 2.14. and often. 3. Sometimes Causal and Argumentative, giving a Reason for confirmation of any thing propounded or asserted: As in Rom. 14.7, 8, 9. And in this sense it's used here 1 Cor. 3.21. as a Reason why the Corinthians should not glory in men, in any of their Ministers: Because they and the Church were not for the Ministers; but the Ministers, and all things for them; and they for Christ, &c. vers. 21. And the Argument seems to be a majori ad minus affirmativè,Sic▪ Joan. Calvin, in Com∣ment. ad 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. from the greater to the lesser affirmatively: Thus; Christ is God's, ye are Christ's, and all things are yours, for your good, for your happiness. All things (as Beza] id est, Admini∣cula vobis de∣stinata, ut ad Christum, & à Christo ad Deum subve∣hamitis, non autem ut in illis Adminicu∣lis haereatis: Ita enim fieret, ut non vestra essont illa, sed illorum potius essetis: Bez▪ in Annot. ad 1 Cor. 3.22. well-illustrates it) are yours, as your helps and fartherances unto Christ, and by Christ unto God: And consequently, All your Teachers, with all their va∣riety and eminency of Gifts, are yours also. Therefore, you must not acquiesce, nor finally rest in any of these; you must not terminate nor glory in any of them; but only in Christ, and in God. Otherwise (as Beza well ex∣presseth it) They are not so much yours, but rather you are theirs.
These Corinthians carnally gloried in the Gifts of their Teachers, some in one respect, some in another: where∣upon contentions and divisions increased amongst them, 1 Cor. 1.10, 11, 12. Therefore Paul, by many Arguments, and by this in the Text after the rest, endevours to quench these heats, and to cure these unchristian distempers. But I may not any further look back to the Context, having many steps to make forward in the Text. Nor in∣tend I to handle these words in their Relative, but in their more Absolute Consideration. The Contents wrapped up in these words, are most  observable and eminent. For, Herein is a rich Magazine of Treasure. And this Trea∣sure is especially Tripartite, viz. 1. God's Treasure. And that's CHRIST the Mediator; Christ is God's. 2. Christ's Treasure. And that's his Saints, His mystical Body; Ye are Christ's. 3. The Saints Treasure in Christ. And that's All things; All things are yours. These three are well explicated by Oecumen. saying; All things are yours: As your Benefits and Gifts. Ye are Christ's: As his Creatures and Workmanship. Christ is God's: As his Generation and Son. Oecum. in Comment. ad 1 Cor. 3. Now, The Saints Treasure in and by Christ, is (1) More generally propounded; All things are yours. And this, after sundry instances, is again reduplicated and repeated, for the greater emphasis. (2) More particularly expounded and illustrated, by an Induction of particular instance, viz. 1. All the Ministers and Teachers are yours. There∣fore glory in none. 2. The World is yours. Therefore, serve it not; but make it serve you.
3. Life is yours. Therefore use it aright: Live unto the Lord. 4. Death is yours. Therefore dread it not; but prepare for it, and die to the Lord. 5. Things present are yours: For your Benefit and Consolation in this world. 6. Things to come are yours also: For your Bliss and Glorification in the world to come. Or, Here's an excellent Scale or Series of Ends sub∣ordinate; And of Things referred unto these their Ends respectively, whereunto they have more immediate ten∣dency and subordination: And these Ends are especially three, viz. 1. The Saints and members of Christ; (for to such be here wrote, 1 Cor. 1.2.) they are the first and lowest end, here mentioned. To them, as to their immediate end, are subordinated, The Ministers, the World, Life, Death, Things present, Things to come, and all things. All these are made contributory and subservient to the Saints, for their benefit, edification, and eternal salvation, ver. 21, 22. 2. Christ. He (as Mediator) is the second End, and superior to the former. To him, his service and glory; as to their immediate end, All the Saints and whole Body of Christ, is, and ought to be subordinate, vers. 23. 3. God. He is the third and supreme End. To him, as to his immediate End, Jesus Christ the Mediator is subordinate, That God in all things may be glorified, vers. 23. Propositions, hence resulting, are many. Especially these, viz.
1. Christ the Mediator is God's: And God is his End. 2. The Saints are Christ's: And Christ is their End. 3. All things are the Saints: And the Saints are their End. And under this third more particularly are com∣prised these Propositions, viz. 1. They that are Christ's, have all his Ministers theirs. 2. They that are Christ's, have the whole world theirs. 3. They that are Christ's, have LIFE and DEATH theirs. 4. They that are Christ's, have things present, and things to come theirs. 5. They that are Christ's, have all things theirs. Thus you may see, here's an ample field of Matter discovered. To treat of all these at this time, is neither possible, nor pertinent to this solemnity. From among all the rest, I shall single out only one Doctrinal Proposition, as being more peculiarly apposite to the present occasion, viz. They that are Christ's,Doctr. have Life theirs, and Death theirs. They that are Christ's; indeed and in truth. 1 Not only in Name, but also in Nature: Being New Creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17. and partaking the Divine Nature, the true Image of God, 2 Pet. 1.4. Ephes. 4.24. with Col. 3.10. 2 Not only in Form outwardly by a meer visible Profession; but also in Power inwardly by an holy Constitution, attended with an answerable Conversation, Matth. 25.3, 4. 2 Tim. 3.5. Rom. 2.28, 29. 1 Joh. 2.6. These, have Life theirs, and Death theirs. 1 Life, their Day to labour in: Death, their night to rest and sleep in. 2 Life, their Race to run in: Death, their Goal to obtain the Prize in. 3 Life, their Sea to sail in: Death their Haven to land in. 4 Life, their Egyptian pilgri∣mage
under the many oppressions of their enemies: Death, their Red-Sea, delivering them, but overwhelming all their oppressors. 5 Life, their long Wilderness-progress towards the heavenly Canaan: Death, their roaring Jordan to be pass'd through at their entrance into the heavenly Country flowing with milk and honey. 6 Life, their time of Conflict and Tribulation: Death, their time of Conquest and Coronation, 7 Life, their holy time of Preparation for the Lord: Death, their happy time of Transmigration to the Lord. But waving Generalities, let's come to a more Particular Illustration of this Proposition. And here we shall en∣quire, 1. What's here meant by Life and Death? 2. How Life is theirs', that are Christ's? 3. How Death is theirs, as well as Life? 4. Whence it comes to pass, that Life and Death are thus theirs, who themselves are Christ's? What's here meant by Life and Death? Chrysostom seems by these to understand,(f) Joh. in. Chrysost. in 1 Cor. 3. Hom. 10. p 99 D.E. the Life and Death of their Teachers: that as they live, so they under∣go Perils and Death it self for the body of Christ, his Church. — And further he thinks it may be said as to Death; . That is to say; That Adam's Death was for us, that we may be corrected (or nur∣tured.:) Christ's Death, that we may be saved.Chrysost. ibid. But (pace tanti viri, by the good leave of so grave an Author:) Life and Death here are not intended either of their Teach∣ers, or of Adam, or of Christ: but of the Life and Death of the Saints and Members of Christ: As the current of the words evidently imports. Besides, that phrase [All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas] suffi∣ciently comprehends all things in their Ministers; Office, Gifts, Graces, Life, Death, &c. here asserted to be theirs. And as for the Death of Adam, or of Christ: nor Text,
nor Context afford the least colour for any such interpre∣tation. But they that are Christ's, Life is theirs, and Death theirs. The Life which themselves shall here live, and the Death which themselves shall die: both are theirs for their great good and manifold advantage. But note; Life and Death are of three sorts, viz. 1 Natural, Corporal, or Temporal.Rom. 14.7, 8, 9. (I list not to be too Critical upon terms,) stile it which you will, so you rightly understand the thing. 2 Spiritual.Ephes. 2.1.5. 3 Eternal.Mat. 25.46. Now here we are not to understand Life and Death, Spiritual, or Eternal: but only Life end Death Natural, Corporal or Temporal. Life Natural or Temporal, is one of our dearest Tem∣poral enjoyments in this present world. All that a man hath will he give for it.Job 2.4. It consists generally, in the vital union of Matter and Form, of Body and Soul. Life (said one) is the Souls abode in the Body:Vita est mansio animae in corpore. Lag. . But here three things must be distinguished, viz. Principium vivendi: Esse viventis: Operationes vitae. 1. Principium vivendi, the Principle of living. And that's the Form, or Soul: Vegetative, in Plants; Sensitive, in Bruits; Intellective or Rational; in Man. 2. Esse viventis, The Being of the living: which is properly such a Nature in the living Creature, while the Principle of Natural life is in it, as whereby it is disposed to exert and exercise acts of life.Vivere, viventibus est esse. 3. Operationes vitae, The Operations or Acts of Life. Properly and formally these are not Life; but the effects, fruits, and evidences of Life. These Acts of Life may be reduced to Motion. — In him we live, and move, — Act. 17.28. Every Creature that lives, moves. And as the Motion in any Creatures is more or less per∣fect; so the Life of them is more or less perfect. Thus, Living Plants do move, by Nourishing themselves, Grow∣ing, Fruit-bearing, and Breeding their like. Thus, Living
Bruits do move by all the said Motions of Plants, and over and above them; by Outward senses. Seeing, Hear∣ing, &c. by Inward senses, The Common-sense, Phan∣tasie, and Memory; and by Loco-motion, or moving from place to place. Thus, Living man moves by all the Motions of both Plants and Bruits; and above them all, by Understanding, Conscience, and Will. The Motion of Bruits is more perfect than that of Plants: and consequently, the Life of Bruits is more perfect than the Life of Plants. But the Motion of Man is more per∣fect than the Motion of Plants or Bruits: and therefore Mans Natural Life is incomparably more perfect, noble and excellent than theirs. Death Natural or Temporal, is, The Privation of Life Natural, through the Separation of the Matter from the Form, of the Body from the Soul.Eccles., 12.7. In the Death of Plants or Bruits, the Form or Soul is so severed, that it's destroyed with the Body, Goes downward: But in the Death of Man, his Soul is so separated, that it separately subsists without the Body, Goes upwards;Eccles. 3.21. Returns to God, to be immediately disposed by him, unto eternal weal or woe, Eccles. 12.7. 1 King. 17.21, 22. Heb. 9.27. & 12.23. Luk. 23.43. & 16.22, 23. 1 Pet. 3.19. Now, they that are Christ's have Life and Death, Natural, Corpoal or Temporal, theirs. Theirs peculi∣liarly; theirs advantagiously, beneficially, salutife∣rously. How is Life theirs, that are Christ's? Resol. They that are Christ's, have Natural Life theirs, in a far and more excellent sort, than any Christless per∣sons have it, viz. I. As a Token of Gods paternal favour. They that are Christ's, have Life, not only from God as a Common Creator, but also from God as a peculiar tender Father
in Christ. — Your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things. — Our Father which art in heaven, — give us this day our daily bread.Mat. 6.9. — 11.32, 33. Again; He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?Rom 8 32. They have Life, not only with Gods leave and permis∣sion; but also with Gods love and approbation: Not only by Gods general Providence and common donation; but also by Gods special Providence and peculiar dispen∣sation. Now the Affectus Amantis, the Affection of the Loyer, is that, which highly commends the Munera Dantis, the Gifts of the Giver; and is more than the Gifts themselves. This makes the present Life of the Saints double sweet. II. As an additional Mercy in and with Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ is, The Gift of God, , The primary, transcendent, supereminent Gift of gifts,Christus iple est Donum Dei primarium & maximè principale: cae∣tera omnia sunt tantummodo accessoria. Ac∣cessorium au∣tem sequitur principaie. S.S. Joh. 4.10. & 3.16. All others are but Additionals, Accessories, Appurtenances, attending upon him. Accessories follow the Principals. Christ is the grand Mercy, the Mercy of mercies. Till we have obtained him, we have in effect obtained no mercy, 1 Pet. 2.10. But to whom God gives Christ, to them he gives freely both life, and all things with Christ, Rom. 8.32, Mat. 6.33. He is the Inheritance: these are but th'appurtenances. He is the Fountain: these but the streams thence flowing. To them that are Christ's, He brings all blessings in his arms. As Christ's blood flows freely to them; so Life and all things come sweetly swimming to them in the blood of a Saviour. III. As a fruit of Gods precious Promises,2 Pet. 1.4. with 11 Tim. 4.8. Mat. 6.33. Christ∣less men have Life and all their enjoyments only by Common Providence: But they that are Christ's, have and hold Life andall things by Covenant and Promise. God∣liness hath the Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which
is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. Again, the Promise is; Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6.33. They that are Christ's, are children of the Covenant which God made with Abraham, &c. Act. 3.25. They that are Christ's, are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the Promise, Gal. 3.28, 29. & 4.28, whilst all others are strangers from the Covenant' of Pro∣mise, Ephes. 2.12. Now to hold Life by Promise, is both a sure and sweet tenure: For, God that promised cannot lye, Tit. 1.2. yea, Gods Promise and Oath are those two im∣mutable things  it is impossible for God to lye: And this ministers o ais strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. And, All the Promises of God in Christ are Yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. Oh what an Advantage is this to them that are Christ's, that hold Life and all of God in Christ by Promise! God hath (as Augustine notes) made himself their Debtor, not by Receiving from them, but by Promising to them.Fidelis De∣us qui se no∣strum debito∣rem fecit: non aliquid à nobis accipiendo, sed ranta nobis promittendo. Paruin rat Promissin: oriam scriptose reneri voluir, veluti faciens nobiscum chi∣rographum promissorum suorum, . Aug. Enarrtt. in Psal. 109. ad init. Tom. 8. They may by Faith confidently rest and rely upon his Promise: They may by Prayer in all wants and dangers plead Gods Promise, and sue him (as it were) upon his own Covenant and Bond. He will not, He can∣not deny himself, 2 Tim. 2.13. IV. As an onely happy Season divinely blessed and sancti∣fied to all that are Christ's, for their salvifical furtherance in Spirituals and Eternals, Tit. 1.15. 2 Cor. 6.2 Others have Life, but not in such sort sanctified. They (as one said) not so much live, as are in life.Non tam vivunt, quàm in vita sunt. Sn. Life unto them is, as the Quaits were to Israel, a curse rather than a bles∣sing:Psal. 78 27. to 32. & 106.14, 15. Or as the Pearl is to the Muscle or Oyster, on the Precious stone to the Serpents head, their Disease, rather than their Perfection. Hereafter the wicked shall say, It had been good for them they had never lived, they had never been born, Mat. 26.24. Or that assoon as they were born alive, they had instantly dyed. But to
the Godly, Life and all things are sweetly sanctified; the Curse is removed; the free, lawful, comfortable and beneficial use is restored, 1 Tim. 4.4, 5. Gal. 3.9, 10, 13, 14. Unto the pure all things are pure; but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled.Tit. 1.15. Now, unto them that are Christ's, this temporal life here on earth is so sanctified and blessed, as (in reference to Spirituals and Eternals) to be, 1. Their holy Seed-time: Their Seed-time of Grace and Glory. In this Life they have their Season or Time accept∣ed, their Day of Salvation.. 2 Cor. 6.. In this Life, their Eternal Life is begun, Joh. 3.36. & 17.3. The foundation stones of their Salvation are laid: Their eyes are opened, and they are turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan, unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inhe∣ritance among them that are sanctified through saith that is in Christ.Act. 26.18. In this Life they are called, justified, and in some measure glorified: As they were before the foundation of the world was lai, eternally predestinatedRom. 8.29▪ 30. 2. Their Spiritual Trading-time. In this Life, they that are Christ's, have an excellent opportunity of driving their Spiritual Trade to their eternal advantage. Their LORD and Master Jesus Christ is gone into a far Country to receive a Kingdom, and to return; And he hath committed a stock of Talents, of Graces, Gifts, endowments, opportunities, &c. to every of his servants during his absence, that they may winde and turn them, imploy and improve them in their spiritual Trade, for their Masters benefit. To some five, to some two, to some one talent. Of all which he will require an exact account at his return; and will according to their works remunerate them respectively, Matth. 25.14, to 31. In this Life they, as wise Merchants, have the happy
season of traffiquing for spiritual Pearls and Treasures of greatest price, Matth. 13.44, 45, 46. Now, now, They buy of Christ gold tryed in the fire, that they may be rich, and eye-salve that they may see, and white raiment that they may be clothed, and that the shame of their nakedness do not appear, Rev. 3.18. The Gold of Christs pure Do∣ctrine, o of unfained Faith, both of them more pure and precious than gold tryed in the fire: The Eye-salve of saving Illumination; and the White-raiment of Christs Righteousness. Of all these spiritual commodities, Christ alone hath the Monopoly. Christus est  ille, qui merces salutis caelitùs venaltsnobis promit & offert in Evangelio, non precio vel hieitis parandas, sed precibus & fide gratis à Deo accipiendas. Hoc  est CHRISTI, extra quod nulla est salu. Fl∣luntur ergo qui à Sancts salutem petunt. Impostor est Papa, qui indulgentias & Goelum uro vendit. D. Pa. us in Comment. ad Apocalyps. c 3. ver. 18. Therefore of him alone they buy them; and of him they have them without money and without price, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. 3. Their striving time. In this Life, they that are Christ's, have a seasonable opportunity, 1. Of striving to enter in at the strait gate, leading to life, which few do find, Luk. 13.24. 2. Of contending earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude v. 3. 3. Of striving, 1 As Wrastlers against all spiritual Antagonists, Eph. 6.12. 2 As Soldiers to fight the good fight of Faith against all spiritual Enemies, the World, Flesh and Devil, 2 Tim. 4.7. Ephes. 6.11, 12. 3 As Racers, to run with patience the Race that is set before them yea, so to run, as to obtain the Crown, Heb. 12.1. 1 Cor. 9.24. Forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before, They press towards the mark for the prize of the highcalling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.13, 14. 4. Their Trying time. In this Life, they that are Christ's, have many Tryals: but all for their good.
1 They are tryed by Temptations, To discover the good that's in them: As Abraham was tryed, Gen. 21.1, &c. Heb. 11.27. 2 They are tryed by Tribulations, To refine and purge away the evil that is in them, Zech. 13.9. Isa. 27.9. 3 They are tryed by Persecutions and fiery Tryals; That they may be partakers of Christs sufferings, and so may have the greater joy and crown at Christs appearing, 1 Pet. 4.12.13. Revel. 2 10. The Wheat will not be clean, without the Fan; The Gold will not be pure, without the Fire and Fining-pot; The Pomander smells the better for rubbing; The Spice becomes the more fragrant by bruising; and the strings of the Musical Instrument, when stricken, makes the sweetest Melody: Thus are they that are Christ's, exceedingly bettered by all variety of their Temptations and Tribulations, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Rom. 5.4, 5. & 8.28. 2 Cor. 4.17. 4 Yea, this Life is the Saints most-happy season for search∣ing and trying their own hearts and ways: That so they may make their calling and election sure; may know that Christ is in them, and that they are no Reprobates, 2 Pet. 1.10▪ 2 Cor. 13.5. 5. Their Growing time. In this Life, they that are Christ's, have an excellent opportunity of spiritual Growth in Grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord, 2 Pet. 3.18. As did those eminent. Thessaloni∣ans; of whom Paul testified, Your Faith groweth exceed∣ingly; (Gr. over-groweth, abundantly-groweth,) and the charity of every one of you all towards each other aboundeth.  2 Thes. .3. And no wonder that in this Life, they that are Christ's so grow and shoot forth: For▪  Now it is, that they have the Ministers of Christ of all sorts planting and watering them, 1 Cor. 3.6, &c. 2 Now they have the Gospel-Ordinances moystening and feeding them, 1 Pet. 2.2. 3 And, which is most of all, Now they have the enlivening
Sun-shine of Gods favours from Heaven influencing them and causing them to increase, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7, &c. And all this makes them exceedingly grow and flourish in all Spirituals day by day. 6. Their Fruit-bearing time. In this Life, they that are Christ's have the very season of spiritual Fruitfulness. Now they are as trees planted by the rivers of waters, giving forth their fruit in due season, Psal. 1.3. Now the North-wind awakes, and the South comes and blows upon their Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out; that Christ their Beloved may come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.16. viz. the fruits of Holiness, Righteousness, Sobriety▪ of Faith, Love, Meekness, Humility, &c. even all the precious fruits of the Spirit; together with all those pious exercises of Hearing, Praying, Meditating, Almsgiving, and all good-works, Rom. 6.22. Ephes. 5.9. Gal. 5.22, 23. Now they are an Orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasan fruits; Camphire with Spiknad, Spiknard and Saffon, Calamus and Cynamon, with all the tres of Frankincense, Mirrh and Aloes, with all the chief spices. Cant. 4.13, 14. Now, now in this Life (O Christians!) is all your fruit-bearing time: This is your golden season for Believing, Repenting, Mortifying of sin, vivifying of Grace, &c. there's no place for any such thing in the grave. I T grave cannot praise God, death-cannot celebrate im; they that go down into the pit, cannot hope for his truth▪ The living, the living he shall praise him▪ — The Father to the children shall make known his truth, Isa. 38.18, 19. Therefore now let the councel of Solomon sink deep into every true Christians heart; Whatsoever thine hand find∣eth to do, do it with all thy might; for there is no work, no device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither t goest, Eccles. 9.10.
7. Finally, Their Hoarding time for Eternity. In this Life, they that are Christ's, lay up for themselves Trea∣sures in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal, Matth. 6.20. Now they treasure up Gifts, Graces, Prayers, Tears, Pro∣mises, Experiences, Evidences for Heaven, &c. Now they may be rich in good-works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate▪ laying up in store for themselves (bags that wax not old, and) a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Tim. 6.19. Now they may make themselves friends with the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when they fail, they may be received into everlasting habitations, Luk. 16.9. Now they may meditate of their Mortality, and prepare for their Immor∣tality. Now they may ponder upon their First, Middle, and Last things, (as Bernard ranks them.) Those bring shame, those grief, and these Fear. They may think whence they came, and blush: where they are, and groan whither they go, and tremble. Fili, memo∣rare novissima tua, & in aeter∣num non pec∣cabis. Revole Primordia; Attende Me∣dia; Memora∣re Novissima tua. Haec pu∣dorem addu∣cunt, ista dolo∣rem ingerunt, illa metum in∣catiunt. Co∣gita unde ve∣neris, & eru∣bsce: Ubi sis, & ingemisce: Qò vadas, & contremisce. D. Bernard. Serm. de Pri∣mordiis & No∣vissimis nostris, ad is p 376. Antuerp. 1616. They may remember their latter end, that they may not easily do amiss. Thus, Life is theirs. How is Death theirs, that are Christ's? Resol. As I have discovered the bright Day of Life to be theirs; so now I shall shew, how the dark Night of Death is theirs also. It's appointed to all men, Godly and Wicked, once to die. Heb. 9.27. But oh, what a vast disparity is there, betwixt the Godly that are Christ's, and the Wicked that are Christless in Death! To the wicked belong, 1 The terrors of Death, Heb. 2.15. that King of Terrors▪ as Bildad calls it; Job 18.14. that Most ter∣rible of terribles,  Aristot. as the Heathen stiled it. The en∣mity of Death, 1 Cor. 15.25, 26. 3 The sting and venom of Death, 1 Cor. 15.56. 4 The curse and bitterness, gall and wormwood of Death, Gal. 3.10.
5 The woful followers of Death, viz. The Judgment of Condemnation, Heb. 9.27. Joh. 5.29. And everlasting Torments in Hell, Matth. 25.41, 46. Luk. 16.23. But from them that are Christ's, All this evil and mischief of Death is sweetly removed away by Christ. . They fear not Death, but can desire it, and groan after it. — Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is much more best. Heb. 2.14, 15. Phil. 1.23. —Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy Word Luk. 2.29. —▪ For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed up∣on with our House which is from Heaven. 2 Cor. 5., 2, 3, 4. 2. Of a Enemy, Death is become their Friend: Of Loss, their Gain, Phil. 1.21. 2 Cor. 5.1. 3. Of an Hornet, Death is become a Drone▪ The sting of Death is pluck∣ed out by Christ, who hath given them the victory, 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56, 57. 4. The Curse of Death is turned into a Blessing; Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works do fol∣low them, Rev. 14.13. 5. And the Consequents of Death are to them most comfortable, viz. The judge∣ment of Absolution, Heb. 9.27. with Matth. 25.34. And eternal life in Heaven, Matth. 25.46. Luk 16.22. Thus, to them that are his, Jesus Christ brings light out of Darkness, Good out of evil, life out of Death. He turns this venemous Viper, Death, into a soveraign Treacle. Death is as Sampson's roaring Lyon, slain by Christ our true Sampson; out of whose carkase he gives his members the sweetest Honey-combs Ecce favas mellis stllat de ventre Leonis. S.S. of Spiritual advantages. More Particularly, let them that are Christs know, That 1. Death is their sweet sleep in Jesus. It's often sti∣led,
their Sleep, As Joh. 11.11, 12, 13. Acts 13.36. 1 Cor. 15.51. & 11.30. And sometimes, their Sleep in Jesus. As; — them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 Thes. 4.14. —Then thy al∣so which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished, 1 Cor. 15.18. The Grave is their Bed.—they shall rest in their Beds—Isa. 57.2. It is said of godly King Asa; — they buried him, — and laid him in the Bed, which was filled with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the Apothecaries art, 2 Chron. 16.14. But the Saints last bed, the Grave, is perfumed with better sweets than Spices and Odors, even wih the Burial of Christs own blessed Body, Matth. 27.59, 60. In these Beds they rest from all their labours, of sin and sorrow, Rev. 14.13. Here they sweetly sleep as in the bosom of Christ, unto whom even their dead dust remains still mystically u∣nited, and therefore is of precious account with him. And out of this last sleep they shall again awake at Christs glorious appearing, Dan. 12.2. 1 Cor. 15.23. 51, 52▪ &c. 1 Thss. 4.14, 15, 16. 2. Death is their Alteration, not their Abolition; their Change, not their Confusion. Thus ob accounted it; — All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come, Job 14.14. And of all men in the world, they that are Christ's, do at death make an happy change: They change Earth for Heaven; An earthly Clay∣tabernacle, for Celestial Mansions in the Heavenly Fathers house, 2 Cor. 5.1, Job 14.2. Rags of Mor∣tality, for Robes of Immortality, 2 Cor. 5.4. 1 Cor. 15.53. Society of Saints imperfect, for the company of blessed Angels and of the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. As Hierom said of Nepotianus; He did not so much die, as remove: not so much leave his friends, as change them. Intelligeres il um, non e∣mori, sed emi∣grare: & mu∣tare amicos, non relinquere. Hier. in Epit. Nepot. tom. 1. p. 25. A. Basil. 1553. In all respects they change every way for the better.
3. Death is their Departure, not their Destruction. Their  or dissolution, not their  or re∣version. — Having a desire to depart, — Phil. 1.23. Their loosing from this Earthly shore, to set sail for Heaven. Good old Simeon said; , &c. Lord, now loosest thou thy servant, or lettest thou loose thy servant, &c. Luk. 2.29. They depart, From this Egypt and Wilderness, to that Canaan: From this earth∣ly, to that better and heavenly Country: From this decaying City below, to that continuing City above, Heb. 13.14. From visibles, to invisibles: From transi∣tory and finite creatures, to God the Creator, and Jesus Christ the Redeemer, blessed for ever, Amen. Joh. 20.17. Phil. 1.23. 1 Thess. 4.17. Rom. 9.5. 4. Death is their Gain, not their Loss. So the Apostle judged it would be to him; For, to me to live is Christ, and to die is Gain, Phil. 1.21. What Gain▪ They that are Christ's, when they die, lose their dearest Natural lives, and therewith their earthly relations and acquaint∣ance, their Friends, houses, Lands, Livings, Honors, Riches, Pleasures, even all these temporal enjoyments. True. But what are all these? Painted shadows, vanish∣ing Bubbles, magnifi'd Nothings. They gain by Dying, other manner of Treasures: as, Perfection of Grace, Possession of Glory, the Inheritance of Heaven, the Society of Saints and Angels, the immediate fruition of Christ, and beatisick vision of God for ever face to face, Heb. 12.23. Job 17.24. 1 Thess. 4.17. Matth. 5.8. 1 Joh. 3.2. All their Losses are nothing to these Gains. 5. Death is their Red Sea, affording them an eternal esape from all evils and dangers, but swallowing up all their enemies for evermore. Then they cease from sin, which shall no more defile them, Rom. 6.7. Then they
rest from their labours, which shall no more weary them, Rev. 14.13. Then God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be to them no more Death, Pain, Sor∣row, nor Crying, Rev. 21.4 Then no fiery darts of Dia∣bolical Temptations shall ever more reach them: Then the wicked shall cease from troubling, and the weary shall be at rest, Job 3.17. 6. Death is their Bodies Seed-time, for an hopeful crop at the Harvest of the Resurrection. Tertullian said ex∣cellently; The Confidence of Christians, is the Resurrection of the DeadFiducia Christiano∣rum, Resur∣rectio mortu∣orum. Tertul. lib. de Resur. carnis, cap. 1. p. 314. Frae 1597. But the Apostle Paul most sweetly; —That which thou sowest, is not quickned except it die. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body which shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain: But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body. — So also is the Resur∣rection of the dead: It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; It is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; It is sown a na∣tural body, it is raised a spiritual body. 1 Cor. 15.36, 37, 38, 42, 43, 44. A wet and sad Seed-time; but a joyful and happy Harvest. 7. Finally, Death is their Souls Birth day of eternal Bliss. As it is the Omega to all their Miseries in this world pre∣sent; so is it the Alpha to all their felicities in that world to come. Then the voice from Heaven saith unto them, Rome up hitherRev. 11, 12.. Oh, the day of their Dissolution will to them be a great, an happy, a glorious day indeed! Their Redemption from all their sin and sorrow, Rom. 6.7. Rev. 4.13. Their translation into the better Country, that is, the Heavenly. Their entrace into their Masters joy, Mat. 25.21, 23. The Day-break of their endless Sabbath, Heb. 4.9. Rev. 14.13. The inchoation of their eternal Jubilee. Their heavenly Coronation-day, with
that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Tim. 4.7. 2 Cor. 4.17. Yea, their blessed Marriage-day with the Lamb, in whose immediate vision and fru∣ition their ravishments shall be unutterable, and their in∣trancements unspeakable, Joh. 17.24. The enjoyment of Christ in Heaven, is the very Heaven of Heaven. —Ah! we want (Christ) himself: And I should refuse Heaven, if Christ were not there. Take Christ away from Heaven, and it's but a poor, unheartsom, dark, wasle dwelling. Heaven without Christ, should look like the direful land of Death.—Mansioris are but as places of briars and thorns, without Christ: Therefore I would have Heaven for Christ, and not Christ for Heaven. Formal Blessedness is created; but Objective Happi∣ness is an increated Godhead, &c. S. Rutherford in his CHRIST Dying, &c. Epist. to the Reader, p. 10, 11. Thus, to them that are Christs, out of Death that great eater comes meat; and out of strength comes sweetness. Whence is it, That thus Life and Death become theirs that are Christ's? Resol. All this comes to pass, 1. From the All-ordering Purpose and Providence of God towards them that are Christ's; who love him, and are the called according to his purpose. He makes all things, good and evil, prosperity and adversity, life and death, &c. cooperate for good unto them. All things, not only some things. All things, not divisim, but conjunctim; not severally, but jointly, one with another, and all with the influence of Divine benediction. As all the wheels in a Wch work together to tell the hour; And as all the Ingredients in a Medicine work together to effect the cure. We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, that are the called according to his purpose, Rom. 8.28. The Lord makes every wind to blow them profit; every thing do them good. 2. From Christ's meritorious Purchase Among many other the glorious atchievements of Christ, there are three
very observable in reference to our present purpose, viz. (1) Christ hath obtained, regained, restored all Good to his, which the first Adam had forfeited and lost, Col. 1.20. Mat. 6.33. Rom. 8.32. Tit. 1.15. (2) Christ hath removed all the evil from his, which the first Adam had procured. Tit. 2.14. Gal. 3.13, 14. Heb. 2.14, 15. (3) Christ turns that evil unto Good to his, which is not totally removed. Their Sin makes them so much the more see the need and worth of a Saviour, Rom. 7.23, 24, 25. Their Afflictions become great spiritual ad∣vantages, Rom. 5.3, 4, 5. Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 2 Cor. 4.17. Yea, their Death it self is rendred to them a glorious gain, Phil. 1.21, 23. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. One well observed; The Covenant of Grace made no Death, but found it in the world. Christ made, of an old enemy Death, a new servant: It's now the Kings Ferry-boat to carry the children over the water.S. R. in his Treat. of the Covenant, &c. p . 1. chap 8. p 47. And I may adde; Through Christ's merit, to them that are Christ's, Death is but a dark entry into their Heavenly Mansions: A churlish Porter, ushering into the glorious Paradise: A fiery Chariot and Whirlwind, conveying them speedily unto Heaven. 2 King. 2.11. 3. From the predominant and inviolable concatenaion of the Causes of their salvation. They that are Christ's, are Predestinated, Called, Justifid, and in some measure Glorified, Rom. 8.29, 30. Therefore, if God be thus for them; what shall prevailingly be against them? He that spared not his own Son, but gave him up freely for them; how shall e not with him also freely give them all things? ver. 31, 32. Shall not life be theirs, and Death theirs, and all things theirs for good? This indissoluble Chain of salvation cannot be broken, by Life, Death, or any thing: Therefore Life, Death, and all things must com∣ply to it, contribute to it, be wholly and universally
subordinate and every way subservient to the accomplish∣ing of it. Thus we see, How Life and Death are theirs, that are Christ's: And whence this comes to pss. Now come we to certain , to certain Con∣sectaries or Inferences hence, by way of Application. Hence, What Priviledged-persons are true Christians, above all Christless wretches, both in Life and Death! Parallel them a little according to former discoveries; and see what the Lord Christ hath done for his, more than for all others. They that are Christ's, 1. Have Life theirs. Their Holy Seed-time: Their Spiritual Trading-time: Their Striving-time after best enjoyments: Their Trying-time in their Spirituals: Their Growing time in Grace and Knowledge: Their Fruit-bearing time in all good works: And their Hoarding time for Life eternal. 2. Have Death theirs also. Their sweet sleep in Christ Jesus: Their perfective Alteration, not their Abolition: Their happy Departure, not their Destruction: Their great Gain, not at all their Loss: Their Red-Sea, delivering them, but drowning all their Enemies: Their Bodies Seed-time for the glorious Harvest at the Resurrection: And their Souls Birth-day of Eternal bliss. They that are Christless, on the contrary, are naked and destitute of all these Advantages both by Life and Death. Nor Life, nor Death are theis, for Good, but for harm: Not their Advantages, but their disadvan∣tages: Not their sanctified Mercies, but their mischiefs, &c. To them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled, Tit. 1.15. To them that are Christless and ungodly, 1. Their Life in this world, what is it else, but Their sinful Seed-time to the flesh? Gal. 6.8. Their wretched working
and trading time in iniquity? Matth 7.23. Luk. 13.27. Psal. 6.8. Their striving time onely after earthly enjoy∣ments? Matth. 6.31, 32. 1 Tim. 6.9, 10. Their trying time, to detect and draw forth their vileness? Exod. 3.19, 20. & 14.17. Job 12.4, 5, 6. Their declining time, wherein they waxe worse and worse? 2 Tim. 3.13. Their Barren time, wherein they bring forth nothing but briars and thorns, fruits of Sodom and Gomorrha, and all pernicious works of the flesh? Hab. 6.8. Deut. 32.32, 33. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. And their unhappy Seson, wherein after their hardness and impenitent heart, they treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God? Rom. 2.5. 2. And their Death from this world, what is it else, than, The rotting of their flesh and bones, full of the sins of their youth, which shall lie down with them in the dust? Job 20.11. Their woful change of painted Felicities, for real Miseries? Luk. 16.19.22, 23. Their wretched departure from their wicked Bodies, till both Souls and Bodies shall depart from Christ? Luk. 16.22, 23. Matth. 25.41. Their utter loss of all enjoyments on Earth, and of all hopes of Heaven? Luk. 12.20, 21. Heb. 9.27. Eccles. 9.10. Their fatal Red-Sea, over∣whelming them for ever? Luk. 16.22, 23, 26. Their Body's bondage in the cursed Grave; and their Soul's enthralment in the Prison of Hell, till the day of the Lords vengeance shall overtake them both at his second appearing? 1 Pet. 3.19. Heb. 9.27. Oh then, let every one consider these things; and say: How happy are all that are Christ's, both in Life and Death! How wretched are all that are Christless, both alive and dead!
Hence, Who would not now study and strive to become Christ's indeed? This, this is the onely way to be truly rich, to be eternally happy: If the World, Life, Death, Things present, Things to come, All things, and all this theirs in Christ, be able to do it. He that hath Christ his, and himself is Christ's, may sweetly say; Christus meus, & omnia: Christ is mine, and all's mine. There∣fore, when others say; Who will shew us good? Do thou sa; Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, Psal. 4.6, 7. Lord, give me Christ, and then I have all. Hence, What a shame is it for Christians to have the least irksom or undervaluing thought of Christianity? When Corruption within rebels against the Spirit in us, Temptation from without perplexeth us, Afflictions toss and tire us, Persecutions puzzle us, and the Prosperity of the wicked amaze and dazle our apprehensions: How are we then distempered and discomposed! Then, we have cleansed our hearts in vain, and wished our hands in innocency. Then, we bless the wicked whom God ab∣horrs; and speak against the Generation of Gods chil∣dren, as once the Psalmist Psal. 73. throughout. Then we loath our Spi∣ritual Mannah; and (like Israel) run back in our hearts again unto Egypt, &c. O let us enter into the Sanctuary of God; and then all our misdeeming thoughts shall be reformed. O all ye that are Christ's, consider this Text, and check your selves for these your imprudent and ingrateful misappehensions. Christ is yours, and ye are Christ's: therefore in Christ, Life and Death are yours, and all things yours, for your manifold advantage. O bless the LORD▪ that ever you were savingly ac∣quainted with, and interessed in, Christ and Christianity. Christ turns all your darkness into light; makes all your gall and wormwood, Honey; turns all your poysons into
Medicines; makes both your Life and Death both profi∣table and pleasant, like the Land of Promise flowing with milk and honey. Christianity is the right Philosophers-stone indeed; turns all it touches into spiritual Gold. Say, oh say it with much rejoycing; Christiani sumus: Beati sumus, tam morientes quaàm viventes. S.S. We are Christians: therefore we are happy, both living and dying. Whether we live, we live unto the Lord; whether we de, we die unto the Lord. Whether therefore we live, or die, we are the Lord's. Rom 14.7, 8, 9. Hence; Why should they that are Christ's, be either weary  of Life, or afraid of Death? Are not both theirs? and theirs for the Best? What wise man is weary of his wel∣fare; or afraid of his Advantages? Especially when both of them are of a spiritual and eternal concernment? It's happy for Christians, that they may live a while on Earth, to be prepared for life eternal. And it's happy again for them, that they may die and depart from Earth, that they may go to possess their Life eternal, for which they are prepared. Hence, How silently, self-denyingly and contentedly  should all that are Christ's submit to Gods disposal of them in all Conditions; yea both in Life and Death! Why? Because Life's theirs, Death's theirs, All's theirs. Every wind blows them profit: All things cooperate unto their good Rom. 8.28.. Murmure not then at any Divine dispensations: but be silent, yea contented, yea thankful in all. Con∣sider how the Saints of old behaved themselves in all, even the worst Conditions: As, Job, ch. 1.20, 21. Eli, 1 Sam. 3.18. David, Psal. 39.9. Hezekiah, Isa. 39.8. Paul, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. yea, Jesus Christ himself, Joh. 18.10, 11. Matth. 26.39, 42, 44. Walk thou as Christ walked, 1 Joh. 2.6. and follow the Saints, as they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. Hence, finally, How thankfully should we rejoyce in
the Life, and how patiently, yea comfortably should we be the Death of dearest Friends and Relations, that were truly Christian! whether of Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, &c. Are they alive? Life is, Their spiritual Seed-time, to sow in; Their Mart-time, to trade in; Their Rare-time, to run in; Their Spring-time, to grow in; Their Summer, to bear fruit in: Their Autumn, to treasure up in for Eternity; And their Winter to be tryed in, that they may be found more precious than gold. Are they dead? Mourn moderately. Comfort your selves with this; That even Death is theirs also: Their sweet sleep in Jesus; Their blessed Change; Their happy Departure; Their great Gain; Their Red-Sea to all their Evils and Enemies; Their Bodies Seed-time for the eternal Harvest; and Their Souls Birth-day of ever∣lasting Bliss. Thus I have done with my Text. And now I know you expect I should superadde something in reference to this Worthy Person deceased: Of whom we were unworthy. Should I say Nothing of him, I doubt I should offend you: Should I say Much, I should offend my self. He was one of the most eminent Members of this famous City: An Alder∣man of the City; and had been Mayor in An. 1651. well known to you all, but more inti∣mately to some, and particularly unto me. And did I not verily believe, That he was one of Christ's, and that Life and Death were his, (as hath been now explained) I should draw a veil of silence over him, and hold my peace. Promiscuous Funeral-Eulogies touching both Good and Bad deceased, is both against my judgment and pra∣ctice. For, 1. Hereby such Praises are oft misplaced up∣on the unworthy. And (as one said) Many are commended
[on Earth] where they are not; whilst they are tormonted [in Hell] where they are.Multi lau∣dantur ubi non sunt, dum tor∣quentur ubi sunt. Au. 2. Hereby, The wicked are encouraged and hardned in their wickedness, that they should not depart from it; The godly grieved, whom the Lord would not have made sad; The Ministry re∣proached; And God dishonored. But when Persons eminent for Piety and Goodness are commended, 1. Not so much they, as the Gifts and Graces of God in them are commended. And such Praises Christ himself approves of, Matth. 26.13. Mark 14.9. 2. They are propounded as Patterns, for the imitation of the living. And we ought to walk in the way of good men, Pro. 2.20. and to follow them, as they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. And, in what I have to say as to this Happy Soul, I shall especially aim at these two Ends, viz. 1 To exalt the Gifts and Graces of the LORD in him. 2 And to incite you to a Christian imitation of him. His Life was such, that it rather calls for our Imitation, than our Commendation: As AugustineIlla qui∣dem anima in societatem fi∣delium recepta, laudes nec cu∣rat nec quaerit humanas: — Tu imitationem, ego laudem: quanquam, sicut supra dixi, laudem ab ho∣minibus jam non quaerat, imitationem verò tuam tantum quaerit, &c. August. in epist. 125. p 637. C.D. & 638. D. & 639 A. Tom. 2. Basil. 1569. once spake in a like case. To this end (always excepting his known frailties and infirmities, which yet were a burden unto him, and for which he was wont quickly to check himself, discover∣ing his error: And which of all, even the best of Gods people, are wholly exempted from failings in this sinful life?Jam. 5.17. Jon 4.1.3.8, 9. Happy he, that hath the fewest:)Nam vitiis nemo sine na∣scitur: Opti∣mus ille est, qui minimis urgetur. Horat. I may justly borrow some of the exemplary Characters of Gods people of old, in whose steps he walked, to set forth his Vertues: wherein you shall do well to follow him.
With Cornelius; He was a devout man, that feared God, — and gave much Alms, and prayed to God alway.Act. 10.2. With Nathanael; He was an Israelite indeed, in whom was no guile.Joh. 1.47. With David; He desired to behave himself wisely in a perfect way. — To walk within his house with a per∣fect heart.Psal. 101.2. With Joshuah; He resolved, whatever others did, That he and his house should serve the LORD.Josh. 24.15. With Job; He was upright, one that feared God, and eschewed evil.Job. 1.1. With Abraham; He commanded his children and house∣hold after him, to keep the way of the LORD.Gen. 18.19 With Noah; He was upright in his Generation, and he walked with God.Gen. 6.9. With Enoch; He walked with God, and he is not, for God hath taken him.Gen. 5.22, 24. And because God hath taken him, The Children and Family left behind him are weeping; his Friends and neer Relations are mourning; The Mi∣nistry sighing, nor can I among the rest (as Hierom said in a like case) dissemble my sorrow;Volvuntur per ora lachry∣mae, & obfir∣mato animo non queo do∣lorem dissimu∣lare quem pa∣tior. Hironym. in Epitaph. Npot. p. 25. tom. . The poor, re∣freshed often with his bounty, bewailing; and the Gene∣rality of the City lamenting him. I verily believe, that here are present this day many moe Mourners in Heart, than Mourners in Habit, for the loss of this eminent Christian. Yet let us recollect our selves, and allay our grief a little: Considering; That, our great Loss, in his greatest Gain, Phil. 1.21. That, He is not amissus, but praemissus: He is not lost, but sent before us: We must, we know not how soon, follow after. That, the LORD in great mercy hath lent us him so long. Therefore let us not so much mourn, that we have now lost such a one; as rejoyce and bless God, that thus long we have had such
an one; As, Hierom once comforted Heliodorus.Nec doleas quod talem a∣miseris, sed gaudeas quòd talem habueris. Hicronym. ad Hlodor. in Ept. Npotian. p. 23. tom. 1. And to speak of him a little, with reference had to our present Text: Life was his; And Death is his. 1. Life was his. And how Christianly did he im∣prove it! As a Magistrate and Citizen. He desired, To govern Religiously and Righteously: To suppress wickedness and Prophaneness, and particularly Sabbath-prophana∣tion: To encourage the good, and deter the evil doers. He knew well the state of this City's Affairs, and aimed much at the publique weal thereof, without self-seeking. He was a man of a very publique spirit, desiring the publique Good: And what evil he was not able pub∣liquely to redress, he was wont privately to lament. As a Merchant. He walked righteously and self∣denyingly: The ballances of deceit were not in his hands; nor a double tongue in his mouth. He was as a Father of Merchants. He fetched his Merchandise from far, but traded most for Heaven. He was sometimes jealous and afraid, (so abundantly God had blessed him) That these Temporals did flow in too fast upon him: And, like Luther, much desired the Lord, That he would not put him off only with these earthly things. As an Housholder. He kept the way of the LORD in, and with his Houshold: By due sanctifying of the Lords-day-Sabbath; Daily Reading of the Holy Scri∣ptures; Daily presenting of his Morning and Evening-Incense of Praise and Prayer with his Family unto his God; And by frequent Instructing of his Houshold in the things of Christ. As a Christian. He was sound in the Faith, in erro∣neous times; Blameless and exemplary in his life, in cor∣rupt times; and an Ornament to the Gospel and Doctrine of God our Saviour. His Search and Enquiries into the
deep mysteries of Religion, were many, and considerable. His Devotion in secret, was much. His Humility in midst of all his ample enjoyments, was great and very ob∣servable. And his Charity, yea his bounteous liberality, to the distressed poor and needy, was well known to be overflowing even unto admiration. Thus,Placita e∣nim crat Deo anima illius: & in brevi spa∣tio tempora multa comple∣vit. Hie. . in Epitaph. Lucinii ad Theodoram, p. 195. B, tom. 1. Basil. 1553. He lived much in a short time, (as Hirom, said of Lucinius:). And so, lived long, by living well. For, to live well, is to live twice. 2. Death now at last is his also. His sweet sleep in Jesus; His happy Change; His blessed Departure; His rich Gain; His Red-Sea to all his Enemies; His Body's Seed-time for a better Resurrection; His Soul's Coronation-day, Marriage-day, and entrance into his everlasting Jubilee. After a short, but sharp Conflict with a violent putrid Fever, for about eleven dayes space, He put off this Tubernacle, to be clothed upon with his house from Heaven. During the time of his Sickness, as his Thoughts, so his Discourses were much upon Spirituals; and his jaculatory Requests to the Lord, for Himself, his Family, and for the Pub∣lique, were very fervent. This was one of his wishes in his Extremities: — Oh that all the Rich men in the City here beheld my Condition, and how little gold and wealth can help in such a day of distress! This was one of his Ejaculations: — O Lord; do what thou wilt with this my mortal Body, so thou wilt shew mercy and salvation to my poor immortal Soul! His last words were these, or to this effect, but with much more amplification: —. Into thine hands, O LORD, I commend my soul and body,Luk. 23.46. Joh. 19 30. Act. 7 59 60. both now and for evermore, through Jesus Christ mine onely Saviour and Redeemer, Amen: I have done. And having said this, he sweetly fell asleep in Jesus: In whose blessed bosom we leave him, until his second Coming.
Life was his; Death is his: He is Christ's; and Christ is God's. FINIS. Josephus Jackson Armiger & Aldermannus Civitatis de Bristol, Anno∣rum 57. faeliciter obdormivit in Domino, Die Dominico Januar. 5. circa horam 5. pomerid. Et perplurimis impensè lugentibus, in Eccles. de Warborrough's in ead. Civit. decenter inhumatus est, Januarii die 17. An. Dom. 1661.
