S2702 12086068 53751
NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS On the Empress of Morocco REVISED. WITH Some few Errata's to be Printed instead of the Postscript, with the next Edi∣tion of the Conquest of Granada. Impune ergo mihi recitaverit ille Togatas? Hic Elegos? —Juven. LONDON, Printed for William Cademan at the Popes-Head in the Lower▪ Walk of the New Exchange in the Strand. 1674.
THE PREFACE. CAsting my Eye upon a Pamphlet entitled Notes and Observations on the Empress of Morocco; and finding no Authors name to it, I used my best indeavour? to get that knowledge by my Examination of the Style, which the unkind Printer had denied me. But that in∣formation was quickly obtain'd: For perusing but the First Page of the Preface, and finding such an Appellation as [Arrogant Upstare and Illiterate Scribler,] with this Allusion at the Tail ont, [This Fellow comes amongst the Poets like one of the Earth-born Brethren, and his first business in the World is to Attacque and Murder all his Fellows;] I presently recollected the same Fancy, spoken on the same subject, in the Epilogue to Cambyses. Like th' Issue of the Dragons Teeth, one Brother In a Poetick fury falls on tll' other. In the next Page I  him strutting, and impudently comparing himself to Ben Johnson. [I knew that to write against him was to do him too much ho∣nour: But I consider'd Ben Iohnson had done it before to Deeker our Au∣thor Predecessor, &c.] And thereupon with very little Conjuration, by those three remarkable Qualities of Riling, Boasting and Thieving I fond a Dryden in the Frontispiece. Then going through the Preace, I observ'd the drawing of a Fools Picture to be the desgn of the whole piece, and reflecting on the Painter I consider'd, that probably his Pamphlet might be like his Plays, not to be written without help. And according to expectation I discovered the Author of Epsome-Wells, and the Author of Pandion and Amphigena lent their assistance. How▪ Three to One thought I? and Three Gentlemen of such disagreeing Qualifications in one Club: The First a Man that  had wit, but it st it; the Second that ha it, if be can keep it, and the Third that neither has, nor is ever like to have it. Then boldly on I went, and fortified with patience (as I found it requir'd) for a full perusal, I wonderd the less at the Deformity of the piece, when such different hands went to the com∣posure. The first of these is the only person that pretends an injury receivd from a Satyrick Line or two in the Epistle to Morocco: Such as the Author never
design'd for a particular reflection, and such as I am sure Elkanah would have thank'd him for, provided like them, as they had been true, they had been harm∣less too. And consequently I conclude him the promoter of so Ile-natur'd, and so scurrulous a retort. The Second I suppose only putting his Comical hand to the Work, to help forward with the mirth of so ridiculous a Libel: and the Third perhaps out of a Vain Glory of being in Print, knowing himself to be so little a Reptile in Poetry, that hee's beholding to a Lampoon for giving the World to know, that there is such a writer in being. Some have advised me in answering these Notes, to retort upon all Thre: But that would be a tedious work, besides the inconvenience of it. The two last had not the same ends in writing, nor are they so fair marks as the First, Oe having no Heroicks in Print, and the other such as cannot well be At∣tacqued; his Plays being fortified against Objections. For like the Leper that from Head to Foot was all Deformity, I defie any man to meet with above one fault in a whole Play of his. And therefore in defending Elkanahs writings, to examine His, I think not worth the while, a whole Play being too long for a Repartee. But in taking Elkanahs part, I answer but half the Pamplet: For through the piece I find the whole Town censur'd; at lest all that have seen that Play, being by the modest Commentatour Dignified by the Title of Town-Fops and City Fools, this wholesome advice being given you in the Preface, [It will be for the benefit of Mankind to observe what People frequent this Play, that men of common sense may know whom to shun.] Now the calling all Mankind Fools, one would think were the boldest Drydenism that e're came in Print. But to con∣vince you that there's worse behind, this Rude, unmannerly, ill-bred, sawcy and over-grown Rayler cannot forbear calling the Ladies Fools too, when he says, [I am not ignorant that his admirers, who are most commonly Women, will ressent this ill, &c.] if therefore through the Examination of his Notes, I reply in his Dialect, and use that Billingsgate Style, which is but Aping of him, and much against my own nature, I declare that 'tis a Language that his Vnimitable Impudence more than his Quarrel with Morocco, or his Abuses on the Author have extorted from me. The Reader is desired to take notice in the following Discourse, that all Lines with this Mark—"—before them are Mr. Drydens; taken out of several of his Poems: And all Discourse in an Italick Character within these Figures [] are His words in his Notes upon Morocco, or in his Conquest of Granada.
ACT▪ The First. COndemned to Fetters and to Scepters horn. [Here the first accusation is writing Non-sence in the first Line; Alass poor Elkanah. Muly Labas in Chains, Before he is in Swadling-Cloaths, in Fetters before he is born.] Now with Reverence would I ask Mr. Dryden (amongst all his undeniable Laws of Action, Time and Place, those insallible guides of Poetry, in which he has done Rea∣son to himself, and Honour to the World, in being that Kind Great Master to the Minor, Poets) by what Rule Men are obliged to reflect on their past State, before their present. And how is it Non-sense to name what is, before we mention what was. How many Examples of this-kind occurr in Common Discourse, as we say Ered and Born, Men and Angels. Besides, I think Muly Labas may say I am condemned to Fetters and am [not was] born to Scepters, for Men say in the Present Tense they are born to such or such an Estate, till they are in possession of it; But I perceive Mr. Dryden is so little obliged to Birth-right, and so weakly intitled to Patrimonies, that 'tis very pardonable in him to mistake in an expression of this kind: Nay, he's so far from a Guilt in this, that were he to discribe himself, I doubt not but he'd tell you what he has been, before what he is, viz. that he once could write an In∣dian Emperour, and a Tyrannick Love: But now by his own confession in his Epilogue to Granada. " When Forty comes if e're he Lives to see " That wretched Fumbling Age of Poetry. Where by the way you must know he was Eight and Thirty Years Old when he wrote that, and 'tis now Three Years since the writing: you must then expect now no more of that Stamp, his last fury being spent in his Love in a `Nunnery. And to convince you of this truth, he is now grown as Ill-natur'd as Old Women in their decay of Beauty, who make it their business to rail against all that's young. Thus the best Title he can allow this Stripling Poet, is to call him [Great Boy] and in∣deed that is his Fault, if it be one To be but a few Years past Twenty, and to show how much he thinks him a Boy, as one not able to answer for himself; he quibbles upon his God-Fathers, and at every pinch to make out a feeble Iest, he cryes [Oh Elkanah. well said Elkanah, read Philosophy Elkanah,] As if he supposed the Reader would be infinitely taken with the Novelty of such a Name as Elkanah. But hold what have I done! Indeed I was too much to blame to tell the World he is Old! When Mr. Drydn, as he has declared himself, designes to please none but his fair Admirers, the Female part of his Audience; and for them to know he is in Years is very severe, however, in the same Epilogue he answers for himself and says: " But yet he hopes he's young enough to Love. 'Tis in this Garb unhappy Princes mourn To pass by his Impertinent question, [are Fetters, the Crape or the Purple that Princes mourn in,] here he says [Muly Labas confesses himself a man of mean Courage;]
and his reason is this, because if a man mourns or complains, he must be a coward Now whether he takes mourning for blubbering or howling I cannot tell, but cer∣tainly to make a Prince sad and concern'd for a King and Fathers unjust displeasure, his being the cause of a Mistriss Imprisonment, and the occasion of a War between her Father and his, might be pardonable in any mans writings; but he who dares reflect on Mr. Dryden. But he is so far from being a Coward that others think the Poet in the whole Speech proves the quite contrary, and wonder Mr. Dryden should be so ill a Judge. Yet Fortune to great Courages is kind: 'Tis he wants Liberty whose Soul's confin'd. My thoughts out-fly &c— [Great Courages are here the same thing with unconfin'd Souls, and the sense is, Great Courages or unconfin'd Souls are unconfin'd by the kindness of Fortune; that is, Great Courages are valiant by chance or by good luck] Now every man but our Commentator, that is every Rational man, and one that had but Brains enough to carry the Sence of two Lines in his head; would have construed it thus, yet Fortune that reduces Princes to Fetters is kind to those of Great Courages, for as the fol∣lowing Lines express, it gives e'm an occasion of manifesting their Courage. To the short Walk of one poor Globe enslav'd. [A walk of a Globe. Now by Mr. Settles Leave, a Globe is a round thing, and a thing improper to be walked upon: for a woman on a Globe is the Em∣blem of Fortunes Inconstancy.] Well argued witty Mr. Dryden. If he means such a kind of of Globe, Alexander was enslaved to, Aristotle was very unkind to give his Pupil the trouble of Conquering a World, when an Astronomers Library might have satisfied his Ambition. But we must suppose Mr. Dryden to be of his Indians Belief, that the World is no Globe, and that the Earth is like a Trencher, and the Heavens a Dish whelmed over it, when he says, " —My Eyes no Object met " But distant Skies that in the Ocean set. Or if he will allow the World to be round, perhaps he may have the same opinion of Alexanders expedition, as some Old Women have of Captain Drakes Navigation (for I shrewdly suspect his Faith to be as Ridiculous as his Reason) and having heard him call'd Alexander the Great, supposes him to have been some huge, heavy, monstrous creature; that the Earth shook under him, and consequently 'twas not a Globe fit, or safe for him to walk on. But to judge more favourably of him (for this is most to his advantage) it may be he tells us a Globe is a round thing, to shew us his Skill in Mathematicks. My Soul mounts higher, and Fas Pow'r disdains, And makes me reign a Monarch in my Chains, &c. [But then wherein do his thoughts out fly Alexanders, Alexanders thoughts were too big for a World; and Muly Labas his for a Prison, as if he should say, he scornd the World, but I scorn a Jayle, I am a greater man than he, because he was a greater man than I.] This Argument is one of the best he has in all his Notes: for the generality of them neither are, nor look like Arguments. But this is a little degree advanced above the Crowd, for this looks like an argument though it be none. For, first he mistakes the whole design of the speech, in mistaking what thoughts those are of
Muly Labes and Alexander which the Poet makes, his comparison upon. Because desres of greatness and ambition are thoughts, therefore there can be no other thoughts, or at lest the Poet can mean no other. But the whole speech proves that the Poet makes the comparison between the thoughts of their , and the satisfaction of their Souls, not the extent of their wishes, dominions, or prisons: which was the more satisfied, not which was the greater Man. Alexander thought himself confined in a World, and Muly Labas thought himself free in a Prison. He was a Slave in Empires, and this a Monarch in Chains. Thy rage, brave Prince, mean Subjects does despise; None but thy Son shall be thy Sacrifice. [Here his Old Emperour is a brave Prince, and why? Because he is so Bloody-minded a man that for Recreation of killing he must pick out his son for his Sacrifice]. I would fain ask him if it had not been famous in Solyman, when he strangled Mustapha, had Mustapha real'y been that Traytor he suspected him. This dazling Object my weak sight invades: [That is, comes before my weak sight.] Ever since " A horrid stilness does invade my Ear. After so excellent a Line, [Invade] will be sence no where else. Such Beauty would make Dungeons loose their shades. [Shades for darkness I] Why not Sir Positive. When I fond Woman in a borrow'd shape, Was a Conspiratour in my  Rape. [Here Morena repents of her hard argain,] and why? Because she calls her self fond woman, but I should think that a woman of a perfect Character, ow great or reasonable soever her passion was, may in modesty call her self fond, for running away from her Father on any soore. But Mr. Dryden can make his perfect Characters, fond, Bawdy and Impudent, and not know they are so, or at lest never blush for their being so, as for Example, His beloved Almahide. Who being present amongst other Granadin Damsels, at the Famous Tryal of Skill, alias the Bull-baiting, and seeing the Butcher-like discords that arose between the Bear-garden assembly of the Zegryes and the Abencerrages, where for a quarrel raised at this merry-meeting, they proceed to a national contention, and as he says, " —prepare " For all the last extremities of War. The prettiest way of setting a whole Nation together by th'ears, (next to falling out at Hot-cockles,) that e're I read of: This fair Almahide (I say) " (Who did with weeping Ejes these discords se, " And fears the Omen may unlucky be) " Prepares a Zambra to be danc'd to Night. " In hopes soft pleasures may their minds unite. Which Entertainment is as follows, First it begins with a  more Baw then, " The Nymp died more quick, and the Shepherd more slow, . Where after a great deal of other amorous stuff, you come to " —Thus, , she cryed, " You use a harmess Maid,—and so she dyed. " I waked and straight I knew " I Lov'd so well, it made my Dream pre tru.
" Fancy the kinder Mistress of the two, " Fancy had done what Phyllis would not do &c. After such a plentiful treat of rank Bawdy, of Almabides preparing. I describe . But perhaps Mr. Dryden will answer that a woman of her might keep a , and the Bawdy entertainment was her  fault; or else he may tell us, that he wrote this to please the Age, who are best delighted with languishing Songs in this Style. And therefore the making a Woman of Ho∣nour, or a Iil in a Comedy, talk Bawdy, or take pleasure in hearing it  alike to him. Next for her Zambra, which in a Marginal Note is a Dance Here he makes a Company of Moores Dance, and make adoration to a Statue of Iupiter. How agreeing Images are to the Mahumetan Worship, and what League Iupiter and Ma∣homet can have, I leave to the judicious to censure: But now for Atmahides mode∣sty. This Scene is the first time that Almanzor and Almahide come to a conference, he having never seen her before, nor she him but in a Crowd, at the aforesaid Bull-baiting, where you must understand after such a Tryal of Strength, as his cutting off a Bulls head with his Sword at one blow, and that so quick, that the head bellowed after it was off. " Making imperfect bellowings as it went. She saw enough to charm any woman of her constitution that fancied a good Womans man, [a terrible man,] and one [Roughly noble] as she calls him; and therefore at the first sight of Almanzor she falls at his feet and cryes. " Stay Mighty Conq'rour, turn your face this way; " Do not refuse to hear the wretched pray. Then unvailing she desires him to [lay Thunder by,] and look more kindly on her. When alter a long and Loving Harague he being smitten at first sight, as well he might, she tells him [she is promised to ] and petitions him [to protect her against the utrage of insulting men.] Now wherein she was wretched,] as yet they had not, [no Sword will hurt the fair.] Besides had she been taken Pri∣soner by the adverse party, she would have had the comfort to have been eased of her disrelisht Boabdelin which would have made some amends for her Captivity, but at worst to prevent the fear, you see how she compounds before hand with Almanzor for her Ransome. He infinitely pleased with this kind coming Beauty, makes a Thundering deal of Love. But she tells him. —" 'Tis but in vain " Fate for each other did not us ordain. " The chances of this day too plainly show " That Heaven took care what it should not be so. The reasonable meaning of which is, she is sorry his Coke is dough, and that he came not soon enough to speed, for [but this very day she had past her promise to Bo∣abdelin] and that [Their Love was tyed by holy vows above.] Where you must note her Breach of a Contract made in the face of Heaven, and her disobedience to her Parents are no stops to hinder her from makeing Love
at first meeting to Almanor. Now to complin of her Contracted before she had lain with him; and to a stranger in my esteem is very comical. Nay to contemn a King too, for the sake of one who might have been but a Butcher or a Car-man for ought she knew, is very loving. But Love par∣dons all that, she has seen Almanzor, and she likes him, and by her own quick apprehension finding him to be somewhat rough, and of an [unfashined nature] she speaks her mind freely, fearing least giving him too little glimpse of her kind∣ness at the first interview, he should prove such a block-head as not to under∣stand her meaning, or if he did, might be so blunt a Courtier as not to have the patience to lay a long seige to a fair Lady, and therefore 'tis policy in her to secure him: and though as before she told him she was to be married and consequent∣ly not fit for his turn that way, yet this first kind meeting would make Mr. Drydens reader▪ believe she would grant him Dufoys kindness, be his friend upon occasion. Had not his darling Conquest of Granada had the start of the Mamamouchi the World would have suspected he had stoln his Almahide from Mr. Jordans German Princess, who just at this rate runs away from Mr Iordan to fly to the protection of the worthy Knight Sir Simon Softhead. Was a Conspiratour in my own rape. [A Conspirator in her own rape is nonsence, for consent makes it no rape.] Now will I be hang'd if he has ever heard of any other kid of rape, than down∣right Ravishing. I thought stealing Women fom their Parents, Husbands, or Guar∣dians had been Rapes, though with their own Consents. If Mr. Lareat had not been above the Learning of a School Boy, and had ever read  the Graecian Wars, he might have heard of the Rape of Helene, who conspired with Paris to  away from her Husband, and yet for some thousands of years, the World has been so foolish as to call it a Rape. If such dull objections against Morocco, are Mr. Drydens Malice, it is the feeblest that ever wrote Satyre, but if he knows o better, and his Ignorance makes such gross Errours, I may say in his own wods as M Mil∣lesent does to Sr. Martia. hey are the foolishest mistakes of a witty man that ever I heard of. Heir only now t' an unkind Fathers Frown; His witty Observaion [that frowns are at best but goods and chattels,] and after∣wards (no shapes of ill can come within er Sphear) Hi  [what part of a woman is her Sphear] (where by the way I might as well ask him what kind of gentle fall his Abdulla means, when he says of Lyndaraxa. " While she is mine I have not yet lost all " ut in ber arms shall have a gentle fall And in the Fourth Act his greasy Jest [He Churne him] for—I'le work him from the Town up to the Camp. These and several other of his smart Quibbles in his Cambridge Dialect, put together, are richly worth the credit of a Suit of Cloaths, if his Taylour in the Wild Gallant had the making of them. Our Amorous flights like threatning Comets are Which thus draw after them a train of Blood. [An amorous thing is compared to a threatning thing; a flight to a Comet, a fault so great that there are scarce so many Syllables in his Lines as Non sensical meanings] but now if both of them are fore-runners of Blood, I think they may be comped, and the Simile so firm that if the Amorous flights had been call'd Threatning flights▪ it had been Sence, when she was like to dy for her flight. But all this Scriblets Similes want so many Grains of Mr. Drydens weight, that they are
every Syllable Non-sence, though for no other reason. But now for a tast of his. His Placidius having Valerias promise of Marriage, and being conscious that though he was like to possess her, Prphyrius had her Heart, says. " He like a subtle Worm has eat his way " And Lodg'd within does on the Kernel prey. " I Creep without, and doubtless to remove " Him hence, wait only for the Husk of Love. A very passionate Simile, besides the Poets flight to compare his Hero to a Maggot, a thought so low that were he as he calls this young Author a School Boy, he would not have dared to write so meanly for fear of whipping. But now for the sence. He like a Subtle Maggot is got to the Kernel, now t'would not be amis to ask him, (as he sayes of Morenas Sphear) what part of Valeria is her Maggot eaten Kernel? But to go on, I creep without, &c. That is, I another Magot not so subtle as Porphyrius creep without the Shell, waiting till he has left it to creep into the Empty Hisk. Which by his favour, besides the nauseous∣ness of the Simile, is no true Position: For who believes that one Magot waits for the Nutshel another ha left. He talks in one of his Prologues of servilely creeping after sence: If this be not servilely creeping, I am much mistaken. But the sence in it he must find out. But no matter for that, this Unimitable Lau∣reat has an infinite charming way of Allegories, and Kernel of Affection, and Husk of Love are delicate; but so much for his Creeping. Now for his soaring; (which you must understand he seldom ventures at, for indeed in Airy walks, (which he did well to make remarks on) he's out of his Element. But when he does mount, like some heavy Fowl that is much troubled to rise, yet when once up has a very strong Wing, he stretches to purpose. Almanzor to Almahide. [Pag. 144.] " When e're you speak " Were my wounds mortal they should still bleed on; " And I would listen till my Life were gon. " My Soul should ev'n for your last accent stay, " And then shoot out, and with such speed obay, " It should not bait at Heaven to stop its way. Now would I ask him i Heaven be but a Baiting place in Almanzors way, (besides the Comical Metaphor of Souls baiting) where is his Souls journis end. If this be sence.—But perhaps Mr. Dryden will answer, that he makes him speak this, to keep up his Character even after death, and as he scorn'd Em∣pires, and was above his King when he lived, when he dyes his Soul shall scorn Heaven, and be above his God. But where that shall be the Laurcat must fid out. But then what does he mean by [with such speed obey] If fr a otch I'm sa∣tisfied; But if for sence: Does he mean Almahides command! No, for she de∣sires him to have his wounds drest, and to live for her sake. Well, if he cannot rare piece of activity, the aforesaid flight. That indeed with a subintelligitur may be sence, but then 'tis the first time that Almanzor ever own'd Obedience to any thing but Almabide. But what's a greater faut then either of these in this speech (for these, being but gross overfights, in a mans Dotage are pardon∣able) he uses a Metaphorical expression for his Souls flight, that is, [shoot out] taken from an Arrow, and then in  same sentence he takes another from a Traveller and a Road, and alludes to Baiting by the way. This great pretender to Learning has not wit enough to make an Allegory, but Violates the common School boy Rules of sence, and puts two disagreeing Metaphors into one sentence:
nd o Almanzors Soul▪ (the Allusion made out;) sets out an Arrow, and comes to Heaven a Traveller. Perhaps he'l say he uses [aiting] in a Faulconers sence and so it alludes to a Hawk. But an Arrow and a Hawk is as Ridiculous. As Purgatory does make way for Heaven. [As if the Mabumetans beliv'd a Purgatory] a very learn'd remark. Read History Mr. Historiographer, and be better inform'd, and prethy blun∣der no mre at this daable rate. But considering the Crime of his Epistle 'tis just Elkanah should suffer gentle Correction, as he calls it; and indeed if this be his Correction 'tis the gentlest that sinner e're sufferd yet. And has my Father—shall we then—and are Our Love and Hopes, &c.—and afterwards Has he—it cannot be—Has he decreed— Morena must not—no she shall not bleed. Here Muly Labas for speaking half Sentences, at his sudden and unexpect∣ed surprise of hearing he shall possss his Mistriss, and afterwards his hearing of her death, i shrply reproved for stammering a kind of Poetical Non-sence. His Almanzor on a less surprise then either of these two says to Almahide, you ere—you shall—and I can scarce forbear; and his Maximin But you shall find—hast take her from my fight. Examples of whih are very frequent in all Writers; but Witty and Elegant in none but Mr. Dryden. And the same Iealousie that made his Breath Decree your Chains, makes him pronounce your Death. Here he is infinitely angry that the Poet gives an Emperours Breath the power of decreeing a mans Imprisonment, and says [He perverts the whoe order of na∣ture, and makes men see with their Ears, and hear with their Noses] but how he has not old us. [O Breath! Wonderful Breath! reath is so beloved a word with Mr. Settle, that it does all things with him, it decrees, nay in the next page it writes, paints, guilds, prints, or something lik it] His witty Antagonist has found the word [Breath] ued a Dozn times in one Play, that is i 2300 Lines, a very great Indecorum. Nay in his Observations on the Epistle he found the word [Smiles] four times in Cam∣byses and Morocco, and therefore, [Smiles] must be wonderful, as well as his Fa∣vourite Breath: If I should count how many times his Vivarambla and Mira∣dor, and other sustian words of Bulk enough, to be more powerful then Breath, are repeated in Granada, You'd think the Author very affectd, that he cannot name a Balcone r a Market place but it must run in Spanish, Miraor and Vivarambla And why? Because his Scene lyes there. Nay he makes Almanzors Ginnet, Poetically Icep'd Fiery Arab— " (Who, while his Rider every stand survey'd " Sprung loose; and flew into an Escapade.) In Compliment to the Scene of the Play, keep the Rules of Heroick, and Prance in Spanish. Or should I count how many times he uses that damn'd canting abso 'ere word [Host] for Army in one Play. [Granada p. 73.] " A Braver man I had not in my Host— " Had we not too n Host of Lovers here, &c. page 75.
You would not think him that man of high conversation he pretends to he, such are his fashionable English words. I confess the Incomparable Cowley a friend that Mr. Drydn makes bold with very often, uses the word in his Davideis, but then 'tis on a Iewish story where the subject, and the Translation of the Scripture has naturalized. the word. Her gentle Breath already from just fame, Has kindly entertain'd your glorious name. [Here Breath hears] But how the words mean so, he would have done well to have inform'd us. I should have guest that her gentle eath, kindly entertain∣ing his name, had signified she had spoke kindly of him. Sure [entertain] is a strange word in thy Nomenclature. If all maner of entertainments with thee can gratifie only the Ear: If a Miss, Bottle, and Fidle, can please none of thy senses but Hear∣ing, take my word, (old friend) the best of thy senses are impair'd, and thy best dayes done, (Dear Heart.) She gave him Breath by which he does command. Spoke to in the Third Act. —Whose Couragious Breath, Can set such glorious Characters on Death. This being the only [Breath] in the next Page (as thou saidst before) after.—And the same jealousie that made his Breath, &c. Must Guild, Paint, Print, Write, &c. To set a good or ill Character on a thing would be construed to speak in praise or dis∣praise of a thing by any body but him, but with him it signifies to Paint, Write, Guild, Print, &c. [Nay he makes Breath transmigrate like Souls, and subsist after a mans death in Parchment and Paper.] Act. Third. For this Guilt our Prophets Breath, Has in his sacred Laws pronounc'd your Death. Take my advice, and if thy Book be worth reprinting, leave out [transmigrate like Souls:] They are hard words thou dost not understand. If the Pophets Breath did transmigrate like souls, (as thou saist,) it could e're have subsisted in Paper nor Parchment, unlese Parchment and Paper, are sensitive crtatures in thy Philosophy. But where is the fault in saying the Prophets Breath in his Sacred Laws pro∣nounces death on such or such an offender? Why may not the Mahumetans have as great a veneration for their Faith, as the Christians and Iews for theirs, who for thousands of Years have call'd that the Word, which was but the Insiration of a Divinity. And h will is it (if they believe their Prophet fom his own mouth  his Law hen he lived upon Earth, and allow it still to have the same powe;) to say what his Breath utter'd once, it does still. —When e're she bleeds, He no severer a Damnation needs, That dares prononce the Sentence of her Death; Than the infection that attends that Breath. This Fellow that world speak sence if he could, when he would make an ob∣jection and say, The Queen must die first, and be condemned afterwards, puts his meaning down in these words. [The Sentence is not to be pronounc'd till the con∣demned party bleeds; (that is) she must be xecuted first, and sentenced after] which
is in other words. The party must not be condemned till the condemned party bleeds, (that is) the party must bleed first, and be condemned after. Did ever man make so many stumbles in so little a way? In the first part he says, [the sentence is not to be pronounced till the condemned party (which is that has been sentenced) bleeds,] there being confounded between two words [sentence] and [condemned] he makes as great a blunder as if a man should say the five Vowels are not five yet, but shall be. But leaving out [condemned] and saying, the sentence is not to be pronounced till the party bleeds, then he means it must be pronounced when the party bleeds, which he to illustrate says, [that is, after the party has bled] viz. [she must be Exe∣cuted first, and sentenced after.] Was ever such a Disputant: But graning what he would say, if he had sense. How is the sentence past after the Execution? At worst he can but argue, that the sentence is given at the same time she bleeds, not after it: For dares pronounce, bleeds, and needs, are all one tense. But now for the blind-side of this great Master in English: He who dares pronounce her Sentence, (which may as well be given this Minute, as any other time,) when ever she bleeds, which is when she shall bleed, for [when ever] makes a present tense have a fu∣ture signification, and implyes the bleeding is to come, otherwise it must have been [now she bleeds.] Then the sense is, he who dares pronounce her death when she shall bleed, shall need no greater torment, &c. For [needs] is of a future significa∣tion, as well as [bleeds] for wherever [when] is exprest [then] must be either exprest, or understood; and so the principle Verb [needs] must necessarily be of the same tense with [bleeds▪] But now for the [liberal Mess of Nonsense] which to prepare your Stomachs for, [h tells you is a coming.] For when we're dead, and our freed Souls enlarg'd, Of natures grosser burdens we're discharg'd. Then gentle as a happy Lovers Sigh, Like wandring Meteors through the Air we'l fly. And in our Airy Walk as subtle Guests, We'l steal into our cruel Fathers Breasts, There read their Souls, and track each Passions Sphear, See how revenge moves there, Ambition here. And in their Orbs view the dark Characters, Of Seiges, Ruins, Murders, Blood, and Wars. We'l blot out all those Hideous Draughts, and write Pure and white forms; we'l with a radiant light Their Breasts incircle till their Passions be Gentle as Nature in its Infancy. 'Till softn'd by our Charms their Furies ccase, And their Revenge dissolves into a Peace. Thus by our Deaths appeas'd, their Quarrel ends; Whom living we made Foes, Dead we'l make Friends. The dsign of which is an Airy Discourse of what their Souls shall do when they are dead, by stealing into their cruel Fathers breasts, and reconciling the Emnities between 'em. Now if she says more than she can do, that is not the matter. [But wandring Meteors, hideous Draughts, dark Characters, radant Lights, white Forms, and a great deal of such insignificant stuff is damn'd Non-sense.] This is the first time Mr. Dryden has been i'th right: Such a parcel of confused words put together without ever a word between e'm to make e'm sense, would indeed be very in∣significant. However sense or Non-sense the Reder is obliged to this Speech for its being occasion of so Poetical a fancy as his [Will in a Wisp, Madge with a
Candle, Iack in a Lanthorn, &c.] A Discourse so jauntée that 'tis the first you have met with yet, that has been all clear wit, and no Billinsgate. I remember a Speech of Berenice to Porphyrius, where she says what she'l do when she comes [all Soul and Spirit to Porphyrius Love,] where amongst the rest she cryes, " At Night I will within your Curtains peep, " With empty arms embrace you when you sleep. And pray why may not Morena's soul play at Bo peep in her Fathers bosome, as well as Berenices at Porphyrius bedside. But to embrace a man with empty arms that indeed none but Mr. Drydens Berenice can do: But truly I thought good Porphy∣rius a Istier Lover then so, to appear nothing in her arms. So witty an expression would make me run into the Authors praise in his own Phrase, and say, he has an em∣pty head, full of excellent fancies. —Through the Air we'l fly; And in our Airy walk, &c. Here he has a more particular Objection against Airy walk. [An Airy walk of a flyer.] A Wittier Poet then e're Mr. Dryden was or can hope to be (though his own ar∣rogance will admit of no equal) was not guilty of Non-sense, when he said in his Second Book of Metamorphosis, speaking of the wing'd Horses of the Sun, when Phaton drove e'm. —Tritumque relinqnt Quadrijugi spatium— Now if wing'd Horses could fly in a beaten track, I guess an Airy walk for a Soul to fly in, is no Nonsense. I'm certain an Airy walk for a place of flight is less Poetical, then his featherd sons; for young Birds in his Rival Ladies. " —Birds ne're impose " A rich plumed Mistriss on their featherd Sons. The Ancient World did but too modest prove, In giving a Divinity to Love. [A Divinity is a trifling thing! Love ought to have been something above a Di∣vinity. Though what that thing is no body can tell, nor is there any such thing, yet that thing Love is.] The Poets plain meaning of these Lines is: That the World in calling Love a Di∣vinity, gave it an Attribute below it, for Love he says afterwards has a Power above that of a Divinity. But then the Commentatour desires you to think that he means 'tis so infinitely above it, that a Divinity is but a trifle. As if a man in saying a Diamond is worth more than a Ruby, must needs infer a Ruby is worth nothing. Next being told Love is above a Divinity, he asks what that thing is that is above a Divinity, for he knows nothing that is or can be so. A very pretty Question! How many are the Ten Commandments. But for his more reasonable Question, [How is Love, or the Power of Love above that of a Divinity.] Heaven but Creates, but Love refines our Souls. [As if refining were a greater work than Creation.] Well said Elkanah.
Now of all places I wonder he should stick here: I durst lay a wager that if a an should make any comparison between a Hundred such unrefined Souls as Poet Settles, and the Soul of one Poet Dryden, he'd take it for a greater affront, than an Epistle to Morocco. But to come nearer to the purpose, he that takes Mr. Drydens argu∣ment, and holds the Creation of Souls above the refining of them, may like the old Proverb compare Sus Minervae, or believe a Cornish Bore, or a wild Arabian, a bet∣ter man than a Fully or an Aristotle. Another fault is. [Crimalhaz and Laula do not agree in any part of their two descri∣ptions of the old Emperours death, and they being both profest Lyars who must be be∣lieved;] I observe through his whole Pamphlet to make his accusation true, [that there are not four Lines together sense in the whole Play.  To prove every thing Non-sense he will have so, he either implicitely begs his Readers to believe the Authors meaning to be thus, or thus, contrary to their Reason or the Poets design, for his own purpose; or else by never taking notice of the dependance of what goes be∣fore, or what follows, gives a plausible argument against this or that expression, when the Props of all sense in a Discourse, Connexion and Circumstance are taken away. Or when these fail, tells you how such or such a thing may be alterd to be made Non-sense. As for example, here should the Contrivers and Actors of the Em∣perours Murder have held in one Tale, in publick and private, as he finds fault they don't: And have told Muly Labas the same thing they own'd amongst themselves of his Fathers Murder, they would certainly have been greater Fools than he would make you believe Muly Labas is. Then with his dying Breath his Soul retir'd, And in a sullen sigh his Life expir'd. [That is, just as he dyed, he dyed, and when he dyed, his Soul expir'd and his Life retired, and he dyed.] I have been told that before a mans life be ended, his Breath and Soul must be gone, and that all this had been but once dying, but all Malice and no Wit, has found out 'tis dying fix times over. Another fault is, [Muly Labas at the news of his Fathers Death, and the enjoying of Morena, in his surprize makes his grief and joy play at Leap-Frog.] For those just tears which nature ought t'employ To pay my last Debt to his Memory, The Crowning of my passion disallows; Grief slightly sits on happy Lovers Brows. [Here he's so overjoy'd for Morena, he has little sense of his Fathers Death; in his next speech he absolutely contradicts it.] Enjoy a Throne and my Morena wed. A joy too great were not my Father dead. [Here his great sorrow for his fathers Death, allays his joy for Morena.] Now for Mr. Drydens Logick, a great sense of sorrow and a little sense of sorrow are [absolute contradictions] with him, I thought sorrow and no sorrow had been contradictions. The poorest Freshman in the University would be sconced for half so great a blunder, but Mr. Dryden is a great professor of Learning, if you'l believe himself or his flatterers, and so cannot sin. Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi.
But ganting this mistake in our Laureat to be nothing, as for my part if you'l all agree I am very willing to grant it, and can as easily forgive the Non sense he writes now for the sense he has writ, as some charitable people cherish old ame Horses for their past services, and the strength they have had: But now I am in the pardoning humour, I'le examine his natural Philosophy in this Argument, and now my hand is in, forgive his mistakes in that too. If he be against [Muly Labas his joy jumping over his grief, and his grief jumping over his joy [(as he calls it,] then he must be for their not jumping one o're another, unless he be like Mr. Iordan that would have his Language neither in Verse nor Prose. First he'l grant Muly Labas had reason to be joyful for the enjoyment of his Mistriss, and sorry for his Fathers death, and at these two surprises he must either think and reflect upon them severally or together, but together he cannot; for 'tis a Maxim in nature that no man can think of two things, much less two such contraries as Ioy and Grief, at on and the same Moment. and words being the discription of thoughts, to speak e'm so as is impssible. If then they cannot Iump but by turns, Tarbox Muly Labas is not the Fool this bou. But now for [the most unintelligible piee of Non-sense has been me with yet.] Heaven fits our swelling passions to our souls. [If every word had been Sphears, Orbs, Infection, White Forms, &c. the sense had been as good.] But now for this Gordian, Heaven predestns nothing for any man that should raise him to an excess of joy or grief, or any other passion more than what he can bear, which I think is fitting passions to our Souls: The Soul being the seat of Passions. But though it be not Non-sense, yet unintelligible I'le grant it is, viz. with Mr. Commentatour▪ Sense and Understanding I confess have been formerly of his acquaintance, but he has long since shook hand with them, I assure you. And indeed I commend him for it, he consults his own ease in it, as a man ought to do at his Years, and why should he burdn himself more than his occasion requires. When some great fortune to Mankind's convey'd, Such blessings are by Providence allay'd. Thus Nature to the World a Sun creates, But with cold Winds his pointed rays rebates. [Cool winds allay the blessing of the scorching Sun.] Why the scorching Sun? O, yes, the blessing of the scorching Sun looks like a Contradiction; and therefore [scorching] is the word for thy turne. Well to humour the Child [scorching] shall be the word: But then sure the heat of the Sun that scorches men, produces Plants and Fruits, &c. and though it offends their Bodies, it maintains their Lives, and if this be not a blessing, Notes is infallible: Nay, where the heat of the Sun is so excessive that it makes the Earth barren, as to the production of plants, yet there it operates another way, and produces Gold. Ad there are those who (say Bays what he can) will think that a blessing too. Thy early growth we in thy Chains had crusht, And mix'd thy Ashes with thy Fathers dust. [A strange Engine it must be that can crush a man to Ashes, and as strange a Poyson that can turn a man to Dust in two howres time, for it could be no longer since the Emperour dyed.]
Bear up briskly Laureat, there you have him: For the Poet lyes Divellishly if he tells you that his Emperour can be really Dust and Ashes in so little a time. But if Mr. Dryden had ever had a friend worth following to the Grave, he would have heard e're this time of Dust to Dust and Ashes to Ashes, said of those that had been neither of them. How common a Figure is this in Discourse. Does his Montezu∣ma (when he says of Cortez. " Grant only he who has such honour shown, " When I am dust may fill my empty throne.) Desire that Cortez may not enjoy his Throne immediately after his Death, but stay till he is Dust first: See what mistakes his malice makes, though to his own disad∣vantage. He has two more observations of the same kind in the Fifth Act. page 55. His Blood shall pay what to your Brothers dust I owe, [He turn'd Dust very quickly in a Country which preserves Mummy 3000. years.] Page 57. So may my Body rot when I am dead, 'Till my rank Dust has such contagion bred, My Grave may dart forth Plagues, as may strike Death Through the infected Air where thou drawst Breath. [By that time it is Dust, it will cease to be rank, and consequently breed no contagion, if it bred none before.] Well but to make it sense in Bays his Style let it run thus. So may my Body rot when I am dead, 'Till my rank Putrifaction, or rank Corruption, or Filth, Nastiness or the like— How delicately this would run in Heroick Verse, and how proper and pleasant would it be for a Gentleman to speak, and an Audience to hear. If the Author had used [Dust] in a strict sense, (as Bays to make it Non-sense would have you believe he does) he should nor have said, so may my body rot when I am dead, till my rank Dust, &c. but thus. After my Body has done rotting may my rank Dust, &c. for I take it, the Rotting must be over before it be really Dust. This Positive Critick sure would find infinite fault, with such an expression as [the Turkish Crown] and to bring it to his sense, alter it, and say Turkish Turbant, for they wear no Crowns. Poison'd my Husband, Sir, and if there need, Examples to instruct you in the deed, I'll make my actions plainer understood, Copying his Death on all the Royal Blood. [She will instruct him by an Example to do a deed that's done, and by an Example that must be copyed after his Example, which he again is to copy, &c.] A great deal more pudder he makes about a Copy and a Copy and a Copy, &c. This Objection has a little of the Polish in it, for he talks of a Copy much at the rate of the Cloak-bag: But now to the Argument. [she will instruct him to do a deed that's done,&c.] Here hee's at his old way of Begging the meaning, but a wiser Body would have guest her meaning to have been, that for his better understanding what she had already done, she would give him more examples of the same kind for his instruction. I am a Convert, Madam, for kind Heaven, Has to Mankind immortal Spirits given,
And Courage is their Life: but when that sinks, And to tame Fears and Coward faintness shrinks, [Which he writes into tame Fears, &c. which quite alters the sense.] We the great work of that bright frame destroy, And shew the world that even our Souls can dy. [The Poet is at his Mock Reasons,] But I am afraid the Commentatour is, [Cri∣malhaz is converted to Villany for the very Reasons he should be honest.] If Crimal∣haz be beyond the fear of damnation and is possest that in being Ambitious, Villanous, and Bloody, he does well and nobly, 'tis Non-sense for him to call himself other∣wise then a convert to Villany for Conversion and Aostacy are sense only as they respect the Opinion or Faith of him that speaks 'em. A Roman Catholick shall tell you of such Protestants made Converts to his Religion, and a Protestant of such Converts of Catholicks to his, and so with Turks and Christians, &c. And yet they all speak sense. If any good Character in the Play that believed Crimalhaz his Tenents ill had said he had been converted to Villany, it had been Non-sense: But hang consideration, Mr. Dryden's above it. But for his next Objection, [Riddle my riddle, can Courage become Cowardise, or Immortality mortal,] What pretty Sophistry is this? A Coura∣gious man it is possible may turn a Coward, which is the sense of the very words, for when Courage in a man sinks and gives way to fear and Cowardise, that Couragious man turns a Coward, but not his Courage Cowardise; No more then I can say of any thing that was white once, and is now dyed black that the whiteness is become blackness. But his Objections are many of them built upon this falacy to make re∣flections upon Incoherence in qualities instead of persons and things. But then how does Crimalhaz say Immortality becomes mortal? He says, Heaven has given immor∣tal Souls to Men, viz. to those men whose Courages are so, Courage as he thinks being the Life of the Soul. But those, whose Courages can fade, be corrupted and dye, their Souls by consequence can do so too. So he affirms that true Courage, viz. that which cannot decline makes Souls immortal, but Cowardise mortal. And by such subtilties his Breast infect, 'Till he his Generals Loyalty suspect. [No body can infect another with a disease which he has not himself, or carries not about him some way or other. Hametalhaz then must have suspition of the Generals Loyalty, or carry the Disease about him, else he cannot infect the King with it.] Did ever any man make such a pudder for nothing. First [Infect] is Lasht, as Beg∣gars for stragling, it transgresses its bounds, and therefore Mr. Critick by Con∣stable Law confines it home to the place of its Nativity. It must be sense no where but where it refers to a Disease: Well to compliment him it shall be so confin'd. [But then no body can infect another with a Disease he has not himself, or carries not about him some way or other.] Dear heart thou art i'th right. What dost thu think of Nurses: Nay, Cats or Dogs in a Plague time that have carried infection with them, yet have not had the Disease themselves. So Hametalhaz had something or other (as thou saist) about him, to make the King jealous of his General though he was not so himself. Never was such stuff—but 'tis his Talent and there is an end. And to that pitch his heightned Virtues raise, That their perfection shall appear their Crime, As Giants by their Height do Monsters seem.
[Here he makes Giantickness the perfection of Humane Stature, and says, Giants are not Monsters, only seem so to Mankind: By consequence all that are not Giants are im∣perfect if not Monsters.] The Poet makes Giantickness, &c. and says, &c. That is Mr. Dryden makes and says it for him, for he neither says nor implies any such thing; Cri∣malhaz tells the Queen Mother he will extol Muly Hamets Virtues so highly that their perfection shall appear their crime, as Giants appear or seem Monsters for their height But how he says or infers, [Giants are not Monsters, and but only sem so to Mankind.] You have only Mr. Drydens word for, and how much that has been worth hitherto in his Observations, I leave his Readers to Judge. Though indeed some are apt to think that Giants are not really Monsters though received so, a Monster in its true defini∣tion being a Creature that either wants or has more parts than Nature requires to make up true proportions and Symetry. And yet a Giant, how much greater soever than an ordinary man, may have all parts proportionable, nor have more or less Arms or Legs, or ay other particular. However if the reception of a Monster be more large, and Giants are Monsters, to say a thing seems to be what it is, no Non-sense. Brave Crimalhaz thy Breast and mine agree. [How Breasts can agree or quarrel any more than Arms or Legs I cannot tell.] And truly we believe him; but if he cannot tell what [agreeing] signifies besides being friends, he is not the best Commentatour I have met with. We'll Act his Death in State. [Will she have a Play made on it, and Act her self in it.] Now why nothing can be Acted but in a Play I cannot tell neither: I am afraid he is not so Critical in his own writings. Almah. to Almanz. page 51. " You bound and freed me; but the difference is, " That shew'd your Valour, but your Virtue this. As if Valour were no Virtue. though it be none of his Virtues, others are pleased to compliment it with the title of a Virtue, when they made Fortitude one of the Cardinal Virtues. But perhaps he'l distinguish, between Valour in one degree, and Valour in another, for Valour is not always a Virtue, there is a Brutish Valour (though very improperly, for in Brutes 'tis Courage.) Yes, that answer is for his purpose, for these two Lines are spoken of Almanzor. We'l Act his Death in State, And dash his Blood against his Palace gate. [A stately thing to dash a Pail full of Blood against a Palace gate.] This Commen∣tator, like Eustathius upon Homer, observes more in every Line than the Poet e're thought on, for I durst swear for him, he never considered just how much the Em∣perours Veins held; which Mr. Dryden has politickly found to be a Pail-full: But I am afraid in observing the quantity he forgot the quality, that it was the Blood of a King when he infers by his observation how inconsiderable the dashing so much Blood against a Palace Gate would be. But he comments, and these are Notes and so forth. Now for the [most rumbling piece of Non sense that has come yet.] To flattering lightning our feignd smiles conform, Which back'd with Thunder do but guild a storm.
[Flattering Lightning! no, Lightning sure is a threatning thing.] But he has an∣swerd for me in his Royal Martyr. " About the place did nimble Lightning play, " Which offer'd us by fits and snatch'd the day. If it has so brisk a Light that in a dark storm it can make an appearance of day, which in a moment vanishes again, it certainly is a very flattering thing to make such splendid illusions to so little purpose. But backt with Thunder much offends him, and a great deal of doe he makes about [a Trooper on Horse-back.] I took [backt] to be more frequently used for attended: An allusion taken from a Leader and his forces, which in all reason wou'd have better agreed with Lightning which immediately precedes the Thunder. But then he has a long dispute against guilding a storm. Now to say that Lightning (which for a moment changes the whole face of Heaven, and makes a glittering Light where so much darkness was before,) guilds a storm, I think a pardonable Metaphor: but then he'll tell you that 'tis [do guild] not [does guild] a storm, and so as a Plural Verb it refers to [Smiles.] To answer that it should be [does guild] and that it was an over-sight in the cor∣rection of the Press, which though it be true, and is, and has been alwayes spoken in Acting [does guild a storm.] Yet since it looks like Mr. Drydens reprinting, Fol∣low Fate which would too fast pursue instead of does too fast pursue: I will not make that Apology, for 'tis sense both wayes. 'Tis an usual custome in Similes to apply the Analogy, either Rei Analoganti or Rei Analogae. I'le go no farther than his own writings: Almahide says of Almanzor Page 31. " Mark but how terrible his Eyes appear, " And yet there's something roughly noble there; " Which in unfashion'd nature, seems divine; " And like a Gemme does in the quarry shine. Here something in Almanzors unfashion'd nature like a Gemme shines in the quarry; what quarry has he in him, if he goes to the strictness of the sènse, for it to shine in? [how can Smiles guild a storm?] If he will admit of no Allegories why does he make e'm? It should have been Lightning guilds the storm, so for the same rea∣son he should have said Almanzor had something in him roughly noble, which seem'd Divine, and like a Gemme which in the quarry shines; for the Gemme he means shines in the quarry. But because he told you [the Act ended with such rumbling Non sense] it shall do so; and therefore you shall have one of his Granada Similes. He compares Almanzors Bull to a Monarch, and says of him. " That Monarch like he rang'd the lifted fields, " Some toss'd, some goar'd, some trampling down he kill'd. He has the strangest Notion of Monarchs that ever I heard of, if ranging, goaring, tossing and trampling be their qualities, I am afraid this Simile has a little of his Sign∣post Painting in his preface [the Lyon is very like a Rose] He tells you of something like a Monarch, but by all I can perceive by his ranging, tossing, &c. 'tis no more than a Bull when all's done.
ACT The Second. GReat sir, Your Royal Fathers general Prince Muly Hamet's Fleet does Homewards Sail. [Here he makes Muly Hamet's Fleet to be the old Emperours General, &c.] [General] and [Prince Muly Hamet] I think are near enough to be better ac∣quainted. In a Solemn and Triumphant pride. [In a Triumphant pride! Then the pride was Victorious before, so the Ships conquer'd with their pride.] How will this Line. The Conquerors Triumphant Chariot grace Escape. Did the Chariots conquer? Besides if so impertinent a question were worth answering, by his favour what is Triumph but pride, the vain glory a Conquerour takes after Victory. Their Course up the great River Tensist guide. [They guide their course, that is they steer themselves.] I hope the Helm that is a part of the Ship guides the Ship, though (as Adlepate gives us to understand) the Pilot steers. Whose guilded Currents do new Glories take From the reflection his bright Streamers make. [If the Currents  guilded when they take new glories, then the Currents are double Hatcht.] At him agen Bays; In the Mak in the Fourth Act. And his tortur'd Entralls sing. [If his Entrails were  or before, why should they be sung afterwards.] These two objections are so like one another, and both so sillily made, that 'tis pitty to part e'm. [Guilded] in the first refers to [new glories] and [tortur'd] in the last to [stung,] and to prove how proper the Authors expressing of it is. In the first Book of Mr. Cowleys Davide, speaking of his desisting from writing of his Mi∣striss, to write a Sacred Poem. I meet this Line. My well-chang'd Muse, I a chast Vestal make. Now a man as impertinent as Mr. Noses, (but Heaven forbid there should be such another Creature in nature; for 'tis pitty such a rarity should be match) would ask if his Muse was well chang'd before, what need she be made a chast Vestal now. But a man of sense, and one that had none of Bays his Wind- in his head,
would tell ye, that the making her a chast Vestal was the well changing of his Muse. From the reflection his Bright Streamers make. [I thought the Water had made the reflection not the Streamers.] I thought if the Streamers had not been there, the Water could not have made the reflection of them. If it had been from the reflection which those Currents make: If the Cur∣rents made the reflection, why was it not made before the Ships came? That sup∣position would be almost as great a Bull, as the two first Lines in his Indian Em∣perour. " On what now happy Climate are we thrown, " So long kept secret, and so lately known. A new Climate long kept. Oh! but Notes will answer it was new to Cortez, for he never was there before, which he would have done well to have exprest, for as 'tis, 'tis as good sense, as if a man should put on an old cast Suit of another mans, and say 'tis new because he never woe it before. The Waves a Masque of Martial Pageants yield. [The Masque is made of the Waves, a new kind of Ship built of War.] Hud every Inch. —By force Of Argument a Man's no Horse. I am afraid if there had not been Waves, or Water, or something to that purpose to help towards it, the motion of these Pagants had been spoild. A flying Army on a floating Field. [Flying is an excellent. Epithite for a Victori Army.] Flying on or off, is all alike to Mr. Commentour, I wonder what he thinks of Alexanders Army, which was call'd a Flying Army, for his expedition in over-running Asia, and yet as I take it there's no Record of Alexanders running away from an Enemy. [But now the Martial Pageants which I took to be Ships are a flying Army: Our Fleet is sunk already, and turn'd into a Army.] Is it so A very pretty kind of Notes his Lgerdemain. Order and Harmony in each appear. [In each? In what? In the flying Army, the Waves, the Masque, or the floating Field.] And how many things do all these amount to, but Water and Ships? If he can make any more of them, 'tis the first time I took him for a Conjurer. Their lofty Bulks the foaming Billows bar. [Now the Ships are Buoy'd up agen.] Hocus agen. [It is no great news to  in England that Water bears Ships.] 'Tis well he tells us he believes so, for by the shallowness of his reason hitherto, a little matter would make him believe any thing.
In state they move, and on the Waves rebound, [To rebound on the Waves is to leap up from the water into the Air.] He's at De∣scriptions agen. But by the way let me ask him, if Leaping off the Waves, be re∣bounding on them. As if they danced to their own Trumpets sound: [Merry Ships to cut Capers as they Sail.] Why that Ships may do, if they are such Creatures as this fresh Water Souldier believes they are, that have Legs and Hands, [that can put off their Caps, and make Legs] as he says. Granada p.49. Benzayda. " Death with our meeting Planets danced above. I am afraid to make Planets, nay Death too such merry grigs as to cut Capers and turne Dancers is a little Burlesquo, whatever Ships may be fancied to do. By Winds inspired, with lively Grace they roul [Ships never Roul but in Calms.] I judged that in Calms they had lain still. Ei∣ther he takes all seasons to be Calms or Storms, and so fresh Gales are Calms with him, or else he believes that Ships have really those Souls which Hametalhaz alludes to, if in still water, without help of Wind or Tide, they can Roul of themselves. As if that Breath and motion lent a Soul. [Here he makes the effect produce the cause; whereas it is a Soul that lends Breath and motion, he makes Breath and motion lend a Soul, as if sight could lend Eyes, if so, then sight must be before Eyes.] Now why the Soul is the cause of Breath and motion I believe he cannot resolve us, for 'tis much disputed whether the Soul be any thing else but Breath and mo∣tion, viz. in Irrational Creatures; all senses being made by a flux or motion of Spi∣rits through several Organs to the Brain. And so the Soul is but a notion or term of Art used to signifie that Breath and motion: And if Don Critick makes this learned Discant that the cause is prior natura than the effect; by his own argument, Things are before Names; and by his rules of priority, Breath and motion cause a Soul. And with that Soul, they seem taught Duty too, [Here this Soul is lent by instruction they are taught a Soul, and with it taught Duty.] Why taught a Soul! what does the Pronoun [that] point to▪ but the lent Soul in the foregoing Line. Their Top-sails lower'd their heads with Reverence bow. As if they would their Generals worth enhance., From him, by instinct taght Allegiance. [The Ship learns by instinct, that is, it learns from another, by having it naturally of it self.] Why it learns from another? Let the question be answered out of the Authors words, by what taught Allegiance? By instinct. From whom? From him? viz. the General, and then pray examine the reception of instinct, and find this Line Non∣sence
dear heart, and eris mihi magnus Apollo, though Instinct in all cases be what a man has naturally in himself, yet that instinct never produces actions, but from some circumstance or cause, extra hominem. For example, some men have an ∣tipathy against a Cat, and by instinct, though they see her not, shall tremble and sweat, or the like when they come near her, and though by nature they have this Antipathy, yet 'tis from the presence of the Cat, that instinct operates, they would not tremble were she not there. If the Poets▪ Ships, (which he by his [As if] in the first Line, only fancies of e'm not affirms of e'm, for the affirmative would be Non sence, Instinct and Allegiance being inconsillent with inanimate Creatures.) If his Ships, I say, are fancied to have a Sympathy with their General, and by instinct can express their Allegiance when he expresses his; certainly though their supposed innate Virtue of expressing their Allegiance be in themselves, yet the Power of ex∣pressing it is from him: For if he did not express His, they could not exercise their Sympathetick quality, and express Theirs with him. But perhaps he'll find fault with the English, and tell us to say, That such a thing is taught to do this or that by instinct, does not please him. But as for that, let it pass: If he be so hard to please, he is not worth the humouring. Whilst she loud Cannons eccho from the shore, Their flaming Breaths salute you Emperour. From their deep mouths he does your Glory sing. [He  his Glory and with their mouths] that is the Cannons Mouths, Which is like its fellows, Non-sence. [For no man can sing with another mans mouth.] Therefore not with a Cannons mouth: a very Poetical reason. I hope the modest Commentatour will tell us,) as he tells the Poet he studied this Non-sense with ano∣ther mans Brains,) that here he had the help of the Breathen, for no less then a Triumviri of Poets could have produced so weighty a— With Thunder, and with Lightning, greets his King. [But two Lines since he call'd it salute an Emperour, and thus these mannerly Ships salute an Emperour, but greet a King, and in saluting, (he says) hey but flash in the Pan only.] If Cannons were so well bred in his Metaphor as only to flash in the Pan, I dare lay an even wager that Mr. Dryden durst venture to Sea. [But when Greet's the word, then the Thunder and Lightning comes.] I observe which is very often objected through the Play, he finds fault that in a Scene or a Speech the Poet uses the words Monarch, King, Prince, Soveraign, Emperour, and all for the same person, another time, Destiny, Fate and Providence for the same thing, as here [salute] and [greet] and this forsooth is impardonable. I believe he means to bring Poetry to the rules of the Law, and having once spoke of a King we must cry at next occasion to name him the aforesaid, or abovenamed King party to these presents. I wonder where the excellency of a tongue would be, which lies in the copiousness of words to express the same thing by, if this Confinement were imposed on itsreest subject Poetry. But I find he has clearly design'd the Authors verthrow, and being possest with an absolute certainty of his Ruine by this fatal blow, prescribes him Laws after the rate of severe Conquerours to Vanquisht Enemies such as they would be unwilling to be tyed to themselves. Thus to express his Ioys in a loud Quire. [He srenaded the King with a Quire of Guns: Srenading and greeting are proper
Sea term.] I have lookt o're the Speech and can find no such term as [srenading] in it, but that's no matter, the sense and terms of expressions are all one in his Di∣ctionary, [Greet] indeed is crept in, very timely for a lash, and though it signifies saluting, however 'tis no Seamans word, and therefore Nonsense. There indeed he was too blame for making his Hametalhaz a Courtier and no Tarpolin; Larbord and Starbord with a score more of such words, would have made excellent Drydenism and no Bombast, and the Ships had been Ships, [which here they are not.] And consort of wing'd Messengers of fire [Singers sure and not Messengers make a Consort.] To answer him in his own sre∣nading Phrase, if by his argument a Gentleman should play on a Violin under a La∣dies Window, he must Ipso facto turn Fidler and no Gentleman, for he can be nothing but a Fidler that plays on a Fidle: But then if I should call him a Fine Gentleman 'tis worse Nonsense still, for 'tis not his fin Cloaths but his Fingers that play on his Instrument, [as 'tis the Voices, not the wings that make this Consort,] give it Sugar-Plums, give it Sugar-Plums. [But how are they Messengers of Fire? Did the Fire blow the Guns up into the Air, or was every Corn of Powder a wing'd Messenger? Then their Wings were very small.] To distinguish particular Corns of Powder in the Discharge of a Cannon requires a younger Eye-sight than Mr. Commentatours. Hadst thou Brains in thy Head, dear Heart, when thou couldst talk of writing Volumes, and labour like Mons Par∣turiens with no more then this? but how are they wing'd Messengers, the next Lines will informe you. He has his Tribute sent and Homage given: As men in Inconse send up Vows to Heaven. [A Tributary Subject.] I cannot find the Poet speaks any thing of a Tributary Subject: he calls indeed his loud expressing of his joys a tribute to his Prince: If this be sin, Heaven help the wicked. But then [can thoughts be carried up in Smoak? He as well may say he will Bake thoughts or Roast thoughts as Smoak them,] then he compares Thunder, Lightning, and Roaring of Guns to Incense, and says he expresses his loud joys in a consort of Thundering Guns, as men send up silent Vows in gentle In∣cense, if this description is not plentifully supplyed with Nonsense, I'le refer my self to the Reader] and I to mine. 'Tis plentifully supplyed indeed, for Mr. Commentatour has given us Ample Testimonies of his stock of Nonsense, in his over kindness to this Authors wants, in furnishing him with so large spplies of it: 'Tis well he has so much to spare, that he can afford his very Enemies such quantity. I assure you were it a thing I much delighted in, I should Court his friendship above any mans I know. But how little delight soever I take in it, to show you I am not an absolute Nonsense hater, I'le return to his last Argument. [Can thoughts go up in Smoak, or be Baked or Roasted?] How Common an expression, sending up Vows to Heaven in Incense and sacrifice is, I leave to the judg∣ment of those that have a great deal less conversation in Books, such as have read less, but understood more sense than Mr. Dryden. Now for the Simile, which in plain sense runs thus; the General exprest his devotion to the King in fire and smoak as men send up Vows to Heaven in Incense. But then Sir Politick Wou'd bee has found out [that Canons make a roaring fire, and Incense a gentle silent fire,] he might as well have gone on, and said that Incense makes a sweet fire, and Gunpowder a stinking fire; therefore his devotion sinks, and 'tis no Simile. Besides, Canons are mde of Iron or Brass, and Altars on which Incense is burnt of Stone or brick, no Simile agen.
At this Sensless Rate will I make the best Simile that can be writ Nonsense. And for example take, a rarity, a Simile with sense in it. In his Granada Almanzor says of Boabdelin. " But at my ease, thy destiny I send, " By ceasing from this Hour to be thy friend. " Like Heaven I need but only to stand still, " And not concurring to thy Life I kill. Here if I'de be as impertinent as he, I should ask how can Almanzors standing still be like Heavens standing still. If he means That Heaven in which the fixt Stars are, and be of Copernicus opinion, the supposition of his Simile is Nonsense: But if of Ptolemys, and supposing Heaven should desist from motion and influence, he must infer the destruction of Day and Night, and seasons, and by consequence the ruine of all Mankind: or if he mean by Heaven the Divinity that rules the world 'twould be as bad. How then can Almanzors standing still which threatens but the ruine of a poor Pigmey King Boabdlin, be compared to the standing still of Heaven which ruins a World. By this extravagant reasoning, I'le prove the best thing he ever wrote Nonsense. And what with Larding of part Quibble, and part Sophistry imitate his way of arguing, and make his description of Ships every Line Nonsense, and demonstrate it so plainly, that if my Pamphlet Readers be but half so much Fools as I suppose he thought his would be, I shall Infallibly bring e'm to my side. " I went in order Sir to your command, " To view the utmost limits of the Land. Then Gyomar must be supposed to have rode round the Land for his Fathers Kingdom had its utmost limits on all sides as well as on that side, where Cortez his Fleet landed. But Gyomar in the following Lines tells you he had been but one way, and therefore the utmost limits of the Land is Nonsense. " To that Sea shore where no more world is found; " But foaming Billows breaking on the ground. Here he makes two absolute contradictions in two Lines, in the first, he tells you of a place where no world was, and in the next he says in the same place was world, for if Billows and Ground which is Earth and Water be no part of the World in Mr. Drydens Cosmography, his Philosophy will get him less credit then his Notes upon Morocco. " Where for a while my Eyes no object met, " But distant Skies that in the Occan set. His Eyes no object met but Skies? How did the Skies meet his Eyes, did his Eyes go half way, and the Skies come the other half towards him, Oh, kind and coming Skies. like page 27. His Death to tears their Chrystal Orbs would melt. [Would the Orbs cry at Muly Hamets death, O kind, good ur'd Orbs, cry your
Eyes out for Muly Hamet.] His Eyes met Skies: then they were like Elkanab's Pilgrims. Pilgrims whose zeal's more blest though less divine, Go meet their Saints, but I must fly from mine. [I thought the Saints had staid for them in their shrines, but Mr. Settles Saints are civiller than any other.] But then why distans skies which in the Ocean set! If the Indians believ'd the Skies to terminate where they seem to do, I'm sure the extremity of a mans sight on the Sea cannot be 40. Miles, and if the Sky had set where it appears to do, Gyomar who had travelled above 1000 Miles by his Fathers command for no other reason but to view the limits of the Land, which Journy the Poet found out for a Prince of his Quality for no other cause than putting his description in a Principal Characters mouth, this Gyomar of all Mankind should never have call'd the Skies but at Fourty Miles off distant skies. " And low-bung Clouds that dipt themselves in Rain, " To shake their fleeces on the Earth agen. Clouds that dipt themselves in Rain! I thought it had never been rain till it fell from the Clouds, This is the greatest piece of Drydenian Nonsense that I have met with yet, to call the exhalation of watry vapours which makes rain, Rain before 'tis made. But Mr. Dryden is a Scholar, and can tell you it was Rain in potentia, and that he meant it for pluvia pluvians, not pluvia pluviata as a learnd Commentatour once prated of natura naturans, and natura naturata, p. 40. " To shake their fleeces on the Earth again. Why did they ever shake e'm before? Be like his Clouds were good three-piled lasting Clouds, that could hold wetting and shaking so often, and neither wear out▪ nor grow thred-bare▪ like (Pag. 31. Unravel their own Scenes of Love, [This implyes the Scenes were knit.] These Clouds were stronger sure than Pitchers for they come not so often to the Well, but they are broken at last. But then why Fleeces? were they Woollen Clouds? Sure the Authors Brains went a Wool-gathering. Like page 13. To Flattering Lightning our feign'd smiles conform, Which backt with Thunder does but guild a storm. [Sure the Poet wrote these two Lines aboard some sach in a storm, and being Sea-sick spued up a good Lump of clotted Nonsense at once.] " At last, as far as I could cast my Eyes " Upon the Sea— At first then his Eyes were for meeting of Objects, but now at last for fear of not reaching them soon enough, he casts his Eyes at e'm. But then how did he get at e'm again when they were cast upon the Sea, sure Gyomar was an excellent swimmer for such an exploit, and like Mr. Settles ships a rare instinct animal to find his Eyes
agen. But when he had found e'm, could he put them in agen and see with them. I have heard of glass Eyes being taken out of peoples heads, and put in agen, but ever of natural Eyes before. p. 39. She is a Beauty and that names her guard. [I have heard of a Hound-bitch, but never of a Princess so call'd before.] " —something methought did rise, " Like blewish Mists which still appearing more, " Took dreadful shapes and mov'd towards the shore. Why something like Blewish mists? Why did he not think e'm really blewish mists, by his own confession at first, he thought they look'd like mists, and how could he tell they were other than what they appeared at that distance. Oh, but Gyomar was a Conjurer, and had the spirit of Prophecy; he knew before hand there was somthing more in e'm than mists, and though he had a mist before his Eyes, yet his understand∣ing was clear. [Oh foolish Poet that did not take the hint and pursue Gyomar's Chara∣cter of a Conjurer, he lost a good opportunity of gracing his Play with flyings and Machins.] But then why something like mists, why not something like a mist. Then gentle as a happy Lovers sigh, pag. 7. [They two like one sigh.] " Which still appearing more, " Took dreadful shapes and moved towards the shore. Appearing more! More what? more misty or more blewish, no that's impossible for the nearer they came they appeard less blew and less like mists. [Thou wretched Blunderhead how confoundedly dost thou intangle thy Brain, and cannot wind off it one clear thred of sense?] " Took dreadful shapes. Why took dreadful shapes! If they could take dreadful shapes, we must suppose they had not dreadful shapes before, and therefore this was but a Copy of their coun∣tenance, they did it only to look grim upon Gyomar, to put him in a fright, and make him beray himself, page 24. I can no less then shrink at horrours which my honour stain. [How could his horrours stain his honour, perhaps it might make him stain his Breeches.] I doubt not but the Poet gave Cortez his Ships this power of taking what shapes they pleased, that like his friend the King of Brandfords Army they might go in disguise: And moved towards the shore. Was his moving towards the shore like Mr. Settles, (guide their course.) Did they steer themselves? And why moved? [No doubt motion may be pleasant like Mr. Settles rouling, page 15. As the posture may be managed.] At this insipid rate the most wretched Scribler in the World, nay one that had the Soul but of a Pandion and Amphigenia, might write Volumes of Errata on a Virgil or a Cowley; Nay and better than on a Polish Princess: at the same rate as Beauty and Majesty may be Libeld. The greatness of the Subject heightens the profanation, but then at the same time the profanation does not lesen their Divinity.
I could have gone through his description of Ships at this sensless Rate, but I con∣fess my self not so bold a writer as Mr. Dryden: And though he had the impudence to trouble you with a Comment on a whole Play in this Style, I think the examination of 20. Lines with such dull, idle and impertinent Remarks upon e'm would tire you. But Mr. Dryden has past the Rubicon, and has over and over agen in his Prefaces told you he has had the happiness to please an age; and though, as he declares he loves to spread his Gold thin, Witness his Love in a Nunnery; yet you are bound to like what∣ever he writes. But after all his Gigantick Arguments against Mr. Settles Ships, [he has daubd him with his own puddle] as he calls it, that is, with a Witless parcel of Rhimes in imitation of his description; and because Mr. Dryden shall say he is Aped for some∣thing. I'le give him such another on the first speech of Maximin, which I assure him is much more to his purpose, and though perhaps it has less Poetry in it then His, that is, more Truth, yet If I should not be thought to play booty, I would bestow it on him, and desire him to place it as a supplement to the other. Maxim. " Thus far my Arms have with success been Crown'd, " And found no stop, or vanquisht what they found, " The German Lakes my Legions have o're past " With all the Bars that Art or Nature cast. " My Foes, in watry Fastnesses inclosed, " I sought, alone to their whole War exposed. " Did first the depth of trembling Marshes sound, " And fixt my Eagls in unfaithful ground. " By force, submitted to the Roman sway, " Fierce Nations, and unknowing to obey. " And now for my Reward ungrateful Rome, " For which I fought abroad, Rebels at home. Bays: " Thus far my Pamplet with success is Crownd, " And found no stop, or vanquisht what it found. " My Mighty Notes Morocco have o're past, " With all the Bars, that Sense or Reason cast. " His faults in slippery Fatnesses inclosed, " Him I've in Print to the whole Town exposed. " Did first the depth of every Sentence sound, " And Play'd the Critick on unfaithful Ground. " By force of Nibling, Quibling, Scribling Wit, " Madet' unknown Reasons, unknown faults submit. " And now for my Reward th' ungrateful Town, " For must'ring up His Nonsense, cryes Mine down. But now for a greater blow than this man of words has given yet. [Morocco is an Inland City, and Tensift never bore any Ships, &c. Therefore the Poet has cut this pas∣sage up to Morocco, for no other reason than to make an idle description of Ships, &c. And how likely is it that a General should bring home his Land-forces in a Fleet Sailing up a River, &c.] If Morocco be an Inland City, so is London too, and yet the River Thames which runs by it, (as Tensift does by Morocco, a River held as great as the Thames, and as Navigable,) can bear Ships, and bring up a Fleet near enough to be seen from any Tower in London, and why Tensift must be prohibited from doing the like, Mr. Notes must resolve us. But then why a Fleet for Land-forces, if he had ever read Geography, he had found some of the places which the Poet makes Muly
Hamet Conquer Maritime Towns, as Salli for example, a place which our Coffee∣house friend, with no greater reading than a Gazet, by the name of Salli men of War, might have guest had been near the Sea. Nor indeed, are any that the Poet mentions very far from the Sea. But then the prettiest of all is, he's angry the Ge∣neral comes not home by Land: that indeed had been very Comical to have deserted a Fleet, and set his Ships a Float, that his Forces might travel so many Miles home by Land, and in so hot a Country too as Morocco. But granting Ships could not come so near Morocco: 'Tis very likely the King of Morocco might have a Fleet, (which Notes find fault with him for having) since his whole Kingdom lay on one side upon the Atlantick Ocean, though his Metropolis (granting Mr. Commentatours as∣sertion true) had been a hundred miles farther from the Sea than 'tis. I'le give him as good an argument as this, nearer home in his own Style. The French have no Ships, for Paris is an Inland City, and some hundred miles from Sea. But now [For the Land of Gotham where we meet nothing but Fools and Non∣sense] Saies the King to his Victorious General. Welcome true owner of that Fame you bring, A Conquerour is a Guardian to a King. Conquest and Monarchy consistent are, 'Tis Victory secures the Crowns we wear. [Welcome true owner. As if a man could be a false owner or have a wrong right to a thing.] A wrong right to a thing! He takes all the care possible to twist contradi∣ctions together, to make every thing appear Nonsense. Nay, confutes the opinion he desires you to have of his high conversation, when he wilfully seems not to under∣stand expressions that a man must meet every day in discourse. Has not he heard of the true or right owner of such or such a thing: For my part I blush for him to think what great structures his malice has designed, where his foundations are so shallow. A Conquerour is a Guardian to a King. [Poor King! The Poet makes thee here confess thy self fit to be beg'd for a Fool, and so use Muly Hamet for thy Guardian.] And so with a great deal of other stuff in pursuance of Estate, Fool and Guardian, he mawls the Poet and his King. If none but Fools have estates as his argument implyes: Mr. Dryden has politickly given you to understand the chief Reason why he is a Wi, and whether or no it abuses the Pot, 'tis no matter it flatters the Commentatour. [And the last two Lines, he saies) rise and are more foolish one than the other.] But how! Heaven knows: for he has so hudled together a parcel of stuff, in which contrary to all his former objections, he neither aims at argument nor wit, as [A Conquerour is a brave fellow, and serves his King, and 'tis possible he may be an honest fellow, and his King and him to agree, &c.] which no body denyes: that I cannot tell what he would be at. Then I must answer to what I think he meant▪ and since his business is to make every thing Nonsense, we must suppose that Victory cannot secure Crowns, nor had Muly Hamets Conquests, and Muly Labas his Monarchy and consistence. Muly Hamet is returned from Reducing some revolted places to their obedience from retaking Towns from the Usurper Gayland, and after the vanquishing of the Kings enemies, says Notes, he neither serves his Crown, nor has the establishing of a Kings Right and suppression of usurpation, nor the enlarging his Dominions any consistence
with Monarchy. I am very glad our dear friend has got stage preferment, and that the State has mist him, as for a Play-wright he may pass, but God bless him for a Statesman. My Actions all are on your name enrol'd. [What 'tis t'enroul upon Parchment I know, but not upon names.] The meanest Citizen in Town, and the poorest Servitour in the University would tell him that putting so much upon a mans name, had signified placing so much to his account. With burning ships made Beacons on the Sea. [He fired Beacons after the Victory.] Preethy take the fore-going Line aong with thee. I made their Fleet to Conquest light my way, With burning ships made cacons on the Sea. To light his way to Conquest, is in Notes his Observations to light his way after Conquest. Whose very looks so much your foes surprize, That you like Beauty conquer with your Eyes. [Here he gives Eyes to a Notion, &c.] and so on he runs for half a dozen Lines with [the Eyes of Features, the Eyes of ones Nose, the Eyes of ones Mouth.] But then he checks himself, and says, [no, perhaps he means you like a Beauty conquer, &c. and then 'tis an Heroick Epithite to call a General a Beauty, and tell him he conquerd with his Eyes like a pretty Wench.] How Beauty is a Epithite here, he should have told us. 'Tis his usual way of making a great many Lines to show how such a thing taken in such a sense would be Nonsense. But then he cuts himself off and says the Poet means otherwise; and then 'tis Nonsense this way or that way: If the Poets fault lyes here not there, to what purpose signifies his first accusation? Yes, it signifies much, for he is so kind to his Readers that he will not let e'm have all Elkanabs Nonsense, but some of Mr. Commentatours. But then [to say the General conquerd with his Eyes like a pretty Wench is not He∣roick.] Yes indeed had [pretty Wench] been put in instead of [Beauty] it had not been very Heroick, but as it is, it must pass. No Madam, War has taught my hand to aim, At Glory to deserve a Lovers name. [Here he makes hands to aim, in another place he makes them give a blast.] Blasted with the hand of Heaven. Which a younger Eye-sight would have read page 52. of Morocco. Blasted by the hand of Heaven, which quite alters the sense. Why not aim at Glory with his hand! if he conquers with his hand, why not aim at Glory by it. Perhaps he would have had him aim'd at Glory, Almanzors way which was to look men dead, who knew his strength so great that he could threaten to kill Boabdelins Guards when he was disarm'd. page 67.
" Here take me, bind me, carry me away, " Kill me, I'le kill you if you disobey. But Muly Hamets Glory was a work of a greater labour to him. But Blasted by the hand of Heaven. The common acception of the hand of Heaven so long used for Heavens exercising its power in any manner, Elkanah need not beg his Reader to justify for him. Though Mariamnes Love appeared before The highest happiness Fate had in store, Yet when I view it, as an Offering Made by the hand of an obliging King, It takes new Charms, looks brighter, lends new beat. No Objects are so glorious or so great, But what may still a greater form put on, As Optick Glasses magnifie the Sun. Here Bays makes a long harange, to prove that [Muly Hamet is a jearing Companion and by craft abuses the King and his Sister, calling the King but a pittiful Optick Glass, a thing to see through, and telling Mariamne that her Love seen through that Optick Glass call'd a King, seems to be a greater happiness than indeed it is▪] The Commentatour, it's to be feared, is more crafty than either Muly Hamet or Mr. Settles Audience: For I must suspect, that the jeer Muly Hamet design'd the King and his Sister was never discovered till now, and that seeing the Sun through a Telescope, implies that the King is a pittiful Optick Glass, a thing to see through, I doubt are as little of kin, as Mr. Drydens Notes and Morocco. A great deal of pudder he makes to prove the Authors words affirm that the Sun looks bigger than it is through an Optick Glass, which you'l find made out at the old rate, for he's as constant to his way of Reasoning as he says Mr. Settle is to writing Nonsense. Muly Hamet says, No Objects are so glorious or so great, But what may still a greater form put on. What can that [Form] mean but the visible form of a thing for the word [ob∣jects] proves it meant so, if the Author had said nothing is so glorious, &c. there had been some pretence for an Objection. But an Object is so glorious or so great signifies such a thing appears so glorious or so great, and then where is this won∣drous Nonsense, when he says no Object is so glorious or so great, but may appear a greater Object still, as the Sun appears a greater Object, when seen through an Optick Glass, than it appeared before. Your Subjects wait with eager joys to pay, Their Tribute to your Coronation day. [Tributary Subjects agen. But the King is beg'd, and so they only give him Tribute: I suppose a small Allowance for an acknowledgment, witness these two fol∣lowing Lines.] Whilst they behold Triumphant on one Throne, The Wearer and defender of a Crown.
[It is something unusual for a Subject to sit on a Throne with a King, but it is his Guardian, whose authority sways all, as it appears by the next words.] King: Lead on— Muly Hamet. Lead on, and all that kneel to you, Shall bow to me. This conquest makes it due. [The Kings word of command signifies nothing, he is but a Cypher, and therefore his Protector Muly Hamet gives it.] The Kings Subjects must be Tributary Subjects, because the Poet calls their publick expressing of their joy a Tribute to his Coronation day. A Subject and a King on one Throne is unusual? What does he take a Throne for, a Wooden Horse, or a Ioint Stool? just enough for one mans Breech and no more. I thought that Kings at a publick Solemnity, how high soever their Seats of State were erected, were so good natur'd to let their Brothers and Sisters sit by them, though perhaps there might be some distinction in the very place they sat on. But to sit by a King with Mr. Dryden, is to Rob him of all his authority and sway all, as he tells you it appears in the next words [Lead on.] Muly Hamet [Lead on] The King is a Cypher, his command worth nothing] Now in my simple Judgment had a les man then Muly Hamet took such a mighty word of Command as [Lead on] out of a Kings mouth, though he had been but a Gentleman of his Bed-Chamber, or a less man then that, the Majesty of a King had not at all been impaired, his Power indanger'd, nor he made a Cypher. Surely the Laureat (who I think has little reason for't) has the left and most Comical Notions of Kings that e're I met with. No Musick like that which Loyalty sings, A Consort of hearts at the Crowning of Kings. [Loyalty sings musick, and sings a consort of Hearts, &c.] I thought [A consort of Hearts] had been put by apposition in the same case with [Loyalty] and not followed the Verb, [sings.] There's no such delightful and ravishing Strain, As the Ecchoes and shouts of Long Live and Reign. Here Notes objects [that Ecchoes are made only in Concave places and Woods.] Elkanh then shall grant that Nonsense, for this Solemnity was made in a City, and a City you know has no Concave places in it. No Musick like that which from Loyalty springs. [Like that which from—is a soft Line for a Song.] [And Loyalty was Musick before, and now 'tis Homage, &c.] Before Loyalty sung Musick, therefore saies Notes, it was Musick. Now Homage springs from Loyalty, therefore agen Loyalty is Homage. I may as well tell him that the Notes upon Morocco are Mr. Dryden, and perhaps with better reason, for they are both but a Farce. But then how came [that which from] hiher which he says is a soft Line for a song? Preethy honest Old friend take my advice, and do not betray thy frailty: why shouldst thou let the World know thou want'st Spectacles; preethy read that passage by day∣light, and thout find it no Musick like what from Loyalty springs, or if thou thinkst
that they who read thy Pamphlet, never read the Play, were I as thee, I'd pal some better cheat upon them than such a slight fiction. No raising of Altars, like Long Live and Reign. [This Long Live and Reign, raises Altars: Sure Long Live and Reign built the The∣ban Walls.  Why, Man of large imagination does Long Live and Reign, raise Al∣tars: Take the whole Stanza. No Homage like what from Loyalty springs, Wee'l kneel to our Gods, but wee'l dye for our Kings: Wee'l pay that Devotion our Lives shall maintain, No raising of Altars like Long Live and Reign. Sure the Poets plain meaning is no Devotion to Gods, is like (viz. equal,) to that they pay to Kings. And though [Long Live and Reign,] be but the words they use in their expressing their Devotion to their King, yet I think it a more pardonable ex∣pression then this. Alman. " I will not hear one word but Almahide. If this be not much a bolder Figure, I am infinitely mistaken; For if Almanzor as he says, will hear no word, but Almahide, and means what he says, sure he takes a strange course of hearing the Queens impeachment, if he will have only Alma∣ide, Almahide, Almahide buz'd in his Ears, I much rather suspect he bid her ac∣cusers keep close to their matter, and that he will hear no discourse but of her. Turns Vassal to a smile, a looks disguise. [As if a smiling look mere not a look as well as other sort of looks,] so have all dis∣guises looks too, if the Critick had not been Lazy, he'd have found out that too. For it had been to his purpose as much as the generality of his Arguments. But in a strict sense a mans natural look is, what hi Aspect appears when 'tis not alterd by Passions, but smiling and frowning or the like, being the effect of passions, the look a man then bears may not improperly be call'd the disguises of a look considering how like disguises they are put on or off in a moment, Oh Charming Sex!— How vast a Circle does thy Magick take? The highest Spirits humblest Lovers make. All that Heroick Greatness, which but now Made haughty Foes and stubborn Nations bow, Turns Vassal to a Smile, a Looks disguise, Who conquer Thousands are one Womans Prize. Fate sets Commanding Beauty in their way, Beauty that has more God-like Power than they: Love o're the Hearts of yielding Heroes sports; Who're Conquerours in Camps, are Slaves in Courts, I have put the whole speech down as necessary to tell how fallaciously he imposes
upon his Reader, what is not in Sense nor nature. He picks out these two Lines in the Speech. Fate sets commanding Beauty in their way, Beauty that has more God-like pow'r than they. And says [Fate sets Beauty in their way, that has more power than it, here he puts false Gram∣mar for Rhimes sake; and Fate sets Beauty in their way, which has more power than it self. By consequence it is not of Fates setting, but of its own; for without its own consent Fate could never set it, if it has more power than Fate,] If he had not design'd to have took Pot Nynnyes way of distributing the Copyes of his Pamplet to so many hundred of his particular Friends, who would have cryed up what ever he wrote right or wrong, he could not sure but imagine that if it came to an impartial hand his blind-side would certainly be discover'd. But perhaps he had not so much policy. Any Man sure that could read English would have found in these words [their way,] that there was something pointed at more than Beauty or Fate, which are singulars: but he cunnigly cut of the connexion to coceal all things else that might be understood in this Speech, but ignorantly forgot to change [their way] into [its way] or [the way] which would have contributed to his design. But since he was so overseen, we'l ask him in whose way does Fate set commanding Beauty? in their way, who conquer Thousands, and whose Heroick greatness makes haughty Foes, and stubborn Nations bow, &c. as before. And who then are they who have a less God like Power than Beauty? Conquerours, who though they can do such mighty actions, as to make stubborn Nations bow, &c. are Vassals to a womans smile. For what dispute is here, but between Heroes and Beauty: if it had been only [Beauty comes in their way] and [Fate sets it] had been left out, the sense and meaning of the speech had been still entire. But such is the Reasoning of a man of Seven years standing in Cambridge, and twice as many in Covent-Garden Coffee-House. ACT The Third. 'TIS now our Royal Mothers Breath must bind That sacred tye of Love my King has sign'd, And Providence has seal'd: Make her but kind— [The King has sign'd, and Providence has scal'd it: The deed being sign'd and seal'd, how is the Mother to bind all with Breath. In witness it is sth, is she to bite the wax with her Tooth, or to puff the Parchment into his hands? the Queen has a strong Blast.] what a first class School-boys Questions are here: Why may not the Queen Mothers consent be a further confirmation of their Love, or at lest a satisfaction to the Lovers, Though the Brother had given him his right in her, and Providence had seem'd to conspire, a Mother sure might put in a word or else 'twas hard.
—Has Lust such Charms, Can make her fly to an Adulterers arms. [Can Lust make her a Whore.] If Lust has more Charms then her Honour, or mor Power over her, than the fear of that punishment or shame, that may attend an  Love, perhaps it can. But for a Virtuous Character to wonder at it i a woman of her Quality and reputed Virtue; Elkanah has the confidence to think no Sin. I'le right her wrongs, but I'le conceal her shame. [This Muly Hamet is an impertinent fellow, he will kill a man for lying with the Queen, though for ought he knows it may be her Husband, and lying with her, though with her own consent he calls wronging of her.] How is it likely he should be her Husband, she was very much in hast when her other Husband dyed but two days since; or how is it likely they should Marry and he not know of it? what an obscure person does he take a Queen for. The marriage of a Maid of Honour, would be blown over the Court in a less time: But perhaps they married privately, and so they had need if they were so hasty. But if Muly Hamet had thought so, he had greater reason to call Crimalhaz to account then before, for he that could be a Queens second husband so nimbly, might be very reasonably askt how he got the first removed. Well, but for ought Mr. Commentatour knows, he might be her husband for all this: But then how could he wrong her when she consented to it? Preethy why didst not go on, and to show thy Learning tell us Volenti non fit injuri. But observe what a Virtuous Character in the Play calls a wrong, the debauching of a Queen. Consent makes a thing no wrong, only incases where people have a just and free Liberty to consent. As if a man stand still to have his Pocket pickt, he is not wrong'd because his money is at hs own free disposal. But 'tis very reasonably suspected that a wo∣man ought not to have a free disposal of her Honour, when not only her self but her Family suffers by the loss. [But then he carrying away Crimalhaz's his sword as witness of his Crime, the King meeting him immediatly, (as 'tis the nature of Fools to be inquisitive,) would needs see what Muly Hamet had got, and cryes, Muly Hamet stay, what have you there. Iust] ack Adams like, Cudden! What have you under your Coat Cudden,] but by his favour, as I remember 'twas not under his Coat; but let that pass. The King seeing Muly Hamet with a drawn Sword in his hand at his Mothers Bed-chamber door, and asking him what have you there, is a Iack Adams: Had he not askt him, I will agree with him he had been so. Well there is but a right and a wrong, and if he be a Fool one way 'tis no matter which, with good natured Mr. Commentatour. But she's my Mother, and I dare not guess— Yet she's a Woman, and I can no less Than start at horrours which my honour stain. [The Women are much beholding to the Poet, for the good Character he gives 'em. His King can no less than guess his own Mother to be a Whore, because she's a Woman.] He's in his old rod of reasoning without circumstances, yet she's a Woman, and I can no less than start at deeds of horrour, as a Queens entertaining of a Man privately in a Seraglio, to  'tis death to enter without the Kings Signet, which had been said fix Lines before; prithee Old acquaintance read History, and understand a little better the Mahometans severe rules of honour on their Womens score, nay go no farther
than Spain, and thou'lt find how jealous they are of their Womens honour there: And how Capital a Crime 'tis for a Woman to keep company in private with any Man but her Husband. But the Men and Women both are much beholding to Poet Dryden, who has such honourable thoughts of them, and such good opinion of Mankind though Turk or Spanard. I'le make him infamous, low and contemn'd. [He will disgrace Crimalhaz for lying with his Mother, he will tell all the world and make him ashamed of it.] I'me much mistaken if the immediate Lines do not convince him that the King will be guiltless of any such tales. Disrobed of all his Titles he shall bleed, Like a Crown'd Victim to an Altar led. Whose Wreath and Garlands to the Fire are cast And then the naked Sacrifice falls last. That sinking Statesman undergoes the worst Of deaths, whose honours and whose power dye first. Is not the loss of his honour, interest, and power, enough to make him infamous, low, and contemned without the divulging his Crime? Besides if before he wrote his bundle of Errata's he had but read, he might have found that the way of the Ar∣bitrary Mahumetan Kings had not been to bring great Men to tryal and publish their Crimes, but to send their Mutes, to save the trouble of a Process; and to take 'em off, without giving them satisfaction of knowing their offence before their death. In∣deed I confess Mr. Drydens Mahometan King is something singular, and takes a more publick way of process on such an account as this: which for your diversion I'le en∣tertain you with. Boabdelin startled at Lyndaraxa, Zulima and Hamets impeaching his Queen of un∣chastity, of being Whored by Abdelmedeck, like a Cunning Polititian to find out his horns takes this way of tryal: he immediately commands the Vivarambla, viz. the Market place to be cleared, that is, the Shambles and Stalls to be pull'd down, and a Stage or Scaffold to be built upon the place. Which done, the Adulterer and the Queen are led bound by the hands of his Common-Guards to the Stage. Her Majesty thus Usher'd, and thus Seated, and her Gallant by her; all the Windows round the place, like, Cheapside at a Lord Majors Show, being pull'd down, and the Area crowded with such company as you may imagine so publick a place afforded, her tryal is as follows. The two Accusers challenge two of her friends, of which Almanzor is one and Ozmyn the other, who appearing on the Stage and stripping themselves to their Shirts much after the manner of our Beargarden Duullers, the Trumpets sound. Then the Town Cryer, or some Officer much like, having aloud askt the Accusers their names and their business gives them their Oath, who downright swear the Queen is an Adulteress, and that they saw Rem in Re, then the other Party, having given the Accusers the lye in the face of the aforesaid Spectatours, justifie the Queens Innocence, and swear by the Alcoran too, that their cause is right. Which by the way is a pretty way of swearing to what they neither of them knew. For they neither of them saw what past between the Queen and Abdelmedeck. She might be a Whore for ought they knew. Oh but they had a mental reservation, She was no Whore to their best judgment. Besides os∣min was her Brother and Almanzor her Lover, and though in the Scene before he had said [he knew her false.]
" She was as faithless as her sex could be, &c. " Could she holily my flames remove, " And fall that hour to Abdelmelcks Love, &c. Yet he is a Man of Honor, and to swear and lye for the Honor of his Mistriss, I have heard has been pardonable in a Comedy. The Combatants then advance and fight, and judgment is askt of every thrust they make, which ended the surviving party or parties of one side carry the Cause, if Almanzor and Ozmin had fain, the Spectators had had the Liberty of crying a Whore, a Whore, a Whore, but they surviving, the Queen is as Innocent as Child in Womb, all is well and the con∣tended man has his goods again. If this be not an excellent decision of a Mahu∣metan peice of Iustice, who have the fame above Christians in that Virtue, I leave the World to Judge. But the Chance of a duel is enough to satisfie so soft a pate as Boabdelins in the dispute of his Wives Chastiy. This is as Comical a proof of a Womans Virtue as the Madd Lovers Lyon was of a Princess. This is the Great and onely Turne of ten Acts of a Play. Prethee dear heart set up for Operas such Knight Errantry and Romantick Turnes may pass there, but Faith thy Ta∣lent of late years does not lye in Heroicks. But perhaps hee'l Swear us down that at Granada this Ceremony was in fashion, which by his favour, hee'l hardly perswade any man of reason: but if it were their custom, the Author was infinitely mistaken in his Subject to Write a Tragedy of what was a Story fit onely for a Farce. Yet nothing is so bright but has some Scars, Men can through Glasses find out spo in Stars. Yet nothing, &c— [He opposes Scars to brightness,] but how, he has not told us, [and makes his Heroc a ridiculous Coxcomb, that is vext he is not faultless and immaculate.] In the fore∣going Lines he says, Oh weak foundations of a glorious name! I from the Fild do a Crown'd Conqu'rour come, To turn a base Informer here at home. Here I must confess he is vext at a fault, and indeed that is a sin against the principles of Mr. Drydens Heroos. His commit greater crimes unconcern'd. His Philocles takes his Queen Prisoner, and his Porphyrius comes in the disguise of a Moor to kill his King treacherously▪ an excellent piece of Roman Glory. Love acts the part of Tributary Kings: As they pay homage to their Conquerour; Our kind Embraces  but Offerings Of Tribute to triumphant Beauty's Pow'r. [Why does not Love as well act the part of Undersheriff or Bumbayliffs as they pay Fes to the high Sherif.] Truly had it lain in our Commentatours way, he would have made this choice before the other. For I observe he has a very great humility in Similes. " He Like a Subtle Maggot eats his way, &c. In Granada page 63. " As flyes in Winter, when they miss the Sun.
Infects and Reptiles are Comparisons for his Heroes▪ But now [for the boldest piece of settlian Nonsense.] 'Tis Blasphemy to name, nay understand What Prince act— [If their actions be good, to name 'em is to speak well of Princes, yet with him 'tis Blasphemy; that is, it is speaking ill of 'em, to speak well of them.] Who says this? the Queen Mother, surpriz'd in the arms of Crimalhaz, who being told of the danger of a discovery, says, Who 'ere has seen us knows I am a Queen. That powerful word his silence does demand: 'Tis Blasphemy to name, nay under∣stand what Princes act. What actions? ad of what Princes is it Blasphemy to name, but of such as her self, and what she had commited? what has she to do in this ex∣igence to reflcton the good deeds of Princes? or why must [what Princes act] be all that Princes act good or bad. But how is it Blasphemy to understand a thing? If to understand a thing, be to have a true and perfect Idea of a thing in ones thoughts. I'le ask him why may not thoughts be guilty of Blasphemy as well as thoughts commit Adultery. And so if to name the ill actions of Princes be a sin, why not the thinking of them. Know, Traytor, I am Mother to a King: His Pow'r subordinate from me does spring. My Orders therefore should unquestion'd stand, Who gave him Breath, by which he does Command. [How is the Kings Pow'r subordinate to her because shes his Mother] I do not be∣lieve the Poet could think a Kings Pow'r sprung from his Mother, nor could he suppose Laula thought so when she said so. No more then his Benzaida, (when she said to the two Servants of her Father that were entrusted to see Osmin dspatchd. " Say that to kill the guiltless, you were loath, " Or if you did, say I would kill you both.) Could think her Father would believe, if that had been their excuse, that two men could be frighted out of obedience, by one poor harmless Womans Threat∣ning both their Deaths. And yet her saying so was not improper. If people in an ex∣igence especially such whose guilt has left 'em no just argument for their desence, should be silent, or say nothing but truth in their own behalf, all ill Characters would be suspected to have a tangue of Fool as well as Knave. Is it not pitty now— That grave Religion and dull sber Law, Should the high flights of Sportive Lovers aw. [A very Heroick expression! Is it not pitty now, that there's a Law against Wench∣ing the recreation is so sportive.] Yes indeed I am of thy mind 'tis pity [the sporting couple tost and flung extremely if they had such high flights.] viz tossing and ging are flights. The recreation indeed may be sportive, but some calamities that may attend such kind of flinging and tossing may lessen the pleasure: as Breaking shins in Coaches
to get Maiden-heads, especially if the Shins were crazed before: and twenty other worse misfortunes. No, though I loose that head which I before Design'd, should the Morocco-Crown have wore. [Wore for worn.] Amongst his false Grammars as he calls them, he has observed through the Play; that the Author uses [wore] [bore] [besel] [shook] [took] [mistook] and [so sook] in the Preterperfect tense, and that they should be [worn] [born] [taken] [shaken] [mistaken] [forsaken] and [befaln,] so that [I have mistook] or [I have forsook] is Nonsense. For he says they are only used in the Aorist: For this I only appeal to the customary reception of the words, and though [worn] [born] [shaken, &c.] Be only Preterperfects, yet [wore] [bore] [shook] &c. are used both in the Aorist and Preterperfect tense, and several other words, [I have eat] or [I have eaten] or [I have beat] or [beaten.]. Yet what's the fear of Tortures, Death, Hell? Death, Like a faint Lust, can only stop the Breath. Tortures weak Engines that can run us down, Or skrew us up till we are out, of tune. [Down and Tune are excellent Rhime:] And are like to be so. And Hell, a feeble, puny cramp of Souls: Such infant pains may serve to frighten Fools. [A mess of absurd stuff.] [To stop the Breath properly implyes a Death by smothering, choaking or strangling, so that he's for hanging Crimalhaz with a Hatchet.] Is he so? No Faith, I'de have him behead him with a Hatchet; and if it be so, that beheading will not stop his Breath, let him Breath on a Gods name. [And why a faint Lust? it is a strong Lust that stops the Breath.] Preethy old Soul∣dier recollect thy self, the strength of it is past when the Breath is stopt. [Tortures can run us down, or skrew us up, that is, Break all our Nerves and Ar∣teries, Sinews and Bones in short, they can only Torture us.] I know it good Sir. But when Crimalhaz says they can only skrew us up or run us down, his business is not to tell you the manner of torturing, but his sense of the pain of it. [Then what is Hell, a feeble puny cramp, an infant pain, he allows a Hell, and yet he says it is no Hell, 'tis but a cramp: he calls a place a Disease.] How, does he say 'tis no Hell? I thought in describing what Hell had been according to his sense of it, in saying 'twas a feeble puny cramp of Souls, He had implyed that such a thing was. Ah! but a place cannot be a Disease. I thought Hell had signified the Torments of Hell, oftner then 'tis used for the place of torments. [To write the Nonsense he stuffs in every Line would put the cramp in my fingers.] Well said Tom Thimble, Snip, Snap, Repartee. I hope the Nonsense thou hast written came from thee with less pain, or thou wouldst never had the Courage to have wrote so much on't. Since you have sullied thus our Royal Blood, The Grounds and Rise of this past Crime relate. That having your Offences understood, We, what we can't recal, may expiate.
[That is, come since you have lain with my Mother, tell the Truth how it was,] to give the reason why he lay with her, is not the description of the Circumstances how he lay with her; to have described those indeed had been perfect Drydenism. A Womans frailty from a Womans Tongue [As if it was a frailty to be Ravisht: She like the young Queen confesses her self a Conspiratour in her own Rape,&c.] Read but the immediate Lines. Whilst pensively I in my Closet sate. My Eyes paid Tribute to my Husbands Fate, And whilst those thoughts my sinking Spirits scis'd His Entrance my dejected Courage rais'd The sudden Object did new thoughts produce, My Griefs suspended, lent my Tears a truce. For then I otherwise employ'd my Eyes, Whilst in his Aspect I read Victories— And afterwards, Having a while upon each other gaz'd, He at my silence, I his Eyes amaz'd— Now let me ask him why such a Woman as she that desired to appear a Saint, may not call it a Frailty to desist from her Tears, and be diverted from her sorrows for her husband that dyed but Yesterday, by her sudden admiration of any object whatever. But, Muly Hamet then your cruel Breast— [He ravisht her with his Breast, having a white Skin, &c.] Muly Hamet was so unkind to cut off the Queen Mothers Speech in the middle, and this kind Botcher is pleased to piece it out. But why [Ravisht] Sir Pol, could no other Verb have followed [Breast.] The Queen does not talk of Ravishing 'till twelve Lines after this; and sure Muly Hamet was not so hot, but he might stay a thinking while before the Sport began, and so Muly Hamets Cruel Breast might be first supposed to have harboured some thoughts to her dishonour, and some desires to be doing, before he fell to it. —His alter'd Brow Wore such fierce looks, as had more proper been To lead an Army with, than Court a Queen. [He places a mans looks on his Brow, and says, his Brow wore looks, &c.] In the last act the Queen says, I should meet Death with Smiles upon my Brow. This is so notorious an Errour, that 'tis not a sufferer in the common Crowd, but is Arraigned amongst the Capital sins of the Epistle. This Common Barrater in Poetry is resolved to jar and quarrel with every thing: Surely he has lived long enough to understand better, (one would think) Has not he heard [Brow] used for the whole Face or Aspect of a man oftner than in a stricter sense? Nay, has he not in Granada said " I cannot clear my mind, but must my Brow, If [the Brow] be taken strictly,
then Boabdelin has liberty to make mouths at Almanzor, provided his Brow be clear still. I wonder how fronti nulla fides would scape with him, if the Latine Authour had the honour to be examined by him. But for Mr. Drydens sake, for once I'le alter these two Lines, and express their design'd sense in words at large, and no Synecdoche. 1. His alter'd Countenance wore such fierce looks, &c. 2. I should meet Death with Dimples in my Chek, or with wrinckles in my Chin; for that is smiling: This would be almost as good as the incomparable Line of Almerias. " Kil'd in my Limbs, reviving in my mind. And as a Ravisher, I abhorr'd him more In that black form, than I admir'd before. [She abhorrd him as a Ravisher in a black form, &c. this no body can make any thing of.] Let it be in [that black form still,] and any body will tell you what to make of it by what the word [that] points to. Our oly Prophet dares not see him fall, I'm sure, had he my Eyes— [As if changing of Eys would alter ones mind.] What says thy Lyndaraxa to this. Page 93. " Fortune at last has chosen with my Eyes, " And where I would have given it placed the Prize. How often do expressions of this kind signify Eyes and inclination too? Sure this Coffee-House Oracle, thinks all Mankind his Cullies, If he expects to be cry'd up for such stuff as this. The Powers above would shrink at what he felt. [He has felt nothing yet as I know, but her, &c.] Sure the King had told him; that for his offence the Law required his death, and what means the Queen Mothers pleading for him, but that, supposing that Law were executed on him, the powers above would shrink at what he felt. Here bind the Traytour, and convey him strait To Prison, there to linger out his Fate: Till his hard Lodging and his slender Food Allay the Fury of his Lustful Blood. [That is, here take this Letcherous fellow away, carry him to Prison, mortifie him, and take down his Mettle, that my Mother and my Women may live in quiet for him.] Since he' so good at Burlesquing; I may as properly apply it to Mr. Commentatour. Hee take this wretched Scribler away, carry him to School agen, lash him, and mor∣tisy his Letchery of writing Nonsense, that the Town and the Press may be at quiet for him. My Soul! Dull Man, what has my Soul to do In such mean Acts as my betraying you?
Murder and Teason— Without the help of Souls, (when I think good,) Such Toys I act, as I'm but flesh and blood. [This is written like one that thinks without a Soul as his Queen Mother does. Such Villanies I act and think, as I'm but flesh and blood, &c.] She says indeed she will act Villanies without the help of her Soul, as she is but flesh and blood, but for think∣ing without her Soul I cannot find any thing like it. For [when I think good] which indeed, is no more than (when I please,) reflects not at all, upon the designing or managing of her Treasons, or the acting of her Villanies, but only upon the time when she resolves to be Vilanous. As if she had said, let me but once resolve to be Treache∣rous, and the acting of Treason is so customary to me, that it comes easie and un∣studied. Hell! No, of that I scorn to be afraid. Betray, and kill, and damn to that degree, I'le crowd up Hell, till there's no Room for me. [This is the principal huff of the Play, and by consequence thickest of Nonsense, &c.] But you shall see how he proves it. [The Queen Mother says she scorns to be afraid of Hell, yet she plainly confesses she is afraid of it, for she will kill and damn to a horrible degree to avoid it.] At this rate every man that draws his Sword to defend himself, and offend his enemy, must be afraid of him. For her killing and damning to fill Hell till there's no room for her, is her Guard against the Power of Hell, as a mans sword is his against an enemy. And so why the is not afraid of Hell, she proves in the following Lines, for she shews that she need not fear it; but then this mighty man of morals disputes the dimensions of Hell, and the cause of damnation, and says [she is the liker to come to Hell her self, than send others thither.] Oh! then the Queen Mother tells a lye, and threatens to do what she cannot do; and therefore the Poet writes Nonsense. O thou Great Master of little wit, if all were Nonsense that persons in plays say more than they can do, I am afraid thy Granada must suffer a great Lop to be squared into sense. Thy beloved Almanzors rants would dwindle much to come within the compass of possibility; nay his large actions too, which the Poet will force the audience to beieve performed, would suffer much correction, to be brought to standard measure. And so his Picture of Achilles, would be much defaced by it. But 'twere no great matter, Achilles would be but a little sufferer for the execution that was done him in effigie: for like the piece of painting with the superscription of this is the Dog, and this is the Hare, had he not told us he meant Achilles, the features and lineaments he has made of him, like Hugh Clod pates representing the King, would never have discovered the original without a marginal note. As I take it, I have heard that Tamberlane and Bajazet at the Red Bull, the four London Prentices, and the seven Champions of England Club'd their Talents to make up an Almanzor. But I rather think he had a more modern Original, and that Sir Arthur Addles Masty Dog was his sire, for hee's very like him, when hee's let loose, he flies upon all persons without distinction and where he lays hold he worries. But this is hi lest fault in pretending Achilles was his Almanzors pattern, for he might read in Iuve∣nals first Satyr—Nulli gravis est percussus Achilles. But his impudent profanation in his Epistle to that play, has arrogated a greater Divinity for the production of so unshap'd a Monster.
Next he says. Betray and kill and damn to that degree. [There he puts degree for number, and for Rhime sake makes it palpable nonsence; For whatever there is in betraying and damning, in killing there is no degree, no man can be more or less kill'd. In betraying and damning there may be degrees, but then it rlats not to the number of the damned, but to the excess of their punish∣ment.] Observe what artiice he has used to cheat you with an argument: he leaves out the line that follows. Hell! No of that I scorn to be afraid, I'le send such throngs to the infernal shade, viz. For that ruin'd his objection. I'le send such throngs, (which was as good as numbers in any Poetical Dictionary) would have spoil'd all, for then [to that de∣gree] would have related to the excess of the aforesaid throngs, and not to the excess of Punishment [But then why must all she kills be damned, &c. Poor innocent People would be hardly dealt with, to be kill'd and damn'd too, &c.] suppose here agen, the says more than she can do: So did Catiline. I'le Plough the Alps to dust, and lave the Tyrrhene Ocean into Clouds, &c. And yet Ben did not write non∣sence in this expression. But 'tis possible that his Empress might murder and damn too; but not innocent people, as commentator thrusts in to help on with the Impossibility. How often the great Designers of Treason, have seduced other inferiour Ministers to their assistance, and when their ends have been accomplisht, have for their own defence betray'd and cut off the instruments of their design, he need not fly far to History to defend him: and if the making People Traytors, and cutting them off in the height of their Treason, do not give a great stroak towards their dam∣nation too, I am much out. Monarchs do nothing ill, unless when they By their own Acts of Grace their Lives betray. When favours they too genrously afford, And in a Treacherous Hand misplace their Sword, Their Bounties in their Ruine are employ'd: Kings only by their Vertues are destroy'd. [They do not ill then it seems, to betray their Lives, provided they do not do it by Acts of Grace. Ingeniously infer'd.] Prethee Mr. Dryden, why wouldst thou have Alkanahs Heroe tell his King to his face, that a King may be a Knave, and can do ill things. Pray how un∣gentleman like is it in thy sense of honour for a perfect Character to say to his Prince, Kings can commit no faults but where their excess of Virtue is their crime. In the last Act, our good Friends is angry at Kings are Immortal, and from Life remove, From their lower Thrones to wear new Crowns above. And says, [that Abdelcador, (who says this to Muly Hamet his King and Friend) in saying that all Kings go to Heaven speaks ill Divinity. Then to have spoken better Divinity, he should have told his King, that a King might be damn'd. In∣deed
I confess Mr. Settle might have made his Heroes tell their Kings to their Faces, that a King might be a Knave, or damn'd, or the like; but then he must have intrencht upon Granada, and have made all his Heroes Almanzors, and his Kings Boabdelins. 'Twill seem Ridiculous to give you an instance out of his Granada, because we all know 'tis the foundation of his Play, to have his King call'd fool, sot, and Puppy, or what is as bad, by his sawcy and masterly Companion Alman∣zor. Yet for once I'le venture. In Granada Page 146. Boabd. " How chang'd, and what a Monster am I male, " My Love and Honour ruin'd and betray'd! Alman. " Your Love and Honour? Mine are ruin'd worse. " Furies and Hell, what right have you to crse! " Dull Husband as you are— " What can your Love, or what your Honour be? " I am her Lover, and shee's false to me. The King is aflicted for hearing his beloved Queen is strumpeted, for which Al∣manzor calls him dull Husband, what right have you to curse, what Love or Honour have you! No, that only is my right, I am her Humble Servant, and shee's false to Me. Mr. Dryden, 'tis true, has told us in Print that his Almahide is a perfect Character, and consequently no strumpet, and the Audience had heard Almahide through the Play say She would be honest. And of any downright debauchery I acknowledge she is Innocent; making Love at first sight to Almanzor, and Baudy Songs to entertain the King and Court, being but a little harmless Gal∣lantry, and no hindrance to the perfection of her Character, as you have been told before. But then how much more guilty is Almanzor to abuse an Innocent Ladies Honour. Had he enjoy'd her, and boasted of her favours, it had been a little more pardonable; yet not according to the rules of Honor, it being something Drydenish, Illnatured and unjauntee I should have said, to fair well, and cy Roastmeat, especially to a Husbands face. But as 'tis, 'tis unsufferable. To tell the King his wife was false to Almanzor, cannot but imply that she had pro∣mis'd him to be constant to her Intrigue, and by consequence lye with none but Almanzor, or else how is she false to him? But Cuckold which may be an hon∣est mans case is the lest aspersion Almanzor gives him, for in calling him dull Husband, what can your Love and what your Honor be, he does as good as call him Eunuch, and sot, and Cully, for if his wives debauching be no loss of his Honor, he is no better then the keeper of her small wares, and a Rascally Wittall. But after all this the King takes no notice, not so much as to make a repartee, nor has the Galless animal so much Courage as Poet Ninny to cry, you are a Son of a Whore as well as my self. But there is good reason for it. The Author no doubt made him a Pattern of Virtue, and perhaps a piece of a Scho∣lar too, that had read Fortitudo consistit ferendo magis quam feriendo. Your Counsels weakly do my Ears attract. [What is it to attract ones Ears; shall Counsels lug him by the Ears.] It must be this or Nonsense,] His Dilemmas are like the rest of his Logick. Live then, till time this sense of Horrour brings, What 'tis to ravish Queens, and injure Kings.
[What sense? for no body can tell] 'tis a sign he keeps up his old good opinion of himself, that he's the Wisest of mankind, and if he cannot tell the sense of a thing no body else can. You see the Fates do their Allegiance know, [As if she was Queen of Fates. Rather by her Character she is Queen of sluts,] Queen of Fairies, and Queen of Gypsies, all's one. But [Sluts] came first and 'tis Authentick but now for one of his Queens in Granada. Benzaida. " Blind Queen of Chance, to Lovers too severe, " Thou rul'st mankind, but art a Tyrant here. I thought that Lovers had been part of mankind. Does he make Demi-Gods or Monsters of them, that they come not in the list with mankind. But then in the second line, Thou rul'st mankind, But—he implies some great distin∣ction between ruling mankind, and being a Tyrant; but I vow to God I cannot find it out; for the Devl's in't if I do not think that Tyrants rule, and rule mankind too, though perhaps not so mildly as other Kings; I must confess if his verse could have held it, thou rulest the rest of mankind mildly but art, &c. there had been some appearance of sense; but no matter, 'tis wrapt up in Rhim, and I doubt not but Mr. Dryden has met with a Swallowing Audience as well as Mr. Settle. Blind King of Poets, thou art too severe, A Wit with all men, but a block-head here. Our guilded Treason thus like Coral seems; Which appears Black within it's native Streams: But when Disclos'd, it sees the open Air; It changes Colour, and looks Fresh and Fair. [He makes a guilded thig look like Coral and like a thing which first looks Black, and then looks faire.] What wonderful Similes the Author makes. But our Commentator out-throws him a Bars legth. Alman. pag. 22. " Whom pomp and greatness sit so close about, " That he wants Majesty to fill 'em out. As I take't, if his pomp and greatness sat close about him, they were fil'd out to his hand, without giving Majesty that trouble. Disrob'd of all at once! what turns more strange Can Ages, if an hour can make such Change? [Why what can Ages do more than rob one of all, &c.] Yes ages can rob two or three of all. And if an hour could destroy the second man in a Kingdom, Ages might destroy whole Kingdoms. The Daughters easie Breast would ill confer A kindness on her Mothers Ravisher.
[What do you think I would be kind to a man that is kind to my Mother] Honest Poetaster let it be [unkind to my Mother.] Unless Ravishing be a kind∣ness in thy Morals. —Cruel Princess to whom Heav'n Has all its Titles but its knowledge given. [Here he makes knowledge a title] Yes of Heav'n dear heart, Where I that Savage Ravisher I seem, I still might Father this imputed Crime: [The sense is, were I that real ravisher I seem, then I might seem the real ravisher I was] Were I a ravisher before I might be one now, might have past as well. But Mr. Notes has an excellent knack at illustrations, and 'twere pitty he should be contradicted. This Prison, and our private Interview, Giving me pow'r t'Attempt that force on you. [Mariamne hearing him talk of attempting her is much pleased with him, and thinks him a Virtuous man presently] Virtue ne're dies, where so much Love does live. [Nay and will huff the Gods in his behalf, what will she not do for a man so lusty.] —I'le correct the Stars, &c. I see our kind Friend improves. Before he ventured at discarding one line in a Speech, but here he has modestly snipt off eighteen. Sure Mariamnes kind an∣swer came not so hasty. As I take it, she listen'd a little longer to some other discourse before she past him the Compliment of Virtuous. Fly these infected Walls, this barb'rous Town. [The walls are infected with Barbarity. Then supposing they were cured they would be civil well bred walls] I'me sure thou art infected with Malice: But so past all cure, that I cannot suppose so great a Miracle as thy Recovery. Yes, in my Memory. Absent you shall in my Remembrance Reign, [He shall not only reign in her Memory, but in her Remembrance] He's a happy man then, and no doubt as he has her Kernel now, shl have her husk to when they meet agen. To make you share those Frowns which threatned Me. [What knack have they in Morocco of ickling of Frowns, did these Lovers divide a Barrel of pickled Frowns] Before he was for making the Emperors veies hold a Paleful, and now hee's for a Barrel of Frowns: a man that had been bred a Clark, and served seven years to an Exciseman, could not have had so Mathe∣matical a head-piece [as his Poscript says of Poets] at gaging of measures▪
If his rash passions natures bonds should quit, And make him both my Sex, and Birth forget; Remember that you wear a Sword, and you As you're my Servant, be my Champion too. [This Poet shews an excellent judgment in his choice of Characters.] And why, be∣cause Mariamne desires her Lover, if her Brother should be as unjustly cruel to her as he was to him, to rescue her from his cruelty. I scarce believe the best and most Virtuous of her Sex, would think the Laws of honour so strict, to tye her to a Prison in compliment to a Tyrannick Brothers Humour. Such an obedience to a Father perhaps the Laws of Heroicks might exact. How dare you, Rebel, with things sacred sport: Ravish the Mother, and the Daughter Court? [Iust as Citizens carry their Wives to see Madfolks in Bedlam, the King brings his Wife, his Mother and his whole Family to see Muly Hamet in Prison, and as it happen'd catcht him Courting his Sister, and very like himself falls a railing, and asks him how he dare sport with sacred things, Ravishing and Courting are the same things with him, both but sporting.] To see Madfolks in Bedlam— the Lyons in the Tower, or the Tombs at Westminster, it had been as much to the purpose, he's no unimitable man at Similes. then his whole Family. Sure the Bing of Morocco kept a very thin Court, if he had but Six in Fa∣mily, for there abouts was the number of Muly Hamets visitants: But if he means his whole Royal Family, then he must have included his Sister who came not with him, and Muly Hamet would have put in for a Cousin too: Therefore he could not mean the whole Royal Family. Mr. Commentatour then is not so expert in counting, as he was at measuring. But let that pass: Meaning he has if I were so learned a Clerk as to find it out; but since I cannot, I'le leave the Notes and examine the Scene in the Play. For I guess he would say for a King and Queen to visit a Prisoner is absurd. Truly I think Muly Hamets eminent services to his King and Country, and his near alliance to his King, might have extorted such a private visit without the violation of Majesty; But then Ravishing and Courting are both but sporting. [How dare you with things sacred sport] does not refer immediately to the Ravishing the Mother and Courting the Daughter but to the affront done to their greatness in the attempts. How often Ludere sacris has signified profaning things Divine, I need not beg my Readers for my advocates. Since Prisons no restraint o're Lust can have, Why did I not confine him to a grave? [Since nothing can rule this Town-bull, I will have his Brains knockt out: This Discourse must needs move pitty.] I'm sorry then Elkanah had the hint no sooner, but put in these two foolish Lines, when so moving a thought might have been had for asking. Not circled in a Chain, but in a Crown. [To be circled in a Crown as men are in Chains, is to wear a Crown about his middle, or upon his Legs.] Faith Mr. Bays is i'th right. He hits the Nail but seldom, but when he does, you'd swear he's an excellent Marksman.
Sir, You mistake a Dungeon for a Throne. [A very foolish mistake, as if one should mistake a Room for a Ioynt-stool.] a very foolish one indeed, but such a one as is nothing to hundreds in Bays his ▪ But take the foregoing Line with thee, —I design'd she shou'd Be in a Palace, not a Prison, woo'd: Nor circled in a Chain but in a Crown. Sir, You mistake a Dungeon for a Throne. Sure the mistake lyes in his taking a Dungeon for the place to Court his Sister in, not in taking a Room for a Joynt-stool. These Prison-walls have Eccho'd to your Sighs, [That Prison was built in imitation sure of the whispering place in Glocester, else it could never Eccho to a sigh.] Observe his Hyperboles, as his Almanz. " And then I'le Thunder in your Ears—you shall— And his Duke of Arcos p. 151. " He lifted up his Thundering arm agen. And then judge whether the saying Muly Labs his Sighs were so loud that they made an Eccho, or Almanzors voice and his arm could rant, and strike so loud as Thunder, be the more strain'd Hyperbole. Tortures nor Chains, shall not my Love rebate. [As if it were a worse thing to be Chain'd than tortur'd.] Why must Chains be worse than tortures? Yes, he's for Climaxes, and (ever since his " My Heart's not made of Marble nor of Brass) 'Tis hard to please him. These Traytors walk, like Mad-men, in a Trance, Seem not to understand the Crimes they Act. [Mad men in trances are most still, and do let harm.] Put the Comma after Mad-men, which was overseen in the Press, and then where's the fault to say, these Traitors walk in a trance like Mad-men; and if there be any fault 'tis comparing madness to a trance. From Springs so deep shall sink thee down to Hell. [I have heard of sinking of a Well, but never of sinking people with springs before.] I thought our wise Coffee-drinker had heard of every thing. I shed my Tears as Rain in Egypt falls, Sent for no common cause, but to foretel
Destructions, Ruins, Plagues, and Funeral. I ne're draw Tears, but when those Tears draw Blood. [Then they are not sent like Rain in Egypt to foretel: Omens do not use to accom∣pany or cause mischiefs, but threaten them: Our Poets Omens foretel things after they are come to pass.] Did ever any man of common sense crowd so much nonsense in so few words. He finds fault here that the Poets Omens do not do as Omens use to do▪ Omens use to threaten, not to accompany or cause mischiefs, viz▪ as the Poets Omens, he in∣fers, do; which he afterwards proves thus. For the Poets Omens foretel things after they are come to pass; which, between these three terms [accompany] [cause] and [foretel after things are come to pass] is; the Poets Omens come with things, or before things, for they come after things. —View that Brw, that Charming Eye: See there the Grace and Meen of Majesty. Can you to Exile then that Man enjoyn, Whose Soul must, like his Aspect, be Divine? [She accuses him of Ravishing her, and yet pleads for his pardon, and says he has a Divine Soul, a charming Countenance, delicate Eye-brows, fine rowling Eye, and has a lovely Meen, is an excellent Dancer. Words that before any one but such a Fool as Muly Labas would clear him.] Which Muly Labas, does he mean, Muly Labas in the Play, or Muly Labas in the Notes; he of the Poets making, or the Commentatours? [Charming Countenance, delicate Eye-brows, rowling Eyes, lovely Meen, and ex∣cellent dancer] I confess have had so much favour with Bays, as to appear and plead for Muly Hamets restoration. But the Author of the Play was more unkind to his Heroe, to deny e'm appearance: But how does she accuse him of Ravishing her? As I take it, that accusation had been over two hundred Lines before▪ Oh! but she once did, and therefore she does now. Be gone, and fly to some infected Air, Where Poysons brood, where men derive their Crimes, Their Lusts, their Rapes, and Murters, from their Climes: And all that Venome which their Soils do want, May the Contagion of your Presence grant. [Hee's for infecting the Air with poyson,] Air dear heart in a civil way. [and de∣riving Crimes from Climes.] Yes, Child of grace do thee a kindness: Hast not thou head of national inclinations, of such people naturally jealous, and such proud and the like. [Their ? The soyles of the infected Air, or the soyls of the Climes.] neither, old Boy, neither. Men derive their Crimes from their Climes; [their] in this Line refers to [Men] and why may not [their] in the next have the same priviledge. [The whole is thus: Go to infected Air, and there piss venome like a Toad, till the contagion fills the soyls of their Climes with Venome, and for the Letchery thou hast shewn, maist thou infect infected Places with all the Rapes and Murthers they want. a most wise dom] Yes▪ as Commentatour has worded it. Since in your Kindoms limits I'm deny'd A seat, may your great Empire spread so wide,
Till its vast largness does reverse my doom; And for my Banishment the World wants room. [These are the only Lines in the Play, that have any tolerable fancy, but like a Suit sent to a Botcher to finish; see how they are bungled together.] [Since I am banisht your Kingdoms, Heaven's blessing on your Empire.] What he drives at here I cannot tell, unless he will not alow that Kingdoms may make an Empire, for I may well guess he has the same understanding of Empires as he had before of Kings. May your great Empire spread so wide, till its vast largness. [Bom∣bazeen in abundance—May your great Empire grow so great, till its great greatness, or till its vast vastness, or large largeness.] This indeed is Bombazeen in abundance; thanks to the Courteous Laureat for his obliging kindness in helping us to it: which in a Marginal Note is, thanks to the Courteous Laureat for his courteous courtesie, or kind Kindness, or obliging obligation; Bombazeen in abundance too. How harmlesly does this Cynick bite. He Lives, though he be banisht; and the Great Are never fully darkned, till they Set. [That is, great Links are never dark till they are out, as if little Links were out, before they were out.] Why must [the great,] be meant great Links? Why not a Christmas Candle, Will in a Wisp, Iack in a Lanthorn, any thing, 'tis all alike to thee: Did ever any man of parts Scrible at this rate. Well, he has been a Wit in his Time, and so forth, but see what Age can do; 'tis pitty his Mercury should be evaporated, 'tis huge pitty, but Age Age as I told you before. This work, which we so roughly do begin Zeal and Religion may perhaps call Sin. No; the more Barb'rous garb our Deeds assume, We nearer to our first perfection come. Since Nature first made Man wild, savage, strong, And his Blood hot; then when the world was Young: If Infant-times such Rising valours bore, Why should not Riper Ages now do more? But whilst our Souls wax Tame, and Spirits Cold, We only shew th'unactive World grows old. [Now if inant times had such perfection, why should not riper ages go beyond per∣fection, that is, if the World was so old, and perfect whilst it was youngr why should it not grow younger and more perfect now it is old! an ingenious inference.] If infant times had a great perfection, why may not riper Ages have a greater? he has never heard of greater or less perfection. But marke his last observation. [If the World was so old and perfect when 'twas young▪] The Poet had told you, in the Infancy of times men were Savage, strong, hot blooded, &c. that is, as Bays has it, were old and perfect. I wonder how [old] got in. Prithee do not flatter thy self, [dear heart, old and perfect] (unless you mean mallice and nonsence he perfection) will not go together in thy Sphear. Then the Poet says when the World was young, mankind was so or so. But he looses [Mankind] on which the discourse is built, and says when the World was young the World was so or so. Was ever such a Rapsody of Impertinence Printed, Nay and whats worse, own'd
by the man that calls himself the greatest Wit in the Nation. I am afraid the apparent magnitude of his Wit, will dwindle like his Sun in Annus Mirabilis stanza, 100. " That happy Sun, said he, will rise again " Who twice Victorious did our Navy see, " And I alone must view him rise in vain, " Without one ray of all his Star for Me. I much suspect the Squire (for I think that was his Title when his Annus Mi∣cabilis came out) was like his Silk-worm in Granada " Lost in his own web of thought; When he made the Sun a Star: like Hamlets Cloud first a Whale and then a Wezel. But perhaps this man of learning avoided the Reading Astronomy, as Elkanah he says, did reading the Bible, for fear of spoyling his Fancy: and indeed it had been pitty such a Fancy as this should have gone lame, though Astronomy had been made a Cripple by it. But no matter the Poet has heard the Sun and Moon are Planets: and all planets you know are Stars. But (laying aside his Astronomy and granting the Sun a Star,) the Sun has not one ray in all his Star for me if he makes this English, or sense, Mr. Settle shall resigne all interest in the Apollo over the Kings Box, and compliment Bays his sweet face with the place. To him, who Climbs by Blood, no track seems hard: The sense of crimes is lost in the reward: A spirers neither Guilt nor danger dread, No path so rough Ambition dares not tread. These lines he had little to say to, but that [they are tag'd with hard words, and end the act.] ACT The Fourth. HOw! Crimalhaz up to the Mountains fled, And with him the Morocco Forces led. Oh Rebel! [Oh Rebel! being all he says of him, is as Comical as if he had call'd him arch wag.] Well but as I take it, the King and his Lords said a great deal more of this arch wag, then these two lines. Aye, but they had as good have held their tongues, for they said nothing to the purpose, his King should have gone on, if our Billinsgate Friend had the Instructing of him. With oh damn'd Son of a Whore run away with my Army, you Dog, you Rascal, you Rogue, bring it back again, when on the Contrary our Poet makes him [leave off his Quarrel to Crimalhaz and abuse poor Innocent Gold Inhumanely.]
The nameless Lord. Sir he only does persue That Treason which you lent him Pow'r to do: He was your Treasurer, and has made bold To be too strict a Guardian of your Gold. [He makes a Thief a Guardian] I wonder he did not persue his hint in the second act, and affirm that Muly Labas his Gold was as great a fool as him∣self, and so chose this arch wag for its Guardian. It had been very witty: but no matter, thy Ramphlet is so well stockt with Wit a ready that it does not want it. Encamped on Atlas skirts, he by your Gold Has Rais'd new Forces, and Confirm'd the Old, [In the last Scene of the last act Crimathaz was in Morocco. A pretty leap Elkanah makes him take from thence to Atlas, 130. miles.] read, Friend, read, and thou'lt find thy mistake here as great as in the River Tensit before. The skirts of Atlas come within 12 leagues of Morocco, Which in the notes is 130 miles. But here lyes his mistake, the skirts of a Hill, and the top of a Hill is all one to him: sure he takes a Hill for a Mole upon the face of the earth, as a Poet and Kinsman of his in the maid in the Mill has it, and if one part be a hun∣dred Miles off, the whole can't be much less. 'Tis well Geography did not lye in his way, what sufferers would the Alps and the Apennines or the Mountain Taurus have been, if our bold friend had had but a Ship at their Tails too. But Heaven be prais'd though Sense and Poetry have felt his heavy hand, Geography escaped. But now for [Poor Gold which the King falls upon so Satyrically.] First, our Com∣mentatour will not grant the inveying against Gold or Ambition which animated Cri∣malhaz to be a Rebel, to be allowable in the King, or at lest to have any affinity with his displeasure against Crimalhaz. I'de ask him why does his Almahide make a long Harangue upon opportunity. " Thou vain seducer opportunity, " Of woman-kind half are undone by thee, &c. When she ought to have exclaim'd against Almanzor that made use of that op∣portunity to her disadvantage, and not abused poor opportunity. How fre∣quenty in this manner are reflections. on the Causes of things for the effects used in Poetry, and Oratory, in all Languages. But next for the nonsence. Oh profane Gold, which from infectious earth, From Sulph'rous and contagious Mines takes Blrth. [Gold is profane because it takes birth from infectious earth, viz. Infection is profaness] Why [because] cannot it be profane and infectious too, but it must be one be∣cause 'tis the other. Cannot thy Malicious Pamphlet be nonsensical but nonsence must be Malice? [Then rakes birth. to be borne hs a passive signification, and to take Birth, an active one, and one that takes Birth, is author of his own Birth.] He that rads Bays his Pamphlet though a stranger to his Person and his style might swear a Poet wrote it, for his observations are much like the growing of the Plot of a Play in the fourth act. The nonsence grows as the notes do, and here it begins to thicken The lowest Boy in Westminster would have told him that [to be
borne] was a passive verb, and [to take] an active, but [to take Birth] is as far from a Passive, signification, as his notes on Morco are from the sence or meaning of the Author. Nor is be that takes birth Author of his own Birth, any more then Mr. Dryden is of his own Plays; his kind Friends History Poetry and Ro∣mance (as the Boy that was askt who made him said of his Father and Mother;) found stuff towards the making of them. I thought that the Womb that produces such or such a thing giues it Birth, and the thing that is born takes it, and yet it is not its own Author. [Then he makes the same thing Sulphurous and Contagious, whereas Sulphur is one of the best things in the World against Contagion. Did ever any man of experi∣ence in the World talk so ridiculously of Physick. If he had understood Mine∣rals (as I wonder he does not) he would have known that Mercury, Sulphur, &c. Are Medicinal when sublimated, or used according to art, but in their own nature in the Mine, or in excess their very vapours are mortal. It grew from Poysons, and has left behind Its native Vome to insect Mankind. Here Mr. Critick writes [it grows from Poysons] which in the Copy is [it grew from Poysons] which varyes the sence. [Gold has left Venome behind has no Construction in it unless Gold has first fsed away and left mankind its v∣nome.] [Has left behind] I esteem as good sence, as [still retains.] What does he mean by " Had I yet left a Country to maintain. [has] is the verb, and [left] a Participle, and not [left] the Vrb and [has] the signe of the Preterperfect tense. Which in Latine would be better distinguisht by the difference between Reliquit, and habet sibi relictum. Rape, Murders, Treasons—what has Gold not done? [What Verb governs Rapes, Murders, Treasons.] " You are—you shall—and I can scarce forbear. what is the Substantive after [you are] and what is the Verb—after [you shall?] If it has ever any Glory won, Given to reward a Virtue, on decrced T'a Pious use, or Charitable deed; That Sacrd Powr's but borrowed, which it bears, Lent from their Royal Images it wears. [Here he iners that no Gold can be given to a Pio us but stamped Gold, viz. money. Ingots or Plate can do nothing, or are worth nothing, the intrinsick value of Gold being in the stamp.] Why does the Poet infr that no Gold can be given to a Pious use but stamp'd money? Because the King having lost his Treasure all his money being stol, from him, reflects upon the  that Gold has been the Auther of, therefore his discourse must refer to all Gold in all shapes Ingots Plate, Chains, Collars of Esses, Rings, Trimbles▪ Bodkins, or any thing, for they may be given to  Pious or Charitable use; as if he had not been strangely forgetful he might have recollected from the Publick Fath in the days of the Committee. Bt great Wits have bad Memories.
But if [Ekanah, as Notes says, has but little acquaintance with Gold, by his mistakes in it.] I'le do him the favour to examine his acquaintance with it, by his larger un∣derstanding of it. In the Indian Emperou, the first Scene. " Methinks we walk in Dreams on Fairy Land, " Where Golden Ore lyes mixt with common Sand; " Each downfal of a flood the Mountains pour " From their rich Bowels, rolls a silver shower. A silver shower made of golden Ore, is the prettiest Poetical piece of Chimistry that has been heard of. But perhaps he'll tell you that to convert gold Ore into sil∣ver, he allays it with common Sand, and that both of them together make a silver shower; indeed so miraculous a composition may do much. And take it Gentlemen which way you will, the expression is so excellent in either sense, that Handy Dandy, 'tis no matter which you choose. But to show you the Squire was not altogether unacquainted with Gold sub tenui panno in his Muses Minority, viz. in his anno aetatis, thirty and a Way-bit: You shall hear what he says of it then, in his annus Mirabillis. Stanza 139. " As those who unripe Veins in Mines explore, " On the rich Bed agen the warm Turs lay, " Till time digests the yet imperfect Ore; " And know it will be Gold another day. If Gold lay no deeper in the Mine than that the taking up of a Turf would come at it, surely the world has been much mistaken, in representing the slavery and toyl of those who dig Gold: if it lay so shallow, as he imagins, the digging up of a Ra∣dish, or a Daizy Root would be the harder piece of work of the two. I am afraid the rich Bed as he has described it, is little less Poetical, then Parsly-beds for the con∣ception of Children. And the covering a Gold Mine with a warm Turf, is much about the excellence of the Poetry upon the Two Children in the Wood, and the Robin Red breasts that covered them with Leaves. You may see by our Authors Notions, at what Age he began to write man: But the perfection of so immense a wit like the production of Hercules re∣quired a longer time than ordinary. And though upstart and illiterate Scriblers, as his Preface says of Elkanah, might Cruise upon the Coasts of Poetry at twenty, (pardon the Allegory; for ever since [Husk of Love] Poetica licentia will make bold.) But such a prodigious Sun ad Star in Poetry [Husk agen] ascended not so soon into his Orbe [Web of thought, as our friend has it]—Kindness will shew it self. I could go on now Allegorically, but shooting out, and never stopping to bait at. Heaven has been before, &c. Kings Bounties act like the Suns Courteous smiles, Whose rays produce kind Flowers on fruitful Soyls: But cast on baren Sands, and baser Earth, Only breed Poysons, and give Monsters Birth. [Bounties are very like smiles. &c.] and in his examination of the Epistle, on the same Lies he says, [the Poet calls a smile Courteous, and says a Kings Bounty acts like a smile: It had been more like sense to have said Kings in their Bounties act like
smiles, and yet it had been ridiculous enough to compare a King to a smile, &c.] No man sure but one that had been drunk when he wrote it, and never sober afterwards to peruse it, between the time it was writ, and the day it was publisht, could hav exposed himself to the world so senselesly malicious, and so wilfully dull as this Farce of a man has done. The Poet says, Kings▪ Bounties act like the Suns smiles. Therefore says Notes [a Kings Bounty acts like a smile.] Prethee take the Sun in, and be not more unkind to him here, than in your Annus mirabilis: to shrink him into a Star was severe, but to make a Cypher of him is a little too hard. Then he says [Bounties are very like smiles.] Nay now King and Sun are both lost, and the dispute lyes between ounties and smiles, and they too are like one another, not act like one another; the comparison being in their resemblance not in their effects. Did ever any man so chop and change, and confound things and qualities, actions and beings so dully and to so little purpose; then his Epistle makes one more remark, that [those Sands are not properly barren that produce Monsters and poysons.] I cannot say they are strictly barren, but I can say that this is not the first time they have been call'd so: But I am certain Sands that produce nothing else, can as improperly be call'd fruitful for the production of Monsters, as a Dutch-woman can be so call'd for the Birth of a Sooterkin, or Land so called that bears nothing but Weeds. I am certain such Sands are more properly barren, than Granada could be empty when Al∣manzor and Almahide were out of it. Almanz. " We leave the City empty when we go. But you shall see what Mr. Dryden calls Barren: In his first Page of the Indian Emperour he says of Mexico. " Corn, Wine, and Oyl, are wanting to this Ground, " In which our Countries fruitfully abound. And twelve Lines ater he says. " No kindly showers fall on our Barren earth, " To hatch the seasons in a timely Birth. Here he calls Spain a Barren Earth, which in the first two Lines was a more fruitful Country than Mexico, producing Corn Wine and Oyl, which Mexico did not: How much more barren then must Mexico be? and yet he told you that was a happy Climate in the first Line. " On what new happy Climate are we thrown. But a Barren Country fruitfully abounding with Corn, Wine, and Oyl, shall and must be sense: for 'tis very unreasonable that our Grand master in Poetry should be less Authentick, then Aristotle in Philosophy: Why not Dixit Dryden, as well as Dixit Aristoteles. Perhaps you have mis-interpreted his Breast.
[This Phrase is not very proper.] Proper enough for so modest a Poet. He who forced Favour both from Fate, and Fame; Made War a Sport, and Conquest but a Game. [Forcing Fate is altering on't, which is ill Divinity in Morocco.] Pray what Religion was Zulema of, when he said page 19. " Would you so please, Fate yet a way would find, " Man makes his Fate according to his mind. Was not he a Mahumetan too: And what says Abdelmedeck speaking of Almanzor. page 17. " Fate after him below with pain did move, " And Victory could scarce keep pace above. Which last two Lines if he can show me any sense or thought in, or any thing but bombast and noise, he shall make me believe every word in his Observations on Morocco sense. [A nameless Lord would perswade the King that Crimalhaz has put a very honourable trick upon him, with running away to Atlas with his Army, which should defend Morocco against Taffalette, as he says a while after, and that honest Crimalhaz. —Has from the common rout, Of the worlds Beauties singled honour out. The common rout of Beauties is excellent sence:] If he that speaks it be of opinion that honour is the worlds greatest Beauty, I think it pardonable in him to call infe∣riour Beautys the common rout of Beautys in comparison of that: But now for the greater fault the Lords perswading the King that Crimalhaz, &c. I wonder where the fault lyes for the Lord to judge of the intentions of Crimalhaz, which he gives you his reason for, and tells you how he may possibly mean honestly. You know that Crimalhaz his high Command Was formerly in Muly Hamets hand: He who forced Favours both from Fate, and Fame; Made War a Sport, and Conquest but a Game. And therefore he, perhaps, to act some Deed Which Muly Hamets glory may exceed, Has for his Mistress from the common Rout Of the worlds Beauties singled Honour out. And that which makes him his Designs disguise, He'l make his flight of Honour a surprize. —as showers Luxurious grown. [The Luxury of showers I never understood, but that Rain takes no pleasure in its Luxury I am certain.] Then he has heard Luxury in Men is their taking pleasure in such or such an excess, which showers cannot do. is Luxury used in no larger sense. Has not he heard of Luxurious Branches of Trees, and yet though Trees are as little. Epicures in taking pleasure as Rain; yet [Luxurious Branches] is not Nonsense.
As Mountains Bulwarks are at Land, but Rocks at Sea. [That is, Mountains if any body should misplace 'em, and whp 'em up, and carry 'em into the Sea would turn Rocks, ipso facto.] Why must these Mountains at Land be thrown into the Sea? are there not enough there already? Let those serve turn and save him that trouble. Out-face his Treason e're its rise begin, Men bashful are 'th' nonage of a sin. [That is, out-face that which is now Treason before it be Treason] He's at his Politicks agen, just at the old rate. Why is not Treason, Treason, till it is set a foot, and put in action, I was of opinion that a resolution or a designe of Rebelling against a King, might be Treason; but as before he would not allow thoughts could be guilty of Blsphemy, now thoughts cannot be guilty of Treason. [Besides the English of its rise beginning is naught, Treasons rise cannot begin of it self.] No I am of his mind: but if Crimalhaz design'd to be a Traytour no doubt he'd be so kind to lend his helping hand to put his Treason forwards. Your thoughts can't reach the flights which Treason takes. [If he means by flight the Wit of Treason, it must be thus, Treason's a witty thing you do not understand, he takes her for as errant a fool as himself.] Whatever the Poet means by the flights of Treason, if he had made his King tell his Mother, whom he supposed virtuous, she had understood the flights or subtleties of Treason, it would have been as gross a Compliment, as to tell a chast Woman, Madam you understand the tricks, and intrigues of Iilts and Whres. I think that the Complimenting the Queens Knowledge and understand∣ing in Treason would have reflected upon her conversation and experience in it. But no matter, he would have every Body as little Complimental as his Almanzor; and because he makes no respect of Persons, like the Fox in the Fable, &c. Kings that want Armes, do not want Majesty. Heav'n is still Heav'n, though't lays its Thunder by. Which he Prints [Heav'n is not Heav'n.] He made an Errata at the end of his Epistle. But why his Eyes should be so dimm or his Spectacles so dull, as to let such as these slip without the lest mentioning them amongst their fellows I can∣not guess, unless he design'd them: for in several places he quite varies the Au∣thors words and sense, and builds some of his Arguments on the mistakes he has imposed upon him. [As if any Fool elieved Thunder made it Heav'n] As if any Fool believed the Author either said or meant so, for he says Heav'n is still Heav'n without it. [Here he compares his having his Army taken from him to Heav'ns Voluntary laying its Thunder by, for if is wanted Thunder as he Arms, or could be rob'd of it; it were no Heaven as certainly as Mr. Settle is no Poet.] O then the Simile does not come within the bounds of Logick, and because Hea∣ven Voluntarily lays its Thunder by, and the King perforce wanted Armes, there∣fore his want of Arms, and Heavens of Thunder, have not comparison enough for a Simile. If he be so strict I'le examine one of his best Similes at the same rae.
" My Soul is soft, which you may gently lay " In your loose Palm; but when 'tis prest to stay, " Like Water it deludes your Grasp, and slides away. Now methinks (under his strict laws of Similes) to lay a Soul in the Palm of a mans hand is a very pretty Poetical Art, but no doubt the Laureat has read Philosophy, and heard that a Thousand Souls may lye on the point of a Needle, and therefore a mans hand is no confinement. But then to make a Soul as soft as water, would have rais'd a discourse of forty lies, in Mr. Granada's Observa∣tions, if Mr. Morocco had been the Author. But Heaven forbid Poetry should be so circumscrib'd, be once in thy life good Natur'd; Veniam petimus dabimus∣que vicissim. Go easy Fool, and Dye, and when you Bleed, Remember I was Author of the Deed. [Here she bids him dye first, and thou Bleed.] I thought [bleed] and [dye] had refer'd to the same thing. Go dye but when you are dying remember, &c. but the Poet must keep to his word. [Here he makes bleeding an action. Bleeding is a suffering and no action by the Poets leave.] But by Notes his leave though bleeding be a suffering in Muly Labas, It is an action in the Queen, if she or others by her contrivance give him that wound by which he bleeds. Never was little Wit better employ'd. T'enlarge Fates black records, search but my Soul: There ye Infernal Furies read a scrowl Of deeds which you want Courage to Invent; Of which Hells Legends want a President. [Here he supposes fate that necessitates all actions records 'em done, which is nonsence.] How many hundred times has the Book of Fate and the records of Fate the registers of Fate or the like been used. Alman. " Kind Heaven thy book of Fate before me lay, " But to tear out the Iournal of this day. But then why does he suppose Fate that necessitates all actions records 'em don: If he'l make us go to the strictness of proveing what Records Fate has, where kept, and by whom wrote: Why may-not we suppose Subminsters of the Fates to write their actions, some under Clarks to the Committee of Destinies. Or why must it be nonsence if we suppose the Fates take the trouble on themselves and write their own Journals. [But reading of a Soul is Nonsense.] He'd take it ill if I should at the same rate say, " a Scrowl with this inscription Be∣renices Soul were Nonsense. Did ever any man take such freedom in Poetry and allow so little. Such storms as these this Climate never knew. A shower of Hail's an Object strang and new. [Such storms as one shower is admirable English.]
Why such storms as one shower? I read it such storms as these, and not such storms as this; and the foregoing Line relates to showers of Hall in general, which that Cli∣mate, never knew, and [a shower of Hall] in the second Line to that particular shower that then fell. As if it were false English to say, such arguments as thine are all ma∣lice but no sense, for an argument of thy making has neither wit nor reason in it. If this be false English so let it be, but I am sure 'tis true demonstration. My Country Princess and my King forsook. [Forsook is false English.] Why not [forsook] the passive participle as well as [forsaken.] These Tempests, Sir, are to my sufferings due, When my King frowns, 'tis just that Heaven frown too. [When my King frowns 'tis just that it should Hail.] Muly Hamet makes this answer to Abdelcador, who surprised at so unknown a storm in that Country tells him. I fear it does portend some ill event, That waits upon your fatal Banishment. Sure then Heavens frowning was not in the Hail, but the Ills that it portended. [Mariamne having alone found out Muly Hamet says] Wing'd by that zeal united Souls do bear Those Stars that smile on Lovers, brought me here. [That is first carried upon wings of zeal, and then upon Stars; besides the single zeal of her one Soul is that which two Souls bear.] But first, why did Mariamne find him out alone. In the same Scene a Chariot that brought her thither is mention'd. In her own Chariot to Morocco forc'd. And sure she did not drive her Chariot her self: and if the Chariot could have been brought upon the Stage, no doubt the Poet would have lent her some atten∣dants to appear with her. But why upon Stars! If the Stars had took her up on their backs to bring her thither the Stars sure had long arms to set her down gently agen without letting her fall. But why may not the Stars be supposed to have influence or power enough to bring her thither without the trouble of thy Trumpeter Hornets " That slide on the back of a new falling Star. I must confess the Poet if he had thought on't, might have introduced her by a Machin, and have had the opportunity of a song like Nakar and Damilcars with ne're a word of sense in it, but 'tis too late now, and it must e'ne pass without that Decoration. But then why is the single zeal of her soul that which two souls bear? Yes by Bays his reason. If her Soul has the same zeal that all united Lovers souls have, therefore her single Soul has all the zeal of those Lovers, and those Lovers themselves have none.
I for your sake my wandring steps engage▪ Devotion is the rise of Pilgrimage. [This Princess is no better then she should be to ellone whom she  not Marri∣ed to that she adores him, &c.] certainly Devotion, and adoration are removed many De∣grees. Devotion amongst Lovers, is as Py between Fathers and Children, r the like, 'tis no doring, nor deifying one another. But if  be profane, as he calls nor, for her Pilgrimage, in leaving the Court to follow her Lover I wonder how much more profan is his Benzaida, whose devotion to Ozmin pro∣ceeds farther then being a Pilgrim for his ake, she offers to dye for him, and fall a Sacrifice for Ozmins safety. Doe she adore, Selin, or make him a God, if she falls a sacrifice to appease his anger. None of my Actions can  Iudges b, But they who've soul enough to love like me. [He, by [they] and [soul,] which are of different numbers would infer that many men have but one soul.] None of thy reasons on fit Idges be, Bus they who're dull enough to prate like thee. I'm certain he that reads this Pamphlet; and believes there went three head pieces towards the production of this Rarity, will infer that one rational soul will o're stock twenty such Scriblers. No Sir, thou doest belye his Name. [He calls him Sir first, and then gives him the lye, and wrongfully: For he does not belye his name, when be calls him his Proph.] As I take it there was something else aid about the Prophet besides his name, in which he belyed him. But Notes is a Courtier and has found out that, [Sir,] is a compliment, and [the lye] an affront and therefore this Line is faulty, or the Character of Muly Hamet, that Scharomau∣cio -like, flatters and abuses in one breath. [Am is the Rhime to Nam to, it should be Nam. But Hameralhaz takes no notice but goes on:] He was not so witty at ob∣servations as Bays, or no doubt he had stopt to have taken notice of so great a fault. Your Mistriss too must your misfortune find. [That could not be, she could not loose a Mistriss.] This is almost as Politick a reason as  page. . of a Prnce and a Rival. If a Prince Court her, whom I adore, He is my Rival, and a Prince no more. Well here's one excellency in Bays, 'tis a perfection in a Poet to keep constant to his style, and I assure you this does, for his Plays and  Notes are all of a piece.
[Besides he says 'tis his Fate, and his Prophet has doom'd him into the Bargain, yet calls it his misfortue, as if that happened by chance that were necessitated.] How many hundred times has misfortune and Fate been indifferently used, without relating to the chance of the one and the necessity of the other. No Titles his eternal will confute. [Here he makes the will which is  facultas to be opinion, for nothing can be con∣futed but opinion. It had been nearer sense, though it had not been sense, if he had said confute understanding] Because the Wll in men subject to passions is caeca facultas, therefore the eternal will of a Divinity is caena facultas with Mr. Commentatour: It had been more for his purpose to have affirm'd that the understanding, (that is, if measured by his) had been  facultas; for his has not the best Opticks I have met with. She is a Beauty, and that Name's er guard. [Here he makes the Quality of a Woman to be her name.] If I should say thou art a wit, as a complem at it might pass, but for a name, 't would be severe, for 'tis the greatest Nick-name that was ever put upon thee. But then why nothing confuted but opinion! I thought argument might be confuted, and yet men may hold arguments quit contrary to their knowledge or opinions, as I doubt not but thou hast done many, or thy Pamphlet had never swel'd so big. Good Fatex as due should be to Beauty given: [Give a Debt is none of the best sense,] but give a man his due will be sense, as long as thou writest Nonsense, and art laught at for it. Beauty which decks our Earth, and props his Heaven. [Whose Heaven? Mahomet is not spoke of in five Lines.] But I am satisfied he is spoke of, and to what can [his] refer to but Mahomet▪ [then how Beauty props Heaven he must tell us; for most think is sends more to Hell then Heaven.] If thy great reading in so many Years has not inform'd thee, how Beauty props the Mahumetan Paradise, Thou art too old now to learn. When Heaven to Beauty is propitious, It pays those Favours it but lends to us. [Heaven pays favours to Beauties but lends them to men.] [Favours are gifts: He gave debts before, and now he lends gifts.] Why must Favours be always gifts? He might have gone on and said, that the Poet pays gifts, for be talks of paying favours as well as lending them. But I perceive the modest Commentatour thought his argument had Nonsense enough before, and therefore to have proceeded any further would have been superfluous. With patience hear the Language of the Skie. Heaven when on Earth it does some Change sore she, Does  above what we must read below.
[Here for want of Philosophy he calls Heav'n the sky; and the Language of the sky as he discribes presently is Hail, a fine white Language; which Hail be thinks ingendred in the sky: he has never heard of the middle Region.] If Hail (because the Poet calls it the Language of Heav'n, viz. An omen of ill in Morocco as is afterwards exprest,) must necessarily be en∣gendred in Heav'n, I may as well tell Bays that his Bundle of Errata's are Written in his fore-head, and no where else. The ethereal walk was uninhabited. [No walk was ever inhabited.] What does he take inhabiting for, sitting ly∣ing and sleeping? I thought Gardens and galleries had been part of Habitati∣ons, as well as Bedchambers, or Closets. A Mourning Garb of thick black Clouds it wore. [Penance is done in White, and that white is no Garb, besides garb includes motion and meen, &c.] Because for one offence Penance is done in white, therefore there must be no other doing of Penance, or no Penance can be done, but in white; Then white is no garb. he should be a great Wit by his ill Memory. In the first Act, he askt if Fetters were the crape or the Purple that Princes mourn in, which was as much as to say that dress only could be a garb, but here garb has a larger commission and includes motion and meen. But then why crape and Purple should be garbs, and not white crape or any other sort of white dress is too nice a criticism for my understanding. The clouds dishevel'd from their crusted Locks, Something like Gems coin'd out of Chrystal Rocks. [Besides the nonsence of crusted locks of Clouds, dishevel'd is never made a verb, but if it were, to dishevell Gems from locks is nonsence, but 'tis as proper as coining of Gems, no body stamps Iewels.] Why not Crusted locks of Clouds as pardonable an allegory as fleeces of Clouds in his discription of Ships. I'me certain [dishevel'd] is a more pardonable verb, then [elemented] an Adjective. " Thy Mortal Elemented son, in Granada. Then because Iewels cant be stampd therefore Gems cant be properly cal'd coin'd out of Christal Rocks. What does he think of money that has been run in a mould is not that coine as well as stampt money. Why then must the verb [Coine] signifie only to [stamp. Of those I reacht a Grain, which to my sence Appear'd as cool as Virgin innocence: And like that too (which chiefly I admir'd) Its ravisht Whiteness with a touch expir'd. [Here is no manner of sense?] which he proves thus. [Nothing appears but to fight.] why may not [appear] be proper to all senses as well as [seem] which in its true derivation to seem quasi to be seen as in Latine
[videri] is more properly related to fight, yet we say suo a thing seems loud, delicious, sweet, painful, &c. [But why cool as Innocence? Virgins are far from being cooler then other women; I'm sure, they have less reason having parted with less of their heat] how wretch∣edly does he quibble. So have chast women: yet chastity has been call'd cold. He might as well ask why Innocence is call'd white, when a black woman may be as Innocent as a fair. With a touch expir'd. [Nothing can expire unless it breath first, does a colour breath?] what doest thou think of [time is expir'd] does time breath? oh thy intollerable tangue of impertinence. Which chiefly I admir'd. [A fine Botch.] Sure so strange a thing as he had never seen before might be admir'd, and the Authour no Botcher. Almah. 96. " These are the day dreams which wild Fancy yields, " Empty as shadows are that fly o're Fields. Why [fly o're Fields] dear heart, but to make up a Rhime? [The nonsence of touching witeneness is admirable.] Sure his touching the Grein he reacht had made the whiteness of it expire. Ravisht whiteness: [Is a woman the less Inno∣cent for being Ravisht.] No but her Innocence is taken from her as well as the whiteness of Elkanahs Hayle, with too warme a touch. which I think, sence e∣nough for a Simile, Its Ravisht whiteness being immediately related to the Hayle not to the Woman. Though Shou'rs of Hail Morocco never see, Which he Prints, those shour's of Hail, &c. which makes it false concord in Grammar, and then tells ye. [That it should be Morocco never saw.] But as 'tis in the Play, I hope [see] is the third person in the subjunctive Mood. But the greatest part of Elkanahs lines which Mr. Notes has made bold with, have met much the same kindness, from him, as young Bear-cubs, they Fancy, receive from their dams. The beastly Commentatour has licks 'em into deformity. And all the story which the Slave did frame, Was only to gain time to take his aim. [He makes 'm ill Marksmen for no man could have been so long aiming at a Wren, as they were at a Man.] Here he finds fault at the conduct of the Poet. First [to make a description of twenty lines to say it Haild which the audience knew before is inartificial.] Then his description of Ships, is inartificial, for the audience knew before that Cortez and his Retinue had Landed, and that they came thither in Ships and not on Horse-back. Neither is is description of Hail inartificial though Muly Hamet knew it Hail'd before, for Hametalhaz describes it as an omen, and like Gyomar, as one that had never seen such a thing before. [Then Hametalhaz having a great many men in Ambush comes in the habit of a Priest to disguise himself from two men and a Woman.] And why not? Does he think half a dozen hirelings or half a score, which is more then either the Au∣thour or Audience supposed Hametalhaz had, would openly assault too men of Courage: whereas though they might expect success, yet they could not but be cer∣tain of lofeing some of their own lives in the assault, when an Ambuscade might do more safely and as well. But then they are ill marksmen to be so long about it.
surely there was more to be done than bare taking im. It had been said before. Pursue him out of Town, and in disguise With some dissembling tale his cares surprize. Till your confed'rate party has gain'd time To lay an ambuscade and murder him: For what intelligence could they have of the particular way Muly Hamet would take, so as to lay their ambuscade before hand. So that his longdiscourse gave them time to draw up near him, as well as discharge at him. But missing of your Blood, your brave Escape Chang'd his intended murder to a Rape. [A Horse may as soon be chang'd into a Poet, as Murder into a Rape.] Here he's at his old fallacy: What was [his] viz. Hametalhaz his intended mur∣der, but his design of murder, [but he Prints it] [chang'd the intended murder,] and though murder cannot be chang'd into a Rape, yet one design may be chang'd to another, though not into another design. I should have fought till I my Princess freed, Though I had waded through the lood I shed. [He should have freed his Mistriss, though after be had shed Blood, he had waded through it, and spoil'd his Shoes and Stockings: Well said Elkanah, to make the summ of his daring to wade.] But sure the daring lay as well in the shedding so much Blood as in the wading through it. I must confess I have heard of more Heroick daring, than either of these two. " Nay more these arms shall throw my head at thine. Sure Porphyrius his throwing his head at Maximin after it was cut off, is something more Heroick and Poetical than Elkanah's Queen's crouding up Hell, &c. As prophane sinners are from Altars driven, Banish'd the Temple to be Banisht Heaven. Horrours and Tortures now my Iaylours be, Who paints damnation needs but Copy me; For if mankind the pains of Hell e're knew, 'Tis when they lose a Mistress as I do. [At the same time to be banisht and a Prisoner is a Bull. I thought the banishment rela∣ted to his Person, and the Horrours and Tortures to the freedom of his mind: but however had they both related to the same thing, they had been ense, for Banish∣ment is a larger kind of Imprisonment, for 'tis confining men to such or such Countries, the freedom of their native Country being taken from them. Paints damnation. [Can a man paint paine, or can a man be like damnation.] No: but a man may describe damnation which is as good, and may not unlawfully call it painting damnation, and 'tis supposed when he says [Copy me] he means describe me with all my miseries that attend me. But now for the dullest objections that he has made yet. In his Observations on the
Mask he says▪ [He thinks they never understood recitative Musick nor Masks in Mo∣rocco. Nor did Taffalet take delight in the represented spoyls Of Cyrus, Cesar and Aeneas Toyles. If the true Characters and customes of Moores in Morocco or Granada, or of Indians in Mexic were to be exactly represented in Plays on those Subjects I fear Mr. Dryden has been as great a Transgressor as hee'd make you believe Elkanah is. To fol∣low truth exacty in the representations of forreign stories, would be as Ridiculous as to imitate their habits exactly. How ill and foolish would the dressing a Roman with naked Arms and Legs, be, or making a Solyman or an Almanzor, and Alma∣hide, sit Cross Leg'd like Taylors▪ or dressing Moores in Bootes and Moorish Women in trouses. Nay there ought to be the same care in representing Characters as dresses. How senselesly and inartificially has he made a long and idle description of Al∣manzors Gallantry, by his encountring a Bull, which though we all know is in use and in esteem at Granada, how little and impertinent does the narrative of it ap∣pear here. All Heroick actions of Virtue or Gallantry on the Stage, being rated and valued by the rules of the place and Age they are presented in, not by the sense of the Age or place when and whee they were first perform'd. I've been an actor in such Comick sport, When in my Father Taffaletta's Court. He took delight i'th' represented spoyls Of Cyrus, Cesar and Aeneas Toyles. [Observe what she calls Comick. Cyrus, Cesar, and Aeneas Toyles.] Would'st thou have had her call'd them Tragick or Pastoral? [The Queen Mother perswades Morena to go in Masquerade, which Morena thinks a very valiant thing, saying.] —I dare do any thing, to show T' a Throne I change of Place, not Passions owe. [A generous brave thing to go in Masquerade.] If thou canst make out that what ever a man dares do must be very valiant, Ge∣nerous, and brave, the ten sheets of nonsense thou hadst the confidence to write are much to thy advantage, and have past a very great compliment on thee. Traytours rarely look like what they act. [Can the looks of Traytours be like Treason? indeed as like as any of his Similitudes.] But not so like as some of Commentatours: For Bays has a very pretty potical way of invention: when he has occasion for a simile, not contented with such common things as are in sense or nature; such as the dull scriblers, who, as he says, ne're reach an Excellence, take allusions from, he forms more Airy notions, and so makes his Flights more sublime. As page 23. Abdalla of Lyndaraxa. " Her tears, her smiles, her every look's a net. " Her voice is like a Syrens of the Land, " And bloody hearts lye panting in her hand. A Syrens of the Land! That is a Land-Mermaid: A pretty fancied creature, a
Land Sea-monster: I have heard of a whole Book in this style; such another kind of Volume as Tom Thumb, that would have done him a courtesie in this nature being richly furnisht wih many such fancies and excellencies, as a she-waterman, an Iron Partree, a Wind-watermil and the like. And though Bays has a perfection above others in that Mercurial art of filching; yet I hope my instructions, though to a man so well vers'd already, may not be wholly disacceptable. Besides, her look's a net; is so old a Phrase, so stale an allusion that it has been in twenty third-Form School-Boys Exercises. But perhaps the Reader, what ever his other Thefts are, will conclude his simili∣tudes his own by their marks: Yet to convince you, there is not the lest thing he will not steal, his Almanzor says p. 69. " You dash like Water back, when thrown against the Wind. The Host in the Villain. Slander returns back into the slanderers face, as a man that pisseth against the Wind. But such Petty Larceny is not woth an Arraignment, nor would his Brethren envy at his stoln Treasures—Omnia si sic Dixisset.— Poyson'd! How was this Murder hid till now, And by what Arts was it disclosed by you. Enter Queen Mother. [Here she enters abruptly, and answers to what she did not hear.] That were too long to tell, th'unhappy Son, This Night too must the Fathers Fortune run. O, then the unkind Printer has mistaken her Entrance, which should have been two Lines sooner, which in the Acting I am sure is not mistakes. [And within three Lines she contradicts her self, saying to him,] I'le save your Life, your Empress, and your Throne. O does she contradict her self, so lt her; but where's the fault to say, Sir you will be kill'd to night. How kill'd? yes, unless you take my Counsel, which if you'l follow, I'le save your life, &c. Which are almost the very words in the Play. On this Foundation I've this Structure laid. [To lay a house upon a Foundation is not English.] Therefore to lay a structure on a Foundation must not be English. Though all Houses be structures, yet I hope all structures are not Hoses: one stone laid upon another is a structure. Knowing how ill your kindness hee'l requite, If he should find you Author of my flight. [He will if he should is false English, &c.] A very great oversight [hee'l requite] for [hee'd requite] he might as well have accus'd the Poet for letting.
My fair Eurdice, my fair Eurdice, instead of Euridice. Pag. 47. escape or at lest go Unmentioned in his Errata, for 'tis a hainous oversight, viz. a litteral fault. Leave that to Providence: but grant he shou'd— He would not sure attempt a Womans Blood. At least when he considers how t'was don: A Mothers Piety to save a Son. [Excellent Grammar. When he considers how 'twas done, to find me Author of your flight, a Mothers Piety to save a Son. How 'was done, a Mothers Piety.] But Prethee let us know why [To find me Authour of your flight] got in between the other two lines. Why? to make the Grammar a little more excellent. Thanks kind Commentatour. But then wherein lyes the great fault in the two last liues of the Speech. Where is thy excellent Grammar in Granada, Pag. 3. " But what the stranger did was more than man. If he puts [man] for [humane] 'tis a very bold Drydenism; but if he means what the stranger did was more then man could do. Then where is the fault to say. When he considers how 'twas don: A Mother Piety to save a Son did it. If this Liberty be prohibited, how many excellent Grammars will I find in Granada. " Must I then kill Benzaida, or must loose, Gran. pag. 117. " 'Tis better once to die then still to fear. pag. 81. " And though I cannot break 'em I'le divide. pag. 108. " My mind shall teach my body how to bear. Ibid. Loose what? and bear what? fear what? and divide what? where are the Ac∣cusative cases to [loose] and [bear] [fear] and [divide] which are all Active Verbs. I'le lead you where you may all eyes escape, And privately put on this borrow'd shape. [What need he put on a borrow'd shape after he had escaped all eyes] Was ever such an Impertinent question aske? Though the King could escape all eyes for so much time as to put on a disguise, sure it does not follow that a disguise must be unnecessary, or that his escaping all eyes for a quarter of an hour must inter he could lye conceal'd a whole night. Whil'st with the noyse of Drums, and Trumpets sound— [, noise and sound, viz. Noyse and noyse.] If [Noyse] without [sound] will make it ese, noyse of Trumpets is a pretty trm of Art of Mr. Commentatours.
Inhumane Monster: such  bloody fact No mortal sure can think, much less dares act. [to think a fact is nonsense, any one but Mr. Settle thinks thoughts not facts. I suppose if he has any meaning 'tis think on such a fact.] Any one but Mr. Commentator, I take it, can make facts the object of his thoughts, and to them that think 'em facts are thoughts. But why think on a fact? why may not [think] govern an Accusative case. If thy litlle head-peice can make this line in Mustapha nonsense, When they dare act what Monarchs scorne to think, thou shalt have my vote for the Chaire at next Sessions of Apollo. In your defence act your own Champions part, With your drawn Dagger stab him to the Hedrt. [To stab him to the heart in her defence, was not to act her own Champions part, but to be her own Champion. But Laula subtly advises it be done with a drawn dagge Morena else might have been such a fool as to have stab'd at him with a sheath'd Dagger.] Oh thou subtle Worm. Granada pag. 4. " Shund and recev'd him on his pointed Spear. Subtly contrived too, if Almanzors Spear had not been pointed how could it have received the Bull upon it. —To take This brave resolve for your fair Vertues sake; [Resolve for resolution. The Verb is never used Substantively by any but affected fools who understand not good English.] Ill English there will be, and affected fools too as long as you and I live deat heart, take it from me. And this Heroick act looks brave and great. [A very Heroick brave and great thing to stab! well said Elkanah] and well Com∣mented Bays. Sure for a Woman and one of her Quality and Character to stab a Vil∣lan, and a Ravisher, for the protection of her own Honour, and the safety of her Husbands life and Crown, is not I take it against the Laws of Heroicks. My deeds above their reach and pow'r aspire: [The doer may aspire but not the deeds.] This is like out face his Treason e're its rise begin. [Treasons rise cant begin of it self.] as Notes said before. My Bosom holds more rage, than all Hell Fire. [This is foolishly unnatural: none ever loved and gloried in wickedness for wicked∣ness sake.] But to be a little positive with Mr. Notes, I am of opinion none ever
loved and gloried in wickedness but for wickedness sake: for the very satisfaction and pleasure which men take in the doing of wickedness; and for which end they com∣mit wickedness, is wicked as well as the doing it. But if he means the Queen is unnatural, and kills for no other end but the bare pleasure of killing, he abuses er: for all the Murders, and Treasons she commits through the Play, are either for her own safety, or her favourite Crimalhaz his advancement to the Crown. [But now for the splendid Mask with never a word of sense in it. In which he can∣not refrain from nonsense in the very direction.] The Scene open'd is presented a Hell. [viz. The open'd Scene is presented a Hell very good English.] Another body would have made it English thus, The Scene open'd, viz. The Scene being open'd a Hell is presented, [And a Hell as if there were more then one.] Though Mr. Commentatour (it he believes there's any) believes there's but one, yet he will allow sure that several Religions varied in their opinions of that one Hell. And 'tis not nonsense to say the Christians Hell, and the Hathens Hell, besides [a Hell] which would not have been sense spoken in the Play, refers here in the di∣rection to the Picture of Hell. The Scene being open'd is presented a painted Hell. Pluto, Proserpine, and other women Spirits, &c. As if Pluto and Proserpine were women Spirits if the Authors words had been Proserpine, Pluto, and other women Spirits, yet then it had been sense. [Besides 'tis nonsensc to say women Spirits, as if Spirits had Sexes] I know 'tis nonsense to say women Spirits, and I know dear heart, as thou doest, that Spirits have no Sexes. But this being in the direction is spoken in reference to the Actors that were women not the Characters they presented. For if the description only related to the persons or buisness in the Play; then it should not have been the [Scene open'd] but [the Tent open'd;] is presented, &c. nor should it have been [the Stage is fill'd on both sides with Crimalhaz, &c.] for this Mask is suppos'd perform'd in a Pavi∣lion, in a Camp. But all marginal descriptions or entryes in Plays refer indiffe∣rently to the real place or Persons, as to the represented Characters. Orpheus. The grones of Ghosts and sighs of Souls, Infernal Ecchoes, and the Houles Of Tortured Spirits cease: A gentle Gust Has all things Husht; And Hell in spit of Vengeance is at Peace: Whilst Ravisht by my warbling Strings, The Vultures moult their Wings; The Furys from their Heads will shake Each useless Snake, The Scorpions loose their Stings, And Hell it self forget their Tyrant Kings. His objection that [sighs of Souls] is nonsense, alias Poetical, souls having no lungs] and his observation [that a gentle Gust is a bull, a Gust being a sudden violent storm of Wind] (which by the way is the first time that [Gust] was ever so defined) and his quarrelling [with warbling strings, voices being the only thing, he says, that war∣bl.] and his finding fault [with moulting of Wings as an improper Phrase, when be
says moulting of Feathers, but not wings, is sense: moulting of wings is very new.] (which by the way too is not so over-new. Annas Mirabilis Stanza 143. " His Navies moulted wings he imps once more.) These idle remarks are so very silly, that letting them pass, or laughing at 'em is the best answering of them. Give our Commentator but Rope, and he hangs himself. The Proverb is something musty, but no matter. But then for a more murdering observation. [Hell forgets its its Tyrant Kings] would be true Grammar though not very good sense. [Hell forget their Kings,] is such false Grammar, that the lowest Boy in Westmin∣ster School would be ashamed to write.] 'Tis well thou art past a School Boy, and so past all shame, or else thou hadst never had the impudence to expose such a line as Hell forgets tyrant Kings,] for Grammar. If thou meanest Hell for the place of Torments 'tis palpable nonsense to suppose a place or pain can forget or Remember. But if thou designest it for sense, and takest it that way the Authour meant it, that is for the Inhabitants of Hell (which is the only way he could in∣tend it for, by the foregoing discourse of Vultures Scorpions and Furies which are supposed to be part of them, and in which sense 'tis very often used, as Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta movebo. [Acheronta] for [Inferos]) certainly thou art the most mistaken in Gram∣mar of any man of thy Years, and great parts (if such thou hast, that is, if all thou sayst be true) that e're I met with. [Its] for a Pronoune to a Noun of Multitude is excellent. Pray which is the truest Grammar to say. Troy held out ten years against its enemyes the Graecians, or against Their enemies the Gr∣cians. But one thing I should not omit, he takes no notice of the three lines be∣fore this. viz. The Furies from their Heads will shake Each useless Snake; The Scorpions loose their stings, And Hell it self forget, &c. And so makes it false concord in Grammar, [Hell will forget] is Grammar, though [Hell forget] is not. For [will] is not only the sign of the Future tense before [shake] in the first line, but before [loose] and [forget] in the two last. Whence Mortal does thy Courage grow, To dare to take a walk so low. Says Plto. To which Orpheus answers. To tell thee God thou art a Ravisher, No Tears nor Prayer, Your unresisted Will controuls; Who commit Force on Virtue, Rapes on Souls. [Pluto asks, whence does thy Courage grow? Orpheus answers, from to tell thee God thou art a Ravisher.] If Pluto had ended there, it had been something: But
put in to dare to take a walk so low; and then examine the connexion? [Besides Orphens came a great Iourney to tell Pluto very great news: viz. that he was a Ravish∣er, as if he did not know that before.] What if he did know it before, is Orpheus his upbraiding him of what he had done nonsense? Or is all Discourse but telling news nonsense? Then the Poet says Plutoes unresisted will cannot be controuled, and Notes asks him. [How can a thing be controuled that is never resisted?] Aye! How indeed? But sure [unresisted] has the same signification with [irresistible] what [cannot be resisted, not what is not resisted. But then this blundering Grammation; says, [your unresisted will who commit, &c. [will] being the proximum antecedens to [who] makes it, false English, [who] for [which] and [commit] for [commits.] If it be [which commits,] and so true Grammar 'tis nonsense: For Pluto's will does not commit Rapes, it only inclines him to commit rapes on Souls.] Well, Grammar and Philosophy are things that buz much in Commentatours head, especially in this fourth Act; but by the insipid rate he talks of them, I durst lay an even wager that such another as ripple in Epsome wells, with his Laws of the Maids and Parsons, and his castigo to non quod odio habem sed quod amem; shall bafle him in both: By the damnable stumbles Mr. Notes makes in them, he is quite different from Aretine in his Preface, who rayld not against God because he did not know him, for he on the contrary abuses poor Grammar and Philosophy, for no other reason but because he never understood them. Let him alter it thus and see his mistake. The will of you who commit, and then let him examine the propriety of the English; Is not [your will] and [the will of you] the same thing? Dares a weak Animal of Mortal Race, Aront a God  his Face; And of a Crime impeach a Deity? [An Animal of Mortal race is very elegant, as much as to say, an Animal of Animal race, or a Mortal of Mortal race: there being no animal but what is mortal.] I Believe the School-boy Elkanah, when he wrote this, had learning enough too as well as pays to tell him that an animal was of mortal race, and yet for all that he has a little of Bays his confidence too, to believe this Line more elegant, than our Ironick friend is pleased to think it. For had he said dares a weak animal affront and impeach a God, 'twould have been as dull and flat (if possible) as a Scene in the Polish Prin∣cess, or the Five Acts of Charles the Eight. [The other Line is Burlesque.] Thy reath has damn'd thee, thou shalt dye. [First he is damn'd, and afterwards he shall dye: Here is Breath agen, which is every thing, and does every thing with Elkanah; nay, breath that makes others live, shall make Orpheus dye.] If a man should tell me that any Creature living had patience to read thy Pam∣phlet out at once sitting, I should swear the story of the Famous Grizil were nothing to him. Nay he deservs to be Canonized as much as she; and to make his Memory live like hers in such another Pindarick, as Full iteen Winters she lived still contented, No wrong she thought upon, &c. I know a friend of mine, that if he would be so kind and strain hard, might do this man the same favour, and in the same style Rhime him into immortality.
But how prettily so ever this Objection is worded, as [first he is damn'd, and fter∣wards dyes.] First let me ask him if Mens sins do not damn them; and then when sins are committed before men dye, or after death? I wonder where's the nonsense to say such a mans ambition, or such a mans blasphemy damn'd him; and wherein is Pluto's fault to tell Orpheus that his words had damn'd him, and he should dye. But then this over-curious Sophister has turn'd [damn'd] into a Passive Verb, [he is damn'd,] which relates to the suffering of damnation: For to say a man is damn'd, implyes he is dead, and his soul in Hell, and thereon he builds his seeming argu∣ment; but to say in the Active sense such a sin damns a man, implyes (as the word is used,) that damnation will certainly follow as a reward of that sin after his death: But his pittiful snarling objection, that [Breath which makes others live makes Orpheus dye,] is so Phlegmatick a thought, that none but our sensless man of Gall but would be ashamed of. Unloose your twisted Crests of Snakes: Into his Breast those swift Totmentors fling, And his tortur'd Entrals Sting. [Twisted Crests of Snakes (viz. upon the Furies heads) I take to be nonsense and sustian.  Ay prethee do, take it so and welcome: Thou hast such a pretty way of taking things, that 'tis pitty to baulk thee: I dare swear for Elkanah, that he would not be unwilling that thou shouldst take all the Plays he has or shall write, provided thou wouldst use them so harmlesly as thou hast done this. [But, why swift Snakes? Snakes (as he takes it agen) are far from being swift Creatures.] Well, if the Snakes on the Furies heads as the Poets feign'd, were the tormentours the Furies used to fling into the Bosomes of men, and our Commentatour will take Furies and their instru∣ments of vengeance to slow creeping things, how can we help it. But I shrewdly guess, what some people would say of such an expression, as a slow Snake flung from a Furies head. Oh Sir, his fatal Doom recal, Dispel your furious anger; Let not such noble worth your Victim fall: Be kind both to a Lover and a Stranger. [Here Prosrpine calls a God, Sir: 'Tis a very new Title for a God; she might as well have said, your worship.] I think not quite so well. I'm afraid a certain new∣made Rhimer would take it very heinously, if I should tell him that his Amphitrite. My Lord Great Neptune, &c. might have been as well Your Lordship Great Neptune. [Then how can worth fall a Victim; a worthy man may, but worth cannot.] How often [Worth] [Virtue] [Innocence] and the like, are used for [Worthy] [Virtuous] and [Innocent people] need not be askt: I wonder how [wrong'd Virtue,] and [injur'd innocence] scaped him in the Examination of the Third Act. I have a Mistriss in your Sphear, Forc'd from my Arms By Deaths Alarm's: My Martyr'd Saint brings me a Pilgrim here. [The Sphear of Hell is Nonsense.]
In the last Act. I'le travel then to some remoter Sphear, Till I find out new Worlds, and Crown you there. [I believe our learn'd Author takes a Sphear for a Country: The Sphear of Morocco, as if Morocco were the Globe of Earth and Water; but a Globe is no Sphear neither by his leave, &c.] Commentatour is as cruel here to [Sphear] as he was to [infect] in the First Act, which he would allow to have relation to nothing but a disease: So [Sphear] here must not be sense, unless it relate to a circular motion about a Globe, in which sense the Astronomers use it: I would desire him to expound these Lines in Granada. page 29. Lyndar. " I'le to the Turrets of the Palace go, " And add new fire to those that fight below. " Thence Hero-like with Torches by my side " (Far be the Omen though) my Love I'le guide. " No, like his better Fortune I'le appear, " With open arms, loose Vail, and flowing Hair, " Iust flying forward from my rowling Sphear. I wonder if he be so strict, how he dares make so bold with [Sphear] himself and be so Critical in other mens writings. Fortune is fancied standing on a Globe not on a Sphear, as he told us in the first Act. But then he says, [Nothing is forced by Alarm's, an Alarme being but a prepara∣tion to force.] If our Nice Critick, Mr. Bays will have an Alarme (viz. before a Battel) to be but a preparation for force, I doubt he mistakes it, for if he were in an Army, (pardon the supposition, for what should he do there?) I much suspect that an Alarme would be a thing of more force with him, then an ordinary man. Oh take me down to her, or send her back to me. [Here Orphous speaks as if he were upon the Stage, and not in Hell: Would he have himself taken down from Hell to Hell, or her brought back from Hell to Hell.] Surely there's a great difference between his being down in Hell, and his being taken down to Hell. Take me down to her, or send her back to me. Signifies, entertain me down with her, or if I cannot be entertain'd here, send her back to me when I am gone from hence. For if a man should come into anothers company, he may not improperly say, Sir pray take me into your company, though he be in it before he says so. Besides Orpeus was in Plutoes Pallace, and sure 'twas not ill in him, to suppose the seat of his Euridice in Hell to be somewhat inferiour to the Throne of the God of Hell. And so [take me down] is more proper than Notes is pleased to judge it. But with thee thy fair Treasure take, Releast by Love from that eternal chain, Which destin'd Kings and Conquerours cannot break. [Releas'd from an eternal Chain is a Bull. If her chain had been ternal, she could
never have broken it.] But certainly thy weak head-piece cannot mean this for an argument: For the Poet says the Chain was Eternal to Kings and Conquerours not to her: And when he says she was releast from that Eternal Chain which Kings and Con∣querours can never break, he makes no Bull at all, for her Chain, viz. of Death and Hell was the same with theirs, only she wore hers but for a time, and they were doom'd to wear theirs for ever. To th'wondring World he in soft Aires may tell, Mercy as well as Iustice rules in Hell. [How shall the world hear soft tunes. They had need be loud ones one would think] To tell the World then is to tell all the World and all the World at once. This observation is so wonderful witty, that none but this Arch wag could have hit on't. No law there nor here, no God so Severe, But love can Repeal, and Beauty can tame. [He repeals a God] No Saturnine friend. Let it be [repeal a] Law and [tame a God.] [The Emperor being stab'd by Morena, says the Queen Mother.] My Son kill'd by her hand! Crim. Call my Physitians. Bid my Guards appear. The Emperour Stab'd, the Queen his Murderer! [Says Crimalhaz since he is kill'd, since as he says the Emperor stab'd, the Queen his Murderer. Call my Physicians, a Physitian is very useful to a dead man] Why since he is kill'd? Though as thou sayst, Crimalhaz had said [kill'd] which he does not, yet sure to say a man is kill'd, does not absolutely imply he is dead as soon as ever the wound is given that kills him: nor is it unmannerly or impertinent to call his Phy∣sitians to the assistance of a wounded King, though in all probability he might not live a quarter of an hour, nor could their assistance defer his death. It had been very pretty to have said the King is stab'd, let us see if he will bleed to death, if he does not, I'le send for Surgeons that shall cure him. But though your hand, has your adorer kill'd. 'T has reacht his heart, but not the Love it held. Your Image cannot from my Soul retire; My Lov's immortal though my life expire. [How could a hand touch Love, or a dagger stab Love.] How could any fellow but Notes ask such a question? though a hand cannot touch Love, nor a Dagger stab Love, as thou callst it, yet sure 'twas not ungenerous in the King to tell her, that hand that kill'd him could not destroy his Love to her that gave him his death, which very probably it might have don. Moren. Good, Gentle, Kind, give me the Dagger back; For mine—for his—For Heav'n—and Iustice sake. Cannot my Tears nor Prayers your heart o'recome? If my requests appear too burdensome,
Grant but this one—that pointed Steel restore, And I'le not live to ask you any more. [That is give me the Dagger back, or if my request appear (for appears) too bur∣densome give me the Dagger] If thou wouldst have took the pains to have look'd into the Printed Errata at the end of the Play, thou mightst have found page 50 line 6 for request read requests. But this act has so many willful oversights, that 'tis in∣tollerable. O cruel Queen, what has your fury done, That made you lose a Husband, me a Son; This Realm a King, the World a Virtue, grown Too sit for Heav'n, but not to go so soon? [The Question is an answer to it self, she asks what her fury had done, that made her lose a Husband, &c. Why it answers to it self, it made one lose a Husband, the other a Son.] Sure her fuy had done something more then all this. If the King had died in his bed, one would have lost a Husband, and the other a Son, And Morocco a King, &c. But certainly it might be supposed his Murder might be the occa∣sion of more Calamitis then his natural death would have been. They might ex∣pect a Vengeance that would attend his Murder, besides the concern and sorrow of a Nation for so fatal a blow, which her fury was Author of. But this unmerciful fellow keeps up his old little thoughts of Kings. Such a word as [Lead on] shall rob 'em of all authority, and make Cyphers of them whilst they live, and when they are dead, dye which way soever, like Cats and Dogs, there is an end of them. [Too fit for Heav'n is a bull, nothing can be too fit for the end it is design'd for, much less for Heav'n.] But relatively a thing may be very properly so call'd. Her saying he was too sit for Heaven but not to go so soon, Implied as much as if she had said he was so good and so Virtuous that he was too fit for Heaven, that is, in so much he was so Virtuous mankind did not deserve him: but not fit to go so soon, considering what loss mankind would have of him, by his going thither too soon. Was it not you that arm'd me to this guilt, Told me I should a Ravishers blood have spilt? [I should have spilt before she did it, is nonsense: it must be, I should spill.] But now she had don, to say she should have done otherwise may be sense. Had it been [I should spill] it had scarce been so. His telling her, and the deed being both past, 'tis more properly said of her [I should have split.] For 'tis a praeterperfect in relation to [now she speaks it] not [when it was told her first.] For if he be so strict as to examine in what tense her spilling a Ravishers blood was first spoke to her, 'twas neither [I should spill] nor [I should have spilt.] For when the Queen Mother set her a work 'tis likely she said Madam do as I tell ye and you shall spill a Ravishers blood. But such pittiful observations raise more words then they are worth. But madness alway users in great Sins. [Madness takes away all sin. Mad men cannot sin.]
These are two of Commentators sentences, and the application of 'em is excel∣lent. Because a fellow that is Lunatick, or a Man that's absolutely devested of Rea∣son and understanding commits no sin, Therefore, madness cannot be accused of in. I hope he designes this excuse for writing his Pamphlet, that he was Frantick when he writ it, for indeed he that reads it would guess as much, and his sentence too holds Good here. For Elkanah I dare swear for him thinks his Pamphlet so far from a sin or an offence, that nothing could please him better. But I wonder at Mr. Commentators rateing of madness, how cruel our English Law is that hangs a Man when he's sober for a crime committed when he was drunk, whereas if the man had had his right senses and not a tangue of frenzy occasion'd by his Wine, 'tis likely he had not commited it. And it so he sin not in the committing it, why is he punisht. She mov'd—star'd—walk'd—storm'd—rag'd—curst—rav'd and dam'd. [She mov'd and walk'd, as if any body could walk without moving.] But sure one may move without walking. The Author has Printed it [she mov'd star'd walk'd] not [she walk'd star'd mov'd,] and 'tis imagin'd that people may move before they walk. [storm'd rag'd raved that is raged, raged, raged.] Well now I do not wonder at Mr. Commentators blunders in Grammar, by his ignorance in English. For 'tis a received opinion that the rules a man makes of what he does not understand may very possibly be faulty. If his great education and greater conversation has taught him no distinction between storming, raving and raging, certainly two great blessings have been thrown away upon him. This is no news to that which she has done; [Done news] Why done news: Was ever such a construction made. That which she had done might be News, without making [News] the Accusative case to [don.] Her face discolour'd grew to a deep red, [That is, either her red face grew red, or her tauny or black and blew face.] Any colour but the right will serve thy turn. Nothing but sense comes amiss to thee. Then with an infant Rage, more soft, and mild, She playd with madness, leap'd, sung, danc'd and smild. [She plaid, leap'd, sung, danc'd, and smild: these are pretty effects of rage. But 'tis an infant rage. Little or moderate rage, that is, moderate excess is a bull.] But sure a less or more moderate rage spoken in comparison to a greater that was mention'd before, is no bull. Observe how idly her wild fancies walk, But she who acts so ill, as ill may talk, Who'd think a thing so young, so soft, and fair, Could be so kind a Husbands Murderer? But see when Heaven commands its gifts away, The Wits and senses lost, the Soul may stray.
[The Poet thinks his own fancy flies, but his Queens but walks.] What ever the Poets may do, flye or walk. I'm certain the Commentators fancy does but creep, and so humbly too, that Placidius's maggot and that may go together; one for the husk of Lo, and the other for the husk of sense. But then The Wits and senses lost, the Soul may sray. [That is, when the Wits and senses are gone, 'tis possible to be mad.] Never was man so unlucky at sentences as I .] Never was man so lucky at 'em as Bays, Thy wits and senses gon▪ 'tis certain thou art little less then mad. But thine is such an innocent madness such an infant rage, as Elkanah has it, thanks to thy Sa∣turnine humour, as thou calst it, for why tamer qualification, that thy Dogs days are not so hot as otherwise might have been expected. Ist not enough that my dear Lord I slew, But must he actor, and designer too. [It should be [I must,] I being as necessary as any word in the verse.] I wonder thou didst not tell us that [she moved, stared, &c.] should have been, [she mov'd, she star'd, she walk'd, she storm'd, she rag'd▪ she curst, she rav'd.] [She] being as neces∣sary there as [I must] here, after [I shew] in the line before. Morena's hand shall wash the stain She wears; As Condemn'd men turn Exeutioners. [Morena must execute her self, as condemn'd men execute others, and she must wash the stain off her self, as condemn men wash the stain off themselves by being Hang men.] In the first place Mr. Bays do not deal so unnaturally and ungentleman like, to treat so honourable a man as a Hang-man so rudely: consider, dear heart, consider, a Hang-man is a Squire. Now wherein lyes the wondrous fault to say Morena will wash off her stain, as condemnd men do theirs, that is, by turning Executioners. But then our canting Commentator runs on to no purpose and tells you that they execute others and she her self. But because [Elkanahs Similes are the most unlike things to what they are compared in the World.] Ile venture to start a Simile in his Annus Mirabilis▪ he gives this Poetical description of the Ship call'd the London. Stanza. 151. " The Goodly London in her Gallant trim, " The Phaenix Daughter of the Vanquisht old, " Like a rich Bride does to the Ocean swim▪ " And on her shadow rides in floating Gold, Stanza. 152. " Her Flag aloft spread rufling in the wind, " And Sanguine Streamrs seem'd the flood to fire, " The Weaver charm'd with what his Loom design'd, " Goes on to Sea and knows not to retire. Stanza. 153. " With Roomy Decks, her Guns of mighty strength, " Whose low-laid mouths each mounting Billow Laves, " Deep in her draught, and Warlike in her length, " She seems a Sea-Wap flying on the Waves. What a wonderful pudder is here, to make all these Poetical Beautifications of a
ship; that is a Phaenix in the first Stanza, and but a Wasp in the last? Nay, to make his humble comparison of a Wasp more ridiculous, he does not say it flew upon the waves as nimbly as a Wasp, or the like, but it seem'd a Wasp. But our Author at the writing of this was not in his Altitudes, to compare Ships to floating Pallaces a com∣parison to the purpose, was a perfection he did not arrive to, till his Indian Emperors days: But perhaps his Similitude has more in it than we imagine. This Ship had a great many Guns in her, and they put all together, made the sting in the Wasps tail; for this is all the reason I can guess why it seem'd a Wasp. But because we will allow him all we can to help out, let it be a Phnix Sea-Wasp, and the rarity of such an Animal may do much towards the heighining the ancy: But to give you an instance of another excellent fancy. In his Observations on this Act dsigning to pass a Compliment on Mrs. Iohnson that Acted Morena, speaking of the Poet and her he says, [Her action exceeds his Poetry, as much as her Beauty and Meen does his.] He might as well have said, Madam, you are infinitely a more beautiful Woman than Poet Settle. Hansomeness in a man I have heard of, though Poet and Commentatour have none of it, but never of Beauty before; but granting it to be that compliment it was intended, to tell the world she is a Beauty is much like Commentatours Obser∣vations on Orpheus his going to Hell to tell Pluto he was a Ravisher; he tells us very great news, as if the world did not know it before. But to finish in our Comentatours words: Thus ends the most tedious insipid dull Comment on an Act I ever read. ACT The Fifth. IN this Act our Waspish Commentatour has a little of the drone in him, and though God knows his sting before has been but eeble, yet here he seems to have lost it. For here his Observations are so wondrous silly, that I rather think he com∣ments upon his own want of understanding then Elkanahs. for thus he begins. Crim. Though on the Blood of Kings my Throne I've built, The World my Glory sees, but not my Guilt. Mysterious Majesty best fits a Throne. They Vertuous seem whose Vices are unknown. Men have ador'd and have made Offerings To unknown Gods, why not to unknown Kings. [Why Mystrious Majesty becomes a hrone better, then plain Majesty is to me a myste∣rious Riddle.] Make Offerings! No man makes the Sheep and Oxen he Sacrifices.] Unknown King! He was no unknown King, though he was an Usurper. They all saw him, knew him, and were forced to acknowledge him.] 'Tis great pitty that a my∣sterious Riddle should come in Mr. Drydens way, for believe me Gentlemen as Te∣rence says, Davus est non Oedipus: Hee's no Alexander at untying of knots, Such
another Riddle as is Fabulously fathered upon Homer, and the Beggars that fat ousing themselves, put upon the Laureat though with a promise of  mii magnus A∣pollo for answering of it, would no doubt be solved much at Homers rate. If our Commentatour does not understand wherein Crimalhaz his advantage lay, in not ap∣pearing plainly the traytour he really was; certainly he has a Skull so thick, that if all his other parts were answerable to it, he might be as stout as Hercules. But then why men cannot make sacrifices and offerings is to me a mysterious Riddle. Ay but he infer, because men cannot make sheep and Oxen; therefore they cannot make sheep and Oxen sacrifices. This is a Riddle ideed, but it may be answered as the oy did the Parson, when he had askt him who made these Oxen: God made 'em Bulls, but my Father made 'm Oxen. [But Crimalhaz was no unknown KIng. If the full kowledge of a King or an Usurper lay in the remarkableness of his Persons; Olivers Nose was no doubt a wonderful intelligencer. Another parcel of faults he fds against Crimalhaz. I thank him for this War he has begun, The numbers of my Foes enhance my Crown, It does a worth on Kings as Beauties set, To have our Rivals numerous and Great. [Numbers of Foes most commonly pull down Crowns.] And afterwards, Crim. Kind Taffalet does for my presence call, I am invited to his Funeral. The little Champion with impatience waits, To beg a Tomb before Morocco's Gates. And rather than his lingring Fate delay, I'le with my Army take a walk that way. His heat of blood, and lust of Crowns shall cease; Lasht to a Calm and cool'd into a Peace. [He was a kind man to invie him o his Funeral; but believe it who will. I can never think Taffalet would come with an Army only to beg a Tomb before Morocco's Gates, &c. Besides Crimalhaz was very uncivil to fly upon a man that came so kind∣ly, &c.] What a wonderful belief has Mr. Bays. these are much like the objections in the Third Act against Tortures weak Engines that can run us down, Or skrew us up till we are out of Tune. And Hell a feeble puny cramp of souls, &c. Because the Poet makes his Villain a Fellow that speaks scornfully of things, and syes every thing that opposes him as little and inconsiderable therefore he writes nonsense: But something more he drives at in the two last Lines, and says, [the Poet does as good as sar I will not only murder him, but lash him and cool him into a Peace, a Climax much like that of showers of Arrows and of Rain.] Now how the Poet does as good a say so, or how he makes a Climax in his speech, all my study cannot search out. I think his Lashing him into a Calm, and cooling his heat of blood, is of a piece with the rest: And may as well signifie he will cool his blood by letting it out, and calm his Ambition by cutting his Throat, as well as this Line. I'le with
my Army take a walk that way, may signify he intends to fight him. Just at this rate he finds fault with the last Lines of the Fourth Act. Moren. Then with a gentle gale of dying sighs, I'le breath my flying soul into the Skies. Wing'd by my Love, I will my passage steer, Nor can I miss my way when you shine there. And says. [His reason why he cannot miss his way is excellent and undeniable.] Nor is his observation on six lines in the latter end of the act, after Crimalhaz his exe∣cution, spoken by Abdlcador much unlike. See the reward of Treason; Death's the thing Distinguishes the Usurper from the King. Kings are immortal, and from life remove, From their low'r Thrones to wear new Crowns above: But Heav'n for him has scarce that bliss in store: When an Usurper dies, he raigns no more. Here the Poet describes the difference of Kings from Usurpers, by their reward after death, and Mr. Impertinent tells us ['tis nonsense; for death makes all men equal] I may as well say that Mr. Drydens Notes upon Morocco, and Mr. Cowleys Davi∣deis are equal (pardon the profanation for neither the Authors nor their writings are to be named. ''th the same breath) and prove it thus: they are both but paper and Ink, and therefore not different. If the Poets discourse tended to nothing but the corruption of their bodies, I am of his opinion that Death makes a King and an Usurper equal: But this worthy Gentleman keeps constant to his Notions of Kings, and as he has not only made so great a Fool of a King in his Boabdlin, but by his sense of them through his Notes made out his opinion of them in general, to be the same or worse then he has character'd there: I wonder not at all at a Tenent that has been so long cherisht by him. [Another sentence, Kings are immortal and yet dye.] The Poet is so far from such a contradiction that he calls it only removing from Life: Yet if he had used Sir Positives own words, the sense had been entire; considering how the whole Speech affirms that Kings leave this Temporal Life for an immortal one. But for [a more glorious sentence, when a man dyes he raigns no more.] Certainly a King's a man, and yet the Authour had said they raignd agen after they dye. But I grow tired, and wonder for what cause he could crowd such a Rabble of Iingles and Blunders together, unless he courted the favour to be ri∣diculous: which he of all mankind might have had without this trouble, though per∣haps not so Plentifully. But I perceive our Laureat has done writing of Plays, and though impotent yet desirous to be fumbling still, like Old sinners worn from their delight as one of this Prologues has it, he desires to be whpt to appetite. It had been much more to his purpose, if he had design'd to render the Authours Play little, to have searc'd for some such Pedantry as this. Lyndaraxa page 17. " Two ifs scarce make one Possibility. Zulema p. 19. " If Iustice will take all and nothing give, " Iustice methinks is not Distributive. Benzayd. p. 48. " To dye on kill you is ah' Alternative, " Rather than take your Live I will not live.
Observe how prettily our Authour chops Logick in Heroick Vese. Three such sustian canting words as [Distributive] [Alternative] and [two fs,] No man but imself would have come within the noise of. But he's a man of general Learning and all comes into his Plays. 'T would have done well too, if he could have met with a rant or two worth the observation: Such as. Alman. page 156. " Move swiftly Sun and fly a Lovers pace, " Leave Months and Weeks behind thee in thy race. \ But surely the Sun whether he flyes a Lovers or not a Lovers pace leaves Weeks and Moneths, nay Years too behind him in his race. Poor Robin or any other of the Philomathematicks would have given him satisfa∣ction in the point. Almanz. page. 56. to Abdalla. " If I would kill thee now, thy Fate's so low " That I must stoop e're I can give the blow. " But mine is sixt so far above thy Crown, " That all thy men " Pil'd on thy Back can never pull it down. Now where that is Almanzors sae is fixt I cannot guess: But wherever 'tis I be∣lieve Almanzor, and think that all Abdalas Subjects piled upon one another might not ull down his Fate so well as without piling; besides I thik Abdalla so wise a man, that if Almanzor had to d him, piling his men upon his back might do the feat, he would scarce bear such a weight for the pleasure of the exploit: But 'tis a huff, and let Abdalla do it if he dare. But though your hand did of his murder miss; Howe're his Exile has restrain'd his pow'r. [But though, and howe're signifie both one thing.] Sir I kiss your hand; 'tis the first time I ever heard so much before. [He fils a Verse as Masons do Brick walls, with broken pieces in the middle,] Pardon me Sir, if I quible with your Similitude, [But though] and [However,] are not in the middle, but the beginning of the Verse. In common Murders blood for blood may pay. But when a Martyrd Monarch dyes, we may His Murderers Condemne; but that's not all. A vengeance hangs o're Nations where they fall. [What does a vengeance hang o're Nations where Murderers of Kings are punisht.] [where they fall] to what does [they] relate? if to martyrd Monarchs 'tis false Gram∣mar.] If [they] may not relate to martyrd Kings in general, the last Line being a distinct sentence from the rest, Mr. Bays has reason. No Prologues to her Death, let it be done.
[Let what be done: Let her Death be done!] No let her Execution be done. Thy poysond Husband, and thy murdered Son, This injur'd Empress and Morocco's Throne Which thy accursed hand so oft has shook, Deserves— A blow more fierce than Iustice ever strook. [Deserves is false Grammar for deserve.] And afterwards. Whose Fortune and whose Sword has wonders done. There he finds the same fault [has for have.] And in another place. And though your hand and hers no Scepter bears. [Bears for bear.] Here our Old Friend has met with Grammar again, but he keeps his old humour, and treats it as uncivilly as before. A Boy that had never arrived beyond the construing Qui mihi discipulus, &c. Would tell him that the Verb after more Nominative Cases than one may agree with them all, or only with the last at pleasure. What does he think of this expression in Ovid. Quum mare quum Tellus, correptaque Regia Coeli Ardeat.— [But how does her poyson'd Husband deserve a blow, and why does her murdered Son deserve another?] I can tell him how the Poysoning of her Husband, and the Mur∣dering of her Son deserves one: But if the Poet has taken too much Liberty in the exprssing of it, he begs his pardon. But this way of speaking is very common, as we say, I'le revenge his blood. There [his blood] is taken for [the shedding of his blood.] " I will not hear one word but Almahide. Is not the name of Almahide here meant for [a discourse upon Almahide] as had been said before. —Stop her poyson'd Breath, And check her growing outrage by her death. [To check a man by death is a very civil reprehension, he'l stop her poyson'd Breath with a Hatchet.] A Bowstring would do as well. Guilt only thus to guilty Minds appears: As Syrens do to drowning Mariners. Seen only by their Eyes whose Deaths are nigh. We rarely see our Crimes before we dye. [Here he makes a false Allusion. For Syre appear not like Porpoises before a
storm, or in it; but if youl believe Homer in a Calm, enticeing Marriners to the Rocks by their songs, who may escape 'em as Ulysses did.] I hope Bays hold, up to his complaint in the third act that to write too much would put the cramp in his fingers. For I much suspect the Cramp or Gout or some∣thing got into them by that time they came to examine the fifth act, for never did fingers put Pen to Paper so fumblingly, nor make such wretched blurs as this super∣annuated scriblers have dn. First he says ['tis no true allusion because Syrens appear not before or in storms like porpoises, but in clams.] Therefore (as he reasons,) they do not appear to drowning Marriners, for no man (he implies,) can be drown'd but in a storm. Why look ye, Gentlemen, was ever more solid reason given, could an Oracle have spoken better? If this do not satisfie ye, the Devil's in ye. But man of learning, recollect thy memory for once, and take the Poetical description of Syrens. The Syrens were suppos'd to be Daughters of Achelous and Calliope creatures half fish, and half flesh, who by their charming voices so enticed Marriners as to make 'em leap over-board, wh allured by their songs and their Beauties, pursued them till they were drown'd, which don the Syrens drag'd 'em to the Rocks and devour'd them. But because Ulisses Miaculosly escaped them; therefore says J. D. Syrens never appear to drowning Marriners. I must confess this allusion is faulty, and why because 'tis quite contrary to Mr. Drydens. And to reform it to his sense it should be thus. Guilt only thus to guilty minds appeares: As Syrens of the Land to drowning Waggoners: viz. Land Marriners in his stylo novo▪ Well Reader, though our Commentator has not performed his promise, I'le treat you with a parcel of Allusions, as delicate as you could with. I in the Royal Martyr. " Such fatal bounty once the Gaules did shew, " They threw their Rings, but thrw their Targets too. Now according to our School-boy Elkanahs reading it was the Sabines that threw their Rings and their Targets. But Gaules and Sabines, all's one in an Allusion. Celadon in the maiden Queen. There's another puff in my Voyage has blown me as far as to the North of Scot∣land. A pretty puff from Sicily, where his Scene lyes. I am afraid our Author's fancy Rambled home to England for that expression. Granada page 38. Abenamar. " The people like a headlong torrent go, " And every damm they break or overflow, " But unoppos'd they either loose their force, " Or wind in Volums to their former course. A very pretty Allusion, contrary to all sense or Reason. Torrents I take it, let 'em wind never so much, can never return to their former course, unless he can sup∣pose that fountains can go upwards, which is impossible: nay more in the foregoing page he tells us so too. A trick of a very unfaithful memory.
" But can no more then fountains upwards flow. pag. 37. Which of a Torrent which signifies a Rapid stream is much more impossible. Be∣sides if he goes to quibble and lay that 'tis possible by Art water may be made returne, and the same water run twice in one and the same Channel: Then he quite confutes what he says, for 'tis by being opposed that it runs into its former course, for all Engines that make water so return, do it by compulsion and opposition. Or if he means a headlong torrent for a tide which would be ridiculous, Yet Tides do not wind in Volumnes, but come directly back (if their current lyes straight) to their former course, and that by opposition of the Sea water that drives 'em back agen. In his Annus Mirabilis he says of the Fire of London. Stanza 217. " In this deep quiet, from what source unknown, " Those see is of fire, their fatal birth disclose. " And first, few scattering sparks about were blown, " Big with the flames that to our ruine rose. A spark of fire big with a flame, is such damn'd nonsense that 'tis unsufferabe. But his blundering mistake lies in applying an allusion to the seed that generates with is proper onely of the Womb that produces. I am of opinion that a spark of fire that lights but a farthing Candle is as big with flme (as our Authors words it.) as a spark of that fire which burnt London. I expect to hear him talk of Acorns big with Oakes, and kernals of Apples big with trees. 'Tis much of a peice with sparks of fire big with flames. But to lard his gross oversights with some more pardonable mistakes. In Granada page second he speaks of one of his Champion Bulls. " Who with high Nostrils suing up the wind. Now if the Bull held his Nostrils upwards, he did not snuff up, but snuff down the wind. Abd. pag. 57. " I'le to the Spanish King; and try if he, " To count nance his own right will succour me, " There is more faith in Christian Dogs then thee. What a damn'd rude and rascally expression has he put into the mouth  rince, a man of courage, and one that through the Play aimes at a Crown  To make him call a King, because he is not of his Faith, Dog: and yet at  same time Fly to his protection. Almanz. Speaking of oabdclin pag, 101. " He like a Devil among the blest above, " Can take no pleasure in your Heav'n of love. What a pretty fancied allusion I here. A Divel in Heav'n. But granting we could suppose such a Creature there, which by the way must destroy that opinion
of the Beatifick Presence, yet I guess that a Divel is not so in love with Hell and his damn'd estate, but he could take pleasure in Heav'n and that blest estate fom which he fell, if he had the honour to be there agen. One thing I observe in the generallity of his allusions, his Allegories are so bold that taking his Liberty I'le turn one of his Similes twenty wys to the same pur∣pose, on th same Subect, an not vary from his fancy. As for example I'le take the forementioned lines in Maximin. " He like a subtle worm has eat his way, " And log'd within does on the Kernel prey. " I creep without, and hopeless to remove " Him hence, wait only for the Husk of Love. And turning it to a Rat in a Venison Pasty, mark if the Simile be not firm, and of the two the Fancy the more lofty. He like a subtle Rat has eat his way, And lodg'd within does on the Venison prey. I creep without, and hopeless to remove Him hence, wait only for the Crust of Love. And so a Mouse in a Cheese would do pretty well, turning the Allegory to the Rind of Love. And if at any time he takes a flight, 'tis ten to one 'tis not to the purpose. As for example. " Alman to Almah. When e're you speak. " Were my wounds Mortal they should still bleed on, " And I would listen till my listen till my life were gon. " My Soul should even for your last accent stay. " And then shoot out, and with such speed obey; " It should not bait at Heav'n to stop its way. Now if these last lines were sense which has been proved to the contrary yet they would be absolutely mal a propos: for Almanzor, that design'd Compliment to Alma∣hide mistakes his Cue infinitely. He tells her in the first lines how long he would listen to her charming voice: but in the last in a Rapture he tells her, how nimbly his Soul should post away from her to Heav'n. If she had been there it had been some∣thing to have said how brikly he could mount to Heav'n after her. But she being still upon Earth, it had been a Compliment to have told her How tardy his soul should be when it left her though to meet Heav'n. And for fancy when he lights of any thing like i, 'tis a wonder, if it be not bor∣row'd. As here for example of, I find this fanciful thought in his Annus Mirabi∣lis. Stanza 232. Speaking of the Fire of London. " Old Father Thames rais'd up his reverend head, " But feared the fate of Simeis would return: " Deep in his Oze he sought his sedgy bed; " And shrunk his waters back into his Urne.
This is stolen from Cowleys Davide is page 9. Swift Jordan started, and strait backward fled, Hiding amongst thick Reeds his Aged Head. Here with a little addition of his own fancy, and turning [aged head] into [reverend head and [thick reeds] into [Ooze and Sedgy bed,] and [starting and flying backward,] into [shrinking his waters back,] he has not only given us to understand he has judgment, but how he uses it too. But one thing I forget in his remarks on the four forementioned lines of the Au∣thour, he says [by Guilt appears] in the first line, and [seen only by their eyes whose deaths are nigh,] that the Poet affirms Guilts appears to dying men, yet in the very next he contradicts himself] We rarely see our crimes before we dye. What a wry faced contradiction is here? The Poet affirms that Guilt appears to men when their deaths are nigh, and that men rarely see their crimes before they come to dye, which in my opinion looks more like a Tautology than a Contradiction. He says in one place [the Poet makes so many faults that a Critick can make no clear riddance.] But he was a little wide there, for if he does not make clear riddance by such Cri∣ticisms as these, the Devil's in him. But since my Dagger has so feebly done, Missing thy Breast I've sent it to my own. [To send a thing is to part with the possession of it, but she it seems sends the Dagger to her self.] To scrible like thee, is to part with all sense and every thing that's like it. To send a Dagger to a Mans heart is an expression older than thou art. Curse on weak nature with my Rage unman'd, A Masculine heart linkt with a female hand. [What reason has she to fall foul upon Nature for not making her a man.] Ay what reason indeed: But for her to curse nature for not lending her an Arm as strong as a Mans, that her rage might have done more manly actions is not improper. Your Courteous Arm retrived mine from a Guilt. Morenas hand, Morenas blood had spilt, [To retrive an arm from guilt is Metaphorical nonsense.] But to reprive an arme from a guilt is not, which is the word that is spoken, though the other escaped the Press. Is this your thanks, &c. [Here is excellent Grammar between [is] and [thanks] what Grammar soever 'tis, I am sre 'tis a propriety the word [thanks] has in English. Are these your thanks▪ is never said. [Thank] is commonly a familiar word that comhends something understood; as w say [thank Sir,] for [Sir I give you thanks.] Is this your thanks: Is this your giving me thanks, or making me a requital.
Your Armie's routed e're the Wars begun, The City taken and your Empire won. [To rout an Army presupposes fighting, but this was intended a flight.] Pray what was this intended for. Almanz. page 22. " An when the Spaniards their assault begin, " At once beat those without, and these within. This Almanzor speaks of himself, and sure for one man to conquer an Army within the City, and another without the City at once is something difficult, but this flight is pardonable to some we meet in Granada. Osmin page 13. speaking of Almanzor. " Who like a Tempest that outrides the wind, " Made a just battel e're the bodies joyn'd. Pray what does this Honourable person mean by a Tempest that outrides the wind. A Tempest that outrides it self: To suppose a Tempest without wind is as bad as sup∣psing a man to walk without Feet; for if h supposes the Tempest to be something distinct from the wind, yet as being the effect of wind only, to come before the cause is a little preposterous, so that if he takes it one way, or if he takes it the other, those two is will scarce make one possibility. —Muly Hamet was ne're taught, To back, but lead those Armies where be sought. [Though Muly Hamet had a Back as broad as Hercules, yet he could scarce back whole Armies with it.] What cannot a nimble witted Commentatour find out. His blood dear Prince shall pay for shedding thine. [Did his blood shed the others blood.] If I should tell thee, this Pamphlet shall make the amends for the writing of thine, wouldst thou say, did this Pamphlet write the other. To expiate thy blood I'le let out mine. [His blood was good and had no crime in it] But the shedding his blood was none of the best deeds. —He by no force withstood, Comes now this way to sacrifice your blood. [To Sacrifice blood is improper.] But for thee to write nonsense is not. Immur'd within the walls of this strong Tower. [That is wall'd within the walls.] Thats, anything to please thee. Draw up my Forces raise my Guards.
[The Usurper had been just told that his Army was revolted and that Muly Hamet was Proclaimed King, yet he talks of drawing up his forces and rayseing his Guards afterwards.] I am afraid Commentator not Crimalhaz talks too much. Though his Army that was sent out to fight Taffalet was revolted, yet 'tis not to be supposed but the Imperial Pallace in Morocco, which writers have related to be the greatest place of strength in that City, had some forces in it to defend it; But how few soever Cri∣malhaz had there, yet for a man of Courage to oppose a pow'r that he knew would take off his head, though with little hopes of success, is not so great a wonder as Hum Buz takes it for. —There's not one dart In Heav'n, that would not srike the Murdrers heart Before his hand should touch her sacred breast. [Pray answer me one civil question: how could he be a Murderer before his hand bad toucht her sacred breast?] This Question may as civilly be answered, as his objection against Treason e're it's begin in the fourth act, The resolved intention of Murder, is enough to give the man that designs it the name of Murderer I wonder how Ben and Shakesear ventured in several of their Tragedies, as one for example in Macbeth, to write [enter Murtherer] at the beginning of a Scene, when the Murder for which they were so call'd was not committed till after their entrance. Though I am faln so low, My fortune lost I may a Beggar grow. [That is, though my fortune be lost I may grow poor.] As if every man that's poor must needs Beg. I'le to a Thousand deaths my life expose, Before I will one inch of Empire loose. [How many lives had she to expose to a thousand deaths] How many years hast thou liv'd and not heard such an expression as I'le die a thou∣sand deaths before I'le do so or so. [An Inch of Empire is no great matter, but she is a woman that speaks it, and an Inch might be somewhat to her.] Well said Archwag: there he hits it. A Smooty quibble tickles him, and is so much in his Element, that I doubt not, but a shrug and a smile attended the con∣ception of this jest. But I'le ask him why Mariamne may not be as unwilling to part with an Inch of Empire as Almanzor was to part with one stone out of Granada's walls. pag. 12. " And he shall buy it dear what his he calls, " We will not give one stone from out these walls. Now to repartee upon him in his own-beloved style. A stone out of a City Wall is no great matter, but he is a man who speaks it, and a stone might be some what with him. Well now let our Gomical friend say he is aped for something, for this baldrdash is o like him, tha Imitation I fear will be the lest thing my Reader will accute me of, for so facetious a thought.
I'le sing my funeral obsequies in these Arms. I'le Ravish her— Then throw my self and her into the Fire, And Arme in Arme together weel expire. [He sings after hee's dead] No sure he says he will sing before he dyes. And though Funeral Obsequies are generally sung after mens deaths, what if Crimalhaz is pleased to be particular, and sing his himself before his death. What Miracle of honour has fate sent? Sure Heav'n acts Wonders! Wonders! no 'tis none— What have th' high'r Powers to do but to take care, Of so much Vertue and a Face so Fair? [Sure Heav'n acts Wonders, Wonders! No 'tis none. That is the wonders is no won∣der. A rare Grammarian.] Let it be put in the plural number▪ Sure Heaven acts wonders, wonders! No they are none. What are no wonders? Though in his admiration he says in the Plural num∣ber, Sure Heaven acts wonders. Yet when it more particularly relates to the saving of his Mistress, both the foregoing line, and the following lines shew the necessity of a singular number to express it by. Sure Heav'n acts wonders, wonders! No the saving of my Mistress is none. For what have the higher pow'rs to do but to take care of so great a beauty, &c. Subjects my homage pay but Monarchs thine. [To pay my homage, is to pay that homage which is my due to another person: But he means subjects pay me homage, and I pay thee.] Is it not English for a Creditour to say to a Debtour, Pay me my debt? why may not pay me my homage signifie the homage that is due to me as well. And saves her blood to be ally'd to yours. [By this alliance he means marriage; but to be married and allied are as different, as Cousin and Husband.] Because we say Husband and Wife are married, therefore we are bound, if we come to particulars, to say their bloods are married too, and their hands are married. A nobler Passion story never writ, That turn'd a Traytour to a Proselite. [How could story write.] But Historians can write though story cannot. And if he finds fault with this expression, how will he be reconciled with such a one as this? Fame reports: or fame says such a thing. Fame can no more speak than story can write; for Fame is not what speaks, but what is spoken of a man: As story is not what writes, but is written of a man.
[But a Proselyte is one that changes his Religion, and he is the likest to make a Tray∣tour.] A very Substantial Apothegme: A man that out of a principle of Piery is con∣verted from a Religion that he thinks erroneous, to one he thinks the true, is the likest to prove a Traytour; which is as much as to say, a man that does his best en∣deavour to be good and honest, is the likest to be a Rogue. Besides in Hametalhaz's case Love converted him from a Villain to an honest man: Therefore says Notes, he is the likest to be a Villain. But his impertinence draws towards a conclusion, and indeed 'tis high time. Ham. I from those Eyes for ever will remove, I cannot stand the sight of hopeless love. In his next Speech he says. To what e're place my wandring steps incline, I'le fancy Empires for I'le think her mine. [His Love is hopeless, and yet he'll think her his.] As if his Love were ever the less hopeless for his thinking her his. If a mans thinking a woman his could make his Love cease to be hopeless, there needs not be such a thing as a despairing Lover in Nature: For if a Cobler were in Love with a Queen, if thinking her his own would give him hopes, who could hinder his thoughts: But if Commentatour will have it otherwise, I am his Humble Servant. Raigning's a whole Lifes toyl, the work of Years. [Raigning is neither a whole Lifes toyl, if the King be not Crown'd in his Cradle; nor the work of Years in case he raign but one Year.] How severely would Elkanah have been handled if he were really guilty, and all Commentatours Objections were sense and reason. How will he reconcile this expression in his preface. [This up∣start and illiterate scribler comes amongst the Poets, like one of the Earth-born Breth∣ren, and his first business in the world is to attacque and murder all his Fellows.] Now I am of belief that Elkanahs first business in the world (if you'l ask his Nurse) was rather as Commentatour says in the Fourth Act [To Bite, stamp, crie and roar] then to murder Poets. If he began to attacque and murder Poets in his Cradle, he was no doubt an upstart scribler indeed. My Iustite ended; now I'le meet a Crown. [Then it seems he intends to do Iustice no longer, now he is King, but to turn Rogue like Crimalhaz, or Fool like Muly Labas.] His Iustice upon Crimalhaz, I am of opinion, was ended when Crimalhaz was Exe∣cuted, and yet he might be just still, and neither Fool nor Rogue, In Love, a Day, an Hour, a Minutes bliss, Is all flight, ratur, flame, and Extaies.
[Is and Extasies are of several numbers,] are they, so: If I were as thee I would not take it at the Poets hands. More Extasies than one in a minutes happiness is too much. Loves livelyer joys so quick and active move, An Age in Empire's but an hour in Love. [How an Age in Empire is but an hour in Love I cannot understand.] And in troth I believe thee, for why thy understanding should be any clearer here than it has been all along through the Play I can't imagine. But to quicken thy apprehension, that thou mayst understand this last Line of the Play, I'le beg the favour of thee to con∣strue these two Lines in Cowley. 'Tis so with man, when once a Crown he wears, The Coronation day's more than a Thousand Years. On the Conduct or Plot of the Play. THis being much of a piece with the Notes on the Play, a man may start into the matter without the trouble of a formal Introduction. He tells you first [On what foundation of nonsense this Play is built. Morena runs away with Muly Labas from her Fathers Court, for which they are both imprison'd by his Father, and to be put to death for stealing one another. Yet in the mean time her Father is so far offended, that he is wageing War against His, and coming with an Army against Morocco. In the first place she relates a thing to one who knows it her self.] And upbraids him with what she suffered for his sake.] A prety Character of his Heroine to make her an illnaturd fool.] This is his first objection, but in the next page he contradicts himself, and says [Morena gives him a reason for this relation, and said it not to upbraid him.] Very well: she does and she does not: she is an illnaturd, and she is not an illnaturd fool. Well argued Laureat. But next says he [why should Muly Labas steal he away, she was her equal, and there∣fore her Father ought to have given his consent to the Marriage.] At him agen Bays. Because they we equals must there be an absolute necessity of her Fathers consent? Wh if he design'd her for some other Prince, Muly Labas his superior, and a per∣son whose alliance might be more for his interest. Or how if she was contracted to some other Prince whom he liked not, and forced by state interest, (a great Math-maker among Princes,) against her inclination, and therefore for Love of Muly Labas ran away with him to avoid the other. Where lyes the impossibility.
How many more reasons might there be for his stealing her; which if the Poet had occasion to have mentiond you should have heard of. But then why does Muly Labas his Father put his Son in Prison at his return? Why did Solyman strangle Mustapha? does not the Play tell him why? for a suspition of an at∣tempt against his Empire. [But why will he kill them both. Yes mark the Poets reasons. He will present her Father with her head, a good way to pacifie him, and make him withdraw the Siege. Sending the Lady back might have avoided the incon∣veniency of the War.] A very pretty King he would make of him the whilst, to say. Here Sir take your daughter agen, I'le rid my hands of the Baggage, she shall come no more within my doores: let us be friends for I do not like bloody noses, and pray deparat in peace if you love me, and you will much oblige yours to command King of Moroc∣co. This is the Character Mr. Dryden likes. But what if Elkanahs King is a little more rough and will fight him, and cares neither for his Army nor him neither: But will cut his Daughtes head off, and his too if he can come at it? [But why Muly Labas a Traytor, he a Traytor. I wonder his Father knew him no better then to suspect him of so much Wit as goes to the making one, &c.] Muly Labas is a Fool, a Fool, a Fool, the Parrat has so over and over agen re∣peated in the Play, that 'tis high time to clear him. Muly Labas in the true sto∣ry was but twelve years of age when he came to the Crown: and through the whole Play, the Author has made him, though no great part, yet a man that does nothing but what reason and Circumstances would convince a Iuditious man ought to be don: and if he has any fault 'tis his believing his Mother Honest; and if at any time he's missed by her, 'tis by a credulity that might very probably be imposed by a Mother upon a Son; she having to his knowledge acted nothing that should make him believe otherwise. But I wonder of all objections how this came from him, knowing how guilty he has been in the Character of a Boabdelin, a man that is not only a Coward, and one that in his Armies head dares not touch an insolent Fellow that he fears Cuckolds him, nay one whom he is certain his Wie Loves better then himself, and for sooth out of a fear of his subjects displeasure. But that fear might be taken off, (a very pretty King the whlst by exposing Almanzors insolence to his Army, who though they loved his Conduct, and Courage, would certainly consent or at lest pardon their dutiful and humble King, for a piece of Justice don on so arrogant an abuser of Ma∣jesty. But another fault he finds against Muly Labas his demonstration of his Innocence to Morena. —Can he think so soul A thought as Treason harbours in his Soul Which does Morena's Sacred Image bear? No shape of ill can come within her Sphear. [He was in Love with Morena therefore Innocent.] What a mighty offender a∣gainst sense and reason is his King for Complimenting his Mistress. [Then enters Queen Mother, an tells Muly Labas, his Father is dead suddenly, and re∣lates the manner of it, with all the Circumstances; yet afterwards being alone with Cri∣malhaz whom she procured to poyson her Husband, she desires him to relate the manner, of it, of which she could not be ignorant. She who was whored by him, and set him on, could not but know the Circumstances also.] Here in our Commentators Phrase Im∣pertinence is pretty thick sown. First because the Queen gives her Son a frged rela∣lation of her Husbands death, therefore she must needs know the true circumstan∣ces:
and next because she set Crimalhaz a work therefore she must know all particu∣lars of his dying within halfe an hour after his death. The particulars of the contri∣vance I grant he understood, but how could she know the particulars of the success of it, unless she had singled out Crimalhaz privately for the knowledge. But how if the publick concern for the sudden death of the King gave 'em no opportunity till now. For as I take it the Queen did not ask him. How did you contrive his death? But. How died the King, how did the poyson take? [But mark how ridiculously he contrives in the person of this great Plotter the Queen Mother. First she makes a politick speech to say her Son is not ripe for ruine till they have undermind his absent General. The General was absent his return uncertain.] That is his Navy came in disguise up the River Tensist, for he enterd Morocco the next Morning, which was more then they could know he would do, so long before∣hand. [Besides her Son being in Prison, and the City at her disposing, she and her Gallant had a much fairer game to play if they immediately possessed themselves of the Crown now in their reach, then if they waited for the Generals return, who was a friend to the King, and whom they were not certain they could render suspected to him.] Oh wondeful Politician, what does he mean by possessing themselves of the Crown now in their reach! They might break open the old Emperors Closet, and Seize his Turbat and his Robes, and dress Crimalhaz in his habit, is that setting up for a King? If he means by the Crown the Imperial pow'r 'tis nonsense. How could he set him∣self up for a King when all the Forces of Morocco, were under Muly Hamets Con∣duct, and he entring into the City, who besides his being Friend to Muly Labas, was himself a nearer heir to the Crown then Crimalhaz and no doubt would have been far from complimenting him with what was his own right, especially being so many thousand strong as he was to argue the case with him, if occasion had been. But our Commentators opinion of King and Crowns moves excentrick to every bodys ese. What Puppets does he make of them. But the silliness of this remark shall be past by, for the Introduction of another so much beyond it, that nothing can be more ridiculous. [The second act (he says) has little business in it except Muly Hamets rturn with the Fleet] But now for Elkanahs Thefts from his Cotemporaries as was urged against him in the Preac. [His Muly Hamets Character is an imitation of Porphirius.] And why? because they both bring home an Army to their Kings aid: [Compare the verses and the Theft will be visible.] Maxim. " Porphyius, whom you Aegypts Praetor made " Is come from Alexandria to your aid. Morocco▪ Hearing whose force Morocco will invade I have brought home your Army to your aid, &c. [His Hametalhaz is likewise as plainly stoln from Placidius: Placidius envy'd Por∣phyius, Hametalhaz, Muly Hamet.] Placid. " May all the Curses envy ever know " Or could invent, Porphyrius persue.
Ham. But in Morocco his high pride may find His name less Glorious, and his Stars less kind. But by the way where lyes Hametalhaz his envy, could not he conspire against Mu∣ly Hamet, to make his name less Glorious, but it must be done out of Envy? Ha∣metalhaz was but a Subminister to Crimalhaz, and acted only for reward, if there was Envy in the case twa between Crimahaz and Muly Hamet, not him and Muly Hamet. [The Image of Morena is taken from Cydaria: They both desire their Fathers should be spared in the Battel: And Cortez and Muly Hamets answer are the same in ef∣fect.] Cortez. " The edge of War I'le from the battel take, " And spare your Fathers Subjects for your sake. Morocco. But the rough hand of War more gentle make; And spare his blood for his Morena's sake: Muly H. We only do aspire to this great end To make your Father not our Prize but friend. Muly Hamet will spare her Father for her sake. And Cortez her Fathers Subjects. But that's the same thing sparing a King, or his Subjects. What a discovery has this Manslayer of a Critick found. Because two Generals bring home their Kings Armies to their assistance, and because Hamealhaz has a spight against Muly Hamet, and Placidius against Porphyrius, therefore Elkanahs Characters are stoln from Mr. Drydens. And because Morena says pray Sir take care you hurt not my Father, and Cydaria says the same; therefore their Characters too are the same. Does this grave Scribler that talks so much of judgment, make an expression of two lines a Character? at that rate I may say all men have one Cha∣racter; for 'tis ten to one but you shall hear 'em at one time or other say the same thing. Suppose one man should say what a Clock is it, and another, what time of day is it, are their Characters the same then? But to prate like him, you shall see whence his Characters are taken. Almanzor is a Copy of Sir Martin Marral, mark but their expressions and the theft will be visible. Almanzor was said to be of a Rough and unfashion'd nature, that is, he was not bred up to singing and dancing, but was an excellent Warriour. So Sir Martin understood neither singing, danc∣ing, Musick no Poetry, but when he beats the Bailiffs, he Cryes, Victoria, Victo∣ria, Mr. Misent must acknowledge him for a Sword-man. Besides Almanzor when he heard Almahide accused of Adultery, says, " 'Tis false: she is not ill, nor can she be, " She must be chast because she's loved by me. And when Sir Martin heard Mrs. Millisent had been accused of unchastity by War∣ner, he says, Come hither you wicked Varlet fruitful in nothing but lyes, how durst you cast your Venome on such a Saint as Mrs Millisent, to traduce her Virtue and say is was Adulterate. His Cortez and Abdalla in Granada are the same Characters, for Cortez deses to get into the Tower whore Almeria and his Mistress Cydaria were together. And Abdalla desires Lyndaraxa to open the Albayzin Gate to let him in to her: and both are but borrow'd from the Ballat of Sweet open the door and let me come in.
Nay his Berenice, and his Cydaria, are exactly the same, Berenice Loves Porphy∣rius, who is a General, and Cydaria loves Cortez who is another. His Boabdelin and Almahide are the same with Bisket and his Wife in Epsom Wells, with a little altera∣tion. Boabdelin makes his wife send for her Gallant Almanzor, and Mrs. Bisket sends her Husband for Mr. Rains, to come and Play at Cribbidge with her. Only Bisket is but a City Pimp, and Boabdelin a Pimp Royal. Another fault he finds that [ kanah has given into his Heroes hands the Conquest of a Town more then is his right] What if there had never been such a man as Muly Hamet, and the Poet had rais'd up a Character and given twice as much into his hands, the fault had not been impardonable, especially when he sees his Elder make bold with one Maximin Emperor of Rome for another. Muly Labas. Lead on Muly Hamet. Lead on: and all that kneel to you Shall bow to me; this Conquest makes it due ['Tis not very Heroick in his Heroe to assume to himself the Conquest of his Mistress, nor savours of good manners to tell the Emperor 'tis his due.] As for good manners to a King that I wonder he took notice of, since Almanzor makes so little Ceremony with Kings. But if his Conquering his Mistress be not Heroick what is this? Page 95 Enter to Almanzor Queen Almahide wearing a Scarfe. Almanz. " So Venus moves when to the Thunderer, " In Smiles and tears she would some sute prefer, " When with her Cestos girt, " And drawn by Doves, she cuts the yielding Skies " And kindles gentle fires where e're she flies. " To every eye a Goddest is confest, " By all the Heavenly Nation she is blest: " And each with secret joy admits her to his breast. " Madam your new Commands I come to know, [to her bowing] " If yet you can have any where I go: " If to the Regions of the dead they be, " You take the speediest course to send by Me. Here Almanzor is a little Heroick to compare himself to Iupiter and his Mistress to a maudlin Venus that comes a whining to him. But observe the rising of the Fancy: Almanzor is the Thunderer, in the fist lines, and his Mistress he petitioning Venus. But in the last she's the Thunderer, and he the Venus: there he begs her com∣mands, nay and is so far from the God he was in the first line, that poor mortal he's goig to the Regions of the dead. But one thing I must not pass by of the Authors Plot here. This Scarfe which she weares she gives Almanzor, which makes the bui∣siness of a whole act with Iealousies, and rants, and Conundrums in Boabdelins Pate who first gave it her as a token of his Love, A very great present from a King to a Queen. A Hood a suite of knots, or a pare of Pendants had been as noble. But he remembred a jealousie occasiond by a Handkercher in the Moor of Venice: and so en∣larged upon that foundation as wittily as a man could desire. [Muly Hamet has a Ring given him by virtue of which he visits the Queen Mother where he surprizes Crimalhaz and her a sleep together. First `tis to be considerd that the Emperor, gave this Ring in publick, so the Queen and Crimalhaz had fair warning of their danger.]
The Emperors Signet was given him in the presence of his Queen his Sister and some Nobility that attended him, now would I ask Mr. Commentator which of these was Crimalhaz, his confident in his Intrigue with Laula, or which should be the Pmp to give him this warning, besides `tis not fix Minutes after the recept of this Ring before he visits the Queen, and he must be very nimble that should carry the Intel∣ligence before him, [But then how could Muly. Hamet get into the Queens Lodgings without the notice of some of her Attendants,] now pray why must all her Attendants be privy to hers and Crimalhaz his interview. The Author tells you that Achmat the Eunuch introduced him. But says he [why did he not stop him he knew what was doing within,] Now does he think such a Fellow at the Surprize of so great a per∣son, and so Commanding an Authority as the Kings Signet drst oppose his Entrance. [But how came Crimalhaz to the Queens rescue he had not the Emperors Signet too. Did he drop from the Clouds] what does this Critick take a Seraglio for, a Pest-House: a building set out of the Common walk of mankind? the Seraglio was an apart∣ment in the Pallace. How impossible then is it that Crimalhaz might fortunately be within the heareing of the Queens supposd outcy: and wherein lyes the impossi∣bility of a Gentlemans running in to a Ladys rescue though on forbidden ground. [But Muly Hamet says nothing in his defence to the purpose,] what should he say? he tells you. My single voice a vain defence will make, Where so much witness and a Mother speak. [A very well bred Heroe to be hang'd in pure respect to her who accused him.] Believe me her intended Ravisher, Appearing so I take the guilt from her. Their false Impeachments do this comfort bring, That I may wear that Cloud would shade a King. Now wherein is his fault in desiring to appear guilty for the saving of a Kings Hon∣our? or wherein has he any probable means of clearing himself, pleading but in his own cause, against the Chastity of the Kings Mother too. [But Muly Hamet offers the duel to Crimalhaz in these words.] To this Adulterer you leave afford, To vindicate his Treason by his Sword: That Iustice by my hand may give him death, And stiffle with his blood his perjured breath. [The King who always takes things in the wrong instead of granting the Combat to Muly Hamet, thinks his offering it a proof of his guilt, in these words.] If you this rash attempt persue, You'l make me credit what he says is true. [That is, if youl offer to clear your self I shall conclude you guilty: admirably argued.] Yes indeed admirably. As if his Conquering Crimalhaz (if the duel had been granted) had been a confirmation of his Innocnce. He's for his Knight-errantry agen, a∣mongst his Zulema, and Hamet, Almanzor, and Osmyn. This is a great proof of a mans Innocence. Then all Valiant men can commit no Capital crime, if the dar∣ing to fight may clear 'em. For if they are Innocent they are fooles if they do not
fight their Accusers: if guilty they are madmen; for if they submit to the Law they must dyes: but in a Duel they have an even chance for their lives, besides if they fall in a Duel, they dye more honourably then by a sentence. [But why should the Queen-Mother, be the woman that should save Muly Hamet, a∣gainst her own Character and nterest.] But hold! the King will then my cheat descry: I wish his death, who tamely see him dye. [What reason had she to care if the King knew she desired Muly Hamets death for attempting a rape upon her.] Yes dear heart, 'tis both agreeing with her Character and Interest to save him. First to make his attempt of Ravishing her more probable, she did not say that Muly Hamet flew upon her without any provocation, [as Bys observes] for she confesses she used him so kindly (as above twenty lines, which she speaks, affirm) that she was partly an accessary to his attempt, by his mistak∣ing her kind usage for Lov which was only Civility: and therefore by the rules of her Character which was to appear a Saint to her Son, she would not seem consent∣ing to the Punishment of a Crime will she had in some respect been Instrument to. Besides it was much for the clearing her Innocence to beg her accusers life, for by that she seem'd to defie all Arguments that possible he if he lived might make out towards the clearing himself, and the impeaching her. [But Mariamnes freeing Muly Hamet in Prison because he had been false to Love, and would have Ravisht her Mother is a senseless Generosity.] The reason the Poet gives you in the Play is not so senseless. Mar. Sir you mistake my kindness. I have lent Your freedom onely as your Banishment, That being releast you might Morocco fly, Removed at once both from my heart and eye, &c. [But how knew she he was in Prison, she was not by when he was committed, and yes within twelve lines has bribed his Taylour for his Delivery.] What a mighty leap is here. Pray let me know how Cortez when he found Orbel∣an in his Tent, could be supposed with only changing the Scene, and not one word spoken, to go out of his Pavilion, and reenter farr enough from the Camp for a General to fight a Duel; especially when `tis supposed a Generals Tent lyes in the heart of the Camp, and the Taxallans Army was so numerous. But when all's done, [heres a Babel for a Morocco] and to have made it a greater heap of confusion he tells you in a reprinted Errata, that there should be more of his Notes, a whole sheet being lost at the Press; but `tis such a loss that his Generous Reader no doubt will pardon, which is a favour those sheets which are not lost can hardly expect.
POSTSCRIPT. TO talke in our Authors Postscript style of such Jimeracks as [Mathematical Philosophical, and Musical headpeices for the compleating an excellent Poet;] or to answer him in Trigonometrical, Metaphysical, and Monochordical Fustian is not to the purpose. Nor is the answering of his Errata on the Epistle worth the while, there being so little appearance of sense in it, except his proveing a trifle, and a Libel to be the same thing, which is the cheife head of the Discourse, most part of his objections against particular lines through the Play, being before examin∣ed amongst their Neighbours. All the Apology I have to make is to beg some of my Readers pardons for the length of the Book, most part of mankind being before convinced of the invalidity of most of his idle Cavils, who consequently will esteem the examination of the whole superfluous, But all I can say for the tediousness of this Pamphlet is, that (as Mr. Dryden says of Elkanahs Play, [several people are delighted with the sound of Robustuous nonsense]) so some few that read his Pamphlet may take the same pleasure in Feeble nonsense, and for ought I know be cheated into an esteem of any thing that comes from so received an Author as a Dryden. And therefore to disabuse them, has been the occasion of swelling the Book. In all the faults I have mustred against Mr. Drydens Granada, or any other of his writings I de∣clare I have not objected any thing but what I think a gross mistake Bombast, or hum∣ble nonsense. Had I retorted like him, I might have made such an examination of a whole Play as I have done of his Description of Ships in the Indian Emperor, and no doubt it might have met with the same success as his Notes upon Morocco. FINIS.
ERRATA. IN the Second Page of the Preface Line the 8. for retort upon read reply to. ibid. l. 29. r. abuses to, p. 6. l. 6. for doubtless r. hopeless, p. 15. l. 1. and l. 3. r. Gigantick∣ness, p. 30. l. 26. r. Looks, p. 34. l. 24. Dele. yet nothing, &c. p. 36. l. 25. r. i' Gods name, p. 39. l. 40. for England . Christendom, p. 40. l. 8. place viz. at the beginning of the Line, p. 43. l. 7. for where r. were, p. 44. l. 20. r. King, . 49. l. 8. r. his Pam∣phlet, p. 51. l. 35. r. yet such, p. 60. l. 27. r. A much different kindness from him to what, ibid. 37. r. is his, p. 77. l. 20. Dele. the, p. 80. l. 26. r. In the, p. 81. l. 7. r. Yet Tides do not wind in Volumes, but come directly back (if their Current lyes straight.) This Errata is corrected through half the Impression, p. 83. l. 24. r. which for with, 84. l. 1. for wars r. war's.
