s2930 12431401 61970
MACBETH, A TRAGAEDY. With all the ALTERATIONS, AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND NEW SONGS. As it's now Acted at the Dukes Theatre. LONDON, Printed for P. Chetwin, and are to be Sold by most Booksellers, 1674.
The Argument. DUncan, King of the Scots, had two Principal Men, whom he Imployed in all Matters of Importance, Macbeth and Banquo, These two Traveling together through a Forrest, were met by three Fairie Witches (Weirds the Scots call them) whereof the first making Obeysance unto Macbeth, saluted him, Thane (a Title unto which that of Earl afterwards succeeded) of Glammis, the second Thane of Cowder, and the third King of Scotland: This is unequal dealing, saith Banquo, to give my Friend all the Honours, and none unto me: To which one of the Weirds made Answer, That he indeed should not be a King, but out of his Loyns should come a Race of Kings; that should for ever Rule the Scots. And having thus said, they all suddenly Vanished, Vpon' their Arrival at the Court, Macbeth was immediately Created Thane of Glammis; and not long after some new Service of his, requiring new Recompence, he was Honoured with Title of Thane of Cowder. Seeing then how happily the Prediction of the three Weirds fell out, in the former he Resolved not to be wanting to himself in fulfilling the third; and therefore first he Killed the King, and after by reason of his Command among the Souldiers and Common People, he Succeeded in his Throne. Being scarce warm in his Seat, he called to mind the Prediction given to his Companion Banquo: Whom hereupon suspected as his Supplanter, he caused to be Killed, together with his Posterity: Flean one of his Sons, Escaped only, with no small difficulty into Wales, Freed as he thought from all fear of Banquo and his Issue; he Built Dunsinan Castle, and made it his Ordinary Seat: And afterwards on some new Fears, Consulted with certain of his Wizards about his future Estate: Was told by one of them, that he should never be Overcome, till Birnam Wood (be∣ing some Miles distant) came to Dunsinan Castle; and by another, that he should never be Slain by any Man which was Born of a Woman. Secure then as he thought, from all future Dangers; he omitted no kind of Libidinous Cruelty for the space of 18 Years; for so long he Tyrannized over Scotland. But having then made up the Measure of his Iniquities, Macduff the Governor of Fife, associating to himself some few Patriots (and being assisted with Ten Thousand English) equally hated by the Tyrant, and abhorring the Tyranny, met in Birnam Wood, taking every one of them a Bough in his hand (the better to keep them from discovery) Marching early in the Morning towards Dunsinan Castle, which they took by Scalado. Macbeth esca∣ping, was pursued by Macduff, who having overtaken him, urged him to the Com∣bat; to whom the Tyrant, half in scorn, returned this Answer: That he did in Vain attempt to Kill him, it being his Destiny never to be Slain by any that was Born of Woman. Now then said Macduff, is thy fatal end drawing fast upon thee, for I was never Born of Woman, but violently Cut out of my Mothers Belly: Which words so daunted the cruel Tyrant, though otherways a Valiant man and of great Performances, that he was very easily slain; and Malcolm Conmer, the true Heir, Seated in his Throne.
The Persons Names. King of Scotland, Mr. Lee. Malcolm his Son, Prince of Cumberland Mr. Norris, Donalbain. Mr. Cademan, Lenox, Mr. Medbourn. Ross,   Angus,   Macbeth, Mr. Batterton. Banquo, Mr. Smith. Macduff, Mr. Harris. Monteth,   Cathnes,   Seyward and his Son.   Seyton,   Doctor.   Feance Boy to Banquo.   Porter, Old man, 2 Mur∣derers.   Macbeth's Wife. Mrs. Batterton. Macduff's Wife Mrs. Long. Her Son.   Waiting Gentlewoman.   Ghost of Banquo, Mr. Sanford. Heccatte.   Three Wittches.   Servants and Attendants.  
ACT, I. SCENE, I. Thunder and Lightening. Enter three Witches. 1 Witch. WHEN shall we three meet again, In Thunder, Lightning, and in Rain? 2. When the Hurly-burly's done, When the Battle's lost and won. 3. And that will be e're set of Sun. 1. VVhere's the place? 2. Upon the Heath. 3. There we resolve to meet Macbeth..... A shriek like an Owl. 1. I come Gray Malkin. All. Paddock calls! To us fair weather's foul, and foul is fair! Come hover through the foggy, filthy Air........ Ex. flying. Enter King, Malcolm, Donalbine and Lenox, with Attendants meeting Seyton wounded. King. What aged man is that? if we may guess His message by his looks, He can relate the Issue of the Battle! Malc. This is the valiant Seyton, Who like a good and hardy Souldier fought To save my liberty. Hail, Worthy Friend, Inform the King in what condition you Did leave the Battle? Seyton. It was doubtful;
As two spent swimmers, who together cling And choak their Art: the merciless Mackdonald (VVorthy to be a Rebel, to which end The multiplying Villanies of Nature Swarm'd thick upon him) from the western Isles: VVith Kernes and Gallow-glasses was supply'd. VVhom Fortune with her smiles oblig'd a-while; But brave Macbeth (who well deserves that name) Did with his frowns put all her smiles to flight: And Cut his passage to the Rebels person: Then having Conquer'd him with single force, He fixt his Head upon our Battlements. King. O valiant Cousin! VVorthy Gentleman! Seyton. But then this Day-break of our Victory Serv'd but to light us into other Dangers That spring from whence our hopes did seem to rise; Produc'd our hazard: for no sooner had The justice of your Cause, Sir, (arm'd with valour,) Compell'd these nimble Kernes to trust their Heels. But the Norweyan Lord, (having expected This opportunity) with new supplies Began a fresh assault. King. Dismaid not this our Genenerals, Macbeth And Banquo? Seyton. Yes, as sparrows Eagles, or as hares do Lions; As flames are heighten'd by access of fuel; So did their valours gather strength, by having Fresh Foes on whom to exercise their Swords: VVhose thunder still did drown the dying groans Of those they slew, which else had been so great, Th' had frighted all the rest into-Retreat. My spirits faint: I would relate the wounds VVhich their Swords made; but my own silence me. King. So well thy wounds become thee as thy words: Th' are full of Honour both: Go get him Surgeons — Ex. Cap. and Attendants. Enter Macduff. But, who comes there?
Malc. Noble Macduff! Lenox. VVhat haste looks through his eyes! Donal. So should he look who comes to speak things strange. Macd. Long live the King! King. VVhence com'st thou, worthy Thane? Macd. From Fife, Great King; where the Norweyan Banners Darkned the Air; and fann'd our people cold: Norwey himself, with infinite supplies, (Assisted by that most disloyal Thane. Of Cawdor) long maintain'd a dismal Conflict, Till brave Macbeth oppos'd his bloody rage, And check'd his haughty spirits, after which His Army fled: Thus shallow streams may flow Forward with violence a-while; but when They are oppos'd, as fast run back agen. In brief, the Victory was ours. King. Great Happiness! Malcol. And now the Norwey King craves Composition. VVe would not grant the burial of his men, Until at Colems-Inch he had disburs'd Great heaps of Treasure to our Generals use. King. No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive Our confidence: pronounce his present Death; And with his former Title greet Macbeth. He has deserv'd it. Macd. Sir! I'll see it done. King. What he has lost, Noble Macbeth has won..... Exeunt. Thunder and Lightening. Enter three Witches flying. 1 Witch. Where hast thou been, Sister? 2. Killing Swine! 3. Sister; where thou? 1. A Sailor's wife had Chestnuts in her lap, And mounch'd, and mounch'd, and mounch'd; give me quoth I; Anoint thee, Witch, the rump-fed Ronyon cry'd, Her Husband's to the Baltick gone, Master o'th' Tyger. But in a sieve I'll thither sail, And like a Rat without a tail
I'll do, I'll do, and I will do. 2. I'll give thee a wind. 1. Thou art kind. 3. And I another. 1. I my self have all the other. And then from every Port they blow; From all the points that Sea-men know. I will drain him dry as hay; Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his pent-house lid; My charms shall his repose forbid, Weary sen-nights nine times nine, Shall he dwindle, waste, and pine. Though his Bark cannot be lost, Yet shall be Tempest-tost. Look what I have. 2. Shew me, shew me, — 1. Here I have a Pilot's thumb Wrack'd, as homeward he did come! A. Drum within. 3. A Drum, a Drum: Macbeth does come. 1. The weyward Sisters hand in hand, Posters of the Sea and Land Thus do go about, about Thrice to thine, 2. And thrice to mine; 3. And thrice agen to make up nine. 2. Peace, the Charms wound up. Enter Macbeth and Banquo with Attendants. Macb. Command; they make a halt upon the Heath. — So fail, and foul a day I have not seen! Banq. How far is't now to Soris? what are these So wither'd, and so wild in their attire? That look not like the Earths Inhabitants, And yet are on't? Live you? or are you things Crept hither from the lower World to fright Th' Inhabitants of this? You seem to know me By laying all at once your choppy fingers
Upon your skinny-lips; you shou'd be women, And yet your looks forbid me to interpret So well of you. — Macb. Speak, if you can, what are you? 1 Witch. All hail, Macbeth, Hail to thee Thane of Glamis; 2. All hail, Macbeth, Hail to thee Thane of Cawdor. 3. All hail, Macbeth, who shall be King hereafter? Banq. Good Sir, what makes you start? and seem to dread Events which sound so fair? I'th' name of Truth Are you fantastical? or that indeed Which outwardly you shew? my noble Partner, You greet with present Grace, And strange prediction Of noble Fortune, and of Royal hope; With which he seems surpriz'd: To me you speak not. If you can look into the seeds of Time, And tell which grain will grow, and which will not, Speak then to me; who, neither beg your favour, Nor fear your hate. — 1. Hail! 2. Hail! 3. Hail! 1. Lesser than Macbeth, and greater. 2. Not so happy, yet much happier. 3. Thou shalt get Kings, thou shalt ne'r be one. So all Hail Macbeth and Banquo.— 1. Banquo and Macbeth, all Hail...... Exeunt. Macbeth. Stay! you imperfect Speakers! tell me more; By Sinel's death I know I am Thane of Glamis; But how of Cawdor, whilst that Thane yet lives? And, for your promise, that I shall be King, 'Tis not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor: say from whence You have this strange Intelligence: or why Upon this blasted Heath you stop our way With such prophetick greeting? Speak, I charge you. Witches vanish. Ha! gone!......
Banq. The earth has Bubbles like the water: And these are some of them: how soon they are vanish'd! Macb... Th' are turn'd to Air; what seem'd Corporeal Is melted into nothing; would they had staid. Banq... Were such things here as we discours'd of now? Or have we tasted some infectious Herb That captivates our Reason? Macb. Your Children shall be Kings. Banq. You shall be King. Macb. And Thane of Cawdor too, went it not so? Banq. Just to that very tune! who's here? Enter Macduff. Macd. Macbeth the King has happily receiv'd The news of your success: And when he reads Your pers'nal venture in the Rebels fight, His wonder and his praises then contend Which shall exceed: when he reviews your worth, He sinds you in the stout Norweyan-ranks; Not starting at the Images of Death Made by your self: each Messenger which came Being loaden with the praises of your Valour; Seem'd proud to speak your Glories to the King; VVho, for an earnest of a greater Honour Bad me, from him, to call you Thane of Cawdor: In which Addition, Hail, most Noble Thane! Banq. What, can the Devil speak true? Macb. The Thane of Cawdor lives! Why do you dress me in his borrow'd Robes? Macd. 'Tis true, Sir; He, who was the Thane, lives yet; But under heavy judgment bears that life VVhich he in justice is condemn'd to lose, VVhether he was combin'd with those of Norway, Or did assist the Rebel privately; Or whether he concurr'd with both, to cause His Country's danger, Sir, I cannot tell: But, Treasons Capital, confess'd, and prov'd, Have over-thrown him. Macb. Glamis and Thane of Cawdor!
The greatest is behind; my noble Partner! Do you not hope your Children shall be Kings? VVhen those who gave to me the Thane of Cawdor Promis'd no less to them. Banq. If all be true, You have a Title to a Crown, as well As to the Thane of Cawdor. It seems strange; But many times to win us to our harm, The Instruments of darkness tell us truths, And tempt us with low trifles; that they may Betray us in the things of high concern. Macb. Th' have told me truth as to the name of Cawdor, aside. That may be prologue to the name of King. Less Titles shou'd the greater still fore-run, The morning Star doth usher in the Sun. This strange prediction in as strange a manner Deliver'd: neither can be good nor ill, If ill; 'twou'd give no earnest of success, Beginning in a truth: I'm Thane of Cawdor; If good? why am I then perplext with doubt? My future bliss causes my present fears, Fortune, methinks, which rains down Honour on me, Seems to rain bloud too: Duncan does appear Clowded by my increasing Glories: but These are but dreams. Banq. Look how my Partner's rap'd! Macb. If Chance will have me King; Chance may bestow▪ A Crown without my stir. Banq. His Honours are surprizes, and resemble▪ New Garments, which but seldom fit men well, Unless by help of use. Macb. Come, what come may; Patience and time run through the roughest day. Banq. VVorthy Macbeth! we wait upon your leisure. Macb. I was reflecting upon past transactions; VVorthy Macduff; your pains are registred VVhere every day I turn the leaf to read them. Let's hasten to the King: we'll think upon
These accidents at more convenient time. VVhen w'have maturely weigh'd them, we'll impart Our mutual judgments to each others breasts. Banq. Let it be so. Macb. Till then, enough. Come Friends...... Exeunt. Enter King, Lenox, Malcolme, Donalbine, Attendants. King. Is execution done on Cawdor yet? Or are they not return'd, who were imploy'd In doing it? Malc. They are not yet come back; But I have spoke with one who saw him die, And did report that very frankly, he Confess'd his Treasons; and implor'd your pardon, VVith signs of a sincere and deep repentance. He told me, nothing in his life became him so well, as did his leaving it. He dy'd As one who had been study'd in his Death, Quitting the dearest thing he ever had, As 'twere a worthless trifle. King. There's no Art To find the minds construction in the face: He was a Gentleman on whom I built An absolute trust. Enter Macbeth, Banquo, and Macduff. O worthy'st Cozen! The sin of my Ingratitude even now Seem'd heavy on me. Thou art so far before, That all the wings of recompence are slow To overtake thee: would thou hadst less deserv'd, That the proportion both of thanks and payment Might have been mine: I've only left to say, That thou deserv'st more than I have to pay. Macb. The service and the loyalty I owe you, Is a sufficient payment for it self: Your Royal part is to receive our Duties; VVhich Duties are, Sir, to your Throne and State, Children and Servants; and when we expose Our dearest lives to save your Interest,
We do but what we ought. King. Y'are welcome hither; I have begun to plant thee, and will labour Still to advance thy growth: And noble Banquo, (Who ha'st no less deserv'd; nor must partake Less of our favour,) let me here enfold thee, And hold thee to my heart. Banq. There if I grow, The harvest is your own. King. My joys are now Wanton in fulness; and wou'd hide themselves In drops of sorrow. Kinsmen, Sons, and Thanes; And you, whose places are the nearest, know VVe will establish our estate upon Our Eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter The Prince of Cumberland: nor must he wear His Honours unaccompany'd by others, But marks of nobleness, like Stars shall shine On all deservers. Now we'll hasten hence To Enverness: we'll be your guest, Macbeth, And there contract a greater debt than that VVhich I already owe you. Macb. That Honour, Sir, Out-speaks the best expression of my thanks: I'll be my self the Harbinger, and bless My wife with the glad news of your approach. I humbly take my leave. Macbeth going out, stops, and speaks whilst the King talks with Banq. &c. King. My worthy Cawdor!.. Macb. The Prince of Cumberland! that is a step On which I must fall down, or else o're-leap; For in my way it lies. Stars! hide your fires, Let no light see my black and deep desires. The strange Idea of a bloudy act Does into doubt all my resolves distract. My eye shall at my hand connive, the Sun Himself should wink when such a deed is done.... Exit. King. True, Noble Banquo, he is full of worth; And with his Commendations I am fed;
It is a Feast to me. Let's after him, VVhose care is gone before to bid us welcome: He is a matchless Kinsman.... Exeunt. Enter Lady Macbeth, and Lady Macduff. Lady Macbeth having a Letter in her hand. La. Macb. Madam, I have observ'd since you came hither, You have been still disconsolate. Pray tell me, Are you in perfect health? La. Macd. Alas! how can I? My Lord, when Honour call'd him to the VVar, Took with him half of my divided soul, VVhich lodging in his bosom, lik'd so well The place, that 'tis not yet return'd. La. Macb. Methinks That should not disorder you: for, no doubt The brave Macduff left half his soul behind him, To make up the defect of yours. La. Macd. Alas! The part transplanted from his breast to mine, (As 'twere by sympathy) still bore a share In all the hazards which the other half Incurr'd, and fill'd my bosom up with fears. La. Macb. Those fears, methinks, should cease now he is safe. La. Macd. Ah, Madam, dangers which have long prevail'd Upon the fancy; even when they are dead Live in the memory a-while. La. Macb. Although his safety has not power enough to put Your doubts to flight, yet the bright glories which He gain'd in Battel might dispel those Clowds. La. Macd. The world mistakes the glories gain'd in war, Thinking their Lustre true: alas, they are But Comets, Vapours! by some men exhal'd From others bloud, and kindl'd in the Region Of popular applause, in which they live A-while; then vanish: and the very breath Which first inflam'd them, blows them out agen. La. Macb. I willingly would read this Letter; but Her presence hinders me; I must divert her.
If you are ill, repose may do you good; Y'had best retire; and try if you can sleep. L. Macd. My doubtful thoughts too long have kept me waking, Madam! I'll take your Counsel..... Ex. La. Macd. L. Macb. Now I have leisure, peruse this Letter. His last brought some imperfect news of things Which in the shape of women greeted him In a strange manner. This perhaps may give More full intelligence. She reads. Reads. They met me in the day of success; and I have been told they have more in them than mortal Knowledg. When I desir'd to question them further; they made themselves air. Whilst I enter∣tain'd my self with the wonder of it, came Missives from the King, who call'd me Thane of Cawdor: by which Title, these weyward Sisters had saluted me before, and referr'd me to the coming on of time; with, Hail King that shall be. This have I imparted to thee, (my dearest partner of Greatness) that thou might'st not lose thy rights of rejoycing, by being ignorant of what is promis'd.Lay it to thy heart, and farewel. Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be What thou art promis'd: yet I fear thy Nature Has too much of the milk of humane kindness To take the nearest way: thou would'st be great: Thou do'st not want ambition: but the ill Which should attend it: what thou highly covet'st Thou covet'st holily! alas, thou art Loth to play false; and yet would'st wrongly win! Oh how irregular are thy desires? Thou willingly, Great Glamis, would'st enjoy The end without the means! Oh haste thee hither, That I may pour my spirits in thy ear: And chastise with the valour of my tongue Thy too effeminate desires of that VVhich supernatural assistance seems To Crown thee with. VVhat may be your news?
Enter Servant: Macb. Servant. The King comes hither to night. La. Macb. Th'art mad to say it: Is not thy Master with him? were this true, He would give notice for the preration. Macb. serv. So please you, it is true: our Thane is coming; One of my fellows had the speed of him; Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more Than would make up his Message. L. Macb. See him well look'd too: he brings welcome news. There wou'd be musick in a Raven's voice, Which should but croke the Entrance of the King Under my Battlements. Come all you spirits That wait on mortal thoughts: unsex me here: Empty my Nature of humanity, And fill it up with cruelty: make thick My bloud, and stop all passage to remorse; That no relapses into mercy may Shake my design, nor make it fall before 'Tis ripen'd to effect: you murthering spirits, (Where ere in sightless substances you wait On Natures mischief) come, and fill my breasts With gall instead of milk: make haste dark night, And hide me in a smoak as black as hell; That my keen steel see not the wound it makes: Nor Heav'n peep through the Curtains of the dark, To cry, hold! hold! Enter Macbeth. Great Glamis! worthy Cawdor! Greater than both, by the all-Hail hereafter; Thy Letters have transported me beyond My present posture; I already feel The future in the instant. Macb. Dearest Love, Duncan comes here to night. La. Macb. When goes he hence? Macb. To morrow, as he purposes▪ La. Macb. O Never!
Never may any Sun that morrow see. Your face, my Thane, is as a book, where men May read strange matters to beguile the time. Be chearful, Sir; bear welcome in your eye, Your hand, your tongue: Look like the innocent flower, But be the serpent under't: He that's coming Must be provided for: And you shall put This nights great bus'ness into my dispatch; Which shall to all our future nights and daies Give soveraign Command: we will with-draw, And talk on't further: Let your looks be clear, Your change of Count'nance does betoken fear. Exeunt. Enter King, Malcolme, Donalbine, Banquo, Lenox, Macduff, Attendants. King. This Castle has a very pleasant seat; The air does sweetly recommend it self To our delighted senses. Banq. The Guest of Summer, The Temple-haunting Martin by his choice Of this place for his Mansion, seems to tell us; That here Heavens breath smells pleasantly. No window, Buttrice, nor place of vantage; but this Bird Has made his pendant bed and cradle where He breeds and haunts. I have observ'd the Air, 'Tis delicate. Enter Lady Macbeth. King. See, see our honoured Hostess, By loving us, some persons cause our trouble; Which still we thank as love: herein I teach You how you should bid us welcome for your pains, And thank you for your trouble. La. Macb. All our services In every point twice done, would prove but poor And single gratitude, if weigh'd with these Obliging honours which Your Majesty confers upon our house; For dignities of old and later date (Being too poor to pay) we must be still
Your humble debtors. Macd. Madam, we are all joyntly, to night, your trouble; But I am your trespasser upon another score. My wife, I understand, has in my absence Retir'd to you. L. Macb. I must thank her: for whilst she came to me Seeking a Cure for her own solitude, She brought a remedy to mine: her fears For you, have somewhat indispos'd her, Sir, She's now with-drawn, to try if she can sleep: VVhen she shall wake, I doubt not but your presence VVill perfectly restore her health. King. VVhere's the Thane of Cawdor? VVe cours'd him at the heels, and had a purpose To be his purveyor: but he rides well, And his great love (sharp as his spur) has brought him Hither before us. Fair and Noble Lady, VVe are your Guests to night. L. Macb. Your servants Should make their Audit at your pleasure, Sir, And still return it as their debt. King. Give me your hand. Conduct me to Macbeth: we love him highly, And shall continue our affection to him. Exeunt. Enter Macbeth. Macb. If it were well when done; then it were well It were done quickly; if his Death might be VVithout the Death of nature in my self, And killing my own rest; it wou'd suffice; But deeds of this complexion still return To plague the doer, and destroy his peace: Yet let me think; he's here in double trust. First, as I am his Kinsman, and his Subject, Strong both against the Deed: then as his Host, VVho should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the sword my self. Besides, this Duncan Has born his faculties so meek, and been So clear in his great Office; that his Vertues,
Like Angels, plead against so black a deed; Vaulting Ambition! thou o're-leap'st thy self To fall upon another: now, what news? Enter L. Macbeth. L. Macb. H' has almost supp'd: why have you left the chamber? Macb. Has he enquir'd for me? L. Macb. You know he has! Macb. VVe will proceed no further in this business: H' has honour'd me of late; and I have bought Golden opinions from all sorts of people, VVhich should be worn now in their newest gloss;, Not cast aside so soon. L. Macb. VVas the hope drunk VVherein you dress'd your self? has it slept since? And wakes it now to look so pale and fearful At what it wish'd so freely? Can you fear To be the same in your own act and valour, As in desire you are? would you enjoy VVhat you repute the Ornament of Life, And live a Coward in your own esteem? You dare not venture on the thing you wish: But still wou'd be in tame expectance of it. Macb. I prithee peace: I dare do all that may Become a man; he who dares more, is none. L Macb. What Beast then made you break this Enterprize To me? when you did that, you were a man: Nay, to be more than what you were, you would Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place Did then adhere; and yet you wish'd for both; And now th' have made themselves; how you betray Your Cowardize? I've given suck, and know How tender 'tis to love the Babe that milks me: I would, whilst it was smiling in my face, Have pluck'd my Nipple from his boneless gums, And dash'd the brains out, had I so resolv'd, As you have done for this. Macb. If we should fail: — L. Macb. How, fail! —
Bring but your Courage to the fatal place, And we'll not fail; when Duncan is a-sleep, (To which, the pains of this daies journey will Soundly invite him) his two Chamberlains I will with wine and wassel so convince; That memory (the centry of the brain) Shall be a fume; and the receipt of reason, A limbeck only: when, in swinish sleep, Their natures shall lie drench'd, as in their Death, What cannot you and I perform upon His spungy Officers? we'll make them bear The guilt of our black Deed. Macb. Bring forth men-children only; For thy undaunted temper should produce Nothing but males: but yet when we have mark'd Those of his Chamber (whilst they are a-sleep) With Duncan's bloud, and us'd their very daggers; I fear it will not be, with ease, believ'd That they have don't. L. Macb. Who dares believe it otherwise, As we shall make our griefs and clamours loud After his death? Macb. I'm setl'd, and will stretch up Each fainting sinew to this bloudy act. Come, let's delude the time with fairest show, Fain'd looks must hide what the false heart does know.
ACT, II. SCENE, I. Enter Banquo and Fleame. Banq. HOW goes the night, Boy? Fleame. I have not heard the Clock, But the Moon is down. Banq. And she goes down at twelve. Flea. I take't 'tis late, Sir, Ex. Fleam. Banq. An heavy summons lies like lead upon me; Nature wou'd have me sleep, and yet I fain wou'd wake: Merciful powers restrain me in these cursed thoughts That thus disturb my rest. Enter Macbeth and Servant. Who's there? Macbeth, a friend. Banq. VVhat, Sir, not yet at rest? the King's a-bed; He has been to night in an unusual pleasure: He to your servants has been bountiful, And with this Diamond he greets your wife By the obliging name of most kind Hostess. Macb. The King taking us unprepar'd, restrain'd our power Of serving him; which else should have wrought more free. Banq. All's well. I dream'd last night of the three weyward Sisters To you they have shewn some truth. Macb. I think not of them; Yet, when we can intreat an hour or two,
We'll spend it in some wood upon that business. Banq. At your kindest leisure. Macb. If when the Prophesie begins to look like truth You will adhere to me, it shall make honour for you. Banq. So I lose none in seeking to augment it, but still Keeping my bosom free, and my Allegiances dear, I shall be counsell'd. Macb. Good repose the while. Banq. The like to you, Sir. Ex. Banquo. Macb. Go bid your Mistress, when she is undrest, To strike the Closet-bell, and I'll go to bed. Is this a dagger which I see before me? The hilt draws towards my hand; come, let me grasp thee: I have thee not, and yet I see thee still; Art thou not fatal Vision, sensible To feeling as to sight? or, art thou but A dagger of the mind, a false creation Proceeding from the brain, opprest with heat. My eyes are made the fools of th'other senses; Or else worth all the rest: I see thee still, And on thy blade are stains of reeking bloud. It is the bloudy business that thus Informs my eye-sight; now, to half the world Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams infect The health of sleep; now witchcraft celebrates Pale Heccate's Offerings; now murder is Alarm'd by his nights Centinel: the wolf, Whose howling seems the watch-word to the dead: But whilst I talk, he lives: hark, I am summon'd; O Duncan, hear it not, for 'tis a bell That rings my Coronation, and thy Knell. Exit. Enter Lady Macbeth. La Macb. That which made them drunk, has made me bold; VVhat has quenched them, hath given new fire to me. Heark; oh, it was the Owl that shriek'd; The fatal Bell-man that oft bids good night To dying men, he is about it; the doors are open, And whilst the surfeited Grooms neglect their charges for sleep,
Nature and death are now contending in them. Enter Macbeth. Macb. VVho's there? La. Macb. Alas, I am afraid they are awak'd, And 'tis not done; the attempt without the deed VVould ruine us. I laid the daggers ready, He could not miss them; and had he not resembl'd My Father, as he slept, I would have don't My Husband. Macb. I have done the deed, didst thou not hear a noise? La. Macb. I heard the Owl scream, and the Crickets cry, Did dot you speak? Macb. VVhen? La. Macb. Now. Macb. Who lies i'th' Anti-chamber? La. Macb. Donalbain. Macb. This is a dismal sight. La. Macb. A foolish thought to say a dismal sight: Macb. There is one did laugh as he securely slept, And one cry'd Murder, that they wak'd each other. I stood and heard them; but they said their Prayers, And then addrest themselves to sleep again. La. Macb. There are two lodg'd together. Macb. One cry'd, Heaven bless us, the other said, Amen: As they had seen me with these Hang-mans hands, Silenc'd with fear, I cou'd not say Amen VVhen they did say, Heaven bless us. La. Macb. Consider it not so deeply. Macb. But, wherefore could not I pronounce, Amen? I had most need of blessing, and Amen Stuck in my throat. La. Macb. These deeds shou'd be forgot as soon as done, Lest they distract the doer. Macb. Methoughts I heard a noise cry, sleep no more: Macbeth has murder'd sleep, the innocent sleep; Sleep, that locks up the senses from their care; The death of each daies life; tir'd labours bath; Balm of hurt; minds great natures second course;
Chief nourisher in life's feast. La. Macb. What do you mean? Macb. Still it cry'd, sleep no more, to all the house. Glamis hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor Shall sleep no more; Macbeth shall sleep no more. La. Macb. Why do you dream thus? go, get some water, And cleanse this filthy witness from your hands. Why did you bring the daggers from the place? They must be there, go carry them, and stain The sleepy Grooms with bloud. Macb. I'll go no more; I am afraid to think what I have done. What then, with looking on it, shall I do? La. Macb. Give me the daggers, the sleeping and the dead▪ Are but as pictures; 'tis the eye of childhood That fears a painted Devil: with his bloud I'll stain the faces of the Grooms; by that It will appear their guilt. Ex. La. Macbeth Knock within. Macb. What knocking's that? How is't with me, when every noise affrights me? VVhat hands are here! can the Sea afford VVater enough to wash away the stains? No, they would sooner add a tincture to The Sea, and turn the green into a red. Enter Lady Macbeth. La. Macb. My hands are of your colour; but I scorn To wear an heart so white. Heark, Knock. I hear a knocking at the Gate: to your Chamber; A little water clears us of this deed. Your fear has left you unman'd; heark, more knocking. Get on your Gown, lest occasions call us, And shews us to be watchers; be not lost So poorly in your thoughts. Exit. Macb. Disguis'd in blood, I scarce can find my way. VVake Duncan with this knocking, wou'd thou could'st. Exit. Enter Lenox and Macbeth's Servant. Lenox. You sleep soundly, that so much knocking
Could not wake you. Serv. Labour by day causes rest by night. Enter Macduff. Len. See the Noble Macduff. Good morrow, my Lord, have you observ'd How great a mist does now possess the air; It makes me doubt whether't be day or night. Macd. Rising this morning early, I went to look out of my VVindow, and I cou'd scarce see farther than my breath: The darkness of the night brought but few objects To our eyes, but too many to our ears. Strange claps and creekings of the doors were heard; The Screech-Owl with his screams, seem'd to foretell▪ Some deed more black than night. Enter Macbeth. Macd. Is the King stirring? Macb. Not yet. Macd. He did command me to attend him early; I have almost slip'd the hour. Macb. I'll bring you to him. Macd. I know this is a joyful trouble to you. Macb. The labour we delight in, gives; That door will bring you to him. Macd. I'll make bold to call; for 'tis my limited service. Ex. Macd. Len. Goes the King hence to day? Macb. So he designs. Len. The night has been unruly: VVhere we lay, our chimneys were blown down; And, as they say, terrible groanings were heard i'th' air: Strange screams of death, which seem'd to prophesie More strange events, fill'd divers. Some say the Earth shook. Macb. 'Twas a rough night. Len. My young remembrance cannot recollect its fellow. Enter Macduff. Macd. Oh horror! horror! horror! VVhich no heart can conceive, nor tongue can utter. Macb. VVhat's the matter? Len. VVhat's the matter?
Macd. Horror has done its worst: Most sacrilegious murder has broke open The Lord's anointed Temple, and stole thence The life o'th' building. Macb. What is't you say; the life? Len. Meaning his Majesty. Macd. Approach the Chamber, and behold a sight Enough to turn spectators into stone. I cannot speak, see, and then speak your selves: Ring the Alarum-bell. Awake, awake, Ex. Macb. and Len. Murther, Treason; Banquo, Malcom, and Donalbain, Shake off your downy sleep, Death's counterfeit; And look on Death it self; up, up, and see, As from your Graves, rise up, and walk like spirits To countenance this horror: ring the bell. Bell rings. Enter Lady Macbeth. La. Macb. VVhat's the business, that at this dead of night You alar'm us from our rest? Macd. O, Madam! 'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: The repetition in a womans ear VVould do another murther. Enter Banquo. Oh Banquo, Banquo, our Royal Master's murther'd! La. Macb. Ah me! in our house? Banq. The deed's too cruel any where, Macduff; Oh, that you could but contradict your self, And say it is not true. Enter Macbeth and Lenox. Macb. Had I but dy'd an hour before this chance, I had liv'd a blessed time; for, from this instant, There's nothing in it worth a good mans care; All is but toyes, Renown and Grace are dead. Enter Malcolm, and Donalbain. Donal. VVhat is amiss? Macb. You are, and do not know't: The spring, the head, the fountain of your bloud Is stop'd; the very source of it is stop'd. Macd. Your Royal Father's murther'd.
Malc. Murther'd! by whom? Len. Those of his Chamber, as it seem'd, had don't; Their hands and faces were all stain'd with bloud: So were their Daggers, which we found unwip'd, Upon their pillows. VVhy was the life of one, So much above the best of men, entrusted To the hands of two, so much below The worst of beasts. Macb. Then I repent me I so rashly kill'd e'm. Macd. VVhy did you so? Macb. VVho can be prudent and amaz'd together; Loyal and neutral in a moment? no man. Th' expedition of my violent love Out-ran my pausing reason: I saw Duncan, Whose gaping wounds look'd like a breach in nature, VVhere ruine enter'd there. I saw the murtherers Steep'd in the colours of their trade; their Daggers Being yet unwip'd, seem'd to own the deed, And call for vengeance; who could then refrain, That had an heart to love; and in that heart Courage to manifest his affection. La. Macb. Oh, oh, oh. Faints. Macd. Look to the Lady. Mal. VVhy are we silent now, that have so large An argument for sorrow? Donal. VVhat should be spoken here, where our fate may rush▪ Suddenly upon us, and as if it lay Hid in some corner; make our death succeed The ruine of our Father e're we are aware. Macd. I find this place too publick for true sorrow: Let us retire, and mourn: but first, Guarded by Vertue, I'm resolv'd to find The utmost of this business. Banq. And I. Macb. And all. Let all of us take manly resolution; And two hours hence meet together in the Hall To question this most bloudy fact.
Banq. We shall be ready, Sir, Ex. all but Malc. & Donalb. Malc. What will you do? Let's not consort with them: To shew an unfelt-sorrow, is an office Which false men▪ do with ease. I'll to England. Donal. To Ireland I'm resolv'd to steer my course; Our separated fortune may protect our persons Where we are: Daggers lie hid under mens smiles, And the nearer some men are allied to our bloud, The more, I fear, they seek to shed it. Malc. This murtherous shaft that's shot, Hath not yet lighted; and our safest way Is, to avoid the aim: then let's to horse, And use no ceremony in taking leave of any. Exeunt. SCENE the fourth. Enter Lenox and Seaton. Seaton. I can remember well, Within the compass of which time I've seen Hours dreadful, and things strange; but this one night Has made that knowledge void. Len. Thou seest the Heavens, as troubled with mans act, Threaten'd this bloudy day: by th'hour 'tis day, And yet dark night does cover all the skie, As if it had quite blotted out the Sun. Is't nights predominance, or the daies shame Makes darkness thus usurp the place of light. Seat. 'Tis strange and unnatural, Even like the deed that's done; on Tuesday last, A Faulcon towring in her height of pride, Was by a mousing Owl hawk'd at, and kill'd. Len. And Duncan's Horses, which before were tame, Did on a sudden change their gentle natures, And became wild; they broke out of their Stables, As if they would make war with mankind. Seat. 'Tis said they eat each other. Len. They did so, To th'amazement of those eyes that saw it.
Enter Macduff. Here comes the good Macduff: How goes the world, Sir, now? Len. Is't known who did this more than bloudy deed? Macd. Those that Macbeth hath slain, are most suspected. Len. Alas, what good could they pretend? Macd. It is suppos'd they were suborn'd. Malcolm and Donalbain, the Kings two Sons, Are stoln away from Court, Which puts upon them suspition of the deed. Len. Unnatural still. Could their ambition prompt them to destroy The means of their own life. Macd. You are free to judge Of their deportment as you please; but most Men think e'm guilty. Len. Then 'tis most like the Soveraignty will fall Upon Macbeth. Macd. He is already nam'd, and gone to Scone To be invested. Len. Where's Duncan's body? Macd. Carried to Colmehill, The sacred Store-house of his Predecessors. Len. VVill you to Scone? Macd. No, Cousin, I'll to Fyfe: My wife and children frighted at the Alar'm Of this sad news, have thither led the way, And I'll follow them: may the King you go To see invested, prove as great and good As Duncan was; but I'm in doubt of it. New Robes ne're as the old so easie sit. Exeunt. SCENE; An Heath. Enter Lady Macduff, Maid, and Servant. La. Macd. Art sure this is the place my Lord appointed Us to meet him? Serv. This is the entrance o'th' Heath; and here He order'd me to attend him with the Chariot. La. Macd. How fondly did my Lord conceive that we
Should shun the place of danger by our flight From Everness? The darkness of the day▪ Makes the Heath seem the gloomy walks of death. VVe are in danger still: they who dare here. Trust Providence, may trust it any where. Maid. But this place, Madam, is more free from terror: Last night methoughts I heard a dismal noise Of shrieks and groanings in the air. La. Macd. 'Tis true, this is a place of greater silence; Not so much troubled with the groans of those That die; nor with the out-cries of the living. Maid. Yes, I have heard stories, how some men Have in such lonely places been affrighted VVith dreadful shapes and noises. Macduff hollows. La. Macd. But heark, my Lord sure hollows; 'Tis he; answer him quickly. Serv. Illo, ho, ho, ho. Enter Macduff. La. Macd. Now, I begin to see him: are you a foot, My Lord? Macd. Knowing the way to be both short and easie, And that the Chariot did attend me here, I have adventur'd. VVhere are our children? La. Macd. They are securely sleeping in the Chariot. First Song by Witches. 1 Witch. Speak, Sister, speak; is the deed done? 2 Witch. Long ago, long ago: Above twelve glasses since have run. 3 Witch. Ill deeds are seldom slow; Nor single: following crimes on former wait. The worst of creatures fastest propagate. Many more murders must this one ensue, As if in death were propagation too▪ 2 Witch. He will. 1 Witch. He shall. 3 Witch. He must spill much more bloud; And become worse, to make his Title good. 1 VVitch. Now let's dance.
2 Witch. Agreed. 3 Witch. Agreed. 4 Witch. Agreed. Chorus. VVe shou'd rejoyce when good Kings bleed. VVhen cattel die, about we go, What then, when Monarchs perish, should we do? Macd. VVhat can this be? La. Macd. This is most strange: but why seem you afraid? Can you be capable of fears, who have So often caus'd it in your enemies? Macd. It was an hellish Song: I cannot dread Ought that is mortal; but this is something more. Second Song. Let's have a dance upon the Heath; VVe gain more life by Duncan's death. Sometimes like brinded Cats we shew, Having no musick but our mew. Sometimes we dance in some old mill, Upon the hopper, stones, and wheel. To some old saw, or Bardish Rhime, VVhere still the Mill clack does keep time. Sometimes about an hollow tree, A round, a round, a round dance we. Thither the chirping Cricket comes, And Beetle, singing drowsie hums. Sometimes we dance o're Fens and Furs, To howls of wolves, and barks of curs. And when with none of those we meet, VVe dance to th' ecchoes of our feet. At the night-Raven's dismal voice, VVhilst others tremble, we rejoyce; And nimbly, nimbly dance we still To th' ecchoes from an hollow Hill. Macd. I am glad you are not affraid. La. Macd. I would not willingly to fear submit: None can fear ill, but those that merit it. Macd. Am I made bold by her? how strong a guard Is innocence? if any one would be
Reputed valiant, let him learn of you; Vertue both courage is, and safety too. A dance of witches. Enter two VVitches. Macd. These seem foul spirits; I'll speak to e'm. If you can any thing by more than nature know; You may in those prodigious times fore-tell Some ill we may avoid. 1 VVitch. Saving thy bloud will cause it to be shed; 2 VVitch. He'll bleed by thee, by whom thou first hast bled. 3 VVitch. Thy wife shall shunning danger, dangers find, And fatal be, to whom▪ she most is kind. Ex. witches. La Macd. VVhy are you alter'd, Sir? be not so thoughtful: The Messengers of Darkness never spake To men, but to deceive them. Macd. Their words seem to fore-tell some dire predictions. La. Macd. He that believes ill news from such as these, Deserves to find it true. Their words are like Their shape; nothing but fiction. Let's hasten to our journey. Macd. I'll take your counsel; for to permit Such thoughts upon our memories to dwell, VVill make our minds the Registers of Hell. Exeunt omnes. ACT, III. SCENE, I. Enter Banquo. Banq. THou hast it now, King, Cawdor, Glamis, all, As the three Sisters promis'd; but I fear Thou plaid'st most foully for't: yet it was said It should not stand in thy Posterity: But that my self should be the Root and Father Of many Kings; they told thee truth. VVhy, since their promise was made good to thee, May they not be my Oracles as well. Enter Macbeth; Lenox, and Attendants. Macb. Here's our chief Guest, if he had been forgotten,
It had been want of musick to our Feast To night we hold a solemn supper, Sir; And all request your presence. Banq. Your Majesty layes your command on me, To which my duty is to obey. Macb. Ride you this afternoon? Banq. Yes, Royal Sir. Macb. We should have else desir'd your good advice, (VVhich still hath been both grave and prosperous) In this daies Counsel; but we'll take to morrow. Is't far you ride? Banq. As far, Great Sir, as will take up the time: Go not my Horse the better, I must become a borrower of the night, For a dark hour or two. Macb. Fail not our Feast. Banq. My Lord, I shall not. Macb. VVe hear our bloudy Cousins are bestow'd In England, and in Ireland; not confessing Their cruel Parricide; filling their hearers VVith strange invention. But, of that to morrow. Goes your Son with you? Banq. He does; and our time now calls upon us. Macb. I wish your Horses swift, and sure of foot. Farewel. Ex. Banquo. Let every man be master of his time; Till seven at night, to make society The more welcome; we will our selves withdraw, And be alone till supper. Exeunt Lords. Macduff departed frowningly, perhaps He is grown jealous; he and Banquo must Embrace the same fate. Do those men attend our pleasure? Serv. They do; and wait without. Macb. Bring them before us. Ex. Servant. I am no King till I am safely so. My fears stick deep in Banquo's successors; And in his Royalty of Nature reigns that
Which wou'd be fear'd. He dares do much; And to that dauntless temper of his mind, He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour To act in safety. Under him My genius is rebuk'd: he chid the Sisters VVhen first they put the name of King upon me, And bade them speak to him. Then, Prophet like, They hail'd him Father to a line of Kings. Upon my head they plac'd a fruitless Crown, And put a barren Scepter in my hand: Thence to be wrested by anothers race; No son of mine succeeding: if't be so; For Banquo's Issue, I have stain'd my soul For them: the gracious Duncan I have murder'd: Rather than so, I will attempt yet further, And blot out, by their bloud, what e're Is written of them in the book of Fate. Enter Servant, and two Murtherers. Wait you without, and stay there till we call. Ex. Servant. Was it not yesterday we spoke together? 1 Murth. It was; so please your Highness. Macb. And have you since consider'd what I told you? How it was Banquo, who in former times Held you so much in slavery; Whilst you were guided to suspect my innocence. This I made good to you in your last conference; How you were born in hand; how crost: The Instruments, who wrought with them. 2 Mur. You made it known to us. Macb. I did so; and now let me reason with you: Do you find your patience so predominant In your nature, As tamely to remit those injuries? Are you so Gospell'd to pray for this good man, And for his Issue; whose heavy hand Hath bow'd you to the Grave, and begger'd Yours for ever? 1 Mur. We are men, my Liege.
Macb. Ay, in the catalogue you go for men; As hounds, and grey-hounds, mungrels, spaniels, curs, Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves, are all Call'd by the name of dogs: the list of which Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtil, The house-keeper, the hunter, every one According to the gift which bounteous Nature Hath bestow'd on him; and so of men. Now, if you have a station is the list, Nor i'th' worst rank of manhood; say't, And I will put that business in your bosoms, Which, if perform'd, will rid you of your enemy, And will endear you to the love of us. 2 Mur. I am one, my Liege, Whom the vile blows, and malice of the Age Hath so incens'd, that I care not what I do To spight the VVorld. 1 Mur. And I another, So weary with disasters, and so inflicted by fortune, That I would set my life on any chance, To mend it, or to lose it. Macb. Both of you know Banquo was your enemy. 2 Mur. True, my Lord. Macb. So is he mine; and though I could With open power take him from my sight, And bid my will avouch it: yet I must not; For certain friends that are both his and mine; VVhose loves I may not hazard; would ill Resent a publick process: and thence it is That I do your assistance crave, to mask The business from the common eye. 2 Mur. We shall, my Lord, perform what you command us. 1 Mur. Though our lives— Macb. Your spirits shine through you▪ VVithin this hour, at most, I will advise you where to plant your selves; For it must be done to night: And something from the Palace; alwaies remember'd, That you keep secrecy with the prescribed Father.
Flean, his Son too, keeps him company; Whose absence is no less material to me Than that of Banquo's: he too must embrace the fate Of that dark hour. Resolve your selves apart. both Mur. We are resolv'd, my Liege. Macb. I'll call upon you streight. Ex. Murth. Now, Banquo, if thy soul can in her flight Find Heaven, thy happiness begins to night. Ex. Enter Macduff, and Lady Macduff. Macd. It must be so. Great Duncan's bloudy death Can have no other Author but Macbeth. His Dagger now is to a Scepter grown; From Duncan's Grave he has deriv'd his Throne. La. Macd. Ambition urg'd him to that bloudy deed: May you be never by Ambition led: Forbid it Heav'n, that in revenge you shou'd Follow a Copy that is writ in bloud. Macd. From Duncan's Grave, methinks, I hear a groan That call's a loud for justice. La. Macd. If the Throne Was by Macbeth ill gain'd, Heavens may, Without your Sword, sufficient vengeance pay. Usurpers lives have but a short extent, Nothing lives long in a strange Element. Macd. My Countreys dangers call for my defence Against the bloudy Tyrants violence. L. Macd. I am affraid you have some other end, Than meerly Scotland's freedom to defend. You'd raise your self, whilst you wou'd him dethrone; And shake his Greatness, to confirm your own. That purpose will appear, when rightly scan'd, But usurpation at the second hand. Good Sir, recall your thoughts. Macd. What if I shou'd▪ Assume the Scepter for my Countrey's good? Is that an usurpation? can it be Ambition to procure the liberty Of this sade Realm; which does by Treason bleed? That which provokes, will justifie the deed.
Lady Macd. If the Design should prosper, the Event May make us safe, but not you Innocent: For whilst to set our fellow Subjects free From present Death, or future Slavery. You wear a Crown, not by your Title due, Defence in them, is an Offence in you; That Deed's unlawful though it cost no Blood, In which you'l be at best unjustly Good. You, by your Pitty which for us you plead, Weave but Ambition of a finer thread. Macd. Ambition do's the height of power affect, My aim is not to Govern, but Protect: And he is not ambitious that declares, He nothing seeks of Scepters but their cares. Lady Md. Can you so patiently your self molest, And lose your own, to give your Countrey rest! In Plagues what sound Physician wou'd endure To be infected for another's Cure. Macd. If by my troubles I cou'd yours release, My Love wou'd turn those torments to my ease: I shou'd at once be sick and healthy too, Though Sickly in my self, yet Well in you. Lady Md. But then reflect upon the Danger, Sr. Which you by your aspiring wou'd incur From Fortunes Pinacle, you will too late Look down, when you are giddy with your height; Whilst you with Fortune play to win a Crown, The Peoples Stakes are greater than your own. Macd. In hopes to have the common Ills redrest, Who wou'd not venture single interest. Enter Servant. Ser. My Lord, a Gentleman, just now arriv'd From Court, has brought a Message from the King: Macd. One sent from him, can no good Tidings bring? Lady Md. What wou'd the Tyrant have? Macd. Go, I will hear The News, though it a dismal Accent bear;
Those who expect and do not fear their Doom, May hear a Message though from Hell it come: Exeunt. Enter Macbeth's Lady and Servant. Lady Mb. Is Banquo gone from Court? Ser. Yes Madam, but returns again to night. Lady Md. Say to the King, I wou'd attend his leisure For a few words. Exit Ser. Where our desire is got without content, Alass, it is not Gain, but punishment! Tis safer to be that which we destroy, Then by Destruction live in doubtful joy. Enter Macbeth. How now my Lord, why do you keep alone? Making the worst of Fancy your Companions, Converting with those thoughts which shou'd ha' dy'd With those they think on: things without redress Shou'd be without regard: what's done, is done. Macb. Alas, we have but scorch'd the Snake, not kill'd it, She'l close and be her self, whilst our poor malice Remains in danger of her former Sting. But let the frame of all things be disjoynt E're we will eat our bread in fear; and sleep In the affliction of those horrid Dreams That shake us mightily! Better be with him Whom we to gain the Crown, have sent to peace; Then on the torture of the Mind to lye In restless Agony. Duncan is dead; He, after life's show feavor, now sleeps; Well: Treason has done it's worst; nor Steel, nor Poyson, No Ferreign force, nor yet Domestick Malice Can touch him further. Lady Mb. Come on, smooth your rough brow: Be free and merry with your guest to night. Macb. I shall, and so I pray be you but still, Remember to apply your self to Banquo: Present him kindness with your Eye and Tongue, In how unsafe a posture are our honors That we must have recourse to flattery,
And make our Faces Vizors to our hearts. Lady Mb. You must leave this. Macb. How full of Scorpions is my mind? Dear wife Thou know'st that Banquo and his Flean lives. La. Mb. But they are not Immortal, there's comfort yet in tha. Macb. Be merry then, for e're the Bat has flown His Cloyster'd flight; e're to black Heceate's Summons▪ The sharp brow'd Beetle with his drowsie hums, Has rung night's second Peal: There shall bee done a deed of dreadful Note. Lady Mb. What is't? Macb. Be innocent of knowing it, my Dear, Till thou applaud the deed, come dismal Night Close up the Eye of the quick sighted Day With thy invisible and bloody hand, The Crow, makes wing to the thick shady Grove, Good things of day grow dark and overcast, Whilst Night's black Agent's to their Preys make hast, Thou wonder'st at my Language, wonder still, Things ill begun; strengthen themselves by ill. Exeunt. Enter three Murtherers. 1. Mur. The time is almost come, The West yet glimmers with some streaks of day, Now the benighted Traveller spurs on, To gain the timely Inn. 2. Mur. Hark, I hear Horses, and saw some body alight At the Park gate. 3. Mur. Then tis he; the rest That are expected are i'th' Court already. 1. Mur. His Horses go about almost a Mile, And men from hence to th' Pallace make it their usual walk. Exe. Enter Banquo and Flean. Banquo, It will be Rain to night. Flean, We must make hast; Banq. Our hast concerns us more then being wet. The King expects me at his feast to night, To which he did invite me with a kindness, Greater then he was wont to express. Exeunt.
Re-enter Murtherers with drawn Swords. 1. Mur. Banquo, thou little think'st what, bloody feast Is now preparing for thee. 2. Mur. Nor to what shades the darkness of this night, Shall lead thy wandring spirit. Exeunt after Banquo. Classing of Swords is heard from within. Re-enter Flean pursu'd by one of the Murtherers. Flean. Murther, help, help, my Father's kill'd. Exe. running. SCENE opens, a Banquet prepar'd. Enter Macbeth, Lady Macbeth, Seaton, Lenox, Lords, Attendants. Macb. You know your own Degrees, sit down. Seat. Thanks to your Majesty. Macb. Our Self will keep you company, And Play the humble Host to entertain you: Our Lady keeps her State; but you shall have her welcome too. Lady Mb. Pronounce it for me Sir, to all our Friends. Enter first Murtherer. Macb. Both sides are even; be free in Mirth, anon Wee'l drink a measure about the Table. There's blood upon thy face. Mur. 'Tis Banquo's then. Macb. Is he dispatch'd? Mur. My Lord, his Throat is cut: that I did for him. Macb. Thou are the best of Cut-throats; Yet he is good that did the like for Flean. Mur. Most Royal Sir he scap'd. Macb. Then comes my fit again, I had else been Perfect, Firm a a Pillar founded on a Rock! As unconfin'd as the free spreading Air. But now I'm check'd with sawcy Doubts and Fears. But Banquo's safe? Mur. Safe in a Ditch he lies, With twenty gaping wounds on his head, The least of which was Mortal. Macb. There the ground Serpent lies; the worm that's fled Hath Nature, that in time will Venom breed. Though at present it wants a Sting, to morrow, To morrow you▪ shall hear further. Exit. Mur.
Lady Mb. My Royal Lord, you spoil the Feast, The Sauce to Meat is chearfulness. Enter the Ghost of Banquo and sits in Macbeth's place. Macb. Let good digestion wait on Appetite, And Health on both. Len. May it please your Highness to sit. Macb. Had we but here our Countrys honor; Were the grac'd person of our Banquo present, Whom we may justly challenge for unkindness. Seat. His absence Sir, Lays blame upon his promise; please your Highness To grace us with your Company? Macb. Yes, I'le sit down. The Table's full Len. Here is a place reserv'd Sir: Macb. Where Sir? Len. Here. What is 'tthat moves your Highness? Macb. Which of you have done this? Lords, Done what? Macb. Thou can'st not say I did it; never shake Thy goary Locks at me. Seat. Gentlemen rise, his Highness is not well. Lady Mb. Sit worthy Friends, my Lord is often thus, And hath been from his youth: pray keep your Seats, The fit is ever sudden, if you take notice of it, You shall offend him, and provoke his passion In a moment he'l be well again. Are you a Man? Macb. Ay, and a bold one; that dare look on that Which wou'd distract the Devil Lady Mb. O proper stuff: This is the very painting of your fear: This is the Air-drawn Dagger, which you said Led you to Duncan. O these Fits and Starts, (Impostors to true fear) wou'd well become A womans story, authoriz'd by her Grandam, Why do you stare thus? when all's done You look but on a Chair. Macb.. Prethee see there, how say you now!
Why, what care I, If thou can'st nod; speak too, If Charnel-houses and our Graves must send Those that we bury, back; our Monuments Shall be the maws of Kites. Lady Mb. What quite unman'd in folly? the Ghost descends. Macb. If I stand here, I saw it: Lady Mb. Fye, for shame. Macb. Tis not the first of Murders; blood was shed E're humane Law decreed it for a sin. Ay, and since Murthers too have been committed Too terrible for the Ear. The times has been, That when the brains were out, the man wou'd dye; And there lye still; but now they rise again And thrust us from our seats. Lady Mb. Sir, your noble Friends do lack you. Macb. Wonder not at me my most worthy Friends, I have a strange Infirmity; tis nothing To those that know me. Give me some Wine, Here's to the general Joy of all the Table, And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss, Wou'd he were here: to all, and him, we drink. Lords, Our Duties are to pledge it. the Ghost of Banq. rises at his feet. Macb. Let the Earth hide thee: thy blood is cold, Thou hast no use now of thy glaring Eyes. Lady Mb. Think of this good my Lords, but as a thing Of Custom: tis no other, Only it spoils the pleasure of the time. Macb. What Man can dare, I dare: Approach thou like the rugged Russian Bear, The Armd Rhinoceros, or the Hircanian Tigre: Take any shape but that; and my firm Nerves Shall never tremble; Or revive a while, And dare me to the Desart with thy Sword, If any Sinew shrink, proclaim me then The Baby of a Girl. Hence horrible shadow. Ex. Ghost. So, now I am a man again: pray you sit still. Lady Mb. You have disturb'd the Mirth; Broke the glad Meeting with your wild disorder.
Macb. Can such things be without Astonishment. You make me strange, Even to the disposition that I owe, When now I think you can behold such sights, And keep the Natural colour of your Cheeks, Whilst mine grew pale with fear. Seat. What sights? Lady Mb. I pray you speak not, he'l grow worse and worse; Questions enrages him, at once good night: Stand not upon the Order of your going. Len. Good night, and better health attend his Majesty. Lady Mb. A kind good night to all. Exeunt Lords. Macb. It will have Blood they say. Blood will have blood. Stones have been known to move, and Trees to speak. Augures well read in Languages of Birds By Magpyes, Rooks, and Dawes, have reveal'd The secret Murther. How goes the night? Lady Mb. Almost at odds with morning, which is which. Macb. Why did Macduffe after a solemn Invitation, Deny his presence at our Feast? Lady Mb. Did you send to him Sir? Macb. I did; But I'le send again, There's not one great Thane in all Scotland, But in his house I keep a Servant, He and Banquo must embrace the same fate. I will to morrow to the Weyward Sisters, They shall tell me more; for now I am bent to know By the worst means, the worst that can befall me: All Causes shall give way; I am in Blood Stept in so far, that should I wade no more, Returning were as bad, as to go o're. Lady Mb. You lack the season of all Natures, sleep. Macb. Well I'le in And rest; if sleeping I repose can have, When the Dead rise and want it in the Grave. Exeunt. Enter Macduffe and Lady Macduffe. Lady Md. Are you resolv'd then to be gone? Macd. I am:
I know my Answer cannot but inflame The Tyrants fury to pronounce my death, My life will soon be blasted by his breath. Lady Md. But why so far as England must you fly? Macd. The farthest part of Scotland is too nigh. Lady Md. Can you leave me, your Daughter and young Son, To perish by that Tempest which you shun. When Birds of stronger VVing are fled away, The Ravenous Kite do's on the weaker Prey. Macd. He will not injure you, he cannot be Postest with such unmanly cruelty: You will your safety to your weakness owe As Grass escapes the Syth by being low. Together we shall be too slow to fly: Single, we may outride the Enemy. I'le from the English King such Succours crave, As shall revenge the Dead, and Living save. My greatest misery is to remove, With all the wings of haste from what I love. Lady Md. If to be gone seems misery to you, Good Sir, let us be miserable too. Macd. Your Sex which here is your security, Will by the toyls of flight your Danger be. Enter Messenger. What fatal News do's bring thee out of breath? Mess. Sir, Banquo's kill'd. Macd. Then I am warn'd of Death. Farewell; our safety, Us, a while must sever: Lady Md. Fly, fly, or we may bid farewell for ever. Macd. Flying from Death, I am to Life unkind, For leaving you, I leave my Life behind. Exit. Lady Md. O my dear Lord, I find now thou art gone, I am more Vaiant when unsafe alone. My heart feels man-hood, it does Death despise, Yet I am still a Woman in my eyes. And of my Tears thy absence is the cause, So falls the Dew when the bright Sun withdraws. Exeunt. Enter Lenox and Seaton. Len. My former speeches have but hit your thoughts
Which can interpret further; Only I say Things have been strangely carry'd. Duncan was pitti'd, but he first was dead. And the right Valiant Banquo walk'd too late: Men must not walk so late: who can want Sence To know how Mostrous it was in Nature, For Malcolme and Donalbain, to kill Their Royal Father; horrid Fact! how did It grieve Macbeth, did he not straight In Pious rage the two Delinquents kill, That were the slaves of Drunkenness and Sleep. Was not that Nobly done? Seat. Ay, and wisely too: For 'twou'd have anger'd any Loyal heart to hear the men deny it. Len. So that I say he has born all things well: And I do think that had he Duncan's Sons Under his power (as may please Heaven he shall not) They shou'd find what it were to kill a Father. So shou'd Flean: but peace; I hear Macduffe Deny'd his presence at the Feast: For which He lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell Where he bestowes himself? Seat. I hear that Malcolme lives i'th' English Court, And is receiv'd of the most Pious Edward, With such Grace, that the Malevolences of Fortune Takes nothing from his high Respect; thither Macduff is gone to beg the Holy King's Kind aid, to wake Northumberland And VVarlike Seyward, and by the help of these, To finish what they have so well begun. This report Do's so Exasperate the King, that he Prepares for some attempt of VVar. Len. Sent he to Macduffe? Seat. He did, his absolute Command. Len. Some Angel fly toth' English Court, and tell His Message e're he come; that some quick blessing,
To this afflicted Country, may arrive Whilst those that merit it, are yet alive. Exeunt. Thunder, Enter three Witches meeting Hecat. 1. Witch. How, Hecat, you look angerly? Hecat. Have I not reason Beldams? VVhy did you all Traffick with Macbeth 'Bout Riddles and affairs of Death, And cal'd not me; All you have done Hath been but for a Weyward Son: Make some amends now: get you gon, And at the pit of Achaeron Meet me i'th' morning: Thither he Will come to know his Destiny. Dire business will be wrought e're Noon, For on a corner of the Moon, A drop my Spectacles have found, I'le catch it e're it come to ground. And that distil'd shall yet e're night, Raise from the Center such a Spright: As by the strength of his Illusion, Shall draw Macbeth to his Confusion Musick and Song. HEccate, Heccate, Heccate! Oh come away: Hark, I am call'd, my little Spirit see, Sits in a foggy Cloud, and stays for me. Sing within. Machine descends. Come away Heccate, Heccate! Oh come away: Hec. I come, I come, with all the speed I may, VVith all the speed I may. VVhere's Stadling? 2. Here. Hec. VVhere's Puckle? 3. Here, and Hopper too, and Helway too. 1. VVe want but you, we want but you: Come away make up the Count, Hec. I will but Noint, and the I mount, I will but, &c.
1. Here comes down one to fetch his due, a Kiss, A Cull, a sip of blood. And why thou staist so long, I muse, Since th' Air's so sweet and good. 2. O art thou come; VVhat News? All goes fair for our delight, Either come, or else refuse, Now I'm furnish'd for the flight Now I go, and now I flye, Malking my sweet Spirit and I. 3. O what a dainty pleasure's this, To sail i'th' Air VVhile the Moon shines fair; To Sing, to Toy, to Dance and Kiss, Over VVoods, high Rocks and Mountains; Over Hills, and misty Fountains: Over Steeples, Towers, and Turrets: VVe flye by night 'mongst troops of Spirits. No Ring of Bells to our Ears sounds, No howles of VVolves, nor Yelps of Hounds; No, nor the noise of VVaters breach, Nor Cannons Throats our Height can reach. 1. Come let's make hast she'll soon be back again: 2. But whilst she moves through the foggy Air, Let's to the Cave and our dire Charms prepare. Finis Actus 3. ACT the 4th. SCENE the 1st. 1. Witch. THrice the brinded Cat hath Mew'd. 2. Thrice, and once the Hedge-Pig whin'd, Shutting his Eyes against the Wind. 3. Harpier cries, tis time, tis time. 1. Then round about the Cauldron go, And poyson'd Entrals throw.
This Toad which under Mossy stone, Has days and nights lain thirty one: And swelter'd Venom sleeping got, We'l boyl in the Inchanted Pot. All. Double double, toyl and trouble; Fire burn, and Cauldron bubble. 2. The Fillet of a Fenny Snake Of Scuttle Fish the vomit black. The Eye of New't, and Toe of Frog, The wool of Bat, and tongue of Dog. An Adders fork and blind Worms sting, A Lizzard's leg, and Howlets wing, Shall like a Hell-broth boil and bubble. All. Double, double, &c. 3. The scale of Dragon, tooth of Wolf, A Witches mummy: Maw and Gulf Of Cormorant and the Sea Shark, The root of Hemlock dig'd i'th' dark. The liver of blaspheming Jew, With gall of Goats, and slips of Yew, Pluckt when the Moon was in Eclips, With a Turks nose, and Tarters lips The finger of a strangl'd Babe Born of a Dich deliver'd Drab, Shall make the Greuel thick and slab. Adding thereto a fat Dutchman's Chawdron, For the ingredients of our Cawdron. All. Double, double, &c. 2. I'le cool it with a Baboones blood, And so the Charm is firm and good. Enter Heccate and the other three Witches. Hec. Oh well done, I commend your pains, And every one shall share the Gains. And now about the Cauldron sin Like Elves and Fairies in a ring.
Musick and Song. Hec. BLack Spirits, and white, Red Spirits and gray; Mingle, mingle, mingle, You that mingle may. 1. Witch. Tiffin, Tiffin, keep it stiff in, Fire drake Puckey, make it luckey: Lyer Robin, you must bob in. Chor. A round, a round, about, about, All ill come running in, all good keep out. 1. Here's the blood of a Bat! Hec. O put in that, put in that. 2. Here's Lizards brain, Hec. Put in a grain. 1. Here's Juice of Toad, here's oyl of Adder That will make the Charm grow madder. 2. Put in all these, 'twill raise the stanch; Hec. Nay here's three ownces of a red-hair'd Wench. Chor. A round, a round, &c. 2. I by the pricking of my Thumbs, Know somthing Wicked this way comes, Open Locks, whoever knocks. Enter Macbeth. Macb. How now you Secret, black and mid-night Haggs, What are you doing? All. A deed without a name. Macb. I conjure you by that which you profess. How e're you come to know it, answer me. Though you let loose the raging Winds to shake whole Towns, Though bladed Corn be lodg'd, and Trees blown down. Though Castles tumble on their Warders heads; Though Palaces and towring Piramids Are swallowed up in Earth-quakes. Answer me. 1. Speak. 2. Pronounce. 3. Demand. 4. I'le answer thee
Macb. What Destinie's appointed for my Fate? Hec. Thou double Thane and King; beware Macduffe: Avoiding him, Macbeth is safe enough. Macb. VVhat e're thou art for try kind Caution, Thanks. Hec. Be bold and bloody, and man's hatred scorn, Thou shalt be harm'd by none of VVoman born'd. Macb. Then live Macduffe; what need I fear thy power: But none can be too sure, thou shalt not live, That I may tell pale hearted fear it lies, And sleep in spite of Thunder. Hec. Be Confident, be Proud, and take no care VVho wages War, or where Conspirers are, Macbeth shall like a lucky Monarch Raign, Till Birnam Wood shall come to Dunsenain. Macb. Can Forrests move? the Prophesie is good, If I shall never fall till the great Wood Of Brnan rise; thou may'st presume Macbeth, To live out Natures Lease, and pay thy breath To Time and mortal Custom. Yet my heart Longs for more Knowledge: Tell me if your Art Extends so far: shall Banquo's Issue o're This Kingdom raign? All. Enquire no more. Macb. I will not be deny'd. Ha! Cauldron sinks. An eternal Curse fall on you; let me know Why sinks that Cauldron, and what noise is this. 1. Witch. Appear. 2. appear, 3. appear. VVound through his Eyes, his harden'd Heart, Like Shaddows come, and straigth depart. A shaddow of eight Kings, and Banquo's Ghost after them pass by. Macb. Thy Crown offends my sight. A second too like the first. A third resembles him: a fourth too like the former: Ye filthy Hags, will they succeed Each other still till Dooms-day? Another yet; a seventh? I'll see no more: And yet the eigth appears. Ha! the bloody Banquo smiles upon me,
And by his smiling on me, seems to say That they are all Successors of his race. Hec. Ay, Sir, all this is so: but why Macbeth, stand'st thou amazedly: Come Sisters, let us chear his heart, And shew the pleasures of our Art; I'le charm the Air to give a sound While you perform your Antick round. Musick. The Witches Dance and Vanish. the Cave sinks. Mach. Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour stand Accurs'd to all eternity. without there. Enter Seyton. Seyt. What's your Graces will? Macb. Saw you the Wayward sisters? Seyt. No my Lord. Macb. Came they not by you? Seyt. By me Sir? Macb. Infected be the Earth in which they sunk, And Damn'd all those that trust 'em. Just now I heard the galloping of Horse; who was't came by? Seyt. A Messenger from the English Court, who Brings word Macduff is fled to England. Macb. Fled to England? Seyt. Ay my Lord. Macb. Time thou' Anticipat'st all my Designes; Our Purposes seldom succeed, unless Our Deeds go with them. My Thoughts shall henceforth into Actions rise, The Witches made me cruel, but not wise. Exeunt. Enter Macduffe's Wife, and Lenox. Lady Md. I then was frighted with the sad alarm Of Banquo's Death, when I did counsel him
To fly, but now alas! I much repent it, What had he done to leave the Land? Macbeth Did know him Innocent. Len. You must have patience Madam. Lady Md. He had none. His flight was madness. When our Actions do not, Our fears oft make us Traytors. Len. You know not whether it was his VVisdom or his Fear. Lady Md. Wisdom? to leave his Wife and Children in a place From whence himself did fly; he loves us not. He wants the natural touch: For the poor Wren (The most diminutive of Birds) will with The Ravenous Owl, fight stoutly for her young ones. Len. Your Husband, Madam; Is Noble, Wise, Judicious, and best knows The fits o'th' Season. I dare not speak much further, But cruel are the Times; when we are Traytors, And do not know our selves: when we hold Rumor, From what we fear, yet know not what we fear; But float upon a wild and violent Sea. Each way, and more, I take my way of you: 'T shall not be long but I'll be here again. Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upwards To what they were before. Heaven protect you. Lady Mad. Farewell Sir.
Enter a Woman. Wom. Madam, a Gentleman in haste desires To speak with you. Lady Md. A Gentleman, admit him. Enter Seyton. Seyton. Though I have not the honour to be known To you, Yet I was well acquainted with The Lord Macduff which brings me here to tell you There's danger near you, be not found here, Fly with your little one; Heaven preserve you, I dare stay no longer. Exit Seyton. Lady Md. Where shall I go, and whither shall I fly? I've done no harm; but I remember now I'm in a vicious world, where to do harm Is often prosperous, and to do good Accounted dangerous folly; Why do I then Make use of this so womanly defence? I'le boldly in, and dare this new Alarm: What need they fear whom Innocense doth arm? Exit. Enter Malcolm, and Macduff. The Scene Birnam Wood. Macd. In these close shades of Birnam Wood let us Weep our sad Bosoms empty. Malcolm. You'l think my Fortunes desperate, That I dare meet you here upon your summons. Macd. You should now Take Arms to serve your Country. Each new day New Widows mourn, new Orphans cry, and still Changes of sorrow reach attentive Heaven. Malc. This Tirant whose foul Name blisters our Tongues, Was once thought, honest. You have lov'd him well. He has not toucht you yet. Macd. I am not treacherous. Malc. But Macbeth is. And yet Macduff may be what I did always think him, Just, and good. Macd. I've lost my hopes. Malc. Perhaps even there where I did find my doubts;
But let not Jealousies be your Dishonours, But my own safeties. Macd. Bleed, Bleed, poor Country. Great Tiranny, lay thy Foundation sure, Villains are safe when good men are suspected. I'le say no more. Fare thee well young Prince, I would not be that Traytor which thou thinkst me For twice Macbeths reward of Treachery. Malc. Be not offended: I speak not as in absolute fear of you: I think our Countrey sinks beneath the Yoak, It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash Is added to her wounds. I think withall That many hands would in my Cause be active. And here from gracious England have I offer Of goodly Thousands. But for all this, When I shall tread upon the Tirants head, Or wear it on my Sword; yet my poor Country Will suffer under greater Tiranny Than what it suffers now, Macd. It cannot be. Malc. Alas I find my Nature so inclin'd To Vice, that foul Macbeth when I shall rule, Will seem as white as Snow. Macd. There cannot in all ransackt Hell be found A Devil equal to Macbeth. Malc. I grant him bloody false, deceiptful malitious, And participating in some sins too horrid to name; But there's no bottom, no depths in my ill appetite, If such a one be fit to govern, speak? Macd. O Scotlond, Scotland, when shalt thou see day again? Since that the truest Issue of thy Throne, Disclaims his Virtue to avoid thy Crown? Your Royal Father Was a most Saint-like King; the Queen that bore you, Oftner upon her Knees, than on her Feet, Dy'd every day she liv'd. Fare thee well, These Evils thou repeat'st upon thy self,
Hath banisht me from Scotland. O my breast! Thy hope ends here. Malc. Macduff this Noble Passion Child of Integrity hath from my Soul Wip'd the black scruples, reconcil'd my Thoughts To thy good truth and honour. Macbeth By many of these Trains hath sought to win me Into his Power: And modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste. But now I put my self to thy direction, and Unspeak mine own Detraction. I abjure The taunts and blames I laid upon my self, For strangers to my Nature. What I am truly Is thine, and my poor Countreys to command. The gracious Edward has lent us Seymour, And ten thousand Men. Why are you silent? Macd. Such welcom and unwelcom things at once Are Subjects for my Wonder not my Speech, My grief and Joy contesting in my bosom, I find that I can scarce my tongue command, When two Streams meet the Water's at a stand. Malc. Assistance granted by that pious King Must be successful, he who by his touch, Can cure our Bodies of a foul Disease, Can by just force suddue a Traitors Mind, Power supernatural is unconfin'd. Macd. If his Compassion does on Men Diseas'd Effect such Cures; What Wonders will he do, When to Compassion he ads Justice too? Exeunt. Enter Macbeth and Seaton. Macb. Seaton, go bid the Army March. Seat. The posture of Affairs requires your Presence. Macb. But the Indosposition of my Wife Detains me here. Seat. Th'Enemy is upon our borders, Scotland's in danger. Macb: So is my Wife, and I am doubly so. I am sick in her, and my Kingdom too.
Seaton. Sir, Macb. The Spur of my Ambition prompts me to go And make my Kingdom safe; but Love which softens me To pity her in her distress, curbs my Resolves. Seat. He's strangely disorder'd. Macb. Yet why should Love since confin'd, desire To controul Ambition, for whose spreading hopes The world's too narrow, It shall not; Great Fires Put out the Less; Seaton go bid my Grooms Make ready; Ile not delay my going. Seat. I go. Macb. Stay Seaton, stay, Compassion calls me back. Seaton. He looks and moves disorderly. Macb. I'le not go yet. Enter a Servant, who whispers Macbeth Seat. Well Sir. Macb. Is the Queen asleep? Seat. What makes 'em whisper and his countenance change? Perhaps some new design has had ill success. Macb. Seaton, Go see what posture our Affairs are in. Seat. I shall, and give you notice Sir. Exit Seat. Enter Lady Macbeth. Macb. How does my Gentle Love? Lady Mb. Duncan is dead. Macb. No words of that. Lady Mb. And yet to Me he Lives. His fatal Ghost is now my shadow, and pursues me Where e're I go. Macb. It cannot be My Dear, Your Fears have misinform'd your eyes. Lady Mb. See there; Believe your own. Why do you follow Me? I did not do it. Macb. Methinks there's nothing. Lady Mb. If you have Valour force him hence. Hold, hold, he's gone. Now you look strangely. Macb. 'Tis the strange error of your Eyes. Lady Mb. But the strange error of my Eyes
Proceeds from the strange Action of your Hands. Distraction does by fits possess my head, Because a Crown unjustly covers it. I stand so high that I am giddy grown. A Mist does cover me, as Clouds the tops Of Hills. Let us get down apace. Macb. If by your high ascent you giddy grow, 'Tis when you cast your Eyes on things below. Lady Mb. You may in Peace resign the ill gain'd Crown. Why should you labour still to be unjust? There has been too much Blood already spilt. Make not the Subjects Victims to your guilt. Macb. Can you think that a crime, which you did once Provoke me to commit, had not your breath Blown my Ambition up into a Flame Duncan had yet been living▪ Lady Mb. You were a Man. And by the Charter of your Sex you shou'd Have govern'd me, there was more crime in you When you obey'd my Councels, then I contracted By my giving it. Resign your Kingdom now, And with your Crown put off your guilt. Macb. Resign the Crown, and with it both our Lives. I must have better Councellors. Lady Mb. What, your Witches? Curse on your Messengers of Hell. Their Breath Infected first my Breast: See me no more. As King your Crown sits heavy on your Head, But heavier on my Heart: I have had too much Of Kings already. See the Ghost again. Ghost appears. Macb. Now she relapses. Lady Mb. Speak to him if thou canst. Thou look'st on me, and shew'st thy wounded breast. Shew it the Murderer. Macb. Within there, Ho. Enter Women. Lady Mb. Am I ta'ne Prisoner? then the Battle's lost. Exit. Lady Macbeth led out by Women.
Macb. She does from Duncans death to sickness grieve, And shall from Malcoms death her health receive. When by a Viper bitten, nothing's good To cure the venom but a Vipers blood. Enter Malcom, Macduff; and Lenox, Meeting them. Macd. See who comes here! Malc. My Countrey-man; but yet I know him not. Macd. My ever Gentle Couzin! Welcom. Malc. I know him now. Kind Heaven remove the Means that makes us strangers. Len. Amen. Macd. What looks does Scotland bear? Len. Alas poor Countrey, almost afraid to know it self. It can't be call'd our Mother but our Grave; where nothing, But who knows nothing is once seen to smile? Where sighs, and groans, and shrieks that rend the air, Are made, not mark'd, where violent sorrow seems A Modern Extasie: there Bells Are always ringing, and no Man asks for whom; There good Mens lives expire e're they sicken. Macd. Oh Relation! too nice, and yet too true. Malc. What's the newest grief? Len. That of an hours age is out of date, Each Minute brings a new one. Macd. How does my Wife? Len. Why well. Macd. And all my Children? Len. Well too. Macd. The Tirant has not quarrell'd at their peace? Len. No, they were well at peace when I left 'em Macd. Be not so sparing of your speech. How goe'st? Len. When I came hither to transport the tidings, Which I have heavily born, there ran a rumour Of many Worthy Men that rose into a head, Which was to my Belief; witness the rather, For that I saw the Tirants Power a foot. Now, is the time of help; your Eye in Scotland Would create Soldiers, and make Women fight.
Malc. Be't their Comfort, We are coming thither: Gracious England hath Lent us good Seymour, and ten thousand Men. Len. Wou'd I cou'd answer this comfort with the like; But I have words, That would be utter'd in the desart air, Where no Mans ear should hear'em. Macd. What concern they? the general cause, Or is't a grief due to some single breast? Len: All honest Minds must share in't; But the main part pertains to you. Macd: If it be mine, keep it not from Me. Len: Let not your ears condemn my tongue for ever, When they shall possess them with the heaviest sound That ever yet they heard. Macd: At once I guess, yet am afraid to know, Len: Your Castle is surpriz'd, your Wife and Children. Savagely Murder'd: to relate the Manner, Were to increase the Butchery of them, By adding to their fall the Death of You. Malc: Merciful Heaven! Noble Macduff Give sorrow words; the grief that does not speak, Whispers the o're charg'd heart, and bids it break. Macd: My Children too? Len: Your Wife, and both your Children, Macd: And I not with them dead? Both, both my Children Did you say; my Two? Len: I have said, Macd: Be comforted; Let's make us Cordials of our great Revenues, To cure this deadly Grief. Macd: He has no Children, nor can he feel A fathers Grief: Did you say all my Children? Oh hellish ravenous Kite! all three at one swoop! Malc: Dispute it like a Man. Macd: I shall. But I must first too feel it as a Man. I cannot but remember such things were,
And were most precious to me: Did Heaven look on, And would not take their part? sinful Macduff, They were all struck for thee; for thee they fell: Not for their own offences; but for thine. Malc: Let this give Edges to our Swords; let your tears Become Oyl to our kindled Rage. Macd: Oh I could play the Woman with my Eyes, And brag on't with my tongue; kind Heavens bring this Dire Friend of Scotland, and my self face to face, And set him within the reach of my keen Sword. And if he outlives that hour, may Heaven forgive His sins, and punish Me for his escape. Malc: Let's hasten to the Army, since Macbeth Is ripe for fall. Macd. Heaven give our quarrel but as good success As it hath Justice in't: Kind Powers above Grant Peace to us, whilst we take his away; The Night is long that never finds a Day. Exeunt. ACT. V. Scen. I. Enter Seaton, and a Lady. Lady: I have seen her rise from her bed, throw Her Night-Gown on her, unlock her Closet, Take forth Paper, fold it, write upon't, read it, Afterwards Seal it, and again return to Bed, Yet all this while in a most fast sleep. Seat: 'Tis strange she should receive the Benefit Of sleep, and do the Effects of waking. In this disorder what at any time have You heard her say? Lady. That Sir, which I will not report of her. Seat: You may to Me; and 'tis most meet you shou'd. Lady. Neither to You, nor any one living; Having no witness to confirm my Speech.
Enter Lady Macbeth. See here she comes: observe her, and stand close. Seat. You see her eyes are open. Lady. Ay, But her Sense is shut. Seat. What is't she does now? look how she rubs her hands: Lady. It is an accustom'd action with her to seem Thus washing her hands: I have known Her continue in this a quarter of an hour. Lady Mb. Yet out, out, here's a spot. Seat. Heark, she speaks. Lady Mb. Out, out, out I say. One, two: Nay then 'Tis time to do't: Fy my Lord, fy, a Soldier, And affraid? what need we fear? who knows it? There's none dares call our Power to account; Yet who would have thought the old Man had So much Blood in him. Seat. Do you mark that? Lady Mb. Macduff had once a Wife; where is she now? Will these Hands n'ere be clean? Fy my Lord, You spoil all with this starting: Yet here's A smell of blood; not all the perfumes of Arabia Will sweeten this little Hand. Oh, Oh, Oh. Exit. Scen. II. Enter Donalbain and Flean, met by Lenox. Len. Is not that DONALBAIN and young Flean, Banquo's Son. Don. Who is this my worthy Friend? Len. I by your presence feel my hopes full blown, Which hitherto have been but in the Bud. What happy gale has brought you here to see Your Fathers Death Reveng'd? Don. Hearing of aid sent by the English King, To check the Tirants Insolence; I am come From Ireland: Flea. And I from France, we are but newly met. Don. Where's my Brother?
Len. He and the Good Macduff are with the Army Behind the Wood. Don. What do's the Tyrant now? Len. He strongly Fortifies in Dunsinane; Some say he is Mad, others who Love him less, Call it a Valiant Fury; but what e're The matter is, there is a Civil War Within his Bosom; and he finds his Crown Sit loose about him: His Power grows less, His Fear grows greater still. Don. Let's haste and meet my Brother, My Interest is Grafted into his, And cannot Grow without it. Len. So may you both Out-grow unlucky Chance, And may the Tyrant's Fall that Growth Advance. Exeunt. Scene III. Enter Macbeth, Seat. and Attendants. Macb. Bring me no more Reports: Let 'em flie all Till Byrnam Wood remove to Dunsinane I cannot fear. What's the Boy Malcome? What Are all the English? Are they not of Women Born? And t'all such I am Invincible, Then flie false Thanes, By your Revolt you have inflam'd my Rage, And now have Borrowed English Blood to quench it. Enter a Messenger. Now Friend, what means thy change of Countenance? Mess. There are Ten Thousand, Sir, Macb. What, Ghosts? Mess. No, Armed men. Macb. But such as shall be Ghosts e're it be Night. Art thou turn'd Coward too, since I made thee Captain: Go Blush away thy Paleness, I am sure Thy Hands are of another Colour; thou hast Hands Of Blood, but Looks of Milk.
Mess. The English Force so please you —??? Macb. Take thy Face hence. He has Infected me with Fear I am sure to die by none of Woman morn. And yet the English Drums beat an Alarm, As fatal to my Life as are the Crokes Of Ravens, when they Flutter about the Windows Of departing men. My Hopes are great, and yet me-thinks I fear My Subjects cry out Curses on my Name, Which like a North-wind seems to blast my Hopes: Seat. That Wind is a contagious Vapour exhal'd from Blood. Enter Second Messenger. What News more? 2. Mess. All's confirm'd my Leige, that was Reported. Macb. And my Resolves in spite of Fate shall be as firmly. Send out more Horse; and Scour the Country round. How do's my Wife? Seat. Not so Sick, my Lord, as She is Troubled With disturbing Fancies, that keep Her from Her rest. Macb. And I, me-thinks, am Sick of her Disease: Seaton send out; Captain, the Thanes flie from thee: Wou'd she were well, I'de quickly win the Field. Stay Seaton, stay, I'le bear you company, The English cannot long maintain the Fight; They come not here to Kill, but to be Slain; Send out our Scouts. Seat. Sir, I am gone. Aside Not to Obey your Orders, but the Call of Justice. I'le to the English Train whose Hopes are built Upon their Cause, and not on Witches Prophesies. Exit. Macb. Poor Thanes, you vainly hope for Victory: You'l find Macbeth Invincible; or if He can be O'recome, it must be then By Birnam Oaks, and not by English-men. Exit.
Scen. IV. Enter Malcom, Donalbain, Seymor, Macduff, Lenox, Flean, Souldiers. Malc. The Sun shall see us Drain the Tyrants Blood And Dry up Scotlands Tears: How much we are Oblig'd to England, which like a kind Neighbour Lift's us up when we were Fall'n below Our own Recovery. Seym. What Wood is this before us? Malc. The Wood of Birnam. Seym. Let every Souldier hew him down a Bough, And bear't before him: By that we may Keep the Number of our Force undiscover'd By the Enemy. Malc. It shall be done. We Learn no more then that The Confident Tyrant keeps still in Dunsinane, And will endure a Seige. He is of late grown Conscious of his Guilt, Which makes him make that City his Place of Refuge. Macd. He'l find even there but little Safety; His very Subjects will aginst him Rise. So Travellers Flie to an Aged Barn For Shelter from the Rain; when the next Shock Of Wind throws Down that Roof upon their Heads, From which they hop'd for Succour. Len. The wretched Kernes which now like Boughs are ty'd To forc'd Obedience; will when our Swords Have Cut those Bonds, start from Obedience. Malc. May the Event make good our Guess: Macd. It must, unless our Resolutions fail They'l kindle, Sir, their just Revenge at ours: Which double Flame will Singe the Wings of all The Tyrants hopes; depriv'd of those Supports, He'l quickly Fall. Seym. Let's all Retire to our Commands; our Breath
Spent in Discourse does but defer his Death, And but delays our Vengeance, Macd. Come let's go. The swiftest hast is for Revenge too slow. Exeunt. Enter Macbeth, and Souldiers. Macb. Hang out our Banners proudly o're the Wall, The Cry is still, they Come: Our Castles Strength Will Laugh a Siege to Scorn: Here let them lie Till Famine eat them up: Had Seaton still Been ours, and others who now Increase the Number Of our Enemies, we might have met 'em Face to Face. Noise within. What Noise is that? Ser. It seems the Cry of Women. Macb. I have almost forgot the Taste of Fears, The time has been that Dangers have been my Familiars. Wherefore was that Cry? Ser. Great, Sir, the Queen is Dead. Macb. She should have Di'd hereafter, I brought Her here, to see my Victines, not to Die. To Morrow, to Morrow, and to Morrow, Creeps in a stealing pace from Day to Day, To the last Minute of Recorded Time: And all our Yesterdays have lighted Fools To their Eternal Homes: Out, out that Candle, Life's but a Walking Shaddow, a poor Player That Struts and Frets his Hour upon the Stage, And then is Heard no more. It is a Tale Told by an Ideot, full of Sound and Fury Signifying Nothing. Enter a Messenger▪ Thou comest to use thy Tongue: Thy Story quickly. Mess. Let my Eyes speak what they have seen, For my Tongue cannot. Macb. Thy Eyes speak Terror, let thy Tongue expound, Their Language, or be for ever Dumb. Mess. As I did stand my Watch upon the Hill, I lookt towards Birnam, and anon me thoughts
The Wood began to move: Macb. Lyar and Slave. Mess. Let me endure your Wrath if't be not so: Within this three Mile may you see it coming, I say, a moving Grove. Macb. If thou speakst False, I'll send thy Soul To th' other World to meet with moving Woods, And walking Forrests; There to Possess what it but Dreamt of here. If thy Speech be true, I care not if thou doest The same for me. I now begin To doubt the Equivocation of the Fiend, They bid me not to fear till Birnam Wood Should come to Dansinane: And now a Wood Is on its March this way; Arm, Arm. Since thus a Wood do's in a March appear, There is no Flying hence, nor Tarrying here: Methinks I now grow weary of the Sun, And wish the Worlds great Glass of Life were run. Exeunt▪ Scene. VI. Enter Malcome, Seymour, Macduff, Lenox, Flean, Seaton, Donalbain, and their Army with Boughs. Malc: Here we are near enough; throw down Your Leafie Skreens And shew like those you are. You worthy Uncle Shall with my Brother and the Noble Lenox, March in the Van, whilst Valiant Seymour And my Self, make up the Gross of the Army, And follow you with speed. Sey. Fare well; the Monster has forsook his hold and comes To offer Battle. Macd: Let him come on; his Title now Sits Loose about him, like a Giants Robe Upon a Dwarfish Thief.
Enter Macbeth. Macb. 'Tis too Ignoble, and too base to Flie; Who's he that is not of a Woman Born, For such a one I am to fear, or none. Enter Lenox. Len. Kind Heaven, I thank thee; have I found thee here; Oh Scotland! Scotland! mayst thou owe thy just Revenge to this sharp Sword, or this blest Minute. Macb. Retire fond Man, I wou'd not Kill thee. Why should Faulcons prey on Flies? It is below Macbeth to Fight with Men. Len. But not to Murder Women. Macb. Lenox, I pitty thee; thy Arm's too weak. Len: This Arm has hitherto found good Success On your Ministers of Blood, who Murder'd Macduffs Lady, and brave Banquo: Art thou less Mortal then they were? Or more Exempt from Punishment? Because thou most Deserv'st it. Have at thy Life. Macb: Since then thou art in Love with Death, I will Vouchsafe it thee. They fight, Lenox falls. Thou art of Woman Born, I'm sure. Exit Macb. Len: Oh my dear Country, Pardon me that I, Do in a Cause so great, so quickly Die. Dies. Enter Macduff. Macd: This way the Noise is, Tyrant shew thy Face, If thou be'st Slain and by no hand of Mine, My Wife and Childrens Ghosts will haunt me for't▪ I cannot Strike At wretched Slaves, who sell their Lives for Pay; No, my Revenge shall seek a Nobler Prey.
Through all the Paths of Death, I'le search him out: Let me but find him, Fortune. Exit. Enter Malcom, and Seymor. Sey. This way, Great Sir, the Tyrants People Fight With Fear as great as is his Guilt. Malc: See who Lies here; the Noble Lenox slain, What Storm has brought this Blood over our Rising hopes. Sey. Restrain your Passion, Sir, let's to our Men, Those who in Noble Causes fall, deserve Our Pitty, not our Sorrow. I le bid some Body bear the Body further hence. Exeunt. Enter Macbeth. Macb. Why should I play the Roman Fool and Fall, On my own Sword, while I have living Foes To Conquer; my Wounds shew better upon them. Enter Macduff. Macd. Turn Hell-Hound, Turn. Macb. Of all Men else, I have avoided Thee; But get thee back, my Soul is too much clog'd With Blood of thine already. Macd. I'le have no Words, thy Villanies are worse Then ever yet were Punisht with a Curse. Macb. Thou mayst as well attempt to Wound the Air, As me; my Destiny's reserv'd for some Immortal Power, And I must fall by Miracle; I cannot Bleed. Macd. Have thy black Deeds then turn'd thee to a Devil. Macb. Thou wouldst but share the Fate of Lenox. Macd. Is Lenox slain? and by a Hand that would Damn all it kills, But thattheir Cause preserves 'em. Macb I have a Prophecy secures my Life. Macd. I have another which tells me I shall have his Blood, Who first shed mine.
Macb. None of Woman born can spill my Blood. Macd. Then let the Devils tell thee, Macduff Was from his Mothers Womb untimely Ript. Macb. Curst be that Tongue that tells me so, And double Damn'd be they who with a double sence Make Promises to our Ears, and Break at last That Promise to our sight: I will not Fight with thee. Macd. Then yield thy self a Prisoner to be Led about The World, and Gaz'd on as a Monster, a Monster More Deform'd then ever Ambition Fram'd, Or Tyrannie could shape. Macb. I scorn to Yield. I will in spite of Enchantment Fight with thee, though Birnam Wood be come To Dunsinane: And thou art of no Woman Born, I'le try, If by a Man it be thy Fate to Die. They Fight, Macbeth falls. They shout within Macd. This for my Royal Master Duncan, This for my dearest Friend my Wife, This for those Pledges of our Loves, my Children. Hark I hear a Noise, sure there are more Shout within. Reserves to Conquer. I'le as a Trophy bear away his Sword, To witness my Revenge. Exit Macduff. Macb. Farewell vain World, and what's most vain in it, Ambition Dies. Enter Malcolm, Seymour, Donalbain, Flean, Sea∣ton, and Souldiers. Malc. I wish Macduff were safe Arriv'd, I am In doubt for him; for Lenox I'me in grief. Seym. Consider Lenox, Sir, is nobly Slain: They who in Noble Causes fall, deserve Our Pity, not our Sorrow. Look where the Tyrant is. Seat. The Witches, Sir, with all the Power of Hell, Could not preserve him from the Hand of Heaven.
Enter Macduff with Macbeths Sword. Macd. Long Live Malcolm, King of Scotland, so you are; And though I should not Boast, that one Whom Guilt might easily weigh down, fell By my Hand; yet here I present you with The Tyrants Sword, to shew that Heaven appointed Me to take Revenge for you, and all That Suffered by his Power. Malc. Macduff, we have more Ancient Records Then this of your successful Courage. Macd. Now Scotland, thou shalt see bright Day again, That Cloud's remov'd that did Ecclipse thy Sun, And Rain down Blood upon thee. As your Arms Did all contribute to this Victory; So let your Voices all concur to give One joyful Acclamation. Long Live Malcolm, King of Scotland. Malc. We shall not make a large Expence of time Before we Reckon with your several Loves, And make us even with you. Thanes and Kinsman, Henceforth be Earls, the first that ever Scotland Saw Honour'd with that Title: And may they full Flourish On your Families; though like the Laurels You have Won to Day; they Spring from a Field of Blood. Drag his Body hence, and let it Hang upon A Pinnacle in Dunsinane, to shew To shew to future Ages what to those is due, Who others Right, by Lawless Power pursue. Macd. So may kind Fortune Crown your Raign with Peace, As it has Crown'd your Armies with Success; And may the Peoples Prayers still wait on you, As all their Curses did Macbeth pursue: His Vice shall make your Virtue shine more Bright, As a Fair Day succeeds a Stormy Night. FINIS. Actus V.
