S3101 99832475 36948
A True Relation of a Notorious Cheater one Robert Bullock, Lately done in Oxford, to prevent the like. To the tune of, And for my Offence I shall die, or, For the losse of my goods. Oh fine Cheat. COme listen all good people, and here what I can tell, My name is Robert Bullock, at Chetington I dwell, For Rougery in Oxford, all others I'le excell, And for mine offence I did flie. That famous ancient City, I lately entered in, To cheat them by the Dozens, I thought it no great sin: And to relate particulars, I'le willingly begin. And for, &c. A Wife and a great Portion I did pretend to have, And thereupon I must have all things fine and brave: I did dissemble with them much like a cheating knave, And for, &c. I took of a rich widdow, a house and shop so fair, That workmen of all sorts nto me did repair, And for their best contrivance, I left it to their care, And for, &c. Spoons and Plates, all Silver, of a Goldsmith I procured, And a great Silver tankard, which Baners booke assured, My yes and nays, were not to be endured. And for &c. A Shute and a fair Cloak, I am sure I had of one, Whose name I have forgot; no matter let it alone, To me hereafter, let them make their moan, And for, &c. A good man a rich Sadler, for my custome courted me, Both Pillion-cloth and Bridle, were at my service free, With Combes, for boots & shoos I quickly did agrée, And for mine offence I did flie.
My wedding gloves I bought, of honest Thomas Bland, My Brass and eke my Pewter I had serv'd me out of hand, And all poor Prices Bodis were at my own command. And for mine offence I did flie, My empty rooms were furnisht, with all Upholdsterers ware, Both Beds and all things else I left to Thurstons care, And when I pay my debts, then he shall have his share, And for, &c. Bedsteds, and Tables, and many a days work to, I had of a Wooden Ioyner, who for the same did sue As most that I have cheated, and now they have time to rue, And for, &c. I had of Cox the Matt man, of several sorts, five Chairs, And Rggs of Bridewel kéeper, mixt with the finest hairs, And blankets from a Wity man who had rather lost his ears, And for, &c. I was a general marchant, for Buttons I did trade, I cheated brother Jennings, and a pure Virgin Maid, My carriage was so wary, thre's none could me upbraid, And for, &c. All sorts of several workmen, that I in his employ'd, I paid them all alike, diss:ention to avoid: If they no better master Masters have, they'l quickly be ststroy'd, And for, &c. There's two that did escape, from my intended plot, That's honest Roger Frye, and Gardiner the Sot, I am contented with it, séeing it was their Lot, And for, &c. I gave each what the asked, for their commodity, A made what rrady monies, I could at Banbury, And then with Edward Bartlet for carriage did agree, And for, &c. I hired a good horse, in Holly-well of one, May add a great repentance (unto his penance done) That such a rogue and villain, with his horse away is run, And for, &c. And when I came to London, that noble and great City, I cheated all my carriage; it being not much pity That all should loose by me, so ends my Ditty. And for mine offences I did flie. By one of Oxford.
