T227 11940704 51268
Londons Triumphs CELEBRATED The 29th. of October, 1664. IN HONOUR To the truely Deserver of HONOUR Sir Iohn Lawrence KNIGHT, LORD MAIOR of the Honourable City of LONDON: AND Performed at the Costs and Charges of the Worshipful COMPANY of HABERDASHERS. William Iustice Esq Master. Wardens. John King Phillip Owen Anthony Dowse Iohn Mascall Written by JOHN TATHAM Gent. Lond. Printed by W. G. for H. Brome at the Gun in Ivylane. 1664.
To the Right Honourable Sir IOHN LAWRENCE Kt. Lord Maior of the City of LONDON. MY LORD, IN the Progresse of this Dayes Try∣umphs, You may clearly Trace the inestimable Love of your Company, who have omitted no Costs that might Il∣lustrate your Fame and Honour, though your Merits in themselves are glorious: In this great Service we ought to commend to your Lordship the especial care of the Committee appointed for carrying it on: who have shown themselves not only Worthy Brethren of your Company, but true Servants to your Honour. They hope your Acceptation, and I your Par∣don, if any Errata's in Fancy are disco∣vered; Begging your Lordships Licence to Subscribe my self Your Honours devoted Servant JOHN TATHAM.
To the worthily honoured the Company of HABERDASHERS. Gentlemen, YOU have been (amongst other the Worshipful Companies) my Patrons for some years past; and it is now my happinesse that you are intirely mine, and that you have Intituled Me your Servant; How much Honour I reap from thence, let others judge; I shall not be too lavish in the Expressions, since I know you are (in one) as great an Enemy to Ostentation, as I am to Flattery (though it hath been alwayes a Blot in the Poets Escutcheon) I am no Boaster of my own Abilities, nor detract from other Mens; I have used my Endevours to serve you, and if your Acceptation give them Merit, the Honour will redound to your Selves, (the Donero,) and a happiness to Me, that I am (Gentlemen) The humblest of your Servants Iohn Tatham.
LONDONS TRIUMPH. The Businesse of the Day is thus Ordered: THE Pentioners meet at Four of the Clock in the Morning. The Batchellors at Six. The Livery at Seven. The number of Persons thought necessary to attend the Service, are 1. The Master, Wardens, and Assistants in their Livery Gowns fa∣ced with Foyns, and their Hoods, in number 32. 2. The Livery (in number 168) faced with Budge, and their Hoods. 3. The Batchellors in number 120, part whereof are in Livery Gowns faced with Foynes, and the other part in Gowns faced with Budge; All of them in Crimson Sattin Hoods. 4. The Gentlemen Ushers in number 40, in Plush Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about his Shoulder, and a white Staff in his hand. 5. Nine Gentlemen for carrying of His Majesties, and other Ban∣ners, and the Companies Colours; Eight in Plush Coats, one in a Buff Coat, each of them Watchet Scarfs over their Shoulders. 6. His Majesties Serjeant Trumpet with a Watchet Scarf about his Shoulder, and one other Scarf of his Lordships favour, with a Leading Staff in his hand: Also his Majesties 16 Trumpets, and Kettle-Drum, and 20 other Trumpets.
7. His Majesties Drum-Major, with a Watchet Scarf about his Shoulder, his Staff in his hand; His Majesties four other Drums and Fife, Seven other Drums, and Three Fifes. 8. The Foot-Marshal with a Watchet Scarf about his Shoulder, has 8 Attendants in Buff-coloured-Dublets, and white Hats. 9. The three Masters of Defence or Quarter masters, each of them a Watchet Scarf about his Wast, and 20 Attendants in their several Equipage. 10. The Pentioners, and other poor people (in number a 100.) are habited in Blew Gowns, Flat Caps, and Crimson Fustian Sleeves, each of them bearing a Target in one hand, and a Javelin in the other. 11. Forty other Pentioners in Blew Coats and Copped Caps, ap∣pointed for carrying of the Standards of St. George, St. Katharine, the Lord Maior and Cities, with other Silk-works. 11. Five Pages in Watchet coloured habits, trim'd with white, and white Stockings, blew Garters, white Caps, blew Cap-bands, with a Truncheon in the one hand, and a Target in the other, wherein is paint∣ed the Coats of Arms of the present Master and Wardens. The said persons being thus accoutred, are by the Care of the Foot-Marshal and his Men ranked out two by two. And between each Di∣stinction placeth Gentlemen Ushers, Banners, and Military Musick (except in the Van of the Pentioners, who have no Gentlemen Ush∣ers▪) And thus march, 1. The Pentioners bearing the Standards and Silkworks, in the head whereof is placed one carrying a Banner of the Companies Arms and two Drums and one Fife. 2. The Pentioners in Gowns are divided into three parts, and in the head of each part is placed one carrying a Pavis of the Compa∣nies, one Ensign, Six Drums, three Fifes. 3. Budge Batchellors, in the head of them is placed the Foot-Mar∣shal, and Master of Defence, eight Ushers, two Ensigns, six Trumpets. 4. Foyns Batchellors, and in the head of them is placed one Con∣ductor, and also the Yeomandry in the Rear, and ten Ushers, two Ensigns, six Trumpets. 5. The Livery, in the head whereof is placed one Conductor, twelve Ushers, two Ensigns, eight Trumpets.
6. The Assistants, in the head of them is placed one Conductor, and ten Ushers, two Ensigns, Drum-major, His Majesties four Drums, and one Fife▪ 7. The Master and Wardens, in the head of whom are placed 5 Pages, Serjeant Trumpet, and His Majesties 16 Trumpets, and Kettle Drum. Being thus Ranked, the whole Body move towards his Lordships house in St. Elens, beginning with the Pentioners, so that the Master and Wardens bring up the Rear, till joyning with his Lordships Atten∣dants, Serjeant Trumpet, and his Majesties 16 Trumpets, and Kettle Drum, quit their Division▪ fall into his Lordships, marching in the head of the four Attourneys of the Mayors Court. Which done, the whole Body move through Cornwall, and down the Old Iury, towards Guildhall, where taking in the Lord Maior and his Attendants, they passe up St. Laurence-lane; and Soaper-lane, and so to Three-Crane-Wharf. At the west end whereof the Lord Maiors take Barge, and at the East-end the Company of Haberdashers, Serjeant Trumpet, and 8 of His Majesties 16 Trumpets, and Kettle Drum, do passe into his Lordships Barge, and the rest into the Companies, as their only Musick: But the Wardens of the Yeomandry, Batchel∣lors, and Ushers, in their Divisions, do passe to their several places of Refreshment. The said Barges, and all other the Companies (appointed for that Service) with their Musick and Trophies being on Float, all convenient speed is made to Westminster, and by the way his Lordship is saluted from the Bank-side, by a Peal of 30. Peeces Ord∣nance. Being come to Westminster, The Companies make a Gallery or Guard from Westminster-bridge and Westminster-hall, through which the Worshipful Drapers, Grocers, and Mercers Companies (together with the Gentlemen of the Haberdashers) in their several Distinctions, with their Musick ordered as before do pass; but the Lord Maior and his Attendants, do all passe from thence up to the Exchequer-Bar in order to his being Sworn into the Office of Lord Maior. Being Sworn, his Lordship (between the old Lord Maior and Re∣corder doth passe down to the Common-pleas, and Chancery-Bar, and in those Courts performeth the accustomed Duty. And from thence all of them hast to their several Barges, and convenient speed is made
to Baynards-Castle, and by the way his Lordship (as before) is enter∣tained from the Bank-side with another Peal of Thirty Peece of Ord∣nance. And being landed at Baynards-Castle, The Gentlemen of the Artillery are there ready to receive him, Commanded by the right Worshipful and much deserving Sir Robert Peak Knight, Vice-President of the Artillery ground. The Foot-Marshal having set the Batchellors, the Pentioners, their Trophies, and Musick in Order as in the Morning, the whole body move up Pauls Wharf-hill, beginning with the Worshipful the Drapers, Grocers, and Mercers Companies; after them the Artillery, after them the Penti∣oners, Musick, Trophies, and Gentlemen-Ushers, Batchellors, Li∣veries, Assistants, Master and Wardens, his Lordships Attendants, both Lord Maiors, and Aldermen. His Lordship being come into Pauls-Church-yard neer the School, Is entertained with a Scene, the Angles of one part whereof is a∣dorned with small Shelters in the manner of Arbours, under which are discovered some persons knitting Caps, others spinning, others making Brushes, and such like parts of the Haberdashers-Trade. In one part of the Stage is a Table, and thereat several persons making Hats, and other dependences thereon. This Scene is represented as the Hiero∣gliphick of Humility; on the head whereof sits a grave person, as Ma∣ster or Overseer of those persons, seeming to smile on their labour and Industry; he is habited like a grave Citizen, according to the ancient manner, in Trunk-hose, Stockings ty'd cross above and below the knee, a Sattin Doublet, close Coat gathered at the Wast, a Set Ruffe about his Neck, ruff Cuffs about his Wrists, a broad brim'd Hat, a large Cypresse Hatband, gold Girdle and Gloves hung thereon, Rings on his Fingers, and a Seal Ring on his Thumb, a blew Linsey Wolsey Apron wrapt about his middle. His male Servants, as Hatters, Brush-makers, &c. are habited in Half Shirts, and blew Breeches, with Caps on their Heads ornamented with Ribboning, &c. His Female Servants in blew Bodies, blew Petticoats, linnen about their heads after the ancient manner, and Aprons.
As the body moves, they are in continual Action, working and Singing at their Work, and sometimes wantonly tumbling. On the four Trees, and other parts of the Scene, is set the Motto of the Companies Arms, SERVE and OBEY. His Lordship drawing neer, The said Master or Overseer, entertains his Lordship thus; SPEECH. VVElcome (My Lord) the Glory of this day, Thanks wch your Merits call for, now we pay; Instructed by your Company, whose love Is the Main Wheel by which these Triumphs move. Here are the Branches of that ancient Tree Which Time can scarce reduce to Memorie: An Ancient numerous Loyal Brother-hood Whence Men have sprung who have bin great & good And though their Rooms have bin debauch'd, you know Their Company has hated to be so, But has brave Members in all times brought forth, Conspicuous both for Vertue and for Worth; Witnesse their Schools and Hospitals, which must Remain till Time turns all things into Dust; Such a Congenial Mysterie, that one Would think they'r made all others to attone; For by their Arts and Industry they are Makers or Sellers of all sorts of Ware.
And the Ingenious Motto that they give Teacheth Men how to labour and to live, SERVE and OBEY; By one Men come to know, And by the other they wise Rulers grow. Birth may advance, or may not, but We see Labour and Art raise Men to Dignitie. The Root of Honour Prudent men conclude To be Humility and Gratitude: Nor can They choose but noble Actions doe, Having this Patron, and this Pattern You. Who being sublim'd above all vulgar reach Do both by Precept and Example teach How Men of Fortune Birth and Honour shou'd Lay out Themselves for their dear Countries good. Blest is that Commonwealth where Goodmen sway, And People not for fear, but love, Obey. The Speech ended, the whole Body move towards Cheapside and in the Rear of this Scene, and between Foster-Lane and Gutter-Lane, is entertained by another Scene made in manner of an Imperial Crown Garnished with Festoones and Flowers; under which (elevated three Ascents) sits a living figure Representing St. Katharine Patronesse of the Company, her hair light brown dishelv'd, her Temples circled with a Coronet of Gold adorned with pretious Stones, her Robe of Crimson Sarsenet, a loose Skye-coloured Scarf about her Shoulder with Gold and Silver fringe; on one side of her a Broken Wheel and an Axe, on which she lays one hand, and in the other she bears the Banner of St. George. Her Attendants are Patience, Chastity, Constancy, and Fidelity, who fill the Four Angles of the Stage, habited in White Sarsenet, be∣tokening
Innocency, with a Crimson Girdle betokening Martyrdome, Sky-coloured Scarves about their Shoulders, Wreaths of Flowers of se∣veral Colours on their heads, in one hand they hold the Banner of St. George with this Inscription Victoria: In the other a Shield. At her Foot sits Scientia (aluding to St. Katharine her knowlege in Arts) habited in Sky-coloured Sarsenet; on her head a Crown made in manner of a Celestial Globe, in one hand a Book, in the other the Banner of St. George with the former Motto Victoria. This Scene is presented as the Hyroglyphick of Integrity. And is flank'd with two Goats, the Supporters of the Companies Arms, back'd with two Boys, each holding in one hand a Banner, in the other a Shield with the Cities and Companies Arms. The Angles are filled with eight persons, representing Shepherds and Shepherdesses, with Hooks, Scrips, &c. and habited answerable. The SPEECH to the KING. PArdon not Praise, great Monarch! we implore, For shewing you no better Sights, nor more: The Greek and Roman Wits (we must confess) Shew'd greater Fancy, but their Theams were less; For we more excellence in You behold Than they in all their Emperours of old. We hope Your Majesty will not suppose You're with your Johnsons and your Inigoes; And though you make a Court, y'are in the City, Whose vein is to be humble, though not witty.
To help us You are opportunely come I'th Wedding day of your Emporium. This day You shew aswell as see, for You Are both our Triumph and Spectator too. Oh what a Glorious sight 'tis to behold Your City in her Loyal Arms enfold! This Spowse whom You to give her have thought fit, And to his Rule (that's Yours) meekly submit. To Your Indulgence we this Blessing owe, VVho to your Subjects peace and joy bestow, May we Your Royal favours still improve, First to Obey, and next rejoyce, and love. To the QUEEN. MADAM, THe Brotherhood to whom we Owe Th' occasion and Expence of all this Show, Reaps no small favour from her laying claim Unto that Saint who bore your Sacred name; Under whose Umbrage they have greatly thriven, And Testimonies of their Bounty given: And 'tis their happinesse that they relate To this great Cities Princely Magistrate;
A Branch sprung out of this undying Stem, And is a Glory to himself and Them. This seems to be a Prophesy of you, And of that happinesse which will accrew To this Fraternity, if you would blesse Them with your Smiles, and be their Patronesse; 'Twill be their Glory while the World endures, When 'tis Recorded that you made them yours. To His LORDSHIP. SIR, VVHen the Heathen Persecution strook At all that at Religion seem'd to look, Kath'rine to seal it with her Royal blood In Opposition to their Torments stood. Twice with undaunted courage she appear'd To Combat death, and her Faiths Standard Rear'd; When the Wheel would not do, the Axe was brought, And she with eager haste to meet it sought: Then took her flight above their Fury's reach, And left her Converts the dull World to teach. This is the Saint which is related to Your honour'd Company, and so to you
Whose Patronage knits your Fraternity In such firm Peace and Love it ne're shall dye. Taught by the Example of this pious Guide, Uphold that Faith for which she boldly dy'd, 'Gainst Faction and Prophaneness; By the one She is Defac'd, by th' other Overthrown. Root out those spreading and pernitious Weeds Which Clemency in stead of Killing breeds: If you defend this, this will you defend, And make your Name live when your life shall end. Saint Katharine was born in Alexandria of the Blood Royal, she was Learned in all the Sciences, and (before her death) by her learned disputa∣tions, she confuted many hilosophers; at whose instigation she was Impri∣soned and punished; and being visited in Prison by Faustina the Empresse, she converted her to the Christian Faith, with Porplurius and 200. of the Emperours Souldiers: afterwards she was tyed to a Wheel, but was mi∣raculously delivered by the breaking thereof▪ whereupon she was beheaded on the 25. of November, in the year of our Lord. 310. with the Em∣presse Faustina, in the Raign of Maxentius and Maximanus. There is an Hospitall that bears her name to this day, which was dedicated to her by Matilda Wife to King Stephen, and confirmed by Maud the Empresse, for the maintenance of many poor People, by the name of the Brother and Sister-hood. It had very large Revenues belonging to it, but through corruption of time and the Governors and Trustees, it is much decayed. Upon his Lordships motion, This Scene falls into the Rear of the former, and near the great Conduit his Lordship is entertained with another Scene, the Hyrogliphick of Honour; the form is made in man∣ner of a Circular Building, beautified and adorned with Flowers and Fruit; The upper part whereof is advanced by two Arms, supporting a Lawrell, being the Crest of the Companies Arms, under the Bower (three Ascents) is seated a Beautiful person representing Honour. Her
Her Hair dishevell'd, her head encompassed with a wreath of Stars, in one hand she holds a Scepter, in t'other a Crown of Gold (to Crown Merit) her Robe purple Sattin, a Scarf of Gold about her Shoulders. Her Attendants are Five, Reason, Iudgment, Resolution, Fortituds, and Munificence. Reason is habited in Flame coloured Robes, on her head a Garland of Flowers, in one hand a Book open, in the other a Banner. Iudgement is habited like a Senator with sad coloured Robes, in one hand holds a Scrole in manner of a Record; in the other the figure of some Prince, made in manner of a Seal. Resolution holds a Shield, whereon is painted the heart of a Lion, and the Teeth of a Wolfe, her Robes are Crimson Sarsenet trim'd with white, on her head a wreath of Lawrel. Fortitude hath on her a Helmet plain, Robes of Lead colour in manner of Armour, she holds a Shield in one hand, whereon is painted a Pillar, and in the other a Banner. Munificence habited like a grave Citizen, in his hand a Gold Purse open. His Lordship drawing near, Reason accosts him in these words, SPEECH. HOnour, the aim of all men, but by few Directly sought, much lesse attain'd unto; Whose Glories are not purchased with Pelf, But Vertues, such as center in your self; VVhere she finds Merit from vain-glory free, A gallant mind mixt with Humillitie; VVose upright Actions are praise worthy, still Guided by Reason and not sway'd by will:
Hither she's come, not for a day or two, But to Eternity will wait on You. Such as through Treason seeks her, them she flies, She hates all Factions and close Mutinies, And shines the brightest both in Church and State VVhen Men love Peace, and a just Magistrate: You are the Cities Eye, which must not be Shut, lest you shut out her securitie; But pry into all private Corners where Suspition points the least Offenders are: For 'tis a Rule, Such easily dispense VVith greatest sins that have of small no sense. Your honour'd Company their wishes send, That you this year may with such Honour end That King and People may applaud your care, VVhose Substitute and Steward now you are. And when you quit this world your mem'ry may Have a perfume that time cannot decay. The Speech ended, his Lordship and his Attendants do passe down the Old Iury through a Gallery of Guard, made by the Foot Marshal of the Haberdashers Company, in their several Distinctions, the Pentioners in the Rear of them with their Targets hung on the top of their Javelins; The Banners flying, Trumpets sounding, and Drums beating until his Lordship and his Attendants be entred into Guild∣hall to Dinner, in order not only for the welcoming his and the She∣riffs Guests, but also for their own refreshment. Which done, the Company do passe to Haberdashers-Hall, but the Pageants are conveyed down the Old Iury into Blackwell-Hall.
The Afternoons Businesse. The Foot Marshal orders the whole Body as in the Morning only the Pentioners in stead of Javelins and Targets, each man hath two Torches for enlightning the Streets, through which the whole Body passe, and for conveying the Aldermen and Members of the Company to their Habitations (if thereto required.) The Body moves up St. Lawrence-Lane towards Paules Church▪ and all the Pageants are placed on the South-side of Cheapside in these several places, viz. The Scene of Artificers or Humillity, near Foster-Lane. The Scene representing Honour, near Woodstreet▪ The Scene representing St. Katharine or Integrity, and the Goats, near Bread-street. And the Scene representing Magnanimity, near Bow-Church. This last Scene is made in manner of a Mountain, on the Top whereof Magnanimity is mounted on a Lyon, holding a Banner of St. George in one hand, and a Sword in the other. The Lyon turning his head to Magnanimity, and close by him on each side, are feeding Lambs, Goats, Kids, and Beavers; on the side of the Mountain Bears, Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey, in a snarling posture, en∣vying the happiness of the Lambs being under the Protection of the Lyon. Magnanimity is habited like a Roman General, on his head a Hel∣met of Gold with a Plume of Feathers, a Buff-Doublet with Sleeves of Cloth of Gold, and Scarlet Breeches richly laced. This Scene is flank'd with two Sea horses, two Trytons mounted on their backs, playing on retorted Musick (as at Sea) because the Mountain represents an Island surrounded with the Sea, neer the foot whereof sits a person seeming to be Shipwreckt and cast on the Shore, habited like a Sea-Commander. The four Angles of the Stage are filled with four persons represent∣ing Sea-men. His Lordship drawing neer, he rouzeth himself, and (as in a Maze) salutes his Lordship thus,
SPEECH. COntract thy Mischiefs to a period, Fate, That I may prove the utmost of thy hate; But see She smiles, and safely casts me on The Land of Promise, plenteous Albion; VVhere by Instinct I am instructed to Congratulate the Honour waits on You. You (Sir) whose innate Virtues did appear E're your Election in this Hemisphere; And were Examples of a publique good, VVhich claim a greater Priviledge then Blood: As you are Merchant and to Traffique tend, So are you both to Land and Sea a Friend; A Merchants generous Breeding is allow'd Before those empty vanities, are proud Only of Titles; Then (Sir) in a word A vertuous Man sounds better then my Lord: Your Titles have not chang'd you, for though thus You are Translated, you are the same to us: And where is center'd Magnanimity, There (we conclude) dwells true Nobility;
Wisdome and Magistracy should be One, An Individual Species, like the Sun. Your Breast (Sir) is a Fortresse to protect The Innocent, and Nocent to reject; alluding to the Pa∣geant. Vultures and Wolves may shew their teeth and grin, But cannot reach their Prey, they are kept in; The generous Lyon does their Fury awe, Whilst the Lambs feed, & their breaths fearless draw. May Honour glorify your belov'd Name, Though not asalluding to St. Lau∣rence. Martyr, yet with equal Fame. The Speech ended, his Lordship and the whole Body move towards St. Pauls Wharf, and the several Pageants face about and move towards his Lordships house, and are placed in manner of a half Moon cross the Street, from Lymestreet-end to St. Mary Axe; The Speaker in the Tryumph alluding to Humility (placing himself in that of Magna∣nimity) and that alluding to Integrity with that of Honour; and those two in the midd'st are flank'd with the rest; Also forms sufficient for 33 persons of the Assistants, are set in Front of the said Scenes, with a Stage conveniently mounted for His Majesties 16 Trumpets, Drums, and Kettle Drums; by which time the whole Body are advanced at a convenient distance from his Lordships house, and then by the Foot-Marshal filed off for a Guard, each man placing himself to the right of his Leader: The Master and Wardens placed on the said Front; the eldest Livery under the Degree of an Assistant terminate at his Lord∣ships Gate; The Colours, Trumpets, Banners and Files, being pla∣ced at a convenient Distance each from other, do all Sound, Play, and Beat Tryumphantly, till his Lordship and the Aldermen come close to the Scenes, where suddenly the four Speakers rise together, and entertain his Lordship as followes.
EUGLOGUE. Humility. MY Lord— Integrity. My Lord— Magnanimity. My Lord— Honour. My Lord— Humility. Pray stay, 'Tis fit Humility should lead the way, Integrity. Accompanied with pure Integrity, Magnanimity. And the Minds Buckler Magnanimity; Honour. Honour to Crown the end, Merit rewards, Humil. And in that Sense Humility regards. Integ. Integrity is Heavens delight, Magn. And he, Dares reach at Stars has Magnanimity: Humil. Nor can his Breast lodge Virtue, that disdains Humility, or an Ingenious pains: Labour and Industry enrich the Land, That Wealth will thrive's got by a painful hand; A Magistrate should have a careful Eye To see the Poor have Work, not Starve and Dye. Integrity. By Patience, Constancy, Fidelity, (Handmaids to Katharines spotless Loyalty) A Magistrate is Taught to spend his blood 'Gainst Schisme and Faction, for the Churches good. Honour. Reason, though plain, takes Iudgement by the hand, Leads Courage on, gives Fortitude Command. points to the per∣son sitting. Princely Munificence whose Mind is free, And Purse still open to Necessity; All which relate to You, and You to Them, They are the Splendour, though You are the Iem.
Magnanim. This shews a Magistrate should never sleep, But from the Ravenous Wolves his poor Lambs keep; Still to be Arm'd against the worst of Fate, Should Storms arise to shake his setled State. Honour. There is no Vertue (Sir) Exempt in you, Receive then what deservedly's your due. Humility. The Cities wishes, Integrity. And your Companies. Honour. May you be ever in your Princes Eyes, His Favours Crown you. Magnanimity. And your honour'd Name In your Successors Breasts brave Deeds enflame. Integrity. Your Goodnesse with your Honours still encrease, Humility. And stifle those that smother would our Peace. Omnes. Miriades of Blessings (Sir) your Life attend, Your Fame and Honour live, when that doth end. Which done, The Foot-Marshal takes care of all the Silk-works. And the Artificer of the Pageants convey them with what speed they can, some to Haberdashers hall, the rest to the place where they were Built: By which time most men may imagine (by reason of the great March) the Members concerned therein will be willing to rest. SONG. REpine not, my Children, my Lads nor my Lasses, For labour is stinted to time, and so passes; We sweeten it with our Content and our sleep, And th' Wolfe from the dore of our Masters do keep:Pointing to the Master. Then cast up your Caps, though Thrummed they be, We shall be as finical one day as he.
The Snail that you see (of Proportion) not tall In time doth clime up to the top of a wall; And tis an old Proverb that few Men but know, That Children must creep before they can go: Then cast up your Caps, though Thrumed they be, We shall be as finical one day as he. For ought we do know there's ne're a Lad here But may be a Lord Maior or something as neer, And his Maioresse may take from this Innocent Rout And give her a hood in stead of a Clout: Then cast up your Caps though Thrummed they be, We shall be as finical one day as he. To serve and obey is no such hard matter, VVhen we find a full Iack, and no empty Platter: Then think of your work in the midst of your play, And you'l find it your own another day. Then cast up your Caps, though Thrummed they be, VVe shall be as finical one day as he. Reader, THe Gentleman, Undertaker of this Businesse, is not ambitious to have his name known, however his merit may deserve your com∣mendations. The singular Artists, the Master Painters, and other the Master Workmen (I humbly conceive) have performed their parts so well, you cannot (in Iustice) but give them your applause. And so Good night. FINIS.
