T2384A 09061666 42359
A True ACCOUNT OF THE Lord Delamere HIS Reception and Wellcome IN CHESHIRE, And at the City of Chester. OUR English Barons have ever made a great Name in History; their Power and Popu∣larity, and the Barons Wars, are never to be forgotten; though at this time the Face of Affairs and Government with us is so Modelled and Altered, that little remains of that their Autho∣rity and Greatness, save what we read of, and re∣member from Books and Monuments of former Days. Only for an Instance of that kind, we may reckon the late Sir George Booth, who shewed,
before the Restauration, what Influence and Autho∣rity an Ancient Family (which had always treated his Neighbours and Country with an unfeigned Heart and Tenderness) might have over them. Nor upon the King's Restauration did the Title of Delamere alter the Conditions betwixt them; the Name of Lord made no Stranger on either side. Upon his Death, the present Lord Delamere found come upon him the New Title, but without any Accession to the Old Estate. He had the same Hearty Affection to his Country, and actually succeeded to that Hereditary Vertue of the Family. Nor have his Country-men been less ready, on their part, to express on all Occasions the Esteem and due Sense they had of his Love and Inclinati∣ons for them. This good Understanding and Corres∣pondence upon any Extraordinary Conjuncture, carried the Eyes of the Nation upon my Lord Delamere. And the People became possessed with a Conceit, that England could not be rescued from their Oppressions, England could not be Saved, unless my Lord Delamere had an Hand in their Deliverance. Hereupon, when Monmouth precipitated Mat∣ters, and threw himself on that ill-concerted, un∣fortunate Expedition at Lyme, every one had their Eyes upon my Lord Delamere, every one suspended their Thoughts, and were upon the Expectation which way my Lord Delamere would stir, and whether he would appear or not. This deference of all People to my Lord Delamere so alarmed the Court, that after Monmouth's Defeat, they resolved to be no longer under those Appre∣hensions
from my Lord Delamere, but by one Law-trick or other, to dispatch him out of the way. So they set their Instruments to work, and rummaged all their Magazines of False Evidence to play against him. How his Wit, and Conduct, and Bravery of Mind brought him off, and baffled his Enemies, is to the World well known already. This provoked him to retire to his Country Friends and Enjoyments, there to cultivate the Popularity he had so ancient and so good a Title to. There we find him, when the Nation all over rung with an Invasion by the Prince of Orange; a Design that then seem'd too great to be believed, and only too good to be true. But we had not long been convinced by the Fact, before our Let∣ters and Prints were full of my Lord Delamere, his Tenants and Friends, and their Rendezvouz at Bowden-Downs. His March and Motions were pre∣sently concerted with the Prince; and according to the Measures then taken, he joyned the Prince afterwards; and had the Honour and Satisfaction to wait on him to London, and there see him possessed of the Seat of our Empire, and of the Supream Administration of Affairs Civil and Military. Thus having succeeded, and all settled to his Mind, he returned to his Country, where his Well∣come was so Extraordinary, the Expressions from all sorts of People, and the Joy so Immoderate, that the like has not been observed in any Age. He went down at the Head of those Gentlemen he had formerly Muster'd at Bowden-Downs. And no sooner had he entered into his County of Cheshire, but he was met by Foot and Horse, from that and the adjacent Counties, incredible Numbers. The
modestest Account makes the Horse upward of Ten Thousand. These all divided, and made a Lane for him as he passed along, they throwing up their Hats, with loud Acclamations and Shout∣ing, We have him again, we have him again, we have him again safe. Whilst the Trumpets and the Vollies from their Guns, made up the Chorus to their Mirth and Harmony. When he came to the Downs he Muster'd his Troops, and ordered them to their several Quar∣ters. He took the Officers to his House at Dunham, where they and the other Gentlemen of the County that could stay conveniently, Sup'd together. Two or three days after, his Occasions called him to Chester, and that City would not be short in their Complements and Congratulation. About a Mile from the Town, their Mayor and Magistracy met him in their Scarlet Robes and Formalities, and gave him their Hearty Thanks for the Care and Fatigue he had undergone for the sake of his Country, their Liberties, and the Protestant Religion. When they came back to the first Gate, besides the Bells and the Boonfires, all the Guns from the Castle proclaimed his Wellcome. He was carried to the Town-Chamber, where a Noble Banquet was provided for his Entertainment; and when his and the Prince of Orange's Health came to be Drank, the Guns from the Castle were again all Discharged. More Particulars would be needless. In short, there be still English-men who deserve well of their Country; and People who have a due Sense where they find that Vertue. With Allowance. London, Printed in the Year, 1689.
