t2963 16264372 105170
A TRUE RELATION Of the Great VICTORY Obtained by the Christian Army OVER THE TURKS, NEAR The Mountain HARSAN, in the Neighbour∣hood of SYCLOS. From the Camp of his Electoral Highness of Bavaria, near Barnowar, the 14th of August, 1687. THE Christian Army having happily retreated from Esseck on this side the Drave, and march'd back towards Mo∣hatz and the Danube; the Grand Vizier with all his Forces, Artillery and Baggage, marched all night also, and followed us. He Encamped near Barnowar, not far from Darda, at a very narrow Pass, having on the Right, a large Bogg; and on his Left, a Wood, with very thick Furs, and contrary to their Custom he fortified his Camp so well, that he could not without great
Difficulty be atrack'd in so advantageous a Post. And we having reason to fear that our Army being further distant, the Imperial Places on that side, might fall into the Hands of such Potent Enemies, it was resolv'd by all the Generals, to take the Garisons out of them, the Cannons and the Ammunitions, and Demolish them. In order to it, our Army parted the 10th of August from the Camp, near Mohatz. The Duke of Lorrain took the Front with the right Wing towards Syclos, and his E. H. of Bavaria, followed in good Order with the left Wing. The next day, 11 of the same Month, we continu'd the same March in the presenee of the Enemy, who by his continual At∣tacks, sometimes upon the right Wing, sometimes on the left, was endeavouring to hinder us from it; and we persu'd it with great care on both sides, to the foot of the Mountain Harsan, where we En∣camped all Night. The 12th being St. Clara's day, the Army March'd in good Order of Battalia towards Syclos. The Duke of Lorrain ta∣king the Front again with his right Wing, the Enemy shewed them∣selves coming out of a Wood, and endeavour'd to stop our March by continual Skirmishes; but we perceived well enough, that the Body of their Army by favour of the high Furs, was drawing towards our left Wing, and indeed we were soon convinc'd of it; for our left Wing had no sooner pass'd the Forest that was before it, and enter'd a Plain of three hundred Paces, or thereabout, but twelve thousand of the best and finest Horse of the Enemy came full Speed, and with great Fury fell upon our left Wing, with a design to put it into dis∣order, by Attacking it in the Flank, and in the Rear; but their design having miscarried by the vigorous Defence they found, and by the good Order which his E. H. had set every where, they went back as quick as they came. Soon after the Enemy attempted to pierce us by mere force; and in order to it, he caused his whole Army, compos'd of a 100000 Men, to advance and meet our left Wing, and 5000 Janizaries, took post upon a height near it, from whence they made a continual Fire upon us, and we plaid on both sides with our Musket∣shot and Cannon, till near three of the Clock in the Afternoon. In the mean time, his E. H. took the Heroick Resolution of Attacking the Enemy himself with his left Wing, having first reinforced himself with some Regiments he had desired from the Duke of Lorrain on pur∣pose. And he soon put it into Execution with a Courage beyond all Expression, boldly carrying the Battalions and Squadrons to Fight, and encouraging them by his Voice and Example, so that that Wing alone, much inferior to the whole Ottoman Army, fell bravely upon it, and after a most bloody Fight, forced it to abandon to us the Field of Battel. The Left still pursuing the Enemy flying before us, to the Retrenchments of his Camp he had at his back, where by the favour of a Defily abovemention'd, which was lined and fill'd with Janizaries, he made a greater Resistance: This did not hinder our Soldiers, encourag'd by the Example of the Heroick Maximilian, charging at the Head of them, and our whole left Wing from running under the Enemies Cannon with incredible Diligence, notwithstanding their continual Fire.
We pass'd their Trenches, and chased the Enemies from their posts; half an hour after, he made a halt, and took breath in another Retrench∣ment larger than the first, but he made no great resistance there: He was soon chas'd from it, and forced to fly in great Confusion at the ap∣proach of the whole Christian Army, but we pursued him through his Camp as long as the light both of Day and Moon lasted, and as long as our Horses could go. Thus all the Camp (as big almost as that before Vienna) all their Artillery consisting in a 100 Pieces of Cannon, and 12 Mortars, all their Ammunitions, Provisions, Baggage, and all other things in great plenty fell into our hands, and there remained above 8000 Men of the Enemy dead upon the place of Battel, not reckoning those that remained in the Boggs, or were drown'd in the Water, or those that hid themselves among the Furs, their Janizaries not having been able to follow, their horse flying with all speed. On our side we have lost only some hun∣dreds of Men: His Electoral Highness to his Immortal Glory has been wounded with one of the Janizaries Balls on the Left Hand. The Prince of Commercy, come that day to serve as Voluntier in the Left Wing, had the Top of his Breast pierced by an Arrow, and the young Count of Zinzendorf had his Leg shot off. His Electoral Highness has had for himself the Tent of the Grand Vi∣zier, which is very Magnificent, and resembles a Palace, being a quarter of a League round, with all the Moveables, and the whole Chancery, where were found Papers in all sorts of Languages, and especially a great number of Letters from Abaffi Prince of Transilvania: His Electoral Highness passed all the Night in that Tent, without lying down, writing almost continually; and by break of day he dispatched Prince Engenius of Savoy to Vienna, and the next day Marquess Gabrieli to Rome, the Che∣valier of Beauvan into France, Collonel Sartory to Munick, and la Chaffon∣nery his Page to Cologne. The 13th we went to search into the Boggs and Furrs, the Turks hid there in great numbers, most were kill'd, and the rest made Prisoners: We pursued also our flying Enemy, and made a detachment of 4000 Horse, who advanced to Darda and even to the head of the Bridg of Esseck, but could find none of them, and heard only that the Garison of Esseck seeing the flight of their fellow Soldiers, they had endeavoured to stop them, and for that effect had taken off some of the Boats that made the Bridg, but that nevertheless the flying men had got upon it with such precipitation, they had thrown one another into the Drave, that the Bridg it self had at last broke under them, and that several thou∣sands had been drown'd: All this was confirm'd both by the Prisoners we took to the number of 1700, and by abundance of Desertors that came into our Camp, assuring us, there was above Thirty thousand Janizaries in the Ottoman Army, and that not above six or seven Thousands had got safe on t'other side; from whence 'tis easie to conclude to what the loss of the Enemy may amount, which is sufficiently evidenced by that vast number of dead bodies wherewith the Ground, the Boggs, and the Furrs are filled. The G. Vizier, as said, has very narrowly escaped by
the means of a little Boat, but another too much loaded with Officers is perish'd. The Remainder of the Enemies Army is dispers'd and in Confusion, and not able to keep the Field, having been forced to fly, and quit all they had of all kind. And no doubt, but That Almighty God that has so visibly fought for Christendom, has miraculously blessed the Imperial Arms; therefore to return God Thanks, his Electoral Highness caused the Te Deum to be sung in his Tent, which was that of the Grand Vizier; after that Father Marco had said Mass in it, the Enemies Cannon being discharged three times, all the Generals, and especially the Duke of Lorrain came to Complement his Electoral Highness upon it, and attri∣buted this Great Victory to the Bravery of the Great Maximilian. The Duke of Lorrain in his Relation to the Emperor, gives the same Testimo∣ny, and attributes all the Glory of that day to his Electoral Highness, May the Almighty God long preserve that Heroe, and always send new Victories to Christendom. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Carr, MDCLXXXVII.
