T3162 12775470 93759
TRƲTH Vindicated, Against All HERESIES, SHEWING How the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent is di∣stinguished. THE Woman cloathed with the Sun discovered, she having the Moon under her Feet. The Old and New Testament made to agree. AND God's JUSTICE and MERCY Magnified. LONDON, Printed, and Sold by Edward Pool at the Sign of the Half Moon under the Royal Exchange. Abel Roper at the Black Boy, over against St. Dunstan's Church, Fleet-street. Mr. Michael at the Crown and Cushion in Westminster-Hall: And at Mercer's Chappel in Cheapside. 1698.
I have by God's assistance, made plain the true meaning of this Text, which I found to be much abused by one, who in his Book, saith, He knows not but that he may be the Elias which was to come. And he in his Book has thrown the mis∣carriage of the Devil and Man upon God, upon the mistakes of this and some other mistaken places of Scripture. By which mistaken places, the Prince of Darkness has got wonderful advan∣tage, to the destruction of many thousand poor Souls. I. Chap. GEN. 3.22. And the Lord God said, Behold the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: And now least he put forth his Hand, and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat and live for ever. Now in that God said, Behold, the Man is become as one of us, to know go and evil. That was, the Man be∣came like God in the knowledge of good and evil. For God had the knowledge of good and evil, to distinguish between the excellency of the one, and the abomination of the other. For God was of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, Hab. 1.13. That is, to behold either the Pride or Malice of the Devil, or the evil of Man, with approbation. And Adam and Eve when they had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, they became ashamed of the Evil they had done, whereby their Nakedness was discovered to them. And so the Evil of Sin became disliked by them. And in that Adam and Eve disliked Sin, and liked Good, therein they became like God, in the knowledge of good and evil: In that they disliked the one, and loved the other, tho' not in that perfect degree, yet unto God it might bear a resemblance. For Man
was at first created in the Image of God, yet infinitely short of the glorious per∣fection of God, who is an unchangeable Being, and beyond the Power of Satan's deceiving. But Adam and Eve being ashamed of what they had done, therein they were quite contrary to the Devil, for he was without shame, and without excuse. For whatsoever Evil he commits, he never is surprized or drawn into it; but he always doth the worst of Evils with his best liking. And whatever Wickedness he does, he is the Father of it, John 8.44. And not that the Evil of Sin was first determined by God, as is falsly asserted by some. Now Adam and Eve were beguiled and drawn into the Snare by the Devil. And he endeavoured to ensuare our blessed Lord, when he said, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their Hands they shall bear thee up, least at any time thou dash thy Foot against a Stone, Mat. 4.6. So likewise Satan used perswasions to Adam and Eve, in setting forth how beneficial the eating of that Tree would be to them: And then she apprehended it was a Tree to be desired to make one wise. And Wis∣dom is pleasing to God and Man: And he that hateth Understanding, is a Fool, 1 King. 3.9,10. Prov. 1.22. And it was by Satan's plausible Insinuations that he deceived them, he telling them They should be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. And that God did but threa∣ten them, and that they should not surely dye, Gen. 3.4. So he beguiled them, and they did eat; but not as they had any dislike to good, or delight in evil, but the contrary; for he perswaded them, they should be like Gods, or God: and when they saw by what they had done, that their Natures were defiled, so as thereby their Nakedness did appear to them, they were asha∣med. And where there remains Fear and Shame, there remains a Child-like frame: Now Adam beholding his Sin with fear and
Shame. Gen. 3.7.10. He there∣byshewed his dislike to Sin. And therefore God had compassion on Man, and promised him a Saviour. And in the State that Adam was then in, God saw a pro∣bability that he might still take and eat of the Tree of Life, and therefore the Lord sent him forth of the Garden, least he should put forth his Hand and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat and live for ever, Gen. 3.22,23. the which God, before they had Sin∣ned, gave them free liberty to do. Gen. 2.16. And there∣fore God determined not Mans miscarriage, by not putting him in ability capable to stand, as some have falsly imagined. But God having said before to Adam, that in the Day that he did eat of the Tree of knowledge of Good and evil, he should surely die. Gen. 2.17. And it being impossible for God to lye, Heb. 6.18. Therefore God sent them out of the Garden, least they should take hold of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live for ever. And God rather choosing to part with the Son of his Love from the Throne of his Glory to Suffer for Sinners, his Love to his Creatures made that pos∣sible; but for God to lye, is impossible. Therefore A∣dam for his transgression dyed in the day of a Thousand Years. For one day is with the Lord as a Thousand Years, and a Thousand Years as one day. 2. Pet. 3.8. And for the Sin of Adam's transgression, there was but the punishment of this Life, and Death pronounced against them, with a comfortable promise by the Seed of the Woman. Gen. 3.15,16,17,18,19. but the Fire of Hell was not threatned to them, neither was Hell Fire prepared for Man, but for the Devil and his Angels, Matt. 25.41. who before the Creation of the World rebelled. 2. Now there is a great deal of difference in Scripture between the meaning of the Creation of the World, and the Foundation of the World: there being but one Creation of the World, but several Foundations,
in as much as there was made several Worlds, Heb. 1.2. As the Old World, This World, and the World that is yet to come. All having several Foun∣dations. Adam being the Foundation of the Old World; Noah the Foundation of this World; And Abraham the Foundation of the World to come. So as all that come in heirs to that World, must come in as the Seed of Abraham. Gal. 3.28. And as the Twelve Tribes are the Foundation of the World to come; so the Twelve Apostles are said to be the Foundation of the Heavenly City, having their names writ on the wall thereof, Reve. 21.14. And the Twelve Tribes when they were brought out of Egypt to be placed in the Heart of the Earth, and to be laid for the Foundation of the World to come, at which Foundation Christ was figuratively slain in the Paschal Lamb. But was fore-ordained to be slain before the Foundation of the World. Which Foundation, is that before mentioned; and therefore God proved and tryed Abraham to see whether he would offer his only Son as a Sacrifice to him, before he made him that Promise, that in his Seed all the Nations of the Earth should be Blessed, Gen. 22.16,17,18. Rev. 11.15. Which Promise will be made good in time to come, and then will be put in Subjection to Christ the World to come. Heb. 2.1. Dan. 7.13,14.26,27. At which Foundation, the Works of those unbelieving Jews were finished, when they refused to go to fight for the Land of Canaan. And from that Foundation, after that miscarriage, God elected a Remnant. And they are those of whom it is said, they were chosen from the Foundation. And the peculiar People chosen from a∣mong the Gentiles, which likewise had the peculiar call∣ing, and also were to receive the Holy Ghost to be in them, which was the anointing of the Spirit, where∣by they spake with Tongues, and wrought Miracle, that thereby they might be also a light to the World
these were they of whom it is said, they were chosen before the Foundation of the World, which Founda∣tion is Israel. And God chose them as to matter of choice and liking, before the Body of Israel, which were the Foundation, because they had wilfully diso∣beyed him but as to the matter of Time, long after. Whereas the Apostle saith, They were chosen in Christ before the World was. That is, before the World was, which is now to come, in which they are to receive the promised Blessing. And as to what God said concerning Jocob and Esau, before they had done Good or Evil, was only that the Elder should Serve the Younger; and not that God did ever hate his Creature, until such time as they wilfully disobeyed him. But these words con∣cerning Jacob and Esau, have a far other meaning then what we have hitherto apprehended. But this and the other mistaken places of Scripture, by which the World has been cast into a mist of Darkness, I have now by Gods assistance, by laying the Scriptures together, made the true meaning of the word appear, as may be found in my Book, lately Published. But St. Peter fair∣ly warns us, That in St. Paul's Epistles are things hard to be understood. (Which those that were unlearned in the Scriptures did wrest, as they also did some o∣ther Scriptures, to their own destruction. 2. Pet. 3.16.) But the Scriptures rightly understood, and believed, are able to make us wise unto Salvation. 2 Tim. 3.15. Whereas St. James saith, Known unto God are all his works, from the beginning of the World, Acts. 15.18. From which words it is clear, that all Gods works were not known to him before the beginning of the World. And that is was then the works that properly belong to God, that were known to him. And that the be∣ginning of the World, the Apostle here speaks of, must have its chief reference to the beginning or Founda∣tion of the World, that was laid in the
Seed of Abra∣hamwhen God brought them out of the Land of Egypt, to place them in the Heart of the Earth for the beginning or Foundation of the World to come, as by his forementioned words doth appear, and not that he had his reference to the beginning of the Crea∣tion of the World, or the beginning of the World in Adam after the Fall. For the Apostle speaking how God did at first visit the Gentiles to take out of them a People for his Name. Acts. 15.14. Which were them to whom the Holy Ghost was given to be in them. vers. 8. And they to whom the Holy Ghost was given, were to be a light to the World, that the world might believe that God had sent Christ, John. 17.21. Af∣ter which 'tis said, he will return and Build again the Tabernacle of David which is Fallen down, Acts. 15.16. The which will be when the Lord returns; Whom the Heavens must receive until the times of the Restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the Mouth of all his Prophets since the World be∣gan. Acts. 3.21. And then in his following words he tells us who the beginning of this forementioned world were. That it was the Fathers in the Wilder∣ness. vers. 22. (For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your Bretheren, him shall ye hear in all things,) the which will be when the Lord again comes. And then will be Israel's Glory, and then the World that is to come will be in Subjection unto Christ. Heb. 2.5. And these are the works, St. James had his chief reference to, when he said, known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the World. Acts 15.18. Which beginning of the World, was as is aforesaid. And the Eternal pur∣pose spoken of, Eph. 3.11. Only reacheth forward to the Eternity that lies before us. As Christ in time be∣came the Author of Eternal Salvation: And as in time he promised Eternal Life. And
whereas St. Paul saith,God worketh all things after the counsel of his own will. He here had his reference as St. James had, to the great works which properly belong to God: As the gift of his Son, and in electing some, setting a door of Mercy open to others. And in determining the great Glory, should be for the heirs of the World to come. For the word All, in Scripture, doth not include the whole. And as for the works of the Devil, and the evil works of Man, they do not belong to God; there∣fore he ordained Punishments for them after they fell, as I have elsewhere proved. And whereas St. Paul saith, Eph. 3.8.9. That I should preach among the Gentises the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all men see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which from the beginning of the World hath been hid in God. That is, at the be∣ginning of the World which was laid in the Twelve Tribes, who were laid for the beginning or Founda∣tion of the World to come. They did not see how the Gentiles should be called in, as to become heirs with them. This great Mystery was all a long hid in God from them, so as they as little understood it as the Old World did: And tho' God told Abraham, he should be Father of many Nations; and the Prophets decla∣red the Gentiles should be called in; yet it is no where declared they should be brought in by preaching the unsearchable riches of Christ through the Gospel. I have here made so long a digression, altho I have some∣thing more to the former Subject to say, the which I could not go on with, till I had given some light to the true meaning of these mistaken places. That thereby I might make plain the way, for what I have yet fur∣ther to say. 3. That is, we are further to consider wherefore the Lord sent them forth from the Garden. Which was, Least he should put forth his Hand, and take also of the Tree of Life. Gen. 3.22. By which words
we are to takenotice, that God doth positively declare, that he did not know what Man would do, till he proved and try∣ed him, and saw what was in Man. And Therefore least he should also take of the Tree of Life, and eat and Live forever, (God having before pronounced Death for his offence) God sent him out of the Gar∣den. These words we are to take in the plain Letter of the Text. That God did not then know what Man would do. And this God declaring, we are bound to believe. In as much as it is impossible for God to ly. Heb. 6.18. But many by not rightly apprehending these forementioned places have laid the generality of the world under Eternal Damnation, by a fore sight in God of Adams transgression. Notwithstanding God hath fully declared that when he saw that the wickedness of Man was great upon the Earth, and that man had wholly corrupted his way, except Noah. It repented the Lord that he had made Man on the Earth, and it grie∣ved him at his Heart, Gen. 6.5,6,9,12. And this we are to take in the plain Letter of the Text, with∣out we will blaspheme his Holy Name, in making the God of Truth a lyer; which is impossible for him to be, Heb. 6.18. And when God promiseth a Blessing, whether conditional, or absolute, according as he hath promised he will make it good. Hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good? For God is not a man, that he should lye; nor the Son of Man, that he should repent, Numb. 23.19. But upon man's returning. God is often said to Repent of the Evil he thought to do unto them. So likewise of a Blessing, when it is promised on condition, and the condition not performed, Jer. 18.8,9,10. And it was after God had proved and tryed man, he saw what was in man. And seeing our great High-Priest could not be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, till he took our Nature, Heb. 4.15. So it was much more impos∣sible
that God who is of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity with approbation, could be cumbred with the foresight of all the abominations and wicked strata∣gems of the Devil or Man before they were created, or the World in which man offended. And the God of Truth having sworn, that he delighteth not in the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he should return and live, Ezek. 33.11. And how can this be true, if God had reprobated the generality of all Mankind from all Eternity. And likewise God saith, The Soul that sin∣neth, it shall dye: the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father; Ezek. 18.20. that is when they come to be judg∣ed. And accordingly it is said, when they are judged, That every one shall receive for the things done in the Body, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. For Christ will then condemn none for the Sin of Adam's Transgression, the which we call Original Sin, for which we have laid the greater part of the World un∣der Eternal Damnation by a foresight in God of Adams transgression. And it is by the false Notions which the Christians have received through the mistaken places of Scripture, which has caused several to deny the Lord Christ to be the Son of God; knowing that the God of Truth would not send his Son, and the Servant of his Son to contradict what he had before declared: for tho' our Faith in some things, may be above our Reason, but not contrary to Reason. And tho' it is said, He that planted the Ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the Eye, shall he not see? Psal. 94.7.9. This is spoken only to the time after Man had a be∣ing; and when they transgressed, and thought God did not see. But in that God said, when Man had corrupted himself, that it repented him that he had made Man, and that it grieved him at his heart. Therefore with permission I speak this, it being not improbable, that if Man had fallen no otherwise then in
Adam's transgres∣sion,that then Christ by taking our Nature, and there∣in performing perfect Obedience, he might thereby have satisfied Divine Justice, without making his Soul an Offering for Sin. Which made the Lord Christ de∣sire of God, that if it were possible that Cup might pass from him: But it being impossible that God's justice could be otherwise satisfied, therefore he drank it, and God was troubled that Man had so corrupted himself as to fall under his severe Condemnation, he having no pleasure in the Death of a Sinner, Ezek. 18.32. But many by their false apprehensions, that all things were fore-ordained before the Creation, ma∣king no distinction between the great difference that is betwixt the Creation of the World, and the mean∣ing of the Foundation of the World, and by several mistaken places. Whereby they have made the won∣derful Love of God in the gift of his Son, only a thing fore-determined according to the Counsel of his own Will, and that from all Eternity. And the wonderful Love of Christ in laying down his Life for the World, which Love passeth Knowledge, has been made a design in God, that thereby some might be saved, and the rest damned. And these conjectures some have had of God, who is the Fountain of all Wisdom, Love and Justice, as to think that God from all Eternity, elected some without Reason, and left the rest to eternal Damna∣tion, without having any regard to Reason, Pity, or Love: But when such come to be judged, they will find that God has a reason for what he doth. And some there are that hold that God hath two Wills, an outward Will to invite all to come and accept of Salvation, and a secret Will, that only the Elect shall be saved. Which Notions were no other then Blas∣phemy against the God of Truth, were they wilfully committed. And because most of the received mista∣ken Notions
will not permit God a Reason for whathe doth: therefore the foresaid Elias, Thomas Moor, pretending to vindicate God's justice more than the others, saith, God not making the Angels that fell, nor Man at first of ability to stand; and therefore he saith, God in Justice cannot punish Man in Hell, nor leave the Devil to damnation. And were this true, that God did not at first make the Angels that fell, and Man of ability to stand, I should be of his mind also, in thinking it could not be justice in God to condemn them to the Fire of Hell, for doing that which he had before determined. But now the Prince of Darkness through our mistaken Notions, by the false Interpretations put upon the Scriptures, has compleated his design in throw∣ing his miscarriage and the World's upon God, that thereby Man might be as wicked as the Devil would have them. Concerning Adam's Fall I formerly lean'd too much to the received Notions, thinking they had been right, till by the abuse of the fore-mentioned Text, I made further search into the Scriptures concerning it, begging God's assistance; by which means I found we are in great Mistakes. II. Shewing whom the Seeds are between whom God put Enmity. NOw as to the Curse the Lord laid upon the Ser∣pent. Gen 3.14,15. Thou art cursed above all Cattel, and above every Beast of the Field: upon thy Belly shalt thou go, and Dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy Life: And I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shalt bruise his Heel. Now this Serpent is to be understood under a twofold Head. First, That this Old Serpent called the Devil, did appear in the shape of a Serpent, or rather entred into a Serpent, and so spake in the Serpent. Whose going was not so uncom∣ly, as we may understand from
the Words of the Text,before the Curse was laid upon him, as after: Neither any such enmity between the Woman and the Serpent. For God made all the Creatures subject to Adam, and therefore then there was no enmity between them. And after Adam's transgression it was that God placed Enmity between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent: And when we would bruise the Ser∣pent, it is at his Head we strike, and he at our Heels. And that there was a real Serpent, it doth further ap∣pear, in that he was to go upon his Belly all the days of his Life; which accordingly he doth. But in that the Scriptures are of more then a private Interpreta∣tion, 2 Pet. 1.20. And therefore this Scrrpture hath its chief tendency to the Old Serpent, called the Devil, whom Christ the Seed of the Woman should bruise. And likewise between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Old Serpent, God hath also put En∣mity. But who this Seed of the Old Serpent was, or is, is here to be considered. Whereas God said, I will put Enmity between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, Gen. 3.15. And the Serpent has no other Seed but what does adhere to him; and then none had adhered to him to give themselves to his dis∣pose but the Angels whom he drew off with him when he revolted; and therefore he is called Belzebub the Prince of the Devils, Matth. 12.24. And it was for the De∣vil and his Angels that Hell-Fire was prepared, Matth. 25.41. And it was between this Seed of the Serpent, and the Seed of the Woman that God did then put Enmity; for the Prince of darkness then had no other Seed but the Angels that fell: For when Eve bore Cain, she said, I have gotten a Man from the Lord: And therefore then he was not the Seed of the Serpent. And for Cain's first Offence, God did not cast him out of his presence, but said, If thou dost well, shalt thou not be excepted? but if thou dost Evil, Sin lieth at thy Door, Gen. 4.7. But he by
adding Sin to Sin, thereby became of that Evil One for which God cast him out of his presence. So the Seed of Seth, whilst they served God, were called the Sons of God. But when they had corrupted their Way, where∣by the earth was filled with Violence they were alike cut off together. And so Israel, of whom God said, I had planted thee a noble Vine, a holy and a right Seed, Jer. 2.21. God having before proved and tryed Abraham, Gen. 22.16,17,18. of whom Israel sprang, and had they con∣tinued in the steps of Abraham, they would have remain∣ed Blessed: but they turned into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine, ver. 21. For when they forsook the holy Commandment, and did strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel, Mat. 23.23,24. For they wanted Faith in the Belief of the Writings of the Prophets, as to think that the threatned Judgments from God by them would fall on them, if they were disobedient to the weightier matters of the Law; and therefore Christ said in the Parable, If they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, (as to be warned by them) neither will they believe, though one rose from the Dead, Luke 16.29,30,31. And also Christ saith, For had they believed Moses, they would have believed me, for he wrote of me, John 5.46. For had they lived blamelesly, Luke 1.6. according to the rule God had given, Israel had never been left to Blindness. And it was better for them to whom Christ spake in Parables and dark Sentences, and did not his mighty Works amongst them, nor suffered his Disciples to declare them, that so they might be left to Blindness, then those where he did his mighty Works which never Man did, Mat. 12.24,35. there∣by to convince them: Yet they would wilfully set themselves in opposition; therefore Christ said, It should be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, and Sodom, in the Day of Judgment then for such, Mat. 11.22,23,24. Deut. 32.5. And whereas some of Israel were
elected, and to others of them, a door of mercy set open, but the greater number of Israel were left to Blindness. And St. Peter saith of Israel, Acts 2.47. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. Because some of them were likewise saved by afore-appointment, whilst it happened that for Sin the major part of Israel were left to Blindness, Rom. 11.25. And the major part in Scripture is often called as the whole, or all; but it was the major part was left to blindness. So likewise the Gentiles that were fore∣chosen, and who first believed, Ephes. 1.12. were ap∣pointed by God, that the World through them might be∣lieve. John 17.21. For there was a particular and a general Calling by the Gospel, by which general Call the Nations embraced the Faith, and became the Seed of Abraham: But when they came to have no Love to the Truth, but took pleasure in Unrighteousness, God gave them up to strong Delusions to believe Lyes, that they might be damned, 2 Thes. 2.10,11,12. Here are two things lays People under Damnation; first, In having no Love to the Truth. 2dly, In taking plea∣sure in Unrighteousness. And those that have no Love to the Truth, are not only those that laid the World in Darkness, but also all those that doe wil∣fully oppose the Truth, thereby to keep the World in Darkness. For all such as would rather let God be dishonoured, and the Bible made to contradict it self, and his People destroyed for lack of Knowledge, Hosea 4.6. rather than themselves be found in a mistake. Such may easily conclude what will be their portion.
III. How the Spirit of Christ must be in us, if we are his. ROmans 8.1. There is therefore no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. That is, such as walk after the Spirit, are in Christ Jesus. For such are said, not to be in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be the Spirit of God dwell in them. Now if any man have not the Spi∣rit of Christ, he is none of his, vers. 9. Now there was a twofold Indwelling of God in the first Churches by his Spirit. That is, there was first a complying frame of Spirit to the Will of God, so as not to walk after the Will of the Flesh, but after the Spirit; which was in a holy Conversation, without which no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. For if we have not thus the Spirit of Christ, we are none of his; for it is required that the same Mind be in us as was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5. Therefore it is not the Seed after the Flesh to whom the Promise belongs, which live after the Will of the Flesh and of the Mind, whether of the natural or the adopted Seed of Israel, they are not the Seed to whom the Promise is made; but the Seed in Christ, and Isaac, both of Jew and Gentile, which walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, so as to have their Wills brought into subjection unto the Will of God, are the Seed to whom the Promise belongs. For to be carnally minded is Death; but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace, vers. 6. For the Kingdom of God and Christ must be within us, Luke 17.21. if we are his. For Christ must have the ruling Power in the Heart: And God also saith, Give me thy Heart. And when we give to God and Christ the ruling Power in our Heart, then is his Kingdom within us. And if Christ be in us, the body is dead because of Sin, but the Spirit is Life because of
Righteousness, vers. 10. Thusthe true Believer is dead to the World, that he may live to God. And this ruling power Christ had in the hearts of his Disciples, before he gave them the Holy Ghost. And likewise, all that did receive the Holy Ghost to be in them, for the confirmation of the Go∣spel, Christ had first the ruling power in their hearts, and they yielded to him to be his Servants, and then were they Baptized; and thus they were prepared be∣fore they could receive the Holy Ghost to be in them, by which they were then glorified, and had power to speak with Tongues and work Miracles, and Prophesy, and understand Prophesies, for the Spirit was to teach them all things, John 14.26. And so by all it was then known who were the Elect: And these were those whom God made to differ, 1 Cor. 4.7. But some through neg∣ligence and heedlesness, the Prince of Darkness makes to differ, they following his dictates and so corrupt th way; and when they have accustomed themselve  do evil, then it is they cannot learn to do well. A some make themselves to differ by taking heed to their Ways, according to the Word of God. And so by considering their ways, they become wise, Psal. 119.. For God hath promised to bless such endeavours, Prov. 3.6. For the common drawings of God, are the In∣vitations of his Word, and the good motions of his Spirit. But the fore-mentioned were chosen according to the Counsel of the Will of God; by the which Will, they were sanctified, Heb. 10.10. And recei∣ved the Holy Ghost to be in them. And Christ said, the World could not receive the Holy Ghost, because they knew him not, John 14.17. For the World then lay in Wickedness, and therefore they could not then receive him, because they knew him not, and were not pre∣pared for the receiving of him. 2dly, God did not intend to give the World the Holy Ghost to be in them, but to be with all such as will keep his Way.
And therefore Christ prayed for his Disciples, and first Churches which believed on him through the Word he Disciples, as he did not for the World, but that  World through them might believe, that God had sent him, John 17.21. And therein he prayed for the World; and by the evident Witness of the Holy Ghost in them, the World did believe, and the Nations embraced the Faith by laying hold of the offered Mercy in the common Salvation. And Christ did but pro∣mise the Remnant, which were his Father's Sheep be∣fore, and given to him, that he would be with them to the end of the World; and that he would send them another Comforter, which should abide with them for ever, John 14.16. But he doth not say In them for ever, And he will be with all while they keep the Way. But the Apostle knowing that the Holy Ghost would  remain in their succeeding Generations in this time; efore he saith, Prophesie should fail, and Tongues they ould cease, and Knowledge it should vanish away, 1 Cor. 13.8. Which came to pass when the Nations came to have no Love to the Truth, but took pleasure in Unrighteousness. Then God gave them up to strong de∣sions, that they should believe Lyes, 2 Thes. 2.10,11,12. he did Israel for Sin to blindness of Mind: But Love and Charity among the Faithful was ever to re∣main, as Love to God in their obedient walking ac∣cording to knowledge, and Charity to their Neigh∣bour. For Faith, Hope, and Charity, were the Graces that would abide, 1 Cor. 13.13. with them that will be faithful. And the Apostle saith, The time would come, when they would not endure found Doctrine; but af∣ter their own Lust shall turn away their Ears from the Truth. For the generality of the World chose to them∣selves false Teachers, before God gave them up to delusions, 2 Tim. 4.3. For a Believer is no longer a Be∣liever, than a Righteous
Man is a Righteous Man in the day that he wilfully commits Iniquity, Ezek. 33.12. But they which live holily, thereby bring forth Fruit to the Spirit. But the Eternal Life that Christ gave to his Sheep, which were his Father's before, was given to their Persons and Posterity, and to every Be∣liever while they continue in Believing, Salvation is to be had, according to his Word, in the way of their Obedience. For every Tree which bringeth not forth good Fruit is hewn down and cast into the Fire, Mat. 3.10. And it is a meer Stratagem of the Prince of Darkness, in per∣swading any Man God will not punish according to his Word; that was the way he beguiled Ewe, and so he doth the generality of Mankind. IV. A Twofold Indwelling of Christ by his Spirit in the first Churches. AND whereas St. Paul saith, Rom. 8.11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the Dead, also quicken your mortal Bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you. Here the Apostle writes to the elect Church among the Romans, who were then called and justified, and glorified, by receiving the Holy Ghost to be in them, 1 Pet. 1.11,12. But these had not the Promise from Christ, that none should pluck them out of his Hand: That Promise did appertain to the Disciples, which were of that Remnant chosen from among Is∣rael, John 10.27,28,29. Of which Remnant were the Elect that should never be deceived by the Beast nor false Prophet: And they are the Foundation which standeth sure. But the forementioned, which were the Elect among the Gentiles, were cleared from their past Sins, Rom. 3.25. by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; and therefore he saith, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that ju∣stifieth, Rom. 8.33. But after they were thus cleared
from their past Sins, they were to walk in newness of Life, and so are all. And therefore when he found the Elect to walk disorderly, and were guilty of Sin, he not sparing to charge them with it, and reprove them for it, like as he did others, Gal. 3.1. But he saith, vers. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. He was perswaded that neither tribulation, nor distress, nor death, nor life, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate them from the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus: But in the forementioned Verses, he mentions not Sin; knowing that wilful Sin will seperate them from God; there∣fore the Apostle saith, vers. 11. And if the Spirit of him that raised Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you; that is, con∣tinue or remain in them. And accordingly he saith to the Elect Church of Corinth, chap. 11.3. Fearing lest the Serpent should beguile them as he beguiled Eve. And then their mortal Bodies will not be quickned again his Spirit being in them; but if they did not ve the Holy Ghost, Ephes. 4.13. thereby to cause him to withdraw, then the same Spirit would raise up their mortal Bodies to have a part in the first Resurrection, and to partake of the glory hen the Lord again comes, Rev. 20.4,5. Ephes. 2.7. it is also by the same Spirit and Power of God that all that has done either good or bad, shall be raised up at the last Judgment: For Christ saith, All that are in the Graves, shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good, to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Danna∣tion, John 5.28,29. But all that remain faithful to the Lord Jesus, longing for his appearing: Though they have not the Holy Ghost in them, but with them, they shall likewise have their part in the first Resurrection, and receive the Crown of Righteousness in that day, 2 Tim. 4. ver. 8. But the Lord speaking of the first Resur∣rection, mentions it very darkly, John 5.25. because he
spake to the Jews that were to be left to blindness, so as seeing they might see, and not perceive; and hearing they might hear, and not understand, Isa. 6.9,10. And like∣wise it is said, the Lord spake to them in Parables, and without a Parable spake he not unto them, Mat. 13.34. And therefore the Lord also speaks to them darkly about the first Resurrection, vers. 25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the Hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. These words may have a twofold ten∣dency in having some reference to the first Churches which had the peculiar calling, and thereby brought in, which was the Hour that then was; but whereas the Lord saith the Hour is coming, that of certain is the time when he again should come; at which time the dead Bodies of the Saints shall hear the Voice of the Son of God and live: And also then dead Israel both see him, and hear his Voice and live. And  these words had their chief reference to the time Judgment, Power, and Honour is given to the Son, is evident by the 22, 23. Verses. But according as the Evangelist saith, So spake the Lord to them in Parable, that they did not understand it, Mat. 13.34. And th it is the Saints that rise in the first Resurrection;  all that have done good, shall afterwards arise to the Resurrection of Life. And Israel, when judged, will not be condemned for that they ignorantly committed against Christ, for he prayed for them, Luke 23.24. Blessed be the great and glorious God, who hath en∣abled a weak Worm to vindicate his Justice to the praise of his Name, and the comfort of his Creatures. In that it is now made clearly appear, the Judge of all the World will do right; who publisheth his Praise by the weak things of this World, that thereby all the Glory may be attributed to himself, who is God bles∣sed for ever and ever.
V. Concerning Election. ELection doth not always secure the Elect from fal∣ling off; but by God's electing some, it was there∣by to accomplish the Counsel of the Will of God, as to what he had before determined: And therefore ac∣cordingly he gave to one five Talents, to the other two, and to the other but one, but every Man had given him ac∣cording to his ability, Matth. 25.15. And each having given them according to their ability, that they might according to their day be capable to stand: But them that was of the Remnant of Israel, of whom the Dis∣ciples were, they did not only stand by their Election, but by a Promise from the Lord, That none should ck them out of his Hand, John 10.28,29. But ikewise both the Disciples and first Churches received Holy Ghost to be in them, whereby they were ed to God by one Spirit, and so beame a Light to the World; and thereby the Prayer of Christ was fulfilled, in that the World through them might believe that God had sent him, John 17.21. Which accordingly llowed, for the Nations embraced the Faith, and so came the Seed of Abraham. But the Elect were to Withstand all the Fury of the Adversaries, and there∣fore had the more Talents given them; for on them was shed forth the Holy Ghost abundantly, Tit. 3.6. But if they did grieve the Holy Spirit of God, whereby they were Sealed to the Day of Redemption, Eph. 4.30. For if they sinned wilfully after they had received the knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indig∣nation, Heb. 10.26, 27. (But all that have a true Heart separate from an evil Conscience, may draw nigh to God in full assurance of Faith, that they shall find acceptance through the Blood of the Lord Jesus, and
they in a more special manner who were fore∣chosen to it, vers. 22.) Now these having the greater Light, if they fell away, fell under the greater Con∣demnation. And that some of the Elect did fall away, that was not secured by a Promise from Christ, is cer∣tain by what St. John saith, That if they had been of them, they would have continued with them, 1 John 2.19. Therefore they were not of that Remnant, but it is clear they were of the Elect, because the Elect then were known by their Speaking with Tongues, and by the Gifts that were given them, by which God made them to differ; for had they not received those Gifts, it would have been known they had been none of the Elect before they went out from them; but by their going out from them, they knew that they were not of them to whom the Promise was made: Which were the Remnant; and as St. Peter saith, It is better not to know the Way of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the Holy Commandment, 2 Pet. 2.18,21. And also of others it is said, they made Shipwrack of Faith and a good Conscience, 1 Tim. 1.19. For tho' the elect were fore-chosen without their willing or run∣ning, yet when they were brought into the knowledge of the Truth, they were to make their Calling and Election sure by improving their Talents; for there was a part for them to do, before they could receive their Eternal Inheritance, unless they were immediate∣ly removed by Death; And therefore saved by Faith, and good Works, James 2.24. So we see, none stood securely, only by their Election; but the generality of the first Churches standing, the major part in Scripture is reckoned for the whole. And the Servant to whom the one Talent was given, was the world, and the Teachers of the World; which after the Gospel was received and established, the Word was then the Ta∣lent, which had they according to
their ability impro∣ved,they had thereby been capable to stand, God ha∣ving promised to all, whilst they kept to the way, his assistance. But the evil Servant, the Man of Sin got Ground, who were the Teachers in the Romish Church, which hid the Talent of the Word, and would not improve it themselves, nor suffer the Truth to be known among the People, among whom it might have been improved, according to the similitude the Lord put forth concerning the Money-Changers, Mat. 25.15,27. And likewise them that will oppose and smother the Truth, will not be counted guiltless, when the Lord Christ shall come. And it is the He-Goats that have eaten the good Pastures, and trodden down the residue, and fouled the deep Waters, Ezek. 34.17,18. By the false Interpretations that have been put upon the Word, so as the Flock of Christ eat that which they have trodden, and drank that which they have fouled with their Feet, vers. 19. For which when the Lord comes, his severe Judgments will fall on them, and then will the Lord feed his Sheep himself; so as then his Sheep shall be no more a Prey, as in the 22, 23, 24. Verses; For this is spoken of the particu∣lar time, in which the Lord vvill come to Judge and Reign. And Man in this time was trusted with the Word for his Posterity, as Adam was trusted with E∣ternal Life for his Posterity. Therefore the Lord alike laid his Commands, that Adam should not eat of the Tree, nor we add or diminish either to or from his Word, Deut. 4.2. Rev. 22.18. The which Word we are to hold fast till the Lord comes, Rev. 2.25. Heb. 2.2,3. But these forementioned. Teachers that hid the Word, would not so much as suffer or permit any Woman to look into it. But when Man acts contra∣ry to God, God acts contrary to Man. The Lord awaken all the Ministers that truly fear his Name of all parties, that by
their acknowledging and owningthe whole Truth, they thereby may clear them∣selves from the Blood of all Men, Act. 20.26,27. as they may not be reckoned with the Goats, And that by them Millions of Souls may be brought out of their mistaken Notions; and that they themselves for so doing, may shine as the Stars; but them that will take advantage of the People's Ignorance, that thereby they may keep them in Mistakes and Darkness, it will be a wofull day to them. VI. Concerning Christ and the Elect Angels. NOw Christ is said to be God's Elect in whom his Soul delighteth, Isa. 42.1. But he was not Elect∣ed because there was any danger of his falling; but he was elected according to the purpose of God: That by him might be made good the promise God made to our first Parents. That by the Seed of the Woman, the Serpent's Head should be bruised. And as for the elect Angels St. Paul speaks of, it doth not appear, that they were elected, because the fallen Angels had left their own Habitation, Jude vers. 6. And therefore God would afterward secure the rest of the Angels by electing them; but rather that God did elect them for a purpose he had determined. For the terrible Judg∣ments of God resting upon the Angels that fell, who are reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, un∣to the Judgment of the great Day. Which thing is known to all the holy Angels, and so a warning to keep them from falling. And the reason of Lucifer's Fall, was not because he was not so much in the favour of God as the other Angels, for he was one of the greatest, if not the greatest Angel of God: And thro' the greatness of the power which God had given him, he set himself in opposition to God, and so drew off others of the Angels with him in that great Rebellion. But if Man had not sinned,
Christ had not suffered;and Christ laid down his Life for the World. But I do not here deny, but am ready to believe that all the Heavenly Host that is now remaining in Heaven, as Arch-Angels, Angels, Cherubims, and Seraphims, might have a Promise from God after the Fall, that their standing should be secured to them through Christ. But in that St. Paul mentions the elect Angels, from those words is rather to be understood, that they were Angels whom God had made choice of to assist and aid Man: And according to this Christ saith of Children, That in Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of his Father, Mat. 18.10. So likewise the Disciples told the Damsel, when she affirmed that Peter knocked at the door, that it was his Angel, Acts 12.15. From these Texts it is clear, that there are some Angels that in particular are concerned with us, and were elected and chosen for that purpose; and so they being more near our Persons man the other Angels, and thereby know our Trans∣actions, and therefore more probable the Apostle gave Timothy his charge before God, and Christ, and the e∣lect Angels, 1. Tim. 5.21. Which Angels being im∣ployed concerning them, could likewise bear witness of this his Charge: And in the whole Book of God there is no mention made of elect Angels but in this place, and therefore it doth appear to be as aforesaid. And after the Creation, God saw every thing that he had made, and it was very good, Gen. 1.31. as to what he had then made, nothing had defiled it self. Therefore when God made the Stars they were then all very good and God made the Lights for Signs, and for Seasons, and for Days, and for Years, vers 14. And they being in the Creation by God made very good, therefore they were not made of God to influence Man to Iniquity; But as the Prince of Darkness drew off part of the An∣gels and Man, so likewise he drew off part of the Stars also, by which he doth
influence Man to Iniquity; forby his drawing the Stars, is not only meant the Mini∣sters of the Word, which he hath drawn after him, Rev. 12.4. Jude vers. 13. but the real Stars also; but with care and Prayer, their evil Influences may, and is to be withstood. Likewise, the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, was of God made good; but by the knowledge of Evil, and liking it, he became a Devil; For the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, was the Devil, or the representative of the Devil; as the Tree of Life was the representative of Christ, as by the Word I have clearly proved in my Book of the Explanation of the New Testament, and the Three Worlds; but God forewarned them of this evil Root: and had they first taken of the Tree of Life, they might have eaten and lived for ever; but this evil root in time to come will be sealed up, and then will the evil Stars fall down into Blackness and Darkness for ever, Jude vers. 13. And the Elect that will be gathered in from the Four Winds, after the Lord comes, they will be Israel, as I have fully proved in my forementioned Book: But their standing will not be secured from their Election, but by God's then establishing the pro∣mised New Everlasting Covenant with them; in which the Saints and true Believers will then be inclu∣ded as Heirs with them to the same Promise. And there is of the Heathen fore-appointed then to be called in, but not being secured by the Everlasting Covenant, part of their Posterity will afterward be insnared again, as I have made appear in the foresaid Book. As for those that talk of a Covenant of Grace from all Eter∣nity, therein they know not what they say, nor what they affirm: But the forementioned mistaken places treated in the 6, 7, 8, and 9 pages, has occasioned these so great and dangerous Errors; for the Covenant that will make the Inheritors of it eternally blessed, is still but the
Covenant of Promise, Gal. 3.29. And if ye areChrist's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs accord∣ing to the Promise: which Promise was the establish∣ing of the New Everlasting Covenant with Abraham and his Seed together, Gen. 17.7,8,9. The which the Remnant, and first Churches were chosen to be Heirs to; and a Door of Mercy set open to others, that now they might freely come by the Call of the Gospel. And whereas the Apostle after he had rehearsed the promised Covenant, Heb. 8. The which they were fore-chosen to be Heirs to; saith of the Old Cove∣nant, That it was ready to vanish away, vers. 13. And in the 9th Chap. expostulating about the Ceremonial Law, shewing they were but Shadows of good things to come, ver. 11. And therefore saith, That they which are called, might receive the Promise of the Eternal Inheritance, ver. 16. The which was the Promise of the foremen∣tioned Covenant. And in ver. 27. he saith, It is appointed for Men once to die, and after this to come to Judgment. For they must rise again, and come to Judgment, be∣fore this Covenant will be established, And then to them that look for him, shall he appear the second time without Sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9.28 2 Tim. 4.8. For they are to have their part in the first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. the which will be at the time of Restitution, for then will the Lord redeem Israel from all their Sins, and establish his Everlasting Covenant; and then it is Israel will be all Righteous, and inherit the Land for ever, Isa. 60.21. For there is to be another time according to the former time, in which it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought? Num. 23.23. And then it is God will behold no Iniquity in Jacob, when he hath purged all Iniquity from them; for then he will for ever perfect them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. For God, and Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, mention things which are to come, as if they were al∣ready past or present. These things were easie to be
understood by them that had been well instructed therein, as all they were, to whom the Apostles writ their Epistels; but unto us that come so many Genera∣tions after the knowledge of these things, were lost by the Nations falling into Popery, by which they were deprived of the Scriptures for several hundred Years, and so they lost the true meaning of them; but in that any of us have been so mistaken as to think the ever∣lasting Covenant is now made with us, is most amazing, seeing by that Covenant they were all to be taught of God; so as they should no more teach every Man his Neighbour, and his Brother, when we all know in this time, the Gospel was establisht to be taught, and that all since have been taught either right or wrong; but had we only thought this Covenant had been made with them who were the first Publishers of the Gospel, and were then taught of God, and had the evident witness of the Holy Ghost in them, and the mighty power of God going along with them, this would have been of no great damage to us, but to think that we are now in the posses∣sion of this promised Covenant is a strange delusion, and of most dangerous consequence, for thereby some have thought they might fall foully, but not finally, and thereby some have made themselves eternally misera∣ble, which had they not known those notions they might have been blessed; but when this Covenant is established they will not Sin; but in this time, Whosoever says he is without sin is a Lyer, and the Truth is not in him. 1 Joh. 1.8. VII. Concerning the Light that lighteth every Man. WHereas it is said John 1.9. That Christ is the true Light that lighteth every Man that cometh into the World. Now in that Christ is said to lighten every Man, is because Christ is said to be Wisdom. Pro. 8.22.23.30,31. In whom are hid all the Treasures
of Wisdomand Knowledge, Col. 2.3. And so far as Men retain right Reason and Conscience, to all such Christ is a Light; for right Reason and Conscience is the Light which God hath set up in the Soul, which if followed, God will never leave such to eternal Death, tho' it is only the Believer is promised eternal Life, and to have their part in the first Resurrection, for St. Paul saith, Those that know not the Law; yet do by Nature the things contained in the Law, their Conscience will excuse them. Rom. 2.14,15. According to which Christ saith, If thine Eye be single thy whole Body is full of Light, but if thy Eye be evil, then the whole Body is full of Darkness. That is, if our Eye be single we are then impartial to our selves, and judge our selves according to right Rea∣son and Conscience, such have Light; but if thine Eye be evil, that is blind to thy self, such are full of Dark∣ness, and then how great is that Darkness? Mat. 6.22,23, for that leads to utter Darkness. But for some there is a Redemption in the World to come, for all that dyed in Adams Transgression will be cleared from Original Sin by Christ, 1 Cor. 15.22. and so a Redemp∣tion for all Children in time to come; For then the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the Iniquity of the Son, the Soul that sinneth it shall Dye, Ezek. 18.20. But in this time it is only the Children of the Believer is Holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. before they have committed actual Sin, and the Believer is he that believes Salvation is to be had according to the words of Christ; but at Judgment there is none Con∣demned but for the Deeds done in the Body. 1 Cor. 5.10. and then all Children will be cleared; and likewise all them unto whom God hath promised Mercy, will then accordingly find Mercy, as the Meek, the Merci∣full, &c. Mat. 5. and all that order their conversation aright, Psal. 50.23. and the Ignorant shall be
beaten with fewer Stripes than those that wilfully offend.Luke 12.47. And whereas it is said, He that hath the Son hath Life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath not Life. 1 John 5.12. These Words do no ways exclude a Redemption by Christ for some in the World to come, or Restoration; but for some Sin there is neither for∣giveness in this World, nor in the World to come. Mat. 12.32. 1 Joh. 5.16. But whereas it is said, Where the Tree falleth there it lieth, thereby it shews that after Death we can no ways help our selves, as we may now by Repentance and Amendment of Life; but all that go into the Pit, must there stay till they are brought to Judgment to receive their Sentence of release or final Condemnation; but the coming of the Lord, the rai∣sing of the Saints, the judgment of this World, and the restoration of Israel, will be many Ages before the last Judgment, when the Sea, Hell and Death deliver up their Dead. Rev. 10.12. In which God hath secret places for Souls which we know not of, for all that go not to Heaven, do not go to the Fire of Hell, for what the Lord speaks by the Law and Gospel, is but to them that are under it (as I have proved) and for them that are under the greater light, they will fall under the grea∣ter Condemnation; but whereas the Prophet prays, Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families that call not on thy Name, for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his Habitation Desolate. The Prophets Petition here is only a∣gainst those Heathens that devoured Jacob, and laid wast his Dwelling Place. The same also is said upon their like Cruelties in Psal. 79.6,7. And whereas the Apostle saith, The Lord will come to take Vengance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Thes. 1.8. And those are they that know not God, that believe he will not Reward and Punish according to his Word.
VIII. Concerning the drawings of God, as to when and upon what account Christ then thus Spake. NOW whereas the Lord saith, No Man can come to him except the Father draw him, John 6.44. And al∣so the Lord saith in vers. 65. No Man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father. The Lord Christ hath here his reference to the then time, in which he appeared as a mean Person, which in Scrip∣ture is termed the form of a Servant, and those that were then first called in, had the more immediate draw∣ings of God; and the Words of the Lord here had their tendency to the Remnant, with the rest of the Elect that were given him of his Father, unto whom the Holy Ghost was afterwards given to be in them. And therefore the Lord saith in the 45. vers. It is written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God. The Lord here having his reference to the time that the Holy Ghost should be given, for the establishing of the Gospel, Heb. 2.3,4. and as an earnest of their Inheritance in time to come, Ephe. 1.14. And whereas the Lord saith, Every Man that hath learned of the Father cometh unto me. Whether the Lord in these Words meaneth only the Sheep, that were his Fathers before, and given to him, or all them of Israel who then lived according to the rule of Gods Word, for of such it may be said they were taught of God, in that they were guided by his Precept, and un∣to all that fear his Name in Israel was the Word of this Salvation sent, Acts 13.26. But the Lord seems rather here to have his peculiar reference to them that was then given him by his Father; but the reason the Lord speaketh thus mystically to them, was because the Mul∣titude had seen the great Miracle that he did, in feed∣ing Five Thousand with Four Loaves and Two Fishes. Upon which the Multitude thought to have taken him by force, and to have made him a King; but
the Lordknowing their thoughts went privatly from them, and the Multitude seeking after the Lord, which when they again had found him, he then spake so mystically unto them, that they could not understand him, and therefore they said they were hard sayings, who could bear them? and from that time many of the Disciples went back, and so the Lord brake their design of mak∣ing him a King, for his time to Reign was not then; but these very Persons that did not then wilfully de∣part from him, but went away because they could not then understand his sayings, Christ said unto them in the 27. vers. Labour not for the Meat which perisheth, but for that Meat which endureth unto everlasting Life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you. Which was to those very Persons that sought after him, to make him a King, and who had eaten of the Loaves and were fill∣ed. For though by those hard sayings, the Lord brake their design, yet from the Word of the Lord it is plain, they were not to be forgotten by him: And whereas the Lord saith, vers. 39. This is the Father's Will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing. Again, in the 40 vers. And this is the Will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting Life. That is every one that so believeth in the Son, as to walk in the Precepts of the Son; it is likewise the Father's Will, that all such may have everlasting Life, which is, if they continue in well doing; then will the Lord raise them up at the last Day; which is the last, Day of the Power of this wicked World. For God is not willing that Man should perish, but that they should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. But if we will not deny our selves for Christ, Christ will deny us. And the Lord saith in the 33d verse, That he is the Bread of God that cometh down from Heaven, and giveth Life unto the World: That is, to all that will take
holdof the offered Mercy. And Christ saith, if he be lifted up from the Earth, he will draw all Men unto him, John 12.32. Which accordingly followed; for after the Lord's Ascension, the Holy Ghost was given to be in the Elect, whereby the World was convinced, that God had sent Christ, and so the Nations embraced the Faith, and by so doing, became the Seed of Abraham, and a great number, for the major part in Scripture is reckoned as the whole; but afterwards, when the evil Servants came to think the Lord delayed his coming, they began to smite their fellow Servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken. Luk. 12.45. But we building our Faith upon those dark Sentences, which the Lord put forth, thereby to leave Israel to Blindness, are be∣come Blind our selves also. XI. The Woman cloathed with the Sun: Or, The Woman in the Wilderness. REV. 12.1. There appeared a great Wonder in Heaven, a Woman cloathed with the Sun, and the Moon under her Feet, and upon her Head a Crown of Twelve Stars. Now whereas it is said, There appeared a great Won∣der in Heaven; a Woman. First, I shall here shew you what, or who this Woman is. This Woman is the Elect Church, or Remnant chosen from among Israel, which had a peculiar Calling. 2dly, Why she is said to be in Heaven. It is because she is highly favoured by the Heavenly Powers, or Powers of Heaven, which is God. In being by him elected, fore-chosen, ordain∣ed, and secured so by God, as none shall pluck them out of his Hand, John 10.29. 3dly, Why she is term∣ed a Wonder. Was because there was none elected through the first or Old World, nor till the then time that Israel was brought out of Egypt to be placed in the heart of the Earth, and laid as a Foundation of the World to come. From which
Foundation, Christwas figuratively slain in the Paschal Lamb: From which Foundation, the Works of those unbelieving Jews were finished, when they through unbelief of the Promise of God's giving them the Victory, refu∣sed to go to fight for the Land of Canaan, for which, all that were numbred of them from twenty Years old and upward, dyed in the Wilderness, save Caleb and Joshua. Now all Israel were taken into Covenant, and Life and Death set before them, for them to choose Life, that they and their Seed might live, Deut. 30.19. But in the Wilderness they were disobedient, therefore they were cut off. After which God secured a Remnant of that Foundation, which was then a laying in Israel for the World to come: which is the World of which the Apostle speaks, Heb. 2.5. And this exceeding kindness of God to this elect Remnant or Woman, was the Wonder in Heaven: For this is the Foundation or Remnant chosen from the Foundati∣on which standeth sure, unto whom Christ promised to be with to the end of the World; and that he would send them another Comforter, which should abide with them forever. Joh. 14.16. This is more fully proved and explained in the former Book. Therein is also shewed, that God elected and chose from among the Gentiles, a peculiar People, to the praise of his Name, Acts 15.14 upon the first publication of the Gospel, who received the holy Ghost to be in them, that the World by the evident witness of the Spirit might be∣lieve that God sent Christ, the which was given for a ground of Faith, that thereby we might believe the Truth, whereby a door of Mercy was set open to all Believers, that believe, like Abraham, the promised Re∣ward is to be had in the way of their Obedience; for Christ is become the author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, whether Elect or not Elect. Whereas it is said in the 4th
verse of this 12th chapter,That the Elect Remnant, or Woman was cloathed with the Sun: That is, she was covered over with the Righ∣teousness of Christ, which was applicable before he was Incarnate, or in the Flesh, as well as afterwards; and in that she is said to have the Moon under her Feet; thereby shewing the little value she has to all the changeable Vanities and Pleasures of this World, which is like the Moon; and therefore she is said to have the Moon under her Feet. And in that she is said to have upon her Head a Crown of twelve Stars, thereby signified the twelve Apostles, to whom was given the prehe∣minency, and in time to come the ruling power. And in that they are termed the twelve Stars, is because they were the first Publishers of the Gospel, by which many were turned to Righteousness; and of such it is said, They shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. Rev. 12.2. Now whereas it is said, This Woman being with-Child, cryed travailing in Birth, and pain to be delivered: That is, of this Elect Remnant or Woman, as concerning the Flesh, the Lord Christ came. And in that she cryed out, pained to be delivered, was her ardent longing for Christ coming in the Flesh, that by the Seed of the Woman, the Serpents Head might be bruised, Gen. 3.15. But whereas it is said in the 3d. Verse, There appeared ano∣ther Wonder in Heaven, a great Red Dragon. When the Apostle saw this Vision, this Dragon or Devil was not then wholly cast out from some part of the Hea∣vens, as doth appear in the 8th verse. And whereas it is said in vers. the 4. That this Dragon or Devil stood before the Woman to devour the Child as soon as it was born. That was in that the Devil stir'd up Herod to seek the young Childs Life, thinking to have destroyed him with the Innocent Children. vers. 5. And she brought forth a Man Child which was to rule all Nations. And therefore notwithstanding all Satans attempts
this Childwas preserved, till he himself freely laid down his Life, by which he conquered Death, after which he was caught up unto God and his Throne; according as it is said Acts 1.9. He was taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight. And in Heb. 8.1. It is said, He is set at the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens. Rev. 12.6. And the Woman fled into the Wilderness, where she had a place prepared her of God, that they should feed her there a Thousand Two Hun∣dred and Threescore Days. From whence we are to take notice, there is no mention made of the time, how long it was before she fled into the Wilderness after the Child was caught up unto God.—Now having proved this forementioned Woman to be a Body of People, as also the Scarlet Whore that sits on many Waters is a Body of People, Rev. 17. And as the Scar∣let Whore is termed a City, that Reigns over the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.18. So this Woman that is clothed with the Sun, is likewise termed the Holy City, that should be trod under foot of the Gentiles Forty and Two Months, Rev. 11.2. These Gentiles were the Gentiles that embraced the Faith, which after they came to have no love to the Truth, but took pleasure in Unrighteousness, and their Kings would not be holden with the Cords of the Laws of the Lord, then God gave them up to strong Delusions, to believe Lies, 2 Thes. 2.9,10,11,12. Psal. 2.2,3. And then did the Devil hoist up the Beast, by whom they were deluded and given up to Worship him. (Whereas it is said, The Holy City should be trod under foot of the Gen∣tiles Forty and Two Months. From whence we are to take notice that this Holy City is not of the Gentiles) And likewise the Beast was to continue Forty and Two Months, Rev. 13.5. And Forty and Two Months, reckoning Thirty Days to a Month, according to the Chaldean account, amounts exactly to a Thousand Two
Hundred and Sixty Days, which is so many Days of Years; The which time the Woman was to be fed in the Wilderness, Rev. 12.6. And a Thousand Years is with the Lord as One Day, and One Day as a Thousand Years, 2 Pet. 3.8. And it is so Recorded to enlighten our understanding in the Word. And also we are to take notice, that the Promise of Christ was not that the Holy Ghost should be in them for ever, but with them for ever. So now this Remnant or Woman, which was drove into the Wilderness, is as liable to fall un∣der some mistakes, as the Remnant chosen from among Israel was before Christ came; for they did not appre∣hend Christ coming to Suffer, neither do these his coming to Reign; and likewise several great Truths in the Word, they did not rightly understand the true meaning of them, so neither do these; but the Promise of God was to them which were of the Remnant, that none should pluck them out of his Hand, which accor∣dingly God has performed, in preserving them in a holy and upright Conversation. And their Enemies declare, that they were a People that walkt uprightly, and kept close to all the Commands of God. As for some in the Valleys that thro the Cruelty of their E∣nemies were forc'd to adhere to the Beast, in the time of their miserable Destruction 1686. when they were expelled their Country, might be some that did come to coinhabit with them, as often some of the French Protestants did, for as St John saith, If they had been of them they would have continued with them. I shall hereafter by God's assistance, make appear who are the two Witnesses, or Olive-Trees, who continually gave the Oyl of Grace out of themselves into the Golden-Candlestick, or Church, or Woman, who had a place prepared of God in the Wilderness, that they should feed her there, Rev. 12.6. with Grace as aforesaid. But as the Lord said, The
Children othis World are in their Generation wiser than the Children of Light, Luk. 16.8. For had this Woman and others of Christ's Servants that truly fear him, understood the Word as well as the other did to get the Riches of this World they had not taken up with such mistaken Notions as has been put upon the Word. X. The Vaudois proved the Church in the Wilderness. THe Vaudois, By the History made of them, It is made appear, that they never did adhere to the Beast. But have always lived in a very strict and Holy and upright Conversation, according to the Commands of God, as the worst of their Enemies, as it is recorded, has de∣clared of them. But by their often Wars, and de∣vastations by Fire, occcasioned by their Enemies, they lost the Scriptures, and Antient Records: So as the An∣cientest Acts that were preserved from the Flames, was writ in 1100. Called the Lesson, As we may find in the late History written concerning them. In which Acts there is not so many mistakes as in their Confes∣sion of Faith made in the Year 1655. They since having received other of the Mistaken notions of their Protestant Neighbours. And they not Apprehending the Foundations of the several Worlds, so think they were chosen out of the Mass or Lump of Mankind be∣fore the Foundation of the Material world. But tho' they think they were then chosen, yet they do not hold that God did then reprobate any. They also clear God from the Miscarriage of the Devil or Man. And declare God to be all Holiness and Goodness, and therefore he cannot be the Author of the Evil of Sin. And that good works are so necessary to the faithful, that they cannot come to the Kingdom of Heaven with∣out doing of them. pag. 19. Article 21. This being accor∣ding to what the Apostles faith of them that were fore∣chosen
That God had fore ordained, That they should walk in good works. Ephe. 2.10. 1 Pet. 1.2. And this faith of Gods elect is required in every true believer, so as they must believe the purchased Redemption, and promised reward by Christ, is to be had in the way of their obedience to him. For in believing that Christ is the Son of God, we are to obey him as such. For it is required of every true believer to do whatsoever he Commands them. Matt. 28.20. For it is he that believes in Christ and his word, that is the Disciple, and believer indeed. John. 8.31. But Christ did never require that all believers should believe that they were elected, or forechosen. But those that were elected were by their good Works to be a light to the World, that others might follow their good Example. For though they are now fallen into several and great Mi∣stakes concerning Christ's second Coming, and several other things, as well as the remnant of Israel was here∣tofore concerning Christ's first coming. For the Lord did not promise that the Holy Ghost should be in them to the end of the World, but with them to the end of the World, John. 14.16. Therefore they are now as liable to mistakes, as the remnant formerly were. But the Lord according to his promise, has kept them from worshiping the Beast, and has preserved them in integrity and Godly simplicity. So that none could pluck them out of his Hand. But through the Mis∣interpretations put upon the Scriptures, they have re∣ceived false Notions. So according to the Word of the Lord in Eze. 34.18,19. The Sheep of Christ have Eaten that which others have Troden, and Drank that which others have fouled with their Feet. And that they have received other Notions than what they had formerly, I shall here make appear. For in their An∣cientest Acts. 1100. Which is the Ancientest they now have, There it is
said, That Christ dyed for all be∣lievers,and so for every one that believeth accord∣ing to his word. And therein is nothing said of their being chosen before the Foundation of the World. And in those Acts it is said, the Scriptures are the rule of Faith. And they being so, the promised Reward is to be had by all that take hold of the offered Mercy, ac∣cording to the Conditions as it is there tendred. And so not only the Elect, but all believers, will be par∣takers of the promised Mercy. But in this latter Con∣fession of Faith 1655. There they believe that Christ dyed only for the Elect. And that Faith comes from the gracious efficacious operation of the Holy Ghost, which Illuminates their Souls, and carries them to relie on the Mercy of God to be applied by the mer∣its of Jesus Christ. Yet they also in this Confession hold that good works are so necessary to the faithful that they cannot come to the Kingdom of God without doing of them. And that they must keep the Com∣mandments. But tho' in this latter Confession they believe that their Faith in Christ Jesus doth come through the efficacious work of the Spirit of God in them, the which is not unlikely, because more of the gracious Influence of the Spirit is with them, by reason they were to withstand all the fury of the Enemy, and to continue to bear their Testimony against all the Su∣perstitious and Idolatrous Worship of the Beast: And also to walk in a holy and exemplary Conversation, that thereby they might be a Light to the World. As for Sins of Ignorance, Sins of Infirmity, Sins of Sur∣prisal, will not be laid to their charge, they being kept from wilful and presumptuous Sins, which is the great Transgression, Psal. 19.13. And as in their Articles they say, This Church can∣not be quite destroyed, but that it will always remain. This being according to what the Lord hath promised them; they being the Church that the Lord prepared
a place in the Wilderness; and therefore they are of that Remnant or Sheep, which were his Father's be∣fore, and given to him. To whom he promised, That none should pluck them out of his Hand, John 10.27,28. Those are they to whom the Five Talents were given, that according to their Day, they might have ability to stand. So that if any among them have at any time fallen into a loose or prophane Conversation, or ad∣hered to the Beast; we may with St. John say, They were not of them, (although they coinhabited with them in the Wilderness, in the place the Lord prepared for them) because they went out from them. For had they been of that Fold to whom Christ made the foremen∣tioned Promise, they would have continued with them, 1 John 2.19. But Christ saith, He hath Sheep of ano∣ther Fold, that are not to be brought into that Fold, until such time there is but one Shephard, and then there shall be but one Fold, and one Shepherd, Joh. 10.16. And that will be when the Lord again comes. For tho' there was at the first publication of the Gospel a peculiar People▪ chosen from among the Gentiles to the Praise of hi Name; yet at that time there was many Shepherds▪ But those peculiar People of the Gentiles had not promise that none of them should be pluckt out of hi hand; and St. Paul cautions them, fearing least the Ser¦pent should beguile any of them, 2 Cor. 11.3. But the Vaudois, as well as we, have lost the righ apprehension of this World which is to come, th knowledge of which, was as a Light that shineth in  dark place, untill the Day dawn, and the Day-Star rise in their Hearts, which is, an inherent perfect Righ¦teousness will then be given, when the Lord agai comes, the which crowns Life to the Soul; not on to the raised Saints, but to Israel, Isa. 60.21. Thy Peop shall be all Righteous. And also to the living Believer th
longs for the Lords appearing, to all such he will githe Crown of Righteousness at that Day, 2 Tim. 4.8. The which things St Peter's care was, they should al∣ways have in remembrance after his Decease, 2 Pet. 1.15. He fearing least at any time they should let them slip, which since, for these many Years, is come to pass, they having lost the knowledge of these things. But God having abounded in his Love to them, in e∣lecting and forechosing them, without their foreseen willing and running; as he did likewise, at the first pub∣lication of the Gospel, choose a peculiar People from among the Gentiles to the praise of his Name. There∣fore the Vaudois, as well as us, by this their last Con∣fession have thought, that God had denied Man the freedom of Will to will his own good; the which is quite contrary to what they held Two Hundred Years before the ancientest Acts they now have were made, which were those in 100. for Two Hundred Years before that time Claudius Bishop of Turin, and of the Vallies, writ sharply against all the Errors of the Church of Rome. This Bishop maintained the Doctrine of St. Augustine concerning Grace, as the late Author of the History of the Vaudois saith in Page 7. And Augustine tells us, lib. de. precat. merit. chap. 18. That it was the great care of every Orthodox Teacher, in his time, to take heed least they did so defend Grace, as to deny Freewill, and least they should so defend Freewill as to deny Grace. (And a good care it was) and further the Author saith, Nei∣ther is there (I think) to be found one of the ancient ac∣counted Orthodox that hath maintained (in the strict sence opposed) that God commanded Men what they could not do, with the common helps that he affordeth. But all abhorred it as an Opinion, laying high accusation upon God, till many Years after Augustine, altho' Augustine did fall into mistakes himself as to this point, he not understanding how the Election ran. And some of the Protestant Christians not apprehending the dif∣ference
between the Eternal Life that Christ gave to his Sheep, that were his Fathers before, and given to him, that unto them the Eternal Life was given to continue to their Persons and Posterity: But the Eter∣nal Life that Christ gave to every true Believer, was no otherwise than whilst they did remain such they should never come into Condemnation; for a Believer, accor∣ding to the Gospel, is no longer a Believer than he yields to Christ his sincere Obedience Rom. 6.16. St Paul said to them that had embraced the Faith, so as to yield O∣bedience unto Christ, Know ye not that Christ is in you, except you are Reprobates, 2 Cor 13.5. That is, except ye have rebelled by relinquishing your Obedience, and so are become Reprobates, as Israel formerly had done; and therefore said of them, Reprobate Silver shall Men call them, because the Lord hath rejected them, Jer. 6.30. which rejection was for their Sin. And the Prophet speaking of the Body of the People that had wilfully Transgressed, saith, All our Righteousnesses are as Filthy Rags, and our Iniquities like the Wind have taken us away, Jsa. 64.6. And the People of Gods Curse to Judg∣ment, will be them that will wilfully persist to do the thing which the Curses in the Law were pro∣nonced against, for although it is said, All that are saved are saved by Grace, and not of Works, that is to show that we cannot perform good Works to that perfection as to become justified by them, without the Merits of Christ; and therefore saved by Grace, and not of Works; but Christ's Righteousness will be appli'd to ju∣stifie his Creatures sincere indeavours, he being the Au∣thor of Eternal Salvation to all those that obey him. But whereas it is said, That it is not of Works of Righte∣ousness that we have done, but according to his Mercy he saveth us, this was spoken to the first Churches which was then brought out of darkness and hath no
reference to us, as is proved; but since the Nations havefallen into Popery, we have not so understood as to dis∣tinguish between that part of Scripture which hath a general tendency, and that which hath not. And whereas Christ said to the Jews, They should die in their Sins, except ye helievc that I am he, John 8.24. And who is this he? but him that all the Prophets, and Moses, Prophesied of, That when that Prophet came they should hear him in all things whatsoever he commanded them, Acts 3.22. which at his first coming they did not. And that all Believers that believe according to the Words of Christ, so as to consent to take his Yoke upon them, to become his Servants, are then of his great Mercy and free Grace saved from their original and past Transgres∣sions by the Gospel tender of his Grace, Rom. 3.25. without their before performing the Deeds of the Law, for Christ is become to such Righteousness, Sanctifica∣tion and Redemption, and by him the Eternal Life, lost by Adam, reenters. But we are no sonner listed his Souldiers and Servants, but we are to Fight, to keep our Ground and Station wherein he hath set us; for the Eternal Life given to the Believer, to make it an Eternal Inheritance, is a Prize set before us; and it is the Runner that holds out to the end, and the War∣rier that overcometh that shall have the reward of the Crown of Life, Rev. 3.11. And he that puts his Hand to the Plough and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of God, Luke 9.62. And it is said, Remember Lots Wife. And the Apostle saith of Himeneus and Alexander, That they made Shipwrack of Faith and a good Conscience, 1 Tim. 1.19. Likewise others who were washed from their old Sins returned as a Dog to the Vomit; and some denied the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.20,21,22. And those that live after the Flesh, and despise Govern∣ment, act as irrationally as the Beasts, for the Beasts had not Reason given them, but were made to be de∣stroyed, ver. 12. And it is the Ground that
remainsbarren, under the tender of Grace, and free offer of Mercy, in the Call of the Gospel, that is nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be Burned, Heb. 6.6,8. And those that receive the sincere Milk of the Word to grow thereby, are thereby brought off from the World and so Regenerated and Born again, 1 Pet. 2.2. But they which have not the Word have not the Call of the Gospel. And likewise among us who are not of the Elect, there are some in a more peculiar manner brought home by the operation of the Spirit of God upon them by the Word; but they do no longer stand than they are found sincere in their Obedience, Rom. 6.16. IX. The Word of the Scriptures is the Word of Faith, and in them the offer of the Common Salvation. I Do also here affirm, that the Word of the Scrip∣tures is the Word of Faith, and in them the offer of the common Salvation; and whosoever believes the Truth of the Scriptures, they are able to make them wise unto Salvation, 2 Tim. 3.15. Therefore the A∣postle saith, It is the power of God unto Salvation, unto every one that believeth; for therein is the Righteousness of God revealed, and the Just shall live by their Faith, Rom. 1.16,17. For the Lord is become the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. And by doing good Works there is a laying hold of Eternal Life, 1 Tim. 6.19. as well as there was some foreordained to Eternal Life. And the Word of the Lord endureth for ever, 1 Pet. 1.25. The which we are to hold fast till he come, Rev. 2.24,25. And if the Word spoken by Angels was stedfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience received a just recompence of Reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him, Heb. 2.2,3. For the Lord Christ hath abolished Death,
and hath broughtLife and Immortality to Light through the Gosple, 2 Tim. 1.10. And the Apostle with Moses, speaking of the Letter of the Word saith, The knowledge of it is in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, that thou mayest do it, Deut. 30.14. So that we may do the thing that is there re∣quired, God having promised his assistance, and that he will accept our sincere Endeavour; and whosoever takes to the way therein directed will find the assistance therein promised, with the assured Reward that Christ has purchased, which they also will be partakers of, as well as those that were forechosen, so as for any ones sincere Service the Lord will be their great Re∣ward, when he again comes, at the time of the Re∣demption of the purchased Possession; for then will he Redeem Israel, and give to others Rewards and Punishments according to their Deeds. And this is the common Faith which all that are under the common Call of the Gospel ought to contend for, the which St. Jude terms the common Salvation, vers. 3. And it was by the common Faith that Titus became so Eminent a Christian, Titus 1.4. XII. How God is the Author of Faith in the Belief of the Scriptures. BUT peradventure some will say, That we cannot of our selves have Faith to believe the Scriptures, for that is the Gift of Ged. These Words were spoken to the Elect Church of the Ephesians, who were part of the peculiar People chosen from among the Gentiles, for the Praise of his Name, which received the Holy Ghost to be in them, who were then first brought out from the Abominations of the Gentiles, and to whom the Apostile saith Eph. 2.8. For by Grace ye are saved thro' Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. That is, it was the great Mercy and rich Grace of God,
thegift of his Son; and this great Mercy is to be received thro' Faith, which Faith is not of themselves, it is the gift of God, who unto them in a peculiar manner he did at first manifest himself to; but God did never leave himself without vvitness for the ground of Faith, to confirm the truth of vvhat he vvould have us be∣lieve; and therefore to confirm the Lavv, that it vvas his VVill and his VVord, he Gloriously and Terribly appeared on Mount Sinai; and to confirm the Gospel, he first sent dovvn the Holy Ghost in cloven Tongues like Fire, Acts 2.2. And then because that vvould not be a sufficient Evidence to the VVorld vvhat vvas done at Jerusalem, altho there vvere then some of all Nations there then present, yet notwithstanding for the far∣ther confirmation to the World, that God had sent Christ, he therefore took from among the Gentiles a People for his Name at the first visiting the Gentiles by the Gospel, Acts 15.14. Who through the conviction of the Spirit upon the word of the Disciples, believed in Christ through their Word, John 17.20. And the Word in this place, Christ terms their Word, because they received it from the Mouth of the Disciples, and believed it; God having then given them no other outward visible Testimony than what they had from the Disciples, whose Word they believed, and so were Baptized. And afterwards the Holy Ghost was given to be in them, according to the Promise of the Lord, John 14.17. by which they were glorified, ver. 22. 1 Pet. 1.2. And became united to God by partaking of that one Spirit that the World might believe that God had sent Christ, John 17.21,22,23. by the mighty Power, Signs and Wonders that were seen among them. These were those that were foreknown, called, justified, and glorified, Rom. 8.29,30 by their re∣ceiving the Holy Ghost to be in them, by which their Bodies became the
Temples of the Holy Ghost. Thesewere those, that when they were brought before Go∣vernours and Kings, were to take no thought how or what they should speak, for it should be given them in that Hour what they should speak, for the Spirit of the Father spake in them, Mat. 10.19,20. For the Holy Ghost which, was but with the Disciples, was afterwards given to be in the Disciples and first Churches, John 14.17. chap. 17.21. So then the World did not believe in Christ through the alone word of the Disciples, but through the evident de∣monstration of the Spirit of God, which was evidently and visibly mannest in the Elect by their Speaking with Tongues, and working of Miracles; so as the World thereby might have sufficient Evidence to believe that God had sent Christ: And thus was the Prayer of Christ fulfilled, in that the World might believe that God bad sent him, John 17.21. And the Gospel be∣ing thus wonderfully establish'd, Heb. 2.4. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things is they were first delivered, and not as we first received them. And the care of the Lord was such, that al∣though he commanded his Disciples to teach all Na∣tions, Mat. 28.19. yet notwithstanding they were for bidden by the Spirit to preach the Word in Asia and Bythinia, Acts 16.6,7. till such time the Elect were called in, that by their receiving the Holy Ghost to be in them, they might be a Light to the World. And af∣terwards the Word was preached in Asia, and believed on there, Rev. 1. And St. Paul saith, That the Gospel had been preached to every Creature under Heauen, Gol. 1.10,23. And that their sound went through the World, Rom. 10.18. And that the World embraced the Faith in the Apostles time, Col. 1.16. And their standing was, as they continued in the Faith, and were not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, by which the promised Hope is attained. And upon the perfer∣mance of this
condition▪ God will never forsake any▪ foras the Lord is the Author of Faith, so to them that obey him, he will be the Finisher, Heb. 12.2. chap. 5.9. (the word our in this Verse, is not in the Greek.) And whereas St. Paul saith, That none can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. This the Apostle spake when the Gospel was first publish'd, at which time the Holy Ghost was given for the con∣firmation of the truth thereof. But since, the Chri∣stians have learned to say by rote, that Christ is the Son of God, without the assistance of the Holy Ghost. And whereas the Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural Man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, neither can be know them, because they are spiritually discerned. That is, whilst the na∣tural Man gives himself to sensual delights, as the pleasures and profits, and other advantages of this life, which in the 6th vers. is termed the wisdom of this world, he will not give himself a liberty to consider his ways to be wise. And therefore such cannot re∣ceive the knowledge of the things of God, because they are spiritually to be discerned, that is by a consi∣dering Spirit, or a Spirit of Consideration: And therefore God often calls to Man to consider their ways, Deut. 32.29. Job 34.27. Psal. 50.22. Isa. 1.3. Chap. 5.12. Ezek. 18.14,28. Hos. 7.2. 2 Tim. 2.7. Rev. 2.5. And also St. Paul saith, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any Man among you seemeth to be wise, let him become a Fool that he may be Wise: For the wisdom of this world is foolish∣ness with God. But by our forsaking the Vanities, Plea∣sures, and subtil Craftiness of the World, is the way to become wise in Spiritual things. And if ye resist the Devil, he will flee from you, draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you James 4.7,8. And Da∣vid, by making the Law of God his Meditation, be∣came wiser than all his Teachers, Psal. 119.99. And if any
man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who givethand upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, James 1.5. If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy Voice for Ʋnderstanding: If thou seekest her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hidden Treasures, then shalt thou understand the Fear of the Lord, Prov. 2.3,4,5. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom, and with thy getting, get Ʋnderstanding. She shall give to thine Head an Orna∣ment of Grace, a Crown of Glory shall she deliver to thee, chap. 4.7,9. But the worldly wise men, the Apostle saith, will be taken in their own Craftiness, 1 Cor. 3.19. And whereas the Apostle saith, vers. 7. Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither is he that watereth, but God that giveth the encrease. This he spake upon the first publication of the Gospel, upon the calling in of the Elect, which great increase God gave by a fore-appointment, of whom he said, they knew God, or ra∣ther are known of God, Gal. 4.9. Because they were those that were fore-chosen. For herein he had his reference to the then time, which was the great Day of Salvation, when the Elect were called in, and a Door of Mercy set open to the World, that they might take hold of the offered mercy in the common Salva∣tion; The which the Nations did, and so became the Seed of Abraham. But they that were made the Temple of God, if any of them defiled the Temple of God, him would God destroy, 1 Cor. 3.16,17. For St. Paul's Epistles had their peculiar tendency to them of that time, to whom he wrote, who then had turned from worshipping dumb Idols to ferve the living God, who was then in a more peculiar manner brought home, and was then justified through the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in the Belief of the Truth, without their before performing the Deeds of the Law, so as none might charge them for their Sins that were past, Rom. 3.25. but then they were to walk in
newness of Life. These were those that were saved, not for Works of Righteousness which they had done, Tit. 3.5. Thus was a Door of Mercy set open, not only to the Elect that had the peculiar Calling, but also to the World that had the general Call by the Gospel, and believed like Abraham the Word of the Lord. And as he for sook his Country, his Kindred, and his Father's House: So were the Christians to forsake all the Va∣nities of this present evil world; the which accord∣ingly they did. And the Lord knew that Abraham would command his Children and his Houshold after him, that they should keep the Ways of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he had spoken of him, which Promises were to be performed upon Conditions, the which conditions he fulfilled. So likewise the first Churches generally obeyed, and commanded their Children and Houshold after them to keep the ways of the Lord, Heb. 2.1,2,3. and to walk blameless; and they were to hold fast that which they had received, till the Lord comes, Rev. 2.25. 1 Tim. 6.17,18,19,20. But when the Christians, as Israel formerly had done, forsook his ways, they then became estranged from God, and so their Children became estranged from the Womb, and stopping their Ear like the deaf Adder, who will not hear the Voice of the Charmers, charm∣ing never so wisely, Psal. 58.4. Here we see their Ears were no otherwise stopt, than as they stopt them them∣selves: And such as harden themselves in Sin, and will not do justly, God chooses to harden them in blindness, and unbelief of the truth, and such will be the Vessels of his Wrath and sore Displeasure. But as for those that have not so hardned themselves in Iniquity, so as to become thereby under a stupid sence, let them seek to God for his assisting Grace, that thereby they may be enabled to withstand Sin, that they may not be guilty of the like again; and
then will not the Prayersof the Wicked be sin, when they go to God to ask Forgiveness for that which they never intend to com∣mit again; but it is their Prayers are abomination and Sin, who ask Forgiveness for those Sins which they intend to commit again. XIII. Concerning being Born again. WHereas Christ said to Nicodemus, John 3.3. I say unto thee, except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Here Christ doth not say every Man must be born again that seeth the Kingdom of God; but such a Man, or Men, as Nicodemus, that had em∣braced this present World, and valued the praise of Men, and so ashamed to own Christ, and therefore came to him by Night; such must be born again, or brought off from the World, or they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. But whereas the Lord saith, vers. 5. Except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. In this Verse he doth not say that all that enter into the Kingdom of God must be born again, altho all that enters, must be born of the Spirit: For some were born after the Spirit from their Mother's Womb, as John Baptist, Luke 1.41,44. and Jeremiah, Jer. 1.5. And the Pro∣phet David says, God made him hope when he was upon his Mothers Breast, Psal. 22.9. And Saint Paul was sepa∣rated from his Mother's Womb, Gal. 1.15. Acts 26.5. And all the Children of Believers are said to be Holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. that is before they commit actual Sin. Likewise Christ saith, Suffer the little Children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of God, Mark 10.14. Mat. 18.10,3,4. Therefore no need of their being born again: But as the Lord had a Figurative mean∣ing in his saying, a man must be born after the Spirit; So it was here but a Figurative Speech, in that he said, a
Man must be born again; for the Lord had here no reference to the natural Birth; for first, those that are Religiously brought up, and walk all along in Integri∣ty, and do not wilfully corrupt their way, such are born after the Spirit, and those that like the Prodigal, wan∣der from home, thereby they become born after the Flesh; such must be regenerated, that is to say, born again, or they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And tho' there is original defilement in all Children; so the best of Saints are not here without Sin, but Christ will take away Original Sin from both, Ezek. 18.20. And whereas Christ saith, John 3.8. The Wind bloweth where it listeth. The Lord had here his more peculiar refe∣rence to the time when the Elect were to be brought home by the inward touch of the Spirit upon the heart, which then in a more wonderful manner the Spirit like the Wind blew where it listeth. Now Nicodemus being one of the Rulers of the Jews, unto whom Christ always spake in dark Sentences and Parables; And with∣out a Parable he spake not unto them, Mat. 13.34. And all that Christ here said to him, was so Mystical that it appeared to him as a Paradox. But no doubt after the Lord's Ascension, but those Rulers that desired the knowledge of the Lord before he suffered, believed on him when the Gospel was taught, and the Scriptures opened. But before these Mystical Sayings of Christ were opened, they seemed to contradict what before they had received, and therefore they could not be∣lieve. And it is said, Psal. 53.2,3. God looked down from Heaven upon the Children of Men, to see if there were any that did understand, that did seek God. Every one of them is gone back, they are altogether become filthy, there is none that doth good, no not one. From these words, it is plain that they might have sought God, and God did expect better from them, but they were gone backward, and became filthy through their own de∣fault. But with these that were gone back, the Elect Remnant were not reckoned▪ For at that time
Godsaid of them that were gone back, that they did eat up his People as they eat Bread, vers. 4. And God's People in Scripture are termed the Sons of God, and there∣fore not reckoned with the Children of Men. And tho' God has concluded all under Sin, so as none can be saved without the Imputation of Christ's Righteous∣ness, Rom. 3. But whereas St. Paul saith in the 10th and 11th Verse; Wherein he could have no reference to the Remnant. For he saith, There was none Righteous, no not one. There was none that sought after God. For if he did here include the Remnant, he did not herein speak agreeable to what is written; for God in the Psalm saith the contrary. Therefore St. Paul's meaning here, was of the Jewish Nation, and not of the Elect Rem∣nant. But after the Lord came, there doth appear by Scripture, to be a larger number of Israel in this Election of Grace then was before; which was sinful, and had corrupted their way, as well as the Gentiles, but to all that feared God in Israel, was the Word of this Salvation sent, Acts 13.26. From whence it is clear, there was then some of them in Israel that then also feared God. And Christ by the Parable of the Ninety Nine Sheep, from whence is made appear they were safe by the Promise of God, Psal. 15. Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, &c. And to all that order their Conversati aright, he will shew his Salvotion, Psal 50.23. And there∣fore Christ saith, He came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance, Luke 5.32. For they were not then to be called home, for such were his Father's be∣fore. As for that one Sheep that went astray, we are to take notice, that the nature of Sheep is not wilfully from their Companions to wander away; but the Prodigal that wilfully left his Father's House, first look home, before his Father lookt on him, Luke 15.18. Now what St. Paul goes to prove from the Prophets, Rom. 3.20,21,22,23. was to prove their Justificatio from their past Sins, through the Blood of Christ▪
vers. 24.25. Without their before performing the deeds of the law; for had not God then justified them by the alone Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in the be∣lief of the Truth, they could not then have been saved; for then not only the Gentile World lay in Wickedness, but the elect also that was chosen from among them lay in Wickedness. Therefore God at the then time, to declare his Righteousness, verse 26. which was in his being just to his Promise made to Abraham, in bringing in the Gen∣tile Nations to be Heirs with Israel. And therefore at the then time, at their first calling in they were justified from their past Sins by believing in Jesus accor∣ding to the word, and Faith in his Blood, verse 22.25. That they and their Children might be brought in Heirs with Israel according to the Promise, Gen. 17.4. And as Abraham after God had called him, was commanded to walk before him in a perfect and upright way, verse 1. which accordingly he did, and so became Heir to the Promises, verse 2.7. And so the Lord ordered his Disciples to go and teach and baptize all Nations, that they should teach them to observe all things whatsoe∣ver he commanded them, Matth. 28.19,20. And whilst they so did they were Heirs to the Promises. And these things, as St. Paul saith, were witnessed by the Law and the Prophers, verse 21. For Moses wrote concerning it. And in Isaiah 55. The tender of the common Salvation was Prophesied of that all that were a thirst might come, buy and eat without Money, and without Price, that is, tho there was nothing then in them to render them acceptable, but a thirsting after the Lord with a weariness of their Sins, Matth. 11.28. And if they did hearken diligently unto the Lord, and eat that which is good, and let their soul delight it self in fatness, and incline their ear and come unto him and bear, and their souls shall live, verse 23 Here we are to take
notice that they were to thirst when they heard ofthe offered Mercy, and then they were to incline their ear, and come unto him, and when they were come they were to hear, that is, all that he by his word commanded them, Matth. 28.20. And if they did hear, and eat that which is good, then upon the per∣formance of these Conditions, the Lord will make an everlasting Covenant with them the sure Mercies of David, The which will be when the Lord again comes, at which time God will establish his promised everlasting Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, together in their Generations, Gen. 17.7. And God also by the Pro∣phet declares the pouring forth of his Spirit, not only at the second coming, but also at the first coming of Christ, Joel 2.28,29. And St. Paul concerning the then fore-mentioned time, Rom. 3.26. mentions Isaiah 49.8. applying these words of Isaiah to the then time, as in 2 Cor. 6.2. I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succoured thee. Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of Salvation. But afterwards when the Gentiles came to have no love to the Truth, for which they were given up to Delusion, 2 Thess. 2.10. Then it was not the great day of Salvation, which falling away was al∣so fore prophesied of Psalm 2.2,3. And in divers other places; for those that God calls will not be accepted when the times of refreshing shall come from the pre∣sence of the Lord, without their now improving in this time their day of Grace under the call of the Gospel; for when the Lord comes, we that have the knowledge of him must appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. For God-without respect of persons judgeth according to every mans work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. And the promised reward was to them that held out to the end, Rev. 2.10.
That they should receive a Crown of Life; that is, be saved with an everlasting Salvation, as Israel will be when the Lord again comes, who then shall not be ashamed, world without end, Isaiah 45 17. And this is the world to come, of which all the Apostles speak of, and which is to be put in subjection unto Christ in time to come, Heb. 2.5. But as St. Peter saith, God before shewed by the mouth of all his Prophets that Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled, Acts 3.18. Whom the heavens must receive until the times of the resti∣tution of all things. Which he likewise saith, God hath spoken by the mouth of all his Holy Prophets since the world began, verse 21. Which beginning of the world was Israel, unto whom Moses declared it, verse 22. And they will be the world without end, when the Lord hath established his new everlasting Covenant with them that they shall not sin against him, and then they will never more fall under Condemnation; therefore said to be world without end. And unto this Promise the Gentile Christians conditionally were brought in Heirs with Israel. XIV. Part of the Christians Mistakes. NOW since the Roman Apostacy, the Christians have built their Faith on those Parables that Christ spake to put out the Eyes of Israel's Understanding; and also on those mistaken places of Scripture that our Predecessors since Popery have lost the true meaning of, and like∣wise the Christians fancying that all that was said con∣cerning the Remnant and first Churches, and Israel at the restitution of all things, that they now belong to them, and are made good to them in this time, although they find not in them what is there promised; but many vainly imagine through their mistaken Notions, that they are now so secured by Christ's Righteousness, as they cannot finally fall away, and so little regarding the plain words of Christ, as his Sermon on the Mount, Matth. 5. to the eighth Chapter. And also that he laid
down his life for the world, John 3.17. And his gene∣ral Invitation to accept of Salvation, by taking his Yoke upon them, Matth. 11.28,29. And Christ faith, If thou wilt enter into Life, keep the Command∣ments, Matth. 19.17. And in loving God and our Neighbours, hangs all the Law and the Prophets, Matth. 22.4. And is commanded us by Christ and his Apostles, Rom. 2.13. And not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified; and it is said, to the Law and to the Testimo∣ny, if they speak not according to this word, it is be∣cause there is no Light in them, Isaiah 8.20. There∣fore St. Peter terms it, a more sure word of prophesie where∣unto ye do well, that ye take heed, as unto a light that shi∣neth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in their hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. For in the Prophecies is declared the promises of the blessedness in time to come, in which time will be given an inherent perfect righteous∣ness, which is the day Star that will then arise in their hearts, for in time to come is given the eternal life, 1 Tim. 6.19. Now the Bereans were said to be noble, because they searched the Scriptures, to see if those things which were spoken by the Apostles were so or no, Acts 17.11. And the Scriptures then was only the Old Testament, and all the Prophesies were to be fulfilled, and as many of them as has not yet been fulfilled, remains still to be made good, in as much as it is impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6.18. Jer. 31.33,34,35,36,37. Isa. 54.9,10,11. Chap. 62.8. much less forsworn, and Christ saith, Think not that I am come to destroy the law and the prophets, I am not come to destroy but to fulfil; for verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be ful∣filled, Matth. 5.7,18. That is, not till all the great Promises and Prophesies that are written in the Law and the Prophets are fulfilled, both as to the
Punishmentsand the Glory that should follow, Dan. 7.27. Isaiah 60.21. Which promised Glory could never come to pass, had not the Lord laid down his Life to purchase to himself a glorious Church in time to come, without spot or wrinkle; but that it should be holy and without blemish, Eph. 5.27. Isaiah 60.21. And according∣ly in Isaiah it is declared, and in the Rev. 5.10. For the glorious time will not be till Israel receives the Promises. Now all our mistaken Notions are quite contrary to the Law and the Prophets and therefore not to be re∣ceived by us; and though Christ Abolished the Cere∣monial Law, it was no ways contradictory to the Pro∣phets; for David Typically speaking of Christ, saith, Sacrifice an Offering thou desirest not, then said I, lo I come in the volume of the Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will O God. Psalm 40.6,7. Christ was that acceptable Sacrifice which only could take away Sin, which the Sacrifices of the Ceremonial Law could not do, and therefore were to be Abolished, Ezek. 20.25. But whereas Christ saith, Matth. 11.13. All the Prophets and the Law Prophesied until John, which was because the Ceremonial Law was then to be Abo∣lished, and then part of the Prophesies was fulfilled in Christ's first coming; but there is other of the Prophe∣sies are still to be fulfilled, which not only foretels the Lord's second coming, but also what will be in time to come, agreeable to which the Lord Revealed to St. John by Revelation. Now though the Gentiles were not commanded the outward Circumcision, yet there is re∣quired of them the inward Circumcision of the Heart, Rom. 2.29. The performance of which has been lit∣tle observed; but unto this Circumcision, Baptism is a Figure, and though we keep the eighth day, or otherwise call'd the first day for our Sabbath, yet this is not re∣pugnant to the Scripture; for when God blessed the Sab∣bath Day, he pronounced the Blessing to the Sabbath
Day, not naming the seventh Day in the Blessing; but in that God said the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; from hence it doth not appear that it should remain so for ever and ever. Which words are added to that which is so to continue, and the eighth Day was the great Day of the Feast, which was like∣wise the Jewish Sabbath, which was a Figure of the great Feast or Sabbath in time to come, unto which their be∣ing Circumcised on the eighth Day doth allude, in which God will Circumcise their Hearts that they shall no more Sin against him by the then Establishing the promised new everlasting Covenant which Crowns Life to the Soul, which Covenant now is but a Covenant of Promise, but when Established, God's People will be all Righte∣ous, and then it is Israel will inherit the Land for ever, Isaiah 60.21. And this God declaring we are bound to believe, in as much as it is imppssible for God to lie, Heb. 6.18. And God never left himself without Wit∣ness to confirm the Truth of his Word, that we might have Ground for Faith; for by that time most of the Elect among the Gentiles were taken off by Death, Jerusalem was destroyed, and the Jews became a scatte∣red People through the World, according as God by the Prophets, and Christ hath declared, and which is to this day evidently known, and that they were thus scat∣tered because of their Sins; this the whole Book of God declares, and themselves acknowledge, and by them the Scriptures of the Old Testament have been more safely preserved all along amongst the Nations, whilst the Nations were deprived of the New Testament by the Pope, and so lost the right apprehension of the meaning of the things therein contained, and likewise the Ordinances spoken of, 1 Cor. 11.2. Which he praises them for keeping them as he delivered them; the which St. Peter foreseeing according as by the Pro∣phet is declared, that
the Goats would eat the goodPastures, and tread the residue with their Feet, and foul the deep Waters, Eze. 34.17,18. Therefore St. Peter terms the Writings of the Prophets a more sure Word of Prophe∣sie, whereunto ye do well to take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19. And the Scriptures declare concerning Israel, first their Rise, their Continuance, their scattering, and there remaining scat∣tered till the Messiah again comes, and there being such a scattered People among us, and through the whole World who acknowledge the Law and Prophets in the truth of these things, it is certainly evident to us and the whole World that the Scriptures are true, and the Word of God; and to confirm the Truth of what God hath there declared, he hath given us a Sign in the Heavens, Signs upon the Earth, and under the Earth, and thro' the World. But for Brevity sake I shall here mention but three, which are evidently known to all. First, That the old World for Sin was drowned, the Rainbow in the Heavens doth witness to the Truth of the Word. Secondly, God declareth that his Anger should set on fire the Foundations of the Mountains, which should burn to the lowest Hell, Deut. 32.22. Which for these many hundred years is come to pass, and also that Hell should enlarge her self, Isaiah 5.14. Which with∣in these few years is wonderfully come to pass by the Rivers of Fire, Pitch and Bitumen which has been sent out thence, the which doth likewise bear witness to the Truth of God's Word, and also Israel's being scattered doth witness to the World the Truth of the same. XV. Christ proved to be the Son of God. BUT peradventure some will say, how can we prove the New Testament to be true, and Christ to be the Son of God, seeing the Jews do not own it. I shall not here go to prove it from the Words of the Apostles, as to be∣lieve it through their bare Word; but I chiefly be∣lieve it, because I find those things that were fore Pro∣phessed of
by the Prophets concerning the Messiah,made good in the Crucified Jesus, unto which sure word of Prophesies we are always to take heed. And in that the Scriptures now again being rightly understood, they are not contradictory to what God before spake by the Prophets; for we are to believe nothing in contradicti∣on to what God hath spoken by the Prophets, for what God hath absolutely promised, he will certainly per∣form. And therefore to declare his Righteousness in the performance of his Promise, he sent the Son of his Love to Suffer for Sinners, as was declared by the Pro∣phets, and that for Israel's wilful Disobedience, he was then a Stone of Stumbling, and a Rock of Offence to both the Houses of Israel, for a Gin and for a Snare to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Isaiah 8.14. Which accordingly so fell out; for they expecting he should come as a King, and not apprehending that he should first come to Suffer, therefore he was Despised and Re∣jected of Men. A Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief; they hid as it were there Faces from him, he was despised, and they esteemed him not, Isaiah 53.3. And it was Prophesied concerning him, Isaiah 7.4,15,16. That a Virgin should conceive and bear a Son, and that he should be born in Bethlehem, Mic. 5.2. And lowly Riding upon an Ass. Zach. 9.9. And the Lords Sufferings and Death were likewise foretold; Isaiah 53 7 He was brought like a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep dumb before the shearers; so opened he not his mouth, Zach. 11.12,13. And they weighed for his price thirty pieces of silver, Ps. 22 16,18. And they pierced his hands and his feet, Dan. 9.26. And the Messiah was cut off, but not for himself; all these hings, and many more were made good in the Crucified Jesus. Therefore I believe him to be the Messiah, that Seed of the Woman that should ise the Serpents Head, Gen 3. And that Lord unto whom the Lord said, sit thou on my right hand till I make thine  Ps. 110.1. Which will be when the Lord again comes to
deliver his People. And forfurther Proof that this Lord is God, God saith, Zech. 13.7. Awake O sword against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, saith the Lord of hosts. And none can be the fellow of God, but the Son of God, which is God, and therefore said of him that Was to be born in Bethlehem, that his goings forth have been from of old from everlasting, Mic. 5.2. And of him it is said, Ʋnto us a child is born, and unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulders, and he shall be called the wonderful counceller, the mighty God, the ever∣lasting Father, the prince of peace, Isaiah 9.6. And when this Prince of Peace shall come and take the Government, then will he be to all his Sheep the everlasting Father, and the God of the whole earth shall he be called, Isaiah 54.5. And of this Prince of Peace it is said, Thy throne O God is for ever and ever, the scepter of thy kingdom is a right scep∣ter, thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness; there∣fore God thy God hath anointed thee with the oyl of gladness above thy fellows, Psalm 45.6,7. And according to this the Apostles declare of Christ the Lord, that he is God; for they were not, nor did not hold any thing in contradiction to what God hath declared by the Pro∣phets, and what is declared of God in the Old Testa∣ment, there is nothing contrary thereunto in the New. And as the Holy Spirit was spoken of throughout the Old Testament, so likewise in the New only sometimes called Holy Spirit, sometimes Holy Ghost, which is all one; it being the Breath of God, which is called the River of God, the Streams whereof shall make glad the City of God, the Holy Tabernacle of the most High, Psalm 46.4. Which pure River of Water is said to pro∣ceed out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1. therefore this River giveth Life and maketh glad. Now as there is Figurative Heavens and Earth spoken of in the Old Testament, so there is also in the New; and as there is a Figurative Sea made mention of in the Old Testament, so
likewise in the New; for there is in bothseveral Figurative Expressions which have one and the same meaning, aluding to one and the same thing in both, which I have fully made appear in my Book of the Fi∣gurative Speeches, therefore I shall not insist here up on it. But God did not only speak mystically to Israel concerning Christ's first coming, because for their Sins they might be snared, broken and taken; but the second coming of Christ is also to us now, since we have lost the true meaning of the word, these things appear very mystical in the New Testament to us, that the wicked of the Adopted Seed, whose turn it is now to be snared, broken and taken for God by the Law, and Gospel speaks to them that under it (as I have fully made ap∣pear from the Scriptures in my Book of the Explanation of the New Testament) and they are the World that will be Judged by it, and the Wicked of them that will not live in, Obedience to it, are the World that will be then Condemned by it. The which the Christians not apprehending, they put the Day of Judgment far off, expecting the Fall of Babylon, and the Restoration of Israel to be before the Lord comes, the which will not be till after the Lord comes; as I have fully made appear in the fore-mentioned Book. For Idumea will be the Figurative Heavens with their Hosts that will be destroy∣ed, Isaiah 34.4,8. When Israel is Restored; which Idumea in the Revelation is termed mystical Babylon, and the Figurative Heavens and Elements which will be de∣stroyed, Rev. 6.3,4. And the Heaven and Earth that will pass away, with which are included the rest of the Wicked that know his Laws; for the Covetous Man is said to be an Idolater, as well as he that Worships an Idol, Eph. 5.5. Col. 3.5. And those that walk after the Lust of the Flesh will fall under the Condemnation; for the Wicked shall pe∣rish, and the Enemies of the Lord shall be as the Fat of Lambs, they shall consume, into smoke shall they con∣sume away, Psalm 37.20. And we reckon our
Ene∣miesalways to be them that knows us, and not them that knows us not. And St. Peter's Charge was that they should be mindful of the words that were spoken before by the Holy Prophets, and of the Commandment of us the Apostles, 2 Pet. 3.20. Which was, that they might not be ignorant of the coming of the Lord, which the Scoffers are willfully ignorant that by the word of God the Heavens were of old, and the Earth stand∣ing out of the Water and in the Water; whereby the World that then was being overflowed with Water then perished, verse 5.6. The which World was the World of People, and then they were not distinguished by Heavens and Earth, for then there was no Ruling Pow∣ers but what belonged to Parents over their Children and Families; and therefore alike termed the World, and not the Heavens and Earth As Israel was not termed Heavens and Earth, till they became a Ruling Power and People. So likewise the Heathen when they became a Ruling Power and People, then were they termed a Heavens and Earth, as I have already proved, but in that St. Peter saith, the Heavens and Earth that are now by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto Fire against the Day of Judgment, and perdition of ungodly Men, verse 7. But in that he saith, the same Heavens and Earth which are now are kept in store un∣to Judgment. Therefore he had no reference here to those that were of old; and the Figurative Heavens which was then in the Apostles time, was the Roman Power, by which the Servants of Christ were then op∣prest, and it is the Roman Power which are now like∣wise their Afflictors, and will remain till the Lord comes, and then will they be destroyed with Fire, with the Per∣dition of the rest of the ungodly Men, who knowing the Laws of the Lord will not obey them. And then not only the fore-mentioned Heavens and Earth of People will be burnt up; that is, that pat of the Earth where the
devouring Storm cometh, mentioned, Psalm 11.6. Ʋpon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tsmpest; and then it is the hail will sweep away the refuge of lies, Isaiah 28.17. Whereby it shew∣eth there will be Hail mixed with Fire, as was in Egypt, Exod. 9.23,25. For the Storm of Hail in Isaiah, and the Storm of Fire in the Psalms, hath ts tendency to one and the same time. And this Hail is said to come down on the Forrest, Isaiah 32.19. At which time Israel and the rest of the Nations that are saved will be safe in Israel's Land whilst the Earth is renewing, as I have largly proved in the fore-mentioned Book of the Figurative Speeches. But because the Adopted Seed to whom this is spoken, have 'transgressed the Laws changed the Ordinances, therefore the Curse devou∣reth the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof burned, and few Men left,' Isaiah 24.5,6. That is, few Men will be found Righteous among the fore-mentioned, so as to be left when the other are destroyed; for this Earth of People that has so wilfully offended he Transgressions 'thereof shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall and not rise again,' verse 20. So as in the first Judgment there will be some Sentenced to everlasting Punishment, ac∣cording as the Lord by the Parable declares, Matth. 25.46. And the wilful Opposers of the Truth will like∣wise be raised to receive their Condemnation; for then the Saints will rise to everlasting Life, and some to Shame and everlasting Contempt, Daniel 12.2. For they that neglect the greater Salvation, fall under the greater Condemnation. For then the Heathen Powers of Rome, or otherwise called Heavens that wilfully resist∣ed the Truth, when the Holy Ghost was given for the Confirmation thereof, will rise to receive Punishment, and therefore likewise said to be kept in store, as well as the Heavens of the Christian Rome, which has made Lies their Refuge. For
these sdumean Hea∣vens,or mystical Babylon will be the Heavens that will be on Fire, and the Elements that will melt with fer∣vent heat, of which St. Peter spake. But he saith, neverthelss we according to his promise look for new hea∣vens and a new eaerth, wherein dwelleth Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.12,13. For the Apostles always had their Eye to the Prophesies, as not to teach in contradiction to the Promises. And God saith, Isaiah 65.17,18. For behold I create new heavens and new earth, and the former shall not be remembred, nor come into mind. But be you glad and rejoyce for ever in that which I cre∣ate; for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoycing, and her People a joy. And because God would have us take no∣tice what this is that he here Creates; he therefore saith, Behold I Create Jerusalem a rejoycing, and her People a joy. This is the new Heavens and new Earth that God Created upon the old Foundation, the which is Israel, of which Foundation Christ is the chief corner Stone. And why is it here said that God will Create new Heavens and new Earth; because they are such Heavens and such Earth as was never here such before, as to have Righteousness dwelling in them, as will be when Jeru∣salem is made a rejoycing, and her People a joy. For when Christ first came, the ruling Power was not gi∣ven him, though he had then Righteousness dwelling in him and it is said these Heavens came down from above, Isaiah 45.8. Drop down ye heavens from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness, let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together, I the Lord have created it. This Righteousness the Lord Creates when he comes down with all his Saints, which are the Heavens that comes from above; then will he pour down Righteousness, and then the Earth of his People will bring forth Salvation, and then Salvation and
Righteousness will spring up together.For the Covenant is to them and their Children, and to as many of us as are found in our Obedience, and in that day God will appoint Salvation for Walls and Bul∣warks, Isaiah 26.1. Thus the Prophets and Apostles agree that Salvation will be when the times of Refresh∣ing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.19,21,22. And Christ saith, Search the scriptures, for they were they that dd testifie of him, John 5.39. And then there was no other Scriptures but the Old Testa∣ment. Now all Christ's Sufferings being fulfilled in the plain Letter of the Word, and left us upon Record ever to believe the same. And as in the Word it is Prophe∣sied that Israel should be scattered, so we evidently see the same; and we ought also, and are bound to believe all the great Prophesies and Promises relating to Christ's second coming, that they will be performed in the plain Letter of the Word, and as it was Prophesied that God would pour forth his Spirit, Joel 2.28,29. Of which St. Peter saith, It was made good to them in that time, Acts 2.16,17,18 Which was for the Confirmati∣on of the Gospel, and as an earnest of their Inheri∣tance in time to come, or Restitution. Before which time, as in Joel 2.30,31. God will shew wonders in heaven and in earth, blood and fire, and pil∣lars of smoke, which accordingly has come to pass, for by wars much blood hath been spilt. And the Lord in a great and wonderful manner hath sent out of the earth fire and pillars of smoke for these many hundred years, but much more of late. And it is said, verse 31. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. This came to pass when the Nations which had embraced the Faith came to have no love to the Truth, God then gave them up to Delusion, 2 Thess. 2.10,11. For when the people could not
endure sound doctrin, but after their own lusts they didheap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they turned away their ears from the truth, and were turned un∣to fables, 2 Tim. 4 3,4. And when the Seducers and false teachers went about to deceive, they then became de∣ceived, ch. 3.12,13. For God doth never so punish without a cause, Eze. 14.23. And then was the Sun turned into darkness; for in the Scriptures the Teach∣ers are termed the Light of the World, and when the Sun the Teachers were darkned, the Moon which is the World of People which receiveth her Light from the Teachers, as the Moon doth her Light from the Sun, the People were soon turned into Blood, by ha∣ting and killing one another. The Pope and his Cler∣gy pretending to be the true Church, Mahomet the true Prophet, and every Sect the right Remnant; and thus the Prince of Darkness carries on his Designs, in setting Men to hate and kill one another through these Divisi∣ons. (Now in that Prophesie of Scripture is of more than a private Interpretation, 2 Pet. 1.20. But we must be sure to put no other Interpretation on it, but what we can make plain from the Word. And in Joel 3.15. It is also said, The sun and moon shall be darkned, and the stars shall withdraw their shining. Here the Prophet may have a Reference to the material Sun, Moon and Stars, which by the Glorious Appearing of the Lord will be obscured by his Brightness. But when the Nations came to have no love to the Truth, God suffered a Spirit of a strong Delusion to go forth, 2 Thess. 2.11. For God hath determined, that those that will not deny themselves for him shall suffer by him; for unto them that are contentions, and will not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath upon every soul of man that doth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; but glory honour and peace to every man that work∣eth good, to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentile, Rom. 2.8,9,10. For there will be a Redemption in time to come, for all that order their Conversation aright, and have not been wilful Opposers of the Truth, which is one of the worst of Unrighteousnesses. And though it is those who comes in Heirs to the Promises made to the Fathers that are made partakers of the greater Glory, yet there is Glory and Salvation for others of a lower degree. And though the Jews that have been since Christ's time were cast off for the Sins of their Parents, yet not for ever and ever to be forgotten of God, without their own Sins does occasion it; for there will be a Re∣demption in time to come for some; and if Israel for the Sin of their Parents has been left to stumble on the dark Mountains these seventeen hundred years, no won∣der if the Adopted Seed has been left to stumble thereon for above this thousand years. For it is Israel, who as touching the Election, is beloved for their Fathers sake, Rom. 11.28. For though there was but a Remnant chosen from among them that were chosen according to the Election of Grace, verse 5. Yet they were all Gods chosen and elected People for their Fathers sake, Isaiah 45.4. And this God did because he loved their Fathers, because they had walked with a perfect Heart before him. The which, when the Lord proved Israel in the Wilderness they did not. And therefore the Lord saith, Deut. 31.21. For I know their imaginations which they go about, even now before I have brought them into the land. Here because God would have us take notice when it was he knew it; therefore he redoubles his Words, and saith, even now at the time when they were in the Wilderness. But we do never read of God's foreknowing his Drowning of the World, till he saw the Wickedness of Man was great, and then it was that it grieved him at his Heart that he had made Man; but God's choosing Israel was for their Fathers sake, and not that he had Elected
them without a why or a where∣fore;but when God had proved and tryed Israel in the Wilderness, and as they had there often miscarried; God saw they would again fall away, for which he de∣termined to leave them to Blindness; the like God fore∣seeing that the Gentiles would fall away, for which he determined to leave them to Delusion. For as of old when the People fell away, Rom. 1.18,20,21. the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all un∣godliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made even his eternal power and godhead; so that they were without excuse, because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkned, verse 28. And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind. So we see Man's not improving his Day of Grace, has been his Destructi∣on all along; and not that they had not a Day of Grace given them; and it is such that God gives up to Delusi∣on, that first deceives and deludes themselves, Ezek. 14.7. And like not to retain God in their knowledge, but in the way of well doing, we may commit the keeping of our souls unto God, as unto a faithful creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. Now St. Paul speaking of the Creation of the World, in the fore-going Words, Rom. 1.20. makes menti∣on of it as such, and not as the Foundation of the World. And all the Apostles in all their Writings, agree in cal∣ling the Twelve Tribes the Foundation of the World to come. And likewise Zachariah the Priest said, God hath raised up a Horn of Salvation in the House of his Servant David. Here he doth not say that this was Prophesied of from the Foundation of the World, but by all the Holy Prophets since the World began, Luke 1.69,70. That he would raise up a horn of salvation in the house of his servant David.
And in David and Solo∣monwas the Typical Kingdom of Christ. And after Da∣vid had received the Kingdom, God by the Prophet, said, His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me, Psalm 89.36. This ever, is the ever of the time to come, the which all the Prophets Prophesied of from David till Christ came; but no Prophet Prophesied that this Salvation should come out of the House of David, be∣fore David was, and had received the Kingdom. But we not apprehending the difference between the Creation and Foundation, nor the beginning of this World to come, has cast us into most dangerous Mistakes; for thereby we have received another Faith, than what the Gospel teacheth, in thinking none but the Elect can be saved, and that some thereby have thought they should be sa∣ved by the Righteousness of Christ, contrary to the Words of Christ, which are upon the condition of their O∣bedience, which will prove destructive, if unrepented of. Likewise we have another Hope than what the Scripture Teacheth; for by our Predecessors falling in∣to Popery, we have lost the form of sound words, as they were first delivered; and to maintain our receiv∣ed mistaken Notions we must not believe what God hath declared, promised and sworn to. And this out of pretence of justifying God's Wisdom, which some say doth greatly consist in God's sore-knowing all the Wick∣edness of the Devil and Man from all Eternity; where∣by they make God the first conceiver of it; and like∣wise with such approbation, as some say, as he did not only suffer it, but decreed it to be committed; which is so quite contrary to the Holy God, as the thoughts thereof are to be abhorred, it being Blasphemy for to think it, for he hath absolutely declared against it. For it was after God saw that Man had corrupted his Way, it repented him that he had made Man upon the Earth, and God said it griewed him at his heart, Gen. 6.6. Now whether it is right
in the sight of God, to believe Manrather than God, judge ye, Acts 4.19. And that God that is an unchangeable Being, in Holiness, Wis∣dom, Justice, Goodness and Truth, which are his pro∣per Attributes, and therefore impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6.18. For God is not a man that he should lie, neither the Son of Man that he should Repent; that is, when God hath absolutely promised, a Blessing, he will certainly perform it, as it is here declared. Hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good? Numbers 23.19. And we are to believe of God in every thing, as he hath declared of himself; to be moved to pity upon Man's Repenting and Returning, and to Anger and Wrath upon Man's Rebellion; and of certain, God will never be angry with any for believing what he saith, or hath promised or sworn to. And the Prophet for believing what another Prophet told him, in contra∣diction to what God had declared to him, a Lyon met him and Slew him, 1 Kings 13.17,18,24. And as the Faith of Abraham was set down for our Example, so this was Recorded for our warning, that we might not believe Man in contradiction to God. Now Christ and the Apostles being rightly understood, are found to agree with the Words of God and the Prophets; and the Care of the Apostles was such, as to compare spiritual things with spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2.13. To see if the Spirit spake in them agreeably to what the Spirit spake in the Prophets of old, that thereby no Delusion or Deceiver might creep in among them; for God did never send his Son, and the Servants of his Son, to contradict what he himself hath declared, promised and sworn to. XVI. The Glory and Blessedness that will be in time to come. For the Lord will come to judge the Nations in the val∣ley of Jehosaphat, and restore his People Israel, Joel
3.1,2,12,13,16,17,18 and then it is the Lord will make MountSion and eternal excellency, and the joy of many Gene∣rations, Isaiah 60.15. And then it is his people shall be all righteous, and inherit the land for ever. Then it is a little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation, the Lord will hasten it in his time, Isaiah 60.21,22. Here the Lord sheweth there will be another time after this time, in which his People will be blessed; against which time St. Paul ordereth Timo∣thy, that he should charge them that are rich in this world, that they be rich in good works, laying up for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, 1 Tim. 6.17,18. And sure if we were not blind, we could not think that all that are Rich in this World are Elected; but that by doing good Works, all may lay hold of eternal Life, 'for Christ is become the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him,' Heb. 5.9. Whether Elect or not Elect, but those that remain blind, now God has made plain his Word, is because they have no desire to see; but whether some will see or not, it is in the time to come that God will make that promised new e∣verlasting Covenant with his People, and put his laws in their inward parts, and write them in their hearts, and they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, know ye the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them, saith the Lord, Jer 31.33,34. And in that day the Lord will make a covenant for them with the beast of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground, and then will the Lord break the bow, the sword, and the battel out of the earth. And then will the Lord betroth Israel to him for ever in righteousness, in judgment, in loving kindness and in mercy, Hos. 2.18,19. And then the days of his People shall be the age of a Tree, and then it is the Meek shall inherit the Earth, and delight themselves in the abundance of Peace, and then it is the evil Beasts will cease out of the Land, Ezekiel 34.25.
Now this Covenant, some have blindly imagined that it is made with them, although they do not find any of those things here promised made good to them. Such like Ephraim feed on Wind, but the Lord will esta∣blish this promised Covenant when he Reigns in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients Glori∣ously, Isaiah 24.23. Which will be when he gathers his wheat into his garner, and burns up the chaff with unquench∣able fire; which is at the time when he will judge the nations in the valley of Jehosaphat, and at the time when the Saints are raised, which are called the first resurrection, Rev. 20. And then will the new Jerusalem come down out of heaven from God, and be placed in the elementary Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. This is the tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man, Heb. 8.2. The pavement of which is of pure gold, as it were transparent glass, through which the glorious Saints will then shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their fa∣ther, Matth. 13.43. And when this 'World is become the Kingdom of our God and of his Christ,' Rev. 11.15. 'Then will it become the Kingdom of their Father, and 'then, in the ages to come, God will shew forth in them the exceeding Riches of his Grace,' Eph. 2.7. That they 'should be to the praise of his Glory that first trusted in Christ,' Eph. 1.12. And likewise all that overcome and 'keep his Works to the end, shall sit with Christ in his Throne,' Rev. 3.21. For the Glorious Tabernacle will be Christ's Throne, as the Heaven of Heavens is God's Throne, and this Glorious Tabernacle, is the Tabernacle or Covert spoken of in Isaiah, which the Lord will place over all the Assemblies of Israel, when he cleanseth their Blood, Isaiah 4.4,5,6. which he hath not yet cleansed, Joel 3.21. And the Glory of the Saints in this glorious Tabernacle, the Apostle had a Refe∣rence to, when he said, 'God hath provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect,' Heb. 11.40.
And the glorious Saints Perfectionwill not be till Israel receives the Promises; for when the Lord comes again, the dead Bodies of the Saints will be Raised, and then under Christ their Head, will be given to them their ruling Power upon Earth, Rev. 5.10. For then they will with Christ Descend from the glorious Tabernacle, as the Lord formerly did in the Cloudy Pillar to the Tabernacle in the Wilderness; so likewise will the Lord Descend upon the real Mount Zion, which the Lord will make an eternal excellency, and the joy of many generations, Isaiah 60.15. And then will the Lord destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations; for then he will take away the sting of death from all his people, which is sin, and the rebuke of his peo∣ple shall he take away from off all the earth, Isaiah 25.7,8. But when Christ first came, he was laid in Zion as a stumbling stone, and thereby a Vail was cast upon the Face of Israel, and they were made the Rebuke of all the Heathen. But when the Lord again coes, he will then take away the covering off of all faces, and the rebuke of his people from off all the earth; and then his people Israel will be all righteous, and inherit the land for ever, Isaiah 60.20,21. For the Lord hath said, he will gather them out of all countries, and will plant them in this land assuredly, with my whole heart, and with my whole soul, Jer. 32.37,38,39,40,41. And at the time of the Judgment of this World it is, that unto the Son of God will be gi∣ven dominion and a kingdom, that all people, nations and languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting do∣minion which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, Dan. 7.14 And then shall be the end of the Wicked of this World, when the son of man shall send his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them that do iniquity, Matth. 13.40,41. Therefore it is clear, according to the Word of
the Lord,in Daniel 7.27. That this Kingdom which shall be gi∣ven, is under the whole Heaven, from whence 'those that Offend, and them that do Iniquity will be gathered out, and cast into a Furnace of Fire after the Lord comes,' and the Angel flies in the midst of heaven, having the e∣verlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come, and worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters, Rev. 14.6,7. And then will Israel and the Heathen Nations that know not God be called in, which will be after the Lord comes, and just before Babylon's Fall, Rev. 14.1,8. And this was the Kingdom that St. Peter's Endeavour was, that the Elect Remnant to whom he Wrote, might be able after his decease to have these things always in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.11,12,13,15. This is the World to come, of which St. Paul speaks of, Heb. 2.5. And this is the Kingdom the Angel told the bles∣sed Virgin of, that Christ should reign over the house of Ja∣cob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1.33. But this Kingdom will not be, until the times of Refreshing shall come from the Presence of the Lord, and then 'tis that the kingdom and dominion, and the great ness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the saints of the most high, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7.27. When the Lord taketh to him∣self his own great Power, and Reigneth; the which will be when the seventh Angel soundeth, Rev. 11.15,16,17. And then it is that the Raised Saints will like∣wise Reign under Christ their Head, Chap. 5.10. And then to Israel and the People under them will be given the Kingdom, they being the People of the Saints of the most High.
Phil. 1.10. And that ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be Sincere, and without Of∣fence till the day of Christ. XVII. Who they were that were made able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. AND whereas the Apostle saith, 2 Cor. 3.5,6. 'Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God;' that is, without God we can do nothing, 'for in him we live, move and have our being,' Acts 17.28. And if he take away our breath, we dye; but as God hath made us Rational Souls, and given us his Law, so as to understand thereby his Will in his Word, and God by so doing has made us capable to do something; but in that he saith, verse 6. God hath made them able ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit; for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life. Now the Apo∣stles received their Knowledge immediately from the Lord Christ, and also of the Spirit, for the Holy Ghost was given to be in them, by which they also under∣stood things to come; and by the Spirit they were made able Ministers, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for all the Gentiles when they were first to be called in, had he then Preach'd the Letter of the Law to them, they then had thereby all been Condemned. But the Apo∣stles were upon the first Publication of the Gospel, to Preach Remission of Sins by Christ, to every one that would turn from their evil way, and by that turn they were to live in obedience to the Letter of the Word. And in that he saith they were made able Ministers of the New Testament; was in that the Holy Ghost was then given as a Witness to their Testimony, to con∣firm the Truth of their Word, and likewise they did Ad∣minister the Spirit; for the laying on the Hands of the Apostles, the People received the Holy
Ghost,Acts 19.6. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came on them, and they spake with tongues and prophesied. So also, Acts 8.17. But should any Man now pretend to Preach such Doctrin of Ad∣ministring the Spirit, and not the Letter of the Word, the People had good reason to believe that Man was out of his Senses. But some have given such a turn to these Words of the Apostle, from hence pretending they are not to take the plain Letter of the Word as it is spoken, but according to the Spiritual Interpretation which they have put upon it; the which has been according to their own Fancy. And so by leaving the plain Letter of the Word in what God hath declared, promised, and sworn to, are thereby fallen into these great and dangerous Mi∣stakes; for the Scripture admits of no other Spiritual Meaning, than what is there specified; which is, that we perform not the Letter or practical part of the Word to be seen of Men, but in sincerity of Heart, so as to Worship God in Spirit and Truth. But in the Word there are many Figurative Speeches, which admits of no other Interpretation than what can be made out from the Word, leaving nothing therein to contradict what we say. And likewise some have got another way to uphold their false received Notions, which is, that God speaks after the manner of Men, and according to Man's Understanding; and if so, how doth any Man dare to open another ay for Man to understand of God, than what God thought fit for Man's Understanding? But there is no such thing said of God throughout the Word, but St. Paul to the Covenant, said, that he spake after the manner of ; though it be but a Man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no Man disanulleth, it Gal. 3.15. But our Reformers had done well, if they had said there was a great Secret in the Word, which as yet they understand not, and that it was not to be medled with till the Lord did give more Light,
ac∣cordingto his Promise, before the time of the end; and not to have set the Scriptures by their mistaken Interpre∣tations, at an unreconcileable Difference, as they have done; or it would have been much better to have thought that when the False Teachers had ingross'd the Word into their own Hands, that they might have put in some words to make the New Testament appear to contradict the Old, in what God had positively Pro∣mised and Sworn to therein; seeing that God had in∣trusted Man with the Word for his Posterity, as Adam was intrusted with Eternal Life for his Posterity; the one being forbidden to Eat of the Tree, and the other, that they should neither add to, nor diminish from the Word, Gen. 2.16,17. Deut. 4.2. Rev. 22.18,19. But as a Reverend and Worthy Dr. said, That when the Reformers first came out of Popery, they did plainly see that the Papists were wrong, but they themselves did not understand how to come right; and indeed, in losing the true meaning of the Word, it was a hard matter so to do. But now God according to his Promise, has caused Light to break forth at Evening time, Zach. 14.7. And has removed the occasion of Mistakes, that thereby Knowledge might be increased, whereby the God of Truth is made plainly appear to speak Truth, as he is Truth, and that he will do in all things accord∣ing as he has said; who having employed and enabled a weak Worm to vindicate his Truth and Justice to the Glory of his Name, and the Comfort of Mankind. Now such as will stand up to vindicate their false received Notions, thereby to make the God of Truth, a Lyar, let them take what will follow for their Pains; I am sure that the honest Heart will be glad that the Truth of God's Word is made plain, and his Honour therein Vin∣dicated. I understand that some of the Honourable of the Clergy of the Church of England are well-wishers to the Truth, and the
soundest in the common Faith, (inthe Knowledge of which is our Interest) are part of the French Protestants, part of the Church of England, the Danish and Swedish Ministers, and the Baptists that ac∣knowledge that Christ Died for the World; I am not to speak for Favour or Affection, but as the Truth is in Je∣sus according to the Gospel. A Papist told me that the Church of England gave the Sacrament as the Body and Blood of Christ, the which I denied, for though they give indeed the Bread and Wine in the words of Christ; yet they do not give it as his real Body, but as his Figurative Body, as Christ did when he was setting whose with them at the Table; for the Lord was no otherwise broken in the Sacrament, than he was Slain in the Paschal Lamb, yet he was said to be Slain in that Sacrifice; but what great Mistakes has it caus'd the Christians to be in, because they and we have lost the right Apprehension of the Scripture way of speaking. XVIII. An account of the Lord's five times Hiring La∣bourers into his Vincyard. WHereas the Lord saith, Matth. 20.1,2. 'The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Man that is an Housholder, which went out early in the Morning to Hire Labourers into his Vineyard, and when he had a∣greed with the Labourers, he sent them into his Vine∣yard.' In the first place we are to take notice by the Comparison, that every time the Lord hired Labourers to work in his Vineyard, he came forth from Heaven and Hired them, that is, Agreed or Covenanted with them himself, as with Noah, and likewise with Abra∣ham, and also with Israel in the Wilderness; and so Christ when he Established the Gospel, the Agreement was, that all that were Hired were to Work in the Vine∣yard, and to have a Reward for their Labour. And at the last time when the Lord comes forth, which will be
at the eleventh Hour, them that he then calls in at the last Hour to Labour in his Vineyard, will be Israel when he again comes, who then will be brought home by Repentance, when 'they see him whom they Pierced,' Zach. 12.10. 'For then shall they come with Weep∣ing and with Supplications,' Jer. 31.9. 'And then will the Lord cause them to walk in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble,' verse 9. For then will the Lord Establish his now promised new everlasting Covenant, and then will the Labourers in the Vineyard be alike Rewarded, being made Partakers of one and the same Covenant, the which will Crown life to the Soul. But let not the Christians be offended at that, but let them remember, that when Israel for Sin was cast out, then were the Sinners of the Gentiles taken in, because they had not Sinned against that Light the o∣thers did; for the Lord was a light to lighten the Gentiles, (before he was to be) the glory of his people Israel, Luke 2.32. And therefore here the Gentiles are put down in the first place; and whereas it is said in the Gospel, the Lord will come in the last day, because to us that are under the Gospel, it will be our last day; for we shall not then be called to work in the Vineyard, for we are then to be brought to Judgment, and then them that are found in their Obedience, will be made partakers of the Promises, and the Wicked among them Condemned in Judgment to e now threatened Punishments; but for the Christians that have not opposed the Truth, and have not  guilty of the Sins of the Times, yet have not a Suplative Love to the Lord Jesus, as is required in a well grounded Faith, according to the Promise; such will be left out, and not be numbred with them with whom the everlasting Covenant will then be esta∣blished when the Lord returns and builds again the taber∣nacle of David which is fallen, that the residue of men may seek after the Lord, and all the
Gentiles upon whom his nameis called, Acts 15.16.17. The word all in Scripture, doth not include the whole, and herein are not included the Gentiles that belong to the everlasting Covenant, neither them that fall under the threatned Condemna∣tion. And the Apostle had here his Reference in this Text to the word of the Lord, Amos 9.11,12. In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David, that they may possess the remnant of Edom, and all the Heathen which are call'd by my name. This all is spoken as aforesaid, after the good are secured, and the bad Condemned; for the Lord will save the Tents of Judah first, Zach. 12.7. That is, the Remnant, with all that are found in their Obedience to Christ, by which they come in as Heirs to the Promises by the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. For were it not so, the House of David would be the Head of the House of Judah, verse 9. Now whereas it is said, that the residue of Men might seek after the Lord, and the Gentiles upon whom his Name is called; the which must be those Gentiles whom Christ compares to the foo∣lish Virgins, who though they were Virgins, so as not to be guilty of the Sins of the times; yet for want of a sound or right Faith upon which the promised Blessedness depends; the Lord therefore then saith he knows them not, Matth. 25 12. And so those that were, and might have been first, will then become last; for the Heathen are plac'd before them, and so will the Word of the Lord then be fulfilled, that the last shall be first, and the first last, Matth. 19.9.30. That is, the Gentiles that received the Gospel, they were first, and Israel last; but when Christ again, comes, Israel shall be then first, and those under the Gospel, which have been as foolish Virgins, shall be last; for then those Gentiles all that come not in to have a share in the everlasting Cove∣nant, will be then given to be Servants to Israel, and Servants to them that are Israel's Servants, Joel 3.8. And when Satan is bound, and
afterwards loosed again,their Off-spring lies liable to Satan's Temptations, by whom they being deluded, will then be miserably taken off, Ezek. 28.22. Rev. 20.9. And the Lord fore∣seeing the sad Condition the Christians would be in that are found unprepared for his coming; therefore the Lord charged them to be upon their Watch, as that day might not overtake them at unawares. And God hath promised that knowledge should be increased at the time of the end, Dan. 12.4,9. And at Evening time it should be light, Zach. 14.7. For the vision is for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie, though it tar∣ry, wait for it, because it shall surely come, Hab. 2.3. The knowledge of this Vision the Christians ought to have retained, but being lost, God now of his great Mercy according to his Promise hath again brought to light; the which Vision we are now to wait for; or how will Israel's Constancy in waiting for the Promises made to their Fathers appear for an Evidence to Condemn us who were to have a share with them in those Promises? for the Door that is now open to all that will lay hold of the offered Mercy to come in Heirs to the promised Covenant will then be shut to the Gentiles, and the wick∣ed Christians will then be Condemned; for then will be the last day of the Gospel Institution, and likewise the last day of the Power of this wicked World, so as their time will be no longer. And why is it foretold that Is∣rael's Return should be in the latter days, Hosea 3.5. And their Glory then when the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains; God thereby shewing that their blessed time was a great distance off; for the Gospel Institution was to come in between, and be ended before their blessed time would be, which was a Secret hid in God from the Fathers, how the Gentiles or true Christians should be brought in Heirs with Israel; for it was but darkly Prophesied by the Prophets. But when the appointed time that the
Lord had determined for the Gentile Power, and Gospel Institution, and that their time should be no longer than till the Lord cometh, who is represented to stand upon the Sea, and upon the Earth, Rev. 10.5,6. But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God shall be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the Prophets, verse 7. For then will this whole Mystery of God be compleated; for the Saints will then be raised, and then Israel will remain no longer scattered. So accordingly it is said, Dan. 12.7. When he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people; all these things shall be finished; and again, hi∣therto is the end of the matter, Dan. 7.28. Of this Vision, which did appertain to this Mystery, which has to this day been hid from Israel. And Daniel heard, but understood not; therefore said, O my Lord what shall be the end of these things? And the Lord said, go thy way Daniel, for the words are closed up and sealed till the time of the end, verse 8.9. And the Disciples asked the Lord why he spake to the Jews in Parables; the Lord said to them, It is given unto you to know the mysteries of the king∣dom of heaven, but to them it is not given, Matth. 13.10,11. For indeed this Kingdom of Heaven, or Heavenly Kingdom, is a great Mystery, which when the Christians had lost the knowledg of this Secret, it was then to remain a Secret till the time of the end; and now is the time the Lord will have it Revealed, and they that desire spiritual Wisdom shall understand it. Dan. 12.10. And the Lord will first come in the Clouds of Heaven, before the last or seventh Angel sound∣eth, Matth. 24.31,32. And the Saints that are under the Altar receive white Robes, Rev. 6.9. In which they will accompany the Lord into the world be∣fore their Bodies are raised, and then will the Nations know the two
Witnesses, which now they understandnot. And all this is to be after the Lord comes, and before the seventh Angel soundeth, Rev. 11.15. And when the seventh Angel sounded, there were great Voices in Heaven, Saying, the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. And the Saints receiving their Bodies at the sound of the last or seventh Trumpet, (1 Cor. 15.52.) the Elders fell upon their faces and worship∣ed God, Rev. 11.16. But our Predecessors having lost the right Apprehension of these things, by reason of the Apostacy; so as they that came after did not under∣stand how God could make his Promise good to the rais∣ed Saints, in providing Mansions in the Heavens for them in that Tabernacle which the Lord shall pitch, and not Man; at which time the Lord will restore Israel to their own Land. Likewise, then God will make good his Word concerning the Heathen, so as all the Families of the Earth shall be blessed in Christ, after the wilfully Wicked are Condemned, accordingly as God hath threatened that he would send his Angel and gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, as I have fully proved. For God by the Law and Gospel, speaks but to them that are under it, and they are the World, and Heavens and Earth that will be Condemned by it, Isaiah 34. Chap. 24 5,6. For transgressing the laws, changing the ordinances, breaking the everlasting covenant, therefore the curse devoureth the earth; that is, the Earth upon whom the Curse falls for the Offences. For the Ordinances which St. Paul would have the Church keep, as they were delivered unto them, 1 Cor. 11.2. God by this Prophet declares they have changed. And in Ezekiel 34.18. it is said, they have eaten the good Pastures, which must be those Ordinances which Isaiah saith they have changed; that is, put them away, and made new ones in their room; that is, new Articles of Faith, new Church Government, new ways of Admi∣nistring
the Sacraments; in all these things the Romish Church is horribly out of the way, besides all their other Abominations; and likewise others as to some of these things will be found dangerously out of the way, for treading down with their Feet the Residue of their Pastures, and also fouling of the deep waters with their feet, so as the flock eat that which they have trod∣den with their feet, and drink that which they have fouled with their feet, verse 18.19. This place, and the fore∣mention'd Chapters of Isaiah, have peculiar Referen∣ces to the second coming of Christ to Judgment, at which time he will Judge between Cattel and Cattel, and the Rams and the hee Goats, v. 17. And then the Lord will feed his Sheep himself, so as then they shall no more be a prey when he is Prince among them, verse 22.23,24. and the offending Shepherds will God then feed with Judgment. But after the Teachers of the Romish Church had changed the Ordinances, or eaten the good Pastures, or, as the Lord saith, hid the Talent; they thereby made way to set up their own Institutions, and so transgressed the Laws, and brake the everlasting Covenant; for the moral Law is an everlasting Covenant, Isaiah 24.5. as well as the new Covenant, when Established, will be an everlasting Covenant to them with whom it is E∣stablished; for the old Covenant will only then be done away as a conditional Covenant, as now it is; for the Lord will then give an inherent perfect Righteousness to all with whom that Covenant will then be made, as thereby they shall be enabled perfectly to keep the mo∣ral Law; for then God will magnifie the Law, and make it Honourable, Isaiah 42.21. But when the Nations came to have no love to the Truth, and their Rulers would not any longer be holden with the Cords of the Laws of the Lord, according as it was Prophesied of, Psalm 2. Then God permitted the
Prince of Darknessto hoist up the Beast, an Instrument whom Satan had prepared for his purpose, who thought to change times and laws, and they were given into his hands till the day of judgment, and then shall his dominion be taken away, Dan. 7.25,26. But God all along preserved the Law, and the Testimony of the Prophets safe in the Hands of the Jews, whom he scattered throughout the World, that they might be a Light to the World in the cloudy and dark Day, when the Beast had deprived the Nations of the rest of the Scriptures; and the Christians knowing that Christ was come, and that the Ceremo∣nial Law was Abolished, and that Christ was that great Sacrifice that had made an Attonement for Sins that were past, for all those that would walk in Obedience to the rest of God's Laws and Commands and Precepts, that Christ would then compleat their sincere Endea∣vours, (they not forgetting Baptism and the Lord's Supper.) For all the Prophets as they declare Christ first coming to Suffer, so also they declare that he will come again to Judge and Reign. And in the way of well-doing, God has declared by the Prophets, that we may stay our selves upon his Promises, in that he will shew his Salvation to all that walk uprightly by their improving the Day of Grace whilst it was in their Hands, that they might not be hardned through the Deceitful∣ness of Sin, by accustoming themselves therein; which had the Christians taken heed to the Law and to the Prophets, herein they could have been very little out of the way; 'for whosoever speaks not according to the Law and the Testimony of the Prophets, it is because there is no light in them, Isaiah 8.20. But many be∣ing deceived by the Popish Idolatrous Worship, and with their pretended Pardons; and also many others by trust∣ing to an Election, that to themselves they have Fram∣ed; and others by expecting to be saved by the Righte∣ousness of Christ,
contrary to the words of Christ,which is in the way of their sincere Obedience; where∣by Millions of poor Christians being thus deluded, are a∣sleep in security, by which miserable mistaken Notions the generality of the Christians are become worse than Heathens. Which if they are not well awakened and brought off of their sandy Foundation, the generality of the Protestant Christians, as well as the Papist, will cry out of their Leanness, the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously, Isaiah 24.16. when they find themselves wanting, both of sound Knowledge and good Fruit when their Destruction cometh. And let all that have pretended to be God's pecu∣liar and elect People when they are not; consider what it is to Exalt themselves into that Station or Place into which God hath not put them, by the Example of them that so did, and were destroyed for so doing, Numb. 16. For did either God or Christ ever threaten Damnation to any that did not think themselves Elected? Or did they only promise Salvation to them that were Elected? Sure we find no such thing in the Word of God, but the promised eternal Salvation, both in the Old and New Testament, is to them that obey him, fear before him, walk uprightly, and fervently love him and believe his Word, and cannot think that he will be false, or a Deceiver; but that God will per∣form his Promise to all according to his Word; and according to his Word it will be that the Transgressors under the Law and Gospel, will fall under the threatned Condemnation. For the Gentiles as well as the Jews, when their Prophets and Rulers, which are their Seers, became weary of the Ways or Laws of the Lord, one was left to Blindness, the other to Delusion; by which we may see the Word of God made good in both, and in the New Testament the Teachers are likewise called Prophets, 2 Cor. 11.4. And it is said, Isaiah 29.10. The Lord hath poured out upon
you the spirit of deep sleep,and hath closed your eyes, the Prophets and your Rulers; the Seers hath he covered, and the vision of all is become unto you, as the words of a book that is sealed. Now in that this Vision is termed the Vision of all; therefore it hath its chief Reference to Christ's second coming, the which is set down to be a Vision, and that at the end it should speak, Hab. 2.3. The which both Jews and Christians were commanded to wait for. But because the Rulers and Teachers of both were the first occasion of laying the World in Darkness, therefore God hath declared he hath covered them, so as this Vision they were not to be the first discoverers of. And though doubtless when Christ first came, there were some good Rulers and good Priests among them, so I hope there are many more a∣mongst us Christians now. But God by bringing out the Truth in an unexpected way, doth thereby carry on the Counsel of his own Will, which is never without a Reason; and God saith he knoweth the proud afar off. And therefore that such may be snared, he brings to light the Knowledge of his Truth by an unexpected Hand; by reason of which, some had rather go without the Know∣ledge of the Truth, than so receive it. But let the Wise in Heart consider it, that the Ignorant by their Example may come out of their Mistakes now God has made the Vision clear, that the thinking Soul may not be taken in the Snare. For this Vision in Isaiah 29.7. hath its reference to the time to come, when all that have di∣strest Ariel, shall be but as a Dream of a Night Vision, they shall so pass away. And this sealed Vision, spoken of in the 11 verse, is the Vision in the Revelations, which has been Sealed unto us, for we have not understood it; and this Vision which God by the Prophet saith is become Sealed; gives us to understand that it was not always so; for when the Gospel was first Established, this Gospel of the Kingdom was one of
the fundamental Doctrins; who when the Apo∣stleshad first fed their Converts with Milk, they after∣ward fed them with strong Meat, in declaring to them all the Counsel of God, Acts 20.26. But afterward the Chri∣stians did Apostatize from the Truth, and did set up their own Imaginations, and would have in this time a tem∣poral Kingdom of Christ. And when they thus grew weary of the Truth of God's Word, then God Vail'd or covered their Understanding, so as they could not appre∣hend the glorious Kingdom of Christ, which will be here in time to come. And after this the Vision again became Sealed, and then neither the Learned, nor Unlearned could Read it. But God often chuses to shew forth his Power through the weakness of the Instrument, and on that side by whom this Offence was not committed. And those that refuse the Truth, because it comes forth by a Woman, may as well refuse to be saved by Christ, because he came by a Woman. For God carries on his Works in one and the same Method; for as when Israel was brought out of Aegypt to go into the promised Land, the Glory of the Lord was then in the Clouds; so it will be again when the Lord comes, and much more abun∣dantly; and also as Christ first came by a Woman, so a∣gain after the Lord arose, he 'then appeared first to a Women, and likewise when Christ was first brought in to the Temple to be Offered to the Lord, then of all them that had their Abode in the Temple, it was a Woman among them that did there first acknowledge him to be the Redeemer, to such that look for redemption in Israel, Luke 2.38. But that God that carries on his Works in a way of Method, that the thinking Soul may con∣sider it, will not now contradict himself by leaving the Method that he formerly took. And now the Vision is made so plain to any that has a Rational Understanding, that according to the Word, he that runs may Read it; and
therefore we are towait, for at the end it will speak and not lie, Hab. 2.3. And now likewise the Old and New Testament are made to agree, and all the occasions of the Mistakes are removed, that thereby knowledge might be increased at the time of the end, Dan. 12.4. And this now the Lord having made good according to his Word, at the time of the end; the which is a greater Evidence, than if Angels had come from Heaven and declared it, if they had not from the Word made it plain; because we are not to receive any other Doctrin, than what was first taught from the Testimony of Prophets and Apostles; so as had not this been made plain from the Word, it would have appeared another Doctrin, and so not to have been believed, because the evil Angels can Transform themselves into Angels of Light, 2 Cor. 11.14. Gal. 1.8. And we were to receive nothing in contra∣diction to Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.31. But God will carry on his work according to his word. As for any to expect the Spirit to be poured out upon them, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, is a great Mistake, and the Prince of Darkness would gladly perswade any to believe that; for by that belief he keepeth them from preparing themselves, that thereby they may be taken at unawares, for Sa∣tan has many Wiles to deceive poor Souls. For the Christians will not have the Spirit poured out upon them, before the Lord comes to prepare them, no more than Israel had when the Lord first came; for if so, the Lord would not have commanded them to be upon their watch, lest coming suadenly he should find them sleeping. XIX. Christ saying all Power was given of the Father, Ex∣plained. WHereas Christ said after he arose, Matth. 28.18.
All power is given to me in heaven and in earth.That was, he then had paid the purchase of it; and he was then as really assured of it, as though he had it in Possession, having the Promise of God for it. And it is the Scriptures usual way of speaking, to mention things that are to come, as though they were then present. Accordingly God said to Abraham, I have made thee a Father of many Nations, at which time he was not Fa∣ther of one Child. But God having promised, it was certainly to come to pass, and therefore spoken as then done, Gen. 17.5. Rom. 4.17. According to which Christ spake; for it is the World to come that is to be put in subjection unto him, Heb. 2.5. And when the seventh Angel soundeth, then it is the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. When he hath taken to him his own great power, verse 17. I hope the Christians will consider these great Truths, that they may not be found upon a false bottom. For God doth not now compel, but chalk out the way, and leaves Man to chuse, or refuse to obey. But in the day of his Power, he will again pour forth his Spirit; for the first Churches had but a foretast of the earnest of that Inheritance, which his People will partake of when the Lord again comes, World without end. And then his People Israel will be made a willing People, Ps. 110.3. When he removeth the Iniquity of that Land in one day, in that day shall they call every Man under his Vine, and under his Fig-tree, Zach. 3.9,10. Then it is the two Olive-trees, will give out of themselves the Golden Oyl of Grace and Wisdom into the Candlestick that is all of Gold, Chap. 4.2. And then the Lord will make his Church a glorious Church without Spot or Wrinkle, Eph. 5.27. But now the best of Saints are not without Sin, 1 John 1.8. I thought at this time to have given a full Satisfaction who these two Olive∣trees were,
who in the New Testament are termed twoWitnesses, who all along have accompanied the Church or Woman in the Wilderness, who according to Promise had never been deceived by Beast or false Prophet. And these two Witnesses always accompanying her, there∣fore said to be cloathed in Sackcloath, in bearing part of her Afflictions with her; as it was formerly said of Christ; that in all his Peoples Afflictions, he was Afflict∣ed, Isaiah. 63.9. And also it is said, the holy Spirit may be grieved. For these two Olive-trees, which in this time are said to be the two Witnesses, Rev. 11.3,4. and also elsewhere in the Scripture they are often so called; and these two Witnesses we may readily be∣lieve can do all those Miracles, Cited in the 5 and 6 Ver∣ses; whereas it is said in the 8 Verse, their dead Bodies. Now this being spoken of the Remnant, to whom the Lord promised to be with to the end of the World, and that he would send them another Comforter, that should abide with them for ever, as is at large in the Wo∣man Cloathed with the Sun prov'd. And when these Per∣sons become so opprest by the Beast, as Scattered, Im∣prisoned, and Slain, these two Witnesses cannot then by them bear their Testimony against the Evil of Sin, and the Pernicious Idolatrous Worship of the Beast; and thus the two Witnesses are said to be dead, when their Bodies are thus Slain, so as they cannot by them bear their Testimony; whose dead Bodies were again to stand up∣on their Feet. As to what I have here but hinted con∣cerning them, to give some Light herein, I thought to have fully proved, and to have made clearly appear who this fore mentioned Beast is. But having many other things to answer, my time would not permit me, at this present. O that we had but a Heart to consider the greater Truths of God, whose Faithfulness cannot fail, according to his Word; for which blessed be his Name, World without end. Amen. FINIS.
