T465 12800055 94036
THE HELLISH PARLIAMENT Being a COUNTER-PARLIAMENT To this in England, containing the Demonstrative Speeches and Statutes of that Court. Together with the perfect league made between the two hellish Factions the Papists and the Brownists. Printed in the yeare, 1641.
The hellish Parliament. HIs infernall Majesty taking into his hellish con∣sideration the great happinesse that now is to∣wards England, and searing that his deare Children, as well those of the Romish saction, as of the Brownists Sect should have a terrible fall and their erroneous and seditious practises should be laid open: Hee re∣solved (if possible he could, to trouble the felicious proceedings of the Parliament, and to that end ha∣ving long consulted with the subtle Iudges of his in∣fernall Empire, hee purposed to summon a counter Parliament against that in England, and gave order that the most prudent politicke and impious Secta∣ries within the bound of his dominions should bee assembled to debate propound, and propound, con∣cerning divers important and very weightie f∣faires. His minde was quickly fulfilled in such a manner that hee was overjoyed to see such arable company of his very diligentest serants of each faction: Therefore his infernalship to make it ap∣peare how much he pleas'd therewithall bestowed on them a speech in this ungracious manner. Most dearely beloved and adopted Children, it is not unknowne to your hellish ucderstandings what great Thunder-claps have falne upon our right trusty
and wel-beloved servants the Papists in England, by that wonder-working Parliament now assembled, I give you now also to understand, that if there be not some speedy course taken, all will be lost; for as soon as they have done with our deare Servants the Pa∣pists, they will begin with our best beloved sonnes the Brownists. Therefore (as it ever hath beene) so now such is our infernall care of the encrease of our servants, we have assembled this sinfull Synod: Rub therefore your hellish invention, and couragiously worke, striving who shall be forwardest to our (I feare) declining Empire. Let me heare your counsels, and I promise in all your endeavors you shal have my utmost assistance. Then was there a great Hubbub betweene the Pa∣pists and Brownists, concerning precedencie of speech (indeed both are wicked great bawlers) The Papists being the elder Faction, thought of right, prioritie of speech belonged to them. But though the Brownists were the younger Sir Iohns, they were his Infernalships Nursle, most re∣sembling him their Father, and his most dearely be∣loved; therefore they thought they should speake first, yet at last, after much squabling they yeelded. Then silence being commanded, Guy Faulks was chose Speaker for the Papists, and after low obeysance made, he thus began; Most Infernall Emperour, We your obedient sonnes and servants the English Romanists are here prostrate before you, and as du∣tifull servants doe all accord to doe you nocturnall and diurnall service. But (Great Emperour) we can∣not
choose but lament, when we remember the disa∣strous chances that have falne upon our forward in∣tentions. You may remember with what Heroicke stomackes we have complotted for the enlargement of your infernal Empire, as in that fat all yeare, 1588. when with such large summes we negotiated abroad, and at home endeavoured to conquer, for you, that same little angle of the world, England. And in that Memorable yeere, 1605. when we had hatcht such a Giganticke Stratagem, that our Bird was almost ready to breake the shell. And now in 1639. when we had made a breach between the English and Scottish Nations, a more hellish Stratagem then which could not be invented. Behold then with a serious eye, the grand enterprise of your deare children the Romish Faction. And (profound Emperour) doubt not, but as we have heretofore, so we will stirre up all forrain power now at this last cast against the English Parli∣ament, and if that faile, Flectere si nequeo superos Ache∣ronta movebo. Thus ended bold Guy Faulks, and for the Brownists, who d'ye thinke was chose? Samuel How, the most famous and renowned Cobler, who thus began after he had hum'd his hoarse voyce up. Dreadfull Emperour, Your most zealously affected children the Society of Separatists or non-conformists alias Brownists most humble in al reverend & devoted posture, attend your service, and in the name of the whole dispersed tribe, I your zealous child and clyent, doe pronounce the ardent heat that burns in all our brests to effect your perpetrations, and whereas Guy Fauks hath extolled with a wide mouth the endevors of the Romish Fa∣ction, as if we ne'r could paralell them, verily (most
Potent Patron we have exceeded them many wayes; for the Brownists (so trimly and slily) have given such rubs and flaves to your enemies reputations, that (I thinke verily) they'l never recover themselves of the wounds that we have given them. True it is being backt with forraine Princes, they have under∣took great endeavours, but never to any perfection. But we have not feared (alas unarmed) to outcry all danger, with what zeale have delivered your com∣mands my selfe in the Nags-head Taverne neer Cole∣manstreet, some in the fields, some in Country villa∣ges, every one some-where: Had we been furnished with forraine ayde, wee could have done more then ever they would have done. But what neede wee desire other power, since your infernall Majesty doth so stiffely maintaine us. And we will requite your love, and will as we use to doe, in the same slye and slanderous and lying way forge and print any Libels and untruths for the furtherance of your ignoble Empire, and had wee armes to fight withall, wee would sprightfully and spitefully use them. After which arose a second fray betweene either Faction, that their Parliament house had like to afire, so hot were they at it, and Pluto thought verily that hell would have broke loose, but Cerberus hath pro∣claimed silence; Pluto with sterne and angy looke thus spake; What meanes this noise, what meanes these angry threatnings? such lookes ye ought to shew mine e∣nemies; this is not the way to inlarge, but destroy my Empire; Contention overthrowes the greatest
States; therefore brethren-like ioyne hands against the common foe. You see how the Parliament of England shakes us so much, that if you doe not bestir your selves we shall be quite undone, then they all imbraced mutually; So, this is well done, hence goodwill doubly redound to us and our, which is your Kingdome. Then they craved instructions which they said should be as absolute Statutes of that their most hellish Parliament; to which Pluto most ioy∣fully accorded. Then Rhadamanthus presented their hellish wor∣ships with these Acts following; 1. That there be a strong and perfect league of friend∣ship betwixt his infernall maiesties servants the Papists and Brownists. 2. That they should crosse, as much as in them lay, all good proceedings of the English Parliament. 3. That the Papists should excite forraine Potentates against the said Kingdome. 4. That the Brownists should strow all libels about, especi∣ally such as tend to the disgrace of learning, his infernalship being an utter enemy to all sound literature. 5. That the Brownists beare up, relieve, and maine∣taine all contrivers of such libels, such as KNAVE RE∣VILER HELL. 6. That Iohn Taylor the Water-Poet be declared an open enemy to his Infernalship and both the Factions.
THus wicked Satan hath a double way, To worke his ends to hinder his decay, His Agents are so many and so wicked bent, They care not for the truth so they'r not shent If that the Lions skin will doe no good, They'l soone put on the cunning Foxes hood, England repent, and for this Parliament pray, Sith th'Devill strives to hurt thee every way. FINIS.
