T773 12392588 61023
TERRIBLE NEVVES FROM YORK: DECLARING The barbarous Actions of the Cavaliers at Yorke, in plundering the houses, seizing the goods, and imprisoning the persons of those Citizens that refuse to contribute money to maintaine a War against the Parliament, having already plundered above twenty Citizens houses, and imprisoned diverse of the Aldermen, for not con∣tributing money to maintain the foresaid War. Also how they cruelly threaten to kill diverse godly and religious Ministers in the said City, if they will not preach as they would have them. ALSO The Earle of ESSEX his Instructions to the Counties of Derby, Northampton, Warwick, and diverse other Counties, to stand upon their guard, and raise the power of the Counties to withstand the Cavaliers, and prevent the like miseries and calamities in other parts of this Kingdome. Printed for Th. Thompson. October 19. 1642.
TERRIBLE NEWES FROM YORKE: Wherein is shewed the barbarous acti∣ons of the Cavaliers in plundering the houses of the Citizens of York, who refuse to contri∣bute money towards the maintaining of a war against the Parliament. Also the Lord Generall his Instructions to the Coun∣ties of Derby, Northampton, Warwick, and divers other Counties, for preventing the like miseries in other places. THe miseries of this King∣dome are almost growne to a height, the malig∣nant Party now hath be∣gun to plunder the City of Yorke, and have already plundered above twenty houses in the said City for
not contributing towards the designes of the Cavaliers to maintaine a warre a∣gainst the Parliament: diverse Alder∣men that refused are committed, and one Alderman that was intrusted by the Act of Parliament for gathering up of mo∣ney for the Parliament, and hath a thou∣sand pound in his hands, hath but seven houres given him to consider whether he will deliver up the money, or be plundered and imprisoned. Moreover they threaten the best Ministers about the City, that they will be the death of them, unlesse they preach as they would have them: they have carried Sir John Bourchier to Yorke: the Lady Melton being about to send her goods by water towards Hull, had all her goods, money and plate, to the value of a thousand pound, taken by the souldiers as they were putting into the Bark; they will suffer none of any degree whatsoever to depart the city without lending of money.) The hift Cavaliers that beare
sway in the City of York are Sir Wortley, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Sir John Kay, M. Francis Nevill and others; the Earle of Cumberland stands for a ci∣pher, they do what they please without his advice. There is a thousand Foot and three Troups of Horse marched to∣wards Cawood where M. Hotham is, and Sir Thomas Glemham hath an in∣tent to force him thence, so that if the other Regiments of Foot that the Par∣liament hath appointed for the securing of that county come not to aid them, M. Hotham must of necessity retreat to Hull. Certain Delinquents revenues are to be made stop of: Two pensions of the Duke of Richmond, one of 2100: l. per annum, another of 1400. l. per an. To the Lord Willoughby of Eresby, 1000. l. per an. To the Earl of Bristol 2000. l. per an. To the L. Grandison, 500. l. per an. &c. The English Fleet lately lying be∣fore Galloway, which is the strongest
towne they have, except Limbrick, and there laid siege to it: so the Lord of of Clenrikard came downe and confer∣red with our Lord Forbes, and the Mer∣chants of the towne: they strongly re∣plied, and said, that they were the Kings loyall subjects, and had not offended in the least thing, but that the souldiers in the Kings Fort had done them wrong: but had the King sealed to our Commis∣sion, we should have found enough a∣gainst them, that we might truly have made an onset upon the towne: wee were so neere the towne with our gar∣rison, that we could heare them plainly call our Parliament rogues, Parliament-dogs, and Puritan-Dogs: so you may very well conceive what subjects they are. On the third and fourth day we re-fetcht aboard our souldiers, and the sixth day wee set saile from Gallaway to go to Limbrick, and on the ninth day we arrived in Limbrick river, and on the two and twentieth day we laid siege
to the Knights of the Elmes Castle, that is to say in English, the Knights of the valley; the which Castle we plaid upon two dayes and two nights with two Demi-Canons: so the second day we entred the Castle, slaying all we found alive: but when we came to burie them we found but eighteene or twentie, the rest made an escape and got into the woods: there came a great army of the Irish within sight of the Castle; there marched out betwixt four and five hun∣dred, and when they began to approach, the Irish men fled, and durst not stand: We tooke in this Castle a thousand bu∣shels of Wheat, three or foure thousand vveight of Butter, besides Barley, Malt and salt Beefe: this Castle vve took on the three and tvvcntieth of September vvith the losse of five men, a Trouper and a Footman in the pursuit after the first landding, and three other after vve came under the Castle vvals, tvvo com∣mon souldiers, and the Master of Cap∣taine Thompsons ship.
The Lord Generall hath sent Instructi∣ons to the counties of Derby, Warwick, Northampton, & divers other countreys in those parts to raise the power of the Counties, and stand upon their guard, to secure themselves from the Cavaliers, who plunder every place where they come without distinction of persons: for the Cavaliers endeavour to come to∣wards London, and plunder by the way, hoping that the Lord Generall cannot remove fast enough to prevent them, but his Excellency hath sent ten Peeces of Ordnance and two thousand men to stop their passage at Coventry, that they may not passe that way: the counties of Northampton and Warwick are already in a warlike posture, and furnished to oppose the Cavaliers. FINIS.
