W1084 13320297 99040
ΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΟΣ OR A SECOND FAIRE WARNING To take heed of the SCOTISH DISCIPLINE, In vindication of THE FIRST. (Which the Rt. Reverend Father in God, THE Ld. BISHOP OF LONDON DERRIE Published Ao 1649.) Against a schismatical & seditious REVIEWER R. B. G. One of the bold Commissioners from the REBELLIOVS KIRKE IN SCOTLAND To His Sacred MAJESTIE K. CHARLES the SECOND when at the HAGE, BY RI. WATSON Chaplane to the Rs. Hoble. THE LORD HOPTON. HAGH, Printed by SAMUEL BROUN, English Bookeseller. 1651.
To the Rt. Honorable. the LORD HOPTON Baron of Straton, &c. One of the Lords of His Majeties most honourable Privie Councel. MY LORD: VPon discoverie of a late motion in some sheetes, I found my booke to have been hitherto but in a trance, which receiving as I thought, (but knew not from whence) a mortal wound before it ap∣peared in the encounter, I gave over long since for downe right dead & buried in the presse. When it recovered spirits enough to crave my hand, I could not denie it so small a courtesie as to helpe it up. In that it lookes not so vivide and fresh complexioned as heretofore it might, it shares-but in the ordinarie effects of such misse-fortune. If resuming what it was speaking a twelve-moneth since, be censured for im∣pertinencie to these times, & (it may be) laughed at by some
for prophesying of things past the possibilitie of their suc∣cesse, the fault may be theirs that disordered the leaves when well suited, and the failing not mine, who undertoke not against all changes of mindes, or alterations of counsels, or preventions of causes running on then visiblie to the same is∣sues I assign'd them in my conjecture. But these exceptions, My Lord, though they clip the fringe, neither unshape, nor shorten the garment I intended as the proper guise for Scotish Presbyterie to be seene in the very same with that wherein the Rt. Reverend Bishop of London Derrie had well clad her, soone afterward not onelie undecentlie discompos'd, but rent in pieces by the rudenesse of an angrie furie, one of those sixe evil spirits that haunted (in the night of sorrow) with both tempting and terrifying apparitions, His Royal MA∣JESTIE and your H. H. at the Hage. From whose prae∣vailing violence no rescue could be offered but by repelling the tempest of his language, wherewith he thought to keepe all Antagonists at a distance, and by blowing in his face the fire & stinking sulphure of his breath. If your Lordship please to passe a litle through the smoke, and take no offense at the smell which in a neare approach will be found to be litle of my making, Truth & reason will be beter discerned in a rea∣dinesse to entertaine you, as some longer traine of Authoritie had likewise if Fathers & Councels in this pilgrimage of ours had been, to a just number, within my reach, and some later Writers at the pleasure of my call. The stand, or at least some impediment in the march, of these Bloudie Presbyters, which this forlorne hope will, in some likelihood cause for a time may by your Lordship, unpraejudic'd, be taken for an hapie augurie of the absolute defeate unquaestionablie to follow, if occasion require, by a greater strength, and that under the
conduct of beter experience in these polemical affaires. In the interim though I humblie crave the honour and power of your patronage (wherof from your integritie and constancie in Gods cause & the Kings, I praesume), I assume not the bold∣nesse to constitute your Lordship any partie in the libertie I take, beyond forward expressions, to declare what may be thought some singularitie in my sence. If any small Politician, whose conscience is squared by no religion at all but what plainlie lies in the image-worship of his temporal designes. will be (which I must looke for to be) quaestioning the pru∣dence of my speaches, I thanke God he hath no priviledge to give judgement against the sinceritie of my thoughts. I can no longer conceale, My Lord, how much I am troubled to see our Churches diffusive charitie mistaken, the precious balme, which she ever liberallie poured into the wounds of her neighbours, cast by some of their hands like common oyle upon her domestike flames purpofelie to consume her; And the skirt, she often spread over their nakednesse, cut of, with an unhandsome intent to laugh at her shame, had she not an under garment of innocencie to praevent them. To behold, after so many yeares cantonizing our Religion amongst Pro∣testant Congregations of different opinions, (reconcil'd in nothing but, or nothing more then in a negative to the Papist) our selves, in the end, at a sad losse for protection (or indeed free permission) from any, now necessitated to seeke it. This makes me so many times in this discourse turne her away from all new names and professions arising whether from pro∣testations or Covenants. to the unconfderate Catholike Christia∣nitie among the Ancients where she is sure to have the afest sanctuarie of truth for her doctrine & practice▪ though she can expect no armed assistance from the dead to maintaine the
distressed Members of her communion. If this must be in∣terpreted a schismatical inclination, let me be left in my hold upon the hornes of this altar, while others rise from their knees to sit downe, out of good felloship, at the Tables; and drinke of all waters they care not what, so draw'n from a cisterne of the Reformed, forsaking or vilifying, for the time▪ that clearer Chrystal fountaine of their owne. Whereas would they enter, as they are quaestionlesse obliged, an un∣animous resolution to demand every where the publike exer∣cise of their canonical devotion, they would either, upon the grant, reape more comfort in continuing the worship of their Fathers, or, upon unworthie denial, more reason to scruple at such a facile conjunction with them, who disclaiming their prayers can not be thought serious when they praetend an harmo∣nie in that faith by which they are exhibited unto God. And (to put your Lordship in minde of a late instance delivered on good credit) who maligning our persons, & mocking at our calamities in their Scholes, are very unlikelie so to alter their mindes as to turne their Barbarous reproach into any bro∣therlie kisse or Christian welcome, when they step but the next doore into their Temples. I confesse, My good Lord, this Magisterial advice may beter become the mouth of some Elder Pastour, who is likelie to have more sheep wandring from his fold then he who can scarce properlie be said to have had any in his charge yet none such, I hope, hath reason to take amisse my modest endeavour, while he is otherwise imployed, to recover those I finde stragling within my call. It being upon due consideration to be feared, that after some few yeares (if there must be yet more of our miserable disper∣sion) with out an universal industrious circumspection of yong and old, as we have broken our pipes, we may throwe
away our whistles, and fold up our time with our armes in ae comfortlesse discourse about the flockes we once had which now alas are got into other pastures; Invite strangers to fight for our Churches while our owne Congregations are instituted to forget the holinesse in the separation of such places, the sa∣cred distance of the meanest from worke-or ware-houses, and the fairest from Piatz'as of pleasure or Exchanges for their bar∣gaines. If what I speake, My Lord, be truth, I shall not hearken to them that may tell me it is misse placed, my conscience suggesting that the climate & season hath too often been here∣tofore neglected; If false, I have a spunge as readie as ever I had a pinne to wipe out all but my shame, which shall be set forth, at your Lordships pleasure, in an English sheet, though it never will be brought unto the Scotish stoole to do its pe∣nance. In attendance on which sentence, if neither your Lord∣ships approbation nor pardon must be expected, I stoup downe to acknowledge my selfe, aswell in submission to your censure as execution of your commands: MY LORD, Your Lordships Most humblie devoted servant RI: WATSON.
D. Hieron. Praefat. in Lib. Esdr. Legant qui volunt; qi nolunt, abjiciant. Horat. —quae nivali pascitur Algid Devota quercus inter & ilices; Aut crescit Albanis in herbis Victima, Pontificum secures Cervice tinget—
Dr. Creighton's Letter. My dear Friend, Brother, and Fellow-sufferer, Mr. Watson, I Thank you for the confidence you reposed in my integri∣ty and affection to your self, and your cause, that you would permit me to read your Treatise, in heets, before it went to the press; which I found so well digested in method, so full of ingenuity,  variety of Learning, so perspicuous, acute and elegant, that I should seem to derogate from your worth, if I added ought to the commendations of your wri∣ting. I may boldly say, you have laid your Adversary flat on his back, you have drest him to the purpose: , as the Greek proverb runs in Suidas: When they have caught the Polypus, they ply him with bastinadoes, cudgel his dissembling coat lustily, to make him tae, feed, and grow fat. Yet I am afraid your Noble Instructions will produce no great effect upon that man: Parce labori Nicopompe: non ig∣norant se errare, nec moniti emendationem promittunt, saith An∣tenorius to the Author of Argenis in that Book: You might have spared your pains (good Mr. Watson) they know they are wrong as well as you can tell them; but all the earth shall never make them confess an errour, or amend it. And you'le pardon me that I quote Argenis in so weighty a cause: Similes labra lactucas; they are more fabulous, and greater liars, then Argenis: and some sleight, prating, finical Nicopompus, I hold a far more proper Antagonist to deal with these men, then you, or any learned grave Divine: For they will say what they please, and maintain what they say, not by strength of reason, but by wilfulness, hate, malice, re∣venge, and blood: Crede, aut juglum dabis, is their motto,
Believe, or I'le cut thy throat. And were those holy aud pri∣mitive Saints now alive, and did read the practises of those men, compared with the innocent passages of Argenis, that draw no bloud, they would infinitely far prefer that airy well∣penn'd Fancy before the Acts of their Assemblies, nay even in point of truth: And perhaps posterity, after a while, may be brought to the same degree of understanding and judge∣ment. They are a perverse generation; and you have took a Wolf by the ears, which you must make account to hold till dooms∣day: you must never hope to be free from Bailey's replies, and janglings: They are like the Indian Dogs in Strabo, presented to Alexander the Great, so fierce and pertinacious, that when they once catch hold, Archimedes's Instrument will hardly pull them off, , they will stick and tear, till their eyes turn round in their eye-holes or sockets, and drop out of their heads. And I never yet knew any man go beyond your Adversary Bailey, in stiness, pride, and arrogance: It is much about a dozen years, since he first published his Canterburian self-con∣viction; The man had seen some Visions in Trophonius's Den, raptures, and embryo's of his own addled brain, and out he comes to vent them, like Aesop's Ass, jetting in purple: He was now high set in pursuit of same, and, like a valiant Com∣batant, he enters the field, brandishes his sword, and looks about whom he may dare to take up the bucklers against him; and scorning to cope with a Pigmee, he challenges no less men then my Lord's Grace of Canterbury, and all the Learned Di∣vines of England; and much grieved he was in mind, that my Lord's Grace himself would not vouchsafe him the honour to confute him: as if a skie-towring Eagle, or Gyre-falcon, should have stoopt to a Kite or Carrion: I dare say, the least line of that incomparable profound Conference with Fisher, written by that peerless glorious Martyr for the Church of Eng∣land,
is of more weight and worth, then all that ever Bailey did, or shall, compose, to the worlds end, could he live Me∣thusalem's age over and over, and spew out yearly whole Va∣ticans of Books. And you may see, Sir, to your comfort, he is no change∣ling; He is Crimson died in grain: Hyaena follicat, & non mutat pellem; the Hyaena will double, and falter, this way, and that, yet still continue an Hyaena. He had done with my Lord's Grace of Canterbury long ago, and it was time, when he and his complices had brought him to a scaffold: But no sooner had my Lord of London-Derry appeared in publick, though with some short avisoes to beware their villanies, but Bailey will have at him: Who but Baily? the great Kill-cow of the North? that unappall'd Champion? that Goliath of brass? that confounder of Bishops in England, Scotland, and Ireland? He startles, and stares about, at the very name of a Bishop reels, frets and fumes; it is more odi∣ous to him then a Turkish Mufti, it rides him like an Incubus, or Night-mare, he cannot rest or sleep for it. I could not choose but smile, though with much indigna∣tion, to mark his saucy impertinent haughtiness: In the very Frontispice of his Book, how unreverently he calls my Lord Bishop, Dr. Bramble, Late Bishop; as if his Lordship were not now what before he was; as if his Order could be cancelled by popular suffrages, s the waspish Puritan thinks fit to rise in Arms, and teach their mis-led rabble to cry No Bishops, no Bishops; as if they could be pulled down, and set up, at mens pleasure, as in King Iames's minority, like a Weather-cock in the wind, to wave on the loose hinges of State-Interests; to rise and fall with ebbs and tides of popular insurrections. Dr. Bramble, late Bishop? How late, Bailey? What hath the Bramble scratcht you by the face, that you so wilfully mis∣take his name? You impudence! And who made you Priest, good Nehemiah? Had you imposition of hands? Episcopal
benediction? And when I pray began his Lordship to be no Bishop? from the General Assembly at Glasgow, Novemb. 38? Indeed from Christ, to the holy Vigils of that Assembly, the whole Christian world held it a sacred Order; the next day after that Assembly, they proclaimed it Antichristian, and annull'd it. And who gave you or them that Authority? Mercy God! in one night to blast that Order, and turn it Antichristian, which over all the world had stood Christian 1600 years before! O nox quam longaes! It is madness to imagine it. I am persuaded in my Conscience, and will live and die in that Faith, let all the Puritans in Christendome prate, and preach, and scribble what they please to the con∣trary, That all the Kings, and Princes, and Parliaments, and Assemblies in the world, have no jus power to abrogate that Or∣der. Bishops are the Apostles immediate Successors; have a Divine Right in Christ's Church, from Christ's Apostles, as great as Christ's Apostles could give them, or Christ give his Apostles, or God the Father give Christ: Sicut me miit Pa∣ter, sic ego mitto vos. And where had Priests been all this while? how had they appeared? how been distinguished? how known from Here∣ticks and Schismaticks, down through so many ages, if they had wanted Bishops in a clear Succession still to regulate and ordain them? But things are turned topsie-turvie in these barbarous tu∣mults and combustions; the Son hath supplanted the Father who begat him; the Priest unthroned the Bishop who made him, and mounting his saddle, like a proud Usurper, furiously spurs on, to make good that Proverb, Set a Beggar on Horse∣back, and he'l ride to the Devil. What blood and murder? what treasons and rebellions have overflowed the World since these tenets were first broached?
Instit. 4. cap. 2. 5. 2. No succession from the Apostles: No succession of Bishops. Instit. 4. cap. 3. 5. 4. Onely 5 Orders in the Church, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastours, and Doctours: whereof the three first moment any, and for their own times. Instit. 4. ch. 3. 5. 8. Bishops, Priests, and Pastours, all one. Instit. 4. cap. 4. 5. 2. Bishops chosen by the Priests them∣selves, upon humane consent, and for occasion. Instit. 4. cap. 4. 5. 15. Bishops gave no Ordination; onely because they sat first among the Priests, Ordination was falsly un∣derstood to be the Bishops. Instit. 4. cap. 11. 5. 1. That the power of the Keys, and Spi∣ritual Iurisdiction, rests in a mixt Company of Lay-Elders and Priests. Instit. 4. ch. 10. 5. 3. That no external Law made by the Magistrate can bind the Conscience. Instit. 4. ch. 20. 5. 31. That the Inferiour Magistrate ought, by vertue of his place, to call the Supreme Magistrate to account, and punish him severely, cut his head off; if the inferiour on∣nive or spare him, he must be held as a perfidious traytour for betraying the Peoples Rights and Liberties. These, these, Sir, have been the bane of Christianity, and ruine of the Church of England: And though, to our great grief, these have took fire in our times, and produced more sad an desperate effects then heretofore, because the Prince of the Air is more powerfull, and vigilant to increase his King∣dome now, toward the near approaching consummation of the World; yet formerly extravagancies have been maintain∣ed as pernicious as these: Iohn Wickliff was a far more dan∣gerous and sturdy Traytour then he. Many have raised para∣doxes of diefull consequence; but never did any attempt, by an universal defection, to dissolve all bond of Loyalty and Obedience to God and Man, as Wickliff did.
That God was bound to obey the Devil. That Churches adorned, were Synagogues for Satan. That Bishops, Deans, and Doctours, were the Hierarchy of An∣tichrist. That there was no Sacriledge. That Kings were bound, on pain of damnation, to take away all means of livelihood from a Clergy that mis-spent it. That any Tyrant might be slain, lawfully, and meritoriously, by any man, or any Subject, notwithstanding any former Oath, and uncondemned of any Iudge. That God could give no Hereditary Succession to any King, for Him, and his Heirs. A King was no King, that committed mortal sin; nor any sin∣ner, a just possessour of any thing. These Assertions Wickliff boldly preached, not in close Conventicles, but publickly, and printed them, in Edward the Third's declining dotage, I may say, upheld by the great∣ness of Iohn of Gant, and Piercy Earl Marshall of England, against the Prelates and Clergy of those times, whom the Duke infinitely hated. And for these, Wickliffs bones were burned, 30 years after his death, by a General Council held at Constance 245 years ago. And would God his Doctrines had burned with him, and been buried in utter darkness, for then we had not now wander∣ed, like forlorn Pilgrims, upon the desolation of the most glori∣ous Church that ever shone in Christendome: we had not seen what the Sun yet never saw, our Kings scaffolded, the Crown of England trampled under foot, the Royal Race undone and scattered, our Reverend Bishops, and Learned Men, abused and baffled by every insolent, stinking peasant: For though, at that time, those hollow-hearted Lollards, and their abettours, fell short of their aim and expectation, by
the matchless sword of Henry the 5th. England's undanted Mars, and the learned Pen of Thomas of Walden his Confes∣sour, into whose bosome that mirrour of valiant Monarchs breath'd out his innocent soul; yet now they have hit us home to the quick. A torrent stopt will make way through hidden channels, bust out at another time, in another place, unlooked for: We feel it now, Bohemia felt it then, by means of some Gen∣tlemen of that Countrey, Students in Oxford, who conveyed Wickliffs Books home with them to Prague, which Iohn Huss published in High Dutch, another jovial John of the same stamp and race, burned alive for Wickliffs Doctrine, the next year after Wickliffs bones, by the same Council: And what Wars that caused, what inundations of blood by Zisca and his Ta∣borites, through the whole Reigns of Wencesaus, and the re∣nowned Sigismund, no age shall ever forget, or parallel, but ours, whose impiety will transcend as far the belief of poste∣rity, as now it surmounts all by-past Examples. God keep my soul from these muckle mawn Iohns, and their ways, these Iohns of all Iohns: I protest, I never read their Books, or think of their devices and stratagems, without horrour and amazement: Obnubilo animam, as that African spake, & sto ut fulguritus, aut sacrum bidental. And therefore, Mr. Watson, I pity you above all men, who, since you have undertook this business against Bailey, have been forced to lay aside your Noble Studies, the Holy Fathers, and History of the Church, to rake in mud, and dunghils; to plunge in quagmires full of croaking Toads, and hissing Setpents, Covenants, Oaths, Perjuries, Assemblies, Reformations by blood, Knox and Buchanan, Consarcinations of trayterous plots, masses of untruths and lies. But you have play'd the man, and I must ever love and honour you, for your excellent Learning, for your pains in this cause, for your unshaken constancy to the Church and
Crown of England, for your perpetual Industry at your Book, and for your unspoed life and conversation: Of all which as I have been an eye-witness, these five years and upward in our exile; so shall I ever be ready before God and man to attest them with hand and heart, and to write my self till death, From my Chamber at Urecht, in the very Id of December, 1650. SIR, Your unfained, affectionate Friend, Brother, Fellow-Sufferer, and Servant, ROB. CREIGHTON.
TO THE READER. I Am necessarilie to advertise you, That if you be notvery conversant in the Rd Bishops Warning and his adversaries Review before you enter upon my replie, you will in the end be as unsatisfied about the true state of the controversie, as all the way offended at the incohaerence of the paragraphs or periods in the booke, there being, to ease the Printer, not much to advantage me, very litle inserted that mine relates to, which notwithstanding is penned as if you had the other perpetuallie in your sight. The credit I claime to have given to several histo∣rical circumstances of a Countrey, which I yet never saw, where∣with I could not be furnished from printed bookes, is upon the sufficient assurance I have of the fidelitie and abilitie in such per∣sons as are natives, whom I consulted as oracles in many cases, and received their answer in no darke ambiguitie of words; But layd downe positivelie in their papers, which if their indiffe∣rence had been the same with mine: I should have published with their names, whereby to put out the envious mans eye and keep curiositie from a troublesome impertinencie in enquirie. I shall make no apologie at all to you for my engagement in the dispute, having allreadie done it where more due. I shall brieflie this for some tantologie, much indecencie and levitie in my language, Desiring the first may be imputed to some necessitie I was cast upon by the Reviewers frequent repetitions, and some difficultie to recollect what expressions had passed from me with the sheetes, most of which I was to part with successivelie as I pennd them at several distances of time and place reteining no perfect copie in my hands. The second is that dirt which did
sticke like pitch unto my fingars while I was handling the fowle Review, and so hath defild my booke. The third came from no affectation to be facetious, for which I am litle fitted, yet thought I might as well sport it as a Divinitie Professour in his chaire, who having it seemes, made hast to the second infancie of his age, or reassumd his first, would never, it may be, have been at quiet, unlesse I had rocked him in his cradle, or play'd a litle with his rattle. The strange misse-takes many times intro∣duced by his ignorance of our tongue that in my absence prae∣pared all for the presse are rectified with references to the pages where. Which amendments in favour of your selfe aswell as justice unto me should be at first transplanted to their several colonies by your pen. The Greeke leters that have lost their grace by the Latin habits wherein they are constrained to ap∣peare, being crowded here and there out of all significancie and order, & so left at large, have their authoritie made good to the full sense of the commission they brought with them, every where by the English Interpreter or Paraphrast when you meet them. Which intimated, I have no greater courtesie to crave from you, if one the Revievers impartial and aequitable com∣parers, then to hearken to truth and reason, and to signifie what you finde here dissonant from either, which I promise you shall be acknowledged or amended Adieu. Yours R. W.
A Table of the Chapters. CHAPT. I. THe Scots bold addresse with the Covenant to K. Ch. 2. Their partie inconsiderable. The Bishop's method, language, and matter asserted. The quaestion in controversie unawares granted by the Reviewer. Page 1. II. The Scotish Discipline overthrowes the right of Magistrates to con∣vocate Synods, and otherwise to order Ecclesiastical affaires. 10. III. The last appeale to the Supreme Magistrate justifiable in Scot∣land. 41. IV. Seditious & Rebellious Ministers in Scotland seldome or never censured by the Assemblie. 47. V. The Discipline exempts not the supreme Magistrate from being ex∣communicate. 57. VI. Kings may sometime pardon capital offenders, which the Disciplin∣rians dnie. As they do their Royal right to any part of the Eccle∣siastike revenue. 59.
VII. The Presbyterie cheates the Magistrate of his civile power in ordi∣ne ad spiritualia. 65. VIII. The divine right of Episcopacie beter grounded then that prtended in behalfe of Presbyterie. 93. IX. The Commonwealth is a monster when Gods Soveraignite in the Presbyterie contradicts the Kings. 113. X. No concord between Parliament and Presbyterie. 116. XI. The Presbyterie cruel to particular persons. 124. XII. The Presbyterie a burthen to the Nobilitie, Ministrie, and all Orders whatsoever. 130. XIII. The Bishops exceptions against the Covenant made good, & this proved. That no man is obliged to keep it who hath taken it. 176.
AN ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE HAd Mr. Baylie contein'd himselfe within the li∣mitsMy reason for refuting his Epistle. of an Epistle, I had there left him to cano∣nize his Living Lord & all his familie, & with what dexteritie he pleas'd to rubb his honourable head piece into a good conceit of his Review. But since the great Diana in his booke, so gloriouslie bespangled with the counterfeit Alchyie of the late Scotish Storie, is lead hither to be magnified by any superstitious inadvertent reader, & his Lordships hand made use of onely to hold the candle, by the false light of his name & pretended vertues the better to com∣mend Her Godesse-ship to publike view; I can not passe by without looking in to see the sight, & spend my verdict upon the motions that attend it. And that His Lordship may not be mistaken to stand altogether for a shadow,The Rewie∣wers vani∣tie in gi∣ving titles inconsistent with the praesent condition & practice of his Lord. I first cast my eye upon the potent Lord Iohn, & must plainly tell his admirer Mr. Baylie, he had better deserved the honour of this title, if he had imploy'd his power, as he was in dutie & by oath oblig'd, in the vindication of His Ma∣jestie, & His Royal Father, of ever blessed memorie, as he hath most dishonoura∣blie & impotentlie against them both. Nor is it much for his credit in the head of this Epistle to be styled one of His Majesties Privie Councel, & in the heart of His Kingdome to be one of the publike conspiracie against him, of a Lord justice general to become a special Injusticiarie in his countrey. The Reviewers long experience of his sincere zeale, &c. argues him to be none of the late illuminates, & gives us some hopes the he hath proceeded upon the dictates of his conscience, though unhappilie erroneous: long ha∣bitsThe Earle of Cassils no late Illu∣minate. though at first contracted by the perversenesse of the will, by perpetuitie becoming very efficacious in imposing fallacies upon the understanding, so
that he which doth ill may hereby be aswell perswaded that what he doth is good, as he that often tells a lie hath at length himselfe believ'dit to be a truth. His rigid adhaerence to the praetended rights & priviledges of his Countrey being professed haereditarie, takes off some what from the personal imputa∣tion,No credit for his fa∣milie to be commended by Bucha∣nan. yet with all demonstrates that it is not all bloud Royal which runnes in His Lordships veines, nor it may be all bloud Noble, having so ample testimonie from him, who had allwayes some dregs of the Common shoare in his inke & whose power is cankerd with envious invectives against them, that have not layd their honour in the vulgar dust, & levell'd Majestie as well as Nobi∣litie with the people. Whose Ghost will not thanke the Reviewer for calling him, Prince of Historians, being so litle enamourd with titles of that nature,Very Im∣proper to style Buc∣hanan Prince. that he accounted them, where they were more properlie due, Legitimi regni gra∣vissima pe∣stis. Praet. ad Dial. de jur. Reg. the filth of flaterie, & the plague of all legitimate praerogative. His exemplarie practice in publike-private duties is indeed some what sin∣gular, my selfe having seen him very zealouslie penning downe such slender (to omit what I might call in the Reviewers language praeter The Re∣viewers ser∣mon divi∣nitie. & anti-scrip∣turall) divinitie, as was not fitting for any Novice or Catechumen in Religion to owne, much lesse for so grave a Theologue to preach, & so well exerciz'd an adultist to register for his use. I commend beter the exemplarie practice of the Reviewers brother Presbyter, who seem'd to take a sound nap in the meane time, hoping, it may be, to be better inspired in his dreame. This He may well count it an advan∣tage to have the E. Cas∣sils his Jud∣ge. potent Lord, thus qualified & brought up to his hand, I can not blame Mr. Baylie for chusing him to be his patron, (who discernes with his eyes & decernes by his dictates) who being judge & partie, both will quaestionlesse doe right like a Lord Justice in the businesse. The An ho∣nour for the Bp. to be calld by the Rev: un∣pardona∣ble incen∣diaire. praejudice the Reviewer would here at first cast upon the person of the Bishop will advance his owne reputation but a litle in high way Rheto∣rike, not advantage him one whit with any of those judicious & aequitable comparers he expects; who being able to instruct themselves, upon these many late yeares experience, that what Mr. Baylie calls that Church & Kingdome is onely a praevalent partie of Schismatikes & Rebells, what adhaerence to the sa∣cred truth of God an obstinate perseverance in an execrable covenant, which hath tied up the hands of many a poor subject from the enjoyment of all the just liberties the established Iawes of Scotland hold out to him; will looke upon the Bishop as a couragious assertour of Gods truth, the Churches puritie, the Kings supremacie, the subjects libertie, & if for that condemned by an unani∣mous faction in both Kingdomes, will commend his zeale, reverence his name, and ranke him with the prime Fathers of the Church, who so soon en∣deavoured to stop that deluge of miserie wherewith Britanie & Ireland have been most unhapilie overwhelmed. For the dirtie language he useth here & otherwhere extreme sawcie spirit, stigmatiz'd incendiarie, &c. I desire the Reader to take notice I shall sweep itThe Rev's uncleanlie language.
out of his & my way, yet if he thinkes it may serve his turne, as well as theAristoph. Plut. garlike heads did Cario & his master in the Comoedie, the Printers boy shall throw it by itselfe at the backe side of my replie in a piece of white paper, that he may not fowle his fingers.The active boldnesse of the Scotish Presbyteri∣ans in Hol∣land, &c, What the Reviewer calls Boldnesse was prudence & seasonable caution in the Bishop to praesent his booke to the eminent personages & in this place, obser∣ving the indefatigable industrie of Mr. Baylie & his brethren of the mission, very frequentlie in their persons, perpetuallie by many subtile & active instru∣ments they imploy'd before & after their coming hither, insinuating into the hearts & affections of all people here, of what sexe or condition soever, in Courts, Townes, Vniversities, Countrey, praepossessing them with the Justice of their cause, the innocencie of their proceedings, the moderation of their demands, the conformitie of their practice & designe to the praesent discipline & Government of the Church & presbyterie in these Provinces. And great pitie it is that all peo∣ple, nations & languages have it not translated into their owne dialect, that a discoverie of this grand imposture may be made to them who are so insolentlie summon'd to fall downe & worship this wooden idol of the discipline, & threat∣ned the aeternal fierie furnace if they refuse it. In the next Paragraph the Reviewer drawes Cerberus like his threeheaded monster out of hell, The three headed monster in controversie Discipline, Covenant, & unkindne's to our late sove∣raigne. —[Sen. Her. Fur. Novos Resumit animos victus, & vastas furens Quassat catenas.]— HIs The Sco∣tish Disci∣pline vrey different from that in Holland & France. Apologie for the first, being the conformitie I mentioned principally with the Brethren of Holland & France, whom he would very faine flater into his partie, & make the Bishop whether he will or no fall foule upon them, whom His Lordship: hath scarce mentioned in all his tract: And I having no rea∣son nor desire to enlarge the breach shall say no more then this, (because some what he will have sayd) That if their discipline harmoniouslie be the same particularlie in those extravagancies His Lordship mentions, (which to my knowledge they denie) & for alleging which, they are litle beholding to Mr. Baylie, they are all alike concerned, yet having as learned Apologists of their owne, when they finde themselves agriev'd, will in their owne case very like∣ly speake their pleasure. No Re∣formed Church calls regu∣lar Episco∣pacie An∣tichristian. In the interim I must require his instance where any Reformed Church hath declared regular Episcopacie which we call Apo∣stolical, Antichristian. What particular persons of Mr. Baylies temper may have publish'd must not passe for an Ecclesiastical decree. And if all, even in those Churches he mentions, might freelie speake their minde, I believe that order would have their Christian approbation as it is in any reformed Countreys established. Many eminent persons in those Chur∣ches have approv'd of it Vindic: of K. Ch. p. 125. Apost. In∣stit. of Epis∣copacie. some such relation was made not long since about certain Divines of the Religion in France, & some that came from other parts to the Synod of Dort. And
I can acquaint the Reviewer with the like piece of charitie bestowed by P. M∣lin in the letters, that passed from him to Bishop Andrewes, beside what Mr. Chillingworth (as I take it) hath collected out of him & Beza in favour both of name & thing, though not to the same latitude we extend them. And (which will not be alltogether impertinent to adde) I doe not remember I have heard that Causabon & Vossius, no obscure men in the French & Dutch Chur∣ches, were at any time by their presbyterie excommunicate for becoming limbes of the English Antichrist, Praebendaries of the Archiepiscopall Church of Canterburie with us. But if the Reviewer here begin to cant, & distinguishEpiscopal declinations different from Epis∣copacie. between Episcopacie & Episcopal declinations, (for that indeed is the expression that he useth▪ I must ingenuouslie acknowledge that there may be some pra∣cticall declinations in Episcopacie which may be Antiapostolical & Antichristian, beside & against the line of the Word, the institution of Christ & his Apostles; but I know none such in the Churches of England, Scotland, or Ireland, if there have been any they are not our rule, & by his owne then must not be stated to be the controversie between us. The Presbyterian aberrations whichPresbyteriâ aberrations. the same with Pres∣byterie. the Bishop hath observed, are for the most part taken from the crookenesse of the Discipline it selfe, which in the very Acts of their Assemblies, he findes not so straight as to run parallel with the word of God, or practice of the true Ca∣tholike Church, & whether what His Lordship cites to that purpose be calum∣nious imputations or no will best appeare in the procedure of our discourse. But the Reviewer takes it ill that Didoclave, Gerson, Bucer, Salmasius & The prae∣sent con∣cernment greater to reveale the Scotish Dis∣cipline, thē refute old adversaries of Episco∣pacie. Blondel were not rather replied to, then the mysteries of the Kirke Discipline revealed. This poor tricke of diversion will not take. If what hath been writ in the behalfe of Episcopacie stand firme notwithstanding these or any other stormes that passe over, it requires no such frequent reparations. The holie cause indeed will shortlie need such auxiliaries as these. He doth well there∣fore to call for them in time. Sr. Claud Somays like∣lie to be no great friend to the Dis∣cipline. And yet it may be the imcomparable knight will not be charm'd by a litle mercenarie breath into the reare of a distressed beggarlie engagement. He hath been since better informed of many fraudulent practices in the Kirke, & so well satisfied about the state of our affaires, that Mr. Baylie is litle pleased (for all his sugar candi'd commendations) with the earnest he hath allreadie given to imploy his pen & paines about a better subject for the future. And 'tis a mere fiction, what he so confidentlie averres, of He offe red no dis∣pute with the Kings Chaplaines about Epis∣copacie. Sr. Claud Somayi's offering to dispute with the Divines by a Person of honour about the King, a person of reverence, then not farre from him having told me that His Majestie knowes not any thing of the buisinesse, nor did the Divines about him heare of any thing to that purpose. Therfore let his person of honour come out from behind the curtaine, & vouch his credit to be such as quolibet contradicente we must believe him: when he appeares in his colours & makes good any such offer as is mention'd, I presume I may say that no apprehensions of trouble & hazard will deerre such judicious and lear∣ned Champions from entring upon any just & reasonable vindication of truth.
In the meane time they doe but the dutie of their places in their Royal atten∣danceThey trans∣gresse not the dutie of their place by infor∣ming the Kings con∣science about. (which the Reviewer calls the Court artifice & their trade) if they watch the seasons & distribute the houres of the Kings opportunities, wherein privaelie (to avoyd the importune intervention of other civil businesse, not to decline I know not what contradiction, which they are not in that case reasonablie to ex∣pect from their modest fellow servants of the laitie, & I hope there are no Clerical Disciplinarians there about▪ to instill into His Majesties tender mind how unsafe it is for his soul, & how litle for his honour, to desert the Holie Church, that is the Episcopal doctrine & government which came into the world with Christianitie it selfe, hath for 1500 yeares enjoy'd a joint haereditarie suc∣cession,The Primi∣ive Doct∣rine & Dis∣cipline. & aequi-universall diffusion with the same, to joyne with a crew in a Northerne corner of rebellious Covenanters, if yow will have it so, for ought hitherto can be judg'd enemies to God, to his Father, & to Monarchie it selfe, if he will take it upon his Father or Grandfathers word. To put him fartherEikôn Basilikè cap. 14. Praeserva∣tion of the Church. in mind that his Martyr'd Father sayd, There are wayes enough to repair the breaches of the state without the ruine of the Church, (it is the Episcopal Church that he meanes) To instruct him that he may as conscientiouslie pardon the Irish as the Pardo∣ning the Irish & to∣ierating their Reli∣gion. Scots, & reward with a limited libertie of their Religion; & what other gracious encouragements he pleaseth, the first fruits of their vo∣luntarie submission to his government, without imposing the slaverie of any co∣venant, or conditioning for a toleration in his other Kingdomes. And this to be (as it is) in reference to a Parliament to be conven'd so soon as the state of that Kingdome will admit. To assure him that this is very consistent with conscience, honour, Eikôn. Basilikè. conscience, honour, rea∣son, law. & all Good reason, & for ought they know, repugnant to no law, yea, to linke the soul of the most sweet & ingenuous of Princes (too sweet, too ingenuous indeed to have to deale with the rough-hev'd Covenan∣ters of the mission) with those Inclining his mind to the Coun∣sels of his Father. Golden chaines let downe from heaven, & rea∣ched out by the hand of a tender hearted father to his sonne, in those peer∣lesse Counsels which the most prudent advice in the last Testaments of all his praedecessours can not parallel. To tell him then, That his necke Cant. 4 4. is like the ower of David, builded for an armourie, whercon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mightie men. The Bishops Eikôn Basilikè penned wholely by . Ch. . not a sylla∣ble of it by the Bishops. unluckie foot, as he calls it, is visible onely in Mr. Blie's margin, As close as he & others follow upon the sent, not the least tracke in e'ikôn Basilikè will in the end be found by them, nor by the whole packe of bloud-hounds other where. But to be sure here as well as in 100 Pamphlets beside is the foule Scotish Presbyterian paw, which besmear'd His Royal Majestie while he liv'd, & would now spoyle that pretious oyntment, & cast as ill a savour as it can upon his sa∣cred memorie being dead. Not the Bishops, God not they the supporter of the Matyr'd King. but God, it may be some∣time by their subordinate Ministrie, strengthened our Royal Soveraigne to
his last, in that which the lampe of natural reason, the leading starre of Ca∣tholike Antiquitie, the bright sun in the firmament of the Word & above all, that inexpressible light streaming from the spirit of God revealed to him to be the safe sanctuarie of truth. Not the Bishops, but the The hard∣hearted Sco∣tish Presby∣terians. Presbyterian Scots hardened their hearts to thrust their native King out of their protection, & with out any compassion did drive him from Newcastle to Holme∣bie the fatal praecipice to K. Ch. 1. Holmebie, which appeares to be the fatal praecipice where he fell. And these same men conti∣nue after his Endea∣vours to make it such to K Ch. 2. death to crie loud in the cares of his sonne to take that direct path to his ruine, ratner then root or branc, or slip shall be left of the Praelatical Cler∣gie, whom they would faine have lie like dung upon the face of the earth, & make a fat soile to pamper the Presbyterian in his lusts. Their His best way to prae∣vent it is consorting with his Fa∣thers booke. gathering together His Majesties papers, (if they must needs have the honour of causing them to be presented in a booke, with out a page or syllable of their owne) was but binding up that bundle of myrrhe which should lie all night in the Virgin breast of his Royal sonne, who maugre all the ma∣lice of his enemies, hath that beloved for his comfort. That fall Wherein is divine wisdome & Counsel. of ungra∣cious dew, as the Reviewer Diabolically calls it, came from an higher region then the Bishops. It was the judgement of God given to the King, & by him his righteousnesse to the Kings sonne. It is he that here comes downe like raine into this fleece of wool, this most soft, sweet, & ingenuous of Princes, & in gentle drops waters that pretious piece of red earth by his praecepts. And may this dew so prosper with him, that the Ps. 72. following words may have their ac∣complishment in his reigne. In his time may the righteous flourish, & abun∣dance of peace then & afterward, even so long as the Moon endureth. May his dominion be (as it ought) from the one sea to the other, & from the floud to the end of that alter orbis, that litle world of his Kingdomes divided by the floud from the greater. May they that dwell in the Wildernesse of errour con∣test no longer, but kneel before him & his enemies licke the dust of his feet. But by the way 'tis worth Gods providence in ordering his commen∣dations of this booke to proceed out of the mouth of the Revie∣wer. the readers observing, & however causeles∣slie praejudiced, may invite him to be conversant in that most excellent booke, which in the midst of that gall that drops from his pen, whose heart & hand were bent to blot it out of the opinion of men, hath by the providence of God such a Chrystal streame of commendation to the world, for Eloution, Reason, Devotion, for Imitable essayes of piety, wisdome, patience, & every ver∣tue confessed; And he that will not be swayed with one word without reason, hath his Majesties sense from the mouth of his enemie, about the danger of the Covenant & the faction that stands for it, And may take it for the timous burning of a dying martyr, & have a care that among too many serpents & so few doves, his innocencie be not swallowed with the rest. What followes may be worth His Majesties notice, The Re∣viewers se∣asonable advertish∣ment to the King. being the assertion of no other man then Mr. Baylie, not long since a pretended commissioner for the Covenant. That the same hand that penned the 27 th. Chapter in the booke entituled Eikôn Basilikè, (which he calls Episcopal, but His Majestie
knowes very well to be Regal) did it on purpose to separate him for ever from all his covenant subjects. And how K. Ch. 1. no Presby∣terian in heart no ongue at Newcastle & the Isl of Wight. neare that came to the heart, language, & writings of our late Soveraigne, let them who were best acquainted with his ca∣riage & most intime affections at Newcastle & in the Isle of Wight speake their conscience. For the two former we have more authntike care testimonies then the Reviewer, & the last is demonstrative out of all the papers that passed from him. To lay aside for the time those against which Mr. Baylie is, more maliciouslie, then ignorantlie, praejudic'd. His severall His pa∣pers to Mr. Henderson against it. printed letters to Mr. Henderson speake his sense about Presbyterie at Newcastle, & some what more at large may in due time, what he thought of it at the Isle of Wight. These, with other undeniable evidences, may render the Reviewer a mere Sceptike, if not rather a knight of the post unto the world. How it concernes Kings when they take in hand Pallas targe to have the face of No Bi∣shop No King. Episcopacie on the bosse, King Iames that had most of her wisdome, could best tell. The experience whereof being too deare bought by his Martyr-sonne, & commended in his Testament to our Soveraigne, the Praela∣tes need not take up the old statuaries cunning to contrive it. To be sure Ovid. Met. lib. . sab. 1. this both Perseus, or Presbyter, here paints a Gorgons head, on every page of his booke, & twists every line with a serpent, hoping to make stones & stockes of his readers, who must submit to his authoritie in silence, & stand fixt in what antike postures he assignes them. What ever some may doe out of igno∣rance & weaknesse, we hope the providence of God will keep the King out of the Scotish Presbyters hands, & the breath of his mouth blow all such flies & lice out of his quarters. And thus much shall serve by way of answer or paraphrase upon what the Reviewer hath brought in apologie for the Discipline of the Kirke. In the next place he becomes a nimble The Re∣viewers false pro∣fession in publike con∣trarie to conscience & vulgar knowledge. advocate for the idol worship of the Covenant. Where I am glad to finde him acknowledging any such thing as reason fram'd by the Vniversitie of Oxford against it, having, not long since, heard this confident averre, (without a blush as I take it) in his chamber-con∣venticle at the Hague (where not any one that was present but knew what he sayd to be most notoriouslie false, except a poore sillie creature or two that might be decoy'd in upon designe) That not any thing hitherto had been obje∣cted against the Covenant, whereas he could not be ignorant then, more then now, that this, with many other learned & rational tracts, had been long since published against it, & for ought I know must stand unanswered to this day. Which affected alsitie so amused me & others at that time, that had not some prudential motives restrain'd us, we must have offered him some affront in the place. And at this it so praejudiceth me against his credit, as I beleeve not a line in his booke for which he brings me no beter authoritie then his word. What he spake then he hath much adoe to refraine from printing now, onely mollifies The  speach now printed in effect. it with his canting about the mater. To this day, he sayth, no man hath shewed any errour in the matter of the Covenant. I am sure not any clause
in its literal or mystical sense hath escap'd the discussion of those acute An∣tagonists it hath found: & what this chymical matter should be, that is of so subtile an extraction, I can not guesse. For the forming & taking it he prae∣tends a necessitie their adversaries imposed which necessitie was nothing else butNo necessi∣tie for the Scots to en∣ter into a Covenant which is. their owne just icalousies & feares that an uncertaine multitude, the necessa∣rie instruments, & indeed sole slaves to doe the worke, could not be kept con∣stant to the cause with out the awfull superstition of an oath. Which false fire is pursued with a thunderclap from the pulpit, whence damnation's day∣lie threatned to the infringers. And being thus driven into an airie castle which these engineers have fortified by the Mathematical subtiltie of their words, he sayth, neither fraud nor force shall reduce them, for they feare forsoothNo oath of God but the Devil. the oath of God. Which God is no other then that Baal Berith, that Jupiter Foederatus, to whom the Israelites made a shamefull defection after Gidcons death, Judg. 8. 33. 'Ethckan e'autoîs tòn Báal diathéken, so the septuagint ren∣ders it. They set up to themselves Baal the Covenant that is the false God or Devil of the Covenant. And yet this Mirio puts it to the quaestion, & seemes to wonder Why any that love the King should hate the Covenant, the wholeNo wonder why the lo∣vers of the King are no Cove∣nanters. designe & practice of which hath been so apparentlie destructive to his Royal Father & all the loyal subjects that he hath. Nay with all it is too well known, how many true The Cheat of the Co∣venant. lovers of the King, but too deceitfull lovers of themselves, who, through feare or covetousnesse, hoping to praeserve their estates & li∣berties, have been cosin'd into this courteous Covenant, & then by their jea∣lous or wanton masters, have been stript naked, turnd out to beg their bread, & regaine their souls & credit as they could. So that this straight tie can in some cases we see play fast & loose, & the strictnesse of it, whereof we have had so sad an experiment, will be found onelie by the hands of the holie lea∣guers (for such we know were the newnam'd Independents at first) to bind Religion, Majestie, & Loyaltie to the blocke, & then lay the axe to the root of them all, & stifle them from repullulating if they can. Therefore they that manage the conscience whether of Court, or Citie, or Countrey, doe well if they possesse their Religious votaries with a particular full sense of the inevitable miserie that will follow them if they be catchd in this noose & advise them to whip all such sawcie beggars, such Whying Covenanters from their gates. The next taske of the Reuiewers Engineer-ship is to draw an out worke a∣bout the open The Scot-Presbyti∣rian open unkindnesse that is trea∣son against the late King. unkindnesse (treason pretilie qualified in the terme) against the (observe he sayth not our) late King, which he makes of so large a compasse, that all the Presbyterian credit he can raise will never be able to maintaine it for an houre: which this skillfull officer foreseeing, despaire puts him first upon a salie, where the Ghosts of Wickiffe, & Husse, & Luther, & with a brazen piece of falshood, his Disciples are draw'n out to assault his dangerous enemie in his trench. For (which he knowes Bishops in other Re∣formed Churches. as well as I can tell him) there are other parts of the Reformed world beside England, & those of Luthers Disci∣ples, that keep up Episcopacic The Re∣vieers in constancie. to this day. And forgetting in part what he
hath sayd allreadie & minding lesse, what he shall bbble otherwhere about the businesse, he tells us here 'tis the violence of ill advised Princes, which when he pleaseth, he makes the Policie of the Bishops themselves that hath kept up this limbe of Antichrist, he meanes the Episcopal order in England. Since the first Reformation whence hath come the perpetual trouble in our land the Hi∣storie of the Schismatical Puritan will sufficientlie satisfie any man that will search. And how the Church & Kingdome are now at last come so neare the ground the Disciplinarian practices will evidence. But the Scotish Presbyterie that gave the first kicke at the miter, & hath since lift up the other leg against the Crowne, may chance to catch the fall in the end, having now much adoe to light upon its feet. Having K. Ch. 1 never justi∣fied the Sco∣tish contests. made his ecreat he begins to endeavour the maintaining of his masterpiece by degrees, & tell us, Their first contests stand justified this day by King & Parliament in both Kingdomes Ans: And must so stand, I say not ju∣fied, till King & Parliament meet once againe in either to consider, whether with out a new ratification by their favour, your after contests make not a just forfeiture of their gracious condescension to your first. His Majestie of ever blessed memorie hath told you His charitie & Act of Pacification forbids him to reflect on Eikōn Baslike Ch. 13. former passages. Which argues some such passages to have been as were not very meritorious of his favour. And though his Royal cha∣ritie may silence, it doth not justifie your contests by that Act. The borders of Scotland being as well His Majesties as yours (though you keep to your Presbyterian The King may bring an armie to the Scotish borders. style, which affords no proprietie to others then themselves, & yeilds very litle communitie to Kings, the King, our borders) I hope it was free for him to move toward them as he pleas'd. If your resi∣stance to the Magistrates he deputed made him for the securitie of his per∣son come attended with an armie for his guard; or if the rod & axe could inflict no paenal justice by vertue of the judge's word upon a banded com∣panie of miscreants at home, & therefore sent abroad to crave the regular assistance of the sword; no lawes of God nor your Countrey dictates any just or necessarie defense, which is nothing but an unjustifiable rebellion: Nor can Dunce law A lawe a∣bove Dunce law. so justifie your meeke lying downe in your armes, but that, if the King would have made his passage to you with his sword, you might have justlie been by a more learned law helpt up with a halter about your necke. The novations in Liturgie & Canons contrarie neither to the lawes of God nor Scotland. Religion were not such a world, but that two words, Li∣iurgie & Canons may compasse it. What was in them contrarie to the lawes of God hath a blanke margin still that requires your proofe, & that any were to the lawes of your Countrey will never be made good, having the King & Lords of the Counsel, I meane those of your Kingdome that did approve them. The power in The Re∣viewers brag K. Ch. 1. gave the Scot too easie condi∣tions. your armie to dissipate the Kings is but a litle of Pyrgopoly∣nices breath. The easie conditions given you to retreat may be attributed to His Majesties mercie & aversenesse from bloud, not to his apprehension of your power.
The Kings second coming toward you with an armie He had good reason to raise a secound ar∣mie against them. was upon no fu∣rious motion of the Bishops, who had no stroke in his Councel for warre, but upon the fierie trial you put him to by that many flagrant provocations, wherewith you & other incendiaries nearer home daylie environ'd him, who fearing the precedent accommodation by peace might afford respite for a farther more particular discoverie of the principal actours in & contributers toward the late warre, & expose many considerable brethren to a legal trial, notwithstanding the agreement contracted; impatient ambition having all∣readie been too much impeded by observing the easie conditions you men∣tion made the first breach, & according to the right account first rais'd a mi∣litarie power, which His Majestie had very good reason to suppresse. The successe you had by your first impression upon part of His Majesties Armie at New-bourne, & your easie purchace of the Towne of New-Castle was not such as cleard the passage to London, The Scots suc∣cesse at New bourne ope∣ned not a passage for them to London. without the farther hazard of which you were too well payd for your stay in Northumberland, & instead of a rod that was due, you caried too honourable a badge at your backes of His Majesties meeknesse, when the second time you returned in peace. What passed after your packing away The Pr. Scotish Re∣bellion co∣pied by the English. to the raising of the new armie you speake of you may reade & blush, if you have any grace, in the former part of His martyr'd Majesties booke, if you have none, you may, as I beleeve you doe, laugh in your slovenlie sleeve to see your prompt scholars come to so good perfection, & copie your owne rebellion to the life. The Bishops then were litle at leisure to looke abroad to any such purpose, being happie if they could get an house for their shelter from the threats & stones that flew very thicke about their eares, the rabble rout at London by that time being well inform'd what effectual weapons stones & stooles, & such like as furie on a sodaine could furnish, had been against blacke gownes & white sleeves at Edenburgh before. That any armie could at that time be raised, when the Kings K. Ch. 1 his raising an armie a signe of di∣vine pro∣vidence. Forts, Ma∣gazines, Militia, Navie, were seizd into the hands of your Rebell brethren, was a special marke of divine providence cleare in so happie successe, as he that ran might then have read their ruine writ by the fingar of God had nor the blacke cloud of our sinnes eclips'd that light, blotted out that handwri∣ting, & shour'd downe vengeance upon our heads. That such earnest & pitifull entreaties The Re∣bells faint in their faith not∣withstan∣ding the re∣velations they pre∣tend to. should be made to strengthen the arme of flesh, by Gods people, in Gods cause, after such divine revelation that this was the appointed time wherein Christs Kingdome was to be exalted on earth, that the Saints should flourish, laugh, & sing at the downefull of that man of sinne, &c. Is a note me thinkes that spoyles all the harmonie of the rest▪ That upon such earnest entreaties the Scots The Presb. Scots coming in no condition of the peace were oblig'd to come in is not to be found among all those easie conditions made & their double former returning in peace.
Their feare of a third Their guilt made them feare a third warre. warre to passe over their brethrens carkasses to themsel∣ves is a strong argument of their guilt, that their advise & some other assi∣stance had passed over the late agreement made between His Majestie & them to promote that horrid rebellion against him. That so many intercessions Their worke of supereroga∣tion in in∣tereding. with the King for a moderate & reasonable accom∣modation had been used by them, was a relique of Poperie they kept not∣withstanding the reformation they had made, & they did truely supererogate in that worke, no law of the three Kingdomes (I take it) making them umpires between the King & his subjects, nor is it yet revel'd to the world what divine authoritie they had (as was pretended in their Remonstrance) to come in the name of our Lord & Master Their Re∣monstrance. Iesus Christ, to wane the King that the guilt which cleav'd so fast to his throne & soul was such, as if not timeie re∣pented would involve him & his postcriti under the wrath of the everliving God. For how moderate, how reasonable They mediate for no reasona∣ble accom∣modation. accommodation they mediated appeares in the 19 propositions, to the substance of every one of which their unreaso∣nable brethren adhaered to the end. That they were at any Were never sligh∣ted nor re∣jected. time slighted & rejected is a mere calumnie of the Reviewer', he would have told us when, & where, if he could. That al they ask'd was not granted, Were justlie den∣jed. was upon unanswerable reasons, which His Ma∣jestie render'd in his publike Declarations about the Treaties, &c. That they & their fainting Cove∣nants the common road for fa∣ctions. brethren were so easilie perswaded to enter into a Covenant together is no great mervaile, His Majestie tells them. Solemne leagues & Covenants ...... are the common road used in all factions & powerfull perturbations of state or Church ..... by such as aye to subdue all to their owne will & power, under the disguizes of holie combinations. The expresse articls in the Covenant, for the prservation of Royaltie, &c. are spun so fine, & woven so thin, as that white vail can not hide the face of that blacke rebellious divel that is under it. Whereof they being conscious that had been very well acquainted with the mysterie, no lesse then an whole Remonst. about the Treaty in the Isle of wight. armie together, conduct us to the per∣fect beholding the sweet countenance of this late Baal Berith as he lies. We crave (say they) leave to beleeve that an accommodation with the King, in the way & terms you are upon, or any at all, as the case now stands, that shall im∣plie his restitution; or shall not provide for his subjection to trial & judgement, would first not be just before God or man, but many wayes evill. Secondlie, would not be safe. 1. The Covenant engaging to the maters of religion, & pub∣like interests primarilie & absolutelie (marke that) with out any limitation, & after that to the preservation of the Kings person & authoritie, but with this restriction, (marke this too) viz. In the preservation of the true religion & liberties of the Kingdomes. In this case, though a Cavallier might make i a question, yet who will not rationallie resolve it, That the preceding maters of re∣ligion & the publike interest, are to be understood as the principal & supreme ma∣ters
engaged for, & that of the Kings person & authoritie as inferiour & subor∣dinate to the other. 2. That where persons joyning to make a mutuall covenant, if the absent parties shall oppose it & the maters contein'd in it, surelie that per∣son excludes himselfe from any claime to any benefit therefrom while he continues so refusing & opposing. So that you see notwithstanding the expresse articles forThe Cove∣nant destru∣ctive to all the Royal line. the preservation of Royaltie, His Majestie may be brought to his trial, & all his posteritie too, when the holie brethren can catch them, be murder'd at their owne gates according to the expresse sense of severall articles in the Co∣venant for maintenance of religion, & libertie. And what unkindnesse was here in the Scots to their King? Besides, whosoever will take the paines to com∣pareThe charge against K. Ch. 1. ta∣ken out of the Pr. Scots Remon∣strance. The Presb. Scots wicked Impostours, no messean∣gers of Christ. the particulars in the Scotish Remonstrance which they brought in their hands when they came in upon the Covenant, with those in the accursed Court proceeding against His late Royal Majestie may be able to doe Dorislaw, Steel, Cooke, &c. some litle courtesie in their credit & pleade for them that they drew not up, but onelie transscribed a charge brought long since from Eden∣burgh to London. And yet what unkindnesse was here in the Scots to their King? There is yet one thing more whereof upon this mention of Remonstrance & Covenant I can not but advertize my reader having but lightlie touch'd upon it before. That whereas the Scots in their Covenant confesse before God & the world many sinnes whereof they were guiltie, & for which they desire to be humbled. Viz. That they had not as they ought valued the inaestimable benefit of the Gospell. That they had not laboured for the puritie & power there∣of; That they had not endeavoured to receive Christ in their hearts (marke that) nor to walke worthie of him in their lives; These men tell the King in their re∣monstrance, That they come in the name of their Lord & Master Iesus Christ, to warne him about the guilt of I know not what sinnes they there heape together upon his soul. A very likelie storie to beleeve, That Christ had sent them into England with this covenanting paper in their hands; who had shut him out of doores very latelie, & would not receive him into their hearts. Notwithstanding all the pretended glorious successe, obteined more byThe Kings partie not subdued when His Majestie left Oxford. the name then exploits of the Scotish armie, the opposite partie was not so fullie subdued, but that the multitude of garrisons, (beside Newarke which might have cost them deare) surrender'd after His Majesties leaving Oxford make a great flame in the Burningbush which your zealous friend Iohn Vicars hath kindled. You will hardlie perswade any your judicious comparers of this your prefaceThe King not necessi∣tated to cast himselfe upon the Scots. with the many treacherous practices you had used, that His Majestie in the greatest necessitie would not have chosen rather to have cast himselfe into the mercilesse yet more mercifull armes of the sea, then without the strongest de∣liberate engagement into the perfidious & more fluctuating armie of the Scots. Nor yet had all your underhand oathes & promises prevaild for the unhappie credulitie of a most pious & prudent King, if some Better credit in all likeli∣hood, had not interposed it selfe, which it may be was more deceiv'd then it
deceived. Therefore your storie about London, Lin, Holland & France isHe had promised all reasonable satisfaction before. a greater circuit then his Majestie toke in his designed journey to Newarke. The promise of satifaction that caried him thence to New-Castle might have long before been his conduct to London if Religion & Reason might have been permitted to goe along which him. That he gave not what you expected, that is to say his Royal soul to the Di∣vel, his old oathes might very well hinder him, for I pray tell me why a KingHis Reli∣gious adhe rence to his old oathes. as well as a Rebell may not feare the oath of God. It is not unlikelie that the prime leaders of the English armie were at that time wearie of your companie, who fill'd the best of their quarters, & did least of your service, Nor that you were out of heart as wel as reputation by the signal victories to a miracle all most obteined against you, by, not your companion good Sir James Grahame, but the Thrice renowned Marquesse Mon∣trosse, whose proceeding had been most successefull & happie, & may they still be for His Majesties affaires. If there were such divisions in Scotland, what could better compose thémThe King presence migh: best have com∣posed the divisions in Scotland. then the personal presence of the King? but this was not according to the Kingdomes libertie meant in the third article of the covenant, In the preser∣vation of which, that is, so farre as you thought fit o make consistent with which, & in the defense of what they call the trc Religion, which you tooke for granted he never intended to complie with, you had sworne to de∣fend the Kings Majesties person, & that is one of the forenam'd expresse ar∣icles to that purpose. The hazard of a warre weighed heavier in the balance of your counsels then the hazard of his Royal person in the hands of his irre∣concileable enemies▪ forgeting that the worke of righteousnesse in performanceIsai. 32. 17. of your promises would have been a more lasting peace, & the effect of that righteousnesse, quietnesse & assurance for ever. The sectarian Armie which you scarce durst have call'd so at that time, hadHis garri∣sons surren∣dered upon the counter. feit profes∣sions of the Pr. Scots. otherworke then to goe into Scotland but that your hollow-hearted profes∣sions to the King, who was in no very indifferent case to make sure condi∣tions of advantage to himselfe, made him order the surrender of his garri∣sons into their hands. So you sav'd His Majestie from the racke to bring him to the scaffold▪ And you with your Brother-Presbyters escap'd the like tor∣ture then, but if you goe on to stretch your conscience till it cracke, we shall see as well the punishment as the guilt of that murder glowing at your heart. After two such accidental confessions wherein your Armie demonstrati∣velieThey ob∣ine no ter∣mes satis∣factorie to the King. shew'd themselves either false foolishlie credulous or cowards at best you reckon up several conveniences of His Majesties being in one of his houses neare London, when it had been ever before pretended to the poor deluded people that he was to be brought to his Parliament in London. And this you did upon the fayth of that Parliament, which you say kept up a sectarian Ar∣mie against you. A very good argument to prevaile with you for their credit. Vpon such termes as should be satisfactorie to the King, particularlie mentioned
in the paper deliverd to the King by the Committe of Estates upon the 15 of May 1646. & noted in that of Iune 8. to the speaker of the House of Peers, sub∣scribed▪ By his affectionate friends & humble servants, Lauderdail, Iohnston, Henrie Kennedie (your owne potent good Lord, &c.) That if▪ His Majestie should delay to goe about the readiest wayes, & meanes to satisfie both his King∣domes, they would be necessitated for their owne exoneration to acquaint the Com∣mittee of both Kingdomes at London that a course might be taken by joint advic of both Kingdomes, for attempting the just ends expressed in the solemne league & Covenant By which His Majestie was to bring satisfaction to them & you, not (as you say) to receive termes satisfactorie to himselfe. Wherein because he made not what hast was required, you exonerated your selfe of all the malice you had unto his person & made an end of his dayes, which was just the end you aim'd at in the Covenant. This being the true case, you aske, Whether it were any injustice? Yes, toTheir inju∣stice, un∣kindnesse imprudence imprison his person by confining him to an house, & to weaken his power by robbing him of his garrisons, Whether any unkindnesse? Yes, to give up your native King, who you confesse cast himselfe on your protection, to them who were so far from affording him any of his palaces neare London, that it was death for any man to harbour him in his house. What imprudence it was, let the best politician of you all speake, because ablest to judge; Or the worst, who by this time can evidence, how besotted you were to your utter disrepute & destruction; What advantage at that time you had to lay the fairest colour upon the foulest fact that ever you committed & win the world, by an after∣game, into an high opinion of your trust; What, to gaine the length of your line in the libertie of Religion or lawes; And, as for wealth & honour, you might, upon such a merit, in all likelihood, have had, what the vastest am∣bitious Helluo could aske, or three luxuriant Kingdomes could yeild you. Whereas now you have ript up your false hearts, & throw'n your guilt in the face of the sun; so that the sound of your rebellion is gone into all lands, & your treacherie travailes in a poverb even to the ends of the earth; Your Re∣ligion hath many times since struggled for life, which the mercie, or tempo∣rizing subtilitie of your sectarian enemie hath preserv'd, & your lawes have taken their libertie from his sword; He deteines at this time the wages of your wickednesse in his house, & your honour not long since kissed his foot, & by fower Commissioners humblie waited on him to his doores. But you come to a closer question, Whether the deliverie of the Kings per∣sonTheir deli∣verie of the Kings per∣son was a selling him to his Ene∣mies. were a selling of him to his enemies? Ans: It may be such for all that you say against it. Your Masters are not allwayes wont to pay your arreares upon single service, I hinted even now that your miscariages of late have cut you off a good sume that is behind, which by Ordinance of Parliament is to be disposed otherwayes. Let the capitulation have been in reference to what it will, & the Act of what you call the English Parliament exclude the disposal of the King; we know
that was the subject of many papers that pass'd between you, which were penned with so much collusion & cunning, that any broker might see a bar∣gaine was driving between craftie merchants, till, having clapt hands, the one brought his rich commoditie to Holmbic, & the other pay'd his money at Non-Castle. The unexpected evil (for I must alter the number & admit of none but theThey might have pre∣vented the murder that followed. murder of the King) that followed, which no mortal eye could foresce any mor∣tal heart might fore feare, & the well affected brethren have prevented, if they pleas'd. The Armies rebellion is very nonsignificant language from your pen, unlesse figurativelie expressing the vengeance of God upon that rebel∣lious citie, which with her golden cup had made the Land drunke, & the Na∣tions mad with the abundance of her wine.Ier. 51. 7. What you call destroying the Parliament was but the plucking up & thro∣wing out of the way that rotten root, the stocke & fairest branches whereof had been cut downe by the keen axe of a violent vote long before. How readie these Scots (which the Reviewer must vindicate) were to theThey were not readi to the utmost of their po∣wer. utmost of their power to have prevented the mischiefe in the murder of the King, & what hazard they ran of what was dearest to them appeares by their hast to come in to Duke Hamiltons partie, & the large contributions they gave to∣ward the raising an armie to that purpose. To make good the proverbe. Murder will out, the next words implie the Reviewers confession. The hard measure they had often receiv'd from the King stucke then in their stomakes, & An old grudge the reason why they were not. would not out till now, with their malice impostumated in his bloud. That they did not in time, & unanimouslie stirre to purpose for that end, they are in∣deed to answer it to God, who were the true authours thereof. And who they were let the Scotish pulpits (I meane not their Presbyters) speake out. The innocencie of the Church is not cleard in the following treatise to be so much as Pilates, they can not wash their hands in it, nor their mouth. They made theS. Matth. 27. 24. tumults they never asked what evill he had done, & this Royal bloudwill be upon them & upon their children. But here comes up a second part of their venemous vomit (for thoughThe Kings not gran∣ting all de∣mands. they cast the temptation upon the serpent, they charge the original sinne upon the King) The King gave not his good subjects satisfaction by granting all their demands which they found most necessarie & due, This they say [by the mouth of the Reviewer] was the cause of the many miseries, & if there be any connex∣ion, was the cause why they stirred not in time, & what's the meaning of this but Caiphas's expedit? It is very expedient very necessarie he die for these people, & (thankes good Presbyter Scot) pay this debt of satisfaction in his bloud Which conclusion is no sooner dispatched, but like very logical Rebells, they fall presentlie on making a new syllogisme, & prepare a second argu∣mentThey beare the like grudge a∣gainst K. Ch. 2. of the axe. The very same cause ties up this day the hands of Covenan∣ters—could they have (that is they can not have) the young King to joyne with them in their covenant, to quit his unhappie Bishops, to lay aside his formal
& dead liturgie & the satisfaction to his good subjects which they finde necess∣rie & due; He hath drawn some what beside his limbes from the loynes of his father; though the serpent hath not reach'd him the fruit of the forbiden tree, he hath transmitted as much malignance in In libro Cap. 1- the barke. Ergo when they get him into their hands (which God forbid) tis but talking a litle with the Pharisees & Priests, taking the money according to the covenant, They have made the premises & may then, sit at home with their hands in their pockets, being well assur'd the conclusion must follow, quia expedit, It is very expedient another man, because another King (which the hand of heaven powerfullie prevent.)The Revie∣wers politi∣ke flaterie. To draw him into the net, this decoy ducke courts His Majestie with more truth then good meaning; for he puts it into a parenthesis I'observe, that when hereafter it shall be left out, the Scotish Reviewer & Remonstrances may not jarre in their expressions. [A lovelie, hopefull, & promising Prince, for all naturall endowments, as this day breathes in Europe, or for a long time has sway'd a Septer in Britaine] And yet this lovelie Prince without taking the Covenant &c. shall not breath nor sway the scepter in Scotland. With which & some other ungracious principles a nest of these unluckie Northeme birds did latelie besiege him, not in his cabin, [for his fathers worke lay upon their hands, when he was there they wanting then the iron instrument to cut the silver cord of his life] but in his Royal bedchamber atEcclesiast. 12. 6. the Hague. And going home, it should seem by the weeping crosse, they & the good people, because they can doc no more, sit downe with mourn∣full eyes, till occasion be administer'd that by Dunce law (which holds as well against the sonne as the Father) they can doc no lesse then lie downe in their armes for their just & necessarie defense. But they hold here & 'tis time I thinke, for they have transgress'd to farre the bounds of an epistle.
CHAPTER I. The Scots bold address with the Covenant to K. Ch. 2 Their partie inconsiderable. The Bishops method, language, & matter asserted. The quaestion in con∣troversie unawares granted by the Reviewer.The unsea∣sonablenesse of the Scots coming to the King at the Hague. WHile Sixe walking Images, the pretended Commissio∣ners of the Church & Kingdome of Scotland, that is to say, a selected packe of the most zealous disciplinarian faction, which had fairlie wrought the destruction of both, were, with the greatest impudence that ever was heard of, pressing into His Majesties sad & most discon∣solate retirement at the Hague, when he held backe the face of hisIob 26. 9. Iob 16. 16. throne, & had spread his cloud upon it, When his face was foule with weeping, & on his eyelids the shadow of death; While, with the highest crueltie that could be, instead of condoling his most lamentable afflictions, beyond the tyrannie of Jobs comforters, they were going about not onelie to lay open in his sight, but to thrust violentlie that bloudie axe (the Covenant I meane) which had cut off his Royal Fathers head, into his hands; This reverend & resolute Prelate steps in between them & the Court, throwes in their eyes the guilt not onelie of their late actions, but of their old Antimonarchical as well as Aniprelaticall go∣vernment it selfe, not so much hoping to amuze them, or stop them in their progresse to the King (whose adamantine face, & elephan∣tine feet, he knew would breake through all the briars & thornes that the hand of truth could cut out of that Northerne wildernesse of errour, & lay, though ne'r so thicke, in their way) as to set the marke of that beast in their forhead, which destroyes root & branch of Religion & Lawes, of Regall & Apostolical government, yea & of the libertie of the people, that all well affected to any of these or themselves might have seasonable warning to get out of their way, or gather strength to hunt this wild monster out of the world.
Which accurate Remonstrance of the Bishops carying with it theThe seaso∣nable suc∣cesse of the Bishops Warning. highest authoritie of their Assemblie acts provincial & general, of the concurrent sense in the writings of many their deified Divines prevail'd with all impartial & advertend persons to bring this glit∣tering Godesse of the Scotsh discipline to the touch, to discover all the dirt & drosse whereof every limbe of her is made, & reduc'd many, her before incautious worshipers, to a better practice of their du∣tie, & opinion of the Catholike truth. So that the shrine trade being very likelie to goe downe, & the craftsmen's gaine to faile, this Demetrius, as it hapens, at a distance from the great companie of his brethren, adviseth onelie with one of his tribe & 3. or 4. the idolarous worshipers of his imaginations, & cries aloud in print Magna est▪ Diana, Great is Diana of the Scots. yea, so great he makes her in the very first page of his booke as if she were Queen of heaven & earth, no other divine providence but hers able to re∣cover▪ as he speakes, the wofullie confounded affaires of the King, &  other nations hands upon the earth but the Antiprelatical be the instruments to effect it. Whereas they are at this time the most inconsiderable faction in His Majesties Dominions, being kept at a bay by the present tyran∣nie in England, having such distractions & divisions among them∣selves,The Scotish Presbyte∣rians an in∣considerable partie. so intermingled with a Royal & Independent partie, that let them talke or write what they will▪ they can make no muster roll of their owne strength, & durst they speake out their desires, or could their guilt permit them an assurance of securitie & protection, they would with all their hearts take sanctuarie in the person, aswell as hitherto they have done an abused authoritie from the name, of their King, & cast themselves with their covenant, & their claimes, to all former concessions, even touching their discipline, at his foot. But desperatione ultim in furorem animus convertitur, instead of that they turne despaire into madnesse, hoping onelie for some miracle to be wrought by the hand of God, that they may have companie inSen Con∣rov. Iob 8. their ruyne. Naturali quodam deploratae mentis affectu morientibus, gratis∣simum est commori. But we are told the hopes of such hypocrites shall perish, That they shall be cut of, & their trust be but a spiders web. Having done his crie, he begins to chop logike with the Bishop,The Bishops method ap∣posite to his matter. complaines of his method, though most apposite to the purpose, calls for Scripture, Fathers, Reason, as if disciplinarian practical in∣stances required the strength of any of the three, unlesse the ver∣tuous precedents of Father Iohn of Leyden, or Kniperdolin should come in, as they may in judgement against the Scots. He admits of theHis proofe  by tenets
Bishops proofes (& I am very glad he doth) butias by , belonging litle or nothing to the main question: Whereas if The overthrowing the rights of Magistrates to convocate Synods, &c. Chapt. 2. Subjecting the supreme to their censures. chap. 5. Cheating him of his civile power in order to religion. ch. 7. be but by tenets; Their challenging this exorbitant power by divine right. ch. 8. That the exercise of it is hurtfull to all orders of men. chap. 12. Belong litle or nothing to the maine questions about the discipline, it should seem we must climbe heaven for the height of the controversie, & see whe∣ther it will suffer God any more then the King, to sit sure in his throne, & have the supreme government of the world. The heape of calumnis he mentions is a faythfull collection of historicall narra∣tions, which requires not the credulitie of the simple, but the search of sedulous people, if distrusted, who may take the other bookes in their way, & satisfie themselves about what passages he pretends to be detorted. If any of the Bishops allegations▪ are coincident with them in Lysi∣machusHis allega∣tions con∣firm'd by others. Nicanor & Isachars burden, they have two witnesses at least to quit them at the barre, & need not stand to the mercie of Iudge Baylie for their pardon. Whatsoever were the sufferings of the au∣thours Mr. Corbet & Mr. Maxwell the Reverend Arch-Bishop ofThe Revie∣wers rash & uncharita∣ble judge∣ment about the ends of Mr. Corbes & Arch-Bishop Maxwell. Towmond, truth & integritie ought not to be danted, The hand of heaven is not allwayes guided by the mouth, nor Gods judge∣ments discernd by the eye of the Disciplinarian brethren, though most commonlie we heare of no lesse then the murder of the best men, when they make themselves dispensers of his punishments. I am crediblie informed that Mr. Corbet was murderd by the Irish, the Arch-Bishop, stript naked & left desperatelie wounded, but by Gods mercie recover'd & since died a natural death. What spirit it is that hath coind Mr. Baylie into this uncharitable beliefe of Gods strange punishments in their ends, or rather fram'd contrarie to his conscience this rash judgement in his mouth I leave to the Chri∣stian reader to conjecture. Had the like befallen any couple of his brethren, he would have writ with their bloud some red letters in the Calendar, & made them currentlie passe for two Martyrs of the discipline. If what the Bishop & they have jointlie published beHis vanitie in mentio∣ning the frequent impressions of his books fullie aswered by Mr. Baylie in his booke printed at London, Edenburgh & Amsterdam, because the weight of the presse addes every time more strength to his arguments, for I know not else to what purpose he mentions the severall impressions) he might have sav'd this labour of Reviewing, & publish'd a fourth editon of it at Delfe. After so much praejudice the Bishop is beholding to you for his
hearing, & since you have tasted the sweetnesse of his spirit, & soberneHis lan∣guage more bitter then the Bishops & his hast greater to vent it. No regard wanting in the Bishop to Scripture nor reve∣rence to th Reformed Churches. of his language in his first page, you doe well to spit out the bitter∣nesse of your owne in a mad epistle before your booke. If any regard had been wanting in his Lordship to the passages of Scrip∣ture whereupon you build your Antiepiscopal tenets, the quotations would have been some what more numerous in your Review. That no reverence should be required to the harmonie of the Reformed he takes care in the third paragraph of his booke where he sayth he hopes there is nothing whereof he convicteth you but will be disavowed ...... by all the Protestant Churches in the world, which it should seem they may doe & yet agree with you in the maine of your discipline, for you calld all those but by∣tenets ev'n now. That they doe so beyond a non admission, to a re∣jection of our Episcopacie as Antichristian (between which as I take it there is some difference) I desire you to tell us where. What respect the Bishop beares to the Civile Magistrate & lawes, appea∣res best by his vindication of just authoritie to them both againstNor respect to the Ma∣gistrate and lawes. your disciplinarian incroachments. His Lordship doth not forget by what authoritie your discipline is established though the extravagance of your practices stands not justified by that which you pretend to. If your rule doth, it doth not quit it selfe of censure, in reference to its reception otherwhere, because vested with the power of a civile law in Scotland; nor is that law unalterable when a future Par∣liament may take into consideration the inconveniencies that ac∣companie it. The Bishop need not be grieved▪ being as ignorant as your selfe (& you are enough, as King knowing as you would seem) that His Majestie doth not at all question the justice, because he doth not the legalitie of these sanctions. Therefore his Lordship may thinke on, & speake on when he pleaseth more about this bussinesse, & yet vouch with out a marke loyaltie in his face; nor (for ought you draw from him) need his veines be so emptie, nor his stomake so sharpe set as to eate his former words, much lesse be so desperate as to burne his whole booke, the consistence of it with his toughts, & professions laying no slan∣der upon the King, & his Royal Father of ignorance, & injustice, the one havingThe Bishop no slanderer of the King no his Roy∣al Father. established, the other offering to establish by your civile lawes such a Church disci∣pline as is mentiond, both having done it upon most unreasonable importunitie, without any know'n inclination to, or approbation of the same, Farther, what a slander this would prove, upon your grounds (beyond the irreverence toward any actions of a King) which is haled hither in a forced consequence by the cords of your malice may be guessed by the Royal Father's confession in his soli∣tude. If any shall impute my yeilding to them [the Scots] as my failing, &Eikôn Ba∣silikôn ch. 17. sinne, I can easilie acknowledge it; but that is no argument to doe so agai, or
much more For the Royal sonne, His Majestie now being▪ you say, heThe Revie∣wers seaso∣nable ad∣vertisse∣ment about the Kings late offer, to the Scots. hath not yet gone beyond an offer, therefore His Martyr'd Fathers poenitential acknowledgement of his failing, & sinne join'd to your seasonable admonition, That there can be no such actual concession, but upon the peril of ignorance, or huge injustieé, except he ownes it aswell to be the religious dictate of his conscience, as a poltike in∣dulgence upon necessitie of state, may probablie move him at leisure to deliberate, & whatsoever he shall determine to doe in this, (wherein God direct him for the best) aswell for his owne sake, as the saftie of his Kingdomes make him cautious hereafter how the importunitie of the mission gets ground upon his goodnesse, when all his grants shall be so publikelie registred as conscientious acts, &, by such barbarious pens, deliver'd to posteritie as sealed with his soule. The Bishops presumption in that which followes is none but whatNo resh presump∣tion in the Bishop. from the grounds of modest Christian charitie may be raised, viz. That a knowing & a just King (such as your owne character renders him) will acknowledge that contrarie to the dictates of his conscience, which is proved contrarie to the lawes of God, & man, And this may be proclaimed, if not prohibited without being his Confessour or taking it from the Clerke of the closet in any whisper. Nor doth your mistrust of reports beare authoritie enough, to make His Majesties conscience passe for Presbyterian, no more then that for a command, or imposition by law which was by your petitionarie violence ravish'd from his passive innocencie into a grant. So that you see in the very beginning you stum∣ble at a strawe, & being to finde somewhat worse in your way, you were best life your legs higher in your progresse.The Scots endeavours to impose their disci∣pline upon England. How much the Disciplinarian Scots have contributed from the beginning toward the alteration of Religion in England, is too large a storie to be inserted in this dispute. Their old account the Rt▪ Reverend Arch-Bishop Bancroft cast up in his Dangerous positions, & English Scotizing Discipline. their later arreares ruu very high in the historie of our times, beginning with his religious & learned successour, The losse of whose head is not more to be imputed to the peoples clamours, then the Scotish papers. Whatsoever they did before, I hope they can not denie themselves to be one of the horned beasts, which together with their English brethren make the supporters of the Presbyterian Rebells scutcheon in the Cove∣riant. This in their remonstrance upon their last inroad into En∣gland, when their fainting brethren with the cause were giving up the ghost, they tell the King plainlie they shall zealouslie & constantlie in their
severall vocations endeavour with their estates & lives to persue & advance. This pursuance was against the King & Bishops, which with the Convo∣cation of divines are the true & full representatives of the Church of England. The assemblie of Divines were but locusts & caterpillars brought together at Westminster by a Northerne wind. The lawes of England convocate no such creatures nor in such a maner. King & Parliament were mere names, had then, & there, no real being, & so no breath to such a purpose, nor those in the two Houses after∣ward more then the heads on the top of them in any politike capaci∣tie to ordaine the abolition of Episcopacie. Beside, what the Assemblie did de∣liberate & debate, poor mechanike people 'tis very well known'n they did as daylie labourers, & sacrilegious, hirelings, spend the thred of their time in your service, & payd the price of their souls for a sequestration or two the Covenanting brethren's pillage of the Church. So that if they began the song, you know by whom they were payd for their paines, & if they danc'd not after your pipe, poor scraping wretches they came at your call, & howsoever you were in a medley together, to be sure your Covenanting Divel had got you all into a circle, & will better distinguish you when he calls to you for his reckoning. But, by your favour good Sir, His Majestie kept out,K. Ch. 1. in no har∣monie with the Presby∣terians. & for the very three yeares you mention told you plainlie he would make one in the practike harmonie of the Catholike Church. That permission (for it was no more) necessitie extorted, & though he could not at that time get you all into Bedlam, he thought in three yeares you would pipe & dance your selves wearie & then be content to give way to a better solemnitie of the Cathedral musike to come in. In the meane time estates & lives engag'd in the advancement of the Covenant by the sword, the end thereof being to setle discipline, was meing with & imposing upon our Church. Quod erat demonstrandum. The Bishop you see gives a shrewd guesse who they are you en∣deavourAll Prote∣stants im∣plied to be Erastians as well as the Episco∣pal by Mr. Baylie. to brand with the name of Erastians, & how all Protestant Churches, even such as are not Episcopal, must be beholding to you for that title because they come not up to the rigour of your Disci∣pline. Wherein Erasttus flaterd the Magistrate to the prejudice of the just rights of the Church, concernd you aswell to prove as to mention, & then to have draw'n a parallel of the like flaterie in the Bishop. Your doubting argues you ignorant or negligent, & confir∣mes my beleefe that you have travail'd as litle in Erastus's doctrines as his wayes, & gone no farther then the title of his booke. What His Lordship asserts about the supremacie of the Civile Magistrate, & Ecclesia∣stike jurisdiction derived from thence is but what he & all his brethren have
sworne to, & not one of the late Bishops retracted who claim'd Episcopacie by divine righs, nor were they at daggers drawing with that horrible word Erastian Caesaro-papisme; having a farre more monstrous crea∣ture, call'd Scoto-Presbytero-Papisme, to encounter. Our lawes are the same aswell to the latter as the elder Bishops, & if their sub∣jection to them must be accounted such an errour, the next pedlars pack that you open we may looke to finde Christianitie bundell'd up into a sect. The Bishop hath more charitie in him then to become an accuser of his friends, & so much ingenuitie as to heare your sense, not onelie speake his owne about their writings, which when you bring in any particular instance shewing them to joyne with the most rigid▪ Presbyterians in opposing Erastus about the Magi∣strates power, you may looke for your answer Here the Reviewer, I can not say for want of a pare of spectaclesThe Revie∣wer not ac∣quainted with the late contro∣versie be∣tween us & the Papists. (for who is more blinde then he that will not see) is pleas'd to over looke the whole bodie of the Bishops charge against them, & instead of quiting himselfe to any purpose, recriminates onelie upon other mens scores, having; as it seemes, been very slenderlie acquainted with the late controversies between the Papists & us, & not sounded the depth of the question, as it was stated by our later most learned writers, particularlie that most glorious martyr the Right Reverend Arch-Bishop of Canterburie with the rational & subtile Mr. Chillingworth, who between them having clear'd the well of that dirt which defil'd commonlie the fingars of them that went to draw water at it before, made the face of truth appeare at the botome to any that came impartiallie to behold it. But the Bi∣shop mentioning nothing hearebout, I have no authoritie farther to enlarge, being oblig'd onelie to put Mr. Baylie in mind that in his next Review he give account to the world, Why the Scotish Presbyterie comes not into the harmonie of all Protestants both Lutharans & Calvinists, who give unto the English Episcopal Church the right hand of fellowship & why he & his later Brethren out doe their forefathers▪ who durst not condemne her either as defective in any necessarie point of Christian pietie, or redundant in any thing that might virtuallie or by consequence overthrow the foundation. TheNo Canter∣burian de∣signe but what was forged at Edenburg. Canterburian designe was forged at Edenburgh into a passe for the Scots to come over the borders. The Prelatical partie might charitablie wish, but never rationallie hope to see all Christian Churches uni∣ted in truth & love, so long as the perverse Presbyterie confines all Religion to it selfe. For whatsoever the blew caps came in, we know when they went out they caried many vvainloades of somevvhat else beside the spoile of the blacke-caps reconciliation vvith Rome,
& so long as such bootie is to be had, they want more power, then will, to set up a new controversie in England. But while they are thinking of that, I must put them in mind of what we have in hand, & notwithstanding Mr. Baylies pretense assure him King James, who had trouble enough with them, makes good upon his owne expe∣rience, that every nicitie u a fundamental among them, & every toy takesBasilik∣dor. up as great a dispute, as if the Holie Trinitie were question'd......De minimis Politiae Ecclesiasticae quaestiunculis tantum excitant turbarum ac si de sa∣crosancta Trinitate ageretur.The Scot heretofore gave no so bad lan∣guage to the English Bi∣shops. 1. Pet. 5. 2 As touching your answer to the last charge, you cunninglie omit what is found in the letter, a word at least of approbation to the office of Episcopacie, in that Bishops are call'd guides, or leaders of Christs flock, wherein a superintendence, Prelacie, or precedence is own, they being Pastorum Pastores, for by the flocke there is mean'd the inferiour Ministerie, not Laitie, otherwise that text of St. Peter is unfitlie applied, Feed the flocke of Christ, which is committed to your charge, caring for it not by constraint e'piscopôuntes mi a'nagkastôs [e'piscopôuntes is being Bishops over it] where a'nagkastôs must relate to the Ministers who were constrained to weare the cap, surplice, & tippet, or else be deprived of all Ecclesiastical function as your Assemblie complaines at the very be∣gining of the letter. Yet had they writ no more then you produce, & had been of the same minde with you now, it would follow ne∣cessarilie that you acknowledge several members of Antichrist Mi∣nisters of the word, reverend Pastours & brethren of the Kircke. Which give me but under your hand in your next. My Lord of Derrie I presu∣me will use you, as his profess'd brother very kindlie, & trouble you no more about that businesse. I must adde this; Mr. Knox, as furious otherwise as he was, before Queen Elizabeths time when as your Historian relates in his life, K. Edward VI. offered him a Bi∣shoprike, he refus'd it with a grave severe [yet not so severe] speach saying the title of Lordship & great state had quid commune cum Antichristo, somewhat common with Antichrist, he sayd not the office of an English Bishop was Antichristian, nor his person a limbe of Antichrist him∣selfe. What the same Assemblie sayd or did about the Arch-Bishop ofThough they acted enough a∣gainst their Bishops a me. St. Andrewes was in the midst of their freanzie, when, as by their actions may be judged, they had alreadie made good what they threatned, & were become subjects or slaves to the tyrannie of the Devil, Whose title their successours, have these last ten yeares renewd, & payd a greater homage then ever, to that Lord. What you suppone is a grant of the question, That some 80. yeares
agoe the Scots might admit the Proiestant Bishops tolerable in England, the law being still the same upon which they are founded, & if their pra∣ctice be not, which is more then you prove, whatsoever it may de∣tract from their persons, it derogates no thing from the continu∣ance of their office. Neither hath your inspection been so accurate of its nature, but that like unskillfull physicians, ye have cast awayIerr. 8. 22. that balme of Gilead whereby the health of the daughter of Gods people must be re∣covered, & like ignorant simplers, have throw'n over the hedge for a noxious weed that Soveraigne plant which God ordain'd for the perpetual service & sanitie of his Church. As for those crimes which you mention, though you will never beThe crimes alleged not the grounds of K, Ch. 1. his conces∣sions against Episcopacle in Scotland able to make them good against the Reverend Prelates of any the three Kingdomes, yet for shame say not for those you got the consent of the King to condemne, kill & burie in your countrey the sacred order of Episcopacie in that Church. His Majestie having not expressed the least word or syl∣labe to that purpose. The most that ever he yeilded was this. For it should be considered that Episcopacie was not so rooted, & setled there [in Scot∣land] as tis here [in England] nor I (in that respect) so strictlie bound to con∣tinue it in that Kingdome as this: for what I thinke in my judgement best, I may not thinke so absolutelie necessarie for all places, & at all times. Not so rooted & setled, not so absolutelie necessarie implies no act of everting the foundations both of Religion & Government &c. nor can such an act be so pleasing to Kings, nor that order, which is wholelie imployed therein, win so much upon their affections & judgements as to make them professe to the world they thinke it best, as you see our King of blessed memorie hath done. When England thereafter, as you terme it, did root out that unhappie plant,Episcopacie in England not put downe by a legal As∣semblie, & Parliament they danc'd after the Scotish pipe, though England was neither in that thing, calld an assemblie, nor in any full & free Parliament that did it. They were but a few rotten members, that had strength enough then to articulate their malice in a vote, but have since given up the ghost being cut downe by the independencie of the sword, & their presbyterie with them, for a Stinking weed throw'n over the hedge, or Severu's wall, into Scotland, where they, & their blew-bottle brethren are left to lie unpittied on the dunghill together. The rest of the Reformed Churches otherwhere did never cast out, what they never had, such an happie plant as regular Episcopacie in their grounds, those that have (as some such I have told you there are) carefullie keep it. The one part hath been more wise in their actions, the other more charitable to us in their words. Let the Scots ap∣plaud, or clap their hands when they please, there is an act behind, the plays' not yet done.
CHAPTER II. The Scottish Discipline overthrowes the right of Ma∣gistrates to convocate Synods, & otherwise to order Ecclesiastical affaires. THe Bishop doth not forget his challenge about the Magistrates right inThe Revie∣wer kno∣wes not good logike when he meetes with it. convocating Synods. But if Mr. Baylie's eyes be too old to see a good, argument in an enthymem, let him take it out of an explicite syllogisme, which may fairlie be draw'n out of His Lordships first & second paragraph in this Chapter. MAJ. That Discipline which doth countenance the Church to convene within the Magistrates territories, whensoever, wheresoever they list: To call before them whomsoever they please, &c: doth over∣throw the Magistrates right to convocate Synods. to confirme their Acts, &c. MIN. But this new Discipline doth countenance the Church to convene within the Magistrates territories, whensoever, wheresoever they list, &c. Ergo, CONCL. This new Discipline doth overthrow the Magistrates right to con∣vocate Synods, &c. The Major his Lordship proves from that know'n Soveraignite of power wherewith all Princes, & States are indued; From the warinesse of the Synod of Dort, Can. 50. From that decree out of Ench. Cand s∣min. Synods ought to be called by the supreme Magistrate, if he be a Christian, &c. From the power the Emperours of old did challenge over General Councels; Christian Monarches in the time of Poperie over National Synods; The Kings of England over their Convocations: The Estates of the Vnited Provinces. From the professions of all Catholikes & Protestants in France, very particularlie & liberallie the State of Geneva, where the ordering of all Ecclesiastike affaires is assumed by the Seigniorie. The Minor, he takes for granted, is know'n out of all the procee∣dings in the Presbyterie; which from time to time have thus con∣ven'd, & convocated themselves, & therefore His Lordship onelie intimates it in his first paragraph, yet afterward proves it in part by an Assemblie, meeting when it had been prohibited, & sitting after it was discharged by the King, which the 20. Presbyters did at Aberdene
Anno 1600. And all this with the Reviewer, is to forget the challenge, because he hath forgot his logike, & the new light hath dazeld the eye of his old intellectual facultie to discerne. The truth of it is, this was a litle too hot for Mr. Baylies fingars, because it makes such cleare instances about the Synod of Dort & Geneva, wherein they dif∣fer from the Scotish Presbyterie, which he will not owne because he every where denies, & therefore takes no notice of it as he goes. Nor can any ignorance of the way of the Scotish Discipline be imputed to theThe Bishop not ignorant of the way of the Sco∣tish Disci∣pline. Bishop, who produceth, so numerouslie, the practical enormities thereof, & strikes at the very foundation as infirme, because contra∣rie to the know'n lawes & lawfull custome, the supreme Magistrate dissenting & disclaiming. For what he pretends to have been unquestionablie au∣thentike by vertue of Parliament Acts & the Kings consent since the first re∣formation, I have otherwhere successivelie evidenc'd, up as farre as the unhappie beheading of Marie Queen of Scots in England, (to which the rest may be hereafter annexed) to have no other strength then what rage & violence could afford it. The power which he saythThe Revie∣wers Sophy∣strie. every man in Scotland gives the King, without controversie, to call extra∣ordinarie Assemblies when he pleaseth, takes not away, in its hast, the maine part, of the Bishops objection, implying no negative to this. That the Presbyterie, hath often extraordinarilie assembled without the Kings leave, nay against his command, nor will they be checkt in that rebellious li∣cense by his power. What the Bishop meanes to speake of the Kings power in chusing Elders, &c.The Bishops meaning a∣bout the Kings power in chusing Elders. Mr. Baylie might know, but that still he hath no mind to take notice, That in the former paragraph His Lordship spake of a seigniorie, a Civile Magistrate at Geneva, to which at the end of the yeare are presented the Elders, & by that continued or discharged. The Civile Magistrate in Scotland hath no more power in placing or displacing, (which before was calld conti∣nuing or discharging) the Elders, then in the election of the Emperour, whose inhaerent right he conceives to be as good there as at Geneva, there∣fore if the lawes do not expresselie provide it, they are such, he thinkes, as tend to the overthrowing of that right. This His Lord∣ship meanes as part of that he was to prove, being a clause in the title of his Chapter. Your closing with the Parliament, which the Bishop hath not men∣tion'd,Ecclesiasti∣ke lawes. is but to beget a wonder by making an hermaphrodite of the question which before was but single in your sexe. You are not so u∣nited, but that I can untwist you, &, though against your will, con∣sider, in this case, the Presbyterie by it selfe. The making of Ecclesia∣stike lawes in Scotland (as for England it shall not be here disputed, as
desirous as you▪ are to be wandring from home) was never▪ in ju∣stice, nor with any Kings content, referred, so absolutelie, to EcclesiastikeThe head of the Church. Assemblies, as not to aske a ratification from the crowne. What the Bishops minde is about the head of the Church will be clearlie rendred when just Authoritie demands it, but His Lordship thinkes not good to be catechiz'd by every ignorant Scotish Presbyter, nor give ans∣wer to every impertinent question he puts in. If your fingars itch to be handling the extrinsecal power in the Minister derivative from the supremacie of the King you were best turne over Erastus & the learned Grotius, after which I guesse weAssembles are the Kings arbi∣trarie Coun∣ss. shall heare of you no more. Your Assemblies are Arbitrarie but at Royal pleasure otherwise then as by your covenanting sword you cut of their relation to the King & his great Councels. So that your Kings were willing to accept, & had good reason to assume, more then ever you would give them. How you robd them of their right by your multipli'd rebellions seeThe Bishop had reason to instance in particu∣lars. Scotish-Presbyterian selfe conviction in my Epitome of your storie. If the Bishop had left this matter in generall, your hue & crie to be sure, had gone after him for particulars. His reasoning stands not to the courtesie of your indulgence, being grounded upon the Acts of your Assemblies, whose backes had been long since broke with the weight, of no peckadillos in disputing, but high & mightie villanies in rebelling, had it not the strength of the whole lay Presbyterie to sup∣port it. Though by the way I must tell you, The failings of your offi∣cers may be taken as naturall to, & inseparable from your office, when, ha∣ving been so notoriouslie publike, they passe without your censure, or dislike. So that this mote, as much as you miskenne it, will prove a beame in your eye, & of such consequence in this argument, as you will scarce finde the way through the most hainous particu∣lars that follow. The first of which layes such a blocke in your way, as you canThe Assem∣blie contest with the King about his com∣mand. not step over, till you have as good as acknowledged one of the principal articles in that charge. You confesse His Majestie did write from Stirling to the General Assemblie at Edenburgh 1579. that they should cease from concluding any thing in the discipline of the Church, during the time of his minoritie. And how well you obey'd it, we may collect by what followes. Vpon this desire [dutifull subjects would have taken it for a command] the Assemblie did abstaine from all conclusions [that we shall see presentlie] onelie they named a Committee to goe to Striveling for conference with His Majestie upon that subject. Any man that is acquainted with your Assemblie logike will know that this clause with the onelie, if
it passe not for a conclusion, caries the force of two praemises with it; And he must be very ignorant in your storie that hath not found all your conferences with your Kings to have been contests. Whether this was so or no, I leave to the discretion of the reader, when he sees what you say followed thereupon. Immediatelie a Parliament is called in Octob. 1579. And in the first Act declares & grants jurisdiction unto the Kirke .......... And declares that there is no other face of a Kirke, nor other face of Religion, then is praesentlie, by the favour of God established within this Realme, And that there be no other jurisdiction Ecclesiasticall acknowledged within this Realme, then that whilke is & shall be within the samen Kirke, or that which followes therefrae concerning the praemises. Now let us lay all this together. The young King is resolved to have no medling with the discipline, yet no sooner doth he see your Commissioners sweet faces, but im∣mediatelie a Parliament is called And in that Parliament your Disci∣pline must have the primacie In the Acts; And that leading Act must not onelie establish what you have at hand, but, upon the engage∣ment of Regal & Parliamentarie power, purchase all future possi∣bilities of your pleasure, & give your invention a patent to play the wanton. There must be some witchcraft sure in your Committee, & (by your relation) a magicke spell to retrive on such a sodaine, the Kings wandring affections to the Discipline.Conf. at Hapt. Court. Ad. Mel∣vin Epist. ad Th. Bez. 1579. K. I & his Nobilitie against the Discipline. Vindic. Epist. Hieron. Philadelph The Revie∣wer & his brethren agree not in their storie. Duo foliae dila erata & in ignem conjecta. But when I finde His Majestie professing, that after ten yeares of age you never had his heart. A brother of yours lamenting that for five yeares before this you had had a perpetual conflict with the Bishops, & ever got the worst. That most of the Nobilitie, upon several interests, were at this time bent against you, I am at a losse for the Kings li∣bertie, as much as for some other concurrent due authoritie, in this Act, & reade nothing but your violence in these proceedings. But let us see how you & a namelesse friend of yours agree. He tells us the letter that Dunkenson brought to this Assemblie had other∣guede contents. That the King onelie quickned your dispatch in consultation a∣bout some head of the discipline, & preparing your unanimous result for the consent of the Parliament that followes. The Kings jealousie of your medling with these affaires he see∣mes to anticipate by two yeares of your account & if there were any such thing, whereof he doubts, he sayth the King was better informed of the truth. He farther complaines of two whole leaves about this businesse that were rent out of your publike records. that ever since left posteritie in a cloud this was done in the yeare 1584. which he calls the houre of darknesse. You say the authentike Regi∣sters
are extant, & convince the Bishop to be heire of falshood. Error caecut quâ cpit eat All the truth that I can picke out of this confusion is, That the King was disaffected to the Discipline; That the Assem∣blie did not obey his command nor answer his desire with their si∣lence; And that what consent you say, he gave in Parliament soon after, was either forg'd, or procured by constraint. What followes con∣cerning your rigour to the Papists, & many orthodoxe Christians comprehended in that title, is easilie credited. But you should have done well to have set downe the names Dominorum Consilii ex quo∣rnm deliberatione proclamation was made, & then we should have know'n how neare they were of knn to your faction. Some bodie tells us, That the Ministers did deliberate, & Buchanan did act [according toGeor. Con. De duplic. stat. Relig. apud Scot. lib. 2. ..... ministri cū omnia ex suo suorum∣que arbitrio pendere, sa∣vente & an∣nitente im∣primis Bu∣chanan, cernerent, &c. K. I. his dislike of the short Confession. Many un∣justifiable practices about it. Vindie. E∣pist Hieron. Philadelph. Archiepis. Fan, S. Andr. Pa. 1 77 the maximes of loyaltie he publish'd.] That the Kings name was to it, & what else you pleased, is not much to be doubted, when you had got his person in your power. For how short a time you could keep his inclination to the Discipline, which was proclaim'd, ap peares out of your storie of an Assemblie mans penning. How cordiallie peremptorie the King was in his command, & how forward in subscribing whatsoever is in the Act for the short Confession of fayth; And what good effects it wrought among the people, you may take notice out of His Majestie speach in the Conference at Hampton Court, wherein he shewes how ridiculous the thing was, & the person that drew it up. I thinke it unfit to thrust into the booke every position negative .......... according to the example of Mr. Craige in Scotland, who with his I renounce & abhorre, his detestations & abrenunciations, did so amaze the simple people, that they not able to conceive all those things, utterlie gave over all, falling backe to Poperie, or remaining still in their former ignorance. These are the Kings words about Mr. Craige the Authour, & his Confession, which you may compare with the Act, you pretend to at your leisu∣re. The approbation of the Assemblie was but the harmonie of a faction, such being excluded as were not prejudged approvers or, if prae∣sent, overaw'd by a praevalent partie in their vote, as much as other Ministers abroad, by Philadelphi Vindicatours confession, in their consent. Qus credat quenquam, qui rem sacram administrabat....... ausum fuisse calculo suo non probare. Or if they were free & did ap∣prove it, they did it in that sense that many Orthodoxe persons did sweare or subscribe it ........... in eam confessionem jurâsse neminem Pres∣byteriorum regimini alligat. Which King Ch. 1. in his large Declara∣tion tells you to be consistent with Episcopacie, is unquaestionablie true. Or it may be the register of your approvers was handled as the roll of subscribers, wherein were a great many more names then
had been hands ............. adde Episcopos nunc sedentes & magnam partemArchiepis. Fan. S. Adr. Ministrorum subscriptiones illas inficiari. The opposition Of the Kings Com∣missioner it may be was ingrossed in the two leaves torne out of your publike records, if not left out as impertinent to the procee∣dings of that Assemblie. If he gave a passive consent by his si∣lence, it was in conformitie to his Masters subscription & command which you mention'd. The direction of His Majestie for the 50. Classical Assemblies was specializ'd by your power which did direct him. The erecting of them was with no intent to pull downe Epis∣copacie, as may be, in effect gather'd from your words. For if they remaine to this day, the same stood while the Bishops were in po∣wer as subordinate chapters or consistories unto them. These some Noble men, you speake of, were most of the Nobilitie,Epist. ad Theod. Bez The reason upon which the Nobili∣tie main∣tained Bi∣shops. Pseudo-Episcopatu. as your Brother Andr. Melvin doth acknowledge .......... reluctan∣tibus nobilium plerisque. And these did not now erect, of new, a ti∣tular Episcopacie, but maintained that which had been legallie esta∣blished. And this they did, not onelie to hold fast their Ecclesia∣stical revenue, but upon other more conscientious grounds, as he ingenuouslie confesseth. Viz. To keep the state of the Kingdome entire from being rent in pieces; sublato enim Episcopatu [Il'e leave the lie for his heires to licke up] regni statum convelli. To prae∣serve Majestie due to the King▪ constitutis Presbyteriis regiam▪ Majesta∣tem imminui And, by asserting his right to some Church revenues, to prevent the utter exhausting of his exchequer ......... bonis Eccle∣siasticis ........... restitutis Regis aerarium exhauriri causantur. That the Nobilitie enjoyed so much of the revenue, beside whatThe Presby∣terie the Cause of the Nobilities keeping the revenue of the Church. was payd in to the King, came upon the perpetual divisions rais'd by the Presbyterie in the Kingdome, which perturbing ever the establishment of the Episcopal order, & voting them to have no more right to the meanes then they had to the office, the lear∣ned at least & prudent Nobilitie having better assurance that nei∣ther power nor meanes belong'd de jure to the brethren of the discipline, it is not unlikelie, till the controversie should be ended, they framed a kind of plausible argument to continue the steward ship in themselves. Yet in the meane time, by your leave, theyEpiscopacie more then titular by the Cove∣nanters acknowled∣gement. did effectuate more then a title to this & tulhan Bishop: And this kind of Prelates pretended right to every part of the Episcopal office, & exerciz'd much more then you mention'd. Which having been made good against you in several volumes, I shall onelie bring an undeniable argument, by producing confitentes reos, the whole packe of Covenanters of all orders & qualities, aswell Ministers, as
others, Who in their publike bill or Complaint, upon which an Act of the Presbyterie of Edenburgh passed Octob. 24. 1638. have these words. Whereas the office of a Bishop (as it is now used within this Realme) was condemned by the booke of policie, & by the Act of the Assemblie holden at Dundee, Anno 1580. Whereof these are the words; For asmuch as the office of a Bishop (as it is now used, & commonlie taken within this Realme) hath no sure warrant from Authoritie, &c. Hence I argue thus. The office of a Bishop now used in the yeare 1580. & the office of a Bishop, now used in the yeare 1638. is ex confesso the same. But the office of a Bishop 1638. consisted in the power of ordination & jurisdiction: Ergo so did the office of a Bishop 1580. And as much is implied by the Act of that Synod which condemnes expresselie the power as well as the title of Bishops, & that with reference to the persons of the Bishops then living, that had executed this power, & were to lay it down or become excommunicate. Therefore you shew us but the halfe face in your discovrse about their voting in Parliament, Into which imployment they crept not, but came upon confidence of better authori∣tie then any general Assemblie could give them, as shall be proved hereafter, particularlie in the case of Rob. Montgomerie Arch-Bishop of Glasgow whom you name. That there was some debate ta∣kes of somewhat from the Kings forwardnesse in commanding, subscri∣bing & directing in special. That he shew'd hi good satisfaction, I beleeveThe Bishop too courteous in passing over 27. yeares storie not, when you publish it with a blancke Reviewer. But the Warner heere jumps over no lesse then 27. yeares time, &c. Ans. The Bishop un∣dertooke no continued historie of your Disciplinarian rebellions. Therefore in passing over 27. yeares he sav'd himself a trouble, but hath done too great a courtesie for you, unlesse you were more thankefull for his silence. Though indeed this signal rebellious Convention of a few stubborne ignaro's at Aberdener shewes to whatmeane, base, & abject persons, who were never any way re∣markable as men of great gifts Decl. of His Majesties Conc. Imperfect policie alte∣rable at the Kings plea∣sure. an height & maturitie of mischiefe your other sucking Conspira∣cies had come to; if Royal presence had not been at hand to sup∣presse their growth & nip these blacke boutefeus in the bu. That King Iames at that time was by his English Bishops perswasions resolv'd to put downe the general Assemblies of Scotland, is disavowed in words by pu∣blike proclamation, bearing date the 26. Septemb. & in act by appoin∣ting one to be holden at Dundee the last Tuesday of Julie. Yet if he had, with the grave advice & consent of his three Estates, your Church lanes & constant practice must have strooke saile, as it after∣ward did, unto the supremacie of that power. Himselfe telling you, That no Monarchie either in Civillor Ecclesiastical policie, had then at∣tained to that perfection that it needed no reformation; Nor that infinite occasiou
might not arise, whereupon wise Princes might foresee, for the benefit of their , just cause of alteration. For what immediatelie followes, take His Majesties answer out of a Declaration penned with his owne hand. As to the nature of their particular priviledge in holding of Assemblies, theyThe Privi∣ledge of As∣semblies li∣mited. have in this their last praetended Assemblie broken the limitations of that privi∣ledge that is clearlie set downe in the first Acte of the Parliament in the 92 yeare, which is the latest & clearest warrant for their Assemblie. For there it is speciallie provided. That as We give them license for holding of their Assemblies once in the yeare or oftner as occsion shall require (which proves that all their power onelie pro∣ceeds from us) so must it not be convened without our owne praesence, or then of our Commissioner, nor no day, nor place set downe for the next Assemblie, but by Our, or our Commissioners appointment, except we be not pleased neither to goe in our owne person, neither to send any for assisting the sayd Assemblie. And how these limitations have beene observed by them at this time, let the world judge, first in not onelie refusing the praesence of our Commissioner, but most contemptuouslie & in∣juriouslie barring the doore upon him, & next in setting downe the dyet of the next Assemblie without either his privitie, or consent. The letter which His Majesties Commissioner Sr. Alex: Strayton of Low∣renstonThe Legal proceedings against the Aberdene Assembler offered you know was a missive from the Lords of the Councel, not addressed to them as to an Assemblie, & therefore no such capa∣citie requir'd to their receiving it. His Majesties letter to the Commis∣sioners of the general Assemblie signifying his pleasure to have the appointment of this meeting deferred, & no new indiction to be made without his consent, having been long before delivered, & the substance of it by them communicated to the several Presbyte∣ries of the Kingdome. In contempt whereof these persons assem∣bled at Aberdene, where, the day before they sate downe, was a publication at the mercate Crosse of a charge to the contrarie from the Lords of the Councel. Beside, they had not, His Majestie tells them. any warrant to hold a new Assemblie, without the praesence either of the Moderatour of the last, or of the ordinarie Clerke of the Assemblie. As for their dutifull demeanour afterward, That they rise immediatelie after the reading of the Missive, Mr. Baylie knowes to be absolute∣lie false, Howsoever, the naming a diet for the next meeting was against an expresse clause in His Majesties letter, which by the Councel is calld a Rebellious, & traiterous misbehaviour. For the trouble that followed hereupon, if by the counsel of Arch-Bishop Bancroft, that could not be pernicious, because the proceeding against them was legal. They were calld before the Lords of His Majesties Councel; had libertie given them to entertaine lawyers, & make their defense, which prov'd a Declinatour disclaiming all subjection to His Majestie, & His Councel; This Declinatour was re∣pell'd,
& they were found to have unlawfullie conven'd; His Ma∣jestie commanded that the ordinarie course of justice should pro∣ceed. Whereupon Sixe of them were presented upon panel at Lyn∣lithgow before His Highnesse Justice being the ordinarie Judge, who had joyned to him a great number of Noblemen, &c. Their inditement grounded upon the first statute in May 1584. Two ofTheir obsti∣nacie. their Procuratours, & Counsellers at law, not being able to per∣swade them to a course of humilitie, did upon their obstinacie re∣fuse to plead for them, Indeed Sixe, or seven of them, touched with the open discoverie made by the Kings Declaratour, upon hum∣ble submission were dismissed, & sent home to their charge. See more particularlie of all these in the Declarations of K. James, & his Councel 1606. The next instance of the Bishops, Viz. Their abolishing the chiefe festivals of the Church, the Reviewer can not justifie to any purposeThe Church festivals a∣bolished in Scotland by no just Au∣thoritie. either from the authoritie, or the time. For first this great Councel of Scotland were but a parsel of the rebell Nobilitie that had of late de∣posed, & persecuted the poore Queen Dowager to the death, And now having the yong King & Queen at as great a distance as France, at the same rate order the affaires of the Church as they had the poli∣cie of the State. The charge they gave the Assemblie brethren dated the 29. day of April 1590. (the summe whereof is so formallie pla∣ced in the front of the Discipline) was upon procurement by them∣selves, It being ordinairie with them, when they had any new de∣vice on foot, to extort some pretended authoritie by their letters. Therefore it is but a mocke obedience by service not onelie offered, but obtruded. Nor was it so pleasing to them, whom they here owne for their masters, but that after many dayes perusal, it was with di∣slike, & scorne rejected by diverse. Those that sign'd it had no power to ratifie it, no more then just before, the Confession of fayth, which they were faine to send over into France. And how their Act, or promisse in secret Councell, dated the 27. of Ianuarie, was illu∣ded from time to time, Knox relates, & very much laments in his sto∣rie. For the time, there was no such Parliament intervall as required the di∣ligence of the Councel of State: for what they call'd a Parliament, though none, was but newlie dissolv'd, when presentlie consulta∣tion was had how the Church might be established in a good, & God∣lie policie. The reason of which haste was lest, the yong Queen should come over, & interpose her Royal authoritie in this great Councel of State, as she did afterward, & rejected the Discipline, for all the Act of State that had passed on it, demanding How many of those that had sub∣scribed would be subject unto it, & her Secretarie telling them. That many
subscribed in side parentum, as children are baptized. Those dayes which Mr. Baylie calls here fond feasts, out of theThe primi∣tive Chri∣stians ob∣serv'd them booke of Discipline & that farther abominations, were not thought such by the Primitive Christians, who were strict in the solemnitie of such times. And if the writings of the ancient Fathers, & the Godlie, & approved lawes of Iustinian the Emperour might be admitted, as once they were offered, to decide the controversie betvixt us, we know whatOrat: of the Protest. of Scotl. to the Q. Reg. 1558. Would become of this part of the Discipline. The authoritie of the Church, warranted by the holie Scriptures is sufficient to justifie them, & us in this observance▪ Nor were the Scots so fallen out with these abominations, but that they let them stand in the Calendar be∣fore their Liturgie, &c. And there were a people in Scotland which, in the Bishops dayes, did celebrate those feasts, Therefore ever since they have not shewed such readie obedience to that direction of the Discipline. See the Bishop of Brechen's defense of the Perth Articles. Your farre-fetecht comparison accidentallie improves the Bi∣shops knowledge by a seasonable experiment, Who findes the Disci∣plinarian barbarismes in Scotland as monstrous as any he ever read of in Iapan, & your nullities in religion as many as Vtopia hath in policie, or nature. If your thoughts had not been rambling so farre for recruits to your malice, you might have been furnish'd with truth nearer home, which His Lordship brings nnto your doore. As fine as here you make your selfe for the triumph, out of every wing you plucke, you will by & by be at a losse for your victorie, & must then weare your blew cap without a feather. For (that you may knowThe Bishop not mistakē in the Scot∣tish Chrono∣logie. my meaning) His Lordship can afford you no such pretie thing as the antichronisme you lay hold on. He sayth not, That statute of trea∣son was in being in the yeare 1580. And his Printer you might see, had done him so much right as to set a number 4. yeares older directlie, against the place where it is mention'd. His Lordships words are these Which ridiculous ordinance was maintain'd stiffelie by the succeeding Synods, not∣withstanding the statute, That it should be treason to impugne the authoritie of the three Estates. The plaine sense whereof is this, The succeeding Synods to the yeare 1584. maintain'd it stiffelie. And not onelie they but likewise the suc∣ceeding Synods afterward, notwithstanding the statute then made, That &c. Yet, not to be too literal, That there should be three Estates, to whom your brethren presented their Assemblie Acts as they did, by the King & them to be confirmed, even before the yeare 1580. & yet, That to impugne the authoritie of the three, estates or to procure the innovation, or diminution of any of them, should have no statute nor law to make it, at least interpretative, treason, is a peice of politikes that Iapan, nor
Vtpia, will never owne, nor any man that is civiliz'd in submission to government beleeve. The businesse of appeales we are to meet with in the chapter follo∣wing, & so farre you shall have leave to travaile with the counterfeit credit of that untruth. What you make here such a positive consent of Lundie the Kings Com∣missioner in that Assemblie, even now went no farther then a suspense in silence, where all you found was, That it appear'd not he apposed.What kinde of Presby∣teries were erected by K. Iames & his Com∣missioners, & to what purpose. And how that might be I there gave you my conjecture. In the next Assemblie 1581. the Kings Commissioner Caprington was not so hastie to erect in His Majesties name Presbyteries in all the land. The businesse was this, The King sends him, & Cuningham with letters to the Assemblie at Glas∣gow, to signifie, That the thirds of the Ecclesiastical revenues, upon the conference had between his Commissioners, & those which they had before sent from Dundee, were not found to be the safest main∣tenance for the Ministrie, they having been so impair'd in twentie yeares before, that nothing of certaintie could appeare; That there∣upon had been drawn a diagrame of several Presbyteries, where∣by a division of the greatest parishes was to be made, & a uniting of the lesse to the end that the Ministers might be with more aequalitie maintained, and the people more convenientlie assemble'd; That His Maestie had determined to sent letters to several of his Nobili∣tie in the Countrey to command their meetings, and counsel here a∣bout. This he did not till the next summer, nor was any thing ef∣fected diverse yeares after. The conventions of the Ministrie wereBishops to praeside in them. to be moderated by every Bishop in his Dioecesse, who was, by agreement, to praeside in the Presbyteries with in his limits. So that the modelling Presbyteries was onelie for setling a convenient re∣venue upon the Ministers, & so farre was it from abolishing Episco∣pacie, that the Bishops were to have the managing the affaire. It would not have cost you, nor your printer, much paines to haveDeclar. 1582. The abuse of the Kings indulgence by the Pres∣byters. put in what hapened before the yeare 1584 The opposition against your abuse hereof by the Bishops Montgoinerie & Adamson; His Ma∣jesties discharging by proclamation the Ministers conventions, & Assemblies under paine to be punished as Rebeils, publishing them to be unnatural subjects, seditious persons, troublesome & unquiet spirits, members of Satan, enemies to the King & the Commonwealth of their native Countrey, charging them to desist from preaching in such sort as they did viz. against the authoritie in Church causes, against the calling of Bishops, &c. removing, impri∣soning, inditing them, &c. Which put you upon the desperate attempts of surprizing and restraining His Majestie's person, whereof other∣where. So that the King, you see, had very good preparatives to
purge his Kingdome of such turbulent humours, before Captain StuartThe E: of Arran no wicked Courtier. put him in minde to make use of that physike. Which Captaine Iames was no such wicked Courtier, when the saints in behalve of the Disci∣pline, set him up to justle with Esme Stuart Lord Aubignie for the nearest approach unto Royal favour. This Parliament 1584. was summon'd with as loud a voyce as any other, & was as open as the sun at Edenburgh could make it. Nor was Captain Stuarts crime about it such as to denominate his exile the vengeance of God, which was wrought in the eyes of the world by your rebellion. Nor his death by Dowglasse's high way murder, aveng'dHis bloud reveng'd. afterward in alike terrible destruction & that in Edenburgh high street, where sanguis sanguinem tetigit: bloud touched bloud, though I dare not, as you doe, judge for reward, nor divine such ambiguous cruelties for money: being no Priest nor Prophet, as you are to the heires of those bloudie soulders in Micah [chapt 3.] I dare not say that it either was the fingar of God, though he imploy not the hand of his power to re∣straine them. Rev. ........... these acts of his Parliament the very next yeare were disclaimedBishop Bancroft Dang. Posi b. 1. Gib∣sons bold speaches to the King. by the King, &c. Ans. They were not disclaimed the 21 of December the next yeare, when James Gibson being question'd for dis∣loyal spea∣ches about them before His Majestie & his Councel, very impudent∣lie told the King, he was a persecutour for maintaining them, and compar'd him to Ieroboam, & threatned he should be rooted out, & conclude that race. His confidence was in the returne of the banish'd Rebel-Nobles, who forced all honest men from the Court, possessed themselves of His Majesties person, & acted all disorder in his name. This was the regular restoring of Presbyterie, Which to say was never more removed to this day, in that sense, you must speake it, is to abuse the igno∣rance of some new convert you have got in the Indies, who it may be, at that distance, know not that, Bishops had the visible Church government in Scotland, for about theirtie yeares together, since that time. Rev. The Warners digression to the the perpetuitie of Bishops in Scotland, &c.Perpetuitie the Bishops in Scotland. Ans. The perpetuitie of their order in that Kingdome is no disgression in this place, where His Lordship shewes your practical contradiction in pulling downe Episcopacie with one hand, & yet seting it up, though under the name of Superintendencie, with the other. The sequestring their revenue, & altering their names, & pruning off some part of their power, he takes to be no root & branch ordinance, for the deposition of their office, or utter extirpation of their order. This he asserts to be the greatest injurie your malice could ever hitherto bring about, & therefore goes not one step out of his way to
let you know. That Bishops have been perpetual in your Church, NorThe Revie∣wers long reach for the antiqui∣tie of Pres∣byters. doe you out of yours (but keep the same path of truth you began in) in acquainting us with the antiquitie of Presbyters, who, it should seem are terrae filii that sprung up in Scotland, like so many mushromes, the next night after Christianitie came in: Though he that is read in your opinions & actions, will take it for granted that you must pay the acknowledgement of your Presbyterie to the San∣hedrin, & your sects conversion to the Iewes. If you will impudentlie crowd it into the companie of the first...... facile est credere Victore Pomificem .... in Scotia reperisse multos quos salutaribus undis expi∣aret alios quo Judai∣zantium in fecerat error. G. Con. De dupl. stat. Rel. apud Scot. lib. 1. Multi ex Britonibus Christiani savitiam Diocletiani tiementes ad eos [Scotos] confugerant è quibus complures doctrina, & vitae inte∣gritate clari in Scotia substiterunt, vitamque solitariam tanta sanctitutis opinione apud omnes vixerunt, ut vita sanctorun cellae in templa commuarentur. Ex eoque consuetudo mansit apud po∣steros, ut prisci Scoti templa cllas vocent. Hoc genus Menachorum Chaldeos appella∣bant mansitque nomen, & institutum donec Monachorum genus recentius in plures divisum e∣ctas eos expulit Buchan. Hist. lib. 4 Christians that came into Scotland, you can not denie but that for some part of the Centuries you speake of, it was confin'd to the monkes colls, never came to clamour at the Court & the poore Culdiis, with a great deale more humilitie & pietie, then the Covenanters, ca∣ried it in their cowles. Rev. .......... & after the reformation there was no Bishop in that land. Ans. The reformation you meane, began the day before, or after the Greeke Calends, & if you will helpe me to an account of the one, I shall know how to order the aera of the other. Many yeares confusion there was of Poperie, Presbyterie & Superintendencie. The re∣form'd Episcopacie could never get ground till King James set it forward, & then it went not far before it met with your violent encounter by Sword, & Covenant, which never suffered the crowne nor Miter to stand long unshaken, till both were held up by the Armes of England, & the Kings person secure at a distance to command you. That ever such a thing as reformed Presbyterie according to the Canon in your Discipline, had the free positive consent of King, & Parlia∣ment (without which it can not legallie passe for the Religion of your Kingdome) I denie to be visible any where in your storie. Rev. ...... till the yeare 1610. Ans. That yeare did indeed complete the Episcopal power, which King James had by degrees piouslie, & industriouslie promoted many yeares before. Rev. ........ When Bancroft did consecrate three Scots Ministers, &c. Ans. A brother of yours tells us they were consecrated by Bishop Abbot: As evil as their report was the men were not so bad, as their names need be in charitie conceled. They were Iohn Spotswood, Andrew Lamb, & Gawin Hamilton, Bishops of Glasgow, Brechen, & Galloway. Who enjoy now their reward in heaven for the reviling they had on earth, it
being for Gods sake & his Church] according to our Saviours pro∣mise, St. Matth. 5. 11. The first was a man for zeale to the Church, fidelitie to the King, prudence in Government, & constancie under affliction singular, & inimitable, & indeed for his excellent gifts onelie hatefull to the Disciplinarians, though especiallie because he through long experience was of all Scotish men best acquainted with & ablest to detect their crosse wayes to the King & all Sove∣raigne Magistracie. He died piouslie, & peaceablie at Westminster in the second yeare of this rebellion, & was buried in the Abbey Church. The second was a great & affiduous preacher, even when he was blinde through extreme age, He also died in peace, & with the good report of all, except these calumniatores, who hold that no Bishop can be an honest man, & whose invention is so rich of nothing as reproaches against better men then themselves. The third was a reverend Praelate of great parts, & singular learning, a most constant preacher who lived in peace, & died in his bed. Rev. ...... that violent Commissioner the Earle of Dunbar. Ans. His vio∣lence did not carie him beyond his Commission, & because he exe∣cuted that upon the rebellious Aberdene Assemblers, & would not take off some of his kindred or acquaintance who were in the jurie, that deliberatelie cast them in their verdict, nor intercede for their stay in Scotland, being desir'd; you here meet with him at the Synod of Glasgow. Which being at large prov'd legitimate in every circum∣stance required by law, is in vaine condem'd as null by your fa∣ction. Nor was it corrupt in any more then three members of about 140. who being rotten drop of from the close union & harmonious suffrage of the rest, Rev: ........... got authorized in some part of the Bishops office. Ans. I hopeEpiscopacie intirelie authorized in the Sy∣nod of Glas∣gow Vind. Epist Hitr. Philadelph. you will not denie that Bishops were authorized to ordaine in this Sy∣nod. And into how many particulars their power of jurisdiction was branched your brother very pittifullie complaines......... jurisdictio in omnibus offendiculis, sive in doctrina, sive in moribus .......... Armantur ..... po∣testate exauctorandi ministros, suspensionis censuram irogandi, excommunicationem decerendi, &c. you may reade the rest, & then tell us what part of their office was left out. Rev. Superintendents are no where the same with Bishops, much lesse in Scot∣land.Superinten∣dents aequi∣valent to Bishops. Ans. That they are aequivalent to Bishops is evident by the conformitie in their offices, & power. The particulars whereof His Lordship recites out of the fourth & sixt heads of your 1. Book Dis∣cipl. To which upon my Review I could adde some more, if those were not enough. Their ambulatorie commission, was no other then our Bishops ambulatorie visitation. If your onelie in the time before have any
influence here, & exempt them from all duties in their visitation, bu preaching the word, &c. you cut of three parts of their injunction in the Discipline. If they were onelie, as you say, for a time, it concernes you to tell us where they ceas'd, & denie there were any since, or ever shall be more but upon some future new plantation in your ChurchesPresbyters not to have Synods as often as they list, nor doe in them what they please. Being pressed about obtruding your Discipline, you tell us. For the Ecle∣siastike enjoyning of a general Assemblies decrees a particular ratification of Par∣liament is unnecessarie. Which holds not where the particular decrees of your Assemblie transgresse the general intent of that Act whereby you are authoriz'd to meet. That relates to the times and matters to be treated of. In the former you are limited to custome, or praescription. In the later to the doctrine, & discipline receiv'd. Which are therefore ratified in such Acts together with your Assemblies, Presbyterie & Ses∣sions, that obedience might be render'd upon the visible conformitie of your decrees, & injunctions to that rule. But to make any Act of Parliament so general as to ratifie at adventure all possible arbitrarie com∣mands of your Assemblie to the altering of the doctrine or discipline established, were to praecontract affinitie with all sects, & haeresies, & to enter into an implicite league, or Covenant with the Devil about his worship, so it may be de futuro ad placitum Synodi generalis. Let me put this case, suppose a general Assemblie should, by an Ecclesiasti∣cal decree, enjoyne the canons of that Antichristian government against which you praetend your discipline is framed. Whether or n is that injunction authentike upon the general A & of Parliament for their Assembling without a particular ratification thereof? I might adde how ridiculous it is for you to make the power of your Assemblies so absolute, & yet trouble King, & Parliament so often with your importunate petitions to passe what is fullie ratified be∣fore, & that by their owne General Acts including that very particular for which you supplicate. The debates about the second booke of Discipline I beleeve: But that inThe King consented not to the second boke of Disci∣pline. the Assemblie 1590. the Kings consent to it was obtaind, I can sooner admit upon undeniable authoritie, then your Logike, you pretend not to the perpetuitie of His Majesties personal praesence which was but some times, & it should seem, not at that time of general consent. Nor is your Act for subscription so cleare in the assurance you give us that His Majesties Commissioner was there, you onelie take it for granted he was among the herd. Nor so explicite in his positive consent, you onelie collect it from a clowdie universal, & to serve your turne, honour him with a primacie in suffrage. Wherein you are a litle re∣dundant in courtesie, there having been a time when if His Maje∣stie,K. Ch. 1. Larg. De∣clar. 1633. pag 411. or His Commissioner siting in Assemblie should denie his voyce
to any thing which appear'd unjust, & repugnant to his lawes, yet i that were concluded by most voyces, you would tell him he was bound jure divino to inforce obedience to your Act. The case, for ought I know, stood no otherwise here in this Assemblie. Where, to discountenance the testimonie you bring, you have been told long before now, That the superintendents of Angus, Lothian Fie, &c. GeorgeRefutat. libel. De Regim. Eccl. Sot. Hayes Commissioner from the North. Arbuthmoth of Aberdene, & others were dissenters from this Act about the discipline, whereby His Majesties, or His Commissioners consent becomes somewhat improbable, to the au∣thoritie whereof such men as they had in prudence submitted, if not in dutie by their silence. That States-men in Parliament oppos'd it is evident. That the King ever endeavourd to get it passe, is your single assertion. Neque usquam fictum, neque pictum, neque scriptum. If your Church did, it was for want of worke, for you told us even now, To this a particular ratification of Parliament was unnecessarie. What the Bishops opinion is about the ptrimonie of the Chuch, howThe Bishop no hypocrice in his cha∣lenge about the patri∣monie of the Church. farre, & by whom, & what part of it may be lawfullie alienated, when just occasion is given, I praesume His Lordship freelie, & fayth∣fullie will declare. In the meane time his chalenge against the Scotish Presbyterians is without hypocrise, & injustice, Himselfe & many other good Prelates having ever aesteem'd it a fault, to call the annexing some part of the Church revenues unto the crowne a detestable sacriledge before God. Nor can Mr. Baylie instance in any indefinite disputes, including all that hath been, or shall be given to the Church, that have ha∣pened since the first reformation between the Kings, of England & their Bishops. Who had they found their Princes rapacious seque∣stratours, would not have failed in their dutie modestlie to admo∣nish them of the danger, yet had it, may be, abstained from calling them.1. Book Dsc. 6. head which be longs not, by haeredi∣taire right to the Pres∣byters. theeves & murderers, peculiar termes characteristical of the Discipline-To which I thinke I shall doe no injustice, if I assert that the revenues of Bishops, Deanes, & Arch-deacons, of Chapellries, Friaries of all orders, to∣gether with the sisters of the seenes▪ (abstracting from the favour of Prin∣ces) no more belong to the Scotish Presbyters, then they doe to the Mufties of the Turke. The intention of the doners having never been that such strange catell should feed in their pastures. Nor can M. Baylie shew me any law that makes him heir to Antichrist, or a just inheriter of his lands. Beside, methinkes the weake stomack'd brethren should take checke at the meate offered unto idols, & any silken sould Presbyter be too nice to array himselfe in the ragge of Rome, or be cloth'd at that cost that belong'd to the idolatrous Priesthood ofLet. o K. Ph. & Q. Mar. Ann. 1559. Baal. But, it may be in the heate of Reformation, they went to
worke with the coyning irons, which they more then once got into their possession, & with them altered th impresion of the beast. And the mattokes & . Which other armes being wanting, they very often tooke in their hands, were, possiblie, onelie to turne up the Church land, & whereever crop had been reap't by Antichrist, that abo∣minable glebe went downe to the center of the earth. What he talkes about the Praelatical jus divinum, & their taking pos∣sessionsThe Revie∣wer is the hypocrite. by commands from Court without a processe, requires his instance, & then he shall have his answer. In the interim he playes the hy∣pocrite in a question: What if then, [the Disciplinarians] had gone to advance that right to all jusdivinum, when the Assemblie at EdenburghMainten. of the sans∣tatie. pag. 10. The Disci∣plinarians declaration of their judgements in their im∣pudent & imperious supplicats. did so April 24. 1576. But he sayth, all the Scots can be challeng'd for, is a mere declaration of their judgement & simple right in a supplication to the Regents Grace. . These Scots judgement was not allwayes in righteousnesse, and their simplicitie in supplicates had many times more of the Lion then the Lambe. Witnesse that to the Queen Regent 1559. where they declare their judgements freelie as true & faithfull subjects, they tell her, yet this is the style of that declaration ......... Except this crueltie be stayed by your wisdome, We shall be compelled to take the sword of just defense, &c. ...... If ye give are to their pestilent counsel. ...... neither ye, neither yet your posteri∣tie shall at any time after this finde that obedience & faythfull service within this Realme which at all times ye have found in us. In the assemblies supplica∣tions to the Lords of secret Councel, May 28. 1561. the second ar∣ticle annexed to, which was for the maintenance of the ministerie, this. Before ever these tyrants & dumbe dogs Empire above us ....... we ..... are fullie determin'd to hazard life, & whatsoever we have recived of God in tempo∣rall things ........ And let these enemies of God assure themselves, That if your Honours put not order unto them, That we shall shortlie take such order, That they shall neither be able to doe what they list, neither yet to live upon the sweat of the browe. December 25. 1566. They order requiring instead of Supplicating & Churh censures to the disobedient. Their sixt head of Church rents in the first booke of Discipline runnes very imperiouslie upon the must. The Gentlemen, Barons, &c. must be content to live upon their just rents, & suffer the Kirke to be restored to her libertie. And Jul. 21. 1567. They tell them they shall doe it, & shall passe nothing in Parliament untill it be done. That ever any assemblie in Scotland did make any other addresse to the Parliament for stipends then by way of such humble supplication, I grant, is a great untruth. Nor were onelie the thirds thus petition'd for, but time after time all tithes, rents, & whatsoever could be comprized under the patrimonie of the
Church, were demanded as insolentlie as could be, which meetes me every where in their storie, as frequentlie as Mr. Baylies dissembling, & falsifying in his Review. In the last instance the Bishop denies not but there was a timeThey anti∣cipate the law in the exercise, of the Disci∣pline. when a kinde of Presbyteries was legallie approv'd & receiv'd, And this I presume he will admit to be after the Assemblie 1580. About which allreadie you have indeed alledged more untruth then you had authoritie to shew for it. I have given you as much as that you brought will beare. What His Lordship brings here is another discoverie. That you did erect them in your Assemblie Acts, & put them in execution, as farre as you durst, before any Parliament had pass'd them. And Synodicallie established such, as no Parliament had passed. For this he cites your Acts of several Assemblies, which you must either disavow,Hieron. Philadelph. de Regim. Eccles. Scot. Epist. Iren. Philaleth. Narrat. mot. Scotic. or unriddle what the mistake is you impute. Vnlesse you thinke good to save that labour, & confesse aswel as other your Brethren, what is so manifest in your storie. The particulars of your proceedings herein, Arch-Bishop Bancroft long since collected in his booke of Dan∣gerous Positions; Where he shewes how you not onelie acted your sel∣ves at home, but sent your emissaries into England to see the like practice there in the very face of Episcopal Government. What other reasons, beside the recalling the Church patrimonie, caus'd the refusall of your second booke of Discipline, I told you before. Which with the rest may suffice to the vindication of what the Bishop premiseth in proofe of the conclusion he makes That the Dissiplinarians by their pra∣ctiesTheir do∣ctrine as de∣structive as their pra∣ctice. have trampled upon the lawes, & justled the Civile Magistrate out of his Su∣premacie in Ecclesiastical affaires. His Lordship proceedes to his scrutinie of your doctrine, wherein if he yet be more happie, as you courteouslie tell us possiblie he will, I shall take you to have the spirit of Tiresas, & having justlie lost your eye-sight for rash judging, to be now betterOvid. Met. lib. 3. sub. 4 at prophesying then reviewing. Which immediatelie appeares, by your wandring at noonday, & being at a losse for that which every man may finde in the very place cited by the Bishop. None are subject to re∣paire2. Book of Disc. ch. 7. 2. to this [the National] Assemblie to vote, but Ecclesiastical persons, &c. This His Lordship conceives to crosse the Kings supremacie, which being aswell Ecclesiasticall as civile, gives him a power of voting & presiding in Assemblies. Nor was there ever act of free Parliament in Scotland, old or late, nor any regular justifiable practice of that Church, but reserv'd this power to the King, & his deputed Commissioner, without being chosen member of any Presbyterie, or made a rulingThe Bishops Super-Era∣stianisme the doctrine of the Refor∣med Churhes elder in a National Assemblie, which your booke of Discipline calls the generall Eldership of the Kirke. Your hypercriticizing upon his thoughts (while the spirit of divination comes upon you) makes his Lordship
no Super-Erastian in his doctrines. Though what transscendent hae∣resie there is in a moderate answer to the malice in your question▪ any of your aequitable comparers may reade in what Vedelius, and Paraeus (noAd Dissert. De Episc. Constant. M. heretikes I hope) have published to that purpose, as the doctrine of all reformed Churches; the one quoting Bellarmine the other Stapleton as proper patrons of the Sub-Erastian principles in the Discipline, & Vedelius, in his preface giving the world a caveat of the danger by the mischiefe it had brought upon England & Scotland in the yeare 1638. How opposite they were to the Disciplinarian language, & sense in that particular which the Bishop remonstrates, these single propositions can evidence. Mult magu est Christiani Magistratus non so∣lùm apprehensivè, & discretivè, sed & definitivè de religione judicare▪ Here a definitive vote is asserted to the Magistrate. ...... .. ad MagistratumPh. Par. Vindic. propos. 8. D. Par. N. Vedel. De Episc. Const M. q. . pertinet judicium de religione, seu rebus fidei, & causis Ecclesiasticis......... tum for∣maliter, tum objectivè. Hereby a formal judgement in religion is attri∣buted. And this Doctor Rivet, who, I am told, is call'd, & reverenc'd in the French, & Dutch Churches as the Calvin of these times hath vouched under his hand to be the Catholike doctrine of the Reformed. If he had not, we are sure it was the primitive practice of the good Chri∣stian Emperours to assume it, to whom our conformitie is requisite. Of Constantine the great, who was personallie present in the Councel ofThe pra∣ctice of the good primi∣tive Empe∣rours. Nice; & is sometimes called koinono épiscopoumenon for his communite of suffrage with the Bishops. Of the Emperour Theodosius, who in the Councel of Constantinople sifted the several Confessions of the Arians, Macedonians, Eunomians, & as Brentius relates it, cast himselfe upon his knees, craving the assistance of Gods spirit to direct him in the choyce of what was most consonant to the doctrine of the Apostles. Which epicrisis, or completive judgement, submitted unto by the Ancient Synods, had these authoritative termes to expresse it. ebaioun, pipscphizesthai▪ pisphragizesthai, cratinein, cratioun, epikyroun, tà pepragmen, To the exercise hereof the Discipline of your Reformed Brethren in these Countreyes not onelie admits, but craves the presence, & suffrage of Delegates from the supreme Magistrate; without which their Synodical Acts are not establish'd. Quin etiam summi MagistratusHar. Syn. Belgic. c. 10. delegati sunt postulandi, ut in ipsorum praesentia eorumque suffragio Synodi Acta concludantur. Nor did K. James any more in the Conference at Ham∣pton Court, then when in freedome. He would have done in any Scotish Presbyterian Assemblie, though he hated the name & thought of the thing, when somewhat was propounded that did not like him, put it of with Le Roy s'avisera. Rev. Yet the most of the prelatical partie will not maintaine hīm heerin. Ans. Bishop Andrewes will in his Tortura Torti & Bishop Field (whom your
friend Didoclave calls Hierambicorum eruditissimum) in his volume of theAltar. Damasc. pag. 15. Church, beside many others. And possiblie those that seem to be opposite may be reconcil'd, if you have the maners to let them state the question among themselves. The chiefe case wherein they [not you] instance of Lontius Bishop of Tripolis in his answer to Constan∣tius the Emperour may be attended with circumstances which may terminate the dispute, if not, we must not take it on their word, that, for that, as well as his other more regular demeanour he is own'd by Antiquitie to be kánonecclesias, as Suidas records, The rule of the Church. However, it behoves you to cite your lawes to which the Bishops assertion is contrarie, And I shall cut you short of that pom∣pous traine which your vanitie holds up in the universal of all the Prin∣ces that have lived in Scotland, & confine you to two, (the rest being by their Religion unconcern'd in voting (though not in permitting) anyRenounced by none of the Scotish King. The Revie∣wers malice not any Prelatical principles doth impos∣sibilitate (as he speakes) the peace betwixt the King & his Kingdomes. Disciplinarian decrees) King Iames, & the holie martyr King Charles the first, who I hope you have not the impudence to say ever made profession so derogatorie to their right. In what followes you practise over the fisher-man in the fable, from whom you know, that unlesse you trouble the water it is in vaine for you to cast in your net, & if you catch nothing for the Dis∣cipline you must sterve. The whole paragraph is naught but a mali∣cious seditious inference of your owne, whereby you affixe an odious sense to the dutifull attributes of Royal prerogative, & your owne guilt causing a trembling in your joyuts at the thought of a scepter, you buselie creep under the protection of the club. The name of Parliament you make but a pandar to countenance the wanton license of your Assemblies, & the great seale you would have set to, nothing but an indenture of the Crownes perpetuall servitude to your Synods. The Prelares Cabin divinitie▪ which sea language you're in love with since your voyage into Holland) came often above deeka with very innocent loyal intentions long before these times of confusion, which your Consistorian divinitie hath wrought, And though you take your selfe to appeare as ominous as Caster without his brother in the shrowd, it feares no shipwracke by any storme you can raise, nor lookes through your cleare prediction upon its ruine. You have not hitherto found such a fate in your words as to produce a consequential necessitie of the banishment of Marquisses & Bishops from Court, though divine justice may hereafter inspire our Soveraigne to returne this judgement upon your heads, who are ever breathing murder, & exile into his eares. For while such popular Sicophants, as you, are suffered to live in any Monarchs dominions, neither can the People be secure of their peace, nor Princes of their lives. K. Iames spake it plainlie,
when he sayd, A Scotsh Presbyterie as well agreeth with Monarchie, as God & the Devil▪ Such Reviewers who looke but halfe way home into theConf. at Hampt. Court. original of crownes, are cleare everters of the first foundation of Kingdomes, which made Kings some what more then fiduciaries of the people, whose solid peace consisted in an humble active submission to their just commands, & a Christian quiet passive obedience if tyrannicallie imperious. This to be sure would keep the best part, if not the best partie, from ruine, till the high hand of heaven over ballance their temporall sufferings with an aeternitie of reward, where no malecon∣tentment can be to come. To the second challenged principle your answer is very slight, & impertinent. And would I undertake a farre more unpleasing im∣ployment then Phocion had in chiping Demosthenes, for which he was call'd kópi ton lógon, I should make a slender instrument of your review, there being beside the extravagancie of your railing language, your malicious enlargements in false commentaries, diverting your Reader from the genuine orthodoxe meaning of the text, drawing him into an intricable labyrinth of jealousies & feares, the chi∣maerical brats of your owne braine; which you would faine lay at other mens doores, scare sixe pages in your booke that are a direct answer to the Bishop, which I can not impute to your ignorance, but your cunning, who feeling your selfe held closse by the necke in the letter of your lawes & Assemblie Acts, would very faine winde your selfe out of the controversie, or run away with it into any Church, or Countrey but your owne. In this paragraph the Bishops citations proveThe Disci∣plinarian doctrine & practice a∣gainst the Kings power to convocate Synods.▪ what he intends (nor dare you, I see, denie what you are too conscious you maintaine) It having never been your practice, but when you could not doe otherwise, to wait the Kings, or Queens call for your Sy∣nods. In the yeare 1561. Knox writes expresselie, That gladlie would the Queen & her secret Counsel have had all the Assemblies of the Godlie, (that is the Rebellious Disciplinarian) discharged. They notwithstanding make a convention, the businesse comes to dispute, Mr. Secretarie Leshington makes a doubt whether the Queen allowed it or no, to whom was this answer returned. If the libertie of the Church should stand upon the Queens allowance, they were assured not onelie to lacke Assemblies, but also to lacke the publike preaching of the Euangel. In the beginning of your late commotions the Historian that so officioussie styles himselfe the Parliaments Secretarie mentions a writing publish'd by you, whereinPag. 41. you affirme. That the power of calling a Synod, in case the Prince be an ene∣mie to the truth, or negligent in promoting the Churchs good, is in the Church it selfe. And that the state of the Church of Scotland at that time was necessitated to such a course. Nor doth your Disciplinarian doctrine make the Chri∣stian
Magistrate any more then your Bayliffe to take up your rents, or the Captaine of your guard to defend you (Vedelius renders it n moreDe Episcop. Constanst M. 2. B. of Disc. ch. 10 harsh language .......... faciunt ex iis [Magistratibus] mancipia, imò lictores & curnifices Episcoporum seu Ministrorum Ecclesiae) To advance the Kingdome of Iesus Christ. ..... To defend it against all that would procure its hurt ........ To ssist & fortifie the Godlie proceedings of the Kirke in all behalfes ......... To see that the Kirke be not invaded ........ To hold hand as well to the saving of the Mi∣nisters persons from injurie & open violence, as to their rents & possessions. Fi∣nallie, not a word is there in all that chapter or booke that asscribes to him à syllable of this power, So that the King may call a Synod when, & whersoever he thinke fit, & if the toy take you in the head to anticipate, or procrastinate his time, you will assemble when, & wheresoever you please for you tell him he ought to heare, & obey your voyce. And your friend Didoclave averres this to be a businesse that hath no absolute dependance upon him, Non absolute, & simplici∣terCap. De primar. Reg. pendere a Christiano Magistratu. If when you have a minde to meet he prohibites, that must make no demurre, non cunctandum est, non cessandum ab officio ...... For this you pretend an intrinsecal power touching which I demand what it is, when, where, & how farre to be exerciz'd. What old or late dutifull Christians did use it when any Christian King did forbid it. Who of the Praelatical partie they be that maintaine it in their writings or practice, for I know none that in either extend it to a like latitude with you. And how manysoever you have of the Papists, all the Popes are not of your side. Leo confessing thatEpist. 43. he had not power to call a Counsel but the Emperour, no durst Li∣berius call one against Constantius pleasure. The necessitie you frame of meeting for the execution of the Discipline even in times of persecu∣tion may have reference to an heathen Magistrate or Christian. If to the former, you doe it either in confidence of your power to resist him, in that rebellion, wherein how are you justified? Or else you runne desperatelie upon your ruine, which is selfe murder no martyrdome, for Quis requisivit? by what praecept, or counsel is it required at your hands? If to the later, there may be at least a fallibilitie in your judge∣ments, if not an obstinate perversenesse in your will. Et quis vos judices constituit? who made you, that are parties, Arbitratours? If at any time the ancient Christians assembled, it was where no Imperial edict restrain'd them. And then the learned Grotius tells you, Non opus fuisseDe Imper∣sum Pot. cap. 8. venia, ubi nulla obsturent Imperatorum edicta. What private conferences they had in the times of heathenish persecution, you know by their apologies were voy'd of suspicion, which yours never were, but anomia ergapiria the very shops or Laboratories of rebellion. The Church is not dissolv'd where dissipline's not executed: if it were, it shouldConstantin. De Ario.
be, where it is, at the pleasure of the Magistrate, suspended. To imagine a final incapacitie of meeting, by perpetual succession of Tyrants hath litle either of reason or conscience, it assaults the certitude of fayth in Gods promises, & advanceth infidelitie in his providence. But to give you at length your passe from this paragraph. Such as you, in a schismatical Assemblie, may, & have frequentlie in Scotland pinn'd the character of erroneous upon an upright Magistrate, & a Dis∣ciplinarian rebell to save his credit call'd a Royal moderate proclama∣tion a tyranous edist. The Bishops third allegation you finde too heavie, & thereforeThe ultima∣te determi∣nation of Ecclesiastike causes by the lawes of Scotland is not in the general As∣semblie. let fall halfe of it by the way. You have too good a conceit of your Parliaments bountie, though had they been as prodigal as you make them, it litle becomes you to proclaime them bankrupts by their fa∣vour: Their Acts were allwayes ratified by your Princes: any which, & whom tell me one wherein this right Royal was renounc'd of suspen∣ding seditious Ministers from their office, or if cause were, depriving them of their places. It were a senselesse thing to suppose that the Bishop would denie to the Church a proprietie to consult & determine abot religion, doctrine, haeresie, &c. Yet its likelie His Lordship allowes it not in that mode which makes her power so absolute as to define, consummate, authorize the whole businesse by her selfe. He hath heard the King to be somewhere accounted a mixt person, & thinkes it may be that the holie oyle of his unction is not onelie to swime on the top, & be fleeted off at the pleasure of a peevish Disciplinarian Assem∣blie, but to incorporate with their power. The lawes of England have notNo more then in the Convocati∣ons of En∣gland. been hitherto so indulgent of libertie to our Convocation, but that the King in the cases alledged did ever praedominate by his supremacie. And the Parliament hath stood so much upon priviledge, that if Religion fetch'd not her billet, from West-minster, she could have but a cold lodging at St. Pauls The booke of Statutes is no portable manual for us whom your good brethren have sent to wander in the world, yet I can helpe you to one An. 1. Eliz. that restor'd the title of supreme to the Queen, & withall provided, that none should have authoritie newlie to judge any thing to be haeresie, not formerlie so judged, but the High Court of Parliament, with the assent of the Clergie in their Convocation. Where the Convocations assent, by the sound, should not be so determinative as the Parliaments judgement, which (right or wrong) here it assumes. As touching appeales (because you will have somewhat here sayd,Appeales to the King in Scotland. though it must be otherwhere handled) No law of Scotland denies an appeale in things Civile or Ecclesiastike to the King. One yet in force enjoines subjection unto them, the Act of Parliament in May 1584. which was, That any persons, either spiritual or Temporal, praesuming
decline the judgement of His Majestie, & His Councel, shall incurre the pain of treason. What you, call a complaint is in our case an appeale, what taking order, is executing a definitive judgement, without traversing backe the businesse to Ecclesiastike Courts, or holding over the rod of a  power to awe them into due regular proceedings. I confesse this the Presbyters in Scotland never made good by their practice. Their appeales were still retrograde from the supreme Magistrate, & his Councel to a faction of Nobles, or a seditious par∣tie of the people. Such is that of Knox, printed at large. Or which in effect is the same. The Scotish Assemblies, when they had no power, appeald to providence, when they had whereupon they might relie, unto the sword. In case of Religion, or doctrine, if the General Assemblie, whichCourt of Delegates against nei∣ther word of God, nor aequitie. is not infallible, erre in judgement, & determine any thing contra∣rie to the word of God, & the sense of Catholike Antiquitie, the King may by a court, of Orthodoxe Delegates, consisting of no more then two or three (Prelates if he please) receive better information of truth, & establish that in his Church. Or, which often hapens in Scotland, If the Presbyters frame Assemblie Acts derogatorie to the rights of his Crowne, & praejudicial to the peace of his people, the King may personallie justifie his owne praerogative and keep the mi∣schiefe they invented from becoming a praecedent in law. This doth not the word of God, nor any aequitie prohibite. The judgement of causes concerning déprivations of Ministers in the yeare 1584 you would have had come, by way of appellation, to the General Assemblie, & there take final end; but this you could not make good within yourselves, nor doe I finde, upon your proponing & craving, it was then, or at any time, granted you by the King. Two yeares before, you adventurd not onelie for your priviledge in that ........ but against the Magistrates puting preachers to silence .......hindering, staying, or disannulling the censures of the Church in examining any offender. Rev. In the Scotes Assemblies no causes are agitated but such as the ParliamentAll causes agitated in Scotish As∣semblies. hath agreed to be Ecclesiastike, &c. Ans: If any Parliament have agreed all causes of what nature soever, to be Ecclesiastike by reduction, & so of the Church cognizance, you have that colour for your pragmatical As∣semblies: but if you admit of any exception, you have for certaine transgressed your limits, there being no crime, nor praetended irre∣gularitie whatsoever, that stood in view, or came to the knowledge of the world, that hath escaped your discussion, & censure, & not been serv'd up in your supplicates to be punished. Rev. ....... No processe about any Church rent was ever cognosced upon in Scot∣landProcesse a∣bout Church rent. but in a Civile Court. Ans. Your imperious, though supplicatorie,
prohibition 1576. I allreadie mention'd. In the Assemblie at Eden∣burgh, April 24. 1576. You concluded ........ That you might proceed a∣gainst unjust possessours of the patrimonie of the Church ...... by doctrine, & ad∣monition, & last of all, if no remedie be, with the censures of the Church. In that at Montrosse June 24. 1595. About setting Benefices with diminution of the rental, &c. you appointed Commissioners with power to take oaths, call an-inquest of men of best knowledge in the Countrey about, to proceed against the Ministrie with sentence of deposition. Master Tho. Craig & the Solicitour for the Church to pursue the Penssionars in Caitnes for redu∣ction of their pensious. If in no particular you actuallie proceeded to Church censure, It was because you foresaw they would not restraine the corruption no more of the laitie, then the Clergie, & then your me∣nasing petitions sometime obtein'd strength from some partial, or pusillanimous Parliament; or when you praevail'd not, you wrapt this up with the rest of your discipline, & put all to the processe of aLetter to the Gen. As∣sembli at Sterling Aug. 3. 1571. warre. And this was, you know, the mysterious sense of Knox's method; upon good experience, praescrib'd on his death bed: First protest, then denounce vengeance, & then to the execution thereof seeke re∣dresse of God & man. Of God by fasting, as you did order for this very cause (wasting of the Church rents without remedie) in the Assemblie at St. Andrewes 1582. Of man, by rebelling, which you practis'd no long afterward. With which godlie advice that saint shut his teeth, & de∣parted if not (after a minutes repentance as I hope) in litle better peace, then he had liv'd. To what followes in the Bishops charge, the legislative power theyReviewer declines answering about the legislative power. praetend to, To make ules, & constitutions for keeping good order in the Kirke. To abrogate, & abolish all statutes & ordinances concearning Ecclesiastical matters that are found noysome, & unprofitable, & agree not with the time, or are abused by the people. And all this without any reclamation, or appellation to any judge Civile, or Ecclesiastical, we have not one word in answer from Mr. Bay∣lie. And indeed being taken up so much with his seemings, & fallacious apparences, he may sometimes overlooke the realities of what alle∣gations he dislikes; for this indeed he had very good reason, know∣ing the natural, & inseparable connexion to be such between it, & the power of jurisdiction, that to whomsoever belongs the supremacie of the one, upon him necessarilie descends the praerogative of the other. For the fourth objection. If the Reviewer had minded the ill con∣sequencesDanger in asserting the divine right of Ec∣clesiastike jurisdiction upon the antecedent of Ecclesiastike jurisdiction by divine right, he would not have held that conclusion at large without professing an infallible assurance that it is haereditarie to the Presbyterie. Some danger there may be of drawing after it an adaequate right in that
ominous Episcopal order, which with no great difficultie may be prov'd from time, to time to have executed this jurisdiction he mea∣nes. Howsoever this inconvenience he gaines by it, That, if it be such, it is indispensable, & turnes all the confessed indulgence of the Scotish Assemblies into sinne for Nulli homini licet cuiquam juris diviniHug. Grot:. De Imper. Sum. Po. gratiam facere. What divines there have been in the world of another minde (which are all except Donatus the haeretikes disciples among the rigid Papists, Anabaptists Scotish & Scotizing Presbyterians, who de∣mand as boldly as their Master, (Quid est Imperatori cum Ecclesia?) heScotish D∣natist. may reade (though I looke not that he, nor all his brethren should muster up abilities to answer) in the nineth chapter of the fore-cited famous Grotius's booke. Vnder the safe conduct of whom the Bishop may travaile with the truth of these contradiction about him through all the Assemblies highway men of the Scots. That all Ecclesiastike power flowes from the Magistrate ......  Ecclesiasticos judices per ArchiepiscoposPolit. An∣glic. Ad Reg. Iac. & Episcopos derivata a Regia potestate jurisdictio Ecclesiastica consistit. That the Magistrate may praescribe a rule how Ecclesiastike censures should be regulated, & in case of resistance, see them executed by his power. Constitutum fuit eis ergon tà krinomena parà ton episcopon agein tous archontas kai tous diaconoumnous au∣toisSozomen. stratiotas. That all the officers praetended to be appointed by Christ for the Government of his Church, if they governe it not according to his, & Aposto∣like example, may be lay'd aside, & such a kind of Governers be put in their place as the Magistrate shall be pleased to appoint, as more just, & upright stewards in that trust. Non frustra gladium gerit potestas, sed vindex est in omnes male agen∣tes,Eliens. ergo etiam in eos qui circa  delinquunt ......Iurisdictionis enim est reegare è loco sive in locum .. .. .. That it is not yet universallie, & unquaestionablie defin'd that the spiritual sword, & Keyes are in any other then the hand of Christ. Nor that ever his Apostles, & Priests layd claime to an absolutelie intrinseal right to execute the power of either Vtinam exscindantur qui vos perturbant. Videtur non imperantis sed optantis Apostoli, That for the sword. Sacerdos quidem officium exhibet sed nullius potestatis jura exercet. That he cites out of St. Ambrose for the Keyes, him I cite, but doe not, being not oblig'd, assert any thing. Your difference herein. (I meane the power of the Magistrate) from the Warner is Donatisme an haeresie so great as deserv'd, it seemes, to be anathematized by the Catholike Church your pra∣ctice schisme, whereby you rend your selves from the Congregations of all the Reformed, as Vedelius hath shew'd you, And whether it beDe Episco∣pat. Con∣stant. M. not rebellion by your lawes, I leave to the verdict of your 15. Godfa∣thers, who gave it in to be such against your differing brethren at A∣berdene. Had Mr. Baylie in his answer, to what he calls the last challengedDisciplina∣rians call re∣sistance a∣gainst the person obe∣dience to the office of the Magistrate principle, tooke upon him to alter that axiom in Ethikes, & make it,
Nolenti non fis ijuria, the dispute had been onelie whether his autho∣ritie, or Aristotles; should have caried it, But when he deletes the commentarie upon it, he conjures the sense into a circle of his owne by such language as none but himselfe, & his spirits understand, In∣deed for a madman to have his hands bound, who, were they at libertie, would doe himselfe mischief, For a sicke man to have physike forc'd into his stomake, which may worke his recoverie, otherwise desperate, if his aversion be countenanc'd, may be cour∣teous violence improv'd to their good; But to contervene a Ma∣gistrates commands praetending punctual obedience thereby, if not an advancement of his power: To wrest the sword out of his hands, & disarme him for the securitie of his person; is a piece of invisible justice, & a favour left by all law and reason to be whollie at the dis∣posal of the Discipline. But in Scotland, you say, there is no such case, &c. Which must relate to mater of fact, or right: If to the former, I must crave libertie to averre, That scarce any one of your Synods pro∣ceedings was ever freelie justified by the consent of the Magistrate for the time. That most were not, I have, & shall sufficientlie prove here, & otherwhere. If to the latter, your selfe confesse that your booke of Discipline (which includes the jurisdiction you have) could not passe the Parliament 1590. Nor can you make appeare where ever after it did with an exception onelie against the chapter▪ De Diaconatu.The Revie∣wer too bold with his Majestie. In what followes, you praetend too much acquaintance with the King, to know what His Majestie ontroverts in his thoughts, with whom, I have hear, your late treatie was not so particular & closse as to make what discoverie you wished, & aim'd at, And what you did is not so authoriz'd as to strengthen your proofe, His Royal, & too gracious concessions having met with such unworthie, impru∣dent, refusal by persons, through habitual rebellion, not yet dispo∣sed to their good. As touching the case which the Bishop intimates, I can not wonder the account of it so odious as not to be met with by your answer, since it sets in your sight the horrour of your many yeares sinne, with the guilt of which you would gladlie runne into dens, & caves, or move the hills, & mountaines to cover you. In the meaneThe Disci∣plinarians no companie for the Pri∣mitive Chri∣stian. time in vaine you hope to have any the ancient Christians companie, Who in times of their persecution never held publike Assemblies in their Edenburghs Imperial Cities, never arm'd themselves to main∣taine the divine ordinance of the Discipline, Though, had they done it, litle would their praecedent availe you, the just imposition of a Christian King being very unlike the heathen Emperous persecution. Nor was the Presbyterie, that divine ordinance of Discipline, practiz'd by the perse∣uted in the wildernesse.
Mr. Baylie in this time, by his affected diversions, & deviousThe Revi∣wers cun∣ning in pas∣sing over what he dares not, can not ans∣wer. mazes, having run himselfe halfe out of breath, begins to thinke on the shortest way home, to finde which he takes a large leape over the hedge (& by vertue of some Disciplinarian priviledge passeth, two whole pages of consequence unanswer'd. Perit libertas nisi illa con∣emnis, quae ugem imponu) yet not so cleare, but that one bramble hath catch'd him by the sleeve, & , if the truth were known, I beleeve, many more have prick'd him to the heart, for one of most danger I ad∣vise him to seeke out a timelie remedie, & stand to the charitie of his aequitable comparers for the rest. 'tis that sharpe quaestion which the Bi∣shope propounds. Who shall judge when the Church is corrupted? the Ma∣gistrates or Church-men? If the Magistrate, why not over you aswell as others? If the Church-men. why not others aswell as you? Mr. Gilespies Theorem. because prefsing such downright rebellion he,His un∣kindnesse to his brother Gilespie whose theo∣remes are the doctrine of the whole Presbyterie without any brotherlie love, leaves on the shoulders of a single Pres∣byter, & will not afford one fingar of the Presbyterie to ease him, though the tantamout be not so unconsequential as to need a stake to helpe it downe in a swallow, It being very well know'n that if Mr. Baylie should not tantamont in this businesse, the Assemblie brethren would give him a drench in the Scotish horne, & send him to grasse with the long-eard creatures, as being no fit companie for the late more rational rebells in a Synod. The consequence, if it must need be such, from one particular, denied by none, to a universal affirmative, as strange as it lookes, may be made good by the new Disciplinarian logike, Mr. Baylie himselve having more then once profess'd an identitie in the Scotish with the Reformed disciplines abroad, in the harmonie of which I finde such a canon as this. Si Minister donum habet aliquid ad aedificationem conscribendi, illud typis nonHarm. Sy. Belg-cap. 1 mandabit, quin prius a classe examinetur. & probetur. From the Classe he knowes it takes a remove to the provincial Synod, & thence to the national Assemblie. Now if the Reviewer will not tell us in what As∣semblie, Mr. Gilespie was censur'd, or this theoreme of his disavow'd, because it will be such a singular case as never was heard of, Re∣bellion disclaim'd in a Scotish Presbyterian Assemblie, otherwise then in a Catholike mist which never drops in any particulars, he shall have the reputation of catching this unconsequence for once. But as the Bishops sayth, Take nothing, & hld it fast if he can. Beside he kno∣wes there are many other such theoremes of Mr. Gilespies upon which the Bishop hath built many high accusations, which the Discipline must acknowlege, & must be meant to be of that number which had the approbatorie suffrages of the Vniversities in Holland viz. Leyden, & V∣trecht, or else he spake litle truth, and as litle to the purpose in his
Epistle. Yet to helpe him to somewhat of better authoritie. He is desir'd to take notice, That the substance of this theoreme was not declin'd in a protestation made (he knowes by whom) in Edenburgh Parliament 1558. In the dutifull letter to the Queen Regent from the faythfull Congregation of Christ Iesus in Scotland 22. May 1549. In another from the Lords of the Congregation, 2. Jul. 1559. In an answer to the Queenes proclamation by the Lords, Baron, & other brethren of the Congregation 1559. In a declaration of the Lords against another pro∣clamation of the Queenes 1559. To all these 'tis undeniable that the Assemblies adhaer'd, or indeed rather the Lords &c, to them. In the Church Assemblie's supplication 28. May 1561. In the vote of the whole Assemblie 1563. In the Superintendents, Ministers & Com∣missioners letter to the Bishops, and Pastours in England they write, If authoritie urge you farther ye ought to oppose your selves boldlie, not onelie to all power that dare extol it selfe against God. but also against all such as dar burthen the consciences of the faythfull (they mean'd the same opposi∣tion themselves made in Scotland) In the seventh article fram'd by the Assemblie 1567. Beside what was very particularlie pres∣sed by Knox in Sermons, Conferences, letters, &c. all acknowledge the sense of several Assemblies. But all these authorities are absolet, the several ends of such speaches, & actions being long since accom∣plish'd in Scotland. However, M. Baylie denies that the maxime i hand was the fountaine of any our late miseries, or the cause at all of the losse of our Soveraigne. Fati ista culpa est, nemo fit fato nocens. If he had but in kindnesse delivered his meaning at large, & Gilespie's theoreme the rule of the late Disci∣plinarian practice. quitted aswell his independent brethren of their bloudie performance in the fift act, as he doth the Presbyterian properties that caried on the rebellion in the foure first of the Tragoedie they might have masked merrilie together in their antike disguises of innocencie, & pointed out to some sillie credulous spectators the guilt of this horrid murder in the starres. But I shall reach him a ladder, where by he may ascend to the top of this truth, (not aninch higher then Edenburgh Crosse) & what else he wants when he comes there, to doe justice accordinglie as he shall be enlightned upon his owne selfe for his share in this maxime, & unpardonable mi∣schiefe, The first step hereof begins neare the ground with the meane, & aser sort of the people, who on the 23. Jul. 1637. when by his Blessed Majesties command, the service booke was to be read in Edenburgh Great Church, fell into the extraordinarie wayes of clapping hands, cursing, & outcries, throwing stones at the
windowes, & aiming at the Bishop with a stool, Continuing this hubbub in the streets, bestting the counsel house, whether the reverend learned, & worthie Bishop of Galloway was forced to flie for his refuge. Their outcries being commonlie such as this. God defend all those who will defend Gods cause, & God confound the service booke, & all the maintainers of it, of whom the King must needs be mean'd to be one, who had expressclie authoriz'd it. Vpon this follow two extraordinarie petitions, one in the names of the Noblemen, Gentrie, Ministers, Burgesses against the service booke, & booke of Canons, which being not answerd to their mind at Sterlin, & otherwhere, themselves in protesting did the same thing which they had call'd the proare of raskals at Edenburgh. From protesting they mount up to co∣venanting, & by that engage multitudes of people to attend them at pleasure in affronting His Majesties Commissioner. With whom when they came to capitulate they gave this extraordinarie answer, That they would rather renounce their baptisme then Covenant (good Christians) or abate one word or syllable of the literal rigour of it. If Mr. Baylie hath any minde to goe farther, I shall desire him to step up beyond the preachers per∣swading the people to arme themselves & to meet in the streets (duti∣fullie) to enteraine His Majesties proclamation. Their protesta∣tions against that & the rest, ▪with such loyal expressions as this. That if the King will not call a general Assemblic, which shall allow of their proceedings, they themselves will. Their branding the subscription of their owne confession of fayth with the most hideous, & horrible name of the very depth, & policie of Satan. Their▪ pulpit imprecations, God satter them in Israel, & divide them in Iacob, who where the authours of this scat∣tering, & divisive counsel, of whom (as srange as it seeme) the King againe must be principal. Their grand imposture in Michelson a mayd, a∣bout whom their Ministers cosin'd the people into an implicite fayth that she was inspired by God, & while she vented their devillish re∣bellion in her fits Rollokes blasphemous praetense for his silence, That he durst not speake while his Master was speaking in her. Another having these words in his Sermon. Let us never give over till we have the King in our power. Another, That the sarpest warre was rather to be endur'd then the least errour in doctrine or displine. Their maintaining this position among the rest. That Nec enim dissimula∣bant foede∣rati, nimis di apud Scotos reg∣natum esse Monarchis, nec recte cum illis a∣gi posse Stu∣arto vel uno super∣stite Hist. M. Mon∣tisros▪ it is lawfull fo subjects to make a Covenant & combination without the King, & to enter into a band of mutual defense against the King & all persons whatsoever: Their laying open the true meaning of their pro∣testing, Covenanting, Arming, &c. That Scotland had been too long a Monarchie & that they could never de well so long as one of the Stuarts was alive. Their raising an armie for their extipation, & meeting K. Ch. 1. to that purpose in the field. Their renewing & continuing, the warre when
their first designe had been obstructed by His Majesties unexpected, unwelcome grant of their demands. Their reasonable dealing with the King when he unhappilie made their Armie his refuge, by chea∣ting his pious facilitie of his strength, & delivering up his naked per∣son to their fellow Rebells, upon conditions litle coulorable in words, not at all justifiable in substance, & sense, Their laying chaines upon His Majestie, when a prisoner, & linking his crowne with iron propositions. Beside what was acted at Derbie house & otherwhere in the darke, & not improbablie agreed on at Cynthia's midnight Re∣vells, when Cromwell was in Scotland. And all this under the fallacie of exstraordinarie refisting, reforming. And now let Mr. Baylie looke not up to the starres, but downe into the depth of hell, where that maxime was hammer'd before ever Gi∣lespie fild it over, & see whether it were not the fountaine of all our mise∣ries, & the cause of the losse of our late Soveraigne. The quaestion that followes about defensive armes (though thereNo defen∣sive armes for subjects. hath been no such thing as a free Parliament, & without freedome 'tis none) I returne on himselve, & demand Did ever his Majestie, or any of his advised Counsellers, I adde, Did ever loyal Parliament in England, or Scotland, declare, or intimate in what cases, how extraordinarie soever, they thought it lawfull? I retort this. The unhappinesse of the Disci∣plinarian Presbyters did put the seditious part of the Parliament on these courses, which did begin, & promote all our miserie And were so wic∣ked as to the very last to endeavour to breake the bands asunder of reason, justice, honour & a well informed conscience, wherein His Majestie professed to the world the hand of God, & the lawes of the land had bound him. The peaceable possession of His Majesties KingdomesEpiscopacie no obstru∣ction to His Majesties peace. depends not upon his Clergies conditionate consent to have Epis∣copacie layd aside. A handfull of Scots, with an hypocritical Assem∣blies benediction in their knapsackes, could they hold their wind when they got over Tweed, & swell up to the picture of Boreas in the face, would not be mistaken for probable Vmpires or over-ruling Elders, in the quarell. Nor can Mr. Baylie possesse any prudent men of the loyal lay partie, that, that order obstructs the King from his happinesse. Why it may not be layd aside the unanswerable reasons in the 9. & 17. chapters of Eik. Basil. His Royal fathers booke will a∣bundantlie satisfie any man, that will rest in what he can not denie. Where he will finde enough of such devout Rhetorike, & Religious logike as this I must now in charitie be thought desirous to praeserve that Govern∣ment in its right constitution, as a mater of Religion, wherein both my judge∣ment is fullie satisfied, that it hath of all other the fullest Scriptures grounds, & also the constant practice of all Christan Churches, till of late yeares the tumul ∣arinesse
of people, or the factiousnesse, & pride of Presbyters [Reviewe that Mr. Baylie] or the covetousnesse of some States, & Princes gave occasion to some mens wits to invent new modells, & propose them under specious titles of Christs Go∣vernment, Scepter, & Kingdome (which are the Scotish titles as I take it) the better to serve their turnes, to whom the change was beneficial. The reasons that convinc'd the Royal Father have so confirm'd the Royal Sonne His Majestie now being, that Mr. Baylie dares not say (what he so prae∣sumptuoussie intimates) that he ever asked the consent of his Canterbu∣rian Praelates to the alteration of that government. If, without asking they spontaneoussie spake their conscience in due, season, there was litle boldnesse in it, & as litle in printing, which hath been often as much, & more at large, in volumes about the unlawfullnesse ofSee the lea∣rned & judicious Digges u∣pon this subjects. subjects taking up of armes, where Parliaments have unanswerablie been proved to be such, though the name of tyrannie is very unhand∣somelie, unjustie, maliciouslie used in this case, & let him speake out if he meanes to attribute it to the King. CHAPTER III. The last appeale to the supreme Magistrate justifiable in Scotland. THe Bishop consider'd that the Kings supremacie is the same inAppeale in Scotland from a Ge∣neral As∣semblie nei∣ther irratio∣nal, nor ille∣gal. Scotland, as in England, & upon that grounds the aequitie of ultimate appeale. The alissimò either of the Parliament, or Assemblie puts them not above the capacitie of Courts, & so makes them not coordinate with the King. What allayes you have for government I know not, & therefore can not close with you in the terme, till you give me an undisputable definition of the thing, which you call a moderat Monarchie, & tell me in what part of the world I may finde it, I know of none any where yet that inhibites appeales to the Kings person, If the Empire may be the standerd to the rest, the learned Grotius, that had better skill in the lawes, then you, or I, sayth. That in causes of Delegacie semper appellatio consessa fuit ad Imperatorem, si ex Im∣periali jussione judicatum esset, aut ad Iudicum quemcunque, si ex judiciali prae∣cepto, which holds good against your general Assemblie, if that jud∣geth caregali jussione▪ & that it doth so is cleare from your Assemblie Act, April 24. 1578. wherein it petitioneth the King to set, & esta∣blish
your policie, a part whereof is your Assemblie judication. That it is, for the most part, order'd to the King in his Courts, is not any way to con∣fine his power, but to free him from frequent impertinencies, & un∣seasonable importunities of trouble, or, it may be, a voluntarie, but no obligatorie, Royal condescension, to avoyd your querulous im∣putation of arbitrarie partialitie, & tyrannie in judicature. There∣fore you injure the Bishop by converting his assertion into a nega∣tive confession, As if when he sayth it is to the King in Chancerie, he must needs acknowledge. It can be neither to the King out of Chancerie, nor to him there but with collaterall aequipotential Assistants. Where∣asAltar. Da∣mascen. your friend Didoclave complaines that our appeales are ever pro∣gress ab unico ad unicum, wherein, whether he mean'd an aggregate, or personal unitie, I leave you to interpret. That an appeale is not per∣mitted from your Lords of session, or Parliament in Scotland, is because whatsoever is regularlie determin'd there receives its ratification from the King. But if one, or other in their session without him, should determine a case evidentlie, undeniablie, destructive to the rights of his crowne, or liberties of his people, whether His Maje∣stie may not admit an appeale, & assume his coercive power to restraine their license, I thinke no loyal subject in Scotland will controvert, As touching your Assemblies, King Iames tells you, It is to be general∣lie observed that no priviledge, that any King gives to one particular bodie, or state within the Kingdome of convening, & consulting among themselves (which in∣cludes whatsoever they doe when they are convened, & consulting) is to be understood to be privative given unto them, & so the King thereby depri∣ving himselfe of his owne power, & praerogative, but onelie to be given cumu∣lative unto them (as the lawyers call it) without any way dending the King of his owne power, & authoritie. This His Majestie alledged against the Ministers at Aberdene, whom he accuseth not onelie of convening, but acting after they were convened, He particularlie mentions their setting downe the diet of the next Assemblie, & His Councel addes their end∣avour to reverse, & overthrow all those good orders, & godlie constitutions former∣lie concluded for keeping of good order in their Church. If you alledge that His Majesties Commissioner was not there, then you grant me their acts are not justifiable without him, And that all are not necessa∣rilie with him, I argue from the language of the Commission, where∣by they meet, which limits them thus secundum legem, & praxim, against which if any thing be acted, upon appeale the Kings praerogative may rectifie it at pleasure, if not, any judge may praetend to be absolute, & then the King must be absolutelie nothing, having committed, or delegated all power from himselfe. What civile law of Scotland it is, that prohibites appeales from the General Assemblie, you should doe
well to mention in your next, I know none, nor did King Iames thinke of any when he cited his distinction from the Scottish Law∣yers, aswell as any other. Where an Assemblie proceeds contrarie to the lawes of God, & man, Which is not impossible, while it may consist of a multitude, men neither the best, nor most able of the Kingdome, the Bishop thinkes an appeale to a legal Court of delegates constituted, by a superiour po∣wer, might be neither unseeming, nor unreasonable. The law of old ne∣ver intended they should be the weakest of all Court; Where it hath so happened, by your owne rule, pag. 22. The Delegates, not Dele∣gacie, are to be charged. Such heretofore in England as imployed mercenarie officials, for the most part, were mercenarie Bishops, & if they had been cut to the core, would have been found, I doubt, Disci∣plinarian in heart, though Episcopal in title. The Scots way of mana∣ging Ecclesiastical causes is not more just, because more derogatorie to the right of the King, And the late Martyr'd King found it not3. Paper An. 1574 more safe, & therefore told Mr. Henderson plainlie the papacie in a multi∣tude might be as dangerous as in one, & how that might be Gualter writ to Count Vnit-glupten in a letter. Emergent hinc novae tyrannidis cornua, paula∣tim cristas attollent ambitios Ecclesiarum pastores, quibus facile fuerit suos assessores in suas partes attrahere, cùm ipsii inter hos primatum teneant. He might have found the experiment of it in Scotland. Nor can it be more satisfa∣ctorie to those rational men, with whom the Bishops arguments are praevalent, beside what else may be effectuallie alledged against it. Allthough the two instances, the Bishop brings, for stopping appea∣les were accompanied with so many treasonable circumstances, as might have enlarged his chapter into a volume, & deleted the credit of a Scotish Disciplinarian Assemblie out of the opinion of all the Cristians in the world; Yet His Lordship thought good to furnish his reader with better authoritie from the second Booke of Discip. ch 12. which shall here meet you againe to crave your acquain∣tance. From the Kirke there is no reclamation, or appellation to any Iudge Civile, or Ecclesiasticall within the Realme.The Rebel∣lious, & in∣solent disci∣plinarian proceedings against the too Rt Re∣verend Arch- Bi∣shops Mont∣gomerie, & Adamson. The reputation of the two Reverend Arch-Bishops Montgome∣rie, & Adamson depends not upon the sentence of a turbulent, & en∣vious Synod, much lesse any single malicious Presbyter in a pam∣phlet, with whom we know 'tis crime hainous enough to be a Bishop, & shall not want his vote to make them excommunicate. Their ma∣nifold high misdemeanours are mention'd in the censure of the Presbyterie of Striveling, for admitting Montgomerie to the tempora∣litie of the Bishoprike of Glasgow, & his owne for aspiring thereto. Assemblie 1587. And of the other for taking the Kings commission
to sit in Parliament 1584. In the last Act of which his commission is printed to register his guilt. The principal of their evil patrons among the wicked States-men (I meane next under the King, to whomAnsw. to the Proses∣sion & De∣clar. made by Marq. Hamilt. 1638. you yeild that praerogative at least) is sayd to be the Earle of Arran, who deserves that character for being second, at that time, in His Majesties favour, & he is sayd by your brethren to have taken them into the Parliament. So that, lay their commission, & Earle Arrans courtesie together (which without the other had implied the plea∣sure of the King,) they tooke not, without authoritie, upon themsel∣ves as you sayd) the Episcopal office, nor place in that Parliament. Whether the pride, & contempt of the Prelates, or Presbyters were greaterVindic. E∣pist. Hier. Phad. may be judg'd in the case of Arch-Bishop Montgomerie, by the Assem∣blies slighting not onelie His Majesties letters, but Messengers such as were two Heralds at Armes, His Master of Requests, who in the Kings name inhibiting their proceedings they send him word by MacgilSupplicum lib. rum Magister. Se psse sal∣v Regs imperio de causa tta cognoscere. they can salve their obedience, & yet goe through with the businesse, Setting up Durie, & Belcanqual, two Edenburgh Ministers, to aile against the E Lnox▪ & when they are accus'd, quitting them by their Ecclesia∣stike praerogative. Putting their scholars at Glasgow in Armes, & oc∣casioning bloudshed in resistance of the Principal Magistrates of that place, against whom they afterward proceeded His Majestie sum∣mous them to his judicature at St. Andrewes, they send their oratours instead of comming themselves. The King exchangeth a promise of securitie, for theirs of suspending the censure. They admit the con∣dition, but collude with His Majestie, leaving an underhand power with some select brethren, to give sentence, as occasion should serve. When they get loose they contest with his Majestie by a serpent-suppli∣cate, which when it creepes at the foot, wounds to the heart. Tell him boldlie he playes the Pope, & takes a sword in his hand, more then be∣longs to him. The Earle of Arran demanding who dares subscribe such a paper; Andrew Mlvin answers undauntedlie for himselfe, & some others, for hast snatcheth the pen out of a scribes hand that was neare him, writes his name, & exhorts his complices ro doe the like. By letter to His Majestie they shew how farre His Majestie had been uninformed, & upon minformation prjudg'd the praerogative of Iesus Christ, & the liberties of his Church (what becomes of the Kings, when this is pleaded?) They enact, & ordaine, that none should procure any such warrant, or charge, under the paine of excommunication. Where K. Iames did acknowledge the aequitie of the Church proceeding in these cases I desire to be inform'd, I am sure K. Charles 1. many yeares sinceLarg D clar. pag 308. hath writ, That they did wickedle, & that which they could not doe. And that it is a very reproveable instance. Which to have been ever his fa∣thers
opinion, I have under the hand of one of the most learned,Marg. not upon Potest. of the Gen. Assemb. a Edenb. Crosse De∣cemb. 18. 1638. knowing men, & eminent historians in your Kingdome, As likewise that they did never confesse their crimes, nor renounce their Bi∣shop-rikes &c, but that they were most cruellie persecuted by that firebrand of schisme in the Kirke, & sedition in the state. Andrew Mel∣vin & his subscribing Associates, & made so odious to the people by their excommunication, that they suffered most grievous penurie, & in the end were sterved to death, which did not quench the malice of their mercilesse enemies, who after their death continued persecu∣ting their names, & memories, making them infamous by false sup∣posititious recantations, whereof they themselves were the au∣thours, & publishers. Others, that acknowledge a word, or two to this purpose, that drops from Arch-Bishop Adamson, say he did it, when set on the racke by his hunger, being faine to beg bread of his ene∣mies, who, glad of the occasion, sold their charitie by weight▪ for hisQui occasio∣ne laeti pa∣linodiam ei per vim ex∣pressam, sed in - numeris a se locis in∣ter-polatam typis publi∣carunt. The Bishops Appeale not deroga∣torie to the Kings per∣sonal Proe∣rogative. selfe seeming-conviction, & when they had it, being too greedie to gaine damnation to themselves, did sophisticate every syllable with a lie. The Bishops in their Declinatour against the Assemblie of Glasgow, (if you remember well) appeale to no general Assemblie, otherwise then as it shall pleace His Majestie to constitute it, & personallie be present, or by his Commissioner, without whom, they acknow∣ledge no authoritie it hath. They referre it to His Majestie to call one to repaire their injurie, by way of humble desire, or direction, no way derogating from; nor impairing his separate, absolute praeroga∣tive, to redresse all personallie, if he please. Their expressions rela∣ting to Royall power in this particular are such as follow—So that they praeventing, & not proceeding by warrant of Royal authoritie—May we not therefore intreat my Lord Commissioner His race, in the words of the Fa∣thers of the fourth General Councel at Chalcedon, Mitte foras superflues. For discharge of our dutie to God, to his Church, & to our sacred Soveraigne, lest by our silence we betray the Church is right, His Majesties authoritie, & our owne consciences.—And we most humblie intreat His Grace to intercede with the Kings Majestie, that he may appoint a free, & lawfull Generall Assemblie.—to whom [Dr. Rob. Hamilton] by these praesents we give our full power, & ex∣presse mandate to praesent the same in, or at the sayd Assemblie, or where else it shall be necessarie to be used, (where's that Mr. Baylie?) with all submission, & obedience die to our gracious Soveraigne, & His Majesties High Commissioner. All which are clauses assertive of His Majesties supremacie over Ge∣neralThe Revie∣wer mista∣ke the scope of the Bi∣shops war∣ning. Assemblies, & implie his power to take cognizance of their demeanour. Though, after all this compliance with your method, & countenancing a seeming pertinencie in your arguments, I must
seasonablie put you in minde that you are very much mistaken in the Bishops meaning, & here, as otherwhere, maintaine a blinde∣conflict which your selfe. For allthough His Lordship often take advantage of your Assemblie proceedings, as contrarie to your la∣wes, & justifiable establishment of the Ecclesiastike power in your Kingdome; yet, where there is a concordance of your practice, with your rule, if accompanied with inconvenience of state, incroach∣ment upon that just praerogative, which Monarchs otherwhere doe, or may, assume, if destructive to that libertie of the people, which is given them by the Gospell, & Christian freedome sealed to them in their baptisme; if disagreeing with the primitive practice for the first five, or sixe hundred yeares after Christ you lie open to the force of his arguments, though you ward the blow from falling upon your Church in its owne peculiar, as constituded in your Countrey. For his Lordships endeavour is not onelie (though in part) to shew how tyrannical your discipline is to your selves, but how praejudicial, & destructive it may prove to us in England, if (through want of cau∣tion, or a facile yeilding to your insolent attempts,) way should be made for you to propagate what you call the Kingdome of Jesus Christ, but is indeed the tyrannie of Satan, & the second practice of Lucifers ambition, (To banish Gods Anoynted from the earth, since he faild in his project of turning God himselfe out of heaven) & we be ensnared in the like Presbyterian slaverie with the Scots. Therefore you see he entituled his booke, A Warning to take ced of the Scotish Discipline, &c. And were it not, that you would clamour in your next pamphlet, you were unanswer'd, this advertisement might passe, with any rational reader, for a refutation of, at least, halfe your booke. If I should prosecute you with the many appeales that have been made before the Bishops declinatour of the Assemblie at Glasgow I know you would runne to your cover of complaints pag. 20. of your booke. What others have been since will be brought to your remem∣brance in such a flying roule as the Prophet Zcharie, mentions (unlesse aCh. 5. v. 1. gracious pardon be given you upon your knees) when His Maje∣stie shall by Gods assistance have power to chastise your rebelling, cur∣sing, covenanting, excommunicating, imprisoning, murdering, decreeing, the confusion of his Royal familie, & three flourishing Kingdomes in your Assemblies.
CHAPTER IV. Seditious, & Rebellious Ministers in Scotland seldome, or never censur'd by the Assemblie. HEre Mr. Baylie layes faster hold upon the title, then the Bi∣shopsSedition, & rebellion not censur'd by the Dis∣cipline. evidences in the Chapter, & because sedition, & rebellion are charg'd home to the conscience of the Presbyters, & their usual indemnitie imputed to the Discipline, he would faine step over these publike enormities, to personal vices; against which (by his leave) the Ecclesiastike rigour is not such, but it can admit of very frequent indulgences, & many times convert the guilt, or shame of such haynous transgressions, to the glorie of their Gospel, & a more certaine signe of the sinners election by grace, according to John Knox's divinitie after proofe made against Paul Meffane. The treason ofHist. of Re∣form. 4. booke. Iudas, the adulterie of David, & abnegation of Peter, did derogate nothing from the glorie of Christs Evangel, nor yet the doctrine which before they had taught, but declared the one to be a reprobate, & the other to be an instrument, in whom mer∣cie must surmount judgement. Nay, if they find it advantageous to their discipline, these declamers against adulterie, & bloud, will make reli∣gious applications to any, as they did to Murray their Regent-bastard & murderer (to say no more of him) whom they made the greatest saint upon the earth, & the most eminent patron of their Church. That your pulpits have been perduellionis plaustra, the common stages for sedition, & treason. I have made appeare upon an old item some∣where else. And because you had not enough of them for the last old Comoedie you were to act, how yow did mount it in halls, schooles, & otherScorish Pres∣byters mounting in halls schooles &c. profane places, is deliver'd unto us upon Royal authoritie in his late Maejsties large Declaration 1639. Where is to be found such loyal doctrine as this. One in Edenburgh, upon his Majesties urging sub∣scription to your owne Confession of fayth, sayd It was an Italian, & a devellish device, first to make them renounce God, & perjure themselves, & then afterward there was an intention to destroy their bodies; & so that this subscription imported no lesse, then the destruction both of their bo∣dies, & soules. Rollocke did as much upon a scaffold in publishing a wicked, & rebellious protestation, Another, That though there were never so many Acts of Parliament against the Covenant, yet it ought to be maintain'd against them all. And Andrew Cant since charg'd His Majestie thus to his face, Awake thow lumpe of day, thow wast not sleeping, when thow gavest out the bloudie commissione to Iames Graham. Of all which I desire Mr. Baylie to
name one that suffer'd any censured from a Synod. what priviledge these, or any other scandalous crimes had in England, or Ireland, the High Commission, & Civile censures can cleare. But the Reviewers conscience can tell how many such tooke shelter under the wings of the Covenant, who were threaned processe, if they subscrib'd not, & , having done it, passed for very zealous, pious brethren in the cause. Their names, & infirmities, if Mr. Bayilie hath not, I have charitie to conceale, Or, if I had not (could their ordi∣nation be justified, & they accounted of our brotherhood) I should thinke my selfe oblig'd to it under the penaltie of theAn. 436. Ancient Canons a∣gainst Mi∣nisters accu∣sers of their brthren. 55. Canon of the Councel of Carthage. Episcopus accusatores fra∣trum èxcommunicet & si emendaverint vitium▪ recipiat s ad communionem, non ad Clerum. If he bear'd the like reverence to Antiquitie when he speakes so broadlie of the Bishop of Derrie, he might be∣thinke himselfe of the 57. Canon. Clericus maledicus, maxime in sa∣cerdotibus cogatur ad postuandum veniam, si noluerit, degradetur, nec un∣quam ad officitsm, absque satisfactione, revocetur. And to give His Lord∣ship his due interest in the prudent provision of the Church, I di∣rect the reader to that in the Councel of Constantinople, De accusatori∣bus Orthodoxorum Episoporum non admittendis, which is to be found in the edition of Chr. Iustell, where he shall see by how many clausesReviewer no compe∣tent witnsse against Bi∣shops. Mr. Baylie is excluded from being admitted to enter any accusation against him, first, by the Religion he professeth, adjudg'd as bad as haeresie by the ancient Canons for decreeing in conventiles against the au∣thoritie of Bishops, antisynagontas tois kanoikois emin episcoposs .......... And whether upon the several grounds that follow, an Oecumentical may not reject him, hoo kathybrisanta tous kanoas, kai n ecclesiastiken lyme∣namenon axian, as a reproachfull despiser of Canons, & a bane to the eutaxie of the Church; let any of his aequitable compare consider. Yet, I thinke, I shall breake no canon by retorting his quaestion, his acts being so publike▪ & himselfe autocatacrits, convinc'd under his hand in his booke, Did the Reviewer never heare of a Presbyterian, sibb to Mr. Baylie, who to this day was never (but may be in good time) called to any account for flagrant scandals of such crimes (even the same the Bishop mentions) sedition, & treason, which (aswell in Scotland, as in any other King∣dome) are punishable by the Gallowes? These crimes, above any, deserve civile cognizance, from which as free as the Scotish Churchmen have been, I dare undertake to prove out of their storie, That there was hardlie ever Synod in Scotland (Presbyterian I meane) but was guiltie of Rebellion, or bloud, having ever made their covenants with death, & their agreement with hell having made lies their refuge, & under fal∣shood hid themselves as they did Isai. 28. 15. So that Marian, & his dis∣ciples,
whether in Italic, or Spaine, or all the world over, can not in aequitie have layd such devillish doctrines, such publike murders of Princes, & Nobles to their charge. Foedus umbrarus perit. As constant a Covenanter as you are withHe will not be at peace & chariti with the dead. the living, I see the holiest league can not chaine up your furious malice against the dead. Your naming Bishop Aderson, For his sinne, & that blessed Martyr the L. of Canterburie for his patron, speakes you a sonne of neither Christian charitie, nor truth, If Presbyterie had been as old as the Councel of Nice, I perceive your sawcie fingars would have snatch'd the libells out of Constantines breast, & your zealous tongues, that are made seven times hotter otherwhere, would have runn the hazard to licke the Bishops faults out of the fire. I wish you had help'd me to a better bargain of your silence, & not forc'd me to give you this, which I am loth to part with, in exchan∣ge for your blabbing That if all be true that is in print (which for your credit I hope is not) Your Discipline had no other then a So∣domite for its patron, some thinke you may take your choyce of French, or Scot. How this abomination hath been propagated with your Discipline, (though by it no Disciple) I leave them to relate, who, to shame you into some speachlesse civilitie, have had reason to be your Domestike observers, if they can frame it by chast language in a riddle. Yet because your Presbyterie shall gaine no credit, if I can helpe it, by any counterfeit innocence, I will returne you a line or two in Latin, which may informe you that such an ill weed hath grow'n even where the sharpe sickle of the Eldership hath praetendedGalth. Epist. Erast. Aug. 3. 1570. to cut downe all wickednesse before it. Hoc tamen dissimulare non pos∣sum, in Palatinatu nulla prius scandala ta atrocia incidisse quam ea sint quae seniorum illic constitutorum culpa acciderunt. Et quis, obsro, eos postea seret correptores, qui sceleratissimm hominem Siculum Sodomitam, & eundem pe∣stilentissimum calumiatorem (you inherite at least the upper halfe of his qualities) impune elabi passi sunt, ne ad Iudices legitimos traberetur. If you name Bishop Aderton in your next, you will force me to breake the bond of modestie with my Readers, & make me lay this horrid scene nearer home. If you will shew your self a better Christian, or Scholar, & strengthen your arguments with the ruines of Bishops doctrines, where you finde them, & not take up the rubbish out of some few sinnes, or lapses in their lives, you may write your pleasure, & without a blush expect the like ingenuitie on this side. Pseudon syncolletes....leptotaton leron hireus, Excuse me sir, if Aristopha∣nesNor speake any truth of the li∣ving. at praesent furnish me with no more honorable titles to salute
you by, for your ingenuous meritorious demeanour in the next pa∣ragraph. Wherein you are pleas'd to pervert all that the Bishop mean'd innocentlie, & writ temperatelie, & sacrifice your soule to the Father of lies to gaine the countenance of your brethren in Hol∣land. Historical ruth I hope is no slander. Nor can it be their shame to keep peace in their Churches, & turne seditios incendiaries out of doores. But while you plead for these your owne brethren among them, (the rest holding not that point of your discipline) what respect you beare to their vigilant Magistrates, whom you taxe for putting out of their cities men zealous in their doctrine, pressing the true practice of pietic, &c. I leave to some interpreter to tell them. But my selfe shall tell you, by the way, that they joyne not with you in rejecting our Episcopacie, as Anti-christian Name you what booke of theirs, or per∣son of any note that hath done it. I am sure since you, & your English mates fell to worke with root, & branch Spanheim, their great divinitie professour in Leyden, held up his hands, & wished that all had been suchSpanheims speach a∣bout En∣glish Bishops as Arch-Bishop Vssher, & Bishop Morton, & then the order with such men he acknowledg'd would passe here wel enough. So that it should seem in the rest there wanted onelie a conformitie in some such thing, as Calvins opinions to qualifie them for a tolerable commu∣nion with the Dutch. What their zealous Ministers have preached forThe Kings booke of re∣creations farre short of what other Refor∣med Chur∣ches tolerate on the Lords day. practice of pietic, suppression of haeresie, & schisme, the Bishop is farre from calling, or accounting any crime. But because you croud into their zealous preachments, the sanctification of the Sabbath-day in your Judaical sense, If, they pressed it in the rigour of your discipline, their au∣ditours use a large practical license to confute them. To passe by their weeklie Sabbath mercatcs, & many publike faires, one of which you, & I met with at the Hague, I could have shewd you there the dancing on the ropes (if not a dutch stage play for a need) & many other prettie sights, to which you were invited with sounding of trumpets, & beating of drumes, which is their businesse at this instant in another part of the reformed Provinces: where I am I can tell you of several recreations I have observed (beside playing on the iceVindic. Ch. Phi∣lad. obected against the Ministers of St. Andrewes that were spectatours) which I litle thought on when the poor Praelatical Clergie, not many yeares since, were cursed with Presbyterian bell, booke, & candel, for approving a narrower toleration in our Countrey. Our persecu∣tions have help'd us to this, & some other experience, whereby we shall be hereafter enabled to unmaske your adventurous impudencie to the world. Whether the streame of Presbyterian, or Praelatical ermons have run clearer from contempt of pitie from silence, flaterie, &c. may be seen by him, that will looke into these last 12 yeares current
of the times. If the vigilant Bishops, such as their Lordships of DerrieBlaire & his compa∣nions justlie banished. & Downe, purg'd their chanels from the filthie doctrines, & rebel∣lious obstructions of Blaire, Levingstone, Hamilton, Cuningham & others, they did it for the more even passage of pure Primitive reformation. The zeale of these men was eating out the foundation of Gods hou∣se, & their swelling waters did overflow the bankes of government, where they came. Their impious doctrines made them first be turn'd out of Scotland, where Blaire had been before expelled theK. Ch. 1. larg. Dec. 1639. pag. 324. Vniversitie of Glasgow by the Professours for teaching his scholars, in his lectures upon Aristotle, that Monarchicall government was unlaw∣full, (the lawfullnesse whereof Mr. Baylie accounts part of the Pre∣lates profanitie, & errours.) Vpon the like misdemeanour the same ju∣stice overtoke them in Ireland, but at a time, as it hapened, when Christs Covenanting, Antimonarchical Kingdome began to be reedi∣fied in Scotland which wanting such bold pieces to supportit, & their blasphemous treasonables sermons to cement it, they were very heartlie welcom'd, & praeferred to places of greatest eminencie in that Church. What a singular difference there is in the point of exemption from secular jurisdiction between the Geneva Discipline, & yours the procee∣dingsThe Disci∣pline. in Scotland different from Ge∣neva. in the next paragraph will shew. And what person convict of, or notorious for those crimes, that you reckon was ever priviledg'd by the spiritual Court, you are to mention. Your generals are aire, the Bishop craves no favour of your extraordinarie charitie to conceale. The Declaration 1584 might be penned by Mr. Patrike Adamson & yet be King Iames's, If his Majestie declin'd the acknowledgementKing Iames Declaration 1584. thereof the yeare after, when your Rebells had seiz'd upon his per∣son at Sterlin, that may very well be imputed to his feare. Nor was that the onlie negative subscription, you extorted from your priso∣ner that yeare, who, when at libertie, afterward, with the same hand, blotted out that which, when you had the guidance of his pen, you had forc'd him to write against his owne inclination, & sense. If Mr. Adamson professed upon his death his repentance for lies, & slanders (to which we have a contrarie tradition from some that were praesent) he did no more then your great Declaratour Buchanan for his that were opposite to the other, And how both these sort of, lies that ca∣ried contradictions could proceed from the same spirit, or their re∣pentance have the same grace, & truth to reforme it. I leave to your discerning spirit to reconcile, or, if you find them different, to di∣stinguish. What the Bishop asserts, Mr. Camden faythfull register will justifie. Ministri nonnulli in Scoti è pulpitis, & per circulos Reginam indignisci∣miPart. 3. An. 1684 calumnis insectati ipss, Regi▪ & Consiliariis asperrimè obtrectárunt▪ & corm
comparere jussi sastidioso quodem contemptu abnuerunt, quasi pulpitae à Reg authoritate essent exema, & Ecclesiastici non Principisi mperio, sed Presbyteri subessent. Tour Ministers raile against, Queen, King, Councel with contempt, & scorne, denie appearance upon summons, stand upon Ecclesiastike priviledge, are not censur'd by the Assemblie, & what is that but protected? & what both but as much as the Bishop out of the Declaration praetends to? What nullitie in the law of your countrey you pleade, can be takenThe Bishops consequence good from Commissa∣ries o Ci∣vile Magi∣strates. for no answer to the Bishops second proofe, who tells you, the same rea∣son may exclude aswell Magistrates, as Commissaries, because they have no function in the Kirke, & they are so excluded out of the 11 chapter of your 2. booke of Discipline, which providing that all abuses may be removed, & dependances of the Papistical jurisdiction abolished, regulates all by the Elder∣ship of the Church, & in silence robs the Civile Magistrate of his power, The strength of which argument you wave, as you doe the 3. instan∣ces that follow, & scowre up an old rustie peice, of Logike of your owne to fight with your shadow; The Bishops consequence holding good. That if those, which have no function in the Kirke, are not to be jud∣ges to ministers, no jurisdiction remaineth in the Civile state where∣by Ministers may be punished. In England the Commissarie, & official, were no ordinarie judges to depose, & excommunicate at their pleasure: what re∣servations there were, & how limited was their power, your friendFucus ad fallendum simpliciores, vel potius illudendum Ecclesis pag. 404. Altar. Damas. Didoclave will acquaint you. Which integritie, & prudence he calls a fucus, & fallacie, because he had found no such native beautie of holi∣nesse in his Church, no such down-right dealing in the discipline. The jurisdiction of Commissaries was reestablished in Scotland in Ec∣clesiastike causes, to as great a latitude as formerlie, by act of Par∣liament at Edenburgh June 4. 1609. Presbyterian Assemblies are easilie satisfied about any delinquen∣cie against Kings. And had not K. Iames at this time been absolute, & the brethren in feare what should become of their Euangel, they hadThe Assem∣blie jugling in Gibsons case. not proceeded so farre as they did in Gibsons case. That many passed at other times with lesse notice, nay with their authoritie to main∣taine them, I have shewed frequent enough out of their stories. De∣linquents of the Episcopal partie could get no such opportunies for absence. When Gibson came about, he praetended not onelie his feare for an excuse, but his tender care of the rights of the Church. This, because more pertinent to the quaestion, Mr. Baylie overlookes, as he doth their purging him of his contumacic without acquainting his Maestie, which the Bishop urgeth. He were better be take himselfe to some other trade then that of reviewing. Two, or three such surveys will loose the Dis∣cipline more ground, then Didoclave, & any other his unanswered
Champions ever gaind them. That no trial of Gibsons fault  perfected though a fugitive was a testimonie of their forward dutie to the King. Others (beside the Bishops by the Synod of Glasgow) have been excommunicated at as great a distance for their loyal expres∣sions, & actions. The Bishops fourth proofe I perceive hath much troubled theThe Bishops relation of Mr. Blackes case vin∣cated & enlarged. Reviewers eyes, osper à sk epi tous ophalmous. Mr. Blackes case may very well seem odious, Odit, quod metuit, It turnes his sto make so much that he findes not confidence enough to wipe of that filth, which was spit upon the reputation of the Discipline by his speaches. He is better imployd with his sieve, & his scissours about divining how his Lord∣ship came by so many particulars of the storie; but the guilt of his conscience makes his hand shake, & so all his witchcraft falls to ground. For the Bishop, to my knowledge, may have his warrant for that relation somewhere else, & , for ought he knowes, recourse to some vocal oracles of that time, beside some such registers as have not been raced by the sword of the Disciplinarian spirit, nor can∣cell'd by the Clerke of the Assemblie in the darke. Though that large, most excellent volume compiled by the Rt. Reverend Arch Bishop having, no tlong since, happilie escaped the Scotish Inquisition, may here∣after be a printed monument of the Disciplines shame, an aeternal dis∣gracè to the Rebellious Presbyterie, & his credit, for all the Revie∣wers calumnies, a lasting pillar to support the fayth of all posteri∣tie, that shall reade it. Yet to take Mr. Blackes storie from his hand, out of the register of truth, the Doomsday booke of the Discipline as it lies. —Veniat invisum scelus, Errorque, & in se semper armatus furor. If the Kings countenance were changed, his conscience was not, which, by his own confession, so soon as ever his judgement was in theHamp. Cour. Cos. bloome, tooke checke at the Religion, as well as at the Rebellion in the Assemblie, professing with our saviour that though he liv'd among you, he was not of you. That you make no medium between Presbyterian, & Popis, is a piece of old Synodical malignancie, which the trial of the orthodoxe partie in these times hath made out of date, since being rejected, & banish'd by the one, they neither finde, nor sue for reception with the other, (saving into a toleration of their asyle) but by the hand of the All∣mightie are held up in their constancie between you both: Yet your feares were not groundlesse; when the Religious King went about to establish such publike workship, as would have informed ignorance in
a discoverie of your errour, & draw'n of all your conscientious, & rational disciples. His Majesties civile favours to some Papists, were not so strong evidences of his change as to wind up your Ministers to such a free warning, nor gave them license to make such rebellios appli∣cations. If that be the use 'tis time for Kings to search better into your doctrine, & see whether the toleration of that have not been the great sinne of our age, which hath pull'd downe such judgements upon their heads. This grace in your pastour is that, which abounds by continuance in sinne.Rom. 6. 1. Ephes. 6. 16. And this fayth is nothing like St. Pauls shield, being beaten by the As∣semblie into a sword, whereby they endeavour to subdue Kingdomes, but have no such commission as had Samuel, & the Prophets. Mr. Blackes denial was too faint to absolve him, & his honest hearers, if conformeHebr. 11. 36. to their English brethren, might perchance be so wrapt in their night caps, as their negative testimonie could not be very currant. When he shew'd himselfe so willing to be tried by all the world, he litle thought who might passe upon the verdict. All the heathen had con∣demn'd him for the murder of moralitie, & he had met with a scurvie packe of hardhearted Godfathers among the Papists. A brother of yoursNescio quid nec quando, sed multo ànte Vind. ep. Philad. confesseth that somewhat Blacke had sayd, though he hath no great minde to take notice, what, nor when. He complaines of Rutherfort his accuser because oblig'd for private courtesies, who deserves to be commended for praeferring publike dutie, & in that appeares to have been one of the most honest hearers there. The Courtiers can not be blamed for intending to stop the mouthes of such Ministers, as layd the Devil with his bairnes at their doores, & put them in afright that they should afterward be charg'd with keeping all the blacke brats of the Assemblie. The advice of the Brethren was adjudg'd treason by the law of Scotland produc'd against the Abcrdene Ministers, & your Edenburgh Bibles have not one text to justifie that appeale. The words layd to Mr. Blac∣kes charge I hope will be confessed to be trulie seditious. All the quae∣stion you make is whether he spake them or no, which though doubtfull (as it is not, being proved before the Assemblie who gave this reason for his exemption from punishment, They knew notL. 1. c. The od. de Re∣lig. with what spirit he was overruled) must be acknowledg'd a mater of civile cognizance (because no póint of religious) aswell as the pu∣nishment, if prov'd. Constat Episcopos & Presbytero forum legibus non ha∣bere, nec de aliis causis ....... .. praeter religionem posse cognoscere, The Breth∣rens reason, or rather mis-apprehension must not be made the mea∣sure of the lawes. If the King yeided so much toward an amicable con∣clusion, what can justifie the Presbyters in continuing the breach? who, say what you will, were bound to subscribe a band for that silence
which was required, Pesimus est mos suggestum in scenam vertere, & dul∣cissimamDe Imper. sum. Potest. circ. sar. cap. .9 Euangelii vocem in Comaediam veterem. What the learned Grotius enlargeth upon this subject, I will not transcribe, but call upon you to answer, being that which I assume to make good upon the same texts & proofes he produceth. The truth was you durst neither have advised Blacke to appeale, nor your selves have shew'd such con∣tumacie to the King, but that you had felt the pulse of the people,Nam eo ē∣porc summā fuit Ecclae concordia & authoditas, ut aulici ab ea, tametsi Regia gratia niterentur, timerent, Vindic. Ep. Chr. Philad. & made it beate high in your behalfe. This your brother confes∣seth though in Gypsie language, calling it the great concord, & authoritie in the Church, such as made the Courtiers to tremble, though never so much in fa∣vour with the King. Which concord, when so magnified in your storie, we know, was ever a covenant to rebell, & awe the King aswell as the Court by your usurp'd authoritie of the sword. Yet whatsoever is your practice, & profession, by fits; sometimes you are more ferious (though seldome more loyal) & the result of your councel apparels it selfe in such a sentence as this Our obedience bindeth us not onelie reve∣entlie to speake, & write of our Soveraigne, but also to judge, & thinke. Which if the Edenburgh Ministers had practis'd, they had not come under that severc sentence pronounced against them for raising a dangerous mutinie among the people. If I would, like you, turne diviner, I might easilie guesse out of whatLet to the Q. of Engl. Iul. 16. 1561. un printed register you have that prettie legend, that followes, which yet is not so decentlie dress'd as to make good the chast credit of the dis∣cipline. Who was this villaine? By whom was he Suborn'd? A villaine. They suborne, without particular instance of either, will not passe upon publike sayth. If the Commotion was innocent, why not approv'd? If not approv'd, how appeares it to be innocent. The best way to have quit the Ministrie from being authours, or approvers, had been to be censu∣rers, but here they could keep silence without a band. I can not yet let goe this singular storie, my dutie forbids my cha∣ritie any where to favour you with my silence. And because you are so prae, udic'd against unprinted traditions I will give it you for the most part out of some printed registers I have met with. King Iames, desirous to set off his Court with what luster he couldThe Mini∣sters guiltie of the tu∣mult. De∣cemb. 17. 1596. to foraigne Ambassadeurs, had, in a provident magnificence, re∣trench'd some allowance formerlie issued for his Courtiers atten∣dants, & contracted their tables to enlarge his owne entertainments. For the managing of this, & somewhat else concerning his revenue. he had appointed eight officers of State, where of some were Papists, but of know'n intergritie. The Reformado Courtiers, by way of scorne call'd these Octavians, & made an easie impression into their Ministrie by suggesting, that they had a designe to introduce Po∣perie,
& subvert the whole discipline of the Church. After private conference, a fast, for the smiting with the fist of wickednesse, soon after was kept at Edenburgh. Balcanqual preacheth, & spares neither, King nor Councel in his virulence, infuseth all the unpleasing particulars, he could thinke of, to imbitter his Satyr, humblie be seecheth the Eden∣burgh Citizens at a certaine houre to meet in the New Church, tells them how much it concern'd their reformed, Euagel. His reser∣vednesse sharpend their expectation, & caus'd their punctual assem∣bling almost to a man, where they found their Ministers in a formal Synod, having chosen a violent Presbyter, Mr. Robert Bruce, their Moderator. Here Mr. Blackes sufferings were aggravated: & the Kings violating the praerogative of the Church. One Watson comes in, & addes oyle to the flame, remonstrates his late repulse at Court, & denial of accesse to the King, being sent with some Rebell-supplicate from the Brethren. The Moderator, with as much malice as my be, comments at large upon every instance in a speach; Makes it Gods cause, & engageth the people to assert the libertie of his Gospel, if not by petition▪ by power. Some Commissioners are sent to the King, then in the Tolbuith, who, receiving some checke for their unjustifiable pro∣ceedings, come backe with their angrie account to the Assemblie. One Alexander Vasius Vaux being (as the Presbyters had praedesign'd) moun∣ted up above the congregation by a pillar, with stretched out arme cries, The sword of God & , of Gideon, bid them to follow him in the vin∣dication of God, & his Church. They take it▪ out of his mouth, & in confusion clamour, Arme Arme, for God, & the Church. They doe accordinglie, & rush violentlie into the streets beguirting the place where His Majestie was. Mr. Thomas Hamilton afterwards Earke of Haddington takes an hal∣berd in his hand, & with some of his friends keepes the multitude▪ from entring. Alexander Hume of Northborvick, for the time Provest of Eden∣burgh, & Roger Makmath ▪ (whom the King ordinarilie called his Barliffe) raise what power they can upon a sodaine, the honest Ham∣mermen come in to their assistance, They demand first whether the Kings person be in safetie, & then by a mixture of faire words, & me∣naces make the rowt quit the place, but not their riot, for they by, & by rallie in the Mercate place. The Captaine of the Castle turnes some canon upon the Towne, & by that militarie argument praevailes with them to disband. The King is safelie guarded to his palace at Halyrud Howse. For all this Bruce sends abroad his writs, to callin the Nobilitie to their succour, some of whom had in zeale abetted the late tumult. The Lord Forbes payd his fine for going into the street, The Lord Hamilton hath an invitation to be General, & should have had his commission (from the Synod no quaestion) if he had signi∣fied
his acceptance. He very noblie, & loyallie delivers up his letter to the King, & detects the Rebellious project of the Discipline. Some of the Ministers are sent for, & convicted, obtaine pardon of the King, but no actual oblivion from any his good subjects, who ever after detested that disloyal sect, & branded the 17. day of December with the indeleble infamie of that prodigious attempt. How like this lookes to an halfe houres tumult or petie fray, How ignorant were the People, how innocent the commotion, How free the Mi∣nistrie from being authours, or approvers; Let the Reviewers aequitable comparers determine. CHAPTER V. The Discipline exempts not the supreme Magistrate from being excommunicate. TVatim agis. The Bishop argues about excommunicating Kings, & youThe Rev. impertinen∣cie or cun∣ning in al∣tering of the state of the quaestion. answer about censuring officials, that pronounce sentence for non-payment of money, wherein yet you are not more imperti∣nent, then malicious: For you know well enough that sentence was not executed for that, but for obstinacie against the power, & com∣mands of the Church, Wherein if any officials inconsideratelie proceeded, it must not bring in quaestion the more deliberate pru∣dence of them, that made the constitution to that purpose. The rash praecipitancie of the Scotish Presbyterian rule, & practice, though many times very reprovable in the later, I finde not heere in the Bi∣shops allegation, nor of what magnitude the sinnes are, for which they excommunicate, though we have know'n a desertion of the Brethren in conspiracie against their Prince, or a glance throughLet: of the Congreg. to the Nobles of Scotland 1559. their fingars, an interpretative neutralitie, hath been made the great sinne, & threamed with this censure. Neither the Praelatical partie, nor any orthodoxe Christians in the world come into your communion in the point of excommunicating their Kings, nor com∣prehend them within the object of their Discipline, by which, though they have kept the sonnes of the Church in a filial awe, yet ever re∣serv'd a paternal priviledge for their Kings, the Nursing Fathers of the same Imperatoria unctione tolitur poenitentia. And the learnedDe Imper sum. Pot. cap. 9. Grotius assures us that the Kings of France for many ages have expres∣selie challenged this exemption for themselves, Ne possint excommunicati.
Rev ........ did never so much as intend the beginning of a processe against theirDisciplina∣rian inten∣tions never better then their words Kings, &c. Ans. Christian prudence admits no such charitable glos∣ses upon the Scotish intentions, where is no colour of ambiguitie in their words. In which if the King be a man, or a Magistrate, he must be necessarilie included, & made subject aswell to Church animadver∣sion, as admonition. If Mr. Baylie hath a perspective for the thoughts of all his praedecessours, he may enjoy the pleasure of such spiritual reviewes, or revelations to himselfe, but can have no demonstrative evidence to propagate the like confidence among others. True causes of citation of Princes to an Assemblie is the peculiar lan∣guage of the Discipline, no such truth is implied in this truer text ofEccles. 8.4. Scripture, Where the word of a King is, there is power, & who may say unto him what dost thou? The beginning of the next verse is not the Scotish Assemblie, in answer to that quaestion. What these true causes have been,No thnkes  to them for not ex∣communica∣ting their Kings. I have partlie manifested out of their storie, their owne Registers ju∣stifying their successive meeknesse, & indulgence; wherein though no King may be found excommunicate, (because their spiritual sword wanted luster, and brightnesse to strike such amazement into Princes, as to make them let fall the temporal one out of their hands) yet not any one of them hath there been since the Assemblies were possess'd of their infernal commission, but have been personallie threatned, imprison'd, depos'd, or murdered, & they should have tasted the meeknesse of the Discipline in them all, if the season had served, & they could have catch'd, or kept them in their power; Against which universal experience whether Mr. Baylie's single word may be taken for the future securitie of His Majestie, & his successours, I submit with silent reverence to be debated in their Councel. Rev. We love not the abused ground, &c. Ans. We are as litle in love withThe An∣cient Fa∣ther quit peccan Kings of all humane censure the Reviewers affronting of Kings, as they with, what he calls the Warners flatering of Princes. To the quaestion he so magisteriallie propounds. St. Ambrose, notwithstanding his Act to Theodosius, makes answer upon that speach of David cited by the Bishop, & addes the reason in such language as Mr. Baylie will not heare from any Canterburian-Praelate, Quod nullis ipsi [Reges] legibus tenebantur, quia liberi sunt Reges a vinclis delictorum. The same is to be found in Isiodore Pelus: And Tertulian to this purpose many hundred yeares before Presbyterie was hatch'd. Scint [Imperatores] quis illis dederit imperium.. ..... sentiunt Deum esse solum,Apos. Gent. adv. in eujus solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, ante omnes, & super omnes Deos, homines. And because the Reviewer calls this doctrine Episcopal, let him take St. Hieroms note too by the way. Rex ipse [David] & alium non timebat. This Catholike doctrine praeserves the
Majestie of Princes, de jre, inviolable from the insolencie of Assem∣blies. Where the abuse of it spurres them on to any dangerous prae∣cipies, they are to stand, or fall unto themselves. The poor oppres∣sed people would many times worke out their deliverance by prayers, & patience, if the outragious Presbyters did not thrust them downe, & with the hazard, if not destruction of their persons, dash all civile government in pieces. CHAPTER VI. Kings may sometime pardon capital offenders, which the Disciplinarians denie. As they doe their Royal right to any part of the Ecclefiastike revenue. WEre your reasoning as methodical as the Bishops, I should notThe Bishops reasonning not unconse∣quential. be so in every Chapter at a losse to find out more to what, then what to answer, having hitherto met with none, but Socrates's three darke principles in your booke, tò chaos touti, kai tas nephela, kai ten glottan, confusion, clouds, & tongue: which among them have made such a mist in your own eyes, & such a clatering in your eares, as youAristoph. Nubes. can neither see, nor heare a good logical argument brought before you. We, that are above this disturbance, & at a distance, observe his Lordship laying out the doctrine of your Discipline (for so I'll speake for once) received by you all, & then illustrates it by your practice, where in if he had roome enough, he would muster up so many particulars as with an, &c. might conclude an inductive uni∣versal. Though the other way of acconsequential arguing hath been thought tolerable in Mr. Baylie (no Doctour as I take it) as not long since in his uncharitable mention made of Bishop Aderton, & his slander against the two reverend Bishops of Downe, & London Derric. The Ministers rigour, & vindictive pleading hath ever multipliedBloud the seed of the Discipline. in Scotland the widowes, & fatherlesse, the deadlie feuds having been ever continued, & received by them, when they saw it tend to their advantage, so that the bloud shed by murderers of their making may be trulie aesteem'd, the seed of their Church. Which duelie consi∣dered, demonstrable in their storie, should deterre any cautelous Christian from their communion, who, by that partaking in their guilt, can exspect from heaven no benefit of his prayers, Gods curse
in the Prophet concerning them nearer, then any ministrie in theEsai. 1. 15. world, When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea when ye make many prayers, I will not heare: Your hands are full of bloud: The historie of that time, though very partiallie, & falselie re∣latedMercie Gods attri∣bute, & so the Kings. by the Reviewer, were it not, can not justifie the insolence in their discipline, wherein they do not occurre to the inconvenience praetended, the impunitie of murder procur'd then by some importunate & powerfull solicitours, but despightfullie scratch out the image of God in his Anoynted, & pull downe his praerogative attribute of mercie, which hath a season of priviledge above justice, if that passe with Mr. Baylie, for any of his workes. What I meane I collect from. Book Discipl. 9. head. this clause. In the feare of God we signifie unto your Honours, that whosoever perswades you that ye may pardon, where God commandeth death, deceives your souls. & provokes you to offend Gods Majestie. Where not onelie the act of impunitie is condemn'd, but all power to pardon in any case denied. Which God never practis'd himselfe, nor exacted in the rigour from his Kings. Beside, the case hath been know'n, when the PresbytersPresbyters sollicite pardon for murder. themselves became the powerfull sollicitours to the King, & drew a pardon for murder from his hand against his heart, as they did from K. Ch. 1. for Mr. Thomas Lambe, a preaching brother, who stab'd a young man of Leith with a ponyard betwixt Leith, & the Abbey of Haliryd House upon the Lords day in the afternoon, in the time of the Assemblie, & Par∣liaments sitting. To whom the King, used this speach Ministers must be pardoned though slaughterrs.  other men must suffer for a words speaking, reflecting upon one Mr. Iohn Stuart, who suffer'd for saying that Ar∣gile had spoken about deposing the King. How they professed their Church to be reformed by the murder of David Rizio, & the King called  weake man, because he would not vouch it, I have shewed more par∣ticularlie in their storie. Yet I hope Mr. Baylie (who is too rigid) when he comes next in the Rebell-Commission, will be no sollici∣tour for any act of oblivion. That if the King gives not what satis∣faction they finde necessarie, & due, he, & the other bloud-hounds will articulate their crie into justice, justice, or lie downe in their armes to exe∣cute it themselves even upon His Majestie himselfe (for he hath all∣readie encircled him, within the object of the Discipline) may be fair∣lie collected from hence, as from what he told us in his Epistle. That you may preach unto Rigour to be preached &c. under none but impious or negligent Magistrates; so excommu∣nication for impunitie. Magistrates, that according to Scriptures mur∣derers ought to die even Erastus will grant you, Yea that in some cases you may rebuke, exhort, admonish, threaten, denounce judge∣ments, aswell as preach promises according to the examples of the Prophets. But he puts you in minde that this they did onelie under impious Kings, no Davids, no Salmons, no more must you assume this
libertie, under Ime's, & Charle's, pious, prudent, & just Kings. If you should have an unhappie occasion to exercise it under other, you must goe no farther, no excommunication which is order'd in your Discipline. He calls for your texts, he answers your arguments, he helpes you to instances of Ioab, whose murder could not safelie be punished, of Absalom, whose, for some reason, was neglected. He demands whether these men, went not into the Temple nor communicated in the Sacraments with this impunitie about them. I have no way to be rid of you, but as Mr. Selden, they say was of the whole packe of your clamouring brethren at London, who layd Erastus booke open before them, & bid them answer him. Which dismounted their tailes, & put a gag in their mouthes, so that I heare he was never troubled with them afterward. E. Huntley's case hath been caried to the mint, & comes now outE. Hunt∣leys case wholie min∣ted in the Assemblie. with a new stampe of the Assemblie at a losse till their Father behind them scatters his kindnesse among his prodigal sonnes, & bids them lavish out his inexhaustible stocke of calumnies, as they please. What the Bishop hath granted you about the guilt of the three Lords, I have no commission to retract. What you aggravate about E. Hunt∣ley's apostacie, & , after seeming repentance, frequent relapses, doth at the worst, but argue his adhaerence in heart to the Romish religion. This added to his banding with the King of Spain (which you pricke into some blanke papers subscribed with his hand, & the rest taken out of Dr. Kerre's pocket, as he was shiping over, upon your excommuni∣cating, & banning; & picke out of some other, such as litle could be made of at that time, when it should have been most advanta∣geous) is not enough to justifie that rigour alleadged by the Bishop. The truth of what followes shall be left to the ingenuitie of your judicious & aequitable comparers, by laying your relation to that of more authentike historians, whose record is this Bothwell, after many murders, & misdemeanours, having broke prison, endeavours to get the King, & Chancellar Maitland into his power, to which end he sets fire to both their chambers, & by vio∣lence makes his entrance into the Queenes. For this, some of his com∣plices were hang'd, the Kings proclamation, publish'd against him, prohibites any man to harbour him. The Earle Huntley, upon the Chancellars intreatie, raiseth some power to surprice him, with which he besets Earle Murray's house, where Bothwell was entertaind, & Murray in defense of him slaine. For this soon after was E. HuntleyBothwells notorious crimes. imprison'd, till having put in caution to appeare at a publike trial, he had his libertie given him to goe home. Murray's friends had not patience to wait the leisure of the law, but worke revenge upon
all advantages they could get. Bothwell having been this while con∣ceal'd in England, enters Scotland in armes, & assaults the King in his palace at Fawlkland, but, being beaten off, makes another escape. The Assemblie, failing of the successe they hop'd for in Bothwells at∣tempt, praevaile for the banishing of Papists, & confiscation of their goods, Bothwell, finding no good welcome in England, gets away, & gaines a private opportunitie by his friends to be secretlie con∣veigh'd into the Kings chamber, where he begs his pardon upon his knees, & obtaines it, yet the next day makes a tumult in the Court, & caries away diverse of the Kings servants; The King (which may seem strange) for the safetie of his person, was faine to put away his friends of greatest trust, the Chancellor,▪ Treasurer, Baron Humes, &c. but within a moneth repents him, appeales to his No∣bles, & by their advice, recalls them, yet permits Bothwell to depart. The Ministers are angrie that the Papists are not persecuted by fire, & sword. They assemble without the Kings order, & call together the Barons & Burgers. Bothwell enters againe with 400. Horse as farre as Leith; makes proclamation, summons all in to defen'd re∣ligion, & put away evil Counsellers; sends it to the Synod at Dun∣bar, which favour'd it; The same day he marcheth against 3000. of the Kings forces neare Edenburgh, fainteth in his businesse, and gets away to the borders; Queen Elizabeth sets out a proclamation against him, yet presseth the King for proscription of Papists; The Lords are but few that meet, & expresse some reluctance at it. The Ministers, & Burgers are many, which vote it, take their armes downe out of the windowes, &c. Argile is sent against them, & beaten; The King drawes toward them, & permits three of Hunt∣ley's houses to be pull'd downe, Huntley escapes to his Aunt in Suther∣land, thence into France. These were Huntley's notorious crimes, & multiplied outrages which cryed up to the God of heaven; Out of which let the world judge what reason the Ministers, those mercifull men of God, had to give such warning, & crie to the Iudges of the earth, to shed his bloud. That appearance with display'd banner against the King in person, should be made an article against him by Mr. Baylie, a loyal peaceable assertour of ten yeares armed re∣bellion in three Kingdomes: I dare not adventure my spleen to dis∣course on but in Mr. Baylies language, hope by his good advise, the Prelates will no more Lull' Princes asleep in such a sinfull neglect of their char∣ge, but breake off their slumber by wholesome & seasonable admonitions from the word of God, such as that Prov. 20. A wise King scatereth, the wicked, & bringeth the wheel over them. Or what other texts, their Lordships bet∣ter know applicable to the most just, necessarie chastisment of schis∣matikes, & Rebells.
About E. Angus, & Errol, you thinke your selfe not concern'd toR. Bruce's speach a∣gainst E. Huntley make answer because your brother Presbyter Mr. Rob. Bruce, gave King Iames leave to recall them, but with this considerable sentence, against E. Huntley. Well Sir, you may doe as you list, But chuse you, you shall not have me, & the E. Huntley both for you. Pretie humble soules, who can weigh downe the chiefest Earles in the ballancing of a state.First fruites &c. witheld from the King as much by the Presbyters as Pope. In the next paragraph, you dawbe with untemper'd morter, such as can never keep the Kings right to any Ecclesiastike revenue, & the claime of the Discipline together. For having comprehended in the patrimonie of the Kirke all things [without exception] given or to be given to that, & the service of God; All such things as by law, or custome or use of Countreys have been applied to the use, & utilitie, of the Kirke. 2. book Disc. ch. 9 And call'd them theeves, & murderers [without exception of persons] that alienate any part of this patrimonie. 1. books Disc 6. head you are the innocent dove that, here bring us newes, That the Church never spoyld the King of any tithes, while those birds of spoyle, your forefathers, have left him, neither eare nor straw to possesse. But to deale with you at your owne weapon in your words. If the King never had any first frui, then, as the Bishop sayth, you are the Popes, that with-held it, & by you, that were the Reformers, was that point of papacie maintained; If he neither had, nor demanded, to what pur∣pose toke you, such paines to obtaine in favour of the Church to have it declar'd in Parliament, That all benefices of cure under Praelacies shall in all time coming be free of the first yeares fruits, & fift penie, & the Mi∣nistersAn. 1587. have their significations of presentation past, at the Privie sealé upon His Majesties owne subscription, & his secretaries onelie, without any payment or cau∣tion to his Treasurer for the sayd first fruits, & fift penie? About tithes, you say, His Majestie, & the Church had never any contro∣versieContradi∣ction about tithes. pag. 57. in Scotland. How agrees this with your Declaratour in his ap∣pendix to the maintenanee of your sanctuarie? When the minor-age of a good King had been abused to the making of a law, whereby the most of these rents, first fruits, Tithes, & the lands belonging to Bishoprikes were annexed to the crowne, the Church very earnestlie do labour for restitution, & never gave over∣till these lawes were repealed. If you review your records, you will finde in the yeare 1588.Patronages. that you had a plea with, which you call an earnest suit to, His Majestie about patronages, & such considerable opposition, as put you upon inhibiting all commissioners, & Presbyteries to give collation, or ad∣mission to any person praesented by authoritie from the King. And [to omit many] a greater you had before with the Queen. Anno 1565 The Nobilitie, & Gentrie were more beholding to your impo∣tencie,
then patience for peace. What gracious men you have shewdPresbyte∣rian rebel∣lion, & ty∣rannie. your selves, since your Rebell-Parliament got that incumbent power into your hands, your congregations would speake if they durst, whom you feed with the bread of violence, & with that you cover them as a garment. So that whether the Presbyterie be not as good patrons of the people, as they are vassals to the King, need never more be quaestion'd in Scotland.Rejoycing at the se∣questring the Church patrimonie. Qui jactare non dubitâ∣runt se E∣pis. plygin airian in∣flixisse. Whether by the wickednesse of Praelates, or Presbyters the King, & Church were cousin'd of the tithes, will appeare by them, that bragg'd most when they were most endanger'd by the sequestring the other patri∣monie from the Church, which I finde to be the Presbyters that could not keep councel but basted they had given a seasonable blow unto the Bishops. That legitimate power in the Magistrate the Bishop pleades for King James never declared to be a sinne against Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, nor did ever the patrons of Episcopacie oppose it. That chan∣geling you here substitute in the roome calls you Father by the ri∣diculous posture in which it stands, your friend Didoclave Atar. Damasc. p. 3. had moreK. Iames anti-presby∣terie. ingenuitie then to inferre a claime to the power of preaching, & cele∣brating the Sacraments upon the power of jurisdiction over Ecclesiasti∣cal persons derived upon the King from his praedecessours in En∣gland, & given them by a statute. Verba statuti de jurisdictione, non de simplici functionum sacrarum administratione intelligenda esse quis dubitat. The well grounded consequences, which you call Castles in the aire, will hereafter batter your Presbyterie to the ground, when Prin∣ces shal retract their too liberal indulgence, take a courageous re∣solution to claime their own, & relie upon Gods providence to maintaine it. King Iames had given you the practical meaning of his wise sentence, seven yeares before he spake it at St. Andrews. For, as you may very well remember, when His Majestie had put downe your Presbyterie by the head, your Ministerial office was with the exercise of your halls, having, to the time of your late rebellion, no other, then an ambulatorie Euangel, no Disciplinarian legallie to∣lerated to officiate, but such as would conforme to the canons of the Church. If the King had sayd, Ego non possum erigere Ministri caput, the heads of the Aberdene, & Edenburgh Ministers might have con∣futed him upon the gates, but that his mercie [without the Syno∣dical censure of impunitie] interpos'd in that dispute. As great an enemie as His Majestie was to such Erastians, as the Bishop, INo Dona∣tist. am sure he was no friend to such Donatists as you, unlesse infestis∣simus hostis be significant to that purpose. He sayd, you wereEp. lector. Atar. Damascen. the perfidious, bedlam knaves among the preachers, my dictio∣narie
will helpe me to no fiter English for his Latin▪ perfidi, &Georg. Con. De Dupl. Stat. Relig. apud Scot. lib. 2. anatici nebulones inter concionatores; And you, or your profession he often styl'd Calvinistarum Satanismum, a ect of lapsed spirits among the Calvinists, whose malice▪ had metamorphoz'd them into Devils. CHAPTER VII. The Presbyterie cheates the Magistrate of his Civil power in ordine ad spiritualia. THe Bishop begs no beliefe of his Readers, beyond what heTheir lati∣tude of scandal. 8. 9. brings proofe out of your Discipline to prevaile for. When you have made all offenses, more, or lesse scandalous, like the Pro∣phet in Hosee, you become the snare of a fowler, & with this coun∣terfeit call catch all the uncleane birds in your net▪ If the Bishops official takes notice of more civile causes then your Presbyterie, the qualitie, & number had been Worth your noting for your Readers satisfaction. To strengthen your evidence, I consulted with Didoclave your brother Scout, whom I finde to have made no such numerous discoverie, & I take him to be alltogether as strict, & able an inquisitour, as your selfe. That capital offenders, whom the Magistrate hath spared, should be excommunicated, is discipli∣narianMalefa∣ctours par∣doned not to be excom∣municated. censure, which no societie of regular Christians ever infli∣cted; Nor can any ingenuous Divine denie such, accesse to the holie table, if otherwise qualified then by their impunitie. He must di∣strust either the prudence or pietie of the Magistrate, conceiving him either too liberal of his pardon to a person shewing no remorse for his fault; or impious in countenancing instead of cutting off, an obstinate malefactour with his sword. Erastus himselfe (whom you raile at so often) puts in this caution (which Beza approves of) for whatsoever he hath asserted in his booke. Quod meminisse t velim etiamsi non semper adjecero. That the person you admit be suppos'd to understand, approve, embrace the doctrine of the the Church, with which he desires to communicate; That he professe an acknow∣ledgement, & hatred of his sinnes (he addes not from your stool of repentance (That a murderer, adulterer, blaspheme, thus par∣doned, thus poenitent, thus supplicant for the seale of the Sacra∣ment, should be, to fill up the amphitheater of any prou'd hypocri∣tical,
popular presbyter, made the sundays sport, or spectacle to the people, No Scripture commands it, no orthodoxe Church ever practis'd it, no law of Scotland imports it. If you suspect his re∣pentance to be but counterfeit, & his humble addresse, a religious imposture; you may discourse with him in private, lay open before him the hainousnesse of his fact, deterre him by the extremitie of the danger, tell him if he discernes not the Lords bodie (which he can not through the blacke unrepented guilt of that sinne) he eates judge∣ment, he drinkes damnation; But all this pertaines ad Consilium, a terme us'd among the ancients in cases somewhat conterminate with ours, to ghostlie councel, no spiritual execution, ad legis annuncia∣tionem, non jurisdictionem, to the terrible declaration of the law, to no jurisdiction or legal exercise of your power. Beside, here I must put you in minde of what I otherwhere prove, and is uneniable. That your excommunicating facultie is not originallie in your As∣semblie, but derived to you from the supreme Magistrate, with an implicite reservation of his own priviledge▪ to remit it at pleasure, it being no ure divino discipline, I hope (for if such, what becomes of those Churches that use it not?) The malefactours exemption from this, without quaestion, accompanies his largesse of civile mercie, & he stands acquitted from all spiritual, aswell as temporal, punish∣ment: For to suppose the Magistrate takes him from the gaoler, to deliver him to Satan▪ exchangeth his shakles for chaines of darke∣nesse, his prison for hell, is inconsistent with reason, or charitie, & gets no more faith, then such a cruel sentence hath the face to aske my opinion of its justice. The learned Grotius tells you, how John a Bishop of Rome became intercessour to Justinian the Emperour in the behalfe of poenitent delinquents, that were separated from the union of the Church, asscribing to him the authoritie, & honour of their restitution to the communion thereof. Which argues him, & his Presbyters, (if you admit him not to be single in his jurisdiction) at that time to have had no independent Discipine, to crosse the Em∣perours power, to have been no countermanders of his pardons. That the Magistrates in Holland have very often commanded the Pastours to their dutie in these cases. And that, by an old law in En∣gland, the Kings pleasure was craved before any of his servants could be excommunicated. Fraud in bargaining, false measures, &c. the Bishop takes to be ma∣tersFalse mea∣sures, &c. maters of civile co∣gnizance. of civile cognizance; He findes them call'd abomination to the Lord▪ not any where such scandals to the Church, as to require publike satisfaction. What Ecclesiastike rebukes are due, he thinkes may be gi∣ven by particular Ministers in their several charges; without a sum∣mons
before a Consistorian judicatorie. Die Ecclesiae was no praecept of speed; There were two or three errands to be done by the way; The offended brother hath, after conference, a private arbitra∣tion praescrib'd him: Nor doth it appeare that, in cases of this na∣ture, our Saviour ing'd him a warrant to fetch his adversarie to the Church, not a word is there that doth authorize the Church to command him out of the Court, to anticipate, or aggravate the civile censure by the Reviewers Ecclesiastike Rebukes.The Revie∣wers 30. yeares expe∣rience no argument of Presby∣terian hone∣stie. The Bishop speakes of Presbyterie in the institution, makes no instance of it in the practice; I'll take no mans word for discipli∣narian honestie throughout 30. yeares trading. The saints, after that rate; will not be readie at Doomesday to give up their account of compassing the earth, & getting in their inheritance annex'd to their dominion, which they will have founded in grace; If the Presbyteries, wherein all that time you were conversant, were no merchant adventurers, tooke no share f the purchase, they have kept some Jubilee to lease out their indulgence; Or it was, not unlikelie, a piece of your Kirke-policie to connive a long time at all petie larcenie, knowing who at length would be catch'd in the great cheate, the 200000. pound sale of damnation to their breth∣ren, & yet keeping backe whole viols of vengeance, and wrath unto themselves. For the many causes of Ministers deprivation, cognosced upon in your Presbyteries, you have the good liking of neither Papists, nor Prae∣lates,Their Ca∣nons not the same with those of the ancient Church. who finde no canon, that gives commission to such a mungrel socitie of lay-Clerical Presbyters to take away, what they have no power to conferre. If I give, but not grant, your usurped tyran∣nie a priviledge, by many yeares rebellious praecedent, to cognosce of such cases, I must except against clipping of canons; the coyne that beares the Majestike image of the Primitive Church, such as is the 67. in the fourth Councel of Charthage, Seditionarios nunquam ordinan∣dosVictorem Romanum Epum cir∣ca annum Dui 200. legimus Coenae usu interdixisse injurias condonare nolentibus T. Erast. thes. 7. Clericos, sicut nec usurarios, nec injuriarum ultores. The first of the three had met with your vertous Fore-Father Knox in the Castle of St. Andrewes, & sav'd all the mischiefe we have reap'd by his call from abetting the murder of Cardinals, to rebelling against Princes, ren∣ting the Church, & the Commonwealth into Congregational, & Cove∣nanting parties. The last, which was your injust praetense, if not in your banners, at least in the Remonstrances, which you brought in your hands when you invaded England (Canons holding aswell for depriving, as ordaining) had rid us of all the rable of Rebellious revengefull Presbyters without a stroke. For the businesse of usurie, I shal not draw up my charge till I discover the Scottish Presbyterian
Cantores; Yet you were best have care (whatsoever becomes of the ancient Canons) that you be not too severe in depriving for that, lest you get a rebuke from your brethren abroad, who, it may be, desire not to shake hands with you in that point of the Discipline. The Bishop neither tooke out, nor put in any causes of Church∣mensNo canon against re∣belion, nor deprivation of rebellious Ministers. deprivation, but merelie transcrib'd, what he thought more concern'd a Civile Court, then a Synod. If he had been at the charge of reprinting all whereof your booke of Discipline makes mention▪ he must have left an &c. to bring up a reserve (though yov will not owne it) of preaching, penning, practizing, schisme, sedition, Rebellion against moderate, just, & pious Kings, aswell as what your Assemblies were solicitous to prohibite, under the terme of Schisme, or Rebellion against the Kirke. For the first, & last of the three sinnes you draw out (because you will have the pleasure, at least, of lickingPresbyters as peccant as Bishops. your lips at the naming) His Lordship knowes no Bishop, nor Do∣ctour but may finde a namelesse Scottish Presbyter to give place to▪ If he should be mistaken (which he hath not so much reason to hope, as charitie to wish) he sees in St. Iames the guilt of murder aequiva∣lentCh. 2. 11. to adulterie, & made as great a transgression of the law; He heares of Isaiah's triel in Scotland, which deserves the same wonder▪29. 9. & crie of the Prophets. Ye are drunken, though not with wine, ye stagger, though not with strong drinke, &c. And, since your last returne ou of England beholds sitting at Edenburgh, aswell as London, the great whore [instead of her blew] arrayed in purple, & scarlet colour, & deckedRevel 17. with gold, & pretious stones, & pearles, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations, & filthnesse of her fornication; And upon the forhead of the woman drunken with the bloud of the Saints, & with the bloud of the Martyrs of Iesus, a name written with a beame of the sunne, Mysterie, Babylon the Great, The Mother of harlots, & abominations of the earth. For the third sinne of glut∣tonie [which you will have produc'd, because in your canon, though not much for your credit that your excessive gossiping comes to be cognosced by your Church] all Bishops, & Doctours may freelie bid defiance to your sect, of whom so manie are so often known to be as fed horses in the morning, & though you flatter yoursel∣ves into a conceit that the noyse is not heard, are neighing as much5. 8. as those in Isai. So that you may in due time have, what you better deserve, the same curse with the Priests in the Prophet Malach.2. 3. which will spoyle your reviewing & singling out other men errours, or secret sinnes to the shame of Christianitie among the Na∣tions, when your selves are spiloi, kai momoi, the principal spots, & 2 S. Pet. 2. 13. blemishes that are in it. God may corrupt your seed, & spread dung upon your faces, solnitatum strcus, even the dung of your solemne feastes, &
you, more likelie then they, may be taken away with it. The Bishops third chalenge mounts somewhat higher then yourTheir exer∣cing civile jurisdiction answer, which pleades onelie for preaching upon texts, concerning the Magistrates dutie, & resolving, from scripture, their doubts, both which reach up onelie to a judgement of direction: but his Lordship cites the clause in your theorem, which makes difficult ca∣ses between King, & people subjects of cognizance, & judgement before the Assemblies of the Kirke, And this, he sayth, riseth to a judgement of jurisdiction. Your second booke of Discipline is more modest in language, though as mischievous in meaning. The Mini∣sters exerce not the Civile jurisdiction, but teach the Magistrate how it should be exerciz'd according to the word; whereas if you take cognizance of, & pronounce judgement in, these difficult cases, Or call before you such as may be more easie, but should be heard otherwhere; this is no other but exercing civile jurisdiction, as spiritual as you make it. If you, with the terrour of your excommunicating Maozin, overaw the Magistrate into a servile submission to what you praescribe, this I take to be no teaching, but commanding, & instead of resolving by de∣liberate advice, & Christian moderation, cutting in sunder with this sword of your spirit (no word of Gods) the knots, & perplexities of his conscience. What doubt-resolvers you are commonlie between Master, & ser∣vant,Their eoc∣nomical su∣perinten∣dencie. husband, & wife, your licentious demeanour in many fami∣lies may informe us, where (it is too well know'n) you have made your selves judges of the trivial oeconomical causes in the hall, & dispensers of, or with, more private duties in the chamber; So that, they say, the good man hath many times met with a consistorian censure at his table, & , if not with a Presbyter a Presbyterian pro∣hibition in his bed: I beleeve you mistake preaching Praelates, & Do∣ctours for some babling Puritanical Pastours, & Lecturers in England, who have made these things▪ their care, & gone about them, as the uncontrver∣ted parts of their Ministerial function. The Bishops negligence herein was the silent reverence he payd, which you owe, to Majestie at a di∣stance; And His Lordships modest declining domestike curiosities, a civile diversion from that, wherein the word is so cleare, as to need no interpreter, & the Husband or Masters authoritie so absolute, a admits no superintendencie to praedominate. Your license to preach personallie against Princes, I finde givenPreaching personalli against Princes. Knox: Hist. Lib. 2. to your Fore-fathers in an answer to the Queenes proclamation 1559 Your tradition still continues the same, touching which (for brevi∣ties sake) I must againe send you (as I can not too often) to the fa∣mous Grotius. De Imper. Sum. Pot, cap. 9.
What the Parliament propon'd to you about the late engagement,Their pro∣ceedings in the late en∣gagement. included no such great scruple of conscience as to long for the com∣fort of your resolution, nor was that, when they had it, the starre by which they steer'd their course, in the businesse. They knew your violence [call'd zeale] to be such, as would force an entrance into the hearts of many poore people, which, when it findes emptie, swepSt. Matth. 12. 43. & garnished for better ghests, would call in 7 wicked rebellious spi∣rits to possesse them. This epidemical mischiefe they endeavour'd to praevent by acquainting you with the plausibilitie of their enter∣prize, & if they could have praevailed for either your consent, or silence, they should have the lesse need▪ they thought, to looke backe in the prosecution of their designe. What conjunction soever you found to be at that time driven on, I can assure, you there was a clearlie malignant partie on this side, that found themselves separated, & who trembled at the hazard of their religion, & the persons of them, that were to be most eminent instruments of its praeservation, when they saw such a solemne outward compliance with oathes, & Covenants, & with a Committee of Estates, that declar'd so at large for the for∣mer joint-interest with England, against the Liturgie, & establishedDeclar. Iul. 21. 1649. religion in our Church. Yet their warning against it made no other noyse then sounding of their bowels in compassion to the King▪ whom they desired to have by any meanes, delivered out of the handsIsai. 63. 15. of the mercilesse Independent, and a tendernesse toward their swee, & ingenuous Prince, who with his loyal & generous Nobilitie, they feard might be deluded, & fall into the hands of the darke merce∣narie Presbyter, the orthodoxe, untainted partie being not inter∣mix'd in such a visible number, as seem'd likelie to secure them from that danger. The Congregational supplications were naught, but your Consi∣storian jugglings: Your selves sow'd the winde in some whispering Assemblie instructions, & then reap'd the whirlewind. in tumultuous petitions from the people. So that your own spirit first rais'd the storme, & then wrapt it selfe in a mistie multitude for concealment. That the States of the Kingdome sent several expresse messages for that end, viz. to receive an Assemblies replie in a Magisterial De∣claration against their proceedings; in pulpit banning▪ & cursing; in Clamourous seditions, & , as you could make, militairie opposition, I can not get within the compasse of my faith, & take it to be such a salving of conscience as none but a Scottish Classical Casuist will professe, beyond what any Jesuite in ordine ad spiritualia will challenge with all the rebellious circumstances, that accompanie it. For that filthie conclusion you cast upon the Bishop, we know aswell as if
we had seen it drop, that it came from the corrupt praemises in your head. In the case you produce His Lordship ties not up the tongues of Gods servants, but concludes the counsel of the wicked to be deceit,Prov. 12. 5. Ps. 50. 16. Gods law not to be taken from your preaching, nor his Covenant any more from, then in your mouth. To applie your general to the particular in hand, The warre you thought unlawfull, because it pro∣claim'dIsai. 61. libertie to the captive, & the opening of the prison to His Majestie that was bound; And the law in St Iames, you had no rea∣son2. 11. to submit to, who may, not uncharitablie, be thought to have resolved upon a connivance at, or collusive neutralitie in the mur∣der, that was otherwise visiblie to follow. The greatest impietie, & injustice, I know, was in it (as exquisite as you are in casting the fashion of uncertain evils) was the advancement of your Covenant in the Van. And, if for that, the Engagers were to▪ expect nothing but the curse of God, I am sure they deserv'd no anathema from your Kirke. If your doubting Nation be put in the scales with your resolving Nation that engaged, I beleeve we must give you at least a graine or two to make it aequiponderate. They, that stated their soules by the councel of your Assemblie, stay'd behinde to praevent all recruit, & oppose the retreat of their more loyal Countrey men upon a possi∣ble misfortune. For the lawfulnesse whereof they had somewhat, worse then silence, from the (miscalled) servants of God, though, I am sure, no authoritie from his word. When Religion, & Royaltie lay panting under the talents of most cruel Rebells, the Civile bu∣sinesse of warre was by the other birds of prey unseasonablie dis∣puted. What concern'd the soul in it, had the cleare sunshine fromIsai. 8. 20▪ the law, & the testimonie to warme, & quicken it, That the Assem∣blie spake not according to this word, was because there was then no light in them, the lampe of the wicked was put out. What the Church declared in their publike papers to the Parlia∣mentProv. 13. had very litlie of modestie, or truth. It bound up your enga∣gement in so many knottie conditions, as had made it sure enough for vindicating the wrongs the sectarians had done, when the onelie injur'd persons were excluded out of their share in the promised successe. To expect reason by Christian, & friendlie treaties from them that you acknowledge had bid adie to Religion, & Covenant, when your zealous selves, praetenders to both, never offered any heretofore, was like the fine-spun thread, or Covent garden paperIanuar. 6. & 29. 1649. you put in afterward between the axe & the Royal head it cut off: If the good people in Scotland were so willing to hazard their li∣ves, & estates; what good Pastours were you that held their hands, & forc'd then to sit still. By whose cunning, & misperswasion the en∣gagement
was spoyled, or impeded in the stating, we require no farther evidence then from your pamphlets, By whose rash prae∣cipitancie, or somewhat else in the managing (if it may not be ascribed to the fortune of the warre) is a mysterie yet not perfectlie revealed. The number was large enough, though the most religious, as you call them, were absent, & the armies courage, I thinke had not1. Tim. 4, 2. been much greater by their companie. The lies spoken in hypo∣crisie, did but cauterize the conscience of the wretched people that stayd at home. The lethargie, call'd peace, which they slumber in for the time, may hereafter breake out into an active warre, to the ruine of the Assemblie spirits that seduc'd them. The three reasons the Bishop toucheth upon, as the principal, may be the test for the many more that went with them. So that we shall not need to rake in your dunghills for the jewel that you promise, which, when we have found, will not yeild one graine of faythfullnesse in your Church. They, that foretold the destruction that followed, were not unlikelie the instruments to effect it. If the Kings friends should not march till the Assemblie Zedekiahs put on their homes, though1. Kings. 22. his person be more righteous, we looke his successe should be litle better then Ahabs, & the Independent Syrians push'd no otherwise then in mockerie and sport, while his loyal subjects should be too se∣riouslie scatered on the hills as sheep that have no shepheard to enfold them. If the misbeliefe, & contempt of whom you call the Lords servants, & the great danger, unto which you make religion be brought, were the onelie losses sustain'd in the last armies misfortune; let those wor∣kers of iniquitie perish, that to the ruine of soules, endeavour to repaire them. What griefe of heart, or repentance, hath shew'd it selfe in those persons, you say, contributed to the spoiling but must mea∣ne, unlesse you condemne your selves, such as were forward in promoting that designe, whether in a politike hypocrisie, or (which can hardlie be rationallie afforded then) a misguided sinceritie, will find it to be poenitenda poenitentia, & a hard retreat from the guilt, & shame of that botomlesse penance you praescrib'd them; unlesse their judgement be, as their sinne, the same with his who sold his birth∣right, as they theirs to their libertie, for a morsell of bread, a poorHeb. 12. 16. inconsiderable temporal subsistence, & may finde no place of repentance, though they seeke it carefullie with teares. Should all the Disciplinarian hands be cut off, that were not held up to the agreement of bringing, by a warlike engagement, the Sectarian partie in England to pu∣nishment, David Lesley would have but a left-handed armie, & His Majestie might relie upon halfe his securitie aswell for his crowne, as his religion. They who, to gaine their arreares, so easilie, I must
say aitourouslie, parted with that Royal person, are not to be credi∣ted as men so unanimouslie resolv'd, with hazard of lives, & estates upon his rescue. Nor can any man, whose faith as not resolv'd into aire, & so, readie to engender with the faint breath of every dissem∣bler, beleeve that they would with such hazard make a long march to the Isle of Wight, who would not, with lesse, conduct His Majestie, a day, or two from Holmebie. But had you been at that trouble, & had Victorie strewed roses in your way, when you should have with pleasure regain'd the rich purchase you went for, I preceive you had been at a losse for a chapman, & a great uncertaintie where to dispo∣se it untill you had got one. For first you talke of bringing the King to one of his houses to perfect the treatit, Then of bringing His Majestie to London with honour, freedome, & safetie, Next of bringing him to sit in his Parliament with what honour, & freedome himselfe should desire; And all these with in the extent of a few lines, which make three degrees of doubt in the Saints, even after their debate of that matter, & universal agree∣ment, not to be quaestion'd. But let us suppose the last, & best of the three in your purpose, & your avant Curriers on horsebacke to ha∣sten it: I see you are pleas'd to call them backe with a quaestion, to which I pray tell me where the Lords servants, or loyal subjects of Christs Kingdome e'r made a like. Yet you, shall have your answer by & by, though you shew not the like civilitie to the Bishop, who seemes to state his quaestion thus. Whether when the Parliament, & Ar∣mie of Scotland had declar'd their resolutions to bring His Majestie to London, &c. without conditioning for a promise of securitie, for establishing (at best a con∣troverted) religion, any legitimate full Church Assemblie ought, an illegiti∣mate imperfect Clerical combination or Conventicle, could in ordine ad spi∣ritualia, declare against the engagement; call for the Kings hand, seale, oath, to establisp a cut throat covenant to the ruine of his person, & posteritie, Religion, Lawes, Libertie, Monarchie, & whatsoever His Majestie was, by a solemne oath, & indispensable peswasion of conscience obliged, with the hazard of life & King∣domes, to maintaine. In answer to yours take this. The Parliament, & armie of Scotland in declaring their resolutions, &c. did what they ought, & that ac∣cording to your own principles, for you had the securitie of His Majesties Royal word [more then once] for establishing your Re∣ligion in Scotland, according to the treaties that had been perfe∣cted between the two Kingdomes; If you intended the like cour∣tesie to England, your Parliament, & Armie, had it consisted of none but the Saints, were in no capacitie to take it, being no part of the principals concer'd in the benefit, nor deputed by England to capitulate for it, Therefore their rescuing His Majesties person
out of the Sectaries hands, had been the untying of his, & puting him in a posture to give; The bringing him to his Parliament in London, where likewise your own Commissioners resided, had been the seting him in sight of such as were to aske, & receive. Which is the same kind of Logike you us'd in your answer to both Houses of Parliament upon the new propositions of peace, & the 4. bills to be sent 1647. Where I finde your opinion, & judgement to be this, That the most aequal., fairest, & just way to obtaine a well-grounded peace is by a personal treatie with the King: & that his Majestie for that end be invi∣ted to come to London with honour, freedome, & safetie. For which you offer 6. reasons. 1. The sending of your propositions without a treatie hath been often essayed without successe ....... Of those propositions this ever was one, To promise securitie for establishing religion, And what better suc∣cesse could now be exspected? 2 ........ His Majesties proesence with his Parliament must be the best, if not the onelieiremedie to remove our troubles. This remedie the Parliament, & Armie intended to helpe you to. 3 ..... .. Without a treatie or giving reasons for asserting the lawfullnesse, & ex∣pedience of the propositions to be praesented, they may be aesteemed impositions. This proposition was to be sent without a treatie, being neither lawfull nor expedient for the many reasons His Majestie had formerlie render'd. I remit the Reader to your paper for the rest, & a great deale more of selfe contradiction (with somewhat worse,) which one of the new English Lights hath discover'd in his answer. ButScot. Mist. dispell'd. you shake of that like an old serving-man which had done your drudgerie in his youth, & bestow your liverie on the Parliaments praecedent, which providence, beleeve me, will save you but litle. Your argument's this: The Parliaments of both Kingdomes in all their for∣mer treaties ever pressed upon the King a number of propositions, Ergo, The Church may desire the granting of one. I should be too courteous in ca∣sting up the numerous account of their rebellions aequal to their propositions, & keep out but a single unitie for you. I shall chuse rather to tell you (cautioning first for the falshood in the fundamental hypothesis) That in cases of treatie the Church of Scotland is subordinate to one, & therefore hath no adaequate conditioning priviledge with the Parliaments of both, Kingdomes, especiallie in her peevish state of opposition to both. Secondlie, This proposition desired, is the Trojan horse into which all the rest of your treason's contrived, there being no fraudulent possibilitie, Eccle∣sistike, nor Politike, which your Sinon Assemblie hath not cun∣ninglie lodg'd in the bellie, the winding entrailes, the maeanders, of the Covenant. Your clause in the parenthesis, when the bolts are off, & set at libertie, tells us your meaning is this.
Let the Kings person, & children continue imprison'd, His Queen, Prince, &c. banished, His revenue sequester'd, his life be irrecove∣rablie endanger'd, rather then those of the Scottish Presbyterian partie (for the rest you can not excommunicate out of your nation, though not in your covenant) should run the hazard of their lives, & estates; Which was the true result of your debate, & agreement. That you heard no complaint, when many of the thirtie proposi∣tions were pressed, was, because your eares were stopt against the lamentations of everie English Jeremie that wept for the slaine of theIerem. 901. daughter of his people, being such an Assemblie as the next verse de∣scribes you. That an out crie, as you call it is made when onelie one proposition is stucke upon, is because that one streightneth theIsai. 58. bands of your wickednesse, layes heavier burdens upon the shoulders of innocencie, & will not let the oppressed goe free; And then Gods Prophets are call'd upon to crie aloud, not to spare, to lift up their voyce like a trumpet, &c. This one was that, the yeilding to which would most of all have violated His Majesties conscience, & in reference to which he tells you 'tis strange there can be no method of peace, but by making warre upon his soul. Yet let the case be disputable, & your tender ex∣cusable, at least in respect of the time, which you say was not to be before His Majesties rescue, but onelie before his bringing to London, &c. If so, why was not His Majestie first rescued, & delive∣red out of the hands of the Sectaries, & then your proposition in∣sisted on? The Bishop tells you the reason out of Humble advice, Edenb. Jun. 10. 1648. viz. lest his libertie might bring your by gone pro∣ceedings about the league, & Covenant into quaestion. All honest Christians, & loyal subjects [though heathen] are of the same beliefe with his Lordship, & whatsoever is their opinion in generall, expect that you prove the innocence, or justice of conditioning in this parti∣cular with your confess'd captive King. Concerning the absolute so∣veraignitie of Kings you are otherwhere answer'd, & if not satisfied, may finde more worke made you by the famous Grotius, whose booke was manifestlie penned against you, & your usurping brother-Re∣bells of England, & bids defiance to all your Didoclaves, Bucha∣nans, & Brutus's of both nations, till replied to. But away with your counterfeit inclination to treaties, which you ever abhorred like death, fearing in that peace, there could be no peace for your wicked selves, & therefore gave publike thankes to God for de∣laying your torments in the disappointment of that at the Isle ofEdenb. 12. May. 1649 postsr. Wight, aswell by your plots, & devices, as by the Sectaries armed∣force. The holinesse of this religious proposition was but the blinde under favour of which you stalked, & made safer approaches to
His Majesties murder, by another, never hitherto repeald, immuta∣blie design'd; Nor are there many of your publike papers but forespake the destruction of his Royal Person, and Familie unlesse he submitted to the tyrannie of your tearmes, and whether that had quitted him as much from your judgement, as it assuredlie had from his supremacie, and crownes, may be guessed by the experiment he made in his first too full, fatal concessions, which your own Parliament Acts have registred completelie satisfactorie to the demands or desires of all sorts of people in Scotland, which too indulgent paternal, goodnesse having turn'd into poison, you regorg'd in his face by a foreigne invasion, and a base mercenarie rebellion till, like evening wolves, you rent in peices, and prey'd upon his person in the darke.Scottish mist Dispell'd The proposition I meane is that, for which one of your sectarian brethren calls God, Angels, and Men to judge of your dissembling in pressing a personal treatie, when His Majestie formerlie desiring one, you told him, There having been so much innocent bloud of his good subjects shed in this warre by His Majesties commands and commissions, . . . . you con∣ceive that untill satisfaction, and securitie be first given to both his Kingdomes▪ His Majesties coming to London could not be convenient, nor by you assented to. What satisfaction you meane, we know by your Discipline, which makes murder unpardonable, and then I pray, what securitie could be taken, but his life? If the granting this one proposition you stand upon, concerning Religion, and the Covenant, had draw'n after it (as it seemes by your silence) the satisfaction for bloud, and securitie for your peace. We may clearlie conclude your Religion wasHendersons Prophesie Pap. to K. Ch. I. In. 3. 1646. Esth. 4. 14. murder, and no resting Canaan for your Covenant but in His Maje∣sties death. Which in effect was thus foretold him by that bold Hen∣derson. My soul trembleth to thinke, and to foresee what may be the event, if this opportunitie be neglested. He would not use, he said, the words of Mordecai to Esther, because he hoped beter things. Whereas if his hopes faild him, we may well argue he had us'd them, as you doe, that survive him, in your endeavour that he, and his fathers house should be destroy'd. But that you take confession to be the Doctrine of Antichrist, youPresbyters Declaring against Parliament debates. mght, without an ironie, put an cce to your own being criminous, to the purpose▪ in declaring against the Parliaments debates, which if therfore needlesse, and impertinent, because you thinke, or will have them thought to be so, the Great Councel you make but a subordinate Eldership, or Classe to the supreme Assemblie of your Kike. You are not allwayes so modest as to keep your distance from your English Parliaments affaires; We have for many yeares found you like loving beagles, upon eithers concernment, so closelie coupled in the slip of your Covenant, as if, when the
game should be lost upon eithers default, you meant to be truss'd up together for companie. If it be proper to have any King in Scot∣land,The Kings negative voice proper to be de∣bated in a Scottish Par∣liament. the proper place of debate about his negative voice is as well a free Parliament there as in England. If your lawes admit not of that, they admit of no King, whose Regalitie consisteth in that, nor hath he any legislative authoritie without it. It is the argument of your own Commissioners, who use to fetch their Syllogismes from the Assemblie, therfore you that made it are best able to solve it▪ Their, or your, words are these. The quaestion is where in his [the Kings] Royal authoritie, and just power doth consist. And we affirme, and hope it canAns: to both Houses upon the new propo∣sitions and the 4. bills 1647. not be denied, That Regal power, and authoritie is chieflie in making, and enacting lawes, and in protecting, and defending their subjects, which are of the very es∣sence, and being of all Kings. And the exercise of that power are the chiefe parts, and duties of their Royal office and function. And the scepter, and sword are the badges of that power. Yet the new praeface compared with other parts of these new propositions takes away the Kings negative voice, and cuts off all Royall power, and right in the making of lawes, contrarie to the constant practice of this, and all other Kingdomes. For the legislative power in some Monarchies is penes Principem so∣lum . . . . in other . . . . by compact between the Prince, and the People . . . . In the last the power of the King is least, but best regulated, where neither the King alone without his Parliament, nor the Parliament without the King can make lawes . . . . which likewise is cleare by the expressions of the Kings answers, Le Roy le veu, and Le Roy savisera; So as i is cleare from the words of assent when Statutes are made; and from the words of dissent, that the Kings power in the making of lawes is one of the chiefest jewels of the crone, and an essential part of Soveraignitie . . . . somet mes the Kings denial had been beter then his assent to the desires of the Houses of Parliament . . . . If I had transscribed all, the Reader had found the argument more full. Out of this, compared with what you write, he may rest assured, that in declaring at that time against the Parliaments debate (which in truth was vindicating the Kings negative voice) you were resolved against Regal Govern∣ment. And whatsoever since you have publish'd in a mocke pro∣clamation, had your Covenanting brethren kept their station in England, the Crowne and Scepter, if not condemn'd to the coyning house, had been kept perpetual prisoners in Edenburgh Castle, whither with funeral solemnitie you have caried them; nor had there been any Royal head, or hand kept above ground for their investment, while your Rebells could catch them, and procure sword, or axe to cut them off. But to follow you in your tracke. If your lawes admitted not absolute reprobation, by a negative voice, they did praeterition by a privative silence, which was all together as damnable to your Parliament bills, they being made Acts by His
Majesties touch with the top of his Scepter, and those irrefragablie null'd which he pass'd by. In what followes, you shew more ingenuitie, then prudence, byWhy op∣posed by the Presbyters. acknowledging the ground whereupon you built your censure of this debate in Parliament as needlesse and impertinent, because of the power it might put in the hand of the King, to denie your co∣venanted propositions. But alasse you graspe the wind in your fist, and embrace an aie cloud within your armes, and, like some fond Platonike, are jealous over that jewel you never had. The King of blessed memorie told you, when he spake it to your brethren, HeEic. Bas. Ch. 1. would never foregoe his reason as man, his Royaltie as King. Though with Samson he consented to binde his hands, and cut off his haire, he would not put out his eye himselfe to make you sport, much lesse cut out his tongue, to give you the legislative priviledge of this voice. That you, at best, sit in Parliament as his subjests, not superiours, were call'd to be his Counsellers, not Dictatours; summond to recommend; our advice, not to command his dutie. And what pretie puppets, thinke you, have you made your selves for so many yeares together to the scorne of all nations, when you so formallie pro∣pounded to His Majestie to grant, what you professe he had never any power to denie. What comes next is one of the many springes you set to catchThe Kings affirmative voice. cockes, but your lucke is bad, or you mistaken in your sport. I see if you were to make an harmonie of confessions, you would be as liberal of other mens faith, as of your own. What the beliefe is of the warner, and his faction about the absolute affirmative voice of any King, you had heard more at large if you had fetchd your authoritie from any line in His Ld. booke for that demand. Yet to keep up your credit (that you may not mount to no purpose). I will bring one who, in spiritualibus at least, shall take off this sublimate from your hands, and pay you with more mysterie of reason then you have, it may be, found in any other of the faction. Nulla in re magis iucescitHug. Grot. De Imper. Pot. cap. 8. vis summi Imperii, quàm quod in ejus si arbitrio quaenam religio publicè exercea∣tur, idque praecipuum inter Majestatis jura ponunt omnes qui politica scripserunt. Docet idem experientia, Si enim quaeras cur in Anglia, Maria regnante, Romana Religio, Elizabetha verò Imperante Evangelica viguerit, causa proxima reddi non poterit nisi ex arbitrio Reginarum. Going on in the Religion of the Spaniard, Dane, Swede, he tells you ad voluntatem dominantinm recur∣retur. Though I shall onelie give you this quaestion in exchange for your language of concluding, and impeding. If Parliaments have power ad placitum to conclude, or impede any thing by their votes, what part of making, or refusing lawes is to the King?
If the Bishop had challeng'd you for nominating officers of theNo such vicitie need be us'd a∣bout momi∣nating of∣ficers. Ch. 4. armie, you are not without some such parrot-praters abroad as can tattle more truth then that out of your Assemblies. Nor need you be so nice in a mater so often exemplified in Knox, & his spi∣ritual brethren, who, as appeares manifestlie by their leters, &c. Were the chiefe modellers of all the militia in their time, and His Ldp. having shewed you when your pulpit Ardelios incourag'd the seditious to send for (though in vaine) L. Hamilton by name (and Robert Bruce dispatched an Expresse for him) to be their head. You are here charged onelie with not allowing such as the Parliament had named, because not so qualified as you praetended. That the State ever sent the officers they had chosen, to doc over all the postures of their soules, to discipline either their men or af∣fections before you, and to have your Consistorian judgement of their several qualifications and abilities, is more I confesse then hitherto I have heard of. That you put it to the last part of your answer (relating to no part of the quaestion) was but to shew what you beare in your armes; That, as plaine as you looke, the crosse on the top of the crowne is the proper embleme of your Assemblie, whom no civile mater can escape, having a birthright from Christ (or depu∣tation at least) to overrule both his Kingdomes upon the earth. Your Ifs & Ands about the necessitie of a warre, in that moment ofThe Pres∣byters de∣structive demurr. time, when the British Monarchie Lay gasping for life, demonstrates what good meaning you had to praeserve the Person, or Government of Kings. The constant proofe of that integritie you required in the officers, must have been the covenant-proofe of their rebellion, and wickednesse, which, if blemished from the beginning of the warres with no religious, nor loyal impression, no sincere pietie toward God, nor real dutie to the King, had marck'd them out for your Mammon Champions and Goliahs, men most likelie to make good the interest, you aim'd at. This you were before practising in Eng∣land, where your Sectarian Masters, that had set you on horsebacke, mean'd not to take your bridle in their mouthes, and be rid by your ambition to their ruine. Though you advis'd them faire for't in your Papers March 3. 1644. requiring to have the officers in their armie qualified to your purpose . . . men know'n to be zealous of the reformation of religion, and of that uniformitie. Which both Kingdomes are obliged to promote, and maintaine, &c. As in September, the yeare before, you told them you could not confide in such persons to have, or execute place, and authoritie in the armie raised by them, who did not approve, and consent to theScot. Mist. disp. Covenant. Which I finde by one, well acquanted with your meaning, interpreted thus. You desired to have zealous hardi men out of the
North, whose judgement about the Covenant, and treatie had concurred so as to introduce your Nation to be one of the Estates of England, to have a negative voice in all things, who would have pleaded your cointerest with the Parliament of England, in the Militia of the Kingdome, disposal of places and officies of trust, &c. Having faild there of your cointerest with the Parliament, you straine here for your cointerest with the King, and would have the com∣manding power of his militant Kingdome in their hands, that should have held His Majestie like a bird in a string, which if he once stretch'd for recovering his own just liberties, or his peoples, they could have pluck'd him in to clip his troublesome wings, or cage him at their pleasure. The firmnesse of your Covenanting Commanders to the interest of God, the Dispeller reveales in his experience of their striking hands with hell, in cursing, and swearing, plundering, and stealing, which might have fill'd the hearts of the people (had your poison not been administred under the guilt of wholesome advice) with more rational jlausies, and feares then any by past miscariages, of them whose designe at that time was very hopefull, and honourable, otherwise then as it caried the fatal praetext of your Covenant be∣fore it. To let the world know how long your mysterie of iniquitie hath been working in the bowells of the State, the Bishop alledgeth an∣cientThe Re∣viewers im∣pertinencie in the suc∣cesse of the Spanish Merchants. praecedents of 80. yeares standing, from more impartial, more credible relations then those in your Romance, falselie intitled, An Historical Vindication. What you shovell in here about treacherous correspondence with Spaine, is but an handfull of sand without lime, adhaeres not at all to the Inquisitours troubling the Merchants in their religion, nor that to your admonishing the people to be warie in their trade; nor all at all to the truth which the Bishop tells you was a Synodical Act prohibiting their traffique under the rigid poenaltieAs. Dund. 1493. of excommunication, which, all the art you have, can not melt into a friendlie advertisement. Those of the Merchants, whom (you say) the Inquisitours seduced, required no relaxation; Nor were the rest so persecuted as to be discourag'd in their trade, when they petition'd the King to maintaine that libertie, where of your spiri∣tual chaines had depriv'd them. Therfore all your courteous mediation was but a disguis'd Imperious prohibition, whereby you checkt the King, and in ordine ad spiritualia tooke it for granted, you mated him, by the Merchants weake submission, to your Censure.
Could we but once take it your Church in agrieving fit for herThe Presby∣terian zeale for the 4. Command∣ment hypo∣critical co∣ver for their breach of the rest. Prov. 11. 9. owne so publike profanesse in the daylie breach of the 5, 6, & other commandaments that follow, we would tolerate her zeale though not commend her discretion, in her will worship, & supersti∣tious nicitie touching the violation of the fourth. But when we finde her enlarging her conscience to laugh at rebellion, murder &c. We guesse her crocodiles teares to be more out of designe then com∣passion, & her mouth open for the destruction of them, that are not, through knowledge [of her hypocritie] delivered. The profana∣tion of the Sabbath is not so in conjunction with à Monday mercate, but that à Saterdays, journey, with some sixpeenie losse, or à Sunday nights watch, and labour might separate them. Your holie supplica∣tions were leven'd with Iudaisme, which had not the Bishops in Christian libertie eluded, as your advantage might lie, the Parlia∣ment might have next been importund to Dositheus's follie, to erect à rediculous statuarie Sabbath in your Countrey. Though I heare all were not so hard hearted as you make them, but that Pa∣trike Forbes Bishop of Aberdene did translate the mercates (which are none of the least) in his diocese to wednesday, as the provin∣cial records of that place will testifie, From the obstruction madeRecreations resections to fit us for spiritual duties. by the rest to your petitions, you can not inferre, what you have formd in a calumnie about their doctrine, & example on that day. What sorts of playes (which were not all if you reckon right) the most emminent Bishops either us'd, or tolerated, were such as consisted with, and spirited, the Dominical dutie of publike and private de∣votion, wherein they had the authoritie and praecedent▪ of other∣guesse Christians, then any scotish Assemblie praecisians, and se∣conded with reason, such as hitherto, you never seriouslie, and so∣lidelie answered. If they endeavoured to make the Sunday no Sabbath; they did it in a farre better sense, and on better grounds then Rob.Rob. Bruc'es motion to al∣ter the Sab∣bath. Bruce could have changd it, as you know he endeavoured, to We∣dnesday or Friday, and Lent from spring, to Autumne, on purpose to priviledge the pure brethren' in the singularitie of their worship, and free them from a profane communion (though not in the time) with Papists, and Praelates. If the Bishops had a designe to advance their Kingdome by such old licentiousnesse, and ignorance as this innocent li∣bertie might be feard to reduce; We know to whom the PresbytersThe Bruc'es Sunday tole∣ration not so large as the Reformed Church's abroad. somewhere are beholding, at least for their Sabbath policie, though they thinke good to enlarge it, beyond Episcopal sports, and playes, to publike mercates, to brewing, fulling, grinding, carying beer, corne, dung, and indeed what not? except opening whole shops, and wearing old clothes; For redressing which I doe not finde your
compassionate prayers to god, or advice to them▪ (which I remem∣ber you us'd) so effectual as to make any amendment, or gaine any proselytes to your circumcised severitie. Therefore, till you prae∣vaile I pray let the Bishops be troubled no more with what all your flintie fac'd malice can not appropriate to▪the times, or places of their government. What hath been granted since you cast them out of the Parliament, was by them▪ that had no more power in one sense to giue then in another to denie. Yet had all your demands meant no worse, then you spake in that about the due sanctification of the day, you might have let them sit still, have had the Souters your friends reconcil'd, and made a better mercate of those Royal concessions, which met too farre (unlesse your gratitude had been greater) your unlimited reguests. For the chalenge that followes, The Bishop knowes so well the historiThe mon∣sts im∣pietie of the Presbyte∣rians in pro∣secusion of their ends. of that time, that he is faine to leave a masse of horrour unstampt in his thoughts, conceiving it uncapable of any due impression by his words. And whosoever shall looke upon Scotland at that time, shall finde it to be nfandi conscium monstri locum, a place that had bred such an hideous monster, as neither Hircania, Seythia; no any of her Northerne sisterhood would foster. Not long before, when the Queen was great with child of that Prince, to whom you professe so much tendernesse soon after, not valuing the hazard, of that Ro∣yal Embryo, you hale her Secretarie, her principal servant of trust from her side and murder him at her doore; Because the King would not take upon him the praerogative guilt of that cruel mur∣der, according to the instructions you had given him, you finde him uselesse must have him too dispatchd out of the way, which was done, though not by the hands, by the know'n contrivance of Murray in his bed, his corps throw'n out of doores, and the house blow'n up with gunpowder where he lay. To get a praetense for sei∣zing upon the yong Prince, you make the Queen and E. Bothwell (because her favourite) principals in the murder of his father, pos∣sesse the people with jealousie; of the like unnatural crueltie inten∣ded to him. Hauing got the Royal infant in your hands, you not onelie null the Regencie of his mother, you worke all the villanie you could thinke on against her person in his name, and make him, before he knew that he was borne, act, in your blacke or bloudie habits, the praevious parts of a matricide in his cradle. In order here∣unto the Queen (as you say,) was declared for Popeie, which re∣quires some Presbyterian Rebell glossarie to explaine it, there being no such expression to be found in the language of any orthodoxe, loyal Christians in the world. In this conjuncture of wiekednesse,
that no other way of safetie was conceivable for your Protesting, and Ban∣ding religion, but a continued rebellion, no other to make sure of the infant King for your prisoner, the Kingdome your vassal, but by such a grand combination in treason, may be granted at sight of your several praeceding desperate exploits. For this end your Ge∣neral Assemblie might crave conference with such of the secret Councel who wereas publike Rebells as your selves. That your advice was mutual whose end and interest was the same, is not to be doubted, saving that we may observe such godlie motions to spring first from the vertuous Assemblie, as you confesse touching this. Your call was in much more hast then good speed, and your considerable persons con∣ven'd a great deale more frequentlie then they covenanted. Argile, that did, slept not wel the next night, nor was he well at ase the day after, till he had reveald your treason to the Queen Knox tells you, That the people did not joine to the lords, and diverse of theLib. 5. Nobles were adversaries to the businesse. Others stood Neuters, The slender partie that subscribed your bond began to distrust, were thinking to dissolve, and leave off the enterprise a confessed ca∣sualtie gave up the Victorie, with the Queenes person, unhapilie into your hands. This mixed, & extraordinarie Assemblie had litle sincere,1560. or ordinarie maners to call that a Parliament, which was none, having no commission nor proxie from their Soveraigne and to make it one chiefe article in their bond, to deend, or endeavour to atifie those Acts, which their Soveraigne would not, when the lord St. Iohn caried them into France. But they persisted in the same rebellious principle, professing in rminis that tender to have been but a shew of their dutifull obedience And that they beg'd of them (their King and Queen) not any strength to their Religion, which from God had full power, and needed not the suffrage of man &c. They are Knox's words, which, were there noLib. 3. other evidence, are enough to convince any your aequitable comparers, That the just authoritie of Kings, and Parliaments in making Acts, or lawes is in consisten with the Presbyterian government. Which is the summe of the controversie in hand. No secret Councel, especiallie, if in open rebellion, can impower anAssemblies have no po∣wer to sum∣mn contra∣rie to the Kings pro∣clamation. Assemblie to issue letters of summons when their Prince's publike proclamation disclaimes it. The greatest necessitie can be no colour to that purpose, Though, what frivoulous ideas of great necessities the Presbyterie can frame, we may judge by their late procedings in our time. Your religion, and liberties seem then to have been in no such evident hazard, as you talke of; if they were, you may thanke your selves, who had the Royal offer of securitie to both, the Queen onelie conditioning, & craving, with teares the like libertie of conscience
to her selfe The life of the yong King was daylie, indeed, in visible danger from the hands of them, who had murderd his father, and ravished the crowne, or Regencie from his mother, but who they were I have told you. In such an ambiguous time▪ men of any wisdome, other then that which is carnal, and worldlie, and so follie before God, would have beta∣ken them selves to their prayers, & teares; men of courage, and pietie would have waited the effects of providence, and not so distrust fullie, deceitfullie peic'd it with their owne strength. From such lovers of Religion, as contest, covenant, depose, murder; as rage, ruin, proscribe, excommunicate, Libra Rges, & Regions DommeCantic. 8. 6. 7. Good Lord deliver Kings, & countreyes from them all; Fortis est, ut mor, dilectio; jura sicut infernus ulatio, Their love is strong as death, in the letter▪ their jealousie is cruel as the grave; The coales thereof, are coales of fire, which have a most vehement flame; No waters of widowes or orphans tea∣res can quench it; No flouds of innocent bloud can drowne it. It's not unlikelie the Praelates resolution may be, That when a most wic∣ked companie of villaines had deposed two Queenes and killed one King; endeavourd to smother the potlesse Majstie of a Royal Son with the fowle guilt of their injurie done to his Gracious Mo∣ther, which they cast enviouslie upon his name: And after these to draw a Nation, and Church, under the airie notion of a true Religion, never establishd by Law of God nor man, into a Covenanting Rebel∣lion: And a free kingdome under a legal Monarchie into an illegal op∣pressive tyrannie. That in this case there ough to be a general meeting of Church and state, to vindicate Majestie, lawes, libertie, and provide remedies against such extraordinarie mischiefes. That the Presby∣terian Scots never were, nor will be of this opinion, I take yourContradi∣ction. word, and beleeve it. Take this supplement with you That E. Bo∣thewell should kill the King to make way for Poperie, and Murray be∣fore endeavour to hinder his mariage with the Queen, under a prae∣tense of a designe by that then to bring it in (which historie relates)The Assem∣blies can re∣forme onelie according to canon, not the canon. will cost some paines to reconcile▪ Errours and abuses in Religion, the ordinarie reformation whereof is referred to your Ecclesiastical Assem∣blies, are such onelie as appeare to be peccant against the ordinarie rule or canon by just authoritie established; But that the Canon it selfe should be alterable at the pleasure of subjects in a combined Assem∣blies declining their subordination to a superiour power in King, and Parliaments; and making them selves not onelie absolute to act, but supreme to praescribe, is contradictorie to all law, and aequitie nor can any necessitie countenance it. What you finde wrong in the Church, according to your method, must be no other, then that, which had been formerlie decreed in some of your Assemblies, which must im∣plie
a fallibilitie in their application of the rule; This errour when you goe about to rectifie from the word of God, you may chance to have no clearer evidence then your praedecessours, nor the people assu∣rance, that your eyesight is better. So that, for ought they know, one blinde Assemblie may leade another by the hand and both with their followers fall into the ditch. Beside It may so hapen, that re∣ligious Acts, answerable to the word, may be offensive to some wicked Assemblie, that have not the feare of God before their eyes, These if they have the power, to be sure they want not perverse∣nesse to abolish▪ for which I finde no cautionarie restraint in your discipline. For, after you have praetended to rectifie if upon your dis∣sembling petition a following Parliament refuseth to ratifie that you have power to abolish, and establish what you please, I finde every where confessd by your faction. And this indeed, as you say, is your ordinarie method of proceeding in Scotland, but in no other Reformed Countrey, who every where attribute to the Magistrate and Archi∣rectonike power in the Church, and but a ministerical, or instrumental to any Synod or Assemblie, Videlius, and other your brethren of note on this subject making you Bellarmines papists, though when your Kings, stand publikelie in opposition against you for the maintenance of their right, 'tis quaestionable whether his most plausible reasons wl as well priviledge you in his doctrine. The legal method of En∣gland you know well enough is otherwise, and therfore can not ad mit of your Discipline without altering the fundamental lawes, the most essential part of gouverment in our kingdome. The three foolish, & unlearned quaestions that follow tell us you2. Tim. 2 23. 24. are in the mind to gender strifes, rather then according to Saint Pauls counsel, follow righteousnesse, fayth, charitie, or peace. To the first I an∣swer. Christians of old, before the Emperial lawes for paganisme were revoked,Ancient Assemblies reversed no Civile la∣wes. Euseb. were more or lesse hindred from embracing the Gospell, according to the zeale, rigour, remissenesse or clemencie of the Emperours that reigned▪ Those that obeyd not their commands, suffer'd their pu∣nishments, resisted no powers, reversed no lawes. Nay, its as high a trial as can well be instanc'd, when Maximilian, & Diocletian publishd an edict to demolish their Churches, and burne their Bibles, because one was found that in great indignation tore the paper in peices, being con∣demned to die, all Christians that heard it approved the sentence, and commended the justice of the pagan Magistrate in his execution. To the second thus. The oecumenical and National Synods of the ancientsReformed no haerefies with out the Emperour. had ever the praesence or authoritie of the Emperour, without which they reformed no haerefies nor corruptions in religion. Who by ratifying their canon did cancel all the lawes of state, which did
protect those errours When this could not behad but with praeju∣dice to religion, the Emperours them selves being draw'n in by the hae∣retikes to their partie, they onelie declared their different opinion, submitted to censure, were disspersed in exile, nor did they coun∣termand by the terrour of excommunication, and cursing, but when summond by the Emperour to rectifie any abuses in the Church. This may be seen in the time of Constantius addicted to the Arians. To your third I answer thus. The civile lawes in Britanie, I meane for our part in it, whereby Poperie was established, were annull'd by the King, whom we make absolute in that power. If the reforma∣tion begun by Hen: 8. be thought clogg'd with any seeming vio∣lence,Henrie the eight's re∣formation the occasion not the origi∣nal of ours. sacriledge, or schisme (which some ties on his conscience that requir'd a more deliberate solution, and some indirect passio∣nate procedings give the Papists a kinde of coloural argument to object) I see not how you are justified that imitate it, nor we bound to susteine the inconveniences that attend it, who may fairlie make the reigne of K. Edward our epoch, and from him, in his first Par∣liament, fetch our authoritie for the change. On your side of Bri∣tain,Scotish Pres∣byterians from the begining schisme. I finde naught but a continued rebellion in the reforming par∣tie (as you meane it) till K. Iames grew up to a judgement of discer∣ning and some resolution of restraining: Nor till that time (though I hope well of many thousand persons under a Presbyterian perse∣cution) can I in reason quit the praevalent part of your Church from a succession in schisme. For Germanie and France I have no more to do at this time to be their judge then their advocate, seeing no where His Lp. joyning with his brother Issachar in impleading then for rebellion. All you can logicallie collect is such a major as thi They who reforme according to the Presbyterian Scotish metod by abolishing Acts of Parliament in a surreptious or violent Synod, by framing Assemblie Acts for religion, and giving them the authoritie of Ecclesiastical lawes, without or against the consent of the Magistrate cheate the Magistrate of his civile power in order to religion. If you will needs be assuming in behalfe of your brethren in Germanie and France, they must put you to prove it, or quit them selves of your conclusion as they can. In the meane time I see your pasture is bad that you turne your catell so often grazing abroad. For the foole in the next line you send to the Bishop, I guesse it may be his minde to have him return'd by the creature that cariesNone but they have declared Bi∣shops & ce∣remonies unlawfull. his brother Issachars burden, expecting a wiser answer by the next paper Mercurie you imploy; which can not be without bringing to light that law that praeauthoriz'd the Ministers protestation against the Acts of Parliament 1584. And that Act of Parliament since the null Assemblie of Glasgow yet standing in force that made Bishops
and ceremonies vnlaw full; The former, beside the contradiction it caries with it, devolving the legislative power upon the Kirke, which according to you can keep the Parliament in awe not by pe∣titioning but protesting, and so ratifie or null all lawes declared at her pleasure; The latter, beside the long perseverance in sinne it impu∣tes to the Latin and Greek Churches, as well before as after the cor∣ruption in either, the late warmnesse to all Reformed Churches abroad, which never hitherto in any National Assemblie declared regular Episcopacie and ceremonies unlawfull, outdoing the very Act of abolishing which his Majestie in Parliament ratified with re∣ference to no unlawfullnesse, but inconvenience, & retracted that too in his too late, yet seasonable, repentance afterward. Though for what His Lp. objects, were there too after Acts of Parliament to ratifie the substance of what the Kirke repraesents, no one of them thereby justifies the circumstance of Ministers mutinous protesting against lawes made in houres of darkenesse, upon what misinformation soever, which is treason against man and excusable by no formal obedience toward God. This for the Bishop to publish, being one of the Governers of that Church which strangers plot what they can to seduce into the same rebellion, with their owne, is no contemning of law, but discharging his conscience and dutie in his place. By the next storie the Bishop will gaine a more perfect discoverie of your resembling those grievous revoiters in Jeremie, who walkeCh. 6. 8. Ch. 9. 3. with slanders, being brasse & iron; Who bend your tongue like a bowe for lies, and yet, when the true case is know'n be accounted by Solomon but a fool for your labour. In King James's minoritie who stole his name (though they ner had his heart) to act by it the most unnatural op∣pressionCapt: I. Stuart vin∣dicated. of that most gallant Queen his vertuous and gracious mo∣ther; to murder and banish many noble assertours of the reformed orthodoxe religion, & lawes, appeares upon publike record in your storie. This one Capt. Iames Stuart very noblie with standing your divellish temptations to have him maintaine a distructive dissention at Court with Esme Stuart. E. Lenox, a faythfull subject & most de∣serving favourite of the Kings, & improving that litle interest you helpt him to▪ to a more Christian conjunction in love and loyaltie, and a double vigilancie over the Kings person exposed too often to your treacherous designes, is unlikelie to have any better character at your hands then what you commonlie give to persons of such fi∣delitie and honour. His advancement to the titles & estate of E. Ar∣ran & Chancellar of Scotland, was partlie in reward of his guardian care over him whom somwhat else beside sicknesse had made unfit for the management of either. Yet were not these taken by force
but on free session, then desperate; to whom if the King were nea∣rest in bloud (not to mention a third which your zealous professours commonlie finde him) his Majestie had a double title to his lands, & a power undisputable to dispose of the Chancellars office at his plea∣sure. What beside Capt. Iames's unheard of oppressions (which dirt his zea∣le for religion contracts when it passeth through the uncleane cha∣nell of any Presbyters mouth) troubled the Nobilities Patience the reader may finde somewhat more trulie and impartiallie related not onelie in the Apocriphal histories of the two Rt. Reverend Arch-Bishops of Canterburie and Saint Andrewes; but even in the Cano∣nical tradition of Philadelphs Vindicatour, who praemiseth some repulse your Church Delegates had about their querulous petitions; A difference that fell out between E. Lenox & Gowrie about some point of honour, to revenge which he calls Murre, Glame and di∣verse other disquiet discontented spirits into a confaederacie, whom you call a number of the prime best affected nobilitie, which improper title he more ingenouslie declines in a peice of Rethorical ignorance,The treason at Ruthuer. putting his hand more modestlie before his eyes, as loth to looke on their sinfull rebellious demeanour. Qualescunque fuerint plerique eo∣rum non multum laberabo . . . . qualis quisque corum suerit nescio: applies the blinde mans speach' in the 9. of Saint Iohn. to the authours of theSaint Iam: 4. 16. miracle in this change; And beside the mere boast & no violence you re∣ioyce in, confesseth diverse of the Kings servants were wounded among the rest William Stuart, the newes whereof brought Capt. Iames thither. Who was not chaced away by their strong breath, but clapt up into a castle by their power, the Kings guard being be∣fore remov'd from him, and His Majestie taken by Gowrie and his conspiratours into custodie; The E. Lenox banished into France, where with in a short time he died, whether by griefe principallie, or his sicknesse, he defines not, He addes, That the Heads of this faction sent the Abbot of Paslet to your Assemblie at Edaenburgh for their approbation, who what soever they did afterward, at that time onelie thanked God for deliverance (viz from the imminent justice of the law to which most of their Members were lyable) durst not approve the businesse, or appeare to doe it at least; put up a non'sense petition to God, praying him it were well done after it was done, and whether well or ill then unalterable by their prayers, or indeed by devine power, whose omnipotencie is not limited when denied to make good moral contradictions, to pleasure an hy∣pocritical Assemblie; He speakes nothing of the Kings sending to his Councel or judicatories to declare the act of the Lords convenient and lawdable, for which he expected no reasonable mans credulitie
not patience, unlesse so farre as to spit it backe into his face; Nor yet of His Majesties entreating the Assemblie, but of their sending Delegates to him. The answer he gave them, if any, or such as the Vindicator hath helpt us to, is much different from yours, and though not extorted by the terrour of death, which may well be suspected by the successive treasonable attempts of the same Go∣wrie and his sonne afterward, gives litle approbation of the fact, being onelie his acknowledgement of a blessing from God for de∣livering his person and the Commonwealth from mischiefe, by which doubtlesse he meant the happie praeservation of his life. So that I againe appeale to your aquitable comparers, what historical truth we are likelie to have of your penning; when seting one Discipli∣narian brother against another, without consulting unprinted re∣cords, we can confute you line by line among your selves. The let∣ter His Majestie sent to Q. Elizabeth was forced. Regem invitum compu∣lerunt, sayth Camden, where by he allowed no more that act for good service, then he would have done a thiefe for taking but his purse, when he might likewise have had his life, But to proceed. Capt: I'ames shortlie after crept not in, but was calld, Revocatur Aranius sayth your brother. Therevenge (whether obtained by him or no) was but the justice of the law, executed with litle severitie upon any, but moderated by the mercie of a gracious King, and tenderd to all upon submission▪ But traitourous Assemblies giving universal allo∣wance for possible misfortunes, had ever an aftergaime of treacherie in reserve. Therefore the Ministers running at this time into a vo∣luntarie exile was upon the apprehension of their guilt, & diffiden∣ce, even in the word of a King for their impunitie if not rather a designe to make His Majestie secure, and so to praepare for the trea∣son at Striveling that followed few moneths after, where not onelie Capt: Iames was cha'd away, but the Kings life endangerd, for which Gowrie very justlie payd his owne. These their actions were ratified by no Parliament but a partie, nor stand they justified by any butsuch as were the actours. The action at Ruthuen being with the advice of the three Estates Assembled in Councel judge and pu∣blished to be treason in December 1583. And not onelie M. Baylie declar'd a Traytour, but all they that disclaime not his booke which justifies that treasonable attempt, by Act of Parliament 1584. cap. 7. If the Bishop had traced your Assemblie rebellions by their an∣nual succession, and not jumpt from the yeare 4. to 48, he might have made it 58. before he got up to your Articles of Striveling. You have not hitherto kept such even pace with His Lp. as that you can with credit say your selfe wearie. If you speake in good earnest (as I ob∣serve
you in some journeys short winded) I despaire of your com∣panie in the 64. yeares travell still behind, for which I thought to call upon you hereafter. In the meane time, since I meet with you at Striveling, I will take you by the hand, till I bring you in sight (suppos'd you are not peevishlie bent to walke blind fold) of the praecipice you tend to in your entrance upon the justification of that article which referres the worke of Reformation abroad in En∣gland and Ireland to the determination of the Generall Assemblie of your Kirke. If you wet your foot by the way you may thanke your selfe, the Bishop opens no sluce, onelie turnes that streame of choler upon you, which you on the least occasion let goe like a torrent upon the Pope and his Conclave of Cardinals at Rome. The fraud used to allure you, if any, was pia fraus, a devout slight to bring you into the concent of the primitive Christians, and the violence offered by the English praelates was onelie with the sufferance of heaven, which theyS. Matth: 11. 12. thought peradventure to take by the force and servencie of their prayers, which they often put up for your conversion from schisme, and for your communion in religion with themselves If a god'lieThe King can not be sayd to in∣vade the Presbyter: Consistorie. Kings conscientious command, with the mature advice and fre sub∣ordination of the Reverend Fathers of your Church, be no lesse then invading your Consistorie, the Bishops floud of choler ran some∣what too gentlie in asking you whether old Edenburgh were turned new Rome, whereas he might have, in reason, demanded whether your Presbyterships be not so absolute as to barracadoe your brasen gates,Rev: 1. 18. and not suffer him that hath the keyes of hell and death to come in. What∣soever was the yoke and by whomsoever imposed, between that and your contented compliance (without any violence or invasion no quaestion) with the earnest desires of the well affected in England, you should in honestie have left some vacant roome for a more in∣genuous impartial hand to insert the time of taking of this yoke from your hard neckes, with the several Acts of Pacification that follo∣wed it; And that clause in the publike Act of Parliament wherein the well affected in Scotland professd His Majestie parted a contended King from a contended people; And then have put it to your aequitable com∣parers what travaile and paines it concern'd you to take in purging ou the leaven of Episcopacie & in the English & Irish Churches, when you should have been purging the leaven of malice out of the Scots. The managing of which great & good worke became such a Parliament to instruct▪Prov: 24. 2. c. 27. 20 Tert: De Praeser: ad∣vraescr hae∣re. c▪ 42. & such an Assemblie to undertake, who studie that destrction which, like hell is never full; and so the eyes of such men are never satisfied . . . . ha magis gloriam Captant si stantibus ruinam, non si jacentibus elevationem operen∣tur,  & ipsum opu non de suo propri  venit, sed de ve∣ritatis
structione. The Arminianisme and Poperie whereof Doctour LaudArch-Bp. Lauds Ar∣menianisme & Poperie the doctrin. of scripture and the Fa∣thers. stands convicted, hath had several appeales to Scripture and Fathers, which is as much as you can shew us for your Creed; his Tyrannie, to the lawes and highest authoritie in our Church, aequivalent with the most your discipline can praetend to A conviction of these I dare promise you will not stand long with out an answer. In the inte∣rim, while your Northwinde is set to drive away the first and the latter ine dropt downe fron those clouds of heaven, the Apostles, and Prophets, & successours to them both, to make good Solomons si∣militude, the Bishops angrie countenance is seasonablie, though in effectu allie bent against your back biting tongue. Your discoveries are your unskil∣fullProv. 25. 23. mistakes of rockes for firme land; your disappointment delayes of Gods worke, who will in his owne time accomplish it, And though too great a number in the Christian flocke follow such as you for their bellwether or leading ramme, they will flie as fast from you when they espie you in your proper shape to be a wolfe. Photinus was serv'd so who had a great deale more wit, learning, & eloquence to seduce them. Nam erat & ingenij viribus valens, & doctrinae opibus excel∣lens, & eloqio praeptens, sayth Vincentius; yet this doome befellAdvers: hares: cap: 16. him soon after; quem antea quasi arietem gregis sequebantur, eundem  veluti lupum fugere ceperunt. What is answered by you before, is replied to and aggrovated. The two stories that follow have those authours whose truth is more currant with you then Spots woods, though his hereafter will shew it selfe more valide then yours or any others whatsoever. The for∣mer is penn'd at large by Iohn Knox, enough in conscience to ren∣der him the authour of that sedition here mentioned. He sayth notAriote un∣der praeteu∣se of taking Priest at Masse. his zalous hearers understood of a Priest at Masse and immediatelie brake in, but consulted how to redresse that enormitie, and by agreement appointed those to waite on the Abbey who, you say, with violence brake i and sez'd upon his person and Masse clothes. That Madam Baylie, your Namesake, Mistris to the Queenes Dountibures as he scoffinlie calls her posted out with deligence to the Comptroller the Lord of Pittarrow . . . . cried for his assistance to save her life and the Queenes Palace; That he tooke with him the Provost & Baylies; That Armstrong and Cranston were summond to finde suretie  underlie the law the. 24 Octob: for a fore thought felonie, praetended murder, and for invading the Queenes Majesties Palace of Halyrud house, and spoliation of the same. That he writ to the brethren in all quarters, requiring their assistanceAvetted by Knox & im∣proid to a rebellion. on the day of their trial. That his letter was intercepted and sent to the Queen, whereupon he was summond before the Queen and Councel; That when he made his appearance. His clients the Brethren of the Towne followed in such number,  the inner Close was full and all the staires even to the chamber doore wher
they sate; That he confessed his vocation of the Queenes leiger &c. That if in th he had been guiltie, he had st offended since he came last in Scotland, demanding (Sawcilie) what vocation of Brethren had ever been to that day unto which h pen had not served; That he told the Queen, If her Majestie complained that this was done without her Majesties commandement, so had all that God had▪ blessed within the Realme from the beginning of this action, meaning the Presbyte∣rian Reformation; That he was a watchman both over the Realme and over the Church of God gathered within the same; by reason whereof he was bound in conscience to blow trumpet publikelie▪ so oft as ever he saw any appearance of dan∣ger either of the one or of the other. This Act, thus related, the Bishop will have (what you can not disprove) to be a huge rebellion, not onelie in the Actours, but also in Iohn Knox, who was praesent, if not in person, by full consent and approbation. To breake open the Royal Palace to bring any delinquent to trial is according to no law but what your Rebellious Assemblie hath framed. That this Priest saying Masse within the Li∣berties of the Court did contrarie to law (the Queen having ever reser∣ved that priviledge to her familie) remaines yet to be proved. YouVit: Eliz. Ao. r 563. did the like to the Arch-Bishop of Saint Andrewes, which Camden tells you was permitted by law, and, though you had Murrays autho∣ritie for it, accounts you no better then Rebells for your paines. . . . Servidi Ecclesiae Ministri, Morvij authoritate suffulti, vim facerent impune sacerdoti, qui missam in aula (quod lege permissum erat) (doe you marke it) celebrârat. Iohn Knox's confession (which I gave you under his hand) may be the harbinger to lodge credit enough to the next storie that fol∣lowes in any man that knowes what superstitious observers your Assemblies have been of all the principles and praecedents he gave them; Nor need you be so coy in taking upon you here the defense of their Convocating the people in armes, which you are forc'd to do other where (as well as you mince it into god'lie directions and conscientions advertisement) and upon lesse colourable occasions approve it every where when done. Though Mr. Spotswood's testimonie can not be refused in the particular evidence he gives in, yet I'll be confined for once to your owne brother in Evill that confutes him. WhenAssemblie's summning the people in Armes upon the trial Popish Lords. his Grace relates the Ministers commanding the people to armes. Your brother playes the Critike upon the word, but grants the mat∣ter in controversie between them, and justifies it from the danger that was at hand from the Popish Lords whom he makes Conspira∣tours with Spaine. Hortate sunt (nam juber a imperare non poterant) quod cum in tanto periculo constitut essent & respublica, & Ecclesia, ill, viti vertendum non est. When his Grace sayth planilie, The King praefixed a day for their trial, the menacing libells put up in the name of a natio∣nal
Synod, the tumultuarie meeting of the faythfull deferr'd it, and made the onelie remedie a necessitie of his remitting their exile. Your brother denies not one clause of all this, but onelie moderates the termes, and enlargeth in some particular circumstances that ag∣gravate the fact, viz. That they appointed a fast this I hope was done by the Assemblie) That they moved the King to appoint a day for their trial, & the Barons those of Perth not to admit them, which advice or injunction they followed till they had received letters from the King, which because they obey'd the brethren tooke pet & armes for the defence of reli∣gion (by whose advice let any man judge) That the King commanded the Conspiratours to submit themselves in a small number to a judical proceeding. That upon the 12. of November they met at Edenburgh; The Conspiratours pleade by their lawyers &c. Propound their conditions; The King declares in a speach the inconveniences very likelie to followe if the Lords were not restored, That an Act of oblivion was voted, which offended the brethren. What Sedi∣tious Sermons and actions ensued appeares undeniablie in your sto∣rie. Let this be compared with the Bp of Derries relation. That the King was forced to take armes, come upon a fatal necessitie by your rebelling when your importunitie praevaild not. How farre he pursued them. What acts of grace he afterward vouchsafd them you there fore conceale because it confutes what your imperfect histo∣rie imports. CHAPTER VIII. The divine right of Episcopacie better grounded then that prae∣tended in behalfe of Presbyterie. HAd I any hopes to keep you in your wits when you were revi∣ved, I would here sprinkle a litle cold water & pitie upon your faynting spirits, who any man may see, are giving up the ghost by your grasping and catching at what you finde within reach, and not liking the lookes of that spirit which appeares readie at hand to conduct you, would have, you care not whether, Anti-Christian Bishop or Papist to secure you. His Lp. having remonstrated at lar∣ge your exorbitand power, here summarilie shewes how by the di∣vine right you praetend to, this sore is incurable, your selves incorrigi∣ble, and how Princes must necessarilie despaire of recovering or
keeping thairs, while Christs Kingdome is yours, and you have Christs Scepter in your hand. The streame of divine Rhethorike and rea∣son he brings for it, you and your Companie, whom the prophet Isai. Describes to be a troubled sea that can not rest, whose waters cast up mireIsai. 57. 20 and dirt, hope invisiblie to swallow. To which if Mercurius Aulicus must be initled Let Britannicus be more properlie to yours, whom I have often heard to be a Common lawyer, but must now take him for some classical divine, since you have grac'd him so much as to serive most of his mater & language into your booke. How unhappie soever you make the Bishop in this chalenge, as in the rest, he carie fortune enough in his argument to confute you. —Miscro cui plura supersunt. Quam tibi faelici: post tot quoque funera vincet. Those of his brethren who stand for the divine right of the Discipline of the Church▪ doe it chieflie in reference to that power of order and thePower of or∣der and ju∣risdiction. distinction they finde of Bishop from inferiour Presbyters in the text. They that draw in the other power of jurisdiction, relate onelie to what they finde practic'd by the Apostles, or by God in them, going under the name of excommunication and the keyes How many circum∣stanciais must passe for substancials, when determind by the judicato∣ries of your Church, and be made adaequate in divine right to the general rules to which you reduce them need not here to be num∣berd, being scatered every where in this discourse, and very ob∣vious to the Reades in your storie. But in answer to what the Bi∣shop objects of geting both swords spiritual and temporal into your hands, the one ordinarilie by common right, the other extraordinarilie; the one belonging direct∣lie to the Church, the other indirectlie; the one of the Kingdome of Christ, the other for his Kingdome in order to the propagation of religion and (to let the Pa∣pist a lone whom, out of what mysterie I know not, you very of∣ten, me thinkes call to your assistance) I pray name one of his Lp's learned brethren that ever writ for't what concessions have pass'd from the elder Edward and Elizabeth Praelates of England, or what from the later Erastian, as you style them, in diminution of the jus divinumThe midd, l Apostolical right of E∣piscopcie. of Episcopacie desends not to the jus humanum in your sense, there being a midle Apostolical right participant of both, enough to consti∣tute an immutabilitie in their order, whatsoever change their juris∣diction may admit of▪ at least such as they finde aequivalent to the communicating of women, baptizing of infants, observation of Sunday; which when you bring arguments to unfixe, you may with greater confi∣dence treate against Bishops wherein those friends His Lo. hath▪ about the King are so perfectlie instructed that they laugh at your sillie stra∣tagems to pervert them being such as, if at any time they repraesent
to His Majestie as you earnestlie desire, will thereby, no quaestion confirme his pious resolution in the continuance of that holie order especiallie since the maxime you build upon, That conscience is bottom'd onelie upon a divine right, they finde ruind by Saint Paul in his doctri∣neConscience not bottom'd onelie upon a divine Right. Rom. 1. v. 2. ch. and practice, who convinceth the heathen upon the right or prin∣ciples of nature, and argues from the testimonie of conscience they had sufficientlie bottom'd upon the worke of the law written in their hearts; Nor had he ever converted any of the nations without divine re∣velation antecedent, I meane in them aswell as in himselfe (which had made lesse effectual and pertinent the ministrie of the Gospell) if no moral arguments had obliged their consent. How farre this is applicable to Episcopacie (though were it not, it is to your argu∣ment against it) I am not here to discusse onelie intimate I may that in proportion it is possible as much to a sacred, as civile, Monar∣chie (I meane not coordinate) & the later, had it not the law of God hath the language of nature importunate to commend it I will trifle with you no farther in this matter, but lay downe this conclusionAlteratio unsate and sinfull while conscience  doubtfull. which you may take up to what advantage you can. That in a thing ambiguous, such as you here seem to give, if not grant, Episcopa∣cie to be, since no command of God nor warrant from scripture en∣joynes or tolerates the change: since no Apostolical nor Christian Church for so many hundred yeares before that single citie of Ge∣neva began it, since neither that nor any other besides ever acted or at least publikelie avowed what change you demand in the many particulars that have been, and shall be, inserted in this dispute, to the inevitable subversion of Regal government; to the confusion of Christian subjection in the enjoyment of just libertie; to the plaine praejudice of Parliament priviledge in three dominions; to the seting up of much spiritual and carnal wickednesse; some grave reverend Divine might modestlie speake a word in season and say, His Majesties conscience can not at the best but doubt, and doub∣ting ought not by the law of God and rule of reason to resolve on it. Which indeed is the substance of his Royal Fathers printed pro∣fession. That he found it impossible for a Prince to praeserve the state inquies,The reasons of K. Ch 1. against a change▪ Peace. Antiquiti. Vnivers∣litie. unlesse he had such influence upon Church men▪ and they such a dependance on him as might best restraine the seditious exorbitances of Ministers tongues &c. And this is onelie to be had in that government, which was one bottome for his conscience. . . . . That since the first age for 1500. yeares not one example can be produc'd of any setled Church, wherein were many Ministers & Congregations which had not some Bishop above them, under whose jurisdiction and government they were. This was another bottome for his conscience. To which such a divine, as I spake of might adde (with a due reserve of all
humblie revence to, and most unshaken confidence in that Holi Martyr, and his most pious hopefull successour our gracious sove∣raigne now living.) That he who for any politike end suggested, or necessitie most fond'le praetended of the subtilest presbyterian of you all, shall adventure to take himselfe off from this bottome, when Iudaisme or Turcisme (some part of your mixture) shall be alike plau∣sible praetended as more advantageous to his purpose, may be fear'd to be found not well setled upon Christianitie it selfe, but fall from it & throw away one or both Testaments of Scripture, which upon the uni∣versalThe conside∣rable ap∣proch of Church dis∣cipline to doctrine. Paternal go∣vernment. tradition of the Church (as the other upon the Catholike practice of the same) he first rationallie received as the word of God, though afterward he found other motives prompting a beliefe of it to be such, which at last be had superinduc'd by (what too many va∣inlie praetend to) the instinct or plerophorie of the spirit▪ His Ma∣jestie likewise found most agreeable both to reason and religion that frame of go∣vernment, because paternal not magisterial &c. Which was a third bottome for his conscience, Nor did he thinke it any point of wisdome or charitie, where Christians differ; . . . . . there to widen the differences, and at once to give all theCommunion with Chri∣stians. Christian world (except a handfull of some Protestants) so great a scandal in point of Church government &c. of which wisdome and charitie, the gifts of the spirit of God, he made another very good botome for his conscien∣ce: Let Mr. Baylie reade the rest of that most excellent divine chap∣ter,. ch. 17. Ius divi∣num of Pres∣byterie fru∣strates all treaties, ex∣communica∣tes all Chri∣stians threa∣tens all Princes. and answer it if he can. The maine ground of the Bishops discourse being wilfullie mista∣ken by the Reviewer, his structure is weake about the Warners conscien∣ce▪ And the Kings advantage. His cordial beliefe of the divine right of Synod and Presbyteries, together with that of the Reformed Churches, which the Bishop shewes to be different, may come from a private spirit that misinformes them, & then is no good interpreter of Scripture, nor any sure praecedent for Christianitie throughout. Their strict and inseparable adhaerence to his errour (beside that it antidates all treaties null, without an effectual complinance against conscience and honour) excommunicates all the world but themselves, & ex∣cludes them from all hope of fellow ship with this new select socie∣tie of Saints, who, could they multiplie into a number large enough to fill the circle of their ambition, and had they every one a dropIsai. 40. 23. 24. The Revie∣wers per∣verting the Bishops do∣ctrine. of Scotish rebellious bloud in their veines, would no longer labour the conversion of Kings, but take Gods angrie worke out of his hands to bring their Princes to nothing . . . . and be the whirlewind them∣selves to take them away as stbble. He that lookes not through Mr. Baylies glasse of vanitie and lies, can never be able to view the Bishop clasped so close with the elder
Praelates impairing the divine right, nor then, with the consequence he makes, about the legal, or expedient mobilitie of Bishops. Therefore as the ambition▪ greed, revenge; so the dissimulation in conscience is his, who can not but know what texts himselfe se th to cte▪ for the divine right of Presbyterie, and what the Bishop expresselie sayth, that the same may with  more reason be alleged for Episcopacit, and more consonable to the analogie of ayth▪ The agreement of sundrie▪ Praelatical divines with Erastus is here impertinentlie▪ mention'd. What correspon∣dence the Bishop holds▪ with them hath been too often all-readie ac∣knowledg'd▪ and maintaind. Mr. Baylies urgent, illogical inference obligeth the Bishop neither in ingeitie, nor reason to untie the hands of the Kings conscience, which his own assures him God hath bound, if▪ not by the hands of his sonne, by those of his Apostles and their successours through all Christian, ages and Churches. Nor can his Lp, from the principle you presse, demonstrate any securitie to His Majestie from offending God in the change. Nor yeild satisfaction to hisErastu's Royal right abused in a Sophisme. doubts. If Erastus's Royal right (which you so often have nveighd against) may be usd as a sophisme to delude the King into your presbyterie, . I pray, by your favour, let it stand as it is, a better argument to confirme him, if he needs it, in Episcopacie. Yet that either here, or other where this Royal right is induc'd by His Lordship to ratifie the order, I say not to actuate the ju∣risdiction of Bishops, I can not finde upon my reviewing▪ and must therefore desire a point by your ocular fingar to direct me. Were not the Presbyterians more obstinate in resuming their er∣rours▪ then the Bishop forward to recapitulate his proofes, his Lp. had spar'd a good part of this chapter, though the receiud rules of method requir'd it. Weake, and naughtie are hackney answers▪ which, if spurrd too often, and reason holds not up by the head, are likelie to lay Presbyterie in the dirt. Your Iudgement of his revenge is ac∣cording to your practice, who, poore, impotent creatures, like wor∣mes, or flies, by corruption, & filth support an uselesse corps to de∣file that hand, that cruheth you to the death. The praelatical inte∣gritie makes good the praesent disadvantage of their fortune, & their evidence in proofe, before any aequitable comparers, will praeserve still the principate in dispute▪ Major est [si non fortun] ratio, quamSen: De Clem l. . c. 20. ut tali solatio egeat, minifestiorque vis quàm at alien malo opinionem sibi virium quaerat. Your Canterburian challenges were but Scottish igges made onelie for mirth to a rude multitude in confusion, the one very in∣considerable in musike, the other flat, if any thing, in the harmo∣nie of truth. If the principles of Praelacie unavoydablie bring backe the
Pope, the practice of Presbyterie unquaestionablie ger before him, & ma∣kesThe conse∣quences from Episcopal principles not such as praetended his Papacie hold it by the traine. The Patriarchate of the west, and primacie of Rome flowes never out of the fountaine of Episcopacie, but when some ignorant Presbyter is turning the cocke, or tampering with the spring. Those English Praelates, that so freelie gave away the Patrimonie of Saint Peter &c. were some singular Executours of Constantinus Do∣nation▪ yet in that nothing so liberal to the Pope, as the Presbyters are covetous, and griping the common inheritance to themselves who, since his refusal that had the profer in possession, take the mocke spirit at his word, fall downe and worship, and then under theS. Matth. 4. 9 counterfeit of dominion in grace, intitle them selves not to Italie alone, but to all the Kingdomes of the earth. What difference there is in number, or nature between the cere∣moniesDifference between us and Rome  ceremo∣nies. they us'd, & those in Rome will appeare best by comparing their ritual with our rubrike, & Canons. The ornament of sacred historical pictures, the name of altars, and the adoration of God in uniformitie be∣fore them, have the ancient Christians innocent praecedent to com∣mend them, when commanded, or Countenanc'd by our superiours in the Church, and to vindicate them inus from the superstition, and idolrie you impute so liberallie to Rome. When the Praelates, & Pa∣pists cope in the controversie there are several other ceremonies they sticke at. That these are the worst, as religiouslie put in practice by the Bishops friends, requires more then your old see saw to confirme it. Adoration of, or to the altaris that, which I never heard professd by their mouth, nor read yet dropt from their pen. For me, lt them that owne it recant it, and if none such befound. Let the mouth of himProv. 10, 31. Real prae∣sence & cor∣poral diffe∣rent. Hist: Mot. Iustifica∣tion. S. Matth. 13; 45. Free will. that speaketh lies be stopped, and the froward tongue be cut out. The real prcence of Christ in the Eucharist on the altar, as I take it, was never denied by our Church, a corporal never asserted by her, no any of the Bishops friends, that I have heard of (though the 21. ob∣jection against our Liturgie in your historie of the Synod of Glas∣gow implies it.) The ustification they held was fetchd farre beyond Trent, and if they that went for it were not able to distinguish be∣tween Saint Pauls workes and Saint Iames's, they were very unfit to trade for that pearle, bad merchants for the Kingdome of heaven. Their free will was held no paragon of nature, but a priviledge by grace, which deliver'd them from the fatalitie of the curse, resto∣ring them in some measure to a libertie of choyce; And, unlesse you will fetch backe Tatians errour, make one God for the law, another for the Gospel, so long as the ten Commandements oblige us, we haveDeut. 30▪ 19. aswell as the Israelites of old, heaven, and earth for our record, that life and
death are to this day set before s, and, by the merits of Christ, the grace of having them in the free election of our will. Their final apostacie was seldome, or never intitled to Saints, or, ifFinal Apo∣stasice. so, with caution enough ro praevent calumnie. They asscribed ever an infallible praescence to God, an immutabilitie in his knowled∣ge; But to make him so peremtorilie, antecedentlie, spontaneou∣slie, irrespectivelie praedestinate a certaine number of men, call'd Sain before their resurrection from sinne; so irresistiblie operate by his power, as to praevent all possibilitie of backsliding, offen∣ding, or, being fallen, forceablie raise them, reenstate them in native innocencie, and his favour; they found consonant to none, disso∣nant from diverse positive texts, in, or inferences from Scripture▪ such as these. Let him that standeth take heed left he fall, which excepts1. Cor. 10. 12. Phil. 2. 12. no more the last houre or moment of life, then the first in the exer∣cise of reason. . . . . . Worke out your Salvation with feare, and trembling.  importing an earnest endeavour unto the last aga∣inst final apostacie, not impossible; And the reason in the next verseA quaestion about Da∣vids case. mplying an hazard of the energie of grace, which onelie supports a Saint from his fall. I demand yea, or no, a direct answer to this. Whe∣ther if a Phineas had come and taken David  in the act with Bathsheba, the point of his speare had been assuredlie blunted, or his hand held by an Angel from heaven. Whether, if so, this extraordinarie miracle had not been wrought in order to the accom∣plishment of somewhat praefix't to the oeconomie of Gods Royaltie upon earth in his person? Whether the like case or capacitie can in such be reasonablie suppos'd incident to all that you call Saints, and what securitie they have from all casualties, all attempts in the very moment of sinne to destroy them? The general promises can be no protection in such cases, & some it may be, are not so gene∣ral as to be made applicable to all, which, well scann'd, incline to the peculiar concernment of them, to whom they were made, and of whom onelie they seeme to be mean'd. But in points of this nature whatsoever the Warners friends have avowed, you exception against them is the same with that against the expresse words of the Church, in the Assemblie at Glasgow 1638 draw'n from what she professd. That infants baptiz'd have all things necessarie to salvation. This you mayRubrike in the confir∣mation. take as the summe of that which the Bishop knew to have been with much moderation, & reason often answerd to your sore challenge. Your slight replies thereunto being indeed but squib, and crackers for children to sport with, had not the armes of sinfull men, & the Kings rtillerie been rebelliouslie us'd, as a more unanswerable argument to force them.
The following position His Lp. nowhere will dispute, nor doth laugh at. That Christ, as King of his Church, hath appointed lawes for▪ & governers of theChrist as King of his Church ap∣points lawes &c. same. Who, and what these are, in the general Saint Paul hath left in his letters to the first Christians, which they and their successours have kept for us that come after. He takes you for usurpers, & ty∣rants, who crosse to these lawes, for pride, & filthie lucre, make your selves not onelie Lords over Gods heritage, but commanders of subjection from Kings 2. b. Disc, ch 1. Pro Rege Regum, & Domino Domi∣nantiumH. Grot. preibyteria nobis, & Synodos supponenes. The consequence here∣upon, That Acts of Synods must be Christs lawe, where Synods make themselves Dictatours of his pleasure, and repraesentatives of his person, is no other follie, then what the Logical rules of Relatives praescribe us, which, if your Sophistrie decline, I must referre the Reader to the like expressions so frequentlie us'd in your publike papers, in the several contests that Knox had with your Queenes & their Councels in defense of your discipline; And; to come some∣what nearer in your very praeface before the booke it selfe, where your Reformed Kirke is call'd the spose of Iesus Christ, the rules of her discipline in the language of Scripture The Lords lawes and commande∣ments . . . . the heavenlie proportion of divine discipline; And at last compared to the booke of Gods covenant, that lay hid in the Temple. Under the name of which Discipline, we are admonished, is to be under∣stood. Beside the two bookes, the Acts, Constitutions, and practices a∣greed upon, and recorded in the Registers of the General, and provincial Assem∣blies &c. And a brother plainlie asserts, That your Discipline in the general (which we denie to have any other authoritie then your votes) is as immutable, as the Scripture. I finde you now here such a Master of Rhethorike, and language asHanc none magis licet Ecclae mu∣tare quàm mutar licet ipsam scrip∣turam Vin∣dic: Eplae Philad. to take your judgement in comparing of styles. If the Bishop hath borrowed the Isuites invectives, or any from the Pagan philosophers, he could not beter bestow them then on you, that are neither good Protestants, nor Christians. His declamations against your noveltie will be regarded by such as take universalitie, and perpetuitie for two discre∣tive markes of Christs Kingdome, & government, which must not be limited to a rebellious schismatical Centurie in one Countrey. The antiquitie, you boast of, is founded upon as great a mistake of the Go∣spell, as was the sadduces of the law, you both erre not knowing the Scrip∣tures. Yet, that being your plea, I will urge the Bishops argument noBy whom his Spters is to be swa∣yed. farther concerning the change, and difformitie of your discipline (which may be prov'd in particulars not twice romov'd from your essentials themselves) but appeale with you to Caesar, who calling to his Councel the Primitive Fathers the most publike spirits, most
unbyassed Interpreters, may, by the tributarie assistance, if his Ma∣jestie please, of as many Bishops, or Doctours, as sectarian Presbyters, after a faire scholastike discussion, discerne the truth, decide the controversie, and, according as he findes Christs scepter was swayedVincent. Lyrin: ad∣vers: haeres cap. 14. among Catholike Christians, by deputation of one part, or other, abolish the Rebell Vsurper at his pleasure. But Annunciare [or impe∣rare] aliqued Christianis, Chatholicis praeter id quod acceperun, nunquam licui, nusquam licet, nunquam licebit. To declare, or command a beliefe of di∣vine right, in that which hath not been received in Gods Church, never was, no where is nor, will it at any time be law full.English Episcopacie t d by the more for ward Pres∣byteri. Your dearth of matter renders you taedious in the rest of the pa∣ragraph, and the course faire wherewith you entertaine your rea∣der, flesh, bloud, and limbes of an English Bishop, makes you suspected here to have been at a stand, to have layd your spiritual scribling aside, till you went to market, and fetcht these carnal expressions from the ambles. My Lord of Derrie▪ and his friends, in citing au∣thoritie, and pressing reason for their order have dealt so farilie, & wrought so effectuallie, as for all the stripping your sleeves and the other ho∣cas poca trickes that he tells you of, you will finde no cleanlie con∣veyance of your Presbyterie into the heads of any your judicious comparers, nor will their eares be chain'd by your brazen hypocri∣sie to maintaine it. Your too curious anatomie of English Episco∣pacie, touching which you interrogate, will onelie countenance them in a demand, not otherwise intended, of a Scripture warrant for Scot∣tish Presbyterie, as such, disciplining, excommunicating, deposing, I shall doe no wrong if I adde what I prove, justifying & praysing God for the death, if not the murder of Kings, renouncing the na∣me, butacting every one a double part of a lord in Parliament▪ not onelie voycing in, but imperiouslie overruling all Acts of State, all elections of principal officers, in order to conscience, for prae∣vention of scandal, & keeping a lower Commission Court in eve∣ry Towne, & parish; forcing every Bayliffe, and provest to be your creature; A Presbyterie bold'lie ordaining without a Bishop, and gulling the people into a foolish conceit of Gods call in them, when 'tis their Iving spirit that hath praepossess'd them, For Iet the peo∣ple call, or praesent whom they will, if the learned (the priviledge ofB. Discipt. 4. head. which title every covie of Dunces challenge to themselves) judge the person unable of the regiment, he is set aside, and they forced to take (without violent intrusion they tell them) whom the superin∣tended Councel offereth to instruct them: A Presbyterie exercing all jurisdiction without any appeale from themselves; A Presbyte∣rie feeding their flockes like swine with graine, and huskes, such
divinitie, as every brewer, or hogheard can helpe them to, never lea∣ding them through the green pastures of the ancient, learned, and devout Fathers, nor to any other waters of comfort, but such as the very fountaine whereof the foot of schisme, or rebellion hath trou∣bled. This is Scottish Presbyterie in practice and such they would have it in law too, if they could with all their Scripture collusions but once corrupt. His Majesties judgement, or by their sharpe-poin∣ted swords, & two edged tongues affright him from a well grounded resolution, into what his Royal Father esteem'd it, a faint servile, ungodlie, and unkinglie consent. The treasure you call, for hath hitherto had God for its defense,The treasure thereof to be found as well before as after the years 800. who hath made know'n, and distributed those talents in Scripture, which maintain'd the litle familie of the Church, and discharg'd the itinerant Gospell of that time. The greater mine hath been often dis∣covered by them whose divina virgula hath stouped, and put them upon the search of the veine that caried the Episcopal government through the 800. yeares of your account. Your soon-shot bolts in ma∣ny frivolous quaestions have been better feather'd with many wise mens answers▪ and for all the horned impudence you hold out, re∣turned very often upon your heads, one of whom I shall send youDr. Ierm. Taylor. to, who (not to derogate from the happie endeavours of many others aswell of the learned Laitie, as Reverend Clergie) hath alone anti∣cipated, and fullie with much acutenesse, and judgement answered allmost every particular you object. Shewing that Christ himselfe hath made the office of Apostle or Bishop distinct from Presbyters; Given them power to do some offices perpetuallie necessarie, which to others he gave not: Asof Ordination, and confirmation; And supe∣rioritie of jurisdiction; Bishops, by vertue of their office, more then called. observed as Lords, in a more sublime sense, then you mention; And commended to the service of Kings▪ Saint Chrysostom, & others imployed in Embasies; Saint Ambrose a Prfect, and Dorotheus a Chamberlaine to the Emperour; Many of them Councellers to Princes, and Iudges aswell in ordinarie secular affaires, as Chancllors in extra∣ordinarie by appeale; Treasurers at least of the Church revenue, and undergoing what ever civile charge the conscientious favour of Princes put upon them, which was not in grad impedimenti clerical; Bishops with sole power of ordination, and jurisdiction, otherwise then as they thought good to call into their subordinate assistance, or deputed Presbyters in their Dioceses. Of officils, and Commissaries I thinke he makes litle mention, because he bends his discourse against all inte∣rest of Lay elders; yet I doe not thinke he would denie that Civilians, such as are our Officiali, and Commissaries, might be instrumental to the
Bishops, especiallie having some learned Presbyter authorized in cases, to which the others lay propertie extends not; Bishops, when necessitie may require, using solitarie ordination, which is good in natu∣reCan. 2. rei, as may betaken for granted by that Canon of the Apostles, which as it enjoines no more then one Bishop, so makes no mention of any Presbyter, which it had quaestionlesse done, if of absolute neces∣sitie to the businesse; Bishops ordaining not with the fashional, but ca∣onical assistance of any two Presbyters that they please, by choyce of their, owne chaplaines or others, where are many, or taking any two that chance otherwise to be neare; Bishops principal pastours of their whole Dioceses, & when commanded, or countenanc'd by the King to waite at Court, not obliged to feed their flockes in their persons, which they doe by many learned, and religious proxies, themselves in the meane time feeding by word, or sacrament, or ghostlie coun∣sel, the great shepheard, whose Royal soul is worth 10000. of the peoples. All this in effect, & a great deale more then your Parkers, or Didoclaves could have answered, hath this one learned Doctour defended, as know'n long before the Pope gave over to say his creed, which he did surelie, when he became the Anti-Christ you call him. I could goe up yet once againe, & helpe you to a third turne from the top of your demands, Shew you that the Warner, and his friends giveThe Praela∣tes still of the same minde they were. the King the same assurance, that ethey did, that what they stand upon as unalterable in their order hath Scripture, and Antiquitie for its warrant▪ That upon the conversion of England to Christianitie, the Ecclesiastike government there constituted, was not Anti-Christian; That a Bishop there is not a Lord in Parliament by vertue of his of∣fice (as it may be to resolve spiritual doubts he ought to be) but byDeclar. B. 2. Dang. Posis. the Baronie & call which the favour of Kings hath annex'd unto it; That in Scotland, when it was decreed that Bishops should have no voyces in Parliament, these your selfe-denying men desired of the King that such Commissioners as they should send to the Parliament and councel, might from thence forth be authorized in the Bishops places for the Estate; That not many protestant English Bishops have been High Treasurers, not many Chancellars, some that have you have litle reason to finde fault with; That they are not bound in law to devolve all jurisdiction &c; That all which in practice did it, are not to be condemned, where they found able & honest men to exer∣cise it in their names; That those, which erre must not praejudice the care and deligence in government of the rest▪ That sositarie ordina∣tions were very rare, & therefore not to be objected as so common; Nor did halfe the Bishops live at Court, nor most that did halfe their time. All these particulars could I enlarge on, but that I beleeve
the Reader satisfied with the execution done before, and hath some what else to doe, then to stay to see you stript. In what followes you take a great deale more, then is given you,Not the Court but Citie Divi∣nes devest Bishops. naming that a donation from the Court divines conscience, for which the Citie Divines, chieflie of Edenburgh, & London, forced the tem∣ple of God by such sacriledge to furnish the two tabernacles of rob∣bers, that then prospered too well in England, and Scotland. That Royal Saint that, upon, this most impious violence, yeilded up so great a portion of his Ecclesiastike inheritance, the Bishops civile im∣ployment, Arch-Bishops, Arch-deacons, with the &c (which might have been better spar'd) did it in angusto comprehensus, not upon any com∣punction of conscience. Sed difficulter, sed subductis supercilijs . . . . & vix exeuntibus verbis, And had not his paternal affection prompted him, to what your unnatural disobedience litle deserved, he had given you not onelie panem lapidosum, as Fabius was wont to call a gift verySen: De Benef. lib. 2 cap. 7. S. Matth. 7. 9. 46. 17. hardlie bestowed upon an hungrie beggar, but pro pane lapidem, with∣out out saviours censure, a stone instead of that bread, which was never ordaind to stuffe the insataite stomach of every gaping Rebell that call'd for't. Yet, whatsoever you had, was, you know, but for a trien∣nal experiment, which being exspired, in the yeare of libertie, that was to succeed, according to Gods paterne in Ezekiel, if you could then praetend no better title then you had done, it was to returne to your Prince, and the inheritance of such an inseparable right to be his sonnes, who of your adversaries gave this unseasonable advice I know not, nor who have acknowledg'd, and recanted for errours those di∣vine truths ordained for peace, but encountred with troubles, and their abettours expos'd to susteime the envie, and obloquie of the world. Therefore alasse its in vaine for you to invite them to come nearer, to hang out like a dead cat in her skin, unlesse you me∣ane to have every one of them moral the rest of the fable with an . But to leave off spea∣kingThe Revie∣wers dete∣stable ingra∣titude. in parables, I desire the reader in plaine English to marke the base ingratitude of an unworthie Presbyter: In that, when a most in∣genuous peace-desiring Prince (for him he meanes when he speakes of his Praelatical adversaries) invaded by audacious importunitie, encompassed with all external visible necessitie, placing himselfe upon the very pinacle of Christi-an charitie, shall yeild all that the softest, gentlest Casuist can indulge (and that upon such conditions as, how easie soever, the perfidious contractours litle thinke to make good) he must be argued with upon the ominous advanta∣ge of his owne gratuitie, & praetended from his adventurous kind∣nesse
to be demonstrativelie convinc'd to give up the rest of that which rebellious license, schismatical singularitie, and degenerate malice have now so devested into a new creature, as neither law, custome, nor honour can call that English Bishop which religion in∣stituded and reformation confirmed. But a crou'd of guiltie conju∣red malefactours presseth shame and the proverbe to nothing, so that ingratum si dixeris nihil dixeris. Seneca knew it who had studied theDe Ben∣lib: 3. cap. 16. point and experienc'd the practice. Pdorem tollit multitudo peccantium, & definet esse probri loco commune maledictum. But to send you backe some of your owne logike and language; If this naked bird which you so pleasantlie play with, be a new creature because the feathers are pluckt, then you must confesse that old creature revested with those Euauge∣lical beauties and Royal graces which once it possessed, to be that know'n true English Bishop that in honour, law, custome, if not in conscience (which I need not suppose) is to be inviolablie maintai∣n'd, when it shall be made to appeare, as it may very easilie, and hath been very frequentlie, that such an order not much different∣lie fashion'd and habited, ever was and ever is to be in the Christian Church. To make good the mutual toleration indented for between your sectarian brethren and your alltogether as sectarian selves, you clo∣selie decline the warners confidence which avowes those texts of Scripture you wrest against Bishops, with as much colour of reason and more truth the Independents may urge against Presbyters, be∣ing resolv'd, since you finde they can make you their province at pleasure (if not command a transmigration of your Euangel) to ar∣gue no more against them then to fight. The triumph you make in two painted Syllogismes is very improperlie plac'd before the victo∣rie, where though you ide like a George on horsebacke in a page∣ant, you will passe for no beter then a dumbe shew, and with your wooden launce be mistaken by none, but children and fooles, for that primitive armed Saint that kill'd the dragon. If you cast not yourThe texts of scripture a∣gainst Epis∣copacie dis∣cussed. texts in a couple of better molds, your workemanship will beare as litle the image of Gods word, as your selves doe of the reasonable men that he created. Were His Lp. at better leisure his great promi∣ses would reengage him in more necessarie imployments then an∣swering every silie Presbyter in his follie; but his Acolythus & ser∣vant (if not because he hath taken up so much of the similitude all∣readie)Prov. 26. 4. & 5. will for once, and it may be oftner, follow Solomons advice in the next verse, seeing you so very wise in your owne conceit. The first text you are medling with is Ephes: 4. 11. whence your imaginarie argument, not to be denied adoration, is this.
Maj: All the officers that Christ has appointed in his Church, for the ministrie of the word, are either Apostles, Euangelists, Pro∣phets, Pastours or Doctours; Mi: But Bishops are none of these five, Ergo. You pleade custome for the free unquaestionable passage of your major, which you must give me leave to obstruct▪ first excepting against the improprietie of your termes (being such as may evacuate your argument) the Ministrie of the word, when the Bishops discourse is about the regiment of the persons to whom the word allreadie is mini∣stred, Secondlie, demanding to have it under Saint Pauls hand, whe∣ther the offices he mentions of Apostolate, prophecie &c were by Christs institution for the personal perfecting of Saints in a Church established, and not as the word seemes rather to signi∣fic. Pros ton Catartismon toon hagioon for jointing or knitting new Saints to the Church, new membres to the bodie of Christ in the propagation of his gospel, so aedisying the bodie of Christ by the worke of the Ministrie, which in the next verse seemes to end in the unitie of ayth, that is the general conversion of nations to Christianitie. Thirdlie, whether this enumeration of the Apostle's be universal, to which J finde more particulars addèd 1. Co. 12. 28. & among them dynamis & Kyberneseis. Powers & governments, the former of which (that you may not cavill about superinfused gifts) he makes as much personal, or persons, as that of Apostle, prophet, Tea∣cher,. 20. vers: 29. Besides that he expresselie calleth the Elders of the Church of Ephesus Bishops, & tells them they were instituted by the holie spirit, which we know came downe to fulfill the promise by the mission of the sonne, & so they must passe upon account as offi∣cers appointed by Christ. Three fifths of your Minor thus you prove. Bishops are not Apostles, Euangelists, nor prophets, because they are confessed extraordinarie & tempora∣rie, Bishops ordinarie & perpetual. To which I answer. First, That Bi∣shopsBeshop are▪ Apostles. Lib. advers. haeret. cap. 32. are Apostles in their ordinarie power of ordination & jurisdic∣tion, though not in their extraordinarie of working miracles, spea∣king with diverse tongues &c. And this Tertullian hath sayd above 1300. yeares since, who, arguing with the haeretikes about succes∣sion, bids them turne over their records, & shew that their first Bishop was an Apostle, or Apostolical, because personallie ordai∣ned by one of them. This the Apostolical Churches could doe, as that of Smyrna shewes Polycarp, because placed there by Saint Iohn. That of Rome Clement, because ordained by St. Peter. And such Bishops as these he calls Apostolici seminis traduces. If they be Apostolical
grafes, good Mr. Baylie, from what tree thinke you were they ta∣ken, and of what may they, without arrogancie, beare the name? Other of the Ancients call'd Timothie Bishop of Ephesus an Apostle, among whom what enterfeering there was of these two termes you may reade in Theodoret upon 1. Tim. Jn the like sense may they be sayd to be Euangelists, (aswell as inMay be call'd Euan∣gelists. H. Grot. Proleg. ad Matth. Should be prophets. In 1. Cor. 12. H. Grot. Why Pa∣stours. the Revelation they are called Angels) who praeside over the prea∣ching of the Gospell, and publication of it to them that have not heard, Euangelion & Kerygma being the same. And they either are, or should be, Prophets, in one kinde accor∣ding to Saint Ambrose, Scripturas, revelances, the ablest interpreters of Scripture, or speakers of mysteries in the spirit to aedification, exhortation and comfort, though not foretellers of things to come. Nam quicquid later, sive id  est, sive praesens mysterium dicitur. The reason why your adversaries pitch upon the fourth is, to decline your trivial objections against the other three. Your syllogisme that labours to prove Bishops no Pastours hath no doubt but a certaintie of falshood in the major which your argumentum a pa∣ribus comes some what improperlie to make good, you having spoke of a confess'd imparitie but just before. But for once a bargaine no bargaine pactum non pactum fit, non pactum pactum quod vbis lubet. It would be a rare invention, surpassing Aristoles Logike, if, without a reserve, you could get a conclusion to creep out of a single propo∣sition, for take it on my word your lucke is bad in majours, which whether you play at even or odde are all pariter fals sicke of a disease, and this here left desperate without any remedie to recover it. No Apostle, you say, is superiour to an Apostle. This is contrarie toApostles superiour to Apostles. what one Walo Messalinus (whom under another name you mistake to be your friend) hath frequentlie asserted. That they were primi & secundi, majores & minores, The second and lesse subordinate in spi∣ritual power to the first and greater. This he gathers out of Theo∣doret and others. The greater he explaines to be the twelve, the lesse, those deputed by them for teaching and governing. Nay, he dis∣covers a third order inferiour to them both, of which was Epapho∣ditus, subordinate to Saint Paul, who himselfe was but minor Apo∣stolus, being none of the twelve. So that here being three degrees, I tell you from him what I might from others, or with them rather collect from the text, That an Apostle is superiour to an Apostle. As much might besayd for Euangelists, whereof foure were prin∣cipal,Euangelists Coadju∣tours. or, if not, it is because they were by their office of the lo∣wer classe, or Coadiutours to the Apostles. Such were Titus, Ti∣mothie, Apollos &c. Saint Hierom sayth all Apostles were Euange∣lists,
but not all Euangelists Apostles. And so likewise that all pa∣stours were Doctours, but not vice versa. The learned Grotius, That Doctours, were Bishops or Arch-Bishops rather, the same withDoctours Bishops. haeres. 75. those call'd Metropolitans afterward. Paeteres Kai didascaloi are Epi∣phanius titles for them. To prove majour & minor prophets un∣der the new Testament is needlesse till you answer what I have brought about Apostles, or strengthned the majour in your argument which I absolutelie denie. And besides remit you to a learned Doc∣tourDr. Tayler Episcop: as∣sert. who proves the word Pastor to be the Bishops peculiar among the Ancients, and frustrates that imparitie from which you argue. Your second reason out of Saint Matthew and Saint Paul hath a litle Philosophical Soul and forme in the majour, but no divine one in in the minour, and so, according to your similitude in the momentNo power of Ordination in the Pres∣byterie, of removal or separation must perih. The first text 1. Tim. 4. 14. puts no power more then approbant or assistent of ordination in the Eldership, & a Bishop is as much a Presbyterie and no more a Pres∣byter (I meane in your sense of diminution) then Saint Paul, who seemes to make that act of ordination solitarie and personallie his owne 2. Tim. 1. 6. And the Greeke Scholiasts say the Elders here were Bishops, excluding interminis all presbyters from that power ou gar hoi Presbyteroi heirotonoun ton Episcopon say both Theophylact and Oecomenius. For the word which you will needes have to be clas∣sical not personal, perchance some will say it may denote the order, or office, the Episcopate they meane, and be put figurativelie here for the single person, of the Apostle, comparing these words, toge∣ther meta Epithescoos oon cheiroon ou Presbyteriou, & dia tes epithescoos oon2. Tim. 1. 6. cheiroon mou. But let it be what it will, the power of ordination must continue in the Bishop, so long as Christians keep to the New Testa∣ment and Fathers, and fetch us not a fift Gospel, or some newer Apostle from Geneva.No power of Iurisdiction in the Church. That the second Saint Matth. 18. puts the power of jurisdiction in the Church is gratis dictum, & your authoritie not so great as that your autos ephen. will be able to carie it. First therefore you are required to prove, that excommunication, the act of jurisdiction you meane, is here at all intended, and not rather no more then the three degrees of fraternal correption, the highest whereof is that elegsis enoopin pantoon, a rebuke before all. 1. Tim. 5. 20. Vt qui non potuit pudore Salvari, Salvetur oppro∣brij sayth Saint Hierom, he sayth not damnetur or eijciatur nsuris. That he which could not be saved by private shame might by more publike reproach. Secondlie, That the Church here, was a judi∣cial Assemblie call'd to that purpose, or if met to other, that a for∣mal
processe was brought before it; And that they were not rather some greater number then the two or three witnesses, upon what occasion soever met together, which may very well be call'd Eccless with out the signal meaning of the word. Coram multis Lib. Musar. Kata Koinon Justin: & tunc multis dicendum est in Saint Hierom. Nor is it like∣lie a deliberate judgement in Court (into which a Christian Con∣gregation, converted) should be after processe in hazard to be sligh∣ted or neglected by one Member delinquent an paracouse. Nor that to be such which relates rather to the person of the plaintiffe then Iudges estoo soi. Let him be unto thee . . . Thirdlie, If it be such a Con∣gregation or Church as you would have it, whether the complaint were to be repraesented to them in general, and not rather in their hearing to their superintendents or praesident above them. Epi toon tes Ecclesias proedroon demofiseoson to ptaisma sayth Theophylact. Fourth∣lie, That sit sicut Ethnicus & publicanus, Let him be unto thee as an heathenman and a publicane is undoubtedlie a sentence commanded to be pronoun∣ced by those superintendents or that Church; or an injunction, ra∣ther then permission, to the partie injur'd to have no farther fami∣liaritie or friendship, to have no more to doe with him then with heathen and publicanes, a voluntarie declination of whose companie was no scandal to the charitie Christians professed, & any civile of∣fice out of common humanitie left arbitrarie, and not censur'd if tend'red. Fiftlie, whether binding and loosing vers. 18. Be assertedConfirma. Thes. lib. 4. c. 5. with reference to this Church, and not rather to the Apostles, as your friend Erastus will have it, or more probablie to any par∣tie against whom the trespasse was committed. Potestatem tribuit Apo∣stolis sayth Saint Hierom. Ou gar monon hosa lyousin hoi hiereis eisi le∣lymena,De Verb. Dom. hom. 15. Iohn Morell excommunī∣cated for this doctrine. all hosa kai hemeis hoi adikethentes and Theophylact. And si fratrem habes pro Ethnico & publicano ligasti illum in terra: si correxeru fratrem, solvisti eum in terra Saint Austin, which seemes to be the proper meaning of the place. After all which I expect you should make some apologie for your brethren abroad that in the yeare 1563. Sept. 6. excommunicated Iohn Morell the Frenchman for writing this doctrine, burn'd his booke, and interdicted under a great poenaltie the reading any copie of it that might escape them. The third 1. Cor 5. appeares not evidentlie to put the porterNo power of jurisdic∣tion in a Companie met together of jurisdiction in a companie of men met together, Theophylact taking it for a modest condescension in Saint Paul to joine the Corin∣thians with himselfe, whose solitarie power was absolute. Hina me doxe authades, Kai autous proslambanei Kinoonous And the context im∣porting the sentence, such as it was, to be but declarative in them
them by the vertual praesence of the Apostles spirit; and judicial in Saint Paul, who had passed it before ede Kekrika sayth he vers. 3. Though it will trouble you to prove that here was any jurisdictionDelivering to Satan hat. exerciz'd, delivering to Satan being probablie but a desertion of the partie peccant, using no intercession in his behalfe, but leaving him naked for Satan to assault him with corporal torments, which pro∣digious punishment was usual in thse times. Excommunication it can not be, because it limits his censure to the destruction of the flesh, de∣prives him not of the Sacraments, the want whereof is destructive to the spirit. The twelfth verse addes no strength to your argument, the sense seeming to be onelie this. I have nothing to doe to judge them that are without, but leave them to God: I have to doe to judge them that are within worthie of deliverance up to Satan. And ye judge them that is deliver them up when ye are gathered together, & my spirit. As he, had sayd vers. 4. So it is Saint Pauls spirit that is principal in this ju∣risdiction, and the companie of men met together but his delegates or assistants, convocated at his pleasure. To Your assumption I likewise answer. That the Bishop is as much the Church as Saint Paul in this case; and hath as much of the ordi∣narie power transmitted to him. So that you see it requires not the Doctours learning, but the search of his Acolythus and servant to satisfie you, if you will be, with an∣tiquitie & reason. Which being done you may send more scirptural arguments against Episcopacie by your brethren of the next Com∣mission. Touching those you have brought allreadie, you need not be so confident in calling for their answer unlesse they were somewhat better. The visible leisure is, in none but such as you & yourWhy Blon∣del &c. are not answe∣red. courteous Disciples in England have procured to be imprison'd in se∣verall goales of both Kingdomes; others having businesse enough by shifting from one place to another to secure their persons and save their lives, from your crueltie. The poor prisoners have few visi∣ble helpes to that purpose. If you will finde courage or conscience enough to undertake their free accesse to the Fathers and other authours that are visiblie necessarie to that purpose. I have enough left still to assure you in the name of them that have more learning then they boast of, that whatsoever becomes of your punie Clerkes Master Parker and Didoclave, (who may be easilie turn'd of with some care∣full quotations and references to a multitude of bookes allreadie printed) Master Blondels magazine of antiquitie shall be seiz'd on, and what in it is upsie Scotch (which is not all) for the presbyterieSomais fare well to the Prebyterie. you bragge of, shall in spight of your power be rescued for the true owners, that is, the Bishops. For your meracle of learning, the most no∣ble
Somais, we wish he may worke more such wonders as he hath of late, and send his petie advocate a new blew bonnet at parting trim∣med with a distick, begining if he pleaseth Ille ego qui quondam—for his fee. Were publike masters of fact as mysterious as the intrigues in yourThe Scottish presb. may be contracted out of their owne storie. Revel. 20. 12. spiritual Iunto; and Consistorian Caballs, some Endor oracle must perchance have been consulted and one of your blacke guardant Angels been superstitiouslie worship'd, or ceremoniouslie waited upon for revelation. But when the bookes of the dead are before their day opened by your hands, and their workes of darknesse re∣gistred by your pennes, the warner may every where, without an ironie, proclaime his knowledge in your storie as great as his strictest search, and as certaine as your rash confession could create. King Iames's 55,K. I.'s. 55. quaestions non plus'd them. quaestions so troubled the Scotish divines, that they finding their plea of divine right and immutabilitie of their discipline to be dis∣puted, the Perth Assemblie indicted principallie for that purpose: to divert the King, if not otherwise to praevent his multiplving such problemes (to which David Blackes processe & the businesse about the banish'd Lords may be annexed) they rais'd a desperate sedition on the 17. of December, which allreadie is discours'd on. Their (if you meane the Synods) answer was not so round but that they first protested & parlied about their priviledge at the conference with His Majestie and the Estates: required time to returne, reason, vote & resolve in all points. If thereafter the propounders were speachlesse in the bu∣sinesse, it might be because the Synod caried it for the King, and de∣termined the problemes in his sense, which (for ought I know) is that the Bishop meanes by yeilding the bucklers without any opposition. The maner and time might very well perplexe them being in a free Synod, and meeting with their bold contestation for David Blacke. Nor were they troubled onelie at the Erastian & Praelatical Counsellers about the King, but at Patrike Galloway and Iames Nicolson, of late Saints but now it should seem become Apostate presbyters in the Synod. The quaestions put by the King were not captions and carping at the parts of Church discipline, but a just controversie raised about the whole, fair∣lie propounded, freelie discussed, deliberatelie resolved, to the sa∣tisfying his conscience, and silencing schismatical scruples for the future. I have often told you no statutes of Parliament nor Acts of any but factious Assemblies authorisd your Discipline▪ though were it ratified (as you would have had it) by any other, set your jusdi∣ninumEpiscopa∣cie recove∣red ground in Scotland. aside, and fetch not your praecedent from the Medes and Per∣sians, a power aequivalent to that which did it might reverse it. The visible Church in your countrey at that time was not so farre from yeildino
to Episcopacie, but that your brother confesseth the cranie was then made by which it afterward crept in, though I am at a losse for so much daylight in your storie, as to see the yeare when legallie it was thrust out. Per hanc rimm (sayth he) ad essentialia ipsa externi regiminis im∣petendum,Vindic. E∣pist: Phila∣delph. & extruendum Episcopatum aditum sibi patefecerunt. You can not denie but that it brought them thus farre on their way, to the title of Praelates and voting in Parliaments. Wicked states men at that time beares the same significancie with Court Divines and evil Counsellers at this, and so doth the most able and saythfull Ministers with the Men of God that are Covenanters in this age, of whom every mans experience can frame a character enough to scare away his credit to the reputa∣tion you would give them. There need no question be prposed when the Bishops were by full authoritie reinstated in part of their un∣quaestionable right; To a great deale more in the yeare 1606. When by Act of Parliament their government was styled the ancient and fun∣damental policie . . . . Declared that they being the Third Estate had been indi∣rectlieWhence they had not been legallie eje∣cted. abolished . . . . That it never had been mean'd by His Majestic and His E∣states that they should any wayes be suppressed: That they had been onelie brought into contempt and povertie . . . . That His Majestie with expresse advice and con∣sent of the sayd whole Estates in Parliament doe repone, restore and redintegrate the sayd Estate of Bishops (it sayth not to their order) to their ancient and accusto∣med honour, dignites, praerogatives, priviledges &c. This was completed in the yeare 610, when a kinde of Episcopacie was set up as neare the primitive paterne as the growing reformation would beare in the As∣semblie of Glasgow excepting the two Members I told you of, no other∣wise corrupt then as it may be flie-blow'n by your breath, and tain∣ted by your naming; under which not the Church but the Kirke of Scot∣land did heavilic groane, as it allwayes doth when it hath not libertie to vent sedition in the pulpit, and act rebellion in the field which the best and most learned of your preachers, the Aberdene Assemblers, practiced in part, and wish'd well to the rest Anno 1606 till the yeare 1637. when if they had met with an English Pharaoh for ri∣gour as they did with a Moses the meeker man of the two▪ he would have appointed taske masters that should have toke away the straw, and spoyl'd their designe of fiering the house: set them making of brickes and building him treasure cities, while they were pulling downe temples & ruining Palaces; he had kept them from shaking of the yoke of Ecclesi∣astike and Civile government, & brought divinc justice to their doores while they brought him to beare the burden of a most inhumane, most unjust judgement at his owne; praeserv'd his Children & sub∣jectsPsalm 137. from sighing and hanging their harpes upon willowes in a stra∣nge land, while they sate, under our vines, and keept us out of the
shadow of our owne figge trees; cut up the root, while he lopped the branches, strake off the head while he clipped the eare; cast out of Bri∣taine, what with regreet of conscience he tolerated in Scotland, him∣selfePsalm. 1. then & his Church had continued like a treeplanted by the water side and had brought forth more fruit in due season His leafe had not wither'd, & what∣soever he had done had in all likelihood prosperd. But he hath overcome them if not in doing, in suffering being more then conquerour, & whenRevel. 2. 7. those briars & thornes are bundled up for the fire he shall have given him to eate of the tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. CHAPTER. IX. The Commonwealth is a monster when Gods Soveraignitie in the Presbyterie contradicts the Kings. THe Reviewer all this while having made a poor shift to save theThe Revie∣wers slender shift. credit of the Kirke, and spent his time in sewing a few figlea∣ves together to cover the shame of a sinfull disobedience against Gods command in the Civile Magistrate, which every puffe of wind rends in pieces and scaters before the face of innocencie and truth; he hereries his skill to patch contradictions together—pergit pug∣naantia secum Frontibus adversis componere—and makes a parti colou∣red coate for his two headed monster which may aswell, in time, out doe the seven-headed dragon, if more crownes & scepters can befound wherewith to invest it, as it hath allreadie the hundred-han∣ded Gyant, in pulling downe as many powers and dominions as it could reach; metamorphozing the Paradise of Kingdomes into the forest of Commonwealths; and changing men that should be good subjects into scorpions, or in serpentes Regulos, such serpents & coc∣ketricesIer. 8. 17. as will not be charmed into any obedience. The Presbyterians ministrie under Christ, being a tyrannie over Chri∣stians,The Pres∣byterians, not Praelates coordinate two Sove∣raignaties in one state. quits them not of coordinating two Soveraignies in a state, Nor doth the Praelates maintaining an hierarchie in the Church make them at all guiltie of that fault since the former acknowledge no superieur in Ecclesiasicis but God; & the later attribute aswell a spiritual as Tem∣poral supremacie to their King. The spiritual Lordship, Domination &c the Bishops exercise over his subjects in his name but the Presbyterians theirs in the name of the Prince of all Kings, whose Minister he is as well
as they, and call all opposition against them a warre against IesusTwo Kings in Scotland. Christ. Nay, rather then faile, when they can catch His Majestie in a closet, Andrew Melvin shall tell him he must know he lies at their mercie, Publice Rex, nos parcimus tibi, That there are two Kings in Scotland, fac. memineris duos esse in Scotia Reges, one of the Church (which must have the praecedence too) and another of the Common∣wealth. That by his leave (which is, to say, without it) they must meet at their pleasure, & have a care of the Church, whereof he is no head but a Member, no nursing Father, as the Scripture vainlie calls him, but the elder sonne or at most brother of the Kirke: And that this is spoken with good authoritie too, summ cum authoritate, shall the Vindicatour publikelie print that all may know it. The contrarietie of commands, when issuing from Masters aequallie to be observed, can not but breed distraction in the servant, and where Ianus hath not a oo-fac'd generation, must needes much unfixe him in his ad∣vertence. Christs particular and extraordinarie commands, if all,Not God o∣nelie but his Anoynted likewise to be obeyed. to all, and at all times to be publish'd with out special commission, oblige not his Ministers publikelie, imperiouslie to prohibite others of his anoynted, which may be mistaken to contradict them If they unhapilie fall out contrarie one to other, the holie Scriptures no where command so to obey God, as activelie to disobey, that is, to rebell against the man that is their King. The Reverend Warners opposition here to the Presbyterians maintaines no such subordina∣tion of the Church unto the state as makes her servile in performance of unjust commands. And where Christ is found ruling in this case. HeSt. Matth. 26. 25. St. Luke 9. 23. bids Saint Peter put up his sword, & all his Disciples to denie themselves, take up their crosse dylie and follow him, When the Presbyterians have as clere a Commission to prohibite festivals, to affront Ambassadous, proclaime fasts at such times when their Kings solemnize feasts, as the Apostles had for the publication of the Gospell, and teaching in the name of their Master that sent them: Let them applie the text in the 5. of the Acts, and (I hope the Reader makes, the incongrui∣tie none of mine) disregard the High Priests commands of a different Religion, and obey God rather then man. The contrarie wayes taken in Scot∣landContrarie∣ie of Com∣mands very frequent in Scotland. by Church and state (so King or Queen may he accounted head or Member of the later) have not been so rare, if the Historie of your foure last Princes be reviewed. Against three of whom Pope Knox personallie and in his Synod made very frequent opposition, which he bragges of in print. I shall not need to number your rebellious Acts and papers against the fourth. In the possibilitie of such cases, which you tenderlie admit, your modestie being great to acknowledge the fallibilitie of Assemblies,
the common rule of humane direction's very good, had it been not onelie know'n by you, but followed. The difference upon disobedience to either is not fairlie repraesented temporal inconveniences in se∣ditious tumults, to the hazard of life, often befalling men by the displeasure of the Church, And by terrour or force a rescue from punishment legallie to be inflicted, contrarie to the good pleasure of the state. Your interdiction of festivals viz. Our Sviours Nativitie to be ob∣served, and Bishops to sit in Parliament, when summon'd by the King, seemes in your sense to implie no contrarietie of command, and areThe Revie∣wers fallacie therefore slighted as impertinent objections. The other two you speake to, but not answer. Not the former but in a fallacie some∣what like that which Logicians call of composition and division. The Magistrates that were to attend the French Ambassadours being not excepted in your indiction of the fast, but included with the people, and yet (as excusable) divided by you in the observance. The truth of Church censure intended can be no calumnie, the Major and Aldermen being cited and convented for their feasting, nor had the processe fallen to ground but through the prudent delayes interposed by the King, I must here put you in minde that your Bre∣thren in Holland indict no fasts but by the Magistrates consent, and your discipline being praetended to be the same, you could not doe it at this time, when the King commanded feasting without coor∣dinating Soveraignities, or which is worse, abolishing his, to or∣daine your owne. In your answer to the later instance, you must cut the tails ofHumble petitions &c full of threats. your humble petitions and remonstrances, which were tipt and turn'd up with defiances and threats, under the notion of portents to the Kings person & his familie; And throw your covenant into the fire which engaged the takers in pursuance of your contrarie commands by op∣posing Acts, and Persons of state too, beyond a declaration of their disli∣ke. The watchman in Ezekiel (whose example you counterfeit, and whose authoritie you abuse) was to warne when God brought the sword upon a land: not to arme nor remonstrate when he sent it out. The fal∣shoodThe Church∣chasing and excommuni∣ting for the late engage∣ment. of your Church-chasing and excommunicating persons in the late enga∣gement, were it any, could at most be sayd but to be antidated by the Bishop, we since daylie conversing with such persons who live not very comfortablie in these parts, yet dare not returne home; And your publike papers ranking them in 4. classes or divisions, excluding them out of places of trust or power, censuring them to sackcloth, banishing, excommunicating all that repent not for their active loyaltie as a sinne. The Bishop chargeth no man with detrac∣ting
from the freedome of the Parliament that engaged them, He onelie anticipates by his answer such  probable praetense. In the place where of since you frankelie give us the advantage of your confes∣sion, in your next you must shew upon what sure grounds you pro∣test, preach, warne, declare against the power of the Kingdome in a free Parliament, in publike Indicatories, and armies, which you con∣fesse you did in your paper May 11. (as 1 take it) 1649. As likewise how your declaring of, became censuring in judgement, and your dissa∣tisfaction transformed into a sentence. The hepes of untruths, when your spectatours wipe their eyes willThe un∣truths are the Revie∣wers. be easilie discerned cast on your side of the way. So that they will not wonder at your falsifying Histories of old-times, when the relation of your latest know'n practices, is by your fierie tongue branded with the ignominie of a lie. The generation you speake of, who keep up their credit according to the rate of too many mens idlenesse or in advertence, can draw no clearer pedegree then from your Synod, whose words can no more weigh with truth in the ballance, then their teeth whence they are lightlie flow'n can with the Silesian boyes en∣dure the touch. CHAPTER. X. No concord between Parliament and Presbyterie. THe harmonie betwixt your Presbyterie and Parliament, when any, is discors concordia, and but still musike at best, such as once was made between Parma and Placentia by the concurrent identitie of the capital leters in their names. So that when their Duke writ himselfe Dux P. P. and no more their ambition was silenced about prioritie in his title. And if we looke any farther into yours, we are encounterd caninā literâ, wish that mastiue leter, which it may be, mysticallie snarles as much against the name, as your power assaults the authoritié of the other. And when you take upon you the writing both at large, your humilitie and Courtship is such as here, ever to give praecedence unto your selves. Your constitution must be look'd upon as no other then a caelestial quintessence. Your end know'n to be compassing a temporall aswell as a spiritual tyrannie, & your daylie practice, subduing, swaying both scepters of Jesus Christs. The Praelatical learning, you see, takes no higher flight then the next
instance to prove the conclusion in hand. And he whose fayth must be forced to credit such unanswerable arguments hath indeed litle or no common sense or reason in him, but mistakes snow to be blacke because he lives in a dungeon, goes upon hot coales, and fceles not his benummed feet toProv. 6. 2. be burnt: the light in him is darknesse because of his evil eye, & quantae tenebr : how great is that darkenesse. S. Matth. 6. 23. What perpetual arrings hath been between you I have otherwhore shewed, which never failed but when you tamper'd with the strings & tuned both instru∣ments to your eare. I see the late engagement often serv'd up is enough a lone to také offThe Rev. eares not for hearing of the late en∣gagement. P. 69:23▪ The 8. desi∣res of the Church nei∣ther just nor necessarie. your stomake; yet that insipide colewort must be set upon your table, while your table contimues a snare to catch your selves withall, and that bill of fare, though but one dish repeted till it choke the rebellious guerts of the Assemblies your paper of eight desires contained 8. very in∣solent demands, in place of that submission which the Parliament sent for, I can not say expected. What justice and necessitie may be in them was not at any time by you, nor by any at that time to be ex∣postulated to the retarding that more just and necessarie designe. If the Parliament counted upon any, it reckoned withall the satisfac∣tion it had render'd, Wherin it had been rather too lavish then close handed, and promis'd more upon the necessitie then thought on, then some conceived in justice or conscience could he performed. Securitie upon oath under hand and seale the Bishop tells you were harder ter∣mes then an Vsurers to a Bankrupt, and it may be you tooke His Majestie for no other, having goten (though by no morgage) his kingdomes in your possession. And knowing what he had contracted with God before, you would not part with them but upon the surest interest of his soul. If the quaestion were not for the thing, that it should seeme you tooke for granted. And then what methodical, and scrupulous tray tours doe you blazon your selves to be, to leave him langui∣shing in a gaole, while the order and some particle of the securitie must be thought an. The qualification of the persons to have the managing of the warre being approved by the Parliament, the highest Court in the Kingdome, no law intimates an Assemblie or Iudicatorie com∣petent to reverseit. So that the Bishop hath sufficientlie inform'd him∣selfe that the knot of the differtnce lies onelie in some bulrush, which youThe Ch. of Scotland hath no li∣bertie to de∣clare against King and Parliament. looke for to litle purpose; And having attentivelie read your publike de∣clarations, drawes out of them no groundlcsse conjecture, but an infalli∣ble assurance that no Historie mentions such Pharisaical Rebells upon the earth. The Warner knowes very well that what you call the libertie of the Church is in truer language the license of the many schismatical hy∣pocrites
that disturbe it; who by long custome of blaspheming God in guilded rhetorike, and a spiritual figure, translating his holie word, but perverting the sense to sinfull ends in publike declarations, have withdraw'n poor people from their dutie to their King into such feares & confoederacies as the prophet Esai had in the place that you cite warning from the Lord with a strong hand, & instructions not to walke in. The three Graces you bragge of had too many sna∣kes dangling about their eares to be mistaken for other then the thre infernal furies which they were Your humilitie was pride and arro∣gancie to the height, attributing more to your private fancies, then to the publike counsels of a free Parliament, the undenied reprae∣sentative of the Kingdome. Your pietie was but the will worship of your owne imaginations that you challeng'd: And your wisdome craf∣tinesse; Iob. 5. 13. where in you will be taken in the end, & by your froward counsel caried headlong to your destruction. The visibilitie of this might encou∣rage the Engagers to run any adventure, rather then to follow you in your wayer. Such of them as fince the disaster have crouched to an acknowledgement of their loyaltie for an errour, are poore Spiri∣ted fooles that have their eyes onelie in the ends of the earth; are never likelieProv. 17. 24. Heb. 11. 39. Ephes. 2. 2. to be in the number of them who obteind a good report through fayth in their sufferings, nor receive the promise, of some beter thing that God had pro vi∣ded for them. Did an Angel from heaven blow his trumpet, and proclai∣me God speaking in your declarations, the Warner and his partie were bound to stop their eares. Or if the Prince of the power of the aire should clothe such wicked language in lightning, or pervert some Boa∣nerges to speake it in thunder, by terrour to worke in children of disobedience, we have Saint Pauls praescript to pronounce a dou∣bleGl. 1.8.9. anathema against him, Accursed, Accursed let him be and in sub∣mission to God in his messenger the Apostle, such men of gallant spi∣rits should we be, as in a Christian constancie or Romane if you will have it, rather to perish with this last breath in our mouthes, then by hearkening to counsels or walking in wayes so palpablie pernicious toLament. 4. 20. Cortradic∣tion between the Revie. margin and text. The lvie was offered to be stop∣ped. Church and state, with the ruine of both let the breath of our nostrils, the Anoynted of the Lord, be taken in their pits. If the margin and text of your following paragraph were not so neare neighbours, in my hast I might chance to have made no comparison, and so escaped the con∣tradicti on between them. No offer to stop the leavie in the one, and oppo∣sition so coldrife and small in the other, will I thinke be reconciled by no logike but that which makes degrees varie species, or argues from the third to the second adject and according to the vulgar proverbe, makes that not to be at all which is litle or nothing to the purpose. To the substance of your answer. By enquirie I finde your oppsition
as hot as your servent zeale and abilities could make it, and if your actions drew in the same yoe with your words, you that sweated it out in earnest be seechments, exhortations, and threats, sate not still to see the effects of your papers, but armed your selves to the worke of retardment, if not to the retracting the designe. Some few lines in a Declaration and warning from the Commission of your General Assemblie, are enough to keep the Bishop from ignorance, & a transscript of them as they lie to discharge him from the malice you impute . . . . We doe earnestlie beseech and exhort all who live in this land, thatMay 11. 1649. as they tender their solemne obligation and oath both by the National Covenant, and by the solemne league & Covenant, & as they love the honour of Iesus Christ and the Gospell . . . . Ny, as they wish to eschew the heavie wrath and indigna∣tion of the Lord, That they doe not give any countenance, nor connivence to these wicked men in their wicked way, much lesse to joyne with them in counsel or in ar∣mes. And because it lies upon us to be faythfull in our station, therefore as we have allreadie given warning unto these men that unlesse they doe speedilie destst from their evil way and repent, that we will proceed against them with the dreadfull sentence of excommunication. . . . if any shall hereafter joine with them, we will be necessitated impartiallie to proceed against them with the highest censures of the Kirke. . . If this be cldrife and small opposition, what tall fellowes are you when you are warme? I Know nothing you could well doe be∣yond it, unlesse with C. Caesar you would be so mad as in Homers language challenge Iupiter to an encounter e m' aneir', e ego se, which you are likelie enough to doe, if it succeeded with him as Seneca Sup∣posed. Non puto parum momenti hanc ejus vocem ad incitandum conjuratorum ani∣mosLib. De Ir∣cap. lr. addidisse. The Armie gotten up so numerous and strong, (which the Commanders thought sooner expedient, and had sooner levied but for you,) was probablie able to have done what service they pro∣fessed; but the version of the hearts of the Church declaring it selfe in dia∣bolical curses and supercilios discouragement, divided the hearts and enfeebled the hands of a faint people. It was a strange sympathie in the hearts of your yeomen that in the midst of their fright made them flee to the same corner of the land. Their consciences are not commonlie of such a tender touch, but when scarified by their Clergie. So that it will b no calumnie to conjec∣ture what spirit gave them wings, and directed their flight to the re∣bellious meeting at Manchlin moor. Their growing number, and abiding there in a bodie for the securitie of their persons, made no partie for, nothing toward the deliverance of the Kings; and their danger being onelie to be forced by the Parliament to goe souldiers into England for that pur∣pose, the quaestion is what violence was therein offered to their con∣science, and, if any, by what law or praecept, divine or humane,
the Assembliecan countenance them in armes, though but in a de∣fensive posture to withstand it? In which had that part of the Armie that sodainly came upon them cut them off, it might have stood for an act of civile justice, more then militarie furie, kept the rest in peace▪ and much conduc'd toward an after securitie to themselves The com∣munion at Mauchlin layd to the publike. Fast appointed in termiis for the apostacie of the Parliament, might occasion some of your Ministers coming thither to as good a purpose as his to the Kirke of St. Andro, who pray'd to Allmightie God, that he would carie through the good cause against all his enemies, especiallie against Kings, Devills and Parliaments. Co∣loured clothes and pistols were no proper accoutrement for yourMinisters in armes. Kirke-men wherein to celebrate the Sacrament of Christian charitie and peace. Nor were they the good instruments with the people to goe away to run away they might be afterward) that had lead them in bands and troupes into the battail. For Presbyterian Scotish Ministers to pro∣test against any rebellion wherein they act, needes no eagle ey'd Par∣liament man to discover it at the bottome as a peice of effronterie veryNot cens. by the Com∣missioners of the Kirke. common among them and proper to their profession, which is very ridiculouslie dissmbled in this case, when diverse of them were taken prisoners, fighting desperatelie for the cause, complain'd of to the Commissioners of the Kirke, who were so farre from inflicting any censure; or giving them admonition, that they approved what they had done, and justified them in the fact. Which I see here you dare not ex professo, but fawlter in your judgement about the mee∣ting, pleading the securitie of their persons as a faire apologie for the yeo∣mens a biding in a bodie, and yet mentioning the Ministers protestation, which is litle beter then a condemnation of their convening & figh∣ting in the field. The Bishops parallel betwixt the Generall Assemblie and Parliament castsS. Pet. 2. 16. v. 13. Presbyterie makes Par∣liaments subject to the Assem∣blie. 2. Book. discipl. 1. ch. the cloake of malicisnesse upon your owne shoulders in the abuse of your libertie, whereby you refuse to submit your selfe to the ordinance of man for the Lords sake, otherwise then as it is ratified in your Synods for when the Presbyterians lay the authoritie of both Courts upon a divine foundation, they make themselves the chiefe corner stone, usurping the proper place of Jesus Christ in the one, and of his anoynted in the other, telling him and all Magistrates (among whom Parliaments are to be num∣bred) he ought to be subject to the Kirke spirituallie and in Ecclesiasticall govern∣ment . . . . that he ought to submit himselfe to the discipline of the Kirke if he trans∣gresse in maters of conscience and Religion. So that when they talke of obedience for conscience sake to their lawfull commands, they take cognizance what is conscience and law, and at their owne arbitement many times oblige subjects on the same principles to rebell, calling this the justifiable
revenge of the Magistrates contempt against the authorite of God resident in them. The Bishop  as not at Ministers that cari themselves a the Ambassadours of Christ, that deliver not more the is in the Com∣mission or instructions they receiv'd; but thinkes they have no priviledge above the Angels, who are not dinantes but ministratesHeb. 1. 14. Ps. 104. 4. spiritus. That they are a  rather to warme indiscreet zeale and devotion, then consume in the fervour of violence and passion. That God rarelie tempers brimstone with the breath of his messen∣gers,Ier. 14. That he sets the time, & names the extraordinarie case, when his words shall be fire in the moues of  prophets, & his people  that it should devoure them. He likes you should judge according to the rule of Scripture, so you follow that rule, and keepe in subjection to good lawes. He commends your caring for life aeternal, not your leaguing and cove∣nanting in order to that for the death temporal of your brethren. He judgeth you according to the rule of Scripture to be shsselic impious that counterfeit a care of life aeternal, whither bloodhirstie Presbyters are never likelie to enter, but have a portion with their fellow hypocrites otherwhere. That make holie Scripture not onelie of private but perverse interpretation, and God the authour of all the wickednesse you act by the authoritie of his word who boast ofIsai. 42. 1. an Ambassie from Christ, when who so blinde as these servants, who so deae as these messengers (you say) he sent? who are lead by a Spirit that doth the workes of the flesh from top to botome menti'd by St. Paul Galat. 4. Who would gull the world out of all but a forme or proper∣tie of religion; who make your selves not Ministers but Masters of Christ, commanding imperiouslie the spirit he sends downe; who make a trade of Scripture, and for wordlie gaine parsel out eternal life to whom you please. The second part of the Bishops parallel, I see, puts you to a stand, andMinisters power with the people dangerous if seditiouslie bent. the quaestion What shall be made? ... argues you some what suspended in your thoughts whether as much should be made of it as you meane, and the people commended for obeying their Ministers (how sedi∣tious soever) more then their Magistrates that command them. If all the power such Ministers have with the people be built on their love to God, what pitie is it that rebellious structure should have such a religious foundation? When it riseth high he is no good states man that doth not demolish it, knowing that what God and conscience constraine , but perswade, to imploy to his good, the Divel without any or with one that's erroneous may tempt them to aedifie to his ruine. It is not a∣misseTh. Capa∣nel. cap. 18. sayd & applied by him that writ of the spanish Monarchie Pri∣mum instrumentum bene imperandi, ling est; secundum verò gladis. The sword is but the left hand instrument in the governing Kingdomes:
The tongue, of the preacher is dextra teibilis, that of the right hand Ps. 45. 5. teacheth terrible things, that by the menace of death, which the sword can not reach to, keepes subiects in obedience to their Soveraignes. Therefore when once it hath a power with the people such as that of St.Ipsis Cardi∣nalibus and . P. max∣ormidabilis suit, dire∣mita aut u∣nyt princi∣pes & sub∣ditos suos ar∣bytratu. Ps. 12. 4. Bernard it had need be endued with the spirit of Saint Bernard, for there is a tongue. Quae conteris spiritum, the perversenesse wherein is a breach in the spirit Prou▪ 1. 4. And the proud me in the Psalmist, pro∣mise themselves a victorie over Princes by the tongue, e will prae∣vle Who because they are the mn that ought to speake, just like you, denie all supremaci. Their first language is this. Quis dominus, Who is Lord over usi. The Politician I spake of hath a discourse worth your reading, wherein he shewes you how Mahomet stirred up the peo∣ple against Heraclius the Emperour. He sayth as much for Calvin your protoplast, which whatsoever may be apologiz'd for him, I am sure is inexcusable in Knox and you that are the workemanship of his hands. This made Charles the good so prudent and resolute, who being become too unhapie in nothing more then in suffering your Babel building to be finished in Scotland, when he beheld the like workeEk▪ Bas: cap. 17. of your fellow Rebell Architects in England, would not exclude him∣selfe out of doores, nor part with that power whereby he might best restraine the seditious exorbitances of Ministers tongs, who with the keyes of heaven have so farre the keyes of the peoples hearts as they praevaile much by their oratorie to shut in and let out both peace and loyaltie. While the Warner scoffes at your threats his meaning is to have deluded people to scorne them and know in your words that the thundrings of (the Scotish aswell as) that Roman An∣ti-ChristSc. Liturg. p. 87. are but vanitie and inde. To tell them in a figure that hell and death are no more in your keeping then the gaole in the prisoners that walkes abroad in the streetes with his shaels about him, but must render himselfe at the end of his covenant: The Praelates proclamation ofV. 18. such Atheise as this is a printed copie out of the original writ by the fingar of God in the 10. S. Matth. Whereby is to be banished out of the hearts of the people all feare of them which kill the bodie but are not able to kill the soul, for all their kirke-bulls and censures that threaten it▪ To the quaestion you close with I answer, That Satan hath driven all∣readie the first instruments of his Republike in Britaine into a very narow roome in the North, where Cromwell and other his more usefull in∣struments at praesent, are likelie to keep them, till, if God neither convert nor by a miracle otherwise confound them his worke being done he may lash them with whips of their owne making, topt' with Serpents heads, and Scorpions tailes, and at last deliver them to the worme that shall not die, cast them into the fire that shall not be quenched,Is. 66. 24
and make their stinking▪memorie  aborring unto all flesh. The third part of the parallel hath been in every particular justified, and were more instances requisite to evidence the truth, they might be a numberlesse number of such imputations as you are never able to refute. The charge which the Bishop subjoines is not so poore but that it enri∣chethNo in hae∣ren right in Courts to nominate Commisio∣ners for in∣tervalls. his proofe with the best argument of your spiritual suprema∣cie. The daylie practice of the Parliaments of Scotland, such as have been of late and heretofore when your Reformation tooke place, constitu∣tes no right, confirmes no power of nominating commitees for intervalls. Nor is there any inhaerent right in Courts to nominate interreigning Commissioners but by Royal favour in such as (except their intertearming vaca∣tions) are perpetual and standing, not call'd by fits ad placitum Domi∣ni Regis, no not in the Parliament it selfe. Which (to omit other proofes) was the ground of this clause in their Act of oblivion 1641. That the peace to be now established may be inviolablie observed in all time to come, It is agreed that some shall be appointed by His Majestie and the Parliaments of both Kingdomes, who in the interim betwixt the sitting of the Parliaments may be carefull that the peace now hapilie concluded may be continued &c. . . . And it is declared that the power of the Commission shall be restrained to the articles of peace in this treatie; As likewise of that fatal Act for perpetuating the last blacke Parliament in England, which had probablie e'r been re∣quired if it might have nominated a Committe of state (that idol to which it now sacrificeth, in bloud) to sit till the next summons upon any inhaerent right in that Court. For the Iudicatories of your Church. I am tired with telling you that no law of the Kingdome doth priva∣tivé authorize them to meet, their Assemblie being illegal without the King or his Commissioner, neither of which are to come upon course or at call. And their power of appointing Committees hath as often been quastion'd (and how often is that?) as it ever was executed with∣out or against the positive consent or command of the King or Queen for the time. And trulie the committees in the times, of your late troubles were the Ambuscdo wherein you lay closelie in wait to disturbe both Chrch and state, while your armed bodie in Parliament retired. Whose frequent meetings were forced no otherwse then by the incessant zeale in their Members to persecute Religion and loyaltie. Whose diversion from their particular charges (for attendance on the publike rebellion) was join'd with so great facherie and expense to fullfill their lusts at other mens cost, Which with all their heart they will in Sempiternm con∣tinue, if feare of their neckes make them not at length slip out of the collar: or their grey haires and withered carkasses (after many a surfeit) call them not to some other account, or their Chiefe in
whose service they made these necessarie meetings pay them not their necessarie wages in pertusum sactulu, into a bag full of holes, whichHaggai 1. 6. shall never be filled, no more then was the measure of the iniquitie they acted. CHAPTER XI. The Presbyterie cruel to particular persons. IF King and Parliament be (as they may very well) incenced against theThe Presby∣terie a ty∣rannie over the conscien∣cies of the∣people. Presbyterie at fight of the Bishops reason, more then out of sympa∣thie with him in his anger, his warning hath taken in part the effect that he wished and aim'd at. Yet in vaine shall they vindicate all just authoritie to themselves, if the people be kept in a servile obser∣vance of a tyrannous discipline, & pay their blinde obedience to the Kirke. Therefore the Warner excedes no bounds in his rage, but en largeth his bowels of pitie to them, who for the most part having disarmed their soules of that judgement which should dictate their freedome from Church censures upon acts indifferent, or sinfull in an in∣feriour degree, their due submission to an arraignment of thoughts onelie in the Court of a poenitent conscience, or hereafter before the tribunal of heaven, where sits the onelie Iudge of hearts, the discerner of perverse inclinations; expose themselves naked to the boundlesse furie of mercilesse Reviewers; to the sharpe scrutinie of malicious Inquisitours; to the arbitrarie sentence of most sinful Iud∣ges, and therefore most suspicious surmisers. The Bishop mentionsCensures upon slight grounds. no faults but such as toward which your Discipline mentions no fa∣vour limited to the privacie of the care. Nor yet doe all those give occasion for that which you take to shew the infinite extent, the interminate divisibilitie of your power. In the booke that he cites is the greatestScot. Lit. censure of the Church praescribed, and more methodicallie then mercifullie shewed how a small offence or sclaunder may justlie deserve ex∣communication by reason of the contempt and disobedience of the offender. Pag. 60. And lest any should thinke that the offenses named are not so hainous as that of the Corinthians incest (whence you take your paterne and Saint Pauls authoritie for your processe) you give such to understand that mercie and favour may rather be granted to any other sinne then to the contempt of wholesome admonitions, and of the just and law full ordinances of the Church▪ Pag. 80. Which if (as you say) it never procured the smallest censure, you have been
a great deale too profuse of your pardons. Where you professe your obligations so great to the performance of the commandement of God. Or, if you thinke it not such may be justlie required by anyRom. 8. 15. Erastian to render a reason, why that ignis fatuus, that foolish spirit of bondage walkes in your Discipline from generation to generation,Prov. 1. 26. while they laugh at the calamitie you threaten, and mocke when your feare co∣meth upon the people. But he that knowes you will never mistake you for such meeke lambes in this mimike disguise of lions, when he findes you aswell preying as roaring. And how any, the most cha∣ritable man will have just cause to complaine of your rigour, let your aequitable comparers judge observing with me but one passage of multitudes in your forme, that one which speakesSpiritual crueltie i the prayers of Presby∣ters. Sc. Lit. p. 196. you the most savage petitioners that ever invocated the name of Christ, whom you humblie beseech (for feare his mercie that is written to be above all his owne workes, should be above that of yours, the in∣humanitie you are about) that whatsoever in his name you pronounce in earth (meaning the sentence of excommunication, though but for susspicions and jealousies, if not confessed to be as real faults as any peevish brother shall construe them) he Would ratifie the same in heaven. Which can not be paralleld in the Turkish Alcaron, nor among all the superstitions rites and cruel offices of the heathen per formed to the most bloudie, most insatiate of divels, who doth nothing else1. Pet. 5▪ 8, but goe about seeking whom he may devoure. Where as if this be your slack∣nesse wherewith sectaries charge you, which you are sorie you are not able to refute. it should seem you are sorie there are no more hells then one, no pluralitie of soules in your single Impaenitents, no imaginable pro∣traction of punishment beyond aeternitie for the execution of yourOur Sabbath recreations shorst of those in other Re∣formed Curches. censures. The Sabbath recreations, which the Bishop sayth are voyd of scandal, are likelie to be, at most but those mention'd in the booke of toleration so much decried by the brethren of your faction; a∣mong which were no stage playes, nor, in my memorie, any allowed to be acted on Sundays, and so not frequented by his friends. The greater license on the Sabbath Krmasses you slide over without any of that zeale, which His Lordship prophesieth, though your selfe have been a spectatour of it in these Countreys, So that in your owne words (which I am a frayd will too often be mistaken for mine, and bring upon me the imputation of a sloven) If the Apoeme in your lo∣west gut had not chang'd places with your braines your words had been wiser and your unsavourie breath (which you too often eructate) somewhat sweeter. The debate among some of your sect. Whether in Scotland or no, which is not expressed, about starch and cuffes, may very well passe upon the credit of the Warner that asserts it, & your putting him upon the poofe makes me guesse you are not in a readinesse to
denie it. Howsoever we know the curses of the Laundrie have beenTrivial de∣bates and▪ articling a∣gainst ha∣bits. through two or three descents a traditional legacie to the brethren of your order in England for the counterscufes they made about the former. And the debate on the later hath produc'd an injunction to your Societie somewhere else to cast away those litle idolatrous ragges, which could scarce be taken for any reliques of Rome, & their gloves too, it may be upon better reason, let the cleanlinesse of their hands might beget a jealousie of some superstition in wa∣shing them before their publike officiating, on their unhandsome dis∣tributing of the word. What litle latitude of discretion you allow & how your superiours must be your slaves or pupils in the attire aswell of their bodies as sules is evident by your preaching and articling against the appa∣rell even of the Ladies of Honour & that waited upon your QueenesKno Hist. Majestie three sundrie dayes when the rode in great state and solem∣nitie to the Tobuith in Parliament time Ao. 1563. Of the second oppression, which the Bishop objects you give up a veryThe same fault under a different formalitie not to be∣twice puni∣shed. imperfect account, leaving the greatest weight to lie as heavie as it can upon the head of your Synods in calling the Magistrate fool for his mercie, and knave for his biberie, which you onelie suspect because he is not as rigid as your selves; In enjoyning publike satisfa∣ction after the Defendant hath given it at an assize &c. What you bring is litle to the purpose, and, if it were, hath been packt away with its answer long a goe Wherewith yet if gou will not be satis∣fied, you must be set to reviewe Erastus and answer him. When he tells you, of old no notice was taken of your double formalitie viz of crime and scandal, so as to subject the delinquent, for the same fact, to the censure of two distinct Courts, Civile and spiritual. He callsLib. De Fi. & Op. cap. 2. ad raucedinem usque▪ for one text or example in Scripture to justifie it; He proves out of St. Austin &c. That the Church used the spiritual sword onelie when the temporal was not in Christian hands. He puts you to make good your  consequence. That if the Magistrate doth not his dutie, an Assemblie, Court is required to constraine him▪ or as your Liturgie speakes, to admonish him, and that too, as the Bi∣shop urgeth when he hath discharg'd it according to his IudgementOffenders quitted to be admitted to the H. Sa∣crament without publike sa∣tisfaction in the Church. and conscience. From your proceedings of this kinde His Lordship drawes 3. observations, which you cannot denie, and yet dare not acknowledge, and therefore say nothing; but worke in a whimzie of his excursions upon his owne friends, not any of whom approve the injustice, the irrationalitie, much lesse imitate the cueltie of your practice. The Popish Praelates are not so neare allied unto the Doctour, nor doe they need to be taken into his protection: The English are, and can vindicate themselves against you for admitting to
the holie tub▪ with signes of repentance, without Ecclesiastike pub∣like satisfaction▪ murtherere that are either quit by their jurie, or have their pardon sealed by the King, whore that either are spared out of hope of amendment, or have had the whip at Bridewell, and theeves burn'd in the hand at Newgate or sau'd by the benefit of their Clergie; And this upon beter grounds then the Presbyters denie them communion with those, who as much as they make up their mouthes, dare not take up a stone to cast at them. The Doctor knowes his owne meaning▪ and plainelie speakes it. And they must be very igno∣rant or worse that are not of his minde, or rather of St. Pauls which I take to be this. That when a man shall without visible hypocrisie1. Cor. 11. say, be hath examin'd himselfe, he is not to be againe examin'd by the Classe, but may eate of that bread, and drinke of that cup, That when he hath judged himselfe, he should not be judged; That when he is judg'd, he is chastened of the Lord, not condemn'd and executed by the Kirke. Your in∣terrogatorie or argument a minore ad majus in case of Scandal is defec∣tive untill you render a just definition of scandal applicable to all where in your discipline doth instance; After which having made your scale of degrees, your antecedent requires your proofe viz. That small scandals are to be purg'd away by that repentance thatThe Scotish practice tou∣ching Ex∣communica∣tion litle le∣se rigid then their Canon. here is in quaestion between us. Had I ever read of any Presbyter in Scotland what I have of abian once Bishop of Rome. That he was chosen by the extraordinarie descent of a dove upon his head. I might charitablie hope sor some spirit of meekenesse among the bre∣thren of the Discipline, and have some litle credulitie that the want of gall in any one of the number might qualifie the exuberance and overflowing biternesse in the rest; But when I meet with such tra∣gike Histories of their implacable furie, and see every where their unjust judgement running downe like a torren, and their unrighteous rigour like a mightie streame; I can put litle trust in the slender banke of Master Baylies professions in behalfe of his Presbyterie, from whom ex∣pect as litle mercie as truth, and as litle Christian righteousnesse as peace. The Warner can not be ignorant of your Scotish wayes, while his eyes are open to reade them in your bookes, or his eares to heare them in very credible reports. He that lives in Scotland, and never seeth the exe∣cution of that censure, must betake himselfe to the mountaines, & con∣verse in some corner with those creatures, who know as litle of ex∣communicating by, as they ever did of communicating with a Church. For the 47. yeares halcion dayes that you have seen (of which from your birth which you so superstitiouslie mention you must give us leave to abate at least one or two▪ as praegnant in knowledge and as quicke an Intelligencer as you could be in your cradle, and about
30. of 40. more, wherein the curst blacke cowes had short hornes, the Presbyterian severitie being regulated by the Bishops, who ca∣ried the badge of clemencie aswell as innocencie on their armes▪ the great citie you liv'd in must be taken for the onelie bright Mercie seate in your Countrey, while the sun of righteousnesse did never arise otherwhere, but turn'd his face away from it as a land of darkenesse, fullPs. 74. 21. of cruel hibitations. As touching the two censures you acknowledge, had the profanesse in the papist, and the horrible scandt in the Prlates been priviledg'd as much in the punishment with a proxie, as, they say, the more true and more horrible scandal in a brher of the Com∣mission, the rod of that furie had passed upon the backes of the fooles in your Citie; as for the lustie Presbyters delinquencie (I have heard) your excommunication was executed upon the Nodie-Innocents in his parish. If you goe no farther then Saint Pauls cand 2. Thes. 3. 14. You should denounce no publike excommunication in the Church, but diates epistoles semeiouthai, by private leters signifie his fault. You should have no companie nor familiaritie with him that he may be ashamed, not forbid every man to sell him bread, that he may be sterved. You should admonish him as a brother, not count him asSc. Lit. p. 100. Master Iohn Guthri Bishopp of Murcay. The follo∣wing in con∣venients to be charged rather upon the Church then state. an enemie, commanding him to be reputed as accursed & delivered to the devil. Much lesse should you arrogate the praerogative of God, if not a greater, in visiting the sinne of the father upon the children, such it may be as hate you not, denying them baptisme till they come to be of age &c. And, to shew what good Angels you are, after sentence pronounced, you dismisse not the Congregation before they have sung with you the 100. Psalme, a Psalme of exultation whereby as much as may be, you rejoyce at the confusion of a sinner. Nor is your reserve of litle kindnesse very constant in permitting the ex∣communicate the companie of them that are ied by natural bonds unto him, when the sharpenesse of your censure cut' these bonds, with-held this indulgence from Master Iohn Guthrie Bishop of Murray, to whom, when he lived in Angus you denied the comfort and conversation of his brother though a preacher of a parish thereabout. For the inconveniences that follow, how powerfull hath been the in∣fluence of the Church upon the State in such Acts of Parliament as are made consequential to their Acts of Assemblies may be guessed by the frequent servile submission to the tyrannie of their papers. In the Parliaments where your Princes were ever praedominant it can not be thought they would ratifie an Act so destructive to their owne strength in the diminution of their subjects, as to set the Qui a tempore quo ut lagatus est caput grit lupi∣num, ita quod ab om∣nibus inter fici posit & impuné Bracton. heads of wolves upon the shoulders of men, and for such trivial faults as the Bishop mentions antecedent to your censure, with le∣ters
of horning expose them to be worried by dogges. For this crueltie may your Church be deservedly challenged, and that by Proelates, who gave no such customarie allowance to thier officials to excommunicate as ap∣peares by the caution in the Canon 1571. Nullus horum, nec Cancella∣rius, nec Commissarius, nec Officialis in cognitione causarum procedes usque ad serendam sententiam excommunicationis, nisi tantum in causis instantiarum. And in the Canon 1604. If the delinquent made his appearance, and after processe was to be censured the official was not to pronounce the sentence but the Bishop nullam ejusmodi sententiam pronunciari volums praeterquam per Episcopum &c. Nor were the civile inconvenients like those after leters of horning. And how easilie all for great crimes, was commuted for, your brother Didoclave complaineth at large. Where as you run againe from the severitie in your lawes to the clemen∣cie in your practice (though that be no answer to the Bishop who presseth upon your Canon) your diverse late yeares crueltie, which still is continued confutes you in the face of the world. In which if your sentence tooke place in heaven as it doth to their confusion on earth, so many have payd the price of their soules for observance of the first & fift Commandements, their dutie to God & obedience to their King. Your parenthesis that hookes in the greatnesse of sinnes is convict by the slight peccadilloe forementioned. And the length of your processe shall be cut short by one instance in the forenamd Bishop Guthrie, who was never so much as admonish'd by a brother, nor summond by a messenger unlesse to yeild up his house to Rob. Mon∣roe, being caried to Edenburgh not to have trial, but to heare that sentence had passed upon him before he came. In the case of fugitives your Discipline makes no distinction notCrueltie to∣ward fugi∣tives. arbitrarie between the contumacious and timerous. And he that stands to your account shall come short of his reckoning on mercie, if your flying rowle can reach his soul at a distance aswell as to be sure it shall consume the timber and stones of his house thats at hand.
CHAPTER XII. The Presbyterie a burthen to the Nobilitie, Ministrie, and all Orders whatsoever. YOu know what Constantine sayd concerning the Arians. . . .The Pres∣byterians as outra∣gious as the Arians. Bryehatai epipriusae ten odonta Rescript ad Arium & Arian. Christe, Christe, Kyrie, Kyrie, ti depote hems to lesterion hosemeran titroske He complaind that when their hainous crimes whereof they were accused had wounded their heads, and the deformitie of Shame spread over their faces, their violent boldnesse stood fiercelie in op∣position to the truth, They wept not in Sorrow, but roar'd in mad∣nesse with a grinding of their teeth. The Presbyterians I see by many passages in this chapter want neither impudence nor rage to outface and raile as much as any haeretikes whatsoever, when once their discipline is touched to the quicke. The Praelatical malice seemes no way exorbitant by this supplement of the Bishops, wherein his just in∣dignation chaceth all the remaining eccentrike motions of these pla∣nets, these starres that wander from the fixed beauties in the firma∣ment of the Church. If you can but finde patience, or your stomake will serve you to returne to your owne vomit and licke up your lan∣guage the aire will be cleansed which was become unfavouri onelie by the uncomelinesse of your speach. The Nobilitie and Gentrie in allPresbyterie more oppres∣sive to the Nobilitie and Gentrie the Praelacce. parts of Britaine have had too long and unhapie experience of the difference between the fatherlie counsels or friendlie correc∣tion of Bishops (whom Religious Princes in honour of their function have dignified with the title of Barons, and priviledge of Peeres) and the unsufferable insolencies of Presbyters, whose peacockes tai∣les that traine it daylie in the vulgar dust, and sweep together the ras∣kalitie of the people, are poudlie spread and fanned in their faces. Those in England, (which were none of the best) that refused no hazard to shake off that easie yoke which was layd upon them by the hands and institution of Christ, have broke their neckes in their hast, & you see their honour buried in the grave. The Scotish Nobilitie that lead them the way, having serv'd allmost a double apprentiship at the trade, alas groane for their freedome yet dare not aske it from him, whose mercie they feare must not be so injurious to justice, as after so many rebellions and murders especiallie that unpardonable
parricide) to redeem them from bondage and to quit the for feit of their lives and estates. Therefore they chuse rather (unhapie choyce between necessitie and nothing) to renew their slaverie, Were the British Bishops se downe againe and (which they may be in beter earnest then you meane it) well wared in their repaired sees, as they would looke to receive a filial respect, so they would doubtlesse re∣pay a paternal Christian care of the Nobilitie and Gentrie in their charge; Those that heretofore did not (if any did not) had no na∣tures nor principles befitting their dignities, and till they have changed what they had for such 'tis pitie, if they survive, they shovld be reen∣stated. You should doe well to name those that set their feet on the neckes of the greatest Peeres, but withall to set downe how long they could keep their footing there when a just appeale had been made to the capital power that was above them. If the publike too scandalous li∣cense of any Peere, how great soever, receiv'd at their mouthes a friendlie rebuke; If after that his untractable confidence in sinne some legal restraint or fatherlie chastisement at their hands; when Gods impartial and irrespective commandements are alter'd; when Christian lawes that are consonant repeal'd, they may be then, & not till then discharg'd of this dutie, and visited by Master Baylie (when he shewes his commission) for their arrogance in the exercise of any oppression or tyrannie in their Courts.The Revie∣wers con∣terfeit of Presbyterie inverted. In the pretie peice that followes Master Baylie hath play'd the part of Pauson the painter in Plutarch, and artificiallie draw'n the Presbyterian horse in his ful career, giving as he thinkes every limme its due proportion to grace him in that posture; But when, with Pausons customer, we turne the table and lay the beast on his backe, his designe is spoyl'd, and that uglie spectacle of a founder'd jade drawes contempt and laughter from all judicious passengers that behold it. That every small Congregation in Scotland can furnish your El∣dershipsWisdome pietie, and learning not so common in Elder∣ships. The Nobi∣litie & Gen∣trie abused when chosen Elders. with wise, pious, and learned men by the dozen, will never be credited till we get some Historical assurance that when all good parts, pietie, and prudence were divorced from Canaan Athens & Lacedaemon they made a voyage to Scotland to court the wilde af∣fections of the Presbyters in the North. For the double portion of discretion and learning in your Clas∣sical Presbyterie, which drawes in by fifteens the Nobilitie & Gentrie you runne the adventure of losing a beter inheritance, if you take St. Pauls to meane that in the leter (as you sometimes tell us when you are angrie with Court and our Academical Clergie) Not many wisemen . . . . not many noble 1. Cor. 1. 26. But it is in truth your owne
carnal wisdome not so much to adde worth, as to arrogate power to, and make absolute the authoritie of your Consistorie, that in other mens names you may Lord it over not onelie the Common people but the Senate as he told some of your kindred that had searchedSchulting Steinwich Hierarch Anacris: Lib. 2. Deut. 22. 10. Doctours at law more fit judges then unstudied Nobles or Gentlemen. every secret corner in your spiritual house. Consistorium ut dominari possit Senatui asciscit pro senioribus Consules, Senatores & Optimates. . . . Where if persons of qualitie be wanting to complete your number, you goe to plow with an oxe and an asse, yoke a Count and a Cobler together, while your prickeard Pastour keepes the goad in his hand to quick en their dull pace and drive them into Rebellious Covenants▪ and so to their shame and destruction. The Iudge in our Officials Court is to be no petie mercinarie lawyer, but a Doctour that hath approved his skill in our Civile lawes before one of our learned universities, & thereby sup∣posed to have beter abilities to judge then any Nobleman, Gentle∣man, Burgesse, one or more, except some select persons who by stu∣die may have attained to some excellence in that facultie, where with neither by birth nor education they are know'n to be ordinarilie qualified, unlesse Dame nature in Scotland hath some faeminine moldsin every parish for your Elders, or some Seraphical fathers to breed their children by the rod or institution of the Spirit. But to returne to our Doctour. From his single sentence appeale may be made to a Court of Delegates consisting of a number the most learned, and in humane opinion the most up right law yers in the land. Which can be taken for no miserable reliefe, being the highest Court constituted by the authoritie of the King where if not His Majestie in person, his immediate Commissioners are Iudges. Your twice a yeare Synods seem somewhat unnecessarie if intendedSynods ot to besummo∣ned to recei∣ve lay ap∣peales. principallie for receiving appeales, your Classical Presbyteries con∣sisting of persons (as you praetend) of such sinceritie & honour, & somewhere (as I remember) Didoclave tells us they have litle worke which, if well examin'd, hapeneth not so much by reason of the aequitable proceedings in inferiour judicatures, as from the assu∣rance which persons oppressed have to meet with the same measure from the same men that are the Members of your Synods, who know well enough how to gratifie one another in the mutual ratification of the particular sentences pass'd before. The Primitive Synods found other worke, praeserving in their Provinces the puritie of doctrine & uniformitie in practice, trusting Bishops in their Dioce∣ses except in singular cases with the censures of persons & redresse of grievances. Yet whatsoever convenience may be in it our Episcopal twice a yeare visitation may parallel. If the chiefe Noblemen &c have decisive voyces in your Synods, they gaine that priviledge by their birth
or estates to neither of which is inseparably annexed wisdome, pieti & learning, the three gifts or spirits you require in your Iudges. How farre private instructions and interests praevaile with your Presbyte∣ries in their elections to exaucto rate all the good qualifications in the competition of Candidates, the records of your Edenburgh Ta∣bles at the begining of this Rebellion can justifie: Though were their Honourable heads gaged and concluded capacious to hold no lesse then a tunn of wisdome & learning, and their armes clasped upon the embrace of the whole sisterhood of zeale, vertue, and grace, with all other abilities requisite to your Elders, your Presbyteries full approbation and choyce could not authorize them to suffrage in a Synod, whereto of old they had no admission, but as in the Se∣cond Councel of Orange, when sent thither by the King. I shall not insist upon the comparison or disparitie between them & inferiour Civile Court Judges, in whom no parts are wanting to the execution of their place in whose choyce the Canon of their institution is ob∣served.Collusion & violence in the choyce of Members for the As∣semblie. All hopes of redresse by appeale from your Synods to a Ge∣neral Assemblie are crush'd in the shell by your underhand violence in election of Members, and praelimitation of them that are chosen in their votes. You remember the seven private directions sent to your Presbyteries before the Assemblie at Glasgow 1638. the fourth of which was. That such as are erroneous in doctrine or scandalous in life, be praesentlie processed that they be not chosen Commissioners, and if they shall hapen to be chosen by the greater part, that all the best affected both Ministers and Elders protest, and come to the Assemblie to testifie the same. By this tricke you not onelie praejudg'd or praecondemn'd the legal freedome in choyce, but caus'd to be process'd all suspected to be of a different sense from that which you praedesign'd or praescrib'd to the Assemblie. Thus the Presbyterie of Edenburgh put very many of their Ministers un∣derMaster Da∣vid Michel▪ Laird of Dun. L. Car∣naegie. processe, begining with Master David Michel, their procee∣ding against whom His Majesties Commissioner could not get defer∣red untill the meeting of the Assemblie. Thus the Laird of Dun cho∣sen Lay Elder for the Presbyterie of Brechen by the voyce but of one Minister and a few Lay Elders, was accepted, & the Lord Car∣naegie a Covenanter too, but somewhat more moderate, more law∣fullie chosen by the voyces of all the rest was rejected. There was another paper of instructions dated August 27. 1638. which is mors in olla, the Collaquintada that spoyles all the pottage you bring us in this paragraph, the Second of which is this, Order must be taken that none he chosen ruling Elders but Covenanters and those well affected to the businesse, so that parts for judgement, wisdome, pietie &c are no considerable quali∣ties in your Members of Assemblies, when the Covenant and good
inclinations to the businesse (of rebellion) can be found though but in Ideots & Atheists. The multitude of Burgesses & Gentlemen is so greatWhy so ma∣ny Burges∣ses & Gen∣tlemen. to some such good intent as this, that you may praeponderate the Parliament in your laike votes, and anticipate any just exception they can make against your Acts. The ground of their admission in your first reformation was a defect of Clergie, which, when once supplied, had for 40. yeares possessed all the places till exchange was made at your Glasgow null Assemblie to doe the worke in hand. The prime Nobilitie are not allwayes the men, but such among them as areThe laitie to have no decisive voyce. first in popular opinion, and for that in your favour. Your choyce of them is many times illegal, when to serve your turnes you call them from one Presbyterie to another. Yet when all is done, you can pleade no praecedent from antiquitie for any more then a decla∣rative consent, no definitive sentence no decisive voyce, the subscrip∣tions in the Ancient Councels, distinguishing the Clergie and Laitie in this maner. Ego N. definiens subscripsi. Ego N. consentiens subscripsi. Those that at any time had greater priviledge, (if the words cited by your Bishop of Brechen must needs give it them) Gloriosissimi edicunt & Glo∣riesissimiPerth Pro∣ceed. Iudicos dixreunt, were special Commissioners sent from the em∣perours not from any Presbyteries, as he tells you, and more to this purpose which you may answer, as likewise what the Reverend Bi∣shops objected in their Declinatour, about Theodosius the yonger, Pulcheria the Emperesse, & Martinius in the fourth General Coun∣cel of Chalcedon. Master Andrew ▪Ramsey undertoke an hard taskeMaster An∣drew. Ram∣sey. upon the top of his stool offering to prove the lawfulnesse of Lay El∣ders by Scripture, Antiquitie, Fathers, Councels, & the judgement of all the Reformed Churches. And therefore, when His Majesties Commissioners offered to bring one into the pit that should encoun∣ter him, the cocke crowed no more, and, with the Brethrens good liking the controversie ceased. Till afterward, on good occasion, a Member offering to prove there was no such thing in the Christian world before Calvins dayes, the Moderatour learnedlie confutedE. Argile. The King or his Commis∣sioner hath litle power in Assem∣blies Pro∣test of Gen. Ass. Nov. 28. & 29. 1638. him, saying, His father while he liv'd was of another minde. The E. Ar∣gile, who was surprized, as he sayd, at the sodain rupture of this Assemblie, held the Members a litle while by the eares with his argument of con∣venience, telling them. He held it fit the Assemblie should consist of Lay∣men aswell as Churchmen; Take this with you. Your Assemblie Mini∣sters are chosen by the lay Elders your Moderatours some times are laymen, a course not justifiable by law, praecedent, or reason. The Kings Majesties person, or in his absence his high Commissioner is there onelie (you tell him) to countenance, not vote in, your meetings, and proesides in them for exernal order, not for any intrinsecal power. So that when you
goe on ▪calmelie in your businesse he findes litle to doe without Do∣mitians flie-flap, of more use by farre in a summer Synod then a Scepter among you which you often times wrest out of his hand, and continue your meetings after he hath dissolv'd them. You can denie him or his commissioner the sight of publike papers brought into the Court▪ which libertie the meanest subject may challenge.)Nov. 28. sess. 7. E. Rothes. And ▪when he hath any thing to object against suppositions, or, at best suspicious Registers, the E. Rothes can tell him boldlie in your names he must speake it praesentlie if at al, and because he doth not you wait no longer; but, pro imperio, vote them to be authentike. Besi∣de, to deminish as well the Kings state as authoritie▪ you send As∣sessours, or Assistants to your Elders, and invest them with power aequivalent to his Councel. This meeting thus disordered sits too long by a moneth when no more, and Assembles, too often when butNecessitie of appeale. Exod. 23. 2. Prov. 10. once in a yeare. The number of such Members no more hindereth an ap∣peale, then a multitude of Malefactours can sentence a necessitie of becoming their followers in doing evil. Their wisdome is such as his to whom, a wiser man tells us, it is a sport to doe mischief. Their eminencie like Sauls, head and shoulders higher then the com∣mon people in Rebellion, And their honour somewhat like Abso∣loms mule, beares them up to the priviledge of the great oake in the wood2. Sam. 18. 9. for their hanging in beter aequipage then their fellowes. So that be∣side the justice theres an absolute necessitie of appeal to the Parliament, or in that to the King from himselfe to himselfe, who sits there asPap. of 10. prop. before M. Hamil arriv. 1638. Why Knigts and Burges∣ses so nume∣rous. supreme, here in no other capacitie but of your servant. Which is farre more justifiable and necessarie then vour appeale from both Parliament and Assemblie to the bodie of the people, which I tell you againe is the final appeale you make when Assemblies are not modell'd to vour minde. The number and qualification of Knights and Burgessesis therefore large and as great in your Assemblie as Parliament, that your power may be as large and great in the State as the Church, and the Nobilitie sit in one by elec∣tion, because they sit in the other by birth, and so in a condition to unite the counsels of both according to the instructions of some few Presbyters that by Sycophantike insinuations have got possession of their soules and by their Spiritual Scepter dominion of their suf∣frages. Headie zeale, craft, and hypocrisie got in commission or Covenant together, we finde by experience can fit them to judge in Ecclesiastike affaires, when age, wisdome and pietie are sentenc'd. If ihe hundred choyce unparliamentarie pastours make up the oddes of some absent Noblemen, it should seem you and the Nobilitie are even pa∣res cum paribus, Peeres alike in your honourable Assemblie. Which
they must not disdaine, since Christ himselfe. I meane not his A∣noynted, (that you take to be out of quaestion) goes but for a single Elder or Moderatour at most. So Cartwright and his Demonstra∣tour cajoles them together, when he sayth, If they (the Princes andLib. 3. de∣monst. c. 14. Nobles) should disdaine to joine in consultation with poore men, they should dis∣daine not men but Christ himselfe. So that Christ being in his name made your Assembly Praesident or Prolocutour, the King in his Commis∣sioner your protectour, the Nobilitie your awfull subvoters or suffraganes, I see nothing wanting can conciliae a tyrannie to your Pres∣byterie, nor keep your foot of pride from trampling as basely as may be upon the people. But not to forget at last what you set in the front as first to be answered. The Presbyterian course, as you, or I more trulie, have describ'd it, is not much more readie then the Praelatical, because the benefit of appeale is to be had ordinarilie but once or twice in a yeare; not much more solide, because most of your Iudges can reasonablie be thought neither good Civilians nor Casuists, not much more aequitable, because, as you order them, many more of the laitie then Clergie. In the second hurt your Nobilitie sustaine, the Bishop lookes not upon the judgement of foreigne Reformed Devines (you doe not say of Chur∣ches) nor yet on their practice, which I have know'n some time a great deale too sawcie with Princelie Patrons, but upon the aequity of the thing, upon the priviledge our Nobles in England enjoy, & the right yours have to the same by many yeares praescription and the lawes of your land. The first will be found if the original be searched. The right ofThe original of patrona∣ge. patronage being by the due gratitude or favor of Kings & Bishops reserved to such as either built Churches or, endowed them with some considerable revenue, as likewise for the encouragement of others to propagate meanes and multiplie decent distinct places for Christian conventions. Hoc singulari favore sustinetur, ut allectentur, Laici,Coras. Glas. invitentur, & inducantur ad constructionem Ecclesiarum. The exercise hereof in Iustinian is expressed by the termes, Epilegein or onomazein, which signifies an addiction or simple nomination, to stand good or be null'd at the ust pleasure of the Bishop, and therefore accounted noTemporale spiritualli annexum. Altar. ▪ spiritual act in the Patron, but a temporal annexed to that which is spiritual in the Bishop, and therefore not simonaical as your brother Didoclave would have it. Nor is there that absurditie he mentions of arrogating to one what belong to all the Members of the Church, as is praeten∣ded, but can never be proved, Nor that danger in transmitting this right from one to another, if the care of the first patron descend not with it, which defect the care of the praesent Bishop must supplie. Nor is it requisi∣te
he should be a Member of the same parish to which he praesents, since the Bishop is head of the same diocese to whom, That this is contrarie2. B. Dis∣ch. 12. to the libertie of the Primitive and Apostolike Kirke, to the order which Gods word craves, and good order, is onelie sayd but not argued in your Dis∣cipline, no more then by you when and to whom it became a grie∣vance. Your patience in enduring it goes for no heroical vertue, being pee∣vish enough soon after the Act of annexation had passed, as appeares by your cariage in the Assemblie at Edenburgh 158. and turned into a Rebellious Conspiracie, allthough painted with the name of a Parliament that now at last (because it could not at first) hath ta∣ken it away. The Nobilitres losse of their Impropriaetions and Abbey lands is very confi∣derable, when they bethinke themselves upon what false pleas, and to what unconcern'd persons they must part with them. Touching which as Sycophantike as is the Bishops accusation, he'll not abate a fig of his right for the Presbyters answer, nor I a leter (take which he will) in exchange for his name. Pl. in Carcul▪ A. 5. sc. Aedepol ngatorem lepidum lepidé hunc pactu'st . . . . Calo∣phanta est qui honeste qui∣dem loqui∣tur, sed u∣jus facto ab oraione dis∣crepant. Par. Al∣ciat &c. The Praela∣tes title to Impropria∣tions and Abbey lands beter then the Presbyters. Calophantam an sycophantam hunc magis esse dicam . That the whole generation of the praelatike faction (as your style it) did hy∣perbolize in zealc against that which they call sacriledge, is an argument they were all true bred, no bastard children of the Church, not so meane condition'd as to sell their spiritual birthright for potage. Were your title as good, (which can appeare to be nothing but your rough hands, and red soules with the bloud of the Martyrs of your owne making,) Gen. 25. 25. we should commend so farre as we act our selves your strugling aswell for the inheritance as primogeniture. But when we compare our professions or evidences, & finde our bre∣thren to say that the benefactours and founders of these Ecclesiasti∣ke possessions were true Christians, though mistaken, we thinke, in many maters of doctrine and worship; yours that that they were Members of Anti-Christ undoubted Idolaters and haeretikes; Ours that the Churches which they endowed were Episcopal, such as we continue them or to our utmost endeavour it. From which you de∣generate, schismaticallie separating, and arming your selves with all resolution & rage to demolish, (beside what other advantage we may use of a nearer union & uniformitie in religion, more conso∣nant to the minde of the doners, at least if such as your malice doth render it, litle thinking it may be to have it so unhapilie retorted in that which is the chiefe drift of all your rebelling and covenan∣ting) when we thinke of no other restitution but by the possessours consent, when it may be transferred to us by the same supreme hand
that confetr'd it on them, out of which you no sooner get opportu∣nitie and power but you violentlie ravis it; calling Princes & no∣bles sacrilegious robbers while they over-power you and deteine it; I beleeve all our Religious and prudent Nobilitie will unanimouslie grant our plea more just, our▪ proceedings more moderate, & when God shall if ever, touch their consciences (not we the skirt of their estates and livelihoods) with an humble feare that such an inheri∣tance with-held from such a Church, may be sacrilegious indeed; with assurance that if it be so 'tis finfull; they will not value their lands at so deare a rate, as to pay their soules for the purchase, but with courage & confidence in a blessing from God to be multiplied on their undevoted temporal possessions returne them to him (the King I meane) from whom they receiv'd them, and be beter content that Episcopal Christians then Presbyterian counterfeits should re∣possesse them. But if such of them as are not perswaded in conscience they are oblig'd to restore them upon the arguments we bring (which would ne'r be convictive if our plea were no beter then yours) shall adventure to leave the suit depending till the Court of heaven give final sentence upon it; at their peril be it, the Praelates & their fol∣lowers use no violence nor course of law here below to put them out of these their possessions, no threats but those against sacriledge in Scripture, sea∣ring this may be such, no activitic but that of a swift charitie to catch hold of their soules and snatch them out of the snare when they finde them devouring the bate, and to put them nte vota, before vowes uponPro. 20. 25. making enquirie, or if post vota to retract them. Therefore such of the Nobilitie and Gentrie as were nakened hereby to take heed of their rights, were best have a care they slumber not in the wrong, and take Solo∣mons counsel intended Prov. 16. 8. Beter is a litle with righteousnesse, then great revenues without right. But (which requires the Readers adver∣tence)The Revi∣wers praeva∣ricatin. 6. head. Ch. 9. for you here to call those the rights of the Nobilitce and Gentrie, which so many Assemblies have declar'd to belong jure divino to the Church, which in your first booke of Discipline you tell them they had from theeves and murderers, and hold a unjust possessions, or indeed no possession before God; which in your second you hold a detestable sacriledge before God; For you to twit the Praelates with violence & threats, who are bound in Iohn Knox's bond not onelie to withstand the mercilcsse devo∣rersApril 24. 1576. Sc. Decl. 1642. Ap∣pend. of the Church patrimonie . . . but to seeke redresse at the hands of God & man; That declare the same obligation upon you to root out of the Kingdome aswell the monster of sacriledge as that of Episcopacie, and so aswell the persons of most your Nobles as the Bishops; For you to object a ourse of law and activitie, who by incessant demands and praeter legal, devices never gave over till the lawes that annexed lands to the
crowne were repealed. For you to bragge of your last Parliament's con∣firmation of titles, because your last Assemblie power could not reach beyond the destruction of patronages; What is this but apertlie Sucophantein & calophantein, to fawne & accuse, dissemble & destroy,Prov. 26. 28. 129. 5 Noble El∣ders slighted by the Cler∣gie. flater your with mouth, while you spread a net for their fees and worke the ruine of their persons and estates? If Noblemen once abase themselves to be Elders of every ordina∣rie Presbyteri, it's not to be doubted but evey ordinarie Presbyter takes himselfe for their fellow if not their superiour, which they finde to their griefe, Therefore all or most respect that they give to their gra∣tious Ministers, is ala a litle Court holy water cast on the flame of their zeale, a sacrifice made for their owne securitie from your tongues and pennes, and from the armes of the people that serve your war∣rants oft times in tumults upon their persons, For the honour you pay them they are faine, like wretches to morgage their conscience,See Let: of the Congreg. to the Nobil. of Sc. 159. those that doe not, gaine the honourable titles of Traytours of God, are cashier'd your companie, and then passe for no beter then ho∣nourable heathen, publicans and sinners. If they become not Truch∣men between a single Presbyter and a Prince▪ when he comes with his I require you in my name &c. Before every charge, (no very humble forme as I take it) they shall be called abusers of the world, neutral livers at their pleasure, if not shedders of Scotoh bloud. And some that draw on themselves their Prince's displeasure for a Rethorical libertie used in their behalfe, shall be pay'd for their paines with the honourable essay of men sold unto sin▪ enemies to God and all godlinesse, the L. SempilsL. Sempil. Lib▪ 2. reward which he had from Iohn Knox as this gratefull Presbyter hath registred in his storie. They that bridle the rage of their Princes, (the phrase usd) as occasion serves, will not sticke to halter the heads of their Nobles, if they will neither leade nor drive, but mo∣lest the progresse of their Presbyterian designes. Your Historical Vindication I hope is no new nam'd Logike, to prove negatives ofCalder∣woods redi∣culous reve∣rence of Bruce's gost Cujus ani∣ma, si ullius mortalium, sede in coe∣lestibus. Ep. Ded. ad Atar. Dam. fact; your detraction from the credit of many irrefragable authours that Historize that insolent speach uttered by Bruce, lookes more like a calumnie then their relation to a fble. And yet such a supersti∣tious reverence is payd by your fond brother Didoclave to the me∣morie of his name, that he could be content to pin his fayth on his sleeve, and hang his soul at his girdle. Anima ma cum anima tua Bruci, si ex aliena fide esset pendendum, and were there to be but one pri∣viledge of aeternal residence in heaven he thinkes neither Patriach nor Prophet Apostle nor Martyr, no, nor the Virgin Mary her selfe were likelie to carie it from Bruce. Which compar'd with King Ia∣mes's opinion of him as a perfidious madman that had a whirligigge
in his head, delivered after to many experiments of his rebellious zeale, and frantike restivenesse, is enough to condemne both saine and votarie to some bedlam purgatorie, before imposture can fixe, or facilitie of fancie finde these new imaginarie lights among the starres. Your following invective is writ with Arrius's quill, and by suchManias Ca∣amo Con∣stant: in Rescript scribling you gaine the title that Constantine gave him, patroctono epieiceias, discovering your selfe to be a parricide of aequitie, mur∣dering truth in your relation, and justice in your parallel. His Lord∣ship takes himselfe not concern'd in this case to recollect 800. yeares Historie of Europe, to picke out of the pietie & humilitie of many Reverend Bishops the pride and passionate errours of some few; No hath he malice enough, with you; to make that the nature ofOur Bishops contest not with King & Nobles. their office which hath been some litle monstrositie of minde, by ill habits accidental to their persons. Beside, what among the Papists the nobilitie by birth of many Bishops concurring with the received dominion and large revenve of their Spiritual praeferment; may elevate their thoughts, and enhaunce their owne opinion of them∣selves, if impardonable, addes litle to the condemnation of ours, which partake in litle with them but their titles. The universal supre∣macie, which the Pope arrogates aswell over Kings as Bishops, may puffe up a litle Cardinal, that is neare him, in his purple, & possesse him with a conceit that he may Write himselfe companion to a King, whom he thinkes (but is mistaken) oblig'd, in Spiritual humilitie, to lie prostrate at his holinesse foot, and kisse his slipper. But the same Kings soveraigntie in Ecclesiasticis at home secur'd him from all such contestation with his Bishops, Though, had it not, the argu∣ment from a Cardinal in Rome to a Praelate in England will hardlie finde a topike. Those in Scotland take themselves as capable of ho∣nourTheir prae∣cedence, & place neare the Throne. conferr'd upon their order as their Popish praedecssours; Nor are such legal establishments (if not of right) of Princelie favour to becast away in complement, Nor were they to make an unne∣cessarie distance out of forme, when the material meaning of their vicinitie to the throne, was the neare concernment of their counsel to the King. Orthodoxe Monarchs, as well as Papists, having doub∣ting consciences, and orthodoxe Bishops as good abilities to resolve them. I have not heard they crowded much; or quickened their pace to get the doore of the Earles &c. Their Provincial that with much humilitie and respect unto their H. H. tookeit, was lead to it by the hand that had exalted them or their progernitours. But for the rea∣son of praecedence, which I guesse to be your meaning, you were best review the Heralds office and reforme it. Poorpdants are not to
be reproached for making a litle diocese of their Schooles (Priests being charged to make such of their houses) and from the experi∣mental1. Tim. 3. 4. & 5. regiment of boyes raising their abilities, by honest endea∣vours, to the meriting an higher Episcopate of men; Nor their con∣scientious demeanour in that office to be aesteemed the arrogancie of their order, if it move Kings to commit the white staves to the cro∣siar,Offices of state. and great seales to be under the keyes of the Church. The most capricios of them all, and most contentious for the honour, (which I thinke were none but such as did you too much service when they had it) were many straines below your Presbyterie of Knoxes, Bru∣ces &c. Who have contested with Kings for their Scepters, which with white staves and seales they brought under the pedantike jurisdiction of their rod. Never have Bishops so ruffled it as many base borne Pres∣byters with the secret Counsel. To whose Consistories all Courts of Iustice were faine to doe homage & the greatest Lords of the land, become subordinate Elders to the parson of their parish. It's not soHow the difference hapened be∣tween the E. Argile and Bishop Gal∣loway. long that yet it can be forgoten, since a most violent and malicious man call'd the Goodman of Earlstounne, aclient of the E. Argile for in∣terrupting of divine service, forceable overturning the Communion Table in his Parish Kirke, theatning and abusing the Minister with many other such enormous crimes, was fined (but the fine never exacted) by the High Commission and confined for a season. The E. Argile complain'd of his hard usge to the Lords of Counsell, and enformed against the Bishop of Galloway that he promised to him somewhat, which he had not perfrmed; The Bishop denied the promise, & gainsayd what the Earle alledged, whereupon sayd the Earle. If you say so 'tis as much as if I lie. The Bishop modestlie re∣plied, I doe not say so, but I beseech your Lp. to call your selfe be∣ter to minde, & you will finde it as I say. This is giving the lie because he would not take it on himselfe, and ruffling with a great Lord, because he would not be ruffled out of a just vindication of the truth, & yeild his consent that a Counsel Table should approve turning the commu∣nion table out of the Church. The Reviewers should doe well to bring in his accounts fuller, when he reckons with Bishops for braving of Noblemen. All Presbyterians are heterodoxe to all good Catholike Christians, withPresbyte∣rians hete∣rodoxe. Tert. De Praescr. cap. 32. whom Episcopacie is so necessarie a truth, as next to the divine in∣stitution, Vniversalitie, Vbiquitie and perpetuitie can render it. Confingant tale aliquid haeretici—nihil promovebunt, Could your inven∣tion feigne such authoritie to Presbyterie, yet your doctrine would diversifie you into a sect. What the Bishops following words cleare, shall not one whit be clouded by any obscuritie in my replie, though the strongest eradiations that come from them would finke them∣selves
silentlie in the deep, playd you not the malignant Archimede (though no such exact Mathematical Divine) to reflect them into a flame that may set the ship of the Church on fire about our eares some coales of this fire I shall heape on your head & cast backe into your bosome, which if you meane not to quench, you may blow up to what farther mischief you thinke good. The Apostles were Bishops, who did, undoubtedlie delegate the1. No Ordi∣nation but by Bishops. 2. power of ordination to none but such as were constituted Bishops by them to that purpose. This power appeares not undoubtedlie to have been exerciz'd by any but Bishops in the Historie of the Scripture. This power was exerciz'd canonicallie by none but Bishops in the3. Historie of the Primitive Church According to the second canon of the Apostles. Presbyter ab uno Episcopo ordinetur, & Diacons, & reliqui Clerii. The laying on of hands of the Presbyterie, both in Scripture and4. Ecclesiastike storie was onelie for external forme, no intrinsecal po∣wer, the efficacie of the act being in the Bishops benediction, which I never finde attributed to the Priest. As in the third Canon of the fourth Councel of Carthage, Episcopo eum benedicente, nowhere bene∣dicente Presbytero. Therefore your friend Didoclave is faine to ac∣knowledgeAltar▪ Dam. cap. 4 5. No comfor∣table assu∣rance but from Apo∣stolical suc∣cession and Episcopal ordination. De Praescr. cap. 32. Reliq uos verò qui ab∣sstunt a principali successione, & quocun∣que loco col∣ligunter suc∣spectos  &c. a great difference, Magnum discrimen, between St. Pauls imposition of hands and that, at the same time, of his Presbyterie; whatsoever is mean'd by it. Nam per impositionem mannum Apostolorum Deus conserebat charismata, non autem per impositionem mannum Presbyterorum, distinguishing in the ordination of Timothie between dia & meta, the former relating to Saint Paul, the later to the assistent Priests. Which is another interpretation of the text then you were pleas'd to make of it chapt. 8. So that I see the brethren agree not upon the point. Succession through the lineal descent of Bispops from the Apostles, and ordina∣tion by the hands of Apostolical Bishops have been ever used as strong argu∣ments to uphold Catholike Christians in a comfortable assurance of their Ministric as lawfull. And haeretikes have been pressed by the ancient Fathers with the want of nothing more then these to justifie their profession. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt, sayth Tertullian And Irenaeus before him joines the gifts of God required in the Ministrie, if he meanes not the sacraments with the Apostolical cession of the Church. Vbi igitur charisata Domini posi sunt, ibi discere oportet veritatem, apud quos est ca quae est ab Apostolis Ecclesiae successis &c. The Presbyterians praetending divine institution, must likewise prove such an uninterrupted succession, or evidence their new ex∣traordinarie
mission, otherwise they can minister litle comfort lesse assurance of their calling to be lawfull. The former they can not doe for Saint Hierom's time at least, who makes ordination a proprietie of the Bishops. Quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus quod Presbyter not facit? where a friend of theirs failes them when he sayth,Walo Mes∣sal. ad morem jusque suae aetatis respexit. That he had respect to the custome & canon of his time. Nor can they doe it for above 200. yeares uncer∣taine storie after Christ, in which they have as litle light to shew their Presbyterie was in, as that Episcopacie was out, which they would faine perswade us to take upon their word dispensing with them∣selves for the use of unwritten tradition to so good a purpose. If they will pleade an extraordinarie mission, they should doe well to na∣me the first messenger that brought the newes of their Euangel, and what miracle he wrought which might serve him for a leter of cre∣dence to us, who it may be otherwise▪ shall be no such superstitious admirers of his gifts or person.6. That therefore the orthodoxe Ministerimust want the comfortable assurance of their undoubted ordination in the Ministrie, which words yet beare a much more moderate sense then that you give them viz. That they may veryKakos her∣meneus a∣tochrema ei∣kon te kai andrias es to . Rescr: ad Ar. The Praela∣tes doe noe annull the being of all Reformed Churches. well know and be assured that their calling and ministrie is null, the distance being (as I take it) not so indivisibe between the negation of one assurance to the position of the other. Such a malicious interpreter beares the image & may stand in Constantines opinion for the statue of him who is the father of calumnies, & cares not what pyson he casts to spot other mens names, & cracke their credits ta tes  ita motetos  apheidos proballon, as true of an Arian as Aian. Your divination about the deleted words will succed in some strange disoverie by and by. In the interim you set too sharpe an edge upon the doctrine of the Bishops friends, and doe act violence where it may be they intended not so much injurie as the ut most extremitie of justice, allthough they held the axe in their hand in Christian charitie disputing the sentence, not so hastie to execute it, (or beyond it) in the rigour, and cut off at one stroke the Clergie from their calling, and so many, lay societies of Christians from the Church. Vntill I meet with some particular more forward instances then I know of, I shall answer for them to the Churches of France, Holland, Zwitzerland and Germanie, as Pope Innocent writ to the first Councel at Toledo, about the ill custome of the Bishops ordi∣nation in Spaine That it's very requisite somewhat should be peremp∣torilie determin'd according to the true primitive tradition might it be without the disturbance of so many Churches. For what is done, ita reprehendimus, ut propter numeru corrigendor ca qu quoquo modo facta
snt non in dubium vocemus, sed Dei potius dimittnus judicio. We so dislike it as not to startle so great a number of delinquents with our doubt, but referre the judgement to God who standeth in the congregationPs. 82. 1. as well of Presbyters as Princes, and is a Iudge aswell among Mini∣sters as Gods. The Sophisme of the Iesuits, because so popular, shouldThey use ot the So∣phisme of the Iesuits. have been refuted, or else not recited. allthough the similitude it brings runnes not upon all foure even with the doctrine of the Bishops prime friends. Some of whom I beleeve will acknowledge there may be resident many Members of the true Church, where are no true Sacra∣ments, being well praepared to receive them when they may have a true Ministrie to dispense them. That one of the two Sacraments is true, though not This word dulie was lest out by Henderson in his recital of K. Ch.  words to this purpose Answ: to 1. pap. Ep. 7. Ad. Symrn. 1. Pap. to Henders. dulie administred, when, in case of necesstie, by lay hands, where is no true Ministrie to doe it, which may consist with that of B. Ignatius if applied, to this purpose, Ouk exon esti choris to episcop oute baptizein, oute prospherein. Exon at most but illegitima∣ting the outward visible act; not nulling the inward invisible grace, That the other's effectual, when had but in voto, if it can not in signo, through want of any or (which is as bad) a lawfull true Ministrie to make it. In the third clause I hope you will shake hands with the Iesuits and them. Where is no true ordination, there is no true ordi∣narie Ministrie, or lawfull Priesthood as His late Majestie call'd it. As for the fourth the Bishops friends, whatsoever they may, doe allay it thus. Where are no Bishops can be no comfortable assurance of a true ordination, And so in whatsoever reformed Countrey are no Bishops, being no true A∣postolike ordination, no comfortable assurance is had of a true visible Church in the publike administration of the Sacraments, though they hope well the invisible Members have an invisible true Priest∣hoodHeb. 7. 25. 26. Rom. 14. 23. among them, or such an high Priest as being himselfe holie, harmelesse &c is able to supplie what their Presbyters want, able to save them is to panteles very completelie, and make intercession for them who sin in submission (out of more good meaning then fayth) to their disci∣pline, who can give no comfortable assurance that Saint Pauls rod or St. Peters keyes everwere committed to▪ their charge. Those of the Re∣formed, which I hope are not all, if any, that concurre, if you meane covenant, like your selves, under praetense of selfe praeservation (being endangerd by nothing beyond the frequent ineffectual po∣wer of good advice, and plea of Apostolike example) with seigned words to make merchandize aswell of Bishops as Kings, and like the insolent Abaddons at Edenburgh and London, to assault their per∣sons and then abolish their order, declare themselves such as Saint Peters false teachers. or worse because more publike in bringing in dam∣ble hresies, denying the Lord (at least in his Ministrie▪ which they
Anti-Christian) and (what they have allreadie in part) bringing  on thselves. Your officious informer that drew the curtaine & made the disco∣verieThe Revie∣wers malic in publi∣shing what the Bishop had deleted & perver∣ting it▪ of what the Bishop deleted, had litle good maners, though, it may be, not so much malice as you in your uncharitable (not so for∣mate) conjecture. A dngerous question being mistaken when called a tru judgement, and doubting whther it be within the pale, not actuallie ex∣cluding all  Ministres &c. out of the line of the Church. Remorse of con∣science hath commonlie antecedent evidence of science, puting all out of question & doubt, without which the vaniti or pusillanimitie of re∣penting had been litle commandable, how condemnable soever had been the iniquitie of erring. What His Lordship lest behind unscraped out, doth not shew his mind onelie▪ but the minde of all good Catholike, orthodox Christians. And why his feare to provoke should incline him more to delete the following expressions, then his care for their com∣fortable satisfaction had mov'd him to pen them▪ I know not. Nor need I be curion to enquire the reason of a line blotted in his booke more then if I had seen it expunged in his papers being not con∣cerned to give account for more then was his pleasure to have publi∣sh'd. Though, were all the Protestant Churches (what they are not)They may be doubted to be un-Christian that call us Anti-chri∣stian. as unconscionablie cruel to us as the Presbyterian Conventicle of the Scots▪ I see not why, in reference to the Religion we professe, it should be more unsafe why more unseasonable (since they give, I hope, the same libertie they take) out of a pious sollicitud to have a union of both, some what ambiguouslie to christen them, then they out of malice, to make an aeternal separation, very affirmativelie anti∣christ us in all the peevish pamphlets they put out. So that whether stands upon the more extreme pinole of impudence & arrogance, the Praelate that doubts your being in a Church visible true for succession & A∣postolike ordination, or the Presbyter that denies our being in any but what is visible false by a Satanical Priesthood & Antiapostolical investiture, let your aequitable comparers impartiallie decide. TheThe Church of Rome not most true. Praelatical tenet is not to verre the Church of Rome, as the stands this day &c to be a Church most true, who praeferre that of their owne for a truer, and condemne many Canons in the Counsel of Trent. That they hld she is true in respect of undoubted succession and Apostolike ordination (our businesse now in dispute) so much concernes them, as the truth of their owne derived from that. Nor can you denie, what you so shamefullie dissemble, that in the retrograde line your last Priest (for a last there must be, unlesse you have been Autóchthones or Autorni i rather, coaeternal with the Priest that's in heaven) had his ordination, and you thereby succession from them; and so both prove as Anti-Christian
as ours. An easie way of salvation in the Romish Church, is noNor hath she the most easie way of salvation. Rom. 11. 33. second tenet of the Praelates, who meet with her stumbling upon many errours in doctrine and worship, going somewhat about by Lymbus Patrum & Purgatorie, whereas we thinke if she walked with us, she might have a more easie & shorter journey to heaven. Yet withall knowing that the wayes of God are anexichniastoi not to be tracked and his judgements anexreuneta not to be searched; we dare not damne at adventure all that goe with her, (no more then you can assure a ship to be sunke so soon as ever you lose sight of her saile,) but leave the issue to him who is great in Counsel, and mightie in worke,Ier. 32. 19. whose eyes are open upon all the wayes of the sonnes of men, to give every one ac∣cording to his wayes, and according to the fruit of his doings. The seperation fromSeparation from her in many things need∣lesse. her, Which they hold to be needlesse is such as that which you fondlie make about copes and surplices, Church Musike and festivals & that came not in with the Counsel of Trent. That which is made upon higher points, (though not yet, God be prays'd, in the highest of having one Lord, saying one Creed, using one baptisme in substance however different in ceremonie) they impute to them who kept not their sta∣tion in conformite to the Primitive Christians of the 5. or 6. first Centuries▪ with whom a reunion not onelie may, but ought to be much desired on just conditions, and that which is, continued, rather then the division made greater by our fruitlesse compliance with morose and humourous Reformers, whose preaching being not with entisingEn apodei∣xei pneu∣matos kai dynameos. 1. Cor. 2. 4. words of mans wisdome, they tell us of aspirit, which can not be the same with Saint Pauls, because thereof they never gave us any demonstra∣tion, nor of any power but the sword. Could your bold praecedent priviledge or excuse me in compa∣ring, judging, censuring or approving, the publike transactions of our Royal Soveraigne, I should with much modest & innocent free∣dome professe more justifiable, according to Christian Religion & prudence, His Majestie late graces and securities granted unto the returning confederated Irish; then any like future concession unto the persisting, covenanting Scots: They gratefullie accepting a li∣mited toleration of their publike worshp to those of their owne di∣vision in that Countrey; you endeavouring to extort an absolute injunction of yours in all His Majesties dominions, denying liber∣tieArtic. 1. of conscience, so litle as to his familie or person. They onelie craving in much humilitie, a freedome from being bound or obli∣ged by oath to acknowledge the Ecclesiastike supremacie in the King▪ you arrogantlie binding by solemne league and covenant (wherein so much is implied) Him and us to attribute it to the Kirke. They re∣newing in the oath of allegeance their recognition of Royal right▪
and swearing, without restriction, their defence of his person &c to the uttermost of their power, you by proclamation admittingFebr.  16. 9. Artic. 3. him to the exercise of his power, but in order to the Covenant, And covenanting his defense no otherwise then in the defense of (what you call) the true religion & liberties of the Kingdomes. They subjoining in that oath their best endeavour to disclose to His Majestie &c all treasons and traitourous conspiracies &c. You having not a syllable to that effect in your covenant, lest you should be obliged to betray your selves, who are resolved to continue principals in such practices against him and his Royal familie to the last▪ They charitablie forgeting all revenge against any of His Majesties partie that had fought against their con∣foederacie; you cruellie combining, expresselie to bring to publike triall all such as had been any way instrumental opposers of your Co∣venant. They embracing in the armes of Christian communion, their quondam enemies, now fellow subjects of a different religion, you baselie butchering them with unexemplified crueltie 1. with your material sword, axe, or halter in their bodies, your civile in their estates, your spirituall (what may be by your excommunication) inThe Pres∣byterian Scots more bloudie then the I∣rish. their soules. The aggravations you bring against His Majesties agree∣ment are, First, That it was with persons so bloudie which as it can not be wholelie excused in them, so ought it of all men least to be objected by you, whose religion hath passed from the Castle of Saint Andrewes to the House at Westminster in a red sea path, made for you neither by Moses's rod, nor Eliah's mantle: under the conduct of no civile, no prophetical power, fenced on both sides with bloud of different complexions, the bloud of Popish and orthodoxe Prae∣lates, the bloud of Princes addicted to several Religions, So thatChapt. 4. God doubtlesse will have a controversie with you, who as the Prophet Hose speakes, by swearing and lying have broke out into rebellion, and bloud tou∣cheth bloud. The bloud of the Cardinal hath touched the bloud of the Arch-Bishop. The bloud of Queen Mary the bloud of King Charles, and more then that, which you may heare of otherwhere Touching the crueltie of the Irish I remit you to what our Royal Martyr hath writ with much Christian indifference. Ch. 12. of  where you may take notice principallie of these clauses. I would to God the I∣rish had nothing to alledge for their imitation against those whose blame must needes be the greater by how much protestant principles are more against all rebellion a∣gainst Princes then those of Papists . . . . . I beleeve it will at last appeare that they who first began to embroyle my other Kingdomes (and who, J pray you were they) are in great part guiltie, if not of the first leting out. Yet, of the not time∣lie stopping those horr'd, effusions of bloud in Irland. To omit what His Ma∣jestie intimated before, That their oppressive feares rather then their malice
engaged them, and you know how profuse you are of bloud when you treate of the doctrine of selfe praeservation. Secondlie, you areWhose Li∣bertie of re∣ligion was limited. troubled at the full libertie of Religion he granted them, which if you e saw the articles, extended no further them the remission of poenal statutes, not to the restitution of Churches & Church Livings, but what they had then in possession, not to any jurisdiction but what they exerciz'd at that time, for which an expresse caution was taken in the very first article of the treatie. And in the last but one their Regular Clergie were restrain'd to their pensions, and confind to the praecincts of their Abbeys and Monasteries, which are explain'd to be within the Walls Mures, and ancient fences of the same. No charitable bene∣factour having libertie to exercise one maine point of their Reli∣gion, by laying a foot of land unto their Convents. But had it been as full as you fancie it (because you make your owne case many times the same with that of your brethren abroad) I pray directlie answer me, Why a Papist may not have as free libertie as a Iew? And Whe∣ther, according to your conscience be more Anti-Christian, a Cloy∣ster or a Synagogue? Thirdlie, You object the Armes, Castles, andPlaces of trust saffer in the hands of Papists then Pres∣byterians. prime places of trust in the state he put in their hands. Whereas if the case were politicallie disputed, Whether the Militia were safer in the hands of Papists or Presbyterians. I beleeve the former would carie it upon the greater securitie (though not generallie the greatest) they give in their principles, and the greater experimentall assurance in many places of trust they have often rendred Princes in their discharge. And had the prime Castle and place of Trust in that Kingdome been theirs, and no armes nor command in the Armie been the others (a tolera∣blee freedome of religion being granted them) it is not improba∣ble that Noble Marquesse last yeare had either not been forc'd to hazard a siege for his reentrance, or at least not betrayd into an in∣evitable unhapie necessitie of retreat, What they demanded, or had the 9. Article of agreement will informe you. That upon the distribu∣tion, conferring, and disposing of the places of command honour profits and trust. . . no difference should be made between them and other his Majestie subjects. (Heres no exception against Malignants nor persons disafected to the cause) but that such distribution should be made with equal indifferencie, according to their respective merits and abilities. By which qualification all disloyal de∣meriting persons are made obnoxious to a just exception at any time. Those that continued in possession of His Majesties Cities, Gar∣risonsArtie. 29. & within their quarters are to be commanded, ruled and governed in chiefe upon occasion of necessitie, as to the Martial and militaire affaires, by such as His Majestie or his chiefe Governer, or Governers of that Kingdome for the time being should appoint. And where any garrison &c. might be endan∣gerd
by restoring to their possessions & estates the Litizens, freemen, Burgesses, & former inhabitans, they were not to be admitted, but allowed a valuable, annual rent for the same, as in the 7. Article was provided touching those of Corke, Youghall, and Dungarvan. Finallie in all that agreement no condition is found, That His Majestie or His Lieutenant should be governed by a Popish Parliament at Du∣blin when it might be in Civile, nor by a Clerical councel or Assem∣blieKings can∣not ratifie too well what they promise, if just . . . . Sed qui ju∣ramentis sudunt sicut pueriastra∣gatus Pet. ad. Alter. Dam. Parlia∣ments not be stay'd for in extre∣mities if they can not be call'd at present. at Kilkennie in Ecclesiastical affaires. Fourthlie, That the King gave assurance, of his endeavour to get the articles ratified in the next Parliament of England, was to ratifie at praesent their confidence in him, for which he can not be blamed, unlesse you would have Kings sport like boyes with changeable knots in their treaties or (what you scornefullie charge them all with when you thinke on't) like children play at checkstone with their promises and oathes. That His Maiestie did this of himselfe, is false, if mean'd exclusive of his Councel. That he did it without a Parliament, which he could not have, and before it, which his urgent necessities could not stay for, is justifiable by that law which will never pleade for your pardon. Salus populi supre∣ma lex. Nor is that currant law contraire to any standing law in such an exigence as his unlesse there be one (as there is none) that injoines him to follow the misfortune of his father, to lot the Presbyterians binde his hands from laying hold upon any advantageous assistance from the Papists, till his head be cut off by your bloudie Executio∣ners the Independents. Therefore whatsoever passed in this agree∣ment, if perswaded by the gracious partie, no faction, of the Praelates, they exonerated their conscience, if opposed by them, they were no antagonists to their dutie; if with moderation and patience heard, their passionate zeale did not so transport them as to reject salvation from God, when he gives it by the hand of Papists unto their King. Who thinke it neither loyaltie nor prudence rather to deliver him up to the hazard, if not assurance, of the axe, then he should by such meanes be delivered from the perill of the sword. The Kings inclinationThe King never ex∣press'd his inclination to Covenant ers. toward covenanting protestants hath never hitherto made such an uglie ap∣pearance as to scare them in a dreame or awaken their art & industrie in a furie. Nor have you heard, I beleeve, His Majestie complaine that his sleep was broake by their midnight disswasions. If in sermons by daylight they layd before him the mischiefes that lurke in your Covenant they did but bring him a message from his Fathers Ghost who it, may be heard the low'd cries of those tongues that had toke it, as he pas∣sed from the skaffold to Ahrahams bosome. Or were sent from some other Ancients that were dead to tell him more truth then he ever will heare from the Scotish Interpreters of Moses and the Prophets.
That temporal death with any misfortune ought much rather to be embracedHis King∣domes ruï∣ne rather to be embra∣ced then his souls. then the losse of his soul in the hell of the Covenant they could not beate too often in His Majesties head, unlesse they infalliblie knew his Mar∣tyr'd Fathers instructions to be engraven with the point of a dia∣mon'd, or unchangeablie set as a seale on his heart. And where as our Saviour assures him the whole world can be no proportionable profit for that damage mention'd in the 16. S. Matth. the ruine of his three Kingdomes need never be grudged in so good an exchange as heVers. 26. afterward speakes of. Though His Majesties conscience (or such of his Councel as look'd well about them) could not hitherto tell him he hath been by any necessitie tempted to one of those two imme∣diate extremities, between which providence ever maintain'd a visible passe (it may be none of the easiest) nor ought is it but sloth and Athiesme (except some treason may be in the composition) that would scare him with fancies of prodigious monsters, worse then Solomons lion in that way. Your forsooth, with a feigned lispe and aProv. 26. 13. courtesie, will winne your Mistresse (the Covenant) no favour in wisemens eyes, who can not be catch'd with such red and white painting and patches as where with you so often praesent her. Since their deare bought experience hath tought them that her crowne of pride can as litle brooke a societie with the Goddesse Regalitie, as Prelacie. Nor doth she oblige in sense, how faire soever she speakes, her takers to lesse in their station, then to the abolition of them both. If I conceiv'd my selfe in danger, instead of answering, I wouldMore lear∣ning under Episcopacie then Pres∣byterie. cut out your next paragraph and weare it for an amulet or special guard against magical enchantments, having read that things most rediculous or filthie are the best securitie that can be in such cases. That you should appeale to Reason & Experience for your Iudges of Pres∣byteries praeeminence before Episcopacie in learning, honour & wealth, who stand selfe condemn'd by the frequent invectives you with your partisans make against the vaine philosophie, which is the sciential learning, of Prelatical preachers, against the dignities of Praebenda∣ries, Archdeacons &c. Against pluralitie of their livings, which doubles their revenues, is as if you were practizing with your pencil upon the first verse in Horace; Poêtrie, rather then disputing byHumano capiti cer∣vicem pic∣tor qui∣m. your pen in divinitie or Logike with the Bishop. The Severest of your Trial before ordination is about cutting to the root some Hebrew word, and corrupting it in the sense; graffing some yong vowel upon an hopefull stocke, or in oeulating with a pricke to make it bring forth fruit pleasing to your tast, though, in all likelihoo'd, never inten∣ded by the Holy Spirit that planted it in the Bible. Your all sort of learning here, called gifts utterance and knowledge in your first booke of
discipline, were it not reduced, as it is in your liturgie, to tatlingThe Bi∣shops trial before he ordaineth more serious then the Presbyters 4. head pag 14. they propose him a theme or text to be treated pri∣vatelic, whereby his abilitie may the more mani∣festlie ap∣peare unto them. 4. Head. halfe an houre beside a text, would put his Lay, if not his Clerical, Iudges to a nonplus when they were to give their verdut of his parts: And though here you talke of disputations upon controversed heads, and there of the chief points of controversie betwixt you and the Papists, Anabap∣tists, Arrians &c. We know what discouragements you give your yong students about looking into Schole Divinitie, the most au∣thentike Ecclesiastical Historie, and Fathers, without which they are proper champions for such an encounter. It is not Davids sling, but in Davids hand, and with Davids God to guide the stone which goes out of 't that, without other weapons, can make these Goliaths fall upon their faces to the earth. Our trial is personnallie by the Bishop or his Archdeacon▪ unlesse in his absence some other learned Mini∣ster be appointed. We have nothing to doe with lay Elders nor peo∣ple in the examen, who have no interest by the Catholike canon in the election. Peri tou me tois oklois epitrepein tas eclogas poiersthai toon mellon∣toon Cathisasthai cis hieratcion is the 117. by Iustells account. Our practi∣ce is seldome so remisse as yours, if our rule be more, it may be im∣puted to the necessitie of that time, when learned men, I meane re∣formed, did not swarme in a number aequal to the cures to be served. Against which what you argue in your owne case 1. Book: Discipl. may be replied to as in ours. 1. That the Bishop His Deane, and Ca∣nons, or Cathedral Clergie, may supplie the imperfections of o∣thers in his Diocese (for if the lacke of ablemen be real, your streight and sharpe examination may disparage by discovering the infirmities, not one whit enable your Proponents or expectants for their duties) 2. The rarite among the Gentiles in the begining of the Gospell was recompen∣sed with the extraordinaire diversitie of gifts. 3. Vn preaching Mini∣stersNeither judge we that the Sa∣craments, can be rightlie Mi∣stred by him in who∣se mouth God hath put no Ser∣mon of ex∣hortation. 1. B. Disc. 4. head. are no idols, having eares to heare what the Church praescribes and mouthes to utter, as her prayers for, so her wholesome doc∣trine unto the people. But what, I can not passe by since it meetes me in the way. That efficacie of the Sacraments, as well as power of the word, which you call of exhortation, should be limited to the abilities of the Minister. And as the Papists directlie, so we by inference, be disabled in both, I thinke will helpe you to a share in the Iesuits So∣phisme, whereof we latelie discoursed, and set you upon the pinacle of arrogance and impudence, who hereby unchurch the greatest part of Christians, and contract this Soveraigne excellencie to your selves. Your Latin disputations when they come by course among the ignorant or yonger frie of your Ministrie, doe but multiplie haeresies, & make them now and then, in their heate, blaspheme God more lear∣nedlie then in their weeklie exercizes and Sermons. As occasion
shall serve, I may helpe you hereafter to more instances then oneThe apis∣tical Priests have nei∣er power nor autho∣ritie to Mi∣nister the Sacraments of Christ Ie∣sus, because that in their mouth is not the sermon of exhortation Ib. 9. head. Alter. Dmasc. Schotih he∣terodoxe di∣vines not comparable to the Or∣thodoxe En∣glish. Admittunt ad Mini∣strim in∣dignisemos sartores, subulcos. & infimad faec homi∣nes, modo sint togod∣dali &c. C. Schul∣ting. Hier. Anacris. Lib. 1. Tert. De Praescr. cap. 1. Quod non ide scandaliza∣riopocat, quod qui prudentis∣simi odifi∣centur in rumam. Bishops commended by the Re∣viewer to be suspec∣ted. Presbytrie how the cause of ig∣norance, contempt and begge∣ry. Provision under E∣piscepacie in England against the beggerie &c of the Priests. Puritani∣cal Bishops make an ignorant Clergie. of the like practice among some of your brethren abroad, where every boardlesse boy (for with such your Presbyterie every where abounds) hath libertie to talke (for I can not call't disputing) upon the highest mysteries the Trinitie, Praedestination &c. As confi∣dentlie▪ to the shame of your religion, as the gravest Doctour can determine in the chaire. What of this may be tolerable among the learned, super toam materiam, s litle beter then a forme, and litle de∣cencie in that, which approves not much, improves lesse the abi∣lities of the longest liver among you all. Our aequivalent to this (let it be what it will) in our Archdeacons Visitation, your friend Di∣doclaves turnes off with a jeer, making as if the abilities of our Mini∣strie were inquir'd into after they were constituted leaders of the flocke. Primum creantur ductores gregis, dinde fiunt discipuli, where as it is principallie to discerne the advancement by studie of what abilities they had at their ordination, whereby the election of rural Deanes may be regulated, & persons know'n that are enriched by gifts be∣fitting them to be Bishops. Your experience shall not draw me into an unnecessarie comparison between our English Clergie and the French or Dutch Divines, whose ordination, yo are not ignorant, hath been impeached by their adversaries (whether deservedlie or no they are to looke to) and their abilities resolv'd just like yours, into an effusive▪ readinesse of words. But I bid defiance to you and your Countreymen of the Discipline, to shew me among you all, a Law'd, an Andrewes, a Montague, a White, to whom the English you name must give the guerdon of learning (which I beleeve Reynolds caried not at Hampton Court Conference) unlesse Perkins had more in his Chaine of Praedestination, or Parket in his silie Arraignment of the Crosse. But how solide and singular soever was their learning, their defection from the doctrines and practical praecedents of so many yeares standing among Catholike Christians makes their fayth in many things, and their good parts comparitivelie in all, but as chaffe to be blow'n away with the winde, and the memoire of them to be winowed by our breath that the truer graine may be visible in Gods Church. Avlent quantum volent pallea levis fidei quocunque. Affltu , eopurio mass frumenti in horrea Domini reponetur. It's well your conscience can be enlarged in some litle charitie towards any of our Bishops, though we may be iustlie jealous of this kindnesse, & feare (if we hear'd their names) it may be placed upon persons inclined to your interest, rather then commended to your good opinion by their merit. But whose'er they be you meane, we know you never prike any in the list of the learned but the best read men in Synopis's
and system in Common place bookes, and Centurists▪ orgeneral∣lie in your select Reformed Fathers, whom, in a fallacie, often ti∣mes you perswade your Disciples to be the more proper men be∣cause standing (you tell them) upon the shoulders of the ancients, when, if set on even ground, the longest arme they can make in true learning and eloquence, will not reach halfe way up to their girdles. But to proceed in some answer to your quaestion. The War∣ner therefore speakes to you of ignorance, because your Presbyterie parts with the greatest incentives and encouragements of studie▪ There∣fore of contempt, because it quits those dignities which give praece∣dence to their persons, and draw reverence to their function; The∣refore of beggerie, because it diverts the Ecclestastical revenue, and makes you but stipendiaries of the people. Of this very conciselie, yet fullie hath his late Majestie admonish'd you Chapt. 17. of . He that surveyes impartiallie the multitude of good Livings and other Clerical praeferments in England which might serve as a sup∣plement to the bad, will finde litle reason for any, none at all for the greatest part of our Priests I meane those that had a title, that were eidicoos cheirotonoumenoi (as it is Can. 6. Concil. Chalced) to be begarlie & contemptible for their want, especiallie since those Pluralists, you con∣fesse were scarce one of twentie that lived in splendour at Court; or were Nonre∣fidents in the Countrey. Such as were apolelymenoos ordinat, ordained at large, without title to any benefice or cure, the Bishop was charged with them till provided for. And they that complained of their povertie had no cause, there being as you tell us, such plentie in his palace. The ignorance of our Clergie (which it may be was not incomparable if we bring yours into the light) was never greater then when Calvin and Knox had some heires and successours that crept into the praelacie, degenerating from the austeritie of their Fathers, who because they lov'd not the office, never mean'd to discharge it. Yet could dispense in their conscience with the title & lawne sleeves into the bargain, that under them they might take the revenues of our Bishops▪ But when and where we had Austins and Chrisostoms, Lawds and Andrews's never cloud was dispelld with the rising sun, so as ignorance at their asscent in the Episcopate of our Church. And they that heard not of the great studie in thse Praelates to remedie the evils, brought in by theCho. 7. v. 10. 11. 12. other, are such as Zecharie speakes of that imagine evil against their bro∣ther their heart, refusing to hearken, and pulling away the shoulder, and stopping the eare that they should not heare, and making their hearts as an adamant that they may not &c. Those some that were most provident, you meane (I thinke) most penurious in their families, were those I told you of that made
a trade of their , and would dispense with any thing among the puritans but their Purses. Such as those  other that  named, as they were ater to rach, so were they know'n to be ofOur Bishop o Purcha∣ser by h parsimonie.  behaviour and  to , the requisites of a Bishop nd accomplishments of our, whose parsimonie or  for   was not that which advanced him a summe to make a purchase. If the sulplusage of his revene could e it in a cheape and plenti∣full Countrey▪ I know not who have beter title to  the  . Though as I am informed, where I may trust ( with a pro∣fess'd enmitie against his office, whatsoever reserve of kindnesse was for his person.) This great , you , was the reco∣verie of lands  taken and  from the Church, in the  whereof, t he pared no endeavour, so it should eem he was well rewarded with . Allthough prating and praying non sense in the Church may well passe forLitle know∣ledged abou or conscien∣ce shewed in Presbyte∣rian pr∣ching. Eccles 5. . 1. S. 15. 2. a paraphrase on that which the preacher   of . Yet I wish that were the worst which Presbyterie brings when she sets her foot in the House of God, and not another * of bewitching re∣bells mention'd by Samuel, or treacherous. K. K, which the pro∣phet Habakkuk calls  , the  o the not , ∣king men as the  , s the  things that have no  1. Habak. 14. In whose praying or preaching (whereof doubtlesse we had the quintessence sent us by the Reviewer and his brethren of the mission) what knowledge there is beside that coning of texts of the Concordance helpt them to; What  but of the lips and the lungs, neither mater nor method requiring their stu∣die; What conference, when no doctrine was proved but by Scripoure wrested, I am sure not to the salvation of the hearer, & I feare to somewhat worse of the speaker, I leave to the testimonie of any kno∣wing, ,  person that at any time was there. And for my selfe, that was sometime seting ae all  and prjudi∣ce, I will in the word of a Priest professe that I found . But what else in the place of it is best know'n to God and my conscience,  etit be to the world to be that which makes me tremble to thinke of their danger that shall adventure their  in the  of such hypocrisie and ignorance. To the calumnies which this  ∣shekal casts on our Church, I answer 1. That a read   theReading Ministers usefull and justifiable in our Church. exerciz of few, and why it may not be of some, aswell as a read chap∣ter & Psalme is of many where the Discipline takes place I know not. Since care is taken that where they  no necessarie  is wa∣ting. Since none that are not in orders may reade it the office of pra∣yer in the Congregation being as much a  the ordinance of preaching. Since all that are have thereby no commis∣sion
to g preach in your , and why they may not   & administer the Sacrements, conferring with and catechizing the ignorant according to their talent I see no reason. Ite & pradicate sen∣ding not all the Disciples up into a pulpit to make an houre or two's continued discourse. New had Nations eves been converted, nor Chri∣stians improv'd and confirmed, if pradicate had been no otherwise order'd, not one of an hundred having abilities to draw arguments out of sermons convictive of their judgements, not all Presbyte∣rians so good Logicians as to frame them. And he that yeilds him∣selfe up to be caried with the streame of their words & wind of their fancies, may have as many changes in fayth as their are points dif∣ferent in Christianities compasse, being like a child Clydonicomenos &Eph. 4 14▪ peripher, as St. Paul speakes, tossed to and fro, and caried about. . . , by  right of men. . . . who are many tha  in wait to deceive him. Second∣lie, Your first Reformers made the same use of Readers as we doe of n preaching Ministers, and continued them as long as necessitie required, nor shall we any longer, if you can furnish us with as many learned preachers as we have pulpits, & them with stipends where are not tithes but impropriate proportionable to their abilities and paines. To the Churches where no Ministers can be had praesentlie must be appoin∣ted the most apt men that distinctlie can reade the Common prayers and the Scriptu∣res4. Head. for Readers. Preaching without booke ap∣proved by our Praela∣tes. That with∣in booke not to be dispa∣raged. sayth your first Book. Disc. It was the late labour of no  of ours to disgrace preaching without booke, who ever respected and cherished men whose praesence of minde and memoire served them to deliver gravelie and readilie what they had at leisure deliberated on, and for the true benefit of their hearers digested into the clearest me∣thod, and a domed with selected significant language before they came into the pulpit. Those who having taken that paines yet wan∣ted the other abilitie not in their power, or some litle confidence to command it in publike, they were at least to excuse, and condem∣ne such itching eares as would hearken unto no sound doctrine but when taught after their lusts and luxurious desires, more for their pleasure then their use. That they disparaged those of your tribe was no wonder, who like your selfe (that goe for one of the best) con∣sulted litle before hand with their bookes or thoughts, onelie whet their tongues like their knives for a meale, with which so they cut out bread for them selves, they car'd not what contemptible frag∣ments they cast among the people. Of their best kinde of speaking We may say as Seneca of one not much unlike it. Haec popularis [oratio] Epist. 4. Lib. . nihil habes veri, mouere  turbam, &  aures impetu rapere, trac∣ s non prbet aufertur . . . . multum habet manitates & vni plus . It hath a great deale of vanitie and emptinesse in it, more
found then substance, you may reade the whole epistle, and learne I'll warrant you to preach better by it if you afflect it▪ For prayingThe Litur∣gie why read. without booke (all though without a command it may be indifferent, & you can bring no more for it then for praysing and you sing not all without booke as I remember) they thought best a conformitie with Catholike Christians, whose liturgies were ever read in their Churches, and that I guesse (besides some decencie it seemes to ca∣rie with it) because they had great varietie of prayers in the exhi∣bition of which a constant order was to be observed, between and in them some varietie of gesture and ceremonious worship, for di∣rection in which they thought humane infirmitie, subject to mi∣stakes, might have cause some times to consult by a glance the ru∣brikes every where inserted. As for you that have naught else to doe but to turne over the tip of your tongue what comes next in your head and up the white of your eyes, as if the balls were run in to looke after the extravagant conceptions of your braines a booke's of no use, though I wish we had one of all the profane and vaine ba∣bling amongst you, that we might make such unskillfull workemen a∣shamed;2. Tim. 2. 15. 16. and shew our selves approved aswell to the world as to God. The Praelates never cried up our Liturgie as the onelie service of God. Who thinke him serv'd in some other Churches that have it not. Their opinion of it as a most heavenlie and divine piece of writ, doth those holie men that compld it but the same justice which a beter comparison will then yours of it with the Breviarie and Missal of Rome. Your paines hadA parallel of it with primitive formes beter then with the Bre∣via. not been lost in a parallel of it with the solemne services disspersed in many parts of the Bible; with the Greeke and Latin Liturgies where they are not interlin'd or corrupted with any superstition or idola∣trie of Rome. That you have made doth but magnifie her and ob∣lige you, had you any Christian charitie or justice, to thanke God for praeserving so much of his word & worship in her service what the Bishop intends when effected, will warrant our Church, upon your principles, in most parts of her Liturgie; when shewed con∣sonant to the most publike formes of Protestant Churches, though 'tis hard for Fathers to aske advice or borrow authoritie of their children, & for Ancients to heare wherein Iob was mistaken. That with the yong men is wisdome and with the shortnesse of dayes understanding. ThePraelatical Doctours not yet so much for preaching a▪ Presby∣terians. 9. head. King and the many well minded men, I beleeve were never deceived by our Doctours, who I can not thinke ever affirmed they were as much for preaching in their practice and opinion as the Presbyterians. So much as to set aside praying for sermonizing as your . Booke Discipline doth, tel∣ling us. That what day the publike sermon is they could neither require nor greatlie approve that the Common prayers be publikelie used. I require the na∣me
of any that sayd the life and soul of the Liturgie was preaching, withoutVerbi prae∣dicatio de bet esse qua∣si anima li∣turgiae. Alter.▪ Dam. c. 10. Ibid. Esa. 56. 7. which it could not be intire in its parts▪ That he must never goe in and out of the, House of God without ringing his bells (a fit alussion) the word of exhortation Interpraetation and praeferring the nams given the Temple by some of the Iewes Domus expositionis, before that by God Domus Orationis. Though it may have been the fruitlesse practice of some, to quit themselves, as they hop'd, of the disreputation you brought them as ignorant and lazic, to preach somewhat more often then formerlie, till they found their ringing the bells was to scare the people from Church, and doubling their paines reform'd not their opinions nor reduc'd them to their duties. They that prayed without booke be∣forePucrile est ut mihi vi∣deur aliter facere Ibid. and after their sermons came not up to the Presbyterians opinion, that it is a childish thing to doe otherwise. Nor to their practice, To bawlk the first and second service of the Church. What they either affirmed or did in this kinde might bemore to shew your grosse dissimulation at all times; in making if such a difficult businesse to talke then to personate their owne in this of their affliction, which, when you have brought them to the lowest, shall never seduce them so to decline the envie of the people, as by profaning the House of God, sooth themGal. 5. 10. in their errour, styling those divine ordinances which in your maner or frequencie of use (being both without praecept) are but humane Canons and Acts, and fo most part in the mater consist of strife, sc∣ditions, and haeresies, the workes of the flesh, or the Divel that dictates them. So that you may see, if your eyes be not full of somewhat else while you are sporting yourselves with your owne deceivings, their tenet re∣maines the same that it was, and themselves readie enough in this season, as unfit as you thinke it, to ring as low'd as you will in the ares of the world,Divine Ser∣vice. That for Divine service in publike, people need no more but the reding of the Li∣turgie. Which is beter furnish'd with pious petitions, occurring to all visible necessities (and for others emergent the Church keepes a reserve, and in due time ever affords a recruit) then any set or ex∣temporarie prayer that er came out of Presbyters mouth. 2. SermonsCarefull Christians will finde litle leisure on weeke dayes to heare ser∣mons. on weeke dayes (if not festivals, wheron a commemoration of Saints departed is necessarie for Historical instruction, and for imitation exemplarie) ma belayd aside by Christians that have no more time to spare from their honest callings then they ought to spend in the ap∣plication and practice of what they heard on the Sunday; in medita∣tion upon God, his attributes and workes &c in the serious exami∣nation of their lives, and very particular scrutinie of their actions, secret, publike, good, bad, indifferent or mixt, in sorting or par∣selling their sinnes of mission, commission, weaknesse praesump∣tion and in private repenting, weeping, praying, praysing, In
conferring closelie with holie men, chieflie their Priest and pastour of their soules, laying open before him their doubts, distractionsQ d crina quae  declara Ministrie b illis qui pent  at consolatio∣nm, relin∣qui con∣scientijs Ministro∣rum &c. Disc. Eccl. Reformat. Regni Fran. Can. 25. Catechi∣zing beter then prea∣ching in the afternoon found. 9. Head.  sermon con venient but not absolu∣telie neces∣sarie See Hook. Ec∣cles. Pol. 5. Book. Sermons not to ex∣ceed an houre. infirmities & perverse inclinations & Invisiting the sicke, strength∣ning the weake; considering the poore and placing charitie with prudence; condoling with and comforting the afflicted; Compo∣sing controversies, reconciling differences, designing and enter∣prising Heroicke exploits for the just advancement and honour of the King, and publike advantage of Countrey, Citie or Parish where∣of they are Members Finallie, acting all (of which thse are not halfe) that concernes them in their publike and private capacitie. And when all is done, not before, in what leisure's redundand, let them in Gods name, call for a weeklie or daylie sermon, and (where the Priest hath discharg'd as much more of his dutie, and findes in himselfe abilities to compose such an one as with confidence or ra∣ther conscience he can speake it) let them have it. 3. That Sundayes afternoon Sermon is well exchanged for catechizing children, instruc∣ting them in their principles of Religion and acquainting them with the doctrine and discipline of the Church, to which they ought to adhre when they come to their choyce at yeares of discretion which is the custome of some Presbyterian Churches abroad and either hath or should have been tong since of the Scots. 1. Book: Disc: Be∣fore  must the word be preached and Sacraments ministred, and afternoon must the yong children be publikelie examined in their Catechisme in the audience of the people. 4. That on the Sunday before noon sermon is very convenient (a∣buses being redressed) and must be while and where enjoined. Yet in Nations converted to Christianitie by the preaching of the Apost∣les or Apostolical men▪ and so fullie confirmed as no reasonable feare may be of their apostacie, since the infallible spirit is not cooperative with all, if with any, and where, as among the Presbyterians, the noxious spirit of delusion in the mouthes of very many preachers, it's farre from being necessaire to salvation, that care must be had left it bring damnation to the hearers. 5. That where some learned Scholars, or honest industrious Ministers, not at pleasure, but publike appointment, on festivals dayes make a sermon, or have an  (for litle difference need be about the name, and t may be't were beter to have lesse in the thing) it would b , not exceeding an houre, according to the Crt paterne, which is likelie to be the best in the Kingdome, and for the most part hath come nea∣rest the most approved example of the primitive Fathers, as may be seen by their sermons and homilies that are extant. And it should seem Presbyterie, aswell as Episcopacie, hath found some incon∣venience in Sermons that were longer which produced the 34. Ca∣non
in the  Synod at  1574.  ,. since extraordinarie superinfusions were rare, have been  attributed to such discourses principallie wherein the Canon of Scripture hath been interpreted by no private enthusias∣me, o partial addiction to one mans opinion how eminent soever for his gifts or good life, but by the Catholike tradition of the Church, that it the consent of most holie men in it throughout all ages and places as much danger having been from the Iewes (& may be now from Iudaizing Scots) by bad glosses, as from haeretical Christians by Rhetorical discourses on Scripture . . . ▪ Hide   graphon▪ apei  . . . .  de pides di tes  cai  . , . . But what spirit o life hath been found in at lectures consisting of non∣cohaerencies, haesitancie, autologies &c (notwithstanding all the gapings and groanes or other artifices used to put them off for divi∣ne  and raptures) let them speake that were aedified, which I was not, I assure you, by What I heard from you and the brethren of bidding prayer be∣  ap. . that brought the Scotish Euangel to us in this Countrey. 7. Though the Canon betrict, the practice was not, so much as at Court, for bidding prayer before (for after Sermon that for Christs holie Catholike Church and the Collects appointed, are not such, if you remember) some it may be knowing his Majesties minde, which now is publi∣shed, That he   against a , odest,  and  use of Mi∣nisters gifts even in publike . . . . the betr to fit and  their  and the   the prsent . Those  tke themselves obliged to keep to the leter of the rule were satisfied as well in the reason as law fullnesse of the command. Being therefore well assured that the Lords prayer i, as the Fathers call it,  , a complete prayer comprehending the summe of what petitions soever were  to be praesented to the Father, (which none knew beter then the Son∣ne) That the people might be inform'd what at such a time they are to ake, and what, asking in fayth, they might hope to receive, the Minister commands them in the name of that particular Church o which they are to submit in all publike duties or so renounce her , to pray for her after  Catholike Church, for the King and his Royal families His Councel, all inferiour Magistrates &c. And because after the Litanie and so many several prayers relating diffe∣rentlie to those particulars he mentions, it is neither necessarie, nor convenient at all, to doubte the time in repeting or  the ormes  he calls upon them to joine with him in that  prayer which very   all can be asked, saying  Fa∣ther
&c. But as touching the Church; limitation of us to the PaterVt non in∣veniamur discordes in ingressu ad preces ante oncionem faciendas, visum suit utileunifor∣mibus ver∣bis uti . . . Concio et∣iam finetur uniformiter verbis Marc. c. 6. No prayer for the dead in our Ca∣non. noster before, & her approving the Gloria patri &c after the sermon, I see no more in it, then in the 33. Canon of that Councel of Dort which I even now mentioned Praying for the welfare of soule departed (a controversie yet depending between Protestants and Papists) hath ever impudentlie and falselie been attributed to that Canon on pur∣pose to delude poor people so rashlie opinionated of their Presby∣ters that told them so, as they thought it derogatorie to their cre∣dit to search the truth: Or so grosselie ignorant as unable to distin∣guish between praying God for the welfare of, and prasing him for the ex∣emplarie lives of and the heavenlie reward conferr'd on the soules of the Saints departed. Wherein nothing need be argued when those of a seeptical conscience will not be convinc'd, and those that are prae∣judic'd will not be reform'd, & to such no more is to be sayd, but si de∣cipi volunt decipiantur. For private prayer, if personal, the Praelates ne∣ver hitherto praescribed any forme, leaving people to themselves who are private to their owne wants, and to the direction, not in∣junction, of their Priest. But if congregational, though but in Par∣lour or Closet, no colour can be brought why an house should con∣fute a Cathedral, or extemporarie non sense take place of the ancient and well advised prayers of Holie Church.The Church of Scotland hath had a liturgie not onelie for helpe but practice. You can not be more loth to confesse then I am hard to beleeve that you ever were guiltie of more conformitie to ancient Christians in your publike worship then opinions; Yet when I consider what establishment our Religion received in Queen Elizabeths reigne, & what advancement your schisme unhapilie had by her misse placed assistance, I can not satisfie my selfe how in policie or conscience a Princesse so fam'd for devotion and wisdome could professe and pro∣secute such seeming contradictions, and without some humane as∣surance of your conjunction with her so liberallie contribute to∣ward your praetended reformation to the utter demolition of her owne. Therefore upon good enquirie, I am faine to lay my diffi∣dence aside, and have where withall to confirme the Warner in his be∣leefe, discovering first your negative Remonstrances and renncia∣tionsKnox Hist. 1. B. of Rome coincident with (though more violent and particular then) ours; Your superintendents aequivalent to our Bishops; And which as all in all, upon Buchanans record, your subscription to a communitie with us aswell in Ecclesiastike as Civile affaires. This your Maintainer of the Sanctuarie tells us was done in the yeare 1560. in the infancie, or before it rather, in the first conception of your Dis∣cipline. Yea, two yeares before that, not long after your Lords and Barons professing Christ Iesus had subscribed your first Cove∣nant
in Scotland, they convene in Counsel, conclude on several heads whereof this is the first. It is thought expedient, advised and ordai∣ned, That in all parishes of this Realme the Common prayer be read wecklie onIb. B. 2. Sunday, and other Festival dayes publikelie in the parish Churches &c. In the first oration & petition of the Protestants of Scotland to their Queen Regent this was the first demand . . . . That they might meet publikelie or privatelie to their Common prayers in their vulgar tongue. And that this may not be set to the account of your Temporal Lords, or some imper∣fect Members of your Clergie, because I. Knox your Holie head was1. B. 9. head. at this time disjointed from that sanctified bodie, the same care is af∣terward taken for Kirkes in your booke of Discipline it selfe with∣out any intimation of your purpose to tolerate it onelie for helpe and direction, being a forme praescribed, as liable to the peoples super∣stition as ours, otherwise then as you approved the omission of itDecl. Ch. Sc: Praes. The hypo∣critical use, of the Com∣mon prayer booke in Scotland. on publike sermon dayes. And your Maintainer sayth, without doubt it was the very booke of England. Your Church having none of her owne a long time. I would not have you mistaken, no more then you would have the Bishop, whom you so carefullie informe (I feare against your conscience) as if I imputed this to you for any more then a politike compliance, to effect your owne ends by Q. Elizabeths armes, which being in a good part accomplished you altered your Liturgie both in substance and use, changed our prayers for worse, and those you neither injoined by law, nor supported by the generalitie of your practice. Thus from petitioning for Common prayer to your Queen you came about at length to condemning it among your selves. This for the Historie of your hypocritical conformitie with us to worke your owne designe, and inexcusable defection from us when that was done. Touching your feigned approbation of set formes for rules, and for use in beginners, I am to aske you 1. What institutions their canSet formes of no use to beginners that pray by the spi∣rit. be for improvement of supernatural gifts. What formes for progresse in extraordinarie graces 2. If there be such why they serve not a∣well for the benefit of tongues as utterance, and whether the Apost∣les before the day of pentecost had any praeparative to that descent of the spirit upon them, if they had not (the difference of persons not diversifying the donation where or to whomsoever God intends it) why we are to looke about for helpes unto this purpose? 3. Whe∣ther this sword of the spirit can not aswell cut the tongue as pierce the heart? Whether God can not without helpes aswell indire words as mater, and make the tongue become the pen of a readie writer. ThatThe gift of prayer in the Pater Noster. your set formes were published onelie for Ministers that are beginners thereby endeavouring to attaine a readinesse to pray in their familie, not in the Church. I take for an evasion scarce thought upon before now. The gift of pra∣yer
which you take gratis without a proofe, I can afford you to be ordinarilie no other then the forme which Christ bestowed upon his disciples. The use of that hath ever hitherto been continued by their successours in the frequent repetition of the words, and analo∣gie of all their enlargements unto the sense. The greatest comfort that can be had by this is in a cheerfull submission to the judgement of that Church in whose communion I adventure my salvation, & the greatest libertie in the exercise of her words; which in Christian hu∣militie and common reason I am to conceive more apposite then mine owne. Herein I rest the beter satisfied, when I see my com∣monS. Iud. v. 13. Presbyte∣rians divi∣ded about prayer. Hist. 4. B. adversaries in this dutie so to fluctuate in their senses, and like raging waves in a conspiracie to shipwrake others, breaking mutuallie themselves by the uncertaine violence of their motion, and so in the end forming out nothing  their shame. Master Baylie renouncing aswell formes composed by themselves, as praescribed by others. Master Knox praescribing such a s prayer unto himselfe, and so praemeditating the words he was to speake, that when quaestioned he could repeat what er he say'd. Their brethren abroad sometimeSynod Hol∣land. & Ze∣land 1574 Artic. 38. Herm. Sy∣nod. Belgic. cap. 11. strictlie enjoining a forme compiled by others Omns Ministri  formam publicam in Ecclesi precandi bunt . . . . ideoq alia forma brevir post concionem recitanda composita est. At other times leaving their Ministers to a libertie of a set prayer composed by themselves, or one depen∣ding on the dictate of the spirit▪ Minister preces vel dictante spirit, v certa sibi proposita formul conipies The 4. wrong that are prtended from our Liturgie to redound upon A Giver, A Receiver, A Gift, and A Church, being Relatives in this businesse are inseparable by nature, and must fall to ground with the falsitie of the supposition upon which they hang: But what injuries are multiplied upon all by the extemporarie license of Presbyters in their prayers. Our Blessed So∣veraigne.The inju∣ries by ex∣temporie prayer;  cap. 16. K. Ch. 1. hath enumerated, the affectation, emptinesse, imper∣tinence, rudenesse, confusions, latnesse,  and ridiculo repetitions, the seclesse and oft times blaspheus expressio, all these  with a most taedious and intolerable length . . . . Wherein men must be strangelie impudent and flaterers of themselves, not to have an infinite shame of what they so doe and say, in things of so sacred a nature before God and the Church, after so ri∣diculous & indd pfane a maner. Nec potest tibi ('tis Master Baylie I meane,Sen. Ep. 40 l. 1. who hath been guiltie of most in my hearing) ist res   quam si te pdere desieri: perfrices frontem oportet, & ipse  non audia. But I referre him to the rest of what K. Ch. 1. Brieflie but solidelie hath5. B, of Ecl. Pol. writ, and what more at large Master Hooker, to whom I may chal∣lenge all the Scotish Presbyterie for an answer. So great a cloud of witnesses encompassing the Scotish Presbyterie, and
giving in evidence against her as the mother of mischief too manyHeb. 12. 1. yeares in three Kingdomes, your arme is too weake to lay aside the eight of those wicked actions that must be charged on her backe, and the sinneThe Par∣liament of Scotl. in no capacitie to demand af∣ter the mur∣der of K. Ch. . of sacriledge Royal that so  besets her. The Parliament of Scotland, sure aequivocates in denying that they have stripped the King of his just rights (I speake to His Majestie now reigning His Father having unanswe∣rablie argued for himselfe) because they never hitherto acknow∣ledged him invested with any but the name, to which bare inheri∣tance they knew him borne without the charitie of their breath, & which he must have had without their sounding trumpet, proclai∣ming this for their almes as hypocrites in their markets. But to come close to you. This Parliament of Scotland, had it been such, as it was not, upon the murder of the Father ought to have been stripped of all it selfe, then no just rights, (no more but such as a deadman hath to his robes) and being a breathlesse carkasse could require no∣thing at the hands of the Sonne. The courses to which he was stirred up and keeped on, out of natural dutie, by no factious advice, were (how∣soever they succeded) praeservative of his Fathers and himselfe, and de∣structive to no people but the workers of iniquitie that with their ownePs. 51. hands plucked downe miserie upon their heads. The bloudshed brings bloud guiltinesse upon them that first opened the veine, from which he had no need to be purged with hysope that was cleane, nor washed,Habak. 1. 13. whose conscience, in that particular, was whiter then the snow. Yet being by your scarlt Parliament imputed to him, (whose impure eyes can behold nothing but iniquitie in others, and whose wicked mouthes are wide open to devoure the man that is more righteous then themselves) the satisfaction they required could be in order to no exercise of his Royal go∣vernment, nor dare they take any by the rules of your Discipline, which must have bloud for bloud, but a slavish subjection of his lie and crowne to sentence without mercie, which had been, though fewer in number, yet as full in your meaning, and as effectual aequi∣table, demands. Allthough this be a replie unanswerable to your prae∣tense.Review changeth the words of the Procl. The origi∣nal of the oath for se∣curitie of disscipline. Yet I must not leave you without discovering your dimin∣tive forgerie in Parliament Proclamations, putting parts of his Royal Government where they the whole without exception. His  portract & seale being not his, when new stampt, and set to publike writings by your hands then in actual rebellion against his person. The securitie to your Religion and Liberties required, were first enacted for an aequitable demand onelie by a Convention of Rebells at Edenburgh 1567. who had been partlie solicited, partlie scared into a dubious consent with, and by a Traiterous Assemblie, (who had in vaine posted away foure Caitiffe-Cursitours, miscalled Commissioners, to the more loyal Lords
delared for the Hamiltons, as likewise to the Neuters, to deposeKnox. Dow∣glas Row, Craig. Kn. Hist. B. 5. their Queen, and clog their future Princes's succession with this impious condition. That all Princes and Kings hereafter in this Realme, be∣fore their Coronation shall take oath to maintaine the true Religion now professed in the Church of Scotland, and suppresse all things (even their soules & con∣sciences) contrarie to it, and that are not agreeing with it. This I take to be the fundamental law your Proclamation reflects upon, foralas the other foundation of your solemne league and covenant lies not fathom deep, a stripling of twelves yeares old can reach to the botom; and evert, both, when he calls for that invisible law of God, which approves much lesse enjoines this praerequiring satisfaction from a King, For itDial. De Iur: Regn▪ ap. Scot. The choyce of a King o∣riginallie not justifia∣ble in any perpl. is not Maitlands idle concession to Buchanan in his cursed dialogue upon Homers authoritie, That there was a time when men liv'd lawlesse in Cottages and caves, and at length by consent tooke a justi∣fiable course of creating a King unto themselves that will reduce Ro∣yaltie to popular restrictions. Such stuffe as this may be put off a∣mong Pagans that will hearken to the fable of Cadmus, & be wonne into a beliefe that the serpents teeth were sowed in so good a soile as that they all sprung up proper men of whose race we might have had some at this day, if they had betoke themselves to the election of a King, when for want of one they fell to civile dissensions & de∣struction of themselves. I demand as a Christian, and as much might a Iew▪ Who was the first King! Whether he was not instituted by God? Whether not with a decree touching primogeniture in the right of succession, by the first borne to propagate his authoritie and office? Whether any people in the world, more or lesse in a bo∣die lawfullie assembled, have been at a losse for a King to command them? & what law beside that of nature which if such as Saint Paul describes it, is somewhat hard to distinguish from an original law of God, (and yet shall be sequester'd from our praesent dispute) con∣stituted them in a full capacitie to chuse one? Who? When? Where?Cum sit & ordini na∣turae con∣sentaneum, & omnibus prop om∣nium gen∣tium Histo∣rijs testifi∣catum. De Iur. Reg. Open Buchanans packe, as big as it is, begirt with no lesse then the cingle of the world, and with out Ambiguons peradventures, or affirmations involv'd in quaestionable circumstances, lay me out one cleare instance to this purpose and when you have, purchase a paral∣lel among your selves. Transmigration of Nations, Navigations of discoverie, design'd or contingent, New plantations upon necessi∣tie or pleasure, Spontaneous secessions, though by supreme autho∣ritie approved; Relegations and exiles, Extinctions of lines. Fi∣nallie whatsoever to be thought on that can separate a medley of men from a setled societe, or make an Anarchie among People, will when all are combin'd, I beleeve, litle disorder me in my hold. So that
to use the words of that valiant General, or take the Kings from his mouth. You declared him to be your King, but with such conditions and provi∣sos'sM. Montr. Decl. 1650 as robbed him of all right and power. For while you praetend to give him a litle, which he must acept of as from you, you spoile him of all that power and authoritie which the law of God, of Nature, and of the Land hath invested him with by so long continued descent from his famous praedecessours. For the nature of yourAbolition of Episco∣pacie will not give the Scots sa∣tisfaction. demand, the abolition of Episcopacie, which you confesse to be a great one (so great indeed as not to be granted but with a devastation of his conscience) the Praelates were very unworthie of their miters, if they pressed not his Majestie (were it necessarie where is so free an in∣clination) to denie you, though they know well enough, were your great demand yeilded, you have one no lesse behind, securitie of liberties, and when both were had (which God forbid they ever should be) your crueltie and guilt would admit of no lesse after-satisfaction from him for England, then from his Father for Scotland, nor your raging Devill be otherwise satiated then with his bloud. There∣fore the advantage you take of his denial (though you confesse upon other mens importunate instance) makes your Praedestinarian Godships no lesse peremptorie in the immutabilitie of your decree, to forme Commonwealths of Kingdomes, and according to you Di∣vinitie the meanes being as unalterablie destin'd as the end, you re∣solve what you can (and doe well to tell us so) that he and all his fami∣lie shall perish. —Levia sed nimium querorSen. H fur. Coelo timendum est, regna ne summa occupet Qui vicit ima . . . . . . For you that thus capitulate with Kings, have nothing next to doe but to article with God. Presbyterie admitting no Rival Regent, much lesse any superiour, will make way to its solitarie supremacie by ruine. I ter ruina quaeret, & vacuo voles Regnare mundo.— Your patient surplicates were your Hage papers, which most inqui∣sitive men have heard or seen before this time. Wherein you tell HisP. Iun. 1. ay 22 Majestie his denial will constraine your people . . . to doe what is incumbent unto them, we know what you meane, that fatal word being scarce toHenders. 1. Pap. to▪ K. Ch. 1. be met with but having Rebellion and Murder at its heeles. Your Euangelist of the Covenant did not cant it to his Father, but sayd plainlie Reformation may be (though he wish'd it not) left to the mul∣titude whom God stirreth up [to kill and slay without quaestion] when Prin∣cis
are negligent, as they are when they yeild not their aequitable demand, grant their patient supplicates, lay their heads on the blocke, and (not doe but) suffer as they would have them. Lsa patientia fit furor, Even in such meeke men as you, patience upon denial can become furre and supplicates after some continuances commands . . And then he may have an offer of his or their Kingdome, as you thinke fiter to style it, but it must be with a resignation of his crowne, their Lives and estates shall be Oretenus for his service, when aurium tenus they are up to the eares in a good bargaine, taking money with one hand, and delivering him up with the other; which is the issue to be expected upon the grant, and nothing worse can be feared (nor that if well thought on) from the denial of your demands. Therefore, to con∣clude, no miserie of King nor people should be so impolitikelie declin'd as to be desperatelie embraced. And till the essentials of Scotish Presby∣terie be changed, which are undisputablie destructive to all Mo∣narchs that come among them, true Praelatical hearts can not be tru∣lie considerate or loyal, if they be not obstinate in this perswasion and beleefe.. R. Disc. 9. head. Nature robbed of her Praero∣gative by Presbyterie The place cited, to which you send us for a view of your tender care in providing the parents consent to the mariage of their children, gives us a full prospect of your tyrannie over Nature, whose throne is usur∣ped, whose praerogative trampled downe, and her Paternal Princes enthralled to the dominion of your spirit. For your publike inhibition of private mariages there mentioned, is not so much to carie the streame of childrens obedience to their Parents and Curatours, as to make sure that the water goe not by your mill, that due homage be payd to the consistorian powers that are above them. Therefore in some cases (and we know no which you except) 'tis sayd. The Minister or Magistrate to whom, (though not you, your Discipline gives the pr∣cedence and praedominance) may enter in the place of parents . . . . may ad∣mitInclina tions to mar∣rie not all wayes devi∣ne motions. them to mariage. For the worke of God ought not to be hindred &c. This worke of God is there called the touch of the heart with desire of mariage, As if all hearts so touched had Gods hand layd upon them, and the Scotsh climate were so cold as all natural or carnal inclinations were frozen untill fire came downe from heaven to dissolve them. As if then, good soules, they were melted in a minute, and had outrun the bounds of all selfe moderation, all rational perswasion, all love mar∣tyrdom in a passive submission to the just rigour or unjust wilfull∣nesse of cruel parents contradicting their sodaine affections and a∣mourous violence, For if these Flames warme by degrees at a di∣stanceConsent of parents. (and some danger drawes on of being scorch'd without scree∣ning) their duie should prompt them to withdraw in due season,
and repraesent to their parents the first sense they finde of that heate, the increase of content or comfort they take in it, and with▪ their approbation farther cherish these desires, or upon their dislike in gratitude and justice to their sufferance of many infant troubles, & elder petulancies, endure a litle hardship for their pleasures. For to change the allegorie, if children first set saile of themselves, & then call to their parents at shoare for leave to take shiping, this mocke re∣spect would rellish more of scorne then good nature or dutie. And as well may they bid adieu to relations, as when before a strong▪ gale of winde looke for a nod or waving hand to incourage that course wherein they themselves are steering, and necessitie carying then not to be resisted. Yet no other is that honour which your Discipline sayth they are bound to give to their parents, the parts whereof you make these. To open their affection. To aske their counsel and assistance how that mo∣tion . . . . may be performed, it speakes not of asking pardon for enterta∣ning it before approved. Vt cun que in Scriptu∣ris determi∣natum sit & jure Ci∣vili de con∣sensu pa∣rentum; In Ecclesiasti∣cu tamen curijs obti∣net jus P∣pale Cano∣nicum qu definitur consensu parentum de houe ate non de ne∣cesitat Et quod Matrimo∣nia deben esse libera, & non pen∣dere exali no arbitrio Assert: Pol. Christ. You know the Civile and Canon law are divided, that standing much upon the necessitie, this onelie on the decencie or honestie of having the parents consent. A friend of yours, that îs hugg'd for his paines in opposing our Church, presseth hard the coincidence of the former with the determination in Scripture, and objects her concurrent practice with the later To tell you how Lib. 2. De Regn. Christ. Bucer playes the strict Civilian in this businesse, whose authoritie is very oracular when for you, would it may be render him but a private opiniatour now against you. And as litle might it availe to produce the Acts of your Brethren in Holland, who seem to declare for a necessitie in their provincial Synod. Nemo proclamabitur de con∣trahendo nisi prius attulerit testimonium de consensu parentum, No more then a convenience in their National, and that determinable by their Presbyterie when controverted . . . . Siquis autem irrationabiliter in his cs & refractarie se gesscrit, sic quod nullo modo velle consentire . . . . presby∣terium constituit quid in talibus casibus sit faciendum. In this division you doe well to quit your selve of all wonted interest, and appeale even from Scripture it selfe to the Tribunal of reason and aequitie. Where yet you will scarce get your hearing before you prove that the authoritie of Pa∣rents is to be restrained by the many times unreasonable (though law∣full and honest▪) desires or motions in their children. As if a Kings daughter should be taken with a beggar borne under an hedge▪ With which instance your Presbytrie is scarce to be trusted, who it may be, are readie enough to justifie the match by the eminencie of his vertues, to which they may beter dispose daughters then distribute crownes, saying Regna virtuti, non generi deberi. Epictetus that was a very good Master of his reason, gave this general rule unto his disci∣ples▪
That all obligatorie offices are measured by the relative habitsDordorac. 1574. ar∣tic. 81. 1578. The inju∣rie done to Parent  by Presbyterie not justifia∣ble in rea∣son. Buchan. Ta cathe∣cnta hoo epipantais schesesi pa∣rametrei∣tui. Enchir. c. 7 Terent Andr. act. 1. Sc. 5. Act. 5. Sc. 3. of the persons. He begins with the Father as most absolute in his po∣wer, all whose injunctions and actions are to have an active or pas∣sive obedience from his children. Pater estin; hypagorenetai epimleisthai, parahorein hapantoon, anechesthai laidorountos, paientos If you talke to him, as Bishop, to the of a cruel parent, ausing his antgoritie &c. He will tell you Na∣ture hath not tied you to a good father, but a father, & your dutie must bepayd him in his natural capacitie, not moral ete un pros aga∣thon patera physi okiothes, alia pros patera. There is indeed somewhat in humanitie it selfe, which may be call'd the office of a father to his son∣ne. To moderate sometimes his autocratical power by affection, & run his iron heart into the same molds with the softer metall of his childrens at least not t make it the hammer and anvil whereby to fashion youth to the humourous morose severitie of age. It was upon some such advantage that Pamphilus argued in the Comoedie. Hocci∣ne est humam factum aut incoeptum? Hoccine officium Patris? . . . . Pro Deum atquchomim, quid est, si non haec contumelia est? Vxorem decreverat dare sese mihi hoie, nonne oportuit praescisse me ante? nonne prius communicatum oportuit. Yet afterward Simo contrapones his improper choyce of a match misbeseeming him, against custome, law, and his dutie as a sonne. Adeon impotenti esse anime ut praeter civium Morem atque legem, & sui volun∣tatem patris. Tamen hanc habere cupiat cum summo probro? In fine Pamphilus convinc'd in likelihood by his reason, made a filial exemplarie sub∣mission in our Case. Ego me amare hanc fateor, si id peccare est, fateor id quoque. Tibi Pater me dedo, quidvis oneris impone, impera. Vis me uxorem du∣cere? hanc amittere? ut potero seram. Yet among Christians, when such submission's not found from a frenzie of love which will take no advice from Nature or Reason, I confesse the Magistrates and Mini∣sters shall doe an act of charitie in their mediation with his father by complying with to cure him of his madnesse, and restore him to his senses. But when their Discipline makes it an act of power and juris∣diction,1. B. 9. head, and that as much, if not more, concerning the Minister as Magistrate, I take it to be very emptie of oequitie, as full as the Reviewer thinkes it, and see not where, after the Scotish mode, any Church or State doth practize or approve it. In the behalfe of them that doe, he is to repaire the breach of the 5. Commandement by the disobe∣dient child, or shew us where in this particular it was dispens'd with.No obe∣dience due to parents requiring a injust mar∣riage, In case of sinne I confesse a just apologie may be made. As if the Fa∣ther would admit of none but an incestuous marriage, or, to save his estate, with one in open rebellion against the King; The child must not obey, nor yet is bound where is feare of incontinencie, to live single. The supreme Magistrate ought here to take the place, &
doe the office of the parent. And the Minister must execute all law∣full commands of this Kind in his function. But if the case be so rare of the childs complaint, and not heard of in an age, the Dawbers of the Discipline might have saved this patch; and need not have found their fingars with such untemper'd stuffe, as hang neither Scrip∣ture nor reason in its mixture, was never intended to cement any building of Gods, not the corrupt affections of willfull children to be called his worke. Yet that the Reader may neither be unsatisfied nor delded (as he will be very often if he observes not your fraud in mistating the case) I must admonish him that the Bishop's may be frequent though yours be . His Lordship objecting your admission to mariage the parent gaistanding. And you reponing an authoritative Sentence so enforce consent. His additions about compelling the parents toEp. S. Ia. v. 9. give portions was fastned upon your practice not your canon. Your rai∣ling accusation, an impudentlie which Michael would not being when disputing with the Devil, will  litle grace, as strengthen, your contro∣versie with a better Angel of the Church In such maters of fact truth can be justified no otherwise then upon enquirie, whereby will best be discovered her faythfull witnesse; and the false one too that will utterProv. 14. 5. 2. Cor. 12. 14. . Tim. 4. . Poitent A dulterere not to be put to de∣ath. . Iohn, . 2. Cor. 12, 7. lies. Yet in the place alledged your cano ordering out of the text, without quaestion a dowrie to a daughter that is destoured, he that at a distance hath any good opinion of your conscience will praesume your care can be in justice no lesse of her who you say, hath committed no such shinesse before, but kept the Virgin▪ at that commends her to your super▪paternal powers to be made a bride. The passage a∣gainst sparing of the life of  (which you here substitute in the roome of a beter answer to the other) is not so consonant to the law of God, a dissonant from the milder Gospell of Christ, who nei∣ther as King commanded stones to be cst at the poenitent brought before him not as Priest retracted by excounication his signal mercie shewed in her dismission. A Presbyter may have a thorne in the flesh as well as a Praelate, allthough for want of Saint Paule spirit he will abate no measure of his pride in oclations▪ And if he take it out to no-better purpose then to thrust it in other mens sides▪ (if he looke not to it) will price his owne fingar, in his hast. The falselie prae∣tentled   and lovers of so severe discipline make it as litle consistent with Christian libertie  &  , to discipline their bo∣dies and subdue them by Apostolical correction▪ as to subject their spirits, according to Apostolical doctrine, to just powers ordained by God, And a peice of tyrannie they count it to chasten and mortifie (which by paecedent they  into reproofe) ever since David did it that was a King. For want of which (whatsoever they fancie of I
know not whose biting and spurning) the Presbyterian Iesuruns have kick'd as much as before, nor since this great severitie was threatned, could they have the face to expunge the clause that by their owne confession occasion'd it, & still stands thus in their booke . . Whore∣dome,1. Book. Discpl. 9. Head. The Bi∣shops caute∣lous in their warrants for claude∣stine mar∣riages. In nuperis constitndi∣nibus anni 1603. vi∣dentur prae∣sules An∣glicane a∣bunde cavi∣se Alter. Dam. c. 70 Ao. 1588 Shulting Reprehens. Synod. Middelb. The Revie∣wers shame∣lesse denial of a know'n truth about impeding civile pro∣ceedings. Contr. E. pilam Phi∣adolph. fornication, adulterie are sinnet most common in this realme. The Bishops warrants for elandestine marriages were not without this par∣ticular caution against spoiling parents of their deare children. Quod parentum, modo sint in vivis, vel alias Tutorum sive gubernatorum suorum ex∣pressum consensum in hac parte obtinuerint. And how abundantlie otherwise was provided let your brother Didoclave beare witnesse. If their mercinarie officers prostituted to their profit this indulgence gran∣ted upon very good reasons to noble personages, whose praecon∣tracts, or impediments if any, were not very likelie, and it may be not so fiting to be discovered, upon publishing their bannes) this can fairlie be charged neither upon the Bishops order, nor their per∣sons, unlesse you would have them ubiquitarie in their Courts, & omni-praescient in the actions of their instruments. Their after-di∣spensations with marriages without warrant I hope are not culpable, except you would drive them to a necessitie of divorce. Among them whom you call brethren heretofore those of Middleburgh did invalidate all private marriage. About which their adversaries, though con∣senting in the substance, call upon them for a text of Scripture, which I never heard was hitherto produced. If he that fixeth his eyes upon the sunne, till the strength of the beames and luster put them out, should declare before the witnesses of his misfortune that he never saw the least glimpse or brightnesse of that luminarie, he were more to be credited then Master Baylie in his grosse selfe-confounding denial, that ever any such mater was at∣tempted in Scotland as drawing civile causes upon praetense of Scandal unto a Synod of Presbyters, or that he ever heard alledged by their adver∣saries their impeding or repealing any civile proceedings. Whereas the first hath been proved allreadie by the Bishop out of the very words in their discipline; And the two other objected in numerous instan∣ces by most, if not all the adversaries that have published any thing against them. By Arch-Bishop Spotswood in the different cases of the Bishops Montgomerie and Adamson, A Melvin, Blacke, the spa∣nish Merchants &c. So that in general he is faine, to alledge against them in this language . . . . Ministrorum eo crevit insolentia, ut non contenti sua functione, lites & reos omnes (what and who is here excepted?) ad suum tribunal revocare niterentur, concilii publici (which is more then the mea∣nest civile Court) placita rescindere, Ordinum decretis (which riseth high  aed siomaum non facerent intercedere, &c. Which is worse then Sy∣nodical
impeding or repeating, populum nem contra hostem in armis parat esse jubere. And which includeth all in all. Nihil denique erat quod istos fam severos censores effugeret. The Answerer by leter . . . How inconsistent Presb. Government is with Monarchie objectts their interposing in a case of debt between J. T. and P. T, determined by the Lords of Session▪ Their discharging Munday mercates against leters Patents under the Great Seale, professeth that like infinite instances might be produ∣ced, and one more of them he brings with the several circumstances about a decree and judgement obtined by Master Iohn Grahum. In general your judicial Vsurpations are censur'd by the Authour of Episcopacie and Presbyterie considered. Whereof he brings no particulars because he sayth nobodie can be ignorant that hath look'd into the knowen stories of this last age. Somewhat to this purpose is in him that writ the Trojan Horse . . . unbowelled. K. Iames's Declaration against you in the case of the Aberdene Ministers is in print. Beside many other of this nature that I have not seen, or doe not thinke on. Where Master Baylie hath slept out all this noyse, J can not guesse, if above ground. So that a lasse the Curtisan Bishops may passe away unquaestion'd with a few innocent prohibitions in their pockets, when the Traverse is draw'n and the Palliard Presbyters discovered in multitudes at the businesse, heaping up such loades of repeales and protestations, as crush all iniquitie into scandal, & make Civile Courts, Parliaments Coun∣cel and King responsable for their sentences to the Synods. The next injurie against Masters and Mistresses of families as it stands inPublike ca∣techizing of Masters & Mistresses indecent. your discipline (not as you subtilie, yet vainlie, advantage it) is criminal, at least so farre as it is a transgression of Saint Pauls rule, which requires all things to be done euschemonoos & cata taxin, decentlie and in order, 1. Cor. 14. 50. Whereas for them to be brought to such a publike account, who at all other times, without personal excep∣tion, are constituted instructours of their children and servants, is not eushemonoot; it caries litle decencie with it, it too much discounte∣nanceth their authoritie, it levels their natural and politike Domi∣nion for the time, nor have those different lines as they are draw'n in your Discipline, such a just symmetrie, as to produce an hand∣some feature of one person. It is not cata taxin, take it in what sense you will, no man will say there is a due order observed, nor any such praescription in Christs Holy Catholike Church. The same A∣postle that gave particular directions in the case made no canon for this. An antecedent examination he appointed, but the Ancients1. Cor 11. 28. Lit. Ch. c. p. 215. interpret it more of the will and affection then the understanding & mind. Or if he meant it of both, he made every man judge of him∣selfe (as you doe when he is praesent at the ministration of baptis∣me)
that had before renderd a reason of his fayth to the Church, neither Presbyter and inquisitour of course nor parishoner a wit∣nesse of his unworthinesse and ignorance Ourh heteros ton hetecon ... all autos heauton sayth Oecumenius which put Cajetan upon the thought that confession was not at this time required, for which he is taken up by Catharinus. And Chrysostom referres us to a text in St. Pauls13. 5. second epistle which tells us what discoverie may put the examina∣tion to an end. Examine your selves whether ye be in the fayth. Omnem prola∣tionem quaerendi & inveniendi credendo fiisti hunc tibi modum statuit fructus ipse quaerendi, is intended, I beleeve, as a glosse upon it by Tertullian. So that the knowledge how to pray was no praerequisite of St. Pauls. NorDe Praeser. c. 10. If they know not how to pray neither whe∣rein their righteous∣nesse sands or consist, they oughs not to be ad∣mitted to the Lords table. 1. Book. Disc. 9 head. Ibid. Excommu∣nication of the igno∣rant with∣out war∣▪ . can we heare from him that the ignorance of other your disciplina∣rian articles exclude a man more from the Sacrament of the Lords supper then from the communion of Saints & Christianitie he pro∣fesseth in his Creed. Beside 'tis easie to conceive what discourage∣ment it brings upon such good Christians as hunger and thirst after this spiritual nourishment of their soules, and how much it deroga∣tes from that reverence Antiquitie render'd to this Sacrament and the high degree of necessitie they held often to participate hereof by such clauses as this. All Ministers must be admonished to be more carefull to instruct the ignorant then readie to serve their appetite, and to use more sharpe examination then indulgence in admitting &c. Which hath a different sound from the earnest crie of the Euangelical Prophet Isai 55. 1. and the free invitation made by the High Priest of our profession in the Gospell S. Luk. 4 you accounting profanelie the losse hereof no more then the misse of a meale, and the disappointment no other then depriving an hungrie appetite of a diner. Our Fathers of old were otherwise minded, and excommunicated those that were pee∣vishlie averse, not those that (being engag'd in no penance) hum∣blie desir'd the benefit hereof. Apostrephomenous tea metalephin tes cucha∣ristias cata fina ataxian toutous apobletons ginesthaites ecclesias. was part of a ca∣non at the Councel of Antioch A. 341. I could adde, That you declare not what may passe among you in the Master and Mistresses answers for the summe of the law, what for the knowledge wherein their righteousnesse stands. without which you say they ought not to be admitted. So that the sharpnesse of your examen and acceptance of their answer being arbitrarie, much roome is left for private spleen, antipathie and passion no justifiable causes of separation from this communitie of Christians, and therefore made the ground of enquirie and cog∣nizanceExtax∣estho de me  ephilo∣neikia e ti∣ni toiaute aedia tou e∣piscopou a∣posynagogo egegenen∣tat. Can. 5. Chr. Iustel. Familie vi∣sitations commenda∣ble aswell in orthodo∣xe Priests as Presbyters. in every halfe yeares Synod by the Nicene Father, that such partialitie might not be tolerated in the Bishops, But whereas you excommunicate the parent and Masters for negligence when their chil∣dren
and servants are suffered to continue in wilfull ignorance. Why not as∣well the God Fathers and Pastours whose subsidiarie care should not onelie▪ be restaurative but praeventive? Why not such aged women as are not teachers of good things, That the yong women be sober, love their husbands and children &c. Tit. 2, 3? Why not all those in whom the word of Christ should dwell richlie in all wisdome, and they teach and admonish one another Col. 3. 16. Which being a like duties of the Text alike require your in∣spection, nor doth i appeare any more that you are left to a liber∣tie of discrimination in your censure, then that for any of these de∣faults you may exercise it at all. Your familie visitations, if sincerelie intended for the inspection of maners and conversations is com∣mendable, if done with the spirit of discretion, moderation & mee∣knesse. When this was practiz'd by the most conscientious Priests of the Episcopal partie (your knowledge whereof to denie by oath would looke litle beter then perjurie) it was calumniated by many of your brood for gadding and gossiping, defam'd by some for more sinfull conversing. And when the generalitie of them (the Episcopal Cler∣gie) remitted the frequencie of preaching, the studie for which they found inconsistent with this more necessarie more beneficial catechizing the people, it was nicknam'd suppressing the word. And when at such times as the sacramental solemnities they entred into any pri∣vate spiritual communication (though advised by the Church) they were put to purge themselves from the imputation of Poperie in practizing auricular confession and injunction of penance. Your or∣der and practice is to keep off from the holie Table not such onelie as conjunctive are grosselie and willfullie, but divisivé (intoo strict ā sense) grosselie or willfullie ignorant. Touching which allthough their negli∣gence is inexcusable, and their dulnesse pitiable, yet that your act of cruel jurisdiction is justified by no divine command nor Catho∣like example. If never any for simple ignorance were excommunicated in Scotland. You must be rebuk'd for transgressing your rule and failing in yourIb. Disc. 9. Head. dutie as your Kirke pleaseth thus to declare it. In sufferable we judge it that men be permitted to live and continue in ignorance as Members of the Kirke. Whether greater tyrannie were exerciz'd in the High Commission CourtsRiot in Scotland to get downe the High Commission. or your Consistories, your aequitable comparers by this time, are not to seeke. What excesse on your side hath been evidenc'd is here resumed onelie to aggravate your floud of boundlesse crueltie by the many heads from which it issues, and the cataracts it powres upon the poor people in every parish. The Bishops playd indeed the Rx in that their Court, because they acted in it by authoritie and deputation from the King. But you and your Brethren playd the Rebells to the purpose,
when you first rioted, then rebell'd and covenanted before, er you supplicated to suppresse it. K. Ch. 1. by his grace and too fluent cha∣ritie praevented the violence intended by your Parliament, though he found no thankes nor yet acceptance at your hands His proclama∣tionLarg. Decl. The Kings palace and Parliament fallen with that in En∣gland. being rudelie encountred with a rebellious protestation read by Iohnston. The King & Anticlerical Parliament in England that alasse joind hands in a maner, yet scarce agreed, to throw downe the o∣ther about their eares (without which the Praelates had no power, lesse then no reason (if it might be) to let it fall) have not onelie covered the poor Bishops with the ruine of that Court, but since hands and hearts were divided, the laborious Lords and Commons, without him, have pull'd the Fabrike of both Houses, and of MonarchieMore com∣fort because lesse rigiour in the re∣formed El∣derships a∣broad. upon themselves. The Congregational Eldership, a thing wheresoever more to be jeerd at and lesse endured then a Commission, is enjoy'd with so much more comfort among other of the Reformed then in Scotland, as we are eye witnesses of lesse authoritie & rigour in it. And while I am writing this Replie one of the Reformed Presbyters, your Countreyman ingenuouslie confesseth to me that he thinkes in his con∣science the praesent Kirke tyrannie in Scotland (he speakes it indeed rather of the practice then rule) is farre beyond what ever could be alledged against our Bishops, or the Pope. And that if he & others of his minde tooke the constitu∣tion of that government every where to be the same as it is executed in Scotland they would not continue a day longer in that communion. The lawes of these Scotish Elderships taken out of Holie scripture can not be very particular in many cases. Their Acts of superiour judicatories doe not, can not, so specifie interpretative Scandals, nor in all occurring possibilities propor∣tion corporal punishments, or pecuniarie mulcts, in the arbitre∣ment of which lies the tyrannie of this petie Aristocratie, and most ridiculouslie many times used in cutting halfe the haire, shaving beards &c. as before now hath been objected by others that having I beleeveAnswer by Letter. seen it, better know it. In the abuses by such censures, and difficul∣tie of some cases, when appeale is made to a Synod, the Bishop tells you (which you observe not) that the shortnesse of its continuance can af∣ford, the condition of the persons will afford litle reliefe. Your dozen of the most a∣ble pious plowmen in many parishes, with an unexperienc'd illite∣rate Pastour praesiding in their Councel are no very reverend Iud∣gesMany of those in Scotland have very unfit, una∣ble Iudges. in many cases. And what pitifull creatures they must be of ne∣cessitie in some places may be guessed untill this quaestion be answe∣r'd which is sent you from another Countreyman of yours an ho∣nest able Divine. Whether you have not heard of Countrey Churches in Scot∣land, especiallie amongst the Saints of Argile, where not three, hapilie not one in the whole parish could reade. Amphictyonum consessus. A very honourable
bench. A Senate that no doubt would strike greater amazement (but upon other reasons) then the Romane if any foraigner shouldEpiscopacie want no ae∣quivalent in Discipli∣ne. Oeconomis testibus Sy∣nodalibus & Collecto∣ribus in Ec∣clesiastcke paroeciana rudera quaedam functionuu diaconorum & seniorum relicta vel potius im∣posita sunt. Alter. Dam c. 12. Synodales aestes, quos sidem ea∣vocant, qui in inque∣stionibus morum & visitationi∣bus adjun∣guntur Oe∣conomis Oe∣conomi sive Gardiani Ecclesiasti∣kae quorum minus est pro eo anno .... inordi∣nateviven∣tesinquire∣re, monere scandaloss, ordinario praesentare &c. Ibid. E. Angl. Pol. Isai 53. 7. behold them. In that you say the Episcopal way is to have no discipline at all in any congregation, you are somewhat more hard hearted then your brethren, Who acknowledge some of the functional rubbish of your Temple building, Elders and Deacons, upon the shoulders of our Church wardens, Sidemen and Collectours, part of whose charge is to observe maners, inquire out il livers, admonish the scandalous, and praesent them to the ordinarie. To direct them in this dutie the Bishops articles are disspersed, and an Audit held of their account at every visitation. The officials pleasure regulates not their infor∣mation, which is to be as impartial as an oath can make it. His con∣science commonlie is not to large, though his learning and wisdome be of greater extension then the Elders. What power he exerciseth is by law and custome. In correctionis negotijs alia quidem facient omnia (excom∣munication is more iselie and conscientiouslie excepted) quae de jure pos∣sunt & solent fieri. Constit. 1571▪ To the Presbyterian tendernesse of medling with domestike infirmities somewhat is sayd allreadie which the Answerer by leter thus avoucheth. It is certaine that a foolish man revealing foolishlie his faults to his wife, the zealous wife upon some quarelling betwixt her and her husband, hath gone to a good Minister, revealed what was told her, and the ho∣nest impertial Minister hath convented the man, charged him with his sinne, and made him confesse satisfie, and doe penance publikelie. Here the flagrant scandal was onelie the fire or furie that broke out of a weake womans breast into a pragmatical Presbyters eares, whose heade is no sanctuarie for spiritual secrecies, but his curiositie the mine that under wor∣kes the foundation of private families, and palaces too (whereof that of Mary Queen of Scots may be a formidable, and lamentable example) and when jealousies faile of materiall truth in the disco∣verie, to blow them up with malicious calumnies what they can. For suits and differences incident between Pastour and flocke, Lay Elder and his neighbour, the passion upon which perverts, & blindes the eyes of the wisest men that are your Congregational or Classical Iudges you passe quietlie by it, as having nothing to say for it. These are the great injuries and hurts which make the Scotish Discipline, Scandalous to all the Reformed world being prov'd destructive to the just praerogative of Kings, the power of Parliaments, the liber∣tie of subjects: enslaving all orders of men, where it takes place, to the arbitrarie jurisdiction of a corrupt Synod, and that common∣lie moderated by the usurped Papacie of a Knox a Buchanan, a Mel∣vin, an Henderson, such meeke lambes as no misbeleeving Iew can mis∣doubt,
them to be fore runners of his Messias who hath prae-inspired this good principle into their heads. To bring their Kings rather then goe themselves to the slaughter. And wheresoe'r they get power, to teare out the throat of the hearers▪ and make them dumb, never more able to open their mouthes against the know'n Ditie of their Pres∣byterie. CHAPTER XIII, The Bishops exceptions against the Covenant made good, and this proved That no man is obliged to keep it who hath taken it. IF I had not found the Reviewer a pretie round and plumpe Gen∣tlemanReasons why the Re∣viewer is so much inli∣ned to the metaphor op a vomit Tous isch∣nous kai e∣vemeas ano pharmace∣vein . . . tous de dy∣semeas kai mesoos eu∣sarcou ca∣to. 4. Aph. 6. & 7. G. moching Compend. Insti. Med disc. 5. in blacke, I might have misse-thought the habit of his bodie and conformation of his parts, facilitating with some pleasure the operation of his physike, to have enamourd him with the o∣therwise undecent, metaphore of a vomit; But Hippocrates praescri∣bing to his constitution (as J take it) the other method for dejection of his humours, I recollect with my selfe a triple cause that might at this time create his distemper, & in his penning force out this floud of gall upon his paper 1. His late fruitlesse voyage by sea might still sticke in his stomake, having before been for many yeares accusto∣med to none but land waves of his raising, the raging tumults and madnesse of the people. 2. A violent agitation of his bodie, the sixe Scoti Iehu's in zeale to the cause coaching it much too furiouslie a∣bout the Countrey. 3. The abominable sight of his Majesties hand to diverse papers, denying the very subject of this chapter, the ta∣king, injoining, or tolerating of the Covenant. So a Doctour in the facultie nearest hand instructs me . . . . vomitum vulgò concitare tradun∣tur . . . . violenta & vehemens corporis agitatio, insueta per mare navigatio . . . . imaginatio & intuitus rerum abominabilium. Beside the pleasing sent of an Irish designe then in hand might offend him, which is a fourth cause he addes and I end with, Odor rerum faetidarum &c. As to the substance of the chapter, wherein his Lordship hath taken the Palladium of Presbyterie, (without which the successe of his o∣ther attempts had been nothing) the Reviewers stratagems (for
strength of reason he brings none) are unlikelie to rescue it, The Bi∣shopVn lawfull Covenants not to be keept-Ou epior∣kein phobe menous tu∣te para ton theon timo∣rian, kai ten para tois anthrapois aischynta. is very sensible how deep the conscience of an oath stickes in men whose hearts are not hardened against religious impressions. And how perjurie is abhorred among heathen, who have conscien∣tious feare of punishment from their God, and a politike one too of shame before men. To undeceive therefore such as fondlie fancie because their hands were lift up, that their covenant's with hea∣ven: And because their eyels are open, that they walke not in darkenesse and the shadow of death, He brings them first the reliefe of se∣veral propositions, which when draw'n out, will appeare to be these. All oathes, vowes & covenants are not binding, it being customarie among men to make the same bonds serve for iniquitie as justice & tie up se∣cret conspiracies with the publike liguments of communitie & peace. 2. Those that are not obligatorie may be broken, viz where a greater jud∣gement solveth the fallacie of a lesse or a beter conscience seekes toEgar ou omeitai, e hotan om∣nysin euor∣kesei. reduce & rectifie a worse. With what other false knots men are foo∣lishlie entangled he demonstrates by the slight wherein the Covenant hath catch'd them. Their deliverance is this, if they will accept it from the hands of unquaestionable truth▪ That Covenant which is devised by strangers to the dishonour of a Nation, imposed by subjects wanting requisite power, and that aswell upon their Soveraigne at aequals extorted by just feare of unjust sufferings, is not binding. But this is that Covenant. Ergo. The ma∣jourPer hoc ju∣ramentm spirationes & conju∣rationes & pleraque in iqua & ae∣qua confir∣mari solent Cardan. Terein au∣ ten chreian on tois anag∣calois ham kai timiois. Hiorocl in Carm. Py∣thag. Prov. 30. 19. Cove∣nants ordi∣narilie min∣ted in Scot∣land not in England. Nor can such after∣contracts devised & imposed by a few men in a declared partie with∣out my con∣set and without a∣ny like po∣wer or prae∣cedent from Gods or mans lawes &c. E. x. Bac. Ch. 14. proque bus arduis & urgenti∣bus negtijs satum & deensio∣nem Regni nostri Angl. & Eccles. Anglie concernen∣tibus . . . . Cum Praela∣tis Magna∣tib. &c. colloquium habere & tractatum. The extract of a letter-shewing by whom the Covenant was devi∣sed. thus put in forme the Reviewer will hardlie grant, and yet da∣res not denie, but sets his foot upon I know not what weaknesse and falsitie of the Minour, the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, as he calls them) being among the number of the first and onelie fra∣mers thereof. He must be wiser then Solomon that can know the way of a Serpent upon a rocke. Yet the Presbyterian Scotish subtilitie is not such, but that we may see whence, if not by what gyres and uncer∣taine sinuations, it came about, and he that meetes it at Westain∣ster may welcome it from Edenburgh, if he likes it. Leagues and Covenants are no usuall abasement of English allegeance, such cop∣per coyne hath been no where so currant as since Knox was Mint∣master in Scotland, whose original inscription With the image of his rebellion is propagated in this counterfeit, as he that delights in such medalls may see if he compares them. This for the thing. For the persons I denie them to be Commissioners on either side, no King, nor Clergie legallie assembled deputing them to that purpose nor in∣deed any of the Laitie but Rebells. They that gave life to it, Lords, Commons, or what you will, or wheresoe r assembled, were in the very act Traitours against the King and so no part of a▪ Parliament in the Kingdome Whither they are called by His Majesties writ to consult about the defense not to covenant the destruction of the Kingdome
and Church. The lawfulnesse of whose constitution and authoritie was no farther acknowledged then it was lawfullie used, and in that act absolu∣telie disclaimed, the King sending for them onelie to discourse and treat with himselfe, not to dispose and ordaine, or enact any thing without him. Therefore these men, thus acting upon the praecedent advice and praescription of strangers, foysted a Covenant devised by stran∣gers, how soever factiouslie denison'd in that Court. But how strange the advice was will appeare beter by true storie then probable divi∣nation, which being sent me in a leter from one well acquainted with these affaires of his owne countrey. I will faythfullie commu∣nicate as it came unto my hands. When the Commissioners came downe from the Parliament with their letter subscrived be some Mini∣sters shewing that their blood was shed lyke water upon the ground for defense of the protestant relligione and the letter being red in the Assembly had no uther an∣swer bot this. Gentlemen wee are sorie for your case, bot there is one thing in your letter, Yee say yee fight for defense of the re∣formed relligione, yee must not thinke us blind that wee see not your fighting to be for civill disputes of the law, wherewhith wee are not acquante. Goe home and reconcile with the King, hee is a gracious Prince, hee will receive you in his favour; You can not say it is for the reformed relligione, since yee have not begun to reforme your Church, yee had thryven better, if ye had done as wee did, begun at the Church, and thereafter striven to have gotten the civill sanc∣tion to what yee had done in the Church, wee can not medle betwixt his Majestie and you.] Few dayes after, Sir W. Ermin, Master Hamden with the rest were invited by some of their friends to make a new addresse to the Assembly, their friends in the Assembly (after a second desire of a more gracious answere) propounded this. [Will yee joine in covenant with us to reforme doctrine and discipline conforme to this of Scotland and yee shall have a better answere,] Sir W. Ermin & the rest answered (that they had not that in their in∣structions,
bot thanked the Assembly & sayd they would represent it to the Parliament of England) the friends in the Assembly told them [there would be much time loosed ere they could go to the Parliament for their resolutione and thereafter to returne to Scotland and draw up a solemne league and covenant the danger was great and they were not able with all their forces to stand two moneths before the Kings armie bot we shall draw it up here and send up with you some noblemen gentlemen & Ministers that shall see it subscribed,] which was done. To proceed your Rebell-Parliaments desires, beside what may beThe Rebells desires were impositions. gatherd from your papers, were not, as I have heard, very hum∣blie praesented by the persons many times that brought them▪ And when your smoothest language is glossed upon (as best it may be by your rude militarie Interpreters at more distance your negative will not hinder them of being impositions rather then supplications. Re∣ligion and liberties in all the three Kingdomes were very sufficientlie secur'd by the lawes. Scotish Presbyterie is no religion but rebellion in the princi∣ples, and the libertie taken by it is license befitting no subjects, and therefore not to be desired of a King. For which if such a covenant or oath is but one maine peice of securitie (as you confesse) I leave to be jud∣ged if any judgement can comprehend the other maine pices of vassala∣ge, for your safetie, you yet farther expected from the crowne. AnNullum privile∣gium Par∣lamenti concedi po∣test propro∣ditione fe∣lonia aut ruptua pa∣cis. 17. Ed. 4. Rot. Pal. num. 39. The Cove∣nant  urable to the English. authoritie to crave many leaves a libertie to resuse, and be of no suffi∣cience to impose upon the subject so long as during the contenuance of the Parliament. Nor can you shew that uncontroverted law which gives vali∣ditie to an ordinance controverted by the King, who assumes no power of politike impossible concessions, such as treason, felonie & breach of peace are by name with us, & covenanting is such when against the Kings consent. The last part of the demonstration is too true, and so farre dishonourable as it blazons the cowardize of men well principled in their religion to God and loyaltie to their King, who for the benefit of a litle fresh aire out of prison, and a titular interest in an estate, the revenues whereof must be excis'd, contributed, fift parted, twentieth parted and particulated into nothing at the pleasure of the blew-apron'd men in the Citie, and Committee plowmen in the Countrey, would desperatelie cast their soules into the guilt and curse of a covenant which they utterlie detested, and their persons into the slaverie of proud, sinfull unreasonable men, whom before it may be they fed
with their charitie and commanded. The nullitie of this oath uponThe nullitie of it. the difference of heart and mouth, is demonstrable, The very taking it being so farre from obliging to be kept, as it subjects them to the judge∣ment of God, because not done in truth nor in righteousnesse. Isai 48. Nec vero ultr quam consensum est juramentum operatur secundum ipsum, quae tunc actus deficit in substantia, deficiente consensu, quem defectum juramentum minimè supplet Say the lawyers. And he that sweares to commit sa∣criledgeIoan. Guti∣errez De Iuram: con∣firm. part. 2. cap. 2. ex Aliat▪ The Revie∣wers. A∣bominable falshood. and murder is as much bound by his oath, which I would faine heare Master Baylie dictate from his chaire against them when they tell him, Iuramentum non est vinculum iniquitatis. The especial aggrava∣tion which he drawes from the Bishops ground is as especial a lie, and as evident a falshood, as ever came out of the mouth of man, & an ir∣recoverable shame to the whole Presbyterie. That a Minister, Pro∣fessour, their great champion & commissioner should utter it, when not onelie the penaltie of two pence hath been threatned, but of sequestration and imprisonment hath been executed upon thousands, and beside these, (because some particular must be instanc'd) upon neare 100. fellowes of Colledges in one weeke banishment out of the Vniversitie of Cambridge, this I can best justifie being one of the number. Which was a leading case to Oxford, when in their power, and theIudic. Oxon De sol. lig. sect. 2. feare of unjust suffering they threatned, her first argument against their covenant. Therefore let us leave the dishonour we were speaking of where we found it, upon the head of our Nation in part, who dege∣nerated so farre as to take a covenant from the hand of strange re∣bells▪ no otherwise their brethren then in the in quitie of maintaining hypocrisie and license, both which they see with their selves now in thraldome to Atheisme and a mercenarie, sword, And beare about them the marke of Gods vengeance in the sight of us who survive toPs. 145. 1. 7. Covenan∣ters take the Disci∣pline for Christs in∣stitution. magnifie him in his justice, saying, Iustus Dominus in omnibus vijs suis & sanctus in omnibus operibus suis. The Bishops second demonstration need be no beter then the first whereby you are convicted, as bad as it is, you dare not venture upon halfe of it, but like a cunning old rat that hath before been catch'd by the taile in a trap▪ will be nibling at the baite, but not enter too farre with his teeth for feare his head goe for't next. This makes you so tender of dealing with the majour, which if not well caution'd why doe not you denie it or attacke it on that side which you guesse weak∣lie guarded? You pervert the minour, though litle to your ad∣vantage. The Bishop sayth not that in the Covenant you sweare the latelie de∣vised discipline to be Christs institution, but that you gull men with it, as if it were so imposing upon them the strictest oath to engage their e∣states and lives in the praeseruation and propagation of it, which is
as much as can be required for Christs institution or Euangel, a title as strange as you make it, often given your Discipline which allreadie I have touchd at. Yet because here you so confidentlie put us upon the words of the Covenant, somewhat not much unlike what the Bishop imputes I finde in the praeface . . . having before our eyes the glorie of God, and the advancement of the Kingdome of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ . . . . whereby I charge your meaning to be the Presbyteriall Government of your Kirke, if not, I require you plainlie to denie it, and to send me this proposition subscribed by your hand. The plat forme of Disci∣pline to which we sweare in the Covenant, is not Christs institution. Especiallie since your General Assemblie 1642. hath sayd. That the Reformed Kir∣kes do hold without doubting their Kirke officers and Kirke Government by As∣semblesAns. to the Declar. by the Parl. angl. Aug. 25. Let. to the Gen. As∣semb. S. Iul. 22. it. 42. Vindic. Ep. Philadelph. Protest of the Noble∣men, Ba∣rons &c. 1638. Accor∣ding to the word of God, a more dubi∣ous & fri∣volous li∣mitationing the Cove∣nant then hereto fore in the oath for Episco∣pacie. higher and lower &c to be jure divino and perpetual. Your brother-Presbyters in England. That Presbyterian Government hath just and evident foundation both in the word of God & religious reason. And the praeface to the English Directorie telling you, That their care hath been to hold forth such things as are of divine institution in every ordinance. Were it not to tire out my Reader, I could shew this to be your language ever since your Dis∣cipline was framed, & thought so necessarie a truth that your denial must make Christ not so wise as Solon or Lycurgus; if he left it as a thing mutable by men, or now after so many ages of his Church to be put to the vote in their Parliaments and Synods. So sayth a friend of yours in these words. Equidm non novi, neque credam Christum, qui Dei sapientia fuit, remp. suam que omnium 'est perfectissima, arbitrio stultorum ho∣minum religuisse agitandam . . . . quod ne Solon quidem aut Lycurgus aljusve quis pium Legislator pateretur. For that and the rest of your religion your Confession of faith sayth. That you are throughlie resolved by the ord & spi∣rit of God, that onelie is the true Christian sayth & Religion pleasing God &c. . . . Gods aeternal truth & ground of your salvation. . . . Gods undoubted truth and veritie grounded onelie upon his written word. Nay afterwards you protest and promise with your hearts under the same oath &c that you will defend the Kings per∣son and authoritie in the defense of Christs Euangel and liberties of your Countrey, which is (or if it be not speake) the same with Religion and liberties in your league. Besides all which otherwhere you blasphemouslie com∣pare both your confessions with the old Testament and the New. That which followes wherein you moderate the first article of your Covenant, imposing an endeavour to reforme onelie according to the word of God, with out introducing Scotes Presbyterie or any other of the best reformed, unlesse it be found according to that paterne, though it served to palliate all blemishes and deformities that were in it; To invite possiblie, some well meaning people into your fraternitie, who like harmelesse bees relishing that sweetnesse, litle thought
what poyson they left behinde for other venemous insectiles to suc∣ke out; To furnish others withan excuse (a petiful one) for using so bad meanes to so good an end and when it undeniablie proves the contrarie (the same it may be they intended) crie they were mistaken1548. Mi∣nistri Regia authoritate compulsi aut subscri∣bere Epali tyrannidi, aut in car∣ceres aut e∣xilia abir▪ Multarum ministrorum tuncse pro∣didit imbe∣cillitas in∣stauratae Ecclae ty∣annidi ho∣monymus subscriben∣tiam adjec∣a limita∣ione am∣igua vel potius suti∣ nempe se∣cundum erbum Dei &c. Ep. Phil. nd.  Gutier∣ez De Iu∣am. Con-rmpar.▪ 1. ap. 71. ium. 5. though now they can not helpe it; Yet it may be shewed to be a du∣bious & frivolous limitation, the same commendation your friends gave it when translated into an oath tenderd in behalfe of Episcopa∣cie by the King, First infirming that member, and so fr disinabling it from beaing part in the mater of an oath, as subjection is required unto the reforming power in a Church. Secondlie, Quitting all that swore it of their engagement every moment, if they see clealie, or judge erroneouslie, your reforming Principals to digresse from that path. Thirdlie, either supposing your reformed religion in Scot∣land to be allreadie conform'd to that paterne, or else enjoining to sweare contradictions. Lastlie, If leaving every man to judge what is according to the word, and to endeavour according to that judge∣ment, imposing an oath productive of confusion there being as many mindes as men, scarce two united in one touching Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and government. The first might be illustrated & ar∣gued from the fallibilitie and uncertaintie in the Reforming power, a maim'd Parliament & an illegitimate Assemblie then siting, whom I could not be assured to have the spirit of God so illuminating their mindes, as whereby jointlie to judge the same reformation according to Gods word. Secondlie as uncertaine should I bee, setng aside all par∣tialitie and passion, that they would▪ declare what they so judg'd, a∣gainst many of whom, if not the most having a well grounded prae∣judice, whether just or no maters not if not know'n to me) I could not sweare de futuro a conformitie to their acts. In which cases wise∣men advise us to abstaine . . . . Ten apochen tou omnynai prostattei peri toon endchomenoon, kai oriston tes baseoos chontoon to peras. Hierocl. in Carm. Pythag. and urans praesumitur certioratus & deliberatus accedere ad ctum super quo urat, sayth the Lawyer. The second is strengthned sffi∣cientlie by your words which oblige the Covenanter no farther then he findes your great worke proceeding according to Gods word. The suc∣cesse whereof if no beter then in your Discipline and the Directorie, will keep no man in his Covenant, Gods word praescribing many parts of neither. The Third is evident from the very clauses in the article, where first an oath must be taken to praeserve the reformed religion in Scotland, which if not according to Gods word, is contradicted in the next that enjoines reformation onelie according to the word And if it be then that is t wherewith a uniformitie must be made, and yet you tell us there is no such word, nor any such mater in the Covenant, About the
last let every man speake his minde as freelie as I shall mine. That ISee Surv▪ of the praet▪ holie Disc. hold no Presbyterian government, Scotish or other, according to Gods word That I have read of much dissension among your selves in for∣mer times, and heard of some in later. That all Papists; all ortho∣doxe persons in the Church of England are jointlie for Episcopacie in the order, as according to Gods word and separatelie for it in the jurisdiction and discipline, neither holding all parts of it exempli∣fied in the word, & so not applicable unto it, & both not the same extensive particulars in the ordinance and exercise of the Church.Vid. Dis∣cus. Eccles. Disc. R∣pel▪ edit. 1584. Besides such as you call Socinians, Sectaries, & separatists, whether individual or congregational. All which having distinct opinions of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government according to the word, if not concentred in the sense of the House or Assemblie but left to their several endeavours, are sworne among them to delineate a pre∣tie implicated diagramme of a Church. But for a farther answer to this article of your covenant. I remit you to the solide judgement of the Vniversitie of Oxford. As likewise to that of several learned men in the Vniversitie of Cambridge, who joined in one minde, & published their refutation of the whole treacherous league A. 1644. Onelie I must adde what persons of knowledge & integritie say they will make good. That your Covenant came into England with some such clause as this. We shall reforme our Church in doctrine and Discipline con∣forme to the Church of Scotland. Whereof Master Nye & his Independent friends fairlie cheated you, making that be rased out and this inser∣ted which we treat of. By which tricke they have pack'd Presbyterie away, and yet pleade with you in publike, That they still keepe the Covenant and goe on to reforme according to Gods word. The second ground of the Bishops demonstration is no evident errour, it beingThe Cove∣nant how the same with that of K. I. 1580. an evident truth, That the principal Covenanters, Noblemen, Gen∣tlemen and Ministers in Scotland protested to Marq. Hamilton His Majesties Commissioner 1638. when it was objected that their Cove∣nant with their new explication was different from the sense of that 1580. because it portended the abolition of Episcopacie. That is was not their meaning quite to abolish it, but to limit it, holding out in the mostK. Ch: 1, Larg: decl 1639: pag: 177: material point an identitie between them. That they assured many who made the scruple, and would not have come into their covenant, unlesse they had so re∣solv'd them. That they might sweare the same confessin, and▪ et not abjure Epis∣copal government, which the three Ministers in their first answer to the Divines of Aberdene positivelie affirmed. That thus they abus'd many, with an ap∣peatance of identitie in the mater and similitude in the end. And themselves fre∣quentlie confessed that this Covenant was nothing but that general one applied to the particular occasions at that time. It is as certaine
that the Covenant of the Rebells in all the three Kingdomes 1643. was held out at least to them in Scotland that toke it, to be the same with that they toke before, otherwise then as it must be againe ap∣plied to a conjunction with their brethren of the other two King∣domes. Nor was there any other new emergent cause, nor was that one for any new Covenant (and you are not to multiplie solemne oathes andProtest. ag. Kings Pro∣clam. 1638 Covenants, you sayd, without necessitie) Nor is there in this the sense of any one clause that is not in the other as it concern'd your owne Nation. And the enemies with their practices, against whom and which you fram'd it, you professe to be the same, though now in∣creased, in your praeface. All which have elements enough, beside an airie fancie, to make up your grosse errour or affected falshood in denying so demonstrable a truth. Yet that notwithstanding this im∣postureHow it dif∣fers from it. there is a real difference in the triplie respect which the Bi∣shop speakes of was never hitherto denied (as I know) by any Epis∣copal writer which are many that occasionallie have mention'd it. So that his Lordship  not his owne vine but your fingars that will be medling with his worke, for which he may expect and will have due thankes from his friends that rightlie understand him. For howsoever indeed that short confession was at first not onelie draw'n up by the Kings command, nor freelie subscribed with his hand, but obtru∣ded violentlie upon him being devised by a partie of seditious male∣contented Noblemen and Courtiers (made such by the Clergie that were worse) against Esme Earle of Lenox, who they hoped by this test would be discovered to be a Papist, Yet the King made a very good vertue of necessitie, and since he must impose it first upon his familie and afterward upon his subjects, being supreme could and did it in his owne sense, though it may be, oppositie to theirs that made it, the ambiguitie of the words tolerating both. To which, in that sense, he praefixed his Royal authoritie, whereas your later Co∣venant in yours was absolutelie against his sonnes. That in his sense was for the lawes of the Realme, the praeservation of Episcopacie, This against them for its utter extirpation. That to maintaine the re∣ligion established, which he did to the uttermost of his power. This to its destruction which it is in effecting, though it spoiles in the ca∣sting that golden calfe you intended to set up. So that the words them∣selves which doe not more flatlie contradict the Bishop, then they are contradict by your workes, are not so expresse for the Kings authoritie, the law of the realme and religion established, and wherein they are, such an abstruse meaning have they, as he that takes your league is ouo a∣gn mysteria the dull creature that ignorantlie caries all the mysteries of your iniquitie on his backe.
In the next paragraph is nothing but a branch or two of your for∣merEpiphylli∣des taut esti kai stomyl∣mata cheli∣donoon momseia. wild discourse, & therein a nest of small birds chattering what we often heare to no purpose, or never to lesse then here having no significancie at all in answer to the Bishops Memento, which recogni∣zeth Q. Elizabeths indulgence, to whom your praedecessours scra∣ped and whined for militarie assistance & (to say no worse) undeser∣vedlie had it without imposing the Discipline of England. Whereas you (to use. Ch. 14. the words of K. Ch. 1.) are not to be hired at the ordinarie rate of auxiliaries [much lesse borrowed or bestowed] nothing will induce you to ingage till those that call you in have pawned their soules to you. The Discipline & Liturgie (which you quarell with some times because different from the En∣glish) was obtruded upon you by no other craft and force then a plaine legal injunction, Deliberated on from the time of K. Iames's investitureK. Ch. 1. Larg. decl. p. 15. &c. The En∣glish Disci∣pline long since setled by law in Scotland, and the Li∣turgie there used in the crowne of England, approved in a general Assemblie at Aber∣dene 1616. (the Liturgie I meane, the Discipline having been recei∣ved long before) read publikelie in the Kings chapell at Haly-rud-house ever since the yeare 1617. not onelie without dislike but with frequent assemblies of the Councel, Nobilitie, Bishops and other Clergie, Iudges, Gentrie, Burgesses, women of all rankes. In seve∣ral other places in the time of K, Ch. 1. The alterations (which were not of such moment as to be met with opposition) were partlie made generallie approved by the Bishops and principal Clergie in Scot∣land, who in the exercise of it were injoined to proceed with all moderation, and dispense with such for the practice of some things conteined in the booke, as they should finde either not well perswa∣ded of them, or willing to be informed concerning them, or didThe Pr. Sco∣tish never so in Eng∣land, but obtruded. Mot. Brit. hope that time and reason might gaine a beter beleefe of them. How otherwise your Discipline was obtruded upon the English, what free long and deliberate choyce they used (beside the sighes and groanes of many pious soules hurried into prisons or disspersed in a misera∣ble exile) your owne Scots Cushi shall beare witnesse. Who, out of no ill meaning to your cause, reveales the truth of your tyrannie from the beginning. . . . That upon your second coming in it was, when some of our Nobles tooke occasion to supplicate for a Parlia∣ment,Vix aude∣bat rex eis de postulato ab nuere propter Sco∣tos &c. p. 28. which the King scarce durst denie for the Scotch armie, nor the perpetuitie of it afterward for no other reason. . . . That when it came to armes the Scotes could not sit still in conscience & honestie whereupon they sent a Commissioner from their Synod to the En∣glish Parliament 1642. to move them to cast out Bishops, Then o∣thers to the King at Oxford to signe all propositions, which because he would not doe, they resolve to assist their brethren against him, whom they call the common enemie. The formalitie of an invitation was
used to this purpose, but their inclination and resolution had pass'dVocatio∣nem lubenti animo am∣plectuntur ut pote d i∣dem prius proclives. pag. 4. Answ. to the let. sent by the Mi∣nisters of Engl; Aug▪ 5. Ps. 62. 9. before. And indeed your Assemblie 1642. confess'd an obligation lay upon them to encourage and assist so pious a worke, but not as you doe here onelie out of brotherlie concernment, but for securi∣tie of yourselves, because without it you could not hope for any long time to enjoy your owne puritie & peace, which had cost you so deare. The Bishops following grounds, which he makes good to be de monstrative, doe not therefore betray the weaknesse of because they adde strength to the praeceding. What wind is in them you fllow too fast after, and feed as greedilie upon as Ephraim on the East, which tur∣nes to the same bad nourishment in you both, increasing lies and some∣what else which you may reade Hose 12. 1. And were the softest hand insensible of their substance, they would praeponderate your answers which are as deceitfull upon the weights as he that made them, and allto∣gether lighter then vanitie it selfe. For not a proposition is there in pro∣syllogisme or syllogisme that is seemes you can denie, though you scarce any where shew ingenuitie to grant. For the second, which youThe power of the Mi∣litia is the Kings. thinke so hard to prove let it be adventur'd thus. He that by covenant di∣sposeth of himselfe and armes contrarie to the established lawes, which by the Kings right in him he is obliged to maintaine, disposeth of them against that right. But every Covenanter disposeth &c. For the established lawes enjoine him to defend the Kings person without limitation or reference to religion, at least not to fight against it, which the Covenant by your practie interpretation doth oblige to. Where the power of the Militia refides His Majesties unanswerable Declaration for the Commission of array will best satisfie you. And himselfe tells you trulie it is no lesse his un∣doubted. Ch. 10. right then is the crowne. In the exercise of it though the Parlia∣ment be not excluded, yet their power is never legallie considera∣ble but when they are, as the bodie with the oul, in statu conjunct with the King. Defense of liberties hath no law to arme them against prro∣gative, nor is there a cause imaginable impowering them to take up armes against a partic countenanced by the Kings praesence which can be according to no law but what is call'd such by rebellious people that offer vio∣lence to Royal right If any such there be, let us have but one imprae∣gnable instance and we'll shake hands. I beleeve you are not much in love with that old custome of the Frisians, long before they be∣came Presbyters, who chose their Earle carying him upon their bucklers, and crying alowd, Haec est potestas Frisiae. You can now a∣dayesH. Grot. lib. De An∣tiq. Reip. Batav. beter indoctrinate them according to the custome of your fac∣tion, when praevalent, which is to admit no new King but at the swords point and there to keepe him, crying after this maner, or
somewhat like it, in your proclamational libells, Haec est libertas Pres∣byteriales Scotiae. Yet your Commissioners when in the mood can prae∣sentAnsw: to both Hou∣ses 1647. the hilt to his hand, and argue with both houses, as they did upon the new propositions, why the power of the militia should be in the crowne asking. How Kings otherwise can be able to resist their enemies and the enemies of the Kingdome, protect their subjects, keep friendship or corre∣spondence with their allies. . . . asserting that the depriving them of this power rootes up the strongest foundations of honour and safetie which the crowne affords, & will be interpreted in the eyes of the world to be a wresting of the scepter and sword out of their hands. So that the Bishops friends may take from yours aswell as from him the same demonstrable conclusion he layd downe, And this for all the Kings acknowledgement▪ which was never any of the Par∣liaments joint interest in his authoritie against his person, which is the true case though you shamefullie conceale it. Nor did His Maje∣stie so put the whole Militia in their hands as to part with his right when he bound his owne from the exercise, Nor was he sure he was not or might not seeme to be perjur'd for his courtesie (which all Kings will not hazard) though he layd the guilt or dishonour at their doores, whither God hath brought allreadie a portion of their just punish∣ment. Ch. 10. that constraind him, saying. I conceive those men are guiltie of the en∣forced perjurie (if so it may seem) who compell me to take this new and strange way of discharging my trust by seeming to desert it, of protecting my subjects by exposing my selfe to danger or dishonour for their safetie and quiet. Therefore what thoughts he had of your parties medling with the Militia may be best jud∣g'd by his words. How great invasion in that kinde will state rebellion in a Parliament, when there's any (as there was none, at that time nor since) shall be told you when the Bishop gives you occasion to de∣mand it. Or if you can not stay so long, I must send you againe to the judicious Digges to satiate your too curious and greedie appetite of such fare as will no well be digested in many stomackes. To the nulling your Covenant by His Majesties proclamation you say nothing because it separates him from the partie to which you attribute all malig∣nance, and you know you can not securelie medle with him but in a croud. In the Bishops second demonstration we must be beholding to you for giving what you can not keep with any credit which more awes you then conscience. That where the mater is evidentlie unlawfull the oth is not binding. The application of which up to your covenant will be justified when brought to the touch by Gods lawe or the Kingdome's. But you first summon it before reason, which helpes you with no rule. To lay aside what might be otherwise rectified, were there cause for't. Nor any evidence that the burden of Bishops and ceremonies was so
heavie as to presse you into the necessitie of a Covenant. This hisBishops and ceremonies no burden. Lordship need not offer to dispute, since the King ever offerd a regulation of that order and those rites by the primitive paterne wherein it o∣therwise differed then in a necessarie, innocent compliance with the politike constitution of his Kingdome. And the Church had ren∣der'dSee Treat. of Cerem. before Com. prayer booke Hookers Eccl. Polit. Dr. Tayl of Episc. Bishop Andr. let. to Molin. &c. To paro∣naci bari tois hype∣coois. Th. Salusi. Bell Catil. Parliament can not re∣forme with∣out the King. all rational satisfaction as well for the ceremonies reteined as those abolish'd▪ And both by particular men most eminent in learning and judgement had been unanswerablie maintained in every graine or scruple that could be quaestion'd or complaind of. Yet the praesent go∣vernment, how light soever, is burdensome especiallie to men that looke for advantages by the change, And the worst of men can seeme as serious in complaint as if their vertues had been the onelie mar∣tyrs to crueltie, and the very common hackneyes for oppression. Quid reliqui habemus praeter miseram animam came out which a sad sigh from Catiline before his bankrupt Comrades, who had left no such sub∣ject for rebellion to rhetoricate on, if their lives had been as good pawnes in the midst of their prodigalitie as their lands. This your method of reformation, whereof the Bishop complaines for which you plead custome, failes not onelie in the maner but of the power, the most material requisite to effect it. And the high path way is no so or∣dinarie as you can name the Parliament that ever trod in it before, We in England having no such custome, nor indeed any where the true Churches of God as to alter religion and government without the King. To your quaestion which ever shelters fraud in universals, I parti∣cularlie answer and to our purpose 1. That the Houses of Parliament are not to begin with an ordinance for a covenantor ath, to change the lawes of the Realme to abolish the Discipline of the Church and the Liturgie lawfullie establi∣shed, by the sword (which are the Bishops words) before the Kings consent be sought to that beginning, much lesse when his dissent is foreknow'n of that and all proceedings in that kinde 2. An ordinance of the Lords and Commons (without and against the King) i no good warrant to change such lawes during the sitting of the Parliament 3. No law nor lawfull custome of England debarres the King by dissenting to stop that change▪ Untill which three assertions be refuted in law, it will be needlesse to debate the qua∣lifications and exceptions, which can be none of moment in this case a∣gainst the Kings consent requisite to turne an ordinance into a law. But you take His Majestics concessions to have praevented all can be sayd in the prae∣sent case. Behold you that kindled the fire in his breast here compasse yourselvesIsai. 50 11 The conces∣sions of Ch. 1. not so larges praetended. with the sparkes of his consent which charitie would have suffered to exspire with the breath that brought them forth, or buried in his a∣shes which they made. Yet can not you walke by the light of thi fire unto the full accomplishment of your ends, His successour being not yet
conveighd into any such place as Holmebye or Carisbrooke CastleK. Ch. 2. not obliged to confirme them. where you would have him, some such fatal haereditarie confinement being the fairest apologie (if any) when he should subscribe so many of your unconscionable desires, and write after his Father in the ex∣tremitie of misfortune, who as litle intended what himselfe accoun∣ted his failings for his copie, as he desired his undeserved miseries should be a patrimonie transmitted to him by your hands. As to the obtaining of what i lacking, your way is not so faire, in which visiblie lies the same Scripture, Antiquitie, law, reason, conscience and honour, which heretofore hindred your journey to the end of your hopes, the ob∣taining His Majesties plenarie consent. Who did not agree to, if you meane approve of the rooting out Episcopacie in Scotland. That he gave so much way to such wild boares as were in your Presbyterie to doe it, he afterward repented, and you rewarded him not so well, as that his Royal sonne should be encouraged to purchase sorow at so deare. Ch. 17. a rate. 2. He was not willing allthough he yeilded to have them put out of the House of Peeres in England and Ireland, out of a generous scorne of your uncharitable susspicion that he would have them there onelie be∣cause he was to make use of their votes in State affaires. 3 He divested them of civile power, hoping to perswade such as your Lay Presbyters, by the objections made against them, out of the Ecclesiasticall which theyIbid. more irrationallie usurped. 4. He joined Presbyters with them for ordina∣tion, because he found it before seldome administred without them. But he never made them coordinate in, nor aequiparticipant of that power. He joined them for spiritual jurisaiction, as being a fit meanes to avoyd.... partialities incident to one man. And tyrannie which becomes no Christians, least of all Churchmen. And thirdlie to take away from them the burden and Odium of affaires, which was a courteous diminution in such times. How sa∣crilegiouslie you rob the Temple of Memorie of the pillar he set up in the period of your Treatie, and erect in the place an impious ca∣lumnie of his abolishing Episcopacie totallie, name and thing will be seen by part of his inscription or ultimate answer to the Rebell Commissio∣nersNov. 18. 1648. at Newport. K. Ch. 1. immove∣ble from Primitive Episcopacie. paper about the Church. The words are these.... His Majestie doth againe clearlie professe, That he can not with a good conscience consent to the total abolition of the function, and power of Bishops, nor to the intire and absolute alienation of their lands, as is desired, because he is yet perswaded in his judge∣ment that the former is of Apostolical institution, and that to take away the later is sacriledge..... And if his two Houses shall not thinke fit to recede from the strict∣nesse of their demands in these particulars, His Majestie can with more comfort cast himselfe upon his Saviours goodnesse to support him and defend him from all afflic∣tions, how great soever, that may befall him, then for any politike consideration, which may seem to be a meanes to restore him, deprive himselfe of the inward tran∣quillitie
of a quiet minde. And some of his last words were▪ I am firme to pri∣mitive. . Ch. 17. Answ. Nov. 18. 1648 Newport. Nov. 20. Episcopacie, not to have it extirpated, (if I can hinder it) He sayd in∣deed, that by his former answer he had totallie▪ suspended Episcopal government for three yeares, & after the sayd time limited the same in the power of ordination and jurisdiction. Which the Commissioners he dealt with so litle thought Tantamont to a perpetual abolition, that they sayd it met not with their feares, nor could praevent the inconvenience which must necessarilie follow upon the returne of Bishops, and the power which he reser∣ved to them after that time. For that a Bishop so qualified as is Majestie expressed should rise againe then they declared whollie in his choyce unavoydable by Par∣liament, if they agreed not. But behold a pretie peice of aequivocation (call'd Anti-christian Iesuitisme by these Rabbi Presbyters of old) to draw their dull Commissioners out of the mire and as good asVna opera ebur atra∣mento can∣deacere po∣stules. Pl. Mostl. The Revie∣wers sophi∣strie. inke for ivorie to wash them cleane. His Majestie suspended it till he and his Parliament should agree. All and every one in both Houses had abjured Epis∣copacie by solemne oath and Covenant and so in no hazard ever to agree with him. Ergo He must either agree with them, that is likewise abjure, which is abolition, or coutinue perpetuallie his suspension which is Tantamont unto it. This is very well orderd, especiallie if you call to minde somewhat else that was condition'd for viz. That twentie Divines of His Majesties, nomina∣tion being added unto the Assemblie were to have a free consultation & debate, whence it might be determin'd by His Majestie and his two Houses how Church government &c should be setled after the sayd time or sooner if differences might be agreed. A very free debate when all demonstrative reasons should be forespoken to be silenced by an oath. And a very conscionable treatie, That a faction in both Houses should be (without the resti∣tution of the rest that were beter temper'd) the men that should con∣tinue siting not onelie 3. yeares but 300▪ if they could live so long, because sworne not to yeild a syllable of their owne tearmes. Yet because you thinke your selfe so witie in your sophistrie let me aske you▪ What assurance these all and every one in both Houses had to be immortal, If they were not, what you have that the new elected would be Covenanters and if they were not, by what law they could have been excluded the Houses whither they should be sent as Re∣praesentatives of their Electours. If admitted and so reasonable as to hearken to a possible result of the Divines debate in condemnation of Presbyterie, and vote according to it, what then were likelie to become of your perpetual abolition, or the Tantamont unto it. Such measure may you have if ever it come to treatie between you and your sectarian brethren now siting in one House, who having as much abjured Presbyterie that praetends for Royaltie by the enga∣gement that hath renounc'd it, as you Episcopacie by the Covenant,
may they condition for their owne confused Jndependencie thr yeares and as much longer as till you and they agree, & may they tell you that can never be because they are engag'd and in no hazard to reerect the roten stooles of English Scotizing repentance, & the corrupt clas∣ses of your Presbyters, which the same sword hath ten times more justlie cut downe then it set them up▪ But I see your full and formal con∣sent findes no such good footing in your fallacie, and therefore falls at length to a possibilitie of defect, which you praesume with much fa∣cilitieK. Ch. 2. much be∣holding to the Revie∣wer▪ to have supplied His Majestie that now is hath much to thanke you for, that at the first you will make him as glorious a King as you made not his Royal father but after so many yeares experience of his rei∣gne. That being at libertie not onelie in his person from your pri∣sons, but in his reputation from the clogges of those calumnies you cast upon the guiltnesse innocencie of his Praedecessour you will ad∣vance him beyond all those sufferances that were Solemne praepara∣tions to his murder, and in primo imperij momento, as in ultimo you did before, hold him by the haire, onelie not as yet permit the Indepen∣dent hand to cut his throat, untill forsooth he hath taken breath to sup∣plie that wherein his too scrupulous too pusillanimous father fain∣ted, And then crowne him with ribbons and flowers for the fater sa∣crifice of the two by the giving up his honour and salvation beyond a life, the onelie leane oblation of Charles the first. But may His Majestie say you, easilie supplie what his father travaild for,He can not so easilie, will not so readilie grant what his Father denied. without satisfaction to the uttermost limits of reason and conscience, be∣yond the farthest excusable adventures of any Praedecessours in his three Kingdomes or out of them, hazarding, allmost to despaire, his memorie with pious posteritie, especiallie at that distance as shall not repraesent distinctlie every angle of the necessitie he was driven to, and his soul to no other assurance of pardon then what the in∣tegritie of his repentance (not so infalliblie haereditarie as his mise∣ries) and his glorious martyrdom afterwards helpt him to? Would he thinke you so readilie but for a whisper of pernicious counsel in his eares, passe by unregarded his fathers charge to persevere in the orthodoxe. Ch. 27. religion of England, and hearken to the Devill of Rebellion whom he kno∣wes well enough though turnd into a Angel of Reformation? Can he so easilie, after three or fower weekes conference at the Haghe with two ignorant Presbyters, and but twice as many leaden headed Lai∣kes, have his reason convinc'd, & his consience satisfied, which is Ro∣yal Father could not in so many yeares conversation with the ablest Divines, & devout consultations had with the Living God himselfe by his prayers, and his dead, Yet livelie oracles of the Holie Word in his watches? Or would he so readilie, without it, give up his Fa∣thers
invincible reserve to the irreparable injurie of the Church, his people, & Ibid. Ib ib. his heire or successour in his Kingdomes? Was he requir'd and intreated by Charles the first as his Father and his King (in case he should never see his face againe) not to suffer his heart to receive the least checke against or disaffection from, the true Religion established in the Church of England. And can he so ea∣silie, even while that pretious bloud hath dyed his garments in pur∣ple, and being the Defender's of the fayth speakes the same langua∣geIbid. and calls every morning he puts them on for the same vengeance as once did the first borne, of the faythfull cast such requests and requisites behind him, quit the true Christian guard he is charg'd with, and desert all his constant subjects that must persevere in their religious profession according to the puritie of our canon? Will he, rather then want, weare a crowne which is not worth taking up or enjoining upon such dis∣honourableIbid. Ch. 17. unconscionable termes? And will he so readilie beare the infa∣mous brand to all posteritie of being the first Christian King in his Kingdome who consented to the oppression of Gods Church and the Fathers of it, exposing their persons to penvrie, and their sacred functions, to vulgar contempts? Will heCh. 14. so easilie because his treasure exhausted, his revenue deteind, be tempted to use such profane reparations, if not acting, consenting to perjurious and sa∣criligious rapines? Or will he so readilie instead of hukes give holy thingsIbid. unto swine, and the Church's bread, not onelie the crumbes of it, unto dogs? This his Royal Father durst not for feare a coale from Gods alter should set such a fire on his throne and his consience as could hardlie be quenched; Nor, in all likelihood, will this ever obsequious sonne (whom you call I hope in expectation of no such concessions, the most sweet and ingenious of Princes) unlesse such furies as you fright his conscience away, while his tongue doubleth in an uncertaine consent, having from your pens & practices nothing but insuperable horrour and inevitable destruc∣tion in his sight. Wherein if ever you unhapilie praevaile, may the same Royal tongue be seasonablie touch'd with a coale of a beter temper before the unquenchable fire of despaire catch hold of his soul, or that of vengeance of his throne. May it call for the fountaine of living waters to. 9. 1. wash away the bloud of his slaine subjects whose soules lie under the altar crying aloud for judgement, and quaestioning its delay. May that ountaine deriue it selve into the head and heart of this otherwise in∣nocent King, and day and night flow out at his eyes in torrents of teares for himselfe (in no soloecisme) the Virgin Father of his people.Rev. 7. 14. 17. And may at last his robes be wash'd white in the bloud of the Lambe, and God wipe away all teares from his eyes. Having payd, in dutie, this conditional devotion, which I wish as frivolous and needlesse, as your praesumption is malicious & un∣likelie. I proceed to vindicate the Bishops discourse, which J can
not see how in sense may be sayd to fright the Kings conscience, by asser∣ting his right and undeniable praerogative the sinewes whereof youThe King supreme Legislatour would shrinke up into nothing. The Legislative power is not here stated or determined by his Lordship onelie the King call'd supreme Legisla∣tour, which he is, What commentaries have been made of it, to the prae∣judice of the right and custome of Parliaments, shall be spoken to when you tell us which of his brethren, and what in their writings it is you meane. No right nor custome can be adjusted to them in your case, which is vowing to God, and sweaing one unto another to changeAnsw. to both Hou∣ses 1647. the lawes of the Realme &c. by the sword, without and against the King, diffe∣rent from the sense of your Commissioners, who would have the Legislative power, aswell as the Militia to be the Kings. For that power that can not constitute can abrogate no lawes, But they will tell you in constituting the King can not be excluded, And we inferre that no more he can be in repealing. If your minde serve you to engage farther in this dispute you were best answer the learned Grotius 8. chap. De Imper. Sum. Pot. to which I promise you my replie.The Bi∣shops pro∣testation not injuri∣ous to Kings Lords nor Commons. In the next place▪ as if you were moderating a matachin dance, from seting the King and Parliament at oddes, you turne both their fa∣ces and powers against the Praelates, whom I doe not finde His Lord∣ship puting in competition with the King about the right of making lawes, but aggravating the injurie done them by your partie in the Parliament, and appealing to their conjcience with what justice they could covenant against the rights of a third order of the Kingdome without ei∣ther their satisfaction or consent. If the whole Repraesentative of the King∣dome have thus priviledg'd the Bishops, one lame part can not de∣prive. Ch. 9. them of it. Their prioritie and superioritie hath been so an∣cient that no Lords no Commons would scruple at it, but such as likewise at the original supremacie of their King; And therefore you may know the bill against their priviledges was five times rejected in the upper House the beter Court of honour of the two, and when the sixt time it was caried by a few voyces, it was when the most ho∣nourable persons were forced to be absent. Their share in the Legislative power hath been so great, that since any was allotted them your fore∣fathers never heard of a law made in Parliament without them. The King may passe what he pleaseth, and what he doth so is a law. The two Temporal States with his bare name without his power, can make none, nor yet having it, as they account it derived from his Regalitie, notH. Grot. his person. Ius enim ferendarum legum, sive generalium, sive specialium, sum∣ma potestas communicar alteri potest,  se abdicar non potest. What one or th' other passe to the injurie of persons fundamentallie concern'd, be it law, can not be justified in conscience, which is all J take to be urged by the Bishop. But what would you have sayd if there had been such a
law in behalfe of Episcopacie in England as there hath been in spaine. That no King could reigne (which is more then a Parliament sit and vote) without the suffrage of the Bishops? Which made Ervigius upon the resignation of Bamba, that turn'd Monke call a Councel ofAno. 681. them at Toledo, to have a confirmation of his crowne. And the time hath been in England when a difference fell between EdwardLud. Aur. Peras. and Ethelred about succession to K. Edgar & a devolution of it unto the arbitrement of the Bishops. The humble protestation of the twelve Bishops rudelie menaced and affronted did not pronounce the lawes & acts after their recesse null and of none effect in derogation to the praerogative of the King either solitarie or in conjunction with what persons soever he pleas'd to make his Legislative Councel; but in saving to themselves their rights and interests of siting and voting in the House of Peeres, the violation of which they conceived to invali∣date a Parliament at least without the Kings passing a rescissorie Act and an Act of new constitution. Because in law and practice it is usual to any who conceive themselves praejudg'd (even in those things where Acts of Par∣liament passe against them) to protest, Which, if you remember, were theSee True Repraesent. of the Pro∣ceed of the Kingd. of Scoth. since the late Pae∣cif. &c. pag. 31. 2. Book Discipl. 7. Ch. words, and part of a long plea to another purpose (though upon the same advantage of the Bishops right in Scotland) used by those your Countreymen that alike intended their ruine, but could not colourablie offer at it without the Act anext the constitution of the Parlia∣ment. Whether the Bishops being a third order of the Kingdome, and by that craving their share in the Legislative power, be more humble then the Presbyters who take themselves to be absolute without King and two states in making all Ecclesiastike lawes, and against King & two states in abrogating all civile statuter & Ordinances concerning Ecclesiastical maters that are found nysome and unprofitable, and agree not with the time . . . . And cen∣suring, punishing all persons, King and Parliament not excepted, I file up with the other references to your quitable comparers, let them be the Lords and Commons you here pleade for. You may chuse whether you will grant what the Bishop takes as demonstrable. That his brethren had harder measure from the thing call'd King and Parliament, then the Abbos and Friars from Henry 8. WhenThe Revie∣wers beleefe is no confes∣sion of the Bishops. he devested them of their estates, Your consecuorie Beleefe hath no article made up out of any of the Bishops words, Who though he could not keepe intruders out of his palace and possessions, meanes to have no such troublesome inmates in his minde. And since you have sequestred him from his gardens, keepes out of your reach a Tarasse to exspatiate in his thoughts. He commends your eyes that can see so distinctlie such Platonical Idea's as never had existence, yet when you draw too neare commands you to your distance with the same answer that Bacchus did Hercules in the Comoedie for all his
club. Me ton emon oikei noun, echcis gar oikian.Aristoph. Ran. Scotish Presbyterie is that me∣ant in the Covenant bongh dis∣sembled. The Bishops last reasoning is as sound as those before, and in all is there a connexion of those parts which any demonstrative integral can require. To your first impeachment by quaestion I answer. That article of the Covenant beares the seting up of the Scotish Presbyterian government in England which is for a uniformitie in both Kingdomes, if taken with the next that extirpates praelacie viz. Church government by Bishops. For when Praelacie is downe, I pray what remaines, according to your principles, but Presbyterie to set up? As for Scotish Presbyterie, you have often told us 'tis the same with that of all Reformed Churches. And if alltogether be not according to the Word of God, after so many yeares Synods, Conferences, and Letters, what blinde Covenanters you are to sweare a league of life & death upon the like or more uncer∣tanitie of future discoverie by a few unskilfull persons whose peti phantastike lights put together must be made a new imaginarie mil∣kie way surpassing in a fermed singularitie of splendour any among the greater & truer luminaries in the firmament of the Church. But I have allreadie shewed how in vaine you aequivocate about that clause, which hath cost your friend Rutherford and others so much paines.Which de∣tracts from the Kings supremacie. What the oath of supremacie imports is evident by the words in it. (The varietie of sences to catch advantages like side windes in paper sailes which are subject to rend in pieces being the poor policie of Pres∣byters that dare not stand to the adventure of plaine dealing) supre∣me Governer of this Realme &c. Aswell in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as temporal. Which the Bishops you see conceald not, though you gratifie your selfe with the observation onelie of the other title supreme head, and accept his explication of it, which yeilding you in your contracted sense (that might securetie afford him more capital priviledges without encroachment upon Christ or his Holie Curch) supreme Governer takes in what your Presbyterie will never grant him, all power imperative, Legislative, judicial, coactive, all but functional, Imediate and proper to the ordination or office of the Minister, which, for ought  know, if he finde an internal call  a supposition drawing neare a possibilitie then likelihood and assurance to have a double portion of Gods gracious power and assistance in both ad∣ministrations, he not onelie may, but must exercise as did Moses and Melchisedech, saving that without a divine institution in this spiritual function his supremacie exempts him not from submitting his head under the hands of holie Church and taking our Saviours commission with the benediction from her mouth. That Scotish Pres∣byterie is a Papacie the Bishop requires not to be granted upon his word, but to be taken before Publike notaries upon your owne the politi∣cal
part whereof consists in the civile primacie which (at least by reduction) you very confidentlie assume. The Bishops contradiction, which is scarce so much as verbal, will be easilie reconciled by the words of the oath which he reflects on, and his argument good a∣gainst you, untill without reserves, limitations, or distinctions, you simplie acknowledge the King supreme over all persons in all causes, which would be a contradiction to this clause in your booke of Disci∣pline.2. B Disc. 1. Ch. The power Ecclesiastical floweth immediatelie from God and the Mediatour Iesus Christ and is spiritual, not having a temporal head in the earth, but onelie Christ, the onelie spiritual King and Governer of his Kirke. Lastlie, No Presbyterian is there in Scotland but counts it sacriledge to give the King what belongeth unto the Church. And whatsoeu'rit isStatutum Parliamen∣ti esse solum quid ac∣cessorium, & civilem approbatio∣nm esse tantum Christiani Principis officium subjectio∣nem suam Christo & Ecclesiae debitam te∣stantis Phil. Eplae Vind. Foraigne Presbyte∣rians ashe∣med to ju∣stifie the Scotish Co∣venant, The Sco∣tish Pr. ne∣ver serious∣e asscrib'd any good intention to the King. Natura insitum est omnibus Regibus in Christum o∣dium Altar. Dam. praet. ... Cosque Deo Crea∣tori non Re∣demptori imperium acceptm debere non obscure praedica∣runt. Re∣fut Epil. Ph. Siquis non obscure prae∣dicavit .... Non longe aberavi Vindic. e∣justd. . . . . Non solum  lon∣ginquo non impediens, connivens, vel plena∣riam pote∣statem . . . .. concedens . . . sed co∣ram intu∣ens & tali facinoris as∣spectu d∣lectatus. they quit in Ecclesiastike causes is not unto the King, but to King, and Parliament, and the power in both when it informes an Act or statute call'd but accessorie by the Aderdene Assemblers, and (that we may no longer doubt whom they account supreme) dutie and subjection from the Prince) which though spoken by them but of their meeting, must be meant of all causes consultable in their Synods, and is as sensible a truth as words without ambiguitie can render it. Out of all which hath been sayd it must necessarilie follow, that your Covenant hath all the good qualities computed which needs no arithmetical proofe by weight or measure, the praemises ever being coextended, with, and counterpoiz'd by, the conclusion. What you rashlie, if not praesumtuouslie, pronounce of the Bishops judgement doth but vilifie your owne. Qui citò deliberant facile pronunciant. Had you brought a judgement to the contrarie of any learned Casuist to whom his Lordship appeales, or any Divine of note in Europe, which he calls for, your answer had been somewhat more serious and solide, But here your oracles of learning are all silent. We finde it not avowed by your especial brethren of Holland and France, by no approbatorie suffrages of Leyden and Vrecht . . . . Omnium flagitiosorum atque facinorosorum circum se tanquam stipatorum catervus habet. A guard is hath, but a blake one, such as Ca∣tilines league, and how can it have beter, wherein is sworne a con∣spiracie as bad? The Bishops following vapours meeting with no suneshine of law o reason to dissipate them, will not so vanish upon a litle blast of your breath but that they 'll returne in showers of confusion upon your head. Your secret will to asscribe good intentions to the King hath by some of your packe been very strangelie revealed in their expressions tou∣ching Kings, whoss very nature they have declared originallie antipa∣thetical to Christ. This Didoclave avowes as planilie as he can▪ And when objected by His Grace of Saint Andrewes with your prover∣bial,
yet mystical appendix of their obligation to the Creatuor, not to Christ the Redeemer for their crownes, is so slovenlie answered by Philadelphs Vindicatour, as any man may reade your good wil in his words, & measure the sense of your Synods by his lines, your good opinion of the intentions of K. Charles 1. (Beside what you im∣puted to his Praelates) may be guessed by what, sometimes in print you have asscribd unto his person▪ An unworthie fellow, your Coun∣trey man that comes runing in hast with the message of your good meaning in his mouth, sayth; His infamous & Barbarous intentions were executed by sheathing his sword in the bowels of his people; And this not onelie himselve not impeding, conniving at, and giving full Commission for, in Scotland and Ireland, but in England looking upon with much delight while it was done. And that so faire were negotiations and treaties from retracting him, that it was in publike declared he sayth not by any Praelatical partie) that he would never desist from thîs enterprise of persecuting Church and Commonwealth so long as he had power to pursue it. Concerning the good intentions of Charles the second, beside what jealousies you expresse by the scrupulous conditions in your proclaemation, your Haghe papers are instancis of your willing asscriptions, which call his answer strange whereby the distance is made greater then before, and farre lesse offered for religion, the Covenant, and the lawes and liberties of your Kingdome then was by his Royal Father even at that time when the difference between him and you was greatest . . . . . So that it will constraine you in such an extremitie to doe what is incumbent to you. I have allreadie told you the usual consequences of that cursed word, and what good intentions you are in hand with when you utter it. Tyrannie and poperie are twinnes engendred between your jealousie & malice, to which In∣dependencie is more likelie to be the midwife then praelacie, and if by that hand they get deliverie at last, will besure to pay Presbyte∣rie their dutie when they can speake. The painted declarations caries be∣ter sense to them that rightlie understand them, which I am sure is not praejudic'd by any paraphrase of the Bishops. Though agere poeni∣tentiam. Be good councel where well placed 'yet egisse non poenitendum requires it not. If the conscience of the Court continue to be managed by the principles of the Praetates, the hearts of the most understanding shall, if they will be satisfied withall moral and fiducial assurance to have that Religion praeserved which shall by reason and authoritie, aswell divine as hu∣mane, in every particular justifie it selfe against all right or left han∣ded sects and factions guiltie of superstition or profanesse, & those lawes observed which appeare now to have constituted the most in∣different innocuous government in the world. Whereas if the conscience of the Court be deluded once into Presbyters hands it will need none
of our angrie wishes to be made sensible of the change, when to be sure, it must take religion, like a desperate patient, from a sullen physician in doses of Covenants and propositions not to be dispu∣ted, and like a bedlam have lawes given it with a whip. The Bishop drawing toward the end of his discourse puts all theThe Revie∣wer dares not speake out to the Bishops quaestion a∣bout taking armes for religion. controversie upon trial by that quaestion which if once categoricallie answered would spare much oyle and inke for the future, giving the Magistrate to know that it is not the pen but his sword whereby this difference must be decided. But these spiders of Presbyterie will aswell be spinning webs as spitting poyson, though so thin as can't conceale the uglie shape of their soules, nor that bay which contines the in∣trinsecal venome of their cause. Though had they the reputation of no better Artists then Master Baylie, the Pallas of Praelacie need not enter on the encounter, but that of Magistracie might in scorne more then envie, teare such wicked worke in peices before their face, and in justice mixed with some litle mercie to beget repentance—Vide quidem. pende tamen improba, dixit Mot. 6. fab. 3. The ambi∣guitie in the Cove∣nanters words lea∣ves religion to the liber∣tie of their conceits. Se short Causes. be∣gin. Nulla un∣quam gens in quovis se∣culo .... O∣pus Refor∣mationis fe∣liciore pru∣dentia ani∣mo & suc∣cessu admi∣nistravit, quam Scoti in sua pa∣tria Mot. Brit. Ver. Custin. Vincent. advers. hae∣res. c. 14. Their alle∣geance con∣ditional. They fight against. . Ch. 9. Their Creed in words the same with ours but not in sense. execute Arachne's condemnation in the fable upon the authours. Of the multitude of untruths which the Reviewer here recriminates upon the Bishop, (that we may be one take a judgement of the rest) the want of charitie is very unjustlie made the first, which he should have done well to have supplied in himselfe, and not so senselesselie to intimate a non realitic of religion in those reverend Fathers, who, beside the visibilitie in their practice heretofore, and of their Chri∣stian patience in being Martyrs and Confessours for it of late, ever made a profession of that fayth which was consonant to Scripture as interpreted in the primitive purest times of Holie Church. Where∣as the censure his Lordship makes of the Presbyterian phantasme is principallie because in their very covenant appeares no reforma∣tion intended but according to the word of God, without mentioning any rule or authoritie for the interpretation of that word, beside their owne humours & conceits. And the example of the best Reformed Churches, which best must be that which seemes so unto them, whether the rest yeild to it as such or no, if indeed they meane any, as it may be wel thought they doe not, but themselves, who are so superciliouslie singular from them all, as they disdaine to heare of a inclioration to be had from their example, and such Tyrants over us as they give us no other law nor reason but their pleasure for the reformation they impose, speaking to us in the language of the Pelagians to the Catholikes. Nobis authoribus, nobis principibus, nobis expositoribus, damnate quae tenebatis, tenete quae damnabatis, reijcit antiquam fidem, paterna instituta, Majorum deposita, & recipite, quaenam ill tandem? Horreo decere sunt enim m superba, ut mihi non modo adfirmari, sed ne refell; quidem sine aliquo piaculo
posse videantur. The second untruth he sayth is. That Covenanters beare no allegeance to the King but onelie in order to Religion, which notwithstanding is the particular limitation in the Covenant, and when all was gran∣ted them but a particle of that by Charles I. they denied to returne to their allegeance without it. And the Crowne of his succes∣sour, our gracious Soveraigne, still hangs out of his reach by that thred, which their proclamation tells him in effect shall for ever keep it off till he consent. To the third I replie. That the Rebell Parlia∣ments verbal denial makes the Bishop speake uo untruth, who will tell them as the King himselfe did, That his person was in vaine excepted by a pa∣renthesi of words, when so many hands were armed against him with swords, & the Canon knew no respect of persons. The praetenses of a Popish Praelatical, and malignant faction are wip'd away by His Majestie in that chapter, to which I require a Scotich replie. The fourth is grounded upon a very false supposition, which sometimes they will not grant us, nor sould we (though too many have out of mistake too often) grant it them, viz. That saving Bishops and ceremonies, the religion of Scotizing Pres∣byterians and Catholike English Christians is the same, whereas there is neare, if not fullie, fundamental difference in the acception of seve∣ral articles in our Creed, (so that though we say the same words, we can not trulie be sayd to be of the same beleife) in these at least, Christs descent into hell▪ The Holie Catholike Church; The communion of Saints; The forgivenesse of snnes; Besides several other accessorie tenets, wherein we thinke they detract from the mercie, if not the justice, of God, reveled in Christ and the ordinarie use of his graces restored by our redemption, without respect of persons, unto men. But if here, for their pleasure, they will have the true Church & counterfeit Kirke be the same otherwise then as they are differenced by the corruptions of Bishops and ceremonies, why tried they not the experiment of puging these with the alteration of the rubrike and their persons, without change of the Liturgie for a Directorie, and the abolition of their of∣fice, As their great Pope Henderson once confessed in the Earle ofHender∣son and the Reviewers speaches a∣bout Bi∣shops. Arundel's tent, when General in the North. That Bishops might have been tolerated in Scotland if their persons had been such as they ought. And the Re∣viewer himselfe, when he wondred why the Doctours of Aberdene would not subscribe the covenant, being asked by a friend of his if he thought Episcopacie and the articles of Perth unlawfull made this answer, He never thought, nor ever would thinke them so. Whence may be conjectur'd their modest meaning to be this; That had the Episcopa∣te in Scotland been seasonablie entailed to their tribe, so farre as they could have hindred what they pretie well promoted, their covenan∣ting tables at Edenburgh had been taken downe, and no armie rai∣sed
to purg Mlignants out of the Kirke 5. The Reviewer sayth,Religion & libertie no good prae∣tenses for taking ar∣mes. Simons's indicat p. 30. their rmes were tken for defense of just liberties, whereof religion was but one. But then it wa one, and tht the , or ee when hey had the Militia   to defend , why stood hey upon that, which is an argument that merelie for that, wre there nothing else in controversie, they might aswell take, as kepe up armes But what shuffling was in this businesse hath been discovered by another. That about liberties Mster Digges  learnedie confute. Nr will the Review and all his complices be able o  in any one law of the three Kingdomes that justifi the subjects against the supre∣me power in defēce of any liberties by their armes. Saint Austin and all good Christians were of another minde. Ia a pleibus Principes, & a servis domini ferendi sunt, ut sub exercitatione tolerantiae sustineantur emporalia & sperentur aeterna. Which I therefore cite not, as if I tooke it to be the Covenanters case, who did, and might have continued to enjoy all just liberties withot any such defense, Yet had they not, they should have ponder'd many beter politike maximes among the heathenIn Bru. such as this i Plutarch cheironinai monarchias paranomo polemon emphylion and that of Plinie in his Panegyrike. Quanto libertate discordi servientibu situtilius, unum esse cui serviant. The other horne of the Bishops dilemma is as sharpe, and it need be no shar∣per then the former, The danger whereof makes the Reviewer keep his distance, first not daring positavelie to assert the lawfullnesse of taking up armes for religion. And then muffling himselfe in his cloake, invaine hoping he shall not by this argument de gored unto the quicke. His spitting Atheisme in the face of Reason the native image we beare of God, will set no wisemē on gaping for extraordinarie revelatiōs, nor his false translating the Bishops sense into mere apprehensions and uncertai∣ne conceptions make him, or theirs of his minde, worse then Pagan Scepti∣kes in Religion. His Lordship I beleeve, grants no such pstvlate as theThe Scotish Presbyte∣rians as en∣thusiastike a the A∣nabaptists & no more excusable by their re∣ligion for taking ar∣mes. Reviewer seemes to looke for. That every Scotish Mas. is a Moses, & every persecuting Presbyter, before Gods judgements have humbled him to his conversion, a Saint Paul. He conceives their Catechisme or Directorie can passe for no Pentateuch nor Apostolical Epistles and sayth they beg the qustion that take it to be the Gospell. He argues, That in as∣serting the lawfullnes of taking armes, they justisie the Independents that supplanted themselves, whose new light shines as much like that from Moses's face as they Presbyterians nw doctrine sounds like the ora∣cles he received in the mount. That the Anabaptists in Germanie were no more Enthusiasts then the Anabaptists in Scotland, who null the po∣werfull operation of the sacrament, and for ought we know, may be nulls in the missionarie power to administer it. That Iohn of Leyden &
his rue could not be more mad then Iohn Kno and hi, nor could they have lesse reason fo their militarie proceedings. His Lord∣ship is so farre from placing the summe of Religion in every simple ap∣prehension, that he desires the authoritie of the Chuch should take place of his conceptions untill the truth, if different from tha doctrine, which is unlikelie were seald to him by some internal impression of Gods spirit. What every man is perswaded in his conscience to be di∣vine truth he would have him praeferre before other mens apprehensions of a contrarie religion. Yet if that perswasion be dissonant from what was ge∣nerallie among the primitive Christians, he would not that he should mistake himselfe to have a singular infallibilitie, nor a transscendent commission, above that of Christ and his Apostles, to take armes & Fayh  so comon, if such as commonlie defined. force all men to his beleefe. The most certain truths, even these divine ones in religion, if His Lordship doth not, which I did not aske him, I doe thinke to be in many men that praetēd to that supernatural grace cal∣led fayth, were uncertaine conceptions, or inadvertent praesumptions, fin∣ding few so considerate of their very principles in Religion as to build them upon any so much as that subordinatie moral certaniti they might doe with good endeavour, fewer live so devoutlie as without it can reasonablie suppose God miraculouslie infuseth his re∣velatious to assure them. Therefore though all the truths of Christian Religion, wherein controverted, are reveal'd from heaven. Yet I thinke we are to looke a great way backe for the persons by and unto whom, immediate inspirations being now adayes very rare, nor doe we live much like the holie mortified men that were wont to have them ofSulpis. Se∣ver in vita. old. You know what Saint Matin told the Divel when he appear'd arrayed like a King, and would be taken for Christ come in triumph upon the earth. Ego Christum, nisi in o habitu formaque qua passurest, nisi  stigmata prorentem venisse non credam. He would not beleeue im to bS. Matth. 10. 16. The Pr▪ Sots must bring beter markes then their ba words for revelations▪ Advers. haeres▪ cap. 14. come till he saw him in the habit of his sufferings. So when we see you quali∣fied like his disciples, wise as Serpents not craftie as foxes, harmelesse as doves, not rapacious as harpies, patient like sheep, not ravening like wolves. Delivered up to Councels, not excommunicating in Synods, scourg'd in Synagogue not disciplining without mercie in your Chur∣ches. Brought before Governers and Kings for Christs sake, not bringing Go∣verners and Kings to mocke-tribunal for your owne. Then tell us of Divine truths, the beleefe of Moses and Saint Paul revelation from hven, and we will hearken to you as Angels, whom now we take to be no beter then the haereties who Vincēt sayth are ranequaedam & cyniphes, & mus∣cae moriurae, such contemptable creatures as croking frogs, gnats, and dying flies that would buzze what mischiefe you can before you leave us, and make the oyntment of the Apothecarie stinke with the
corruption of your writings when you are dead; The second part of your apologie is most false both thesei kai hypothesi 1▪ Because subjects have no armes, while the Magistrate is in being to hold the sword, put into their hands to defend their religion and liberties how legallie so euer established, They have onelie pleas by that law to claime them, and pe∣titions of right or aequitie to put up unto the Magistrate to maintaineThey are ut hrotes of Magistra∣tes & planters of Religion by armes. them. 2. If they goe beyond defending themselves in their religion and force others to enter into their league & covenant though con∣trarie to their conscience, this is no other thn planting of religion by ar∣mes. And if the difference in any point of religion be such as to state the Magistrate in a condition to be put to death by his subjects, as it doth, in your sense, when he joines in worship with Papists & Prae∣lates, whom you make idolarers. and idolatrie death unpardona∣ble; this is cutting the throates of all Magistartes. And this is maintained to be just and to have the ground of Gods ordinarie judgement by your Patriach Knox. And to be imitated of all those that praeferre the true honour of the true wor∣shipHist. Lib. 4. and glory of God to the affection of flesh and wicked Princes. Your hypo∣thesis is false, because the religion and liberties of your Covenant in England were never established by law, and what was so established was never usurped by Papists Praelates and Malignant, And if it had been, from so good a King redresse had probablie been procured upon just com∣plaint without taking armes. To your third I replie, That the BishopWe say no∣thing to fo∣raigne pro∣estants ta∣king armes. till they justifie yours & & theirs by yours gives no judgement, makes no mention of the Protestants Armes in France Holland and Iermanie, compares them not with the Anabaptisis in Mun∣ster or Sectaries in England. If you can once perswade them to espouse your quarell, (for which you have begg'd long enough at their gates by this time) or publish a parallel between your taking up armes and their owne, the praelatical partie will make no difference between you, but give alike judgement against you all. In the meanetime the maximes they give are rational and divine, & they are brutes or A∣theists, divested allreadie of all religion and reason, who praeferre them not to the Presbyterian enthusiasmes, who give out for Mi∣chael the Archangels revelations what counterfeit impostures Mor∣pheus puts of to them in their dreames. Touching a general Councel, with a wish for which Hi Lordship pi∣ouslieThe Prae∣lates decli∣ne not the judgement of Councels. concludes, No Covenanters goe before him, nor will set one step af∣ter him in that desire, who most uncharitablie make three prts of fo∣wer in the Christian world Antichristian, and o no constitutive mem∣bers of such a meeting. An oecumenicke Synod of Protestants would un doubtedlie condemne them, which is most shamefullie praejug'd to approve of the rebellion and murder in their Covenant. Nor can their Principals, in honour, be silent at such an horrid impious prae∣sumption
publickelie printed & imputed to them. The Bishops & his brethren have declined no solemne assemblies of their owne countreyes▪ those so called were factious schismatical conventicles▪ illegallie gathe∣red & composed of such musromes as how numerous soeuer, durst not admit of twentie Praelatical Divines into debate, lest they should be squeez'd into a litle spungie earth & winde (their originals) having no substantial worth or abilities to support them. You need not pray the Warner to speake unto the question you put, since you have his answer before hand without asking, viz. That its worth the enqui∣ring (even in such an Oecumenicke synod) whether the markes of Anti∣christ do not agree as eminentlie to the Assemblie General of Scotland as to the Pope. He mentions some that plainlie doe, & meanes, it may be as much of all the rest. To the charge in a Christian Councel they would answer. That they are able to evidence before God & the World, That all bloud & miserie drawn from, & brought upon, the former King & his Kingdomes must be cast upon the Covenant & General Assemblie in Scotland, who will never cease to embroyle all in new calamities untile they be destroyed. That if this King & his whole familie re∣solve not to prosecute Gods cause, which the former did with much Christian courage unto the death, they hazard the tearing their crownes into more peices then the miters, & the demolition of theirPresbyte∣rian cruel∣tie, may by Gods pro∣vidence be restrained. thrones beneath that of the Praelates chaires, To conclude all. The Re∣viewers breath, though violent enough, becomes in vaine so defi∣nitive, as to perpetuate persecutions against the providence of God, whom the Bishops looke upon as a potent Protectour of Kings, & a mercifull repairer of the breach made in his Church by their owne ruines. Their resolution, may be justlie peremptore to persevere in their opinion of the Scotish Presbyterian crueltie to be such That as they, have bured their Bishops alive, conniv'd at, & if, not countenancd, the Massacring their Kings; so their endeavour will not be wanting to scater the ashes of e Royal familie & three Kingdomes on their graves, Though their consistorian fourmes, & repenting stooles with other luggage be next cast into the flames first kindled by themselves. The mysteries of their religion being murder & dead monuments such as neverAdmn. ad G. made those heathen the summe of whose devotion Clemens of A∣lexandria comprehended in two words. FINIS.
Errours to be amended. Epist. Ded. pag. 3. line 18. Reade, she or her Ancients. Ans. to Ep▪ Ded. p. 2. l. 8. for common shoare, r. com. fewer. Ibid. l. 9. for power, r. paper. p. 3. l. 6. for and, r. &c. p. 6. l. 16. for comfort, r. confort. l. 38. for burning. r. warning. p. 7. l. 18. for both, r bold. l. 36. for must. r. most. p. 8. l. 20. r. deceitfull lovers of themselves there are. p. 9. l. 35. r. two or three such words as. p. 11. l. 32. for late, r. babe. p. 16. l. 13. for Reviewer, r. Reviewes. Acolut. p. 8 l. 13. for own, r. owned. p. 13. l. 30. for otherguede, r. otherguesse. p. 19. l. 37. for literal, r. liberal p. 20. l. 8. for apposed. r. opposed. p. 21. l. 15. it delatur. p. 22. margin, for Chaldaeos, r. Culdaeos. p. 26. l. 10. for then, r. they. l. 11. for all r. a. p. 29. l. 1. for Hierambicorum, r. Hierarchicorum. l. 25. for buselie, r. basilie. p. 31. l. 30. for in that, r. & that is. l. 41. for anomia ergapiria, r. anomias ergasteria. p. 37. l. 17. for stake, r. sticke. p. 38. l. 19. for acknowledge, r. acknowledged. p. 40. l. 2. for reasonable, r. trea∣sonable. p. 45. l. 19. for Vnitglupte, r. Vuygeastein. p. 48. l. 36. After Oecumenical, adde Councel. p. 53. l. 37. for asgle r. aire. p. 59 l.▪ 24. for acconsequential, r. unconse∣quential. p. 60. marg. for to excom. r. no excom. p. 60. l. 29. for too rigid. r. to rigid. p. 64. l. 32. for halls r. heeles. p. 68. l. 20. for triel, r. Ariel. p. 72. l. 11. for then, r. them. p. 73. l. 3. for as, r. is. p. 78. marg. for vicitie, r. nicitie. p. 0. marg. for 1493. r. 1593. p. 81. l. 34. r. (though but in the time) Ibid. marg. r. The Bishops Sunday toleration. p. 48. l. 10. pro libra, r. litera. Ibid. l. 12. for jura r. dura. p. 85. l. 1. for papists, r. pupills. l. 3. for its. r. in. p. 86. l. 14. for coloural, r. colourable. Ibid. marg. r. Scotish Presbyterian re∣formation from &c. p. 7. l. 7. for latewarmnesse r. lukewarmnesse. l. 13. for too. r. 100. p. 88. l. r. for session, r. cession. l. 14. for Murre, r. Marre. marg. for Ruthuer, r. Ruthuen. p, 92. l. 21. for servidi, r. fervidi. p. 94. l. 9. for scrive. r. transscribe. p. 57. l. 1. for then, r. them. p. 101. l. 39. for superintended, r. superintendent. p. 11. for masters, r, maters. marg. for contracted, r. confuted. p. 117. l. 14. guerts. r. Masters. p. 121. l. 6. for indiscreet, r. in discreet. p. 122. marg. fuos, r. suo. p. 126. l. 9. for on, r. or. p. 127. l. 1. r. from whom I expect &c. p. 142. l. 39. for cession, r. succession. l. 40. for successis, r. successio, p. 145. l. 40. for Autorani ei, r. Autouranici. p. 148. l. 39. for & r. &c. p. 149. marg. for su∣dunt ... astragatus, r. sudunt astragalis. p. 152. l. 35. for pallea, r. paleae. for Affltu, r. Af∣flatu [with no point before it] p. 127. marg. for togodaedali, r. logodaedali. p. 153. marg. for odificentur in rumam, raedificentur in ruinam. p. 155. l. 41. for manitates, r. inani∣tatis. p. 157. l. 16. for if, r. it. l. 41. for mission, r. omission. p. 159. l. 40. for doubte, r. double. p. 16. l. 14▪ for forming, r. foming. p. 163. l. 1. for too, r. so. p. 165. l. 13. susplicates, r. sup∣plicates. pag. 169. l. 6. r. to the Bishop. pag. 175. l. 83. for to, r. so large. Ibid. marg. for a estes quos sidem ea vocant, r. testes quos sidemen vocant. for minus▪ r. munus. p. 177. marg▪ for spirationes, r. conspirationes. p. 175. for many leaves, r. may leave. p. 180. l. 5. for quae, r, quia▪ p. 181. l. 26. for quis pium, r. quispiam. p. 182. marg. for homonymus subscribentiam. r. homonymoos suscribentium. p. 185. for momseia, r. monscia Aristoph. p. 187. l. 38. for up to, r. unto. p. 188. l. 14. for which, r. with. p. 191. l. 14. for guistnesse, r. guiltlesse. p. 155. l. 15. for fermed, r. feigned. l. 34. for neare, r. nearer a possibilitie then likelihood, p. 157. l. 13. for faire. r. farre. marg. for Cosque, r. Eosque. p. 198. l. 11. for bay▪ r▪ bag. l. 35. for inclioration, r. melioration. marg. for vide, r. vive. for se short causes, r. see short confes. p. 200. l. 40. for Anabaptists, r. Abaptists. p. 201. l. 16. for were, r. mer.
An Alphabetical Principal Table of the Contens. A. THe Disciplinarians rebellious pro∣ceedings in their persecution of Arch. Bp. Adamson. Pag. 43 Poenitent adulterers not necessarilie to be put to death. 169 Litle aequitie in the Reviewers debates & treaties. 190 Alteration in Religion or Church Go∣vernment unsave & sinfull while con∣science is doubtfull. 95 They may be feared to be unchristian that call us Antichristian. 145 Trivial debates among Scotish Presby∣ters about apparell. 125 The Reviewer dares not speake out to the Bishops quaestion about taking armes for religion. 198 That & Libertie no justifiabîe praetenses for taking armes. 201 The Pr: Scots that did, no more excu∣sable then the Anabaptist in Germa∣nie. 200 They are planters of their misse-named Religion by armes. 202 K. Ch. 1. had just cause to march with an armie toward Scotland Ans. to Ep. Ded. 9 The Pr. Scots had none for their invading England Ibid. 11 Their General Assemblies Disobedience to the Kings command. 179. 12 The incohaerent excuses therof. 13 The rebellious Assemblers at Aber∣dene 1605. 16 Appeales in Scotland to the King. 32 And so the ultimate of them every where elce. 41 The proceedings against them no other then legal. 17 Wherein the E. Dunbar cried himselfe impartiallie and noblie. 23 Assemblies summoning the people in armes upon the trial of Popish Lords. 92 Collusion and violence in the election of Members for Assemblies. 133 Why so many Burgesses and Gentlemen in them. 134. 135 B. TReason by statute to impugne the authoritie of Bishops, being one of the three Estates. 19 Bishops perpetuall in Scotland. 21 The calumnie against the three Bishops consectated by the Arch - Bishop of Canterburie refuted. 22 How the Difference hapened between the E. Argile & the Bishop of Galloway. 141 Our Bishops contest not with King and Nobles. 140 Their praecedence and place neare the throne. Ibid. Officies of State. 141 The Antiquitie, &c. Of Bishops justified very judiciouslie by Dr Ier. Tayler, Whose booke is an antidote against the poyson of all the Reviewers objec∣tions. 102 Bishops Apostles. 106 Evangelists, Prophets, Pastours. 107 Doctours. 108
Bishops & Ceremonies no burthen. 187 The Bishop of Derrie's prudence, no boldnesse in the publication of his booke Ansto Ep. Ded. 2 Very seasonable. 1 In it His Lordship is no slanderer of the King. 4 Blackes rebellious case. 53 Balcanqual, Bruce & other Ministers guiltie of raising the tumult. 56 Blaire and his complices justlie banished out of Ireland. 51 Bthwells notorious crimes. 61 Bruce's bold speach to the King about E. Huntley. 63 The Bishops appeale in the Assemblie at Glasgow not derogatorie to the Kings personal praerogative. 45 C. CAlderwood's ridiculous reverence of Bruce's ghost. 139 E. Casls demeanour Ans. to Ep. Ded. 1 Canons infirming the Reviewer to be an accuser of the Bishop. 48 Publike catechizing of Masters and Mistresses indecent. 171 Not very necessarie before their rece∣iving the Sacrament. Ibid. The Kings Chaplanes use no Court arti∣fice, but what becomes such reverend worthie persons in their places Ans. to Ep. Ded. 4 A proposition of trial to be made whether Christ's scepter must be swayed by Bishops or Presbyters. 100 The difference between us & the Church of Rome about ceremonies. 98 Iurisdiction of Commissaries. 52 The Kings Commissioner how offronted in Pr S. Synods. 134 Rit in Scotland to get downe the High Commission Court. Which was not so tyrannical as the Pr. Consistone. 173 Wherein is more rigour then other where among the Reformed Churches. 174 The adventurous concessions of K. Ch. . extorded by the necessitie or difficultie he was brought to. 104 K. Iames's dislike of the Scotish short confession. Many unjustificable prac∣tices about it. 14 Conscience not bottom'd onelie up on divine right. 95 Contrarietic of commands at the same time ordinarie under Scotish Presby∣terie. 114 The Reviewers fallacie to salve it in the case of the French Ambassadours. 115 His ignorance of the true stated contro∣versie between vs and the Church of Rome. 8 His cunning in altering the true state of that between the Bishop and himselfe as in many places so. 30 K. Ch. I. invaded not the Scotish Con∣sistorie, his condescensions leaving them contended. 90 The Reviewers uncharitable interpreting Mr. Corbets's end a punishment from God. 3 Particulars about framing the English-Scotish Covenant. The persons by whom &c. 177 How dishonourable it is to the English that approved it. 179 The Reviewer's abominable affected falshood in defense of it. 180 His impudence in preaching at the Hage that nothing at all had been objected against it. Ans. to Ep. Ded. 7 How destructive it is to the Royal line. Ibid. 12 How the same with that of K. Iames 1580. 183 How it divers from it 184 Foraigne Presbyterians asham'd to coun∣tenance it. 196 The ambiguitie of the words in it leaves religion to the libertie of their conceits that take it. 198 Covenants unlawfullie taken are more
unlawfullie kept. 177 The Praelates decline not the judgement of Councels. 202 No inhaerent right in Courts to nominate Commissioners for intervalls. 123 Spirituall crueltie in the prayers of Sco∣tish Presbyters. 125 Their temporal crueltie, as much as they praesume, may by Gods providence be restrained. 203 The Court conscience will, if the expe∣riment be tried, soon finde the diffe∣rence between the Episcopal and Pres∣byterian Clergie. 197 D. NO defensive armes for subjects. 40 Court of Delegates neither unbe∣seeming, nor unreasonable. 43 K. Iames's Declaration 1584. How by His Majestie subscribed. 51 The Pr. Scots imprudence as well as in∣justice &c. in delivering up K. Ch. I. to his murderers. Ans. to Ep. Ded. 14 The old grudge that mov'd them to it. Ibid. 15 The same newlie conceived against K. Ch. II. Ibid. 15 The difference between Vs and Scotish Presbyterians is more then in Bishops and ceremonies. 199 The Sc. Discipline omits what the ancient Canons had among the cases of Mini∣sters deprivation. What it hath con∣concernes more Presbyters then Prae∣lates. 67 It playes the tyrant over the consciences of the people. 124 Divine attributes proaned in asscribing them to the Discipline and Assemblie Acts. 100 ovenanters missetake the Discipline for Christs institution. 180 o legal establishment in Scotland of the first booke of Discipline. 18 K. Iames's consent to the second booke of Discipline how improbable. 24 They anticipate the law in the exercise thereof. 27 The English Discipline long since setled by law in Scotland aud our Liturgi there used. 13 That of the Pr. Scots obtruded upon England. Ibid. Divine right pleaded for Presbytere frustrates all treaties. 96 Episcopacie wants no Discipline aequi∣valent to that in the Scotish Presby∣terie. 175 Our doctrines about real praesence, justi∣fication, free will, final apostasie, prae∣destinatîon, breifie touched. And a quaestion propounded about Davids case. 98. 99 Dowglasse that murdered Capt. I. Stuart kill'd in Edenburgh high street. 21 E. OUr Episcopacie not reputed Anti∣christian by other Reformed Churches. Ans. to Ep. Ded. 3. 50 K. Ch. I. suspended the jurisdiction of Episcopacie in Scotland for no crimes. No full and free Parliament that voted it downe in England. 9 Episcopacie no obstruction to the Kings peace. Why it may not be lay'd aside. 40 What right it hath to become unalte∣rable. 94 The reasons of K. Ch. I. well bottom'd. 95 Some particulars about the historie of Scotish Episcopacie. 111 Abolition of Episcopacie is not that which will ever give the Pr. Scots sa∣tisfaction. 165 K. Ch. I. in his largest concessions yeilded not unto it. 188 The assertours of the Magistrates just power misse call'd Erastians by the Reviewer. 6 Erastuss Royal right of Church go∣vernment can not untie the Kings cons∣cience if streightned. No is that onelie it the Bishops praetend to. 97
The Sc. Discipline exempts not Kings from being excommunicate. 57 Excommunication not mean'd by de∣livering up to Satan. 110 Ignorance no ground for the execution of it. 172 The Scotish Presbyters practice touching excommunication litle lesse rigid then their canon. 227 The inconveniences that follow to be imputed rather to the Kircke then State. 128 Impunitie no good ground for excom∣munication. 61 The Kings pardon quitting poenitent malefactours. 65 F. SCotish Presbyters much too busie in private families. 175 Fayth not so common, if such a grace as ordinarilie it is defined. 201 Church Festivals not legallie abolished in Scotland. 18 Crueltie toward fugitives. 129 G. GIbson's insolent speaches unto the King. 21 The Assemblie's juggling in his case. 52 Gilespie's theoreme for resisting Ma∣gistrates disclaimed by no Assemblies. The substance of it the sense of ma∣ny. 37 The King why concerned to be cautelous in his grants to the Presbyterian Scots. 5 The Bishops Office entirelie authorized in the Assemblie at Glasgow 1610. 23 H. THe proceedings against D. Hamil∣ton's late engagement discus∣sed. 70. 71. &c 115. 117. &c. Mr. Henderson's speach of Bishops. 199 E Huntley's case truelie related. 61 I. K. Iames a greater Anti - Presbyte∣rian then Anti-Erastian. 64 The Praelates title to Impropriations and Abbey lands beter then that of Presbyters. 137 Presbyterian indulgence in cases of sedi∣tion and rebellion. 47 Their monstrous ingratitude for the too liberal graces of K. Ch. I. 104 The Kings concessions to the Irish more justifiable then the other could be to the Scotish Presbyterian demands. 146 The Pr. Scots endeavours to impose their Discipline upon England. 5 The Assemblie at Westminster having no power to authorize it. 6 Many of the Presbyteries in Scotland have very unfit & unable Iudges. 174 Iurisdiction Ecclesiastical floweth from the Magistrate. 34 Sc. Presbyters usurpe Civile jurisdic∣tion. 69 No power of jurisdiction in what the Reviwer misse interprets the Church. 108 Nor in a companie met together. 109 K. THe election of a King not original∣lie justifiable in any people. 64 K. Ch. I. not inclinable, though by coun∣terfeit promises praevail'd with to cast himselfe upon the Presbyterian Scots Ans. to Ep. Ded. 12 His writings not interlined by the Bi∣shops. The Reviewers commendation of them unawares Ibid. 6 K. Ch. II. hath expressed no inclination to the Covenant. If any praeventiv disswasion of His Majesties from  hath been used by the Praelatical par∣tie, it was a dutifull act of conscience and prudence. 149 His Majestie can not so easilie, will not so readilie grant what his Royall Father
denied. 191 Scots Presbyterians never seriouslie as∣scribed any good intentions to K. Ch, I. nor. 2. 197 L. MOre learning under Episcopacie then Presbyterie. 150 The King supreme Legislatour. 193 The Bishops share in making lawes▪ as great as any one of the three E∣states. Ibid. Our Liurgie why read. A parallel of it with primitive formes fiter then with the Breviarie. 156 The Church of Scotland hath had a li∣turgie not onelie for helpe but prac∣tice. 160 The Presbyterians hypocritical use of it. 161 M. THe Magistrates definitive judge∣ment in Synods owned by the Reformed Divines both Praela∣tical and Presbyterian. 28 Sc. Presbyterie will have Magistrates▪ sub∣ject to the Kirke. 120 Presbyters why against clandestine mar∣riages. 166 Consent of Parents how to be required. Ibid. No obedience due to them command∣ing an unjust marriage. 169 The Bishops cautelous in giving license for clandestine marriages. 170 Gods mercie in praeserving Arch-Bishop Maxwel falsified by the Reviewer. 3 The businesse about the Spanish Mer∣chants sophisticated. 80 Sc. Presbyters controllers in the Mi∣litia. 79 The power of it in the King. 186 P. Ministers rebellious meeting at Mauchlin moore. 119 They exceed their commission. 121 Their power with the people dangerous to the government. 122 Their rebellious proceeding in the per∣secution of Arch-Bishop Montgo∣merie and Arch-Bishop Adamson. 43 The murders & other prodigious impie∣ties acted by the Sc. Presbyterians in prosecution of their ends. 82 The scale of degrees whereby they as∣scended to the murder of K. Ch. I. 38 Which might have been foreseen by their propositions, never repealed▪ 76 Murder may be pardoned by the King who hath been petitioned in that case by the Disciplinarians themselves. 60 N. THe King's negative voyce justified as well in Scotland as England▪ 77 What is the power of his affirmative. 78 The Sc. Presbyters gave the occasion and opportunitie for the Nobles to get the Ecclesiastike revenue. The Episco∣pacie more then titular they kept up. 15 Presbyterie more oppressive to the No∣bilitie & Gentie then Praelacie. 130 Noblemen why chosen Elder. 131 Where such, how slighted by the Pres∣byters. 139 O. SC. Presbyters assume the arbitration of oeconomical differences. 68 The Officers appointed by Christ in his Church need not be restrained to the number of five. Nor those taken to be the same the Presbyterians would have them. 106 The Officials Court a more compent Iudicatorie then the Classical Pres∣byterie. 132 No power of ordination in the Presby∣byterie. 108. 142 No comfortable assurance but from A∣postolical succession & Episcopal or∣dination which Presbyterians want. The Sc. Presbyterians trial before ordi∣nation more formal then truelie expe∣rimental of abilitie in the persons. 10
The qualification different from that required by the Bishops. 152 The original of the pretended oath taken by the King▪ for securitie of the Sc. Discipline. 163 P. THe Sc. Assemblies decrees to be ra∣tified by Parliament. 24 As those of our Convocations. 32 Presbyterie makes Parliaments subject to Assemblies. 120 The Parliament of Scotland in no capa∣citie to make demands after the mur∣der of the King. 163 Presbyterie hath no claime to the Church partimonie given by Episcopal foun∣ders and benefactours. 25 Their disputes with Princes about Church revenue. 63 The original right of patronage in Lay persons. 136 Peirth Assemblie 1596. 111 Provision under Episcopacie against the povertie of such as are ordained. 153 The Praelats still of the same minde they were about the rights and priviledges of Bishops. 103 Reason of bidding prayer before sermon. 159 In the Caon forme is no prayer for the dead. 160 St formes of no use to beginers that pray by the spirit. 161 The gift of prayer in the Pater Noster. Ibid. Presbyterians divided about prayer. 162 The injuries by extemporarie prayer. Ibi. Presbyteries when, and how, erected in Scotland Bishops to praeside in them. 20 Christianitie at its first entrance into Scotland brought not Presbyterie with it. 22 Fallacie in the immediate division of re∣ligion into Presbyterian & Popish. 53 No authoritie of Scripture for the many practices of Scotish Presbyterie. 10 Litle knowledge, labour, or conscience shewed in Presbyterian preaching. 54 Scotish Presbyterians beter conceited of themselves then of any other Re∣formed Church to which yet they praetend a conformitie in their new model. 198 K. Iames's speach concerning Scotish Presbyterie. 30 How a King may, and whe, exercise the office of a Priest. 195 Sc. Presbyteries processe for Church rents. 3 The same fault under a different forma∣litie not to be twice punished. 126 Q. K. Iames's 55. Quaestions. 111 R. REading Ministers usefull and justi∣fiable in our Church. 154 The Praelats doe not annull the being of all Reformed Churches. 143 Though they have no full assurance. 144 The Reviewers speach of Bishops and Peih articles. 199 The Church of Rome true, though not most true. 145 A rigid separation from her in many things needlesse. 146 Assemblies can reforme onelie according to canon, not the canon. 84 The Primitive Christians reformation different from that of Sc. Presbyte∣rians. 85 That of the Church of England began rather at K. Edw. VI. then Henr. VIII. 6 The Parliament can not reforme with∣out the King. 18
Resistance against the person of the Ma∣gistrate can not be made inobedience to his office. 35 Reviewer willfullie missetakes the scope of the Bishops booke. 45 His barbarous implacable malice against the dead. 49 A riot under praetense of taking a Priest at Masse. 91 Abetted by Knoxe with his confessed interest in many more. 92 The Pr. Scots must bring beter markes then their bae words for revela∣tions. 201 S. FOraigne Presbyterians tolerate more libertie on their Sabbath then e Bishops on our Sunday. 50. 125 The hypocritical superstition of the Sc. Presbyters in the sanctification of their Sabbath. 81 Offenders quitted to be admitted to the H. Sacrament without publike satis∣faction in the Church. 126 False measures &c under colour of scandal not to be brought into the cogni∣zance of the Church. 66 All civile causes are brought before the Presbyterie under the preense of scandal. 170 The Pr. Scotish partie inconsiderable. 2 They gave beter language to our Bishops heretofore then of late. 8 Carefull Christians will finde litle leisure on weeke dayes to heare many ser∣mons. 157 Sermons not to exceed an houre. 158 Those that are Rhetorical may be as usefull as many meelie Textuarie. 159 S. Claud Somais no Countenancer of the late Kirke proceedings Ans. to Ep. Ded. 4. 111 The Sc. Presbyterians coordinate two Soveraignities in one State. 113 Two Scotish Kings at one time avouced by A Melvin. 114 Capt. Iames Stuart vindicated at large. 87 Superintendents aequivalent to Bishops 23 Imperious supplicates from the Presby∣terie. 26 Rebellion the subject of most. 165. 179 The Kings supremacie impaited by Pres∣byterie. 27. 195 Placed upon the People. 29 Scotish Presbyterie overthrowes the right of the Magistrates convocating Sy∣nods. 10. 30 Synods where the Magistrate prohibited them. 31. 36 Receiving appeales not the principal end of calling Synods. 132 Noblemen to have no suffrages in them but when sent thither by the King. 134 T. THe by tenets of the Discipline. 3 The Texts of Scripture urged a∣gainst Episcopacic, for Presby∣terie, answered. 105. &c. The Presbyterians treason at Ruthuen. 88 At Striveling. 9 V. FAmilie visitations commendable aswell in orthodoxe Priest as Pres∣byters. 173 The Reviewer much in love with the uncleanlie metaphore of a vomit. 176 W. ACcording to the Word of God a more dubious and frivolous limi∣tation in the Covenant them here∣tofore in the oath for Episco∣pacie. 181 FINIS.
