W53 7915907 40399
An EXACT ACCOUNT OF The Late Action AT THE Town of DUNDALK, AGAINST The IRISH, by Their MAJESTIES FORCES, Commanded by Sir JOHN LANIER. TOGETHER, With the ARTICLES of the Surrender of MOSS-TOWN. Lisbourne the 10th of February, 1689/90. ON Friday his Grace received an Express, that the Forces he sent from Antrim to Charlemont, had Burnt many of their Boats, and Fired the Bridge, half of which was Burnt down before the Enemy could extinguish it; and a very hot Dispute hapned, in which we lost a French Captain in the Regiment of Cukimott, and five or six private Souldiers, with the loss of many on the Enemies side, and some Prisoners. The same Evening his Grace received an Ex∣press from the Newry, that there were six Re∣giments of the Enemies Horse, and five Regi∣ments of Foot arrived at Dundalk, and that five Regiments more of Foot were coming to them; and that several Gabbard (or Lighters) Loads of Hay and Oats were arrived there from Droghe∣dah. And yestarday another Express from the New∣ry, That there were come to Dundalk 13 or 14 Gabbards more from Droghedah, loaden with Ba∣con, Cheese, Butter, and the like. Upon which his Grace hath sent Expresses to Col. Stewart and Col. Pursell, to direct them in the better securing the Newry, and adjacent Pas∣sages, and another to the Captain of the Man of War in Carrickfergus Road (as is thought) to di∣spatch some Persons to burn the Hay, Oats, Gab∣bards, &c. And also by a Messenger arrived here four days since, he hath sent for the Danes to hast∣en thither; and to Morrow designs towards the Newry himself. Febr. 13. On Tuesday the General set out from hence towards the Newry, having first given Or∣ders for all our Forces to dispatch from all Parts towards him, and given out 6000 Arms to the Country to defend themselves in their absence; and accordingly our Forces were on their march. But this Morning his Grace sent an Express from Drummore, that the whole Noise was a false Alarm; and order'd Directions to be sent to all Regiments to stop their march, and return to their Quarters. In my last I told you, our General was gone towards Newry, but by the Road receiving an Account, which contradicted his former, of the Enem speedy approaches towards our Frontis on that Quarter; his Grace went no far∣ther than Drummore, eight Miles from this place, where he ave Orders for all the Forces on their March to those parts, to return to their Quarters, excepting 500 Foot, and 500 Horse and Dra∣goons, who were detached out of several Regi∣ments, and Commanded by Sir John Lanier, to Dundalk, where they arrived on Friday Morning the 14th. before day, and passed the River a Mile above the Town, near Bellews-Castle, where being a Garrison of the Enemy, as our Men approached, the Enemy fired briskly, and ours as briskly ad∣vanced upon them; the Enemy fled from the Walls into the Castle, and upon this briskly fired from the Battlements; however, our Men, like Lions eager for a Prey, could not be daunted or restrain∣ed, but ran up to the Gate, which being only Barricadoed within, was soon forced open, and our Men soon got into the lower part of the House, and fell to firing up through the Floor, by which they wounded one Man, and threatning to burn the House, the Enemy from above hung down a white Handkerchief, and desired leave to march out with their Arms; but being denied that, were forced to accept of Quarter, and sur∣render themselves up Prisoners, of which there is in all about twenty of their Army, and ten Coun∣try Fellows, who are now  Road coming hither under a Guard  the Castle, another Party advanced  the Enemy's side of the Town  the South East part, where our chief Works formerly were, and
without Opposition burnt all the Houses on that Quarter to the Gate, where a strong Party being got, opposed our further Progress, till in the At∣tempt we lost one Lieutenant, and two private Men, and killed one of the Enemy, and then retired. There were other ways which with difficulty our Forces might have (yet not without great difficulty) attempted to enter the Town; but there being 3000 of the Enemy within, and se∣veral strong Castles and Houses; and not know∣ing but a stronger Party might advance from Atherdee, where some of their Horse lieth, it was thought advisable to retire, which accordingly our Men did, to the Fields and adjacent Moun∣tains, from whence they brought 1500 Head of Cattle, without the least opposition from the Ene∣my; which at the Newry is to be divided among the whole Party. All the Houses they burnt were full of Pro∣visions, so that it's believed, and the Prisoners report that the Town is full also: Our Men dis∣cern'd four Gibbards, in the River of Dundalk, and a Ship of ours lying at the Harbours mouth, who, it's said, have burnt four others there loaden with Forage from Dublin. Our Out-Scouts lye constantly within four Miles of Dundalk. The General returned hither on Saturday, and at Night received Colonel Wolsely's Letter, and which Action will undoubtedly much frustrate the Enemies designed Expectations, and re∣tard their intentions of Attacking us in our Quarters, as without all-doubt they intended by all these great Preparations. I have herewith sent you the Articles on which the brave Lady therein mentioned, surrendred up her House to the Brigadeer Nugent, who, we are told, is mortally wounded in that brave Action on the 11th Instant, by 1000 Inniskilling English and French, Commanded by the famous Col. Woosely, in which they fought 4000 cho∣sen Irish, under the Command of the Duke of Berwick at Cavan, whom they routed twice, kill'd 300, took many Prisoners, &c. of which you will have the full Particulars this Post from ano∣ther hand. I am yours, J. W. Conditions granted by the Honourable William Nugent, one of his Majesties Brigadeers, and Lord-Lieutenant of the County of Longford; To all Persons residing in Moss-Town, upon the Surrender of the said House, Fire-Arms, and Ammunition. I. That Sarah Lady Newcomen be at her Choice, either to stay in her own House, and there peaceably and quietly to enjoy all the Goods now in her Possession belonging to Herself, Children, or Relations; or else to remove Her∣self, Family, and the aforesaid Goods, to what∣ever place her Ladyship shall appoint and that the said Lady shall be permitted to keep her Chaplain Mr. John Wilson, to officiate for her in her own House, if her Ladyship stays there, or in her Journey if she removes. II. That the said House of Moss Town shall not be burnt by any Party of Men to be placed there. III. That all Persons now in the House, or for∣merly belonging to it, who are so inclin'd, have liberty to March safely from thence, with their Lives, carrying all Swords and Horses not Ser∣viceable, and Goods now in their Possession, to Inniskilling, or to whatever place the said Per∣sons belonging to the said House, shall think convenient, with a safe Convoy under the Com∣mand of Captain Francis Nangle, and Captain Bryan Mac Mahone, to defend the said Lady Newcomen, and all Persons belonging to the said House, from the Injury of all Persons in their Journey. IV. That all Persons imprisoned either for being in this House, or coming hither, that are now in Longford, be Released, and have leave to march with the rest of the Party, to the place they shall appoint. V. That Persons who have deserted His Majesty's Army, and are now in the said House, parti∣cularly Charles Deanes, shall have Liberty to March with their Lives and Goods with the rest of the Men. VI. That the Lady Newcomen, and all other Per∣sons in the said House, have Liberty to carry what Provisions they think convenient with them, and also liberty to dispose of all the rest of their Provisions, Corn, and Goods, as they think fit. VII. That all such as are inclin'd to stay in the Country, or elsewhere, shall have free and full Pardon for all past Crimes; and a Protection for them and Goods for the future against all Persons: and that protected Persons shall have liberty to carry their Goods to their respective Habitations. VIII. That the Convoy shall be ready at 24 hours warning, under the Command of the afore∣mentioned Person, to Convoy the said Lady, and all Persons in her House, to the place where they shall appoint. And that these above-mentioned Conditions be justly performed, I do hereby Oblige my self, un∣der my Hand and Seal, this 13th. of January, 1689. William Nugent. I Do hereby empower all Officers and Souldiers to Press in this Journey for all such belonging to the said House of Moss-town, as will pay 12 d. per day for each Horse so Prest, to carry them, their Chil∣dren, and Goods. And I do hereby Promise to take no Advantage of any Error committed in the wording of the said Conditions, but admit them to be taken in the largest sense, to the Advantage and Assurance of those to whom they appertain. As Witness my Hand this 13th. of January, 1689. William Nugent. Licensd, March 1. 1690. LONDON: Printed for R. Greenhill, near the Exchange. 1690.
