W499 12438506 62058
INSTRUCTIONS to a PAINTER FOR THE Drawing of a Picture of the state and posture OF THE English Forces at Sea, Under the Command of his Royal Highness in the Conclusion of the year 1664. First Draw the Sea, that portion which between, The greater World, and this of ours is seen: Here place the British, there the Holland Fleet, Vast floating Armies, both prepar'd to meet. Draw the whole World, expecting who shall Raign After this Combat, o're the conquer'd Mayn; Make Heav'n concern'd, and an unusual Star Declare th' importance of th' approaching War. Make the Sea shine with Gallantry, and all The English Youth flock to their Admiral The valiant DUKE, whose early Deeds abroad Such Rage in Fight, and Art in Conduct show'd. His bright Sword, now, a dearer Int'rest draws, His Brothers Glory, and his Country's Cause. Let thy bold Pencil Hope and Courage spread Through the whole Navy by his Highness led; Make all appear, where such a Prince is by, Resolv'd to Conquer, or resolv'd to Dye. With his Extraction and Heroick mind, Make the proud Sails swell more than with the wind. Preventing Cannon, make his lowder Fame Check the Batavians, and their fury Tame. So hungry Wolves, though greedy of their Prey, Stop, when they find a Lyon in their way. Make him be-stride the Ocean, and man-kind Ask his consent to use the Sea and Wind: While his tall Ships in the bar'd Chanel stand, He grasps the Indies in his Armed hand. Paint an East-wind, and make it blow away. Th' excuse of Holland, for their Navies stay; Make them look pale, and the bold Prince to shun, Through the cold North, and Rocky Regions run; To find the Coast, where morning first appears By the Dark Pole, the wary Belgian stears, Confessing now he dreads the English more Than all the dangers of a frozen Shoar; While, from our Arms, security to find, They fly so far they leave the Day behind. Describe their Fleet abandoning the Sea, And all their Merchants left a wealthy Prey. Our first success in War, make Bacchus crown, And half the Vintage of the year our own; The Dutch their Wine, and all their Brandy lose, Dis-arm'd of that from which their Courage grows. While the glad English to relieve their Toyl, In Healths to their great Leader drink the spoyl. His high Command to Africks Coast extend, And make the Moor before the English bend; Those barb'rous Pyrats, willingly receive Conditions, such as we are pleas'd to give. Within those Streights make Hollands Smyrna Fleet, With a small Squadron of the English meet; Like Falcons these, those like a numerous Flock, Of scattering Fowl, which would avoid the shock. There Paint Confusion in a various shape, Some sink, some yield, and flying some escape; Europe and Africa from either Shoar Spectators are, and hear our Cannon roar. While the divided World in this agree, Men that fight so, deserve to rule the Sea. LONDON; Printed in the Year 1665.
