13482 99839832 4287
The Contemplation of Mankinde, contayning a sin∣guler discourse after the Art of Phi∣siognomie, on all the members and partes of man, as from the heade to the foote, in a more ample maner than hytherto hath beene pub∣lished of any. In the place next after the Chapter of the fore∣head, hath the Phisiognomer added a proper Treatise of the signification of sundrie lines seene in most mens foreheads: which in sundrie disputations with a skilfull Iew, he at the last obtayned. In the worke also hath the Phisiognomer lear∣nedly placed for instruction sake, manye straunge and rare examples that he knewe and iudged in his tyme. In the ende is a little Treatise added of the signi∣fication of Moles, seene in any member or part, eyther of the man or wo∣man, written by a worthie Grecian named Melampus. All which, englished by Thomas Hyll. 1571.
The glorie of the Honourable, is, the feare of God. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
To the Noble and Right worthy prince, Thomas Duke of Norfolke, Earle Marshall of Eng∣lande, and Knight of the honorable order of the Garter. AS Man the ex∣cellentest Creature, doth confesse the Al∣mightie to be the au∣thour and framer of the whole worlde, with all things contayned therein, e∣uen so of duetie must hee faithfullye graunt, God to be the fountaine and spring of all wisedome and know∣ledge, out of which, this science and Arte of Phisiognomie (as a part of Philosophie) hath hir proceeding, for if a man diligently beholde, not only the sundry and variable formes and shapes of liuing creatures, but also
the forme & fashion of man himself, shall wel perceyue such marueylous differences of countenances, such di∣uers lineaments of the body, & they all greatly diffring one frō another, so that man maye not, nor ought to attribute it to hap, casualtie, or for∣tune, but onelye to the great proui∣dence and will of almighty GOD, which extends it selfe vnto the num∣bring of the heares of mans heade, as our sauiour witnesseth in the E∣uangelist S. Mathevve. And there∣fore it is no absurde thing to affirme those small and little lineaments ap∣pearing on sundrye parts of mans bodye, by God to be appointed, for the great comfort and behoofe of mans nature, to thende he might enioy the perfite vse, and full know∣ledge of them. And althoughe the weakenesse of mans nature be such, as it cannot redily attaine the know∣ledge of them, yet it is the part and
dutie of euery good and well disposed minde to searche oute the excellent workes, and secretes of nature, so farre forth as the almightye power and heauenly gouernor doth permit and suffer him, and therein to note and consider the magnificencie and wme of the highest workeman: the which very bright shall shine out, and as apparauntlye be seene in the least and smallest creatures, as in the greatest and largiest bodies. The learned Aristotle in his booke De ani∣malibus, diligentlye beholding and considering the two small beasts, the Bee and the Ante, doth not a little marueyle at their diuine workman∣ship and cunning. But to be briefe▪ there is nothing contained in the ex∣cellent frame and Theatre of this worlde, that requireth not great ad∣miration, and the same of purpose appointed, for the only vse of nature▪ therefore in times past among▪ the
auncient Philosophers, it was an vndoubted principle taught in their schooles, that all things were formed and made vnto some certaine ende and purpose. This mighty wisedom of God, although it doth most boun∣tifully shewe and expresse it selfe in euerye worke, yet in mans nature, which farre excelleth all other in dignitie and worthynesse, and in whiche the singular impressions of God are decerned, it doth offer all thinges to consideration and vewe more plainly, more cleare, and more abundaunt. This well vnderstoode and known to the auncient students of wisedome, did preferre mans na∣ture to be considered before all o∣thers; and in the same they asmuch arueised at the great diuersitie and disposition of minds, as at the linea∣mentes of the bodye. And they both carefully and diligently endeuoured to appoynt euery condicion and qua∣litie,
his proper body, and to ech body contrarywise, his proper qualities and condicions, thereby to obtayne and purchase the truth. The aunci∣ent Poete Homere tooke vppon him liuely to describe that worthy Ther∣sites, in comparing his maners and condicions to the notes seene on his body. The lyke also did Dares Phry∣gius in his long Catalogue of noble Piers, where he cunningly applyed their condicions with their formes and lineamentes seene. This Dares wrote that the valiant Aeneas was well coloured of body, tending vnto a rednesse, in personage square set, hauing cheerefull and smyling eyes, and these somewhat declining to a blacknesse, and therfore Dares repor∣teth him eloquent, gentle, friendlye of behauiour, wittye and politike in his counsels, pleasant at times, va∣liant in his attempts, and vertuous. The iolly warrier Antenor, he descri∣beth
to be talle of stature, slender in bodye, in his members nimble and quicke, and therefore iudged to be warie, and craftie in his doinges. But the valiant Achylles is described to be bigge and large breasted, fayre spoken, gentle, strong membred, and with great strength of the armes; ha∣uing a curled heade, a cheerefull or smyling countenance, and the heares of the heade of a browne Chest nut colour, by which notes, he was iud∣ged not only fierce in armes, but al∣so of great courage, mixed with cur∣tesis & liberalitie. Many moe exam∣ples of antiquity might herebe alled∣ged, were it not that I thinke these sufficient for our turne, to note the antiquitie of comparisons, betweene the bodily formes & lineaments, and betwene their dispositions, courage, and wit: Like to these, many may be read & seene in Aristotle, Suctonius▪ & other of the Poets, who haue left in
wryting to vs, sundry Pamphlets of this Art, extant in manye places, in which, it may euidently appeere, how much it hath bene accounted and es∣teemed in times past. For the skilfull Antenor (by the report of Homere) being a man expert in the Arte of Phisiognomie, tooke vppon him to consider, and diligently to vewe, the personages and formes both of the couragious Vlysses & Menelaus, pro∣nouncing the one in condicions & na∣ture, farre diffring from ye other. Me∣nelaus, sayth he, was a person of few wordes, yet graue & wise in counsel, but the iolly Vlysses for his prowde shewe and boasting in words, did he pronounce like to ye winter snowes. Seeing this knowledge hath so long time bene obserued and exercised of so excellent and famous men, what shall it let or staye me, not to applye my study and penne thereto, and the rather for that it is lawfull for euery
man to decerne, as farre as he can, the qualitie and condicions of the hart: seeing the secret matters lying deepe in the breast, are many times bewrayde by the outward gestures, what singular cōmoditie the know∣ledge of this Arte bringeth with it, may euidently appeare in this, that oftentimes men happening into ac∣quaintances and friendshippes, such as they suppose to be most friendly, most sounde, and most faythfull: for the more parte are founde dissem∣blers, vnfaithfull, turnecotes moste hurtfull, and most peruerse in their doinges. And without this Arte, a man can not so well detect their fals∣hoode and doings, as to find out and know Thersites from the mighty He∣ctor, or the effeminate Vlysses & sub∣till Catiline, from the worthie Fabius and Camillus. If euer this were in any age a necessary science, then no doubt in this our time, being moste
peruerse and wicked, it is most pro∣fitable and necessary. For who doth not see in our dayes, how the impu∣dent Thersites, the subtill Vlysses, and the most seditious Catiline, do rage. For this cause most prudently were appoynted in times paste (as some report) in the Courtes of kings, and noble Princes, certain learned men able to discouer the facts and minds of their subiectes, souldiers, and o∣thers conuersant about them. The learned Aristotle in his booke of go∣uernement, willeth that comely men be chosen in office and made Magi∣strates, and not mishapen and de∣formed. In another place he admo∣nisheth men to beware of those per∣sons, which are marked by nature, according to the common opinion of men: an euill fauoured and crabbed countenance, doth euermore yeelde vntoward condicions. For by the a∣greement of all writers, the counte∣nance
is euermore a bewrayer of the minde, and Martiall in his twelfth booke describeth by these signes and notes, his pieuish Zoilus and wicked backbyter, in two proper verses. Crine niger, ruber ore, breuis pede, lumine laesus, Rem magnam praestas Zoile, si bonus es. These englished, are thus much in effect. Thy heares are black, thy fete be short, purblinde to, vvith bearde readde, A good deede do (the Prouerbe sayth) and then cut of thy headde. The Greeke Poet Agadius, des∣cribed also a certaine lymping or halting person in this sort, . Which may thus be translated. VVhy doste thou limpe and halt, thy minde is lame I see, These outvvard signes are tokens plain of secrete yll in thee.
If Pompeius had vsed this dili∣gence in beholding and considering the countenance, hee woulde not so lightly haue credited, and bene sedu∣ced by Achylles and Septimus, nor the valiant Caaesar had happened into the hands of Brutus and subtill Cas∣sius, by whome they and their com∣pany were lamentably murthered, Further, this Art procureth no smal commoditie and profite to Schoole∣maysters, in searching out & know∣ing the aptnesse and pregnancie of their scholers vnto learning. For if they deale like honest and faythfull tutors, they ought to receyue none into their schoole to be instructed in learning and Arts, contrary to their capacitie, but rather followe the ex∣ample of Apollonius Alabandensis, that deuine and rare Schoolemay∣ster, of whom Cicero writeth in his booke De Oratore. This man (sayth he) although he customablye reade
and taught schollers for a stipende and gayne, yet would he suffer none vnder him, to lose their tyme, if hee perceyued their wittes vnapt to at∣tayne Oratorye: but rather wylled them to leaue of and cease that stu∣dy, and to follow that skill and Arte that he knew and saw them inclyned vnto. Which example if our schoole∣maysters and tutors would indeuor to practyse and followe, we shoulde then enioy and haue many more ex∣cellent scholers, in all laudable stu∣dies & Artes, than at these daies are knowne to be. Here I thinke it good tyme to ende, not meaning to wade or proceede any further in the infinit prayses of so singular an Art, therby to hinder your honors graue & seri∣ous studies, with this my rud & sim∣ple worke, the which although it be not worthye to craue the protection of so Noble a personage, yet am I (the author thereof) bolde to intrude
and thrust it vppon your Grace, to thintent that through your Graces fauorable protection, it may possesse a free passage, Zoilus be put to si∣lence, and I encouraged to shewe my simple skil and small iudgement hereafter in matters more pleasant and delectable. God preserue your Grace, and increase your meditati∣ons and thoughtes, in all godlynesse and vertue, and sende you long helth, and the yeares of the mightye Nestor. Amen. Yours most humble, Thomas Hill.
The Preface to the Reader, and diligent traueyler, in the Arte of Phisiognomie. SEeyng it is true (gentle Reader) that the first and principal∣lest poynt of wisedome is to know God, the se∣cond to knowe our sel∣ues, and the thirde to knowe our duties towardes our neighbors: it must néedes then be graunted and confes∣sed, that those meanes which leade vs to the nearest vnderstanding and perceyuing of them, are both good, profitable, and necessa∣rie: wherefore great folly ruleth these men, who by their slender and faint arguments, woulde condemne and banish Philosophie. The which after the minde of S. Paule, doth force vs to the vnderstanding and knowledge of the seconde, and also by the agréement and consent of all the learned, doth throughly instruct vs in the last. The people of the world, lifting vp their mindes to the Elementes, beholding the motions, alterations, chaunges, the seuerall courses of the lightes, and Planets, with theyr infi∣nite
obseruations: looking downe againe vpon the earth, and there in séeing the com∣passe, the situation, and magnificence there∣of, with the wonderfull working of nature, did acknowledge a God, the maker of them, and therein did confesse his power and om∣nipotencie. The Philosopher Ariopagita, being without the swift hearing of thinges, done in Iewrie, when he sawe the wonder∣full and vnnaturall darcknesse that sodain∣ly ranne ouer the face of the earth, durst af∣firme the worlde to drawe to an ende, or else the maker and framer of it, to suffer violence. In Athens (the mother and nurse of learning) where the Philosophers had their long resting place, by learning ac∣knowledged a greater God, then by cor∣rupt nature they could attaine vnto: when by the witnesse of S. Paule, they erected an aultar (ignoto deo) to the vnknowne God. I haue read of a prowde king of Englande, whome the water (notwithstanding hys fierce, and thundering commaundement) woulde not obey, but still rose higher and higher, to the wetting of his féete, with shame ynough confessed a god, to whom the waters were obedient. By Philosophie we
learne to know our selues, the diuersitie be∣twéene Mankinde and other Creatures: the excellencie of the one ouer the other, in some pointes, and the excellencie of the other in other poyntes. Reason hath made man, to differ from the brutishe generation, and therefore more excellent, but by his disabi∣litie and weake ruling of himselfe, the other is his superiour. The beast doth all thinges, by the instinct and prouocation of nature: Man without reason, not able to bridle hys sensualitie, degenerates from that he ought to bée, and becommeth more monstruous with sinne, sensuality, lust, and all other wic∣ked vices, than any other monster in forme and shape. By Philosophie we learne, what is iust, honest, comely, profitable, decent, vertuous, and Godly: and againe what is dishonest, vnseemoly, vicious, and to be ab∣horred. To make a perticuler prayse of Phi∣losophie, the treatie woulde not be so long & tedious, as the aduenture great, I should hasard a greater enterprise, than any here∣tofore durst take in hande: but generally whatsoeuer procéedeth from reason, it is Philosophie. If reason procéedeth from a naturall disposition or inclination, if it come
by experience, or forced by learned meanes, it is Philosophie. Peraduenture some there be (more curious a great deale, than theyr holye liuing requireth) that doe impugne some part of Philosophie, as a thing or Art not necessarie or méete to be knowne and studied. These men I suppose eyther neuer knewe, or else haue forgotten what maketh a man. Reason telleth, if a whole bodie or substaunce lacketh a part, it is become lame and vnperfite. If a man wanteth a member or ioynt, it cannot be said, there is the whole and perfite forme of a man: no more can Philosophie bée perfite, if anye one part bée plucked away. The Arte of diuination by the Starres, the face and hande, is a percell of Philosophie, and grounded vpon long ex∣perience, and reason: and therefore not so wicked and detestable as some men do take and repute these. Although it be an Arte wherewith many be deceyued (through the gréedie desire of gaine) yet it is no good con∣sequent to say, that the Arte therefore is fri∣uolous & naught. Diuinitie, being the words of God, perfit and most pure, where lurketh no deceyte nor leasing, suffereth abuse: for the deuill coulde alledge it agaynst Christ:
and Antichrist therewith persecuteth hys members: bicause some men with wine be druncken, is wine therefore naught? Put a knife into a mad mans hande, he knoweth not how to vse it: but a wise, discreate, and sober man, will neuer hurt himselfe wit∣tingly with it. Though some men do ghesse at randon, as touching the proper conditi∣ons and qualities of persons, yet the Arte laudable and certaine is not to bée blamed: neyther is it to be condemned, though some∣tymes he pronounceth cleane agaynst the persons maners, and conuersation. Tullie witnesseth (4. Tusculanarum) about the ende, of a certaine Phisiognomer named Zopirus, which tooke vpon him to beholde, and iudge the natures and dispositions of many persons, by the formes of their faces, and lineaments of the bodie: among which he was requested to beholde the forme of the learned Hippocrates, and fayling in hys iudgement, for that he onely pronounced by the lineaments of the bodie, what by nature he was inclined vnto, and not what by lear∣ning and vertue he was become, was of many laughed to scorne: although the wise Hippocrates, well allowed and confirmed
his iudgement, saying by nature he was the lyke, that the Phisiognomer had pro∣nounced of him. Therfore I admonish eue∣ry one, that will rightlye pronounce and iudge in this Art, that they first consider and vew all the partes of man, and not to iudge rashly by any one member alone: so shall they be sure not to be deceyued, I meane to vnderstand and know the truth of the natu∣rall disposition, and yet may they faile of the mans conditions, which Socrates well de∣clared in himselfe. For when he on a tyme (as vttereth Aristotle) sent two of his scho∣lers, with his table or Image liuely drawne and counterfeyted by a cunning workman, to that famous Phisiognomer Phylemon: who after he had diligentlye viewed, and considered one member with another, pro∣nounced Socrates to be a leacherous per∣son, subtill, a deceyuer, couetous, and giuen to wickednesse. This iudgement so much mooued the schollers, that they bitterly re∣buked the Phisiognomer. And in their re∣turne, opening this iudgement to Socrates, confessed that Phylemon had truely repor∣ted of him in all poyntes, and swarued not one iotte from a truth after nature: but the
studie of Philosophie, and honestie, had so brideled his desires and wicked nature, that he became a new man. By this a man may conclude, that our will to be subicct vnder the gouernement of reason and grace: and that through these we may bridle nature in vs, turning the prouocations of them vnto goodnesse. For the Chollerick or yrefull man may eyther by grace represse his furie and lust, or else alter the same in correcting of vices. The malicious man also may either by grace aswage his lust, or else turne the same agaynst the euill: and so lyke may be done, in all other naturall inclinations re∣sting in vs. Experience teacheth how ma∣ny giuen to sundrie kind of vices, after they by Gods grace begin to haue a swéete taste of Gods worde, doe shake of their woonted nature, and become altered and chaunged fellowes. Saule by Gods spirite, of a perse∣cutor, became a Martyr, of a bloud sucker, an innocent and méeke Lambe. I might here recyte a number of Godly examples, it I wist these were not ynough, to prooue mine intent. It is not to be decyded, what Gods holy spirite can doe. It worketh my∣racles, it worketh wonders contrarse to na∣ture,
it turneth olde Adam (in vs) into new Adam, contrary to all sence and vnderstan∣ding of man: and then no marueyle, though the Phisiognomer doe faile, where nature fayleth. Much more (gentle Reader) I might say, but that I suppose this is sufficient, to shew vnto thée, the right vse of Phisiogno∣mie. I will leaue the whole commendation of the Arte, vnto thine owne iudgement, and experience. If by practise thou shalt find anye certaintie in it, then reiect it not as vaine and friuolous, but if thou canst not attaine vnto the certaine knowledge there∣of: yet let not thine yll fortune, condemne the iudgementes and experiences of a num∣ber well learned and practised in this Arte: neyther thinke yll of me, who wisheth vnto thée verie well, and haue taken these paynes altogither for thy sake. Somewhat I haue séene by experience, all that thou hast here, gathered oute of the best wryters: muche more I haue reade, and the best of that, I also giue thée. So many as shall receyue a∣ny fruit or commoditie by me, let them giue thankes vnto the worshipfull and high lear∣ned man, Mayster Dée, by whose helpe and ayde at the beginning, I receyued such mo∣numents
and principles, as gaue me great light vnto this knowledge, and vnto whome also thou art greatly bound: for that he wi∣sheth well vnto his Countrie men, and hath taken great paynes to do his Countrie good. Thus leauing (gentle reader) to trouble you any longer: I commit you to God, wishing onely your fa∣uour, in the furthering of thys my simple worke. Et feliciter vale.
Ioannis Coci ogdoastichon. INternae facies spectabilis indolis index, Aestus, quo rapimur, prodere signa solet. Hinc foris augurium capitur, natura quod intus Seminat, & motus indicat ipsa satos. Sed retrusa rei latet experientia tantae: Ni iuuet experti nos manus artificis. Praestitit at nobis insigniter Hillus, ab arte Pectoris vt iudex quilibet esse queat. Nicolai Leihi ogdoastichon ad Lectorem. INdole qua quis sit, vultu dignoscere, Thomas Hillus depingit, qua ratione queas. Plurima doctorum peruoluens scripta virorum Optima decerpsit sedulus, instar apis. Nec piget immensos illum nauasse labores, Quod, quantum in sese est, vtilis esse studet. Vt gratis donat, quaecun{que} haec munera praebet: Sic voto satis est, fi tibi gratus erit. HEre Thomas Hill depainteth plaine, the picture of the minde, Which way you may by countenaunce, the disposition finde. Pervsing many monuments of auncient wryters hée,
Electing still thats excellent, doth imitate the Bée. It nothing yrkes him labors great, nor traueyles to bestowe, In any thing he can deuise, that profite séemes to showe. As he doth gratis giue thée these, what ere they séeme to bée. So hath he all his with, if he be gratefull vnto thée. Thomas Hillus Londinensis, ad pro∣prium librum, vt animo constanti iniurias multorum perferat. Iliber, & videas ne te patientia vincat, Inuida verba feras, & patiare sat est. Nedum natus eras suspendebaris, adunco Naso, te verbis inuidus increpuit. Quid faciet tandem cùm iam perfectus abibis: In proprium iacet, tela retorta caput. Itamen; & parui facias haec garrula verba, Dum placeas doctis, hoc tibi sufficiat.
Thomas Turnerus ad candidum Lectorem. FRontis vt est index speculum, fic prorsus in ips Fronte, velut speculo, mentis imago patet. Illud quis{que}, suo tantum non lumine captus, Perspicit, at sapiens solus vtrum{que} videt, Lumina nil Lyncis, nil sunt specularia Momi, Frons docet hic, quicquid pectora clausa geru. The Bookes request. MY sute (good Reader) is but small, and such, as I am sure Your courtesies on my behalfe may easily procure. Your fauour is the thing I aske: and nothing else I craue: For that in le of traueyle done, Hyll (onely) séeth to haue. A recompence sufficeing well, and counteruayling aye, The blacke reproch that Momus tongue enforceth day by daye. To learned sort I onely sue: I force not Momus ne Zoylus crue.
Antonius Molinus ad lectorem Tetrastichon. ▪ Si studiose voles hominum cognoscere mores, Ex hac multiplici corporis harmonia: Haec animo voluat vigili noctes{que}, dies{que}, Auctorem rerum laudet vbi{que} Deum. Gulielmus Fildus in nomine Hilli ad quemuis Zoilum. ZOile macrescas; solus tua damna rependen. Non curan oster liuida verba liber. A nullo petijt precibus, flexitue fauorem, Complicuit nullos in sua vota viros. Zoile tu tibi sis flagrum, sed tempore longo, Quare, age, tu inuideas Zoile perpetuò.
To the gentle reader. IF mightie Mountes, and hautie hilles, to forraine Nations brings Both ioy and welth, by vertue of the fruite that thereon springs, As well by rootes, and sundrie herbes, to ease the sicke of care: As fountaynes, mettals, stones, & iemmes, of vertue straunge and rare. What cause haue we then in this Ile, to ioy with gladsome minde: That haue a Hill wherein we may more precious iewels finde. As for experience, lo, beholde here blazde before thine eyes, A worthie Iem wherein we may with little exercise Suck out such sappe of learned skill, as shall be for thy gaine: And learne to shunne those ylles to come, which may turne thée to paine. And also thou thy luchie fate mayst learne so too foresée: That by preferring of the same, good haps may rise to thée. Wherefore sith he this toyle hath tooke, and for thée traueyles still: Thou canst not choose but let him haue, both thy good worde and will. M. N.
AETATIS SUAE TH 42.
A large and pleasant discourse of the whole Arte of Phisiogno∣mie, orderly vttering all the speciall parts of man, from the head to the foote, in a more ample maner than hy∣therto hath beene published. Of Phisiognomie in generall. Capit. j. THE PHILOSO∣pher Aristotle and Con∣cylatour agree, that to all lyuing creatures, it is a matter common, as to suffer and doe of a natu∣rall inclination: which as the same in beastes is named a violence, euen so in men this is by a contrarie maner named an inclination. For as much (as by way of example) in the Chollericke, is knowne an inclination to yre: in the Melancholick, to feare: in the San∣guine, to mirth: and in the Flegmatick, to slug∣gishnesse. All which inclinations, are reported to be the vtterers both of the naturall motions and conditions in men, which by reason and wisedome
be well gouerned. Which well appeared by Hy∣pochrates, who by his face was iudged wicked, yet thorow Philosophie knowne to be well condi∣tioned. But in beasts for ye lack of reason, are these affections and conditions as Aristotle vttereth in his booke de secretis secretorum, may not be go∣uerned: in that they liue and perseuer after their sense, and appetite. By which euidently appea∣reth, that Phisiognomie to be a necessarie and lawdable science, seing by the same a man may so readily pronounce and foretell the naturall apt∣nesse vnto the affections, and conditions in men, by the outwarde notes of the bodie. Which al∣though a man may thus foretell the naturall mo∣tions, and actuall conditions: yet of this, is it not accounted, so perfite and firme a science: seing by the same a man may erre, in sundrie subiects ha∣uing grace and wisedome. But in that men (for the more part) doe lyue after a sensuall will in themselues, and that none but the wise and godly (which is by an inwarde working of the spirite) doe lyue after reason: For that cause is this Phi∣siognomy accounted and named a science: which instructeth a man by the outwarde notes, to fore∣tell the naturall motions, and actuall conditions, that consist and dwell in many persons, especially in those, which lyue after their affection, and ap∣petites, rather than gouerning themselues by
reason. And of this did the learned (Bias Priaenias) report, that there lyued and were more of the wicked, than of good persons: in that so manye are ledde, and moued after a sensuall will, than procured by reason: which causeth that man (as Aristotle affirmeth) to swarue and fall from a meane, in many maners: but the same is appro∣ched vnto and purchased, by one maner of waye. And two kinds there are of the notes: as certaine, which of the elementarie qualitie conceiued, that vtter and signifie the affections of the minde: as doth the hearinesse of the breast, which is a note of yre, through the hote heart. And certayne are of propertie, as the declyning of the head to the right side in the walking, which is the note of a Cynede as Aristotle reporteth: and this lyke is neyther gathered of a hote, nor colde cause, but of the propertie. Yet doe the Perypatetickes (as writeth Aristotle secundo priorum) vtter, that not any one affection to consist and be in man, or any condition of nature: but that a like note is outwardly to be séene on the bodye: by which not onely that passion or condition maye be vttered, but the fortune vnto good or euill by the accyden∣tall notes may be iudged: And although the spi∣rite (as vnto vnderstanding) is from the bodye eleuated: yet (as vnto the other partes and po∣wers) is the spirite comprehended of the bodie.
Although the inner affectes of the spirite can not be iudged by the outward notes of the body: yet may the accydences of the spirite & minde, accor∣ding to those which togither alter both spirite and body be iudged, as Aristotle reporteth in secundo priorum. Auerro is vttereth that the accidences not naturall, cause no note but in the spirite: as if any knoweth the Arte of Musick: he hath the note in the spirite, and not in bodie formed of the same. The lookes also of men, although they doe not differ in the essentiall kinde: Yet doe these differ in the kinde accedentall. So that the acci∣dentall difference of lookes in man, doth onely suffice, for the difference of conditions. But if a∣nye shall here obiect, that sentence written in the seuenth chapiter of saint Iohns Gospell: where our Sauiour willeth none to iudge rashely, after the vtter appearaunce of the face or looke, but to pronounce and iudge a righteous iudgement. To this maye thus be aunswered, that the same saying of the Lord was spoken vnto them, which in very deede were wicked persons, of malicious conditions: yet not of the matter and cause doe they procure a iudgement, but through the ac∣cepting of persons, and in the hate or contempt of men: are they so alienated from the truth of the matter in iudging, which otherwise must be es∣chewed, and that especiallye where the person is
occupied in the celestiall doctrine. Thys is also to be learned and noted, that anye person (as a∣fore vttered) to iudge alone by the face, mightily to erre and be deceyued, so that necessarie it is, to gather and marke sundrie other notes of the bo∣dye, and after to pronounce iudgement; and the same not firmely, but coniecturally: As by thys example may well appeare, that if the Phisiog∣nomer earnestly beholding and vewing any mer∣rie person by nature, doth sée him at that instant tyme (through some hap) verie sadde of counti∣naunce, and doth of the same iudge hym to be sad by nature, where he contrariewise is of nature merrie: or otherwise appearing then merrie; shal iudge him of the same to be of nature merrie, where perhaps, by nature he is giuen to be sadde: must néedes (through these lyke) greatly erre, and be deceyued in iudgement. Here also note, that there are two maner of passions, as the one na∣turall, and the other accidentall. The accidentall are those, which consist of the spirite, and for the same, that they consist of the spirite, no alterati∣on in body is caused: as of the Arte, and science: and these by notes in the bodye are not indicated. But the naturall, which for that they consist in vs, as afore taught: for that cause doth some al∣teration appeare in the bodye: as yre, feare, and such like, of which hereafter (in this worke) shall
be intreated. To be briefe, this Phisiognomie is aknowledge which leadeth a man to the vnder∣standing and knowing both of the naturall moti∣ons, and conditions of the spirite: and the good or euill fortune, by the outwarde notes and lines of the face and body. Yea by the pases many times is the heart bewrayed, and the voyces (as Aristo∣tle reporteth) are notes and vtterers of the inner thoughtes: all which vnder the Phisiognomicall science are contayned. Lucius Scylla, and Cesare dictatoure by the helpe of this science founde out and iudged the wylie craftes and disceites of their aduersaries manye times: that secretly conered their malicious mindes, by their fayre shewes. The most singular and prudent Plato in his Phi∣siognomie vttereth these wordes: that the man which hath members like to any beast insueth his nature: as he which hath an Aquiline or hauked nose, vseth and exercyseth Aquiline conditions, as magnanimitie, cruelnesse, and gréedie catching. The common sort at this day, without any reason and learning, doe pronounce and iudge certayne matters verie straunge of men: as when he sayth of anye fowle looke, this person pleaseth me no∣thing. They also say, God defend and kéepe me from the fellowship of that person marked: as are the bunch backed, and gogle eyed persons. By which euydently appeareth, that the bodily notes
of Phisiognomating by the naturall conditions of men doe procure and cause a great probable∣nesse, although no necessitie. To conclude, all the workings and passions of the spirite, appeare to be matched and ioyned with the bodie: which es∣pecially appeareth in the passions of the concupis∣cible or desirefull spirite: as are yre, méekenesse, feare, pittifulnesse, mercie, and such lyke: which are not caused, without the locall motion of the heart dilating, and drawing togither. Of thys, the bodies of diuers men, are diuersly disposed, ac∣cording to the dyuers dispositions of spirites: in that mens spirites through dyuers members, are diuersly disposed in their passions. To ende, the conditions and naturall affections, that consist in the sensytiue part: is reported of the Phylosopher Aristotle, to be the sense gyuer, being common both to men and beastes. The knowne signes and notes, both of the healthfull and sicke bodies, after the condition of the foure qualities.
First the signes and notes of a hote qualitie. The. ij. chapter. THose bodyes naturally hote, doe most speedily encrease, and waxe fatte: as the like in yong children, doth well appeare. But after yeares such waxe drie, their veyues apparant in the pla∣ces, and beating fast. Also their breath strong, their voyce lowde, mightie and great of strength, Iustie and strong to coeate, and much or verie of∣ten desiring thereto. Such also doe féede well, brooke and digest their meats. Further they haue much heare on their heade, and in other places the like, where as naturallye the same shoulde growe: and that thicke bristled, speciallye on the breast. The cause of which procéedeth through the
much heate of the heart: as the like may appeare (after the minde of auncient men) both in the Lion, and Cocke. The signes of those bodies of a colde complex∣tion or qualitie. The. iij. chapter. THose bodies naturally cold, doc slowe increase and come to a fatnesse, their veynes appeare bigge and apparaunt, but their pulses beate slow. Also their breath lowe in the hearing, hauing a small voyce, and weake to ceate: so that sildome desiring thereto, of the which such beget few chil∣dren. They also be great sléepers, and sléeping often: yet eating little, weakely digesting, and bearing their meate euill. Further, such be
white of skinne, with some rednesse mixed: and in the féeling appeare cold, with the heares thume and slowe in the growing, whether the same be blacke or white. Also dull of witte, fearing or trembling of a light cause, and weake to labour. The signes of those bodies of a moyst qualitie. The. iiij. Chapter. THose bodies naturally moyst, be tender and soft of fleshe, corpulent, wyth their ioyntes and bones hidde, and weake of strength, that they can not long, or but a while endure to labour, so that the wearinesse of labour is soone espyed, and séene in them. Also, such feare and tremble in a maner for euerye cause, coueting to sléepe
much, and delighting to coeate often: hauing be∣sides thinne heares on the heade, and but little in quantitie. The eyes often waterie and running, yet in wyt foreward, and apt to learne. The signes of those bodies, of a drie qualitie. The. v. chapter. THose bodies naturally drie, be well descerned, rough in the féeling, and leane in fleshe, yet strong and may wel endure to labor, féeding wel, and their ioyntes also in the places verye appa∣raunt. Besides such haue much heare on the head and in ye other places: and that rough, and curled. The signes of temperate and helthfull bodies. The. vi. chapter.
THose bodies temperate and helthfull doe féede and drinke sufficiently, according to the con∣gruencie of nature, and digest the like: so that thinges néedefull be sauerie to them, and doe hun∣ger also in due houres, ioying besides with such as be merrie, and sléeping their full sléepes. Fur∣ther thincking themselues both light of bodie to go light on the grounde, and sweating lightlye: yet seldome snéesing, and waxe meanely fatte, but coloured and redde in the face, and in the fée∣ling hote. Besides in them the fiue senses haue congruent force, according to the agréement of the age, bodie, and houre. The signes of distemperat and vnhelthfull bodies. The. vii. chapter.
THose bodies distemperate and vnhelthfull, be in all poyntes vnlike to the bodies temperate and helthfull: so that such do euilly eate, and that very little, & force not to drink. Also they doe euil∣ly digest & brooke their meate, and to them things be vnsauery, whereof they hunger not in due houres, and giue not themselues to be throughly chéerefull, and merrie, neither reioysing in them which laugh and be merrie, but rather alwayes sad, and the like contynuing. Further such make their sléepes vnquietly, and suppose themselues heauie, and to go heauily on the grounde, and sildome (or in a maner) sweate any thing at all: also gape, or snéese often, and stretch their armes out and abroade. So that such be eyther pale, or ouer high coloured in the face, & in them also are the fiue senses weake, and such as cannot long endure to labour: yea they soone forget matters, spitting muche and often, and muche filth séene commonly in their noses. Also they be (in a ma∣ner) throughout fatte, and their fleshe blowne or puffed vp like to the nose, and their handes and féete, doe sometimes sweate, and their eyes doe like runne.
The signes of a good nature and memorie. The. viii. chapter. THat person is of a singuler memorie, and vn∣derstanding, and well fashyoned in nature, which hath both moyst and soft fleshe, being a meane betwéene roughnesse and lenitie, & meane of stature, and hath a ruddie countinaunce suffu∣sed with whitenesse, & a gentle or friendly looke: whose heare on the heade is plaine lying, and hath the eyes meanely bigge, which decline to a roundenesse, and the heade meanely bigge with an equalitie: the neck well proportioned, and the shoulders declining downewardes, or the like ra∣ther readie to fall. Being not fleshye about the shankes and knées, and hath a cléere and meane voyce, betwéene small and great, of a meane
laughter, and not in deriding: and hath also the palmes of the handes long, with long fingers, and his countinaunce framing after a chéerefull and merrie sort. The signes of a good vnderstanding & nature, after Conciliatour. The. ix. chapter. THat man is of a singuler nature and vnder∣standing, whose fleshe is tender and soft, with a meanenesse betwéene grosenesse and leanenesse tending. And that the face be not muche fleshye, the shoulder poyntes somewhat bearing vp, the belly and backe not fleshie, the sides decently extensed: meane of stature, and gentle of counti∣nance. That his colour also be a meane betwéene white and red: being somewhat bright and cléere, and the skinne thinne. Further, that the heare
of the heade, be of a meane thicknesse, abourne in colour, and betwéene plaine and curled, the eies betwéene variable and blacke, and the bearde in a meane maner, sufficiently thinne and fayre. The signes of hote and drie bodies. The. x. chapter. THose bodies after full grouth be thicke, bushy of heare, and the heare on the heade, thick and blacke. Also their bodyes in the ende be founde leane, and in féeling appéere hote: hauing besides a thickenesse of skinne, and rough, and strong sy∣newes: and haue also both the vaines, bones, and ioyntes, much apparaunt: a lowe voyce, their pulses beating verie fast, and their mouing the lyke: yea, they be bold, stout, and obstinate with all. These hitherto Rasis.
The men of a temperate nature, and thys borowed out of Conciliatour. THe stature of such persons, obtayne an equa∣litie betwéene the thrée Diamiters: And be∣twéene a fatnesse and leanesse, possesse the like a meane habite: the colour of these is whyte mixed with red: their skin appeareth thinne and cléere: their handes and féete in all dispositions, possesse a meane, their heades are proportionally formed, to the bodie: yet great vnto the respect of the whole body, and flatted lyke to a Ball of Waxe lightly compressed with both the handes on eche side. Their nostrils figured erect, lineally and very fayre, the eyes in colour like to the Lyons, or be∣twéene the black and variable a meane. In which
(after the minde of the Author) a cléere moysture consisteth. The heares on the heade in the forme appearing a meane: for that in euerye bodye a meane consisteth: the like in these which are by the part of the spirite: as in the conditions and others a temperate condition is founde. And to this disposition, the contrarie shewe forth and vt∣ter their vnlike. Of the equalitie of the same nature, and thys vvritten of Aristotle, vnto king Alexander. THe Philosopher Aristotle learnedly vttereth, that the equaler and more temperate creature to which a meanenesse of stature agréeth: hath the eyes black, and heares of the heade of lyke
colour, with a roundnesse of the countinaunce: but the whitenesse of skinne in that creature com∣mixed with a rednesse: and a swartishe colour temperate consisting in that subiect, with an inte∣gritie of the body: hauing also an vprightnesse of stature: yea a meanesse of the heade, formed in the smalnesse and bignesse, a person also vsing the raritie of wordes, but when néede shall requyre: and a meanesse discerned in the sounding of voice. When that nature declyneth to a blacknesse and yellownesse, then is the best temperancie consis∣ting in the same creature: for this creation and habite (Oh Alexander) shall well please and lyke thée: and such a person retayne continually about thée. Here mightie Alexander doe I enterpret by maner of the condition of forme: but thou shalt fe and prooue the same, in the certaintie and vp∣rightnesse of vnderstanding. The Phisiognomie of the notes of a sapient Philosopher, and thys borowed of the learned Conciliatour. THis singuler man affirmeth his stature to b vpright with an equallitie of the fleshe, the colour of the skin white pertaking, with a meane rednesse: the forme of hys head compowned suf∣ficient bigge and large: the eyes conditioned be∣twéene
a black and variable colour, whose looke is iscerned like to one merrie: the hands formed plaine with a séemely diuision of the fingers, and modest articulation: the heares on the head séene betwéene many and fewe, and a meane conditi∣on consisting betwéene the plaine and crisped, blackishe and yellow in colour, hauing a meane bearde and fayre, and sufficiently thinne: these hi∣therto Conciliatour. The signification and iudgement of the aboue∣sayde, vttered by the auncient Rasys. THis worthye Physition, openeth the notes of the abouesayde person: that he ought to be of
an vpright stature, hauing the fleshe of the bo∣dye throughout equall: the skinne whyte▪ myxed with a small rednesse. The heares on the head dis∣cerned a meane, betwéene the plentie and fewe, and betwéene the plaine and crysped, and abourne in colour. The handes formed seemely and plaine, and the fingers comely distaunt a sunder. The forheade (in respect of the heade) formed bigge, the eyes comely conditioned, and a meane be∣twéene the black and variable: the fleshe soft in the féelin, gentle of countinaunce, and the looke discerned as one smyling: These hytherto Rasis.
The signes of colde and moyst bodies, after Rasys. The. xi. chapter. THose bodies be iudged soft in the féeling, and naked of heare, which haue gentle and soft heares on the head, the veines appearing narrow and the ioyntes hidde, hauing besides corpulent bodies, and very fatte. And that make their sléepes weakely, and vnquietly: and slow of mouing, but slower in their pase going. Further, such bodies be eyther colde and drie, or hote and moyst: & haue mixte dispositions, according to the dispositions of the simples, of which they be compouned: and as the lyke to any of them, they doe approch, or that there be betwéene them a meane. These hytherto Rasys.
The deuyding of mankinde into two formes or natures: and a perfite description or distincti∣on of the man from the woman, after Phy∣siognomy: vttered by the singular Conciliatour. The. xij. chap. THe wyse and skilfull Phystognomers, in their examinations, doe diuide mankinde into two formes, as into the Masculynitie and Femini∣tie, according to the propertie of the spirite. For man naturally, except his procreation be hinde∣red, is perfiter than the woman, both in conditi∣ons and anions. First, he is of a liuely minde and courage, and vnto a brunte or an attempt prest and vehement: yet slowly mooued to yre, slowly pleased, aduised in businesses, in due and fytte
tymes studious, abroade lyberall, stowte, iuste, trustie, vnconstaunt or wandring from place to place, and true of his worde. Of which Auicen (wryting of the conditions of persons) reporteth, that man is the subtiller: and that women are more pittiful and gentle than men: more conuer∣tible, lighter perswaded, sooner seduced, enuiouser, fearefuller, vnshamefaster, more foolishe, lyars, more fraudulent, more receiue frawde, more estée∣ming trifles, slower, tenderer, weaker, and more prone, or sooner drawing into familiaritie, and in∣to companie with an other. This like vttereth the Phylosopher, in lib. 9. de hystoria Animalium, cap. primo: that man in nature is perfitest: and for the same cause, the proportions of al the mem∣bers and parts are séemelier, and stronger com∣pact: in so much that the woman is more pittifull and mercifuller, yea readyer to teares & wéepe, than the man: yet enuious, full of complayntes, euiller speaking, backbyting, and slaundering. Besides more sorrowfull, carefull, and dispay∣ring, than the man: yea more impudent; a grea∣ter lyer, lighter deceyued, apter to call to memo∣rie or remember matters: vnto these watchfuller, sluggisher, lesser sturring abroade, and lesser de∣siring meate. But the man (as aboue vttered▪) lyuelier, more stirring, and stronger. Auerrois primo phisico. commen. 81. vttereth, that the wo∣man
is npefiter than the man: and the femini∣nitie hapneth to man by accidence (an other texte openeth) of the depriuing. And the learned Ioannitius in hisagogis reporteth, that the man differeth from the woman, in the same, that he is hottér and drier than the woman, and shée con∣trariwise colder and moyster than he. And the sin∣guler Aristotle vttereth; in primo de animali: that the: worthiest, noblest, and with vs more common and knowne, yea and the more stable and safe creature, is man. And in the. . de ani∣malib. Aristotle reporteth, that man among all other creatures, is accounted the worthier: and of the virill kinde, the Males are stronger, and stowter, than the Females: except in the Beare, and Lybarde, as. 8. de Animalibus. In all the kinds of Beastes, the Females haue a more dead minde, and are lesse pacient, and maye sooner be conuerted, and are sooner angred, and sooner ap∣peased, and ae of aer heate: they are bosides rashe and hastie, and inuericundious: and haue a small head, the face and neck stender, the breast and shoulder points narrower, the rybbes lesser, but the haunches bigge, and buttockes the like the legges also are slender, the handes and féete slender and thinne. The Females in al the kindes of Beastes (as afore reported) are foure feare∣fuller, and puisher or owarder condicioned
than the Males. These hytherto, Almansor se∣cundus. The woman for the more part is light of beliefe, and vngracious or frowarde in conditi∣ons. The light beliefe, signifieth the malice of vnderstanding: but the temperate is more con∣gruent, as reporteth Hyppocrates, in lib. secre∣torum. But if the man possesseth the womans properties: whose note appeareth, that he is vn∣faythfull, an yll reporter, and a lyar: and thys rather, when he draweth néere to the woman, by the counterfayting, the often shifting, and deck∣ing of partes. The like may be sayde of the wo∣mans qualities, when shée often exercyseth and foloweth néere man, in the apparelling and dec∣king of hir bodye like to hym: as did that manly woman Fracassa, of whome shall fullie be vtte∣red, in the proper place. The Phylosopher Ary∣stotle reporteth, that the person which leaneth with the body to the right side in the going, to be effeminate, in that he is of a moyst qualitie, and soft of skinne. The like of these Cocles noted, to haue a soft skinne, a cléere and fayre throte, effe∣minate legges, and for the more part were slen∣der, but the haunches were bigge and soft, the face whyte, and pympled, the voyce small, lowe, and horsely: lyke to the common Harlot, haun∣ting verie often mans company: and these haue many other notes, which for that they are more
at large vttered, in other places of his booke, he doth here wittingly omyt them. And in his tyme was a certayne noble person imprisoned, being one of these. And an other effeminate person he sawe of the Citie of Luca, being of. lx. yeares, which hanged or leaned to the left side as he went, and had a red colour in the face, so fayre a throte as the cléere woman, the face pimpled, the heares of the heade trussed and finely trimmed, the voice small and soft, and to be briefe, he was a verie ef∣feminate person and Cyned. The man (to come vnto the matter) by the part of the composition of habitude, ought to be as Conciliatour vtte∣reth: that is, the perfite man (if the lasciuious nature disturbeth not the order) hath a bigge head, the face in bredth and length, equallie stret∣ched
out, according to proportion: the neck bigge, liuely & sinewed, the breast strong and large, the shoulder pointes and ribbes bigge to the backe, and afore, strongly coupled and ioyned togither: the back throughout sinewed, and strong ioynted, the belly but meanely fleshie, the hips and but∣tockes, lesser and smaller than the womans: to conclude in all parts much bigger and stronger than the woman, vnlesse any accident may con∣trarie the abouesayde, as in the kinde of rapine or gréedie catching birds, a temperate nature found. The woman ought to haue a contrarie composi∣tion, as a small head, a long face, a small necke, a large throte, and somewhat eminent, the breast narrowe, the shoulder pointes flatte lying, the flanckes and ribbes slender, the back lyke: but the hips and buttockes, bigger than the mans: the legges in a maner of one bignesse throughout, the féete small, the héeles flat, short armes, the hands and fingers small, the lippes thinne, and the chin round, with a certaine pit or denting in, whether the same be of length or bredth, the fleshe soft in féeling, and long comely heares on the head: yet little and small heares on the breast, belly, hands, and féete, through hir cold complexion: and of the same weaker of strength and courage, and lesse bolde through hir narrow breast which shée hath, yet coupled she is to man to yéelde (by their con∣sents)
a naturall tribute to the worlde. The gel∣ded persons become not onely weake of bodie, but in minde and courage little differ from the wo∣man, as the Phylosopher Aristotle reporteth. This worthie lesson also the Philosopher vttreth, that he wisheth to flie and eschewe that womans company, when she is of composition manly: for there is a sure token in hir, both of luxurie, and wickednesse, but contrarie, iudge the courage of such men, which in composition be effeminate. The iudgement of the colours of the vvhole body. The xii. chapter. THe colour is manye wayes chaunged, accor∣ding to the commixion of the humours: and according to the dominion of them intensiuely
and remissinely, by which also a man must Phi∣siognomate. For the iudging of colours, except the proper effect be adioyned to his cause: er∣rour to the iudger, must in manye happen. So that their natures and qualities cannot easily be iudged, except a man diligently consider the pro∣per country in which eche be borne: for that we sée in many places, and chiefely in Italy, manye nations dwelling togither, lyke as the Iewe, Turke, Schauone, Gréeke, and highe Almayne, and many others. Whose mixt natures must be considred, if a man wil rightly phisiognomate, and iudge vpon anye of these aboue named, or of any other nation besides. Seing those people dwel∣ling farre North, be strong of bodie, comely of colour, soft of flesh, bigge bellied, yet simple, yre∣full, of small learning, meane of counsell, vnsta∣ble, lyers, deceyuers, and boasters. And on such wise temper your iudgement, according to the nature of the place and countrie, where such are borne: which in an other chapiter happily, I wyll further write of. But to returne vnto the matter, vnderstand that the whyte, wanne, and yellowish colour is a note of the deminished decoction: if this dimunition therefore hapneth, the goodnesse of nature shall like be diminished. For which cause, flie and eschue the companye of a wanne, and yellow coloured man, for that he is gyuen to
vices, and luxurie: but this luxurie, doth the Phi∣losopher here meane to be the immoderate appe∣tite of the thankfull matter, in causing euil works vnto others hurt and lesse, and not of the coeating alone: in that coldnesse, is a contrarie vnto yt lust: seing the lust is caused, of hotenesse and moyst∣nesse. For the wanne, and yellow colour, doth here rather argue coldnesse. Further, the wanne colour, is the way & beginning of the mortifying of natural heate, and extinction of the same: by which reason appeareth, that the wanne colour doth no otherwise differ from the black, but as to the remission of the mortifying. And by thys wanne colour, is to be vnderstanded the leadie co∣lour. The learned Auicen wryteth, that the whytenesse of colour is a note of the depriuing of bloude, or the scarcitie of it with a coldnesse, for if this colour should procéede of a whotnesse, and that with the Cholerick humour, then shoulde it tende vnto a cytrinesse. Further Auicen writeth, that the ruddie colour, doth signifie the plentie of bloude: the red and somewhat red colour, doth declare the hotenesse of qualitie: yet more doth the somewhat red colour, declare the red choller: and the red colour, the sanguine choller. Here further is to be noted, that the colour somewhat red, doth signifie the depriuing of bloud: although there appeareth not the red choller, as the lyke
hapneth in the helthfull bodies. But a very swart colour, as betwéene the black and yellow appea∣ring, doth rather signifie coldenesse, throughe which, the bloud then is deminished & congealed: and that little so congealed, is through the same turned into a blacknesse, which chaungeth the co∣lour of the skinne. And this we name a wanne or yellow colour, according to the intensine, and re∣missiue dominion. The honie colour, signifieth a coldnesse and drienesse: for as much as the colour is the same which insueth a pure blacke choller. So that the whytenesse of colour, foloweth the condition of flewme, and qualitie of the moy∣sture: but the gréenenesse of colour doth rather argue the bloud congealed, which then tendeth to a blacknesse: so that the same commixed to the flewme, is made gréene: yet doth the whytishe graye colour, rather signifie a flewmatick cold∣nesse, mixed with a little red choller. And after the opinion of many Phisitions, the colour is for the more part chaunged, through the lyuer: vnto a reddishnesse and whytenesse: and through the milt, into a swartnesse. Further Auicen writeth, that the swart yellow colour, doth argue the redde choller: but the darck browne colour, doth signifie the black choller. And the like in (a maner to this) affirmeth Auerrois, which wryteth that in an equall climate, the swart yellow colour,
doth declare that the redde choller, to gouerne the chollerick: but the darcke browne colour doth te∣stifie in the same climate, the dominion of the blacke choller. Auicen also wryteth, that the body commeth red, through the dominion of bloud, and whyte in colour (as the Iuorie) of the flewmatick humour. Besides these, the complexion hauing a mixte colour, both of the whyte and red, is after the estimation, a meane temperated. Rasis also reporteth, that the qualitie of the bo∣die through the colour, and habitude of the same: of the féeling and operations, and of the matters yssuing from the bodie, is so knowne. For the whyte and swartishe colour, and of a whyte∣nesse and graynesse mixed: and the wanne and leadie colour, doe innuate a colde complexion: But the red, reddish, the high red, and blake red, all these demonstrate a hotenesse of complexion: and if a cléerenesse and thinnesse be conioyned to the colour: the cléerenesse and thinnesse of hu∣mours, are then declared. But if a troublednesse and grosenesse be mixed to it, the grosenesse of humours is then signified. The whyte colour be∣sides to which a rednesse, with the thinnesse and cléerenesse is admixed, doth demonstrate an equallitie of the complexion. That if a rednesse shall abounde, and the cléerenesse shall be lesser, the dominion of bloud is there signified. But if the
rednesse shall so muche be diminished, that it ap∣procheth to the colour of yuorie, doth innuate the paucitie of bloude. Which if the same shall yet be more diminished, in such maner, that of the same appeareth in a maner nothing at all, the darke wanne colour procéedeth: which portendeth the paucitie both of choller and bloud, and the do∣minion of flewme in that body. But if this colour approcheth to a whytenesse, to which a gréene∣nesse is admixed, then insueth the same, which of the Phisitions is named a leadie colour: which declareth a diminution of the bloud and red chol∣ler, and indicateth the dominion of the black chol∣ler and flewme. The swartish colour, if the same shall approch to a rednesse, or that to it this admix∣ed, doth demonstrate a grosse bloud to beare sway, according to the quantitie, which to it is appro∣ched, or if a rednesse to it be admixed. And the co∣lour perfitely swartishe, which is approched to a gréenesse, doth declare the dominion of the black choller. But bodies coloured with a redde cou∣lour, which is found to drawe néerer to a whyte∣nesse, are of a colde complexion. If the colour, shall appéere néerer to a gréenenesse or gray∣nesse, shall be of a hote complexion. But the other are cytrine bodies, which to a whitenesse pertake a néere subtilnesse: which colour in the helthfull, or in whome the multitude of bloude consisteth,
and not for the dominion of choller. So that these bodies are not cytrine, but accydentally or by ac∣cydence. Yet the other bodies perfitly cytrine, are somewhat cléere, which like perseuer at any time. And these are, chollericke bodies. There are be∣sides of these certayne, which with a cytrinesse, approch to a gréenenesse and swartish colour, per∣taking a small fayrenesse: in which either choller beareth swaye: whose complexion is prooued and knowne to be worser than all others. The Lyuer and Mylt, hauing the like qualitie and condition, are for the more part diseased: and the health of these bodies, is not firme, nor permanent or con∣tynuing. But the bodies hauing a darcke colour, which are néerer to a cytrynesse, are of a hote complexion: and néere to the redde choller. And those which haue a gréenenesse admixed, are less hote, and pertayne to the black choller. Conciliatore reporteth, that the black colour, very soft, doth declare a weake, fearefull, & craftie man, applied vnto them which dwel farre South, like as the Indian: & that bicause such are Melan∣cholick: whose property is to be feareful. Againe, the Moores and the Egyptians, and through the inordinate heate, vnder which they be borne, are thereby but weake. If the redde colour shall be sparsed wyth a whyte, doth then declare stowte & strong persons,
The colour which is a meane betwéene these two, doth denote a temperament of qualitie, pro∣portioned to them, which dwell vnder such a cly∣mate. The colour betwéene a yellownesse not tinc∣ted, and a blacknesse, which chaungeth into a cléere browne: doth declare a good witte, and ho∣nest maners. Such persons the Philosopher Ari∣stotle, willed king Alexander to retaine to his person, and about him. The colour couered with a palenesse, doth tes∣tifie a weake & fearefull person, & that such a one to be bereft and taken in the loue of a woman: and applied after the kinde, vnto heresies: except this hapneth in passions.
When the colour shall be a swart camelline, mixed to a palenesse: doth then demonstrate such a person to be a babler, vndiscréete and full of yre. The blacknesse of colour like to the cléere horne, in anye man, is a note of adustion: and this is generall, as wel in the members, as in the colour of the heares of the heade. Whose colour is a darke gréene, or black, and not soft in the féeling, doth argue such persons to be prone vnto yre. A ruddie colour of the bodye, is an argument of a mischieuous man, and endued with variable maners. The colour verye redde, doth declare suche a person (of experience knowne) to be craftie, and applyed to the Foxe: also the prouerbe vttereth, that we sildome sée a little man méeke, and a rud∣die man faythfull, but the godly I here except. The face redde spotted, so that the greater red∣nesse appeareth in the forehead, and frée from the eyes: doth declare a shamefast person, and ap∣plied vnto the passion: for that the shamefast face for the more part, is couered with a rednesse. The colour whyte, wyth some redde mixed, doth argue strong & stowte persons, applyed vnto the Septentrionals. The colour mightily and ouer whyte, is con∣trarie
to vertue, for that the same signifieth the person to be a sluggarde: for as much as he is of a flegmatick, and colde qualitie, and through the same fearefull. That colour which is deformed with a pale∣nesse, doth testifie a weake and fearefull person, and a hafter or ouerthwarter: if that neyther sick∣nesse, nor earnest studie, be the cause of that pale∣nesse. The colour swarter, and mixed with a pale∣nesse: doth declare that person to be a glutton, a babler, and vndiscréete, both of yre, and tongue. That person which hath a rednesse simply, with a pleasaunt moouing and playing of the lippes, and inlarging of the nostrels: doth argue such a mans minde to be occupied and troubled with a most great yre, and referred vnto the accidences of the passion. The cheekes and eyes red aboue, with a cer∣taine moysture like to watery pimples: doe de∣note such to be Drunkards, and louers of Wine, and strong drinkes: applyed to the men, of the Cytie of Pauie. If the eyes appeare redde and drie, then doth it declare such a person to be stoute, and soone moo∣ued to yre: and referred to the passion, which like so hapneth in that action. The eyes appearing verye black, doe declare
such a person to be fearefull, and couetous of gaine. The eies a white gray, and troubled: are notes of a fearefull person: and compared to the Goate and shéepe. The eyes not very black, to a yellownesse ten∣ding, like to the Lyons: doth declare an honest and friendly person, compared to the Lyon and Eagle. And a meannesse of colour, with an abate∣ment: doth signifie shamefastnesse and honestie. And whose inner partes of the lippes, shall not be with a certaine rednesse coloured: is then of the Phisitions iudged sickly. When the veynes both of the temples, and be∣hinde the necke, doe appeare to waxe redde, other∣wise to swell out, and that the eyes seeme promi∣nent and bloudie: doe argue an yrefulnesse so ve∣hement, that they incurre vnto a madnesse: and referred to the passion. When the countinaunce appeareth all redde, doth then eyther declare a shamefastenesse, or to be a Wine bibber: and this rednesse is readilye knowne by tokens of the eies, and by the custome of it. That person which hath a fyrie rednesse on the breast, and face, is inamed with yre, and easilye commeth franticke and mad: as the like of these,
the Phisiognomer hath knowne by experience, in sundrie persons, and referred to the passion. The redde colour of the heares of the head in∣tensed, is a note of craftie wiles and deceytes, of much yre, and of fransinesse, when as the same declareth the aboundance of choller. The browne Chestnut colour, doth declare vp∣rightnesse, and the loue of iustice: and all report, especially Nuncius naturae, in the seuenth booke of the nature of beastes, and in the first Chapi∣ter, of the condition of a Nurse, where he vtte∣reth, that of those, the better and healthfuller sort are they, which be browne in colour, than the whyte woman, and haue a helthfuller milke: the selfe same affirmeth Auicen. 4. de animalibus. Those persons hauing a flerie redde colour, or néere to it, doe retaine anger long, that harde to be qualified and appeased, and harde to be ruled, when they be angred: and suche are referred to the passion, that is, vnto the maner appearing, in any such grieuously angred. Those persons which haue the veines of the necke extensed, and appearing bigge and emi∣nent out, with a red colour tincted, doe retaine an∣ger long: and suche an vngracious anger, that harde it is to be appeased. Those also (as the Philosopher wryteth) be re∣ferred to the maner appearing, for that in such an
yre this hapneth, as that the veines to be exten∣ded and magnified, through the boyling and swel∣ling vp of the bloude, and spirites from the heart, which so retch out those veines as is aforesayde: and the like iudge in the forhead, where we vtter iudgement of the lynes there séene. The iudgement of the colour, and substaunce of the heares of the head, and in all other places of the body. The xiii. chapter. NVncius naturae vttreth, in lib. 2. de partibus. cap. 14. animalium, that of all lyuing crea∣tures, man in especiall, is thickest and hath most plentie of heares on the head. The cause of which
matter is applyed, as well vnto a necessitie, as vnto the reason of a helpe and succour. For ne∣cessarie it was that the heares should be, both for the moysture of the braine, and seames of the scull: for where ye most quantitie of humours and heate is, there of necessity must ye great plenty of heares growe, for the reason & cause of a defence, that ye daylie increasing & growing of the heares, couering the head, may so defende and succour it from the extreme colde, and mightie heate. Seing mans brayne in proportion, is greatest and moy∣stest, for that cause it néedeth especiallye a de∣fence. &c. Isydore reporteth, that the heares of the heade were ordayned of nature, to couer and beséeme the head: & that these might so defende the braine from the colde, and heate of the Sunne. Albertus in lib. de animalibus. cap. 3. repor∣teth, that the heares procéede of the grosser va∣pours issuing by the poores of the skinne of the heade, sent forth by heate, through the narrowe holes of the skinne, which dryed and hardned in the comming forth, through the outward colde of the ayre. And the heares of the head which slowly increase (through the lacke of bloud) is a note, that the complexion to be verye moyst. That if these spéedily increase, is a note that the body de∣clyneth vnto a drynesse.
But to come to the matter, the heares of the head doe naturally declare, the qualities & quanti∣ties of humours, and the conditions of the spirite or minde. The Phylosopher also (in. 5. de generatione animalium, cap. 3.) vttereth, that the cause of the bignesse and smalnesse of the heares of the head, is most chiefely caused, and growe out of the skin, and not out of the flesh: when the humour in them is euaporated, and breatheth forth: seing we sée that the grosse heares doe spring out of a thick and grosse skinne, and the small heares out of a thinne and soft skinne, these hytherto Aristotle. So that when hotenesse and drinesse be conioy∣ned, the heares of the head doe much sooner grow, & waxe many & thick. For as much, as the much quantity, signifieth a hotenesse: and the bignesse of them, a much fumositie. And for that cause in yong men, there is a more quantitie, than in children: for as much, as the matter of children is vaperous, and not humerous. And the contraries of these, doe folow their contraries. Further, the signification by the part of the figure, is that the crispednesse declareth a hotenesse, and drinesse: for the same is caused, when it findeth a tortuousnesse both of the holes and powers: but this doubt is not here resolued, when as the complexion is alte∣red, although the two first matters be chaunged.
The playnnesse and flat lying of the heares of the head doth signifie a contrarie, that is, coldnesse and moystnesse, as euidently appeareth. As touching the part of the colour, the blacknesse signifieth a hotenesse: which blacknesse is here ment like to the cléere horne: with a roughnesse, and some∣what tortuous. The whitishnesse signifieth a cold∣nesse: but the citrinnesse and rednesse, signifieth an equalitie: and the whitishnesse doth eyther ar∣gue a vehement coldenesse, as the horinesse: or a strong and mightie drinesse, which like hapneth in the vegetalles, when they are dried: which from their blacknesse, or gréenesse, passe into a whyte∣nesse: and this like hapneth not to men, but in the ende of drying sicknesses. Auerroys (quarto col∣ligit capitulo) of the notes of the complexion of the whole bodye reporteth, that the signification of the colour of the heares of the head, is not veri∣fied (for the more part) but in temperate climates: although in euery climate, may be somewhat cō∣prehended, in comparing the men of that climate dwelling there vnder. As for example in the Ger∣manes and Moores, of which the Moores are black, and their heares are crisped, with an vttermost tortuousnesse: yet not for this, is their complex∣tion hote, but rather these notes ought to be at∣tributed to the outwarde heate, seing they are knowne rather to be colde, through the heate va∣porating.
But the Germanes, Wendenland peo∣ple, and those which dwell in the colde countries, are white of body, their heares yellow and plaine: yet not for this, is it generally to be sayde, that they be colde: but rather that their complexion is very hote, in that the heate is included in the in∣warde partes of their bodies: as the like hapneth, in the winter time. Gallen vttreth, that the white heares of the head, doe declare a cold complexion: and the quality of a deminished coldnesse, hath the heares of the heade yellow to Gold: and the com∣plexion of a diminished hotnesse, hath the heares of the heade redde in colour. Auerroys wryteth, that in whome coldnesse is lesser than hotnesse, hath golden or yellow heares on the heade, in that the yellownesse, doth signifie the complextion of a diminished coldenesse. And the rednesse of heares on the head, doe declare a complextion of lesser hotenesse, than is the qua∣litie hauing black heares: and this (for a truth) is true, in that the rednesse is néere, and a neighbour vnto blacknesse: & like the yellownesse, and whit∣nesse. The golden colour of the heares, hath an equall and temperate qualitie, of the yellow, and red, mixt and compound togyther, these hytherto Auerroys. The ayres and Countries, haue an operation, in the cause of the heares of the heade, which di∣ligently
is to be obserued and noted: seing it is not to be doubted at, that so well in the blacke heares, as ye yellow, is the equality of a like com∣plexion declared: here we apply Iupiter, seing it hath an ayreall nature. Nor in the heares of the Illirian, the blacknesse, which of his qualitie, sig∣nifieth a hotenesse, when as their kinde hath the same. The ages also doe worke, in the matter of the heares of the head: for that yong men, be like to the Meridionals, children like to the Septentrio∣nals: and olde age, as a meane betwéene both. The heares of the heade much in a childe, doe argue that his qualitie (as he groweth) turneth into the Melancholie: and in an old man the like, signifieth that he is presently Melancholick. By these we vnderstand, that the heares of the head lying playne, doe denote a coldnesse of the braine, especially when they are soft in the féeling: for these doe then declare a fearefulnesse, and pu∣sillanimitie: applyed to the Indians, and shéepe: for as much as this is a moyst complexion, as the learned Albertus vttereth. Those which haue the heares of the heade so much crisped, that these be in condition like to the dried Pepper, as the Indians are: which dwell vnder such hote places, that doe make blacke and crisped the heares so much, euen like to the dried
Pepper: by which most wryters, doe digestiuely note a weakenesse. When in them shal be a most great resolution wrought: and that moysture, is diminished, then doth olde age fast come on. For such which dwell in those Countries, become olde at. xxx. yeares, and their heartes are fearsfull, and weake of courage: which well declareth that the kindes in them, be much resolued: The bodies dwelling in hote Countries, are lighter than others: as the same wytnesseth Ari∣stotle in Methaphoricis: where he putteth a dif∣ference of the Countries, in Phisiognomating. Conciliatore in .10. partic. proble. reporteth, that for the much hotnesse, causing the moysture to euaporate forth, by which accidence their mem∣bers are like wynded and wrythed, and generally the lyuing things of those clymates: which euy∣dently is declared by gréene woode dryed, which depryued of the proper moysture, appeareth winded and wrythyne: when the moysture doth not equally breath forth thorow out: except it hath a viscous moysture verye vnctuous. For which cause (in Phisiognomating) it behoueth to con∣sider many matters, and notes. The colour of the heares of the head yellowish, like to honny: doe declare the dominion of cold∣nesse, through the heate couered in the moysture as the like are in children: yet the persons dwel∣ling
Northerly, haue the like condition, through the region: which much beguileth in Phisiogno∣mating vpon the like subiect. And such persons to Venus are attributed, so that the same be eyther of nature or by Arte. The heares of the heade grosse and black are applyed to Saturne: yet is not the same to be like considered of them, as of the Spaniards: for this declareth them to be sub∣iect, to the earthly, and shadowye moysture. The heares verie blacke and rough, and not plaine lying, doe signifie a hotnesse in that person: as ye white heares, doe indicate a cold complexion. Ionnitius in hysagogis vttereth, that there are foure maner of colours of the heares of the head: that is to say, the black, the red, the gray or flax∣ine, and the hoarie. The black colour procéedeth through the great & much quantitie of the kind∣led choller: or by the much combustion of the bloude: but the red colour, through the mighti∣nesse of heate, not adust: of which the heares are alwaies caused red: the flaxine colour, procéedeth of the aboundance of Melancholie: but the hoa∣rie white, is caused of the ouermuch lack of natu∣rall heate, and through the effect of rotten flewme: & this for the most part is caused in olde persons. And these somtimes declare, ye veneral conditions. The colour of the heares, like to the cléere horne, are attributed to the nature of Mars: So that the
heares be not grosse, but somewhat small, and this through the subtilnesse of the humours. And that they also be black through an intensed heate which like appeareth in the bred baked on coles, from which the moysture flyeth, so that by ye long lying on coales the same is made black. When in the other partes of the bodie, there is an ouer much hearinesse séene, there doe the starres of Saturne and Mars worke their vertue, and suche are noted to be robbers, or lurckers by the highe waye, especially when the eye browes be verye thicke, ioyning ouer the nose, and that the eie liddes be hearie: but when the breast shall be on∣ly hearie, doth declare a hote, and stoute person. The whole bodie couered with heare, both thicke and rough: doth denote such a person to be of a more brutish will and nature, than manly.
When the nape of the neck from the heade, shall be hearie: doth denote that person to be strong, and couragious: and such, applied to the Lion. When the Phisiognomer, (by anye oc∣cation procured) came either to Princes courtes, or Noble mens houses, would at the first be∣holde, and thorowly consider on euery syde, the Officers, and seruauntes about the Prince, or Lorde: but especially, their faces. As touching these, did on a time (at request mooued) vew and earnestly marke the faces both of the Officers, and other seruaunts, continually attendant on the person, of a noble Prince, named Astorgius Fauentnus: but among these, hée especially re∣garded the Secretarie of this prince, whose perso∣nage and forme, was on this wise. This Secre∣tarie (by report of the Phisiognomer) was small of stature, in bodye slender; the colour of skinne and face wanne, a little necke & somewhat short, Mercuries line in the forheade, conditioned in a retrograde maner, the other positures of the face and bodie, in a maner aunswerable to the figure here demonstrated: as touching the iesture of body, he went vpright, making short paces, and troade very fast on the grounde. And the Phi∣siognomer in further considering the others a∣bout this Noble man, perceyued sundrie of them to be both subtill, and craftie deceiuers: through
which their Lorde by them, he throughly con∣ceyued, to be greatly abused and indamaged: but specially through the occasion and meanes, of that notable deceyuer (the Secretarie) aboue described. All which the Phisiognomer well wet∣ing, did (by a similitude, framed to the Prince) vtter these wordes: that he as an Angelicall rose, was in a maner suffocated and choked by the wicked thornes daily conuersant about him. Thus by manye outwarde signes, maye a man finde out the qualities of the minde and courage. As when a woman is aparelled & dec∣ked in mans apparell: which doth then declare hir nature to draw néere to mans. As the like did that woman of courage named Fracassa, who commonly vsed to weare (by the report of the
Phisiognomer) mans apparell: and would vpon a brauerye manye times, arme hir selfe at all poynts to iust, and runne sundrie times so armed at the ring. The forme of which woman (by the earnest vew of the Phisiognomer) was on this wise: shée had a small heade, and Pineapple like, a necke comely formed, large breasted, séemelye armes, aunswering to the body: but in hir other partes, as in the hippes, buttockes, thighes, and legges, nere agréeing to mans. This manlye woman also walked vpright in bodie, treading light on the grounde, and bearing hir head play∣ing, like to the Hart. The other notes of this woman, did the Phisiognomer for breuitie sake here omitte. Yet he thus concluded, that by the sundrie notes, which he vewed, shée was prone, to come to a violent death.
These verses of the Italian Franciscus Ascu∣lanus, may aptly be applyed in thys place: tou∣ching the great deceyte, and subtile practises of many Strumpets, in their deckings, and other wanton alurements to the mightie harme and vndoing of many men: as the like well knowne by that coragious woman aboue described, who drew (for the personage and singuler beawtie) many a worthy Capitane and Souldiour to hir company. For which cause, this man mooued with a loue and pittie towardes his countrie∣men, wrote these, by the way of a perswation, in the mother tongue, as followe. De non credati a femina scioccha, E non vacenda lor ficta bellezza Ma riguardati come dentro fioccha Miri la mente cum gli occhij cerueri Che alhora perderai la sua vaghezza De lei mirando li socij misteri. That some light & vnderstanding may be con∣ceyued by these verses, he vttereth in them, that he woulde his countrie men to beware of the counterfeyt beawtie of most women with them: in that the same not naturall, but like framed by Arte, with waters, tinctures, and suche like. The Phisiognomer also reporteth, that manye
women like delighted to garnishe and decke vp themselues, carrie the heade after the maner of the Hart, with the eies rolling, and turning here and there: still turning the head, one whils on the right side, an other whiles on the left, yea vpwarde and downewarde: which argueth an especiall vnstablenesse, and an vnsatiable luxury in that creature. In so much that if they inten∣siuely possesse or haue these, then suche be for the more part ercmeriti: and of experience (sayth the Phisiognomer) doe I report this. Where sundrie men are named to be Effe∣mynate, is vnderstanded and ment two wayes: the one, when as such be delighted to go in appa∣rell, and decked with ornaments like to women: the other, to appéere laciuious, and weake both of will, and courage. The qualitie of which ap∣parently declareth, that the minde (for the more part) doth like ensue and aunswere, to the dispo∣tion of the bodie. For such be noted of experience to be vnfaythfull, and euill reporters, and lyars, in that they thus through their counterfayting, aunswere in partes, to the kinde fraudelent and wylie. Further, the youthfull delightes in men, is séene vnto twentie yeares, or néere vpon: for that the naturall heate, is all that time couered, and hinde of the moysture. The knowledge of which,
is well discerned, through their members then being soft: that suffer in a maner as the women. The wearing of heauie garments customably doth perfitly argue a heauie braine: but the gar∣ments light, doe witnesse, a light braine: which rule and note, much furthereth the person min∣ding to Phisiognomate on any subiect. The heares of the heade, blackish in colour, if they be meanely thinne, (as writeth Palemon) and the like Albertus, Aristotle, and Consilia∣tore: doe then denote honest condicions, and both a good disposition, iudgement, and nature in that person. The heares of the head yellowish and meane∣ly thinne, doe denote that the Sunne, and Mer∣cury to beare sway, in the qualities and nature of that person, after the minde of the Phisiogno∣mer, which I thereto agrée. The learned Consiliatore writeth, that he which hath the heares of the heade, and in all o∣ther partes of the body standing vpright is argu∣ed by iudgement fearefull: for that such persons in great feare appeare the like: which for that applyed to the condition of the passion. A lyke reason of the same vttereth Albertus, which af∣firmeth that the windie moysture, is cause of such an vprightnesse and staring of the heares. Yet be the heares somtimes crisped, curled, and
hard, which procéede through the drinesse in the sharpe heate, is causing and working the lyke. The worthy man Almansor writeth, that the crispednesse of the heares, and of these standing vpright: doe demonstrate a hote qualitie, and hastye nature in that person. Here in the first persons touching the colour of ye heares, and the effeminacie of parts, doth the Phisiognomer aptly apply the Moone and Ve∣nus: but in the seconde kinde, doth he néerer attri∣bute the Sunne, or rather Mars. The heares of the heade lying flatte, and rea∣ching out on the foreheade: doe denote a strong person▪ yet brutish (of likelyhood) in condicions: for that the powling of heades in our time, may greatly beguile the iudger: and these applied to the Beare, and other wilde beastes. A like iudgement (the Philosophers) vttereth, that the roughnesse of the heares of the heade, do denote in many (lacking education and grace) the rudenesse of maners, and wilde behauiour. The heares of the heade after the minde of the Philosopher Aristotle, very thinne, doe in∣dicate an effeminate minde, for the lacke of bloud, through which not onely a slownesse, but a womanly courage, and dulnesse in conceyuing is procured.
A muche quantitie of the heares of the head lying flat, and appart on the middle of the fore∣heade folding, and winding vpwarde towarde the braine, or crowne of the heade: doe argue (after the agréement of Authors) that such a per∣son to be both subtile and wilye: yet in honest and iuste causes not founde so aduised and wit∣tie: for which reason, attributed of the Phisiog∣nomer to the barbarous sort. The heares of the heade, flat lying of eyther side, descending to the forheade: doe declare such a person condicioned, to the nature of the Horse. The heares next the temples small and thin▪ doe denote a colde person and weake of strength▪ the reason of which séemeth to bée, for that the
temples supply that place, where the great Ar∣ters and Uaines doe ende. And in this, the place shoulde naturally be hote, through which causing the engendering of heares, in that the same is procured of heate. For which cause, when the heares of the temples be small and thinne, doe then denote the lacke of naturall heate: and ap∣plyed to women being there bare of heares. The heare by the temples, thinne, yet founde stiffe: doe then denote not only a fearefull per∣son, but colde also by nature. The heares thicke growing about the temples and eares: doe denote that person (of experience knowne) to be of a hote nature, and prone to the veneriall act. The heares in that place, if they shall be bigge, and whiter: doe then denote vntaught manners, and rude conditions: applyed to those brutishe sort, named the Fryselande men. The heares in the same place, if they shall be eyther perfite blacke, or flaxine of colour▪ doe then argue a violent and furious mynde: ap∣plyed (of the likelyhood) to the Boare. The heares soft & thinne, and excéeding small: doe then declare an effeminate minde, and cou∣rage: and that this person not onelye lacking bloude, but to be dull of sense, and slow. When the heares shall be yet much thinner,
doe then innuate a craftie, harde, or néere, and couetous person: applyed (after qualitie) to the fearefulnesse, and couetousnesse, both of the Barbarian, and Assirian: for that the Assirians, are by nature excéeding couetous. The heares much and grose, and flatte lying, with a hearinesse of all the bodie, in a childe: doe witnesse the Melancholie to ensue, that is to saye, to become franticke and madde. When the heares in age are much increased, then doe they represent the much adustion aboue nature: which so causeth the sickenesse of inno∣cencie, and foolishnesse. The vttermost line or creast of the heares of the heade, if the same reacheth and goeth from the forhead: doth then argue a craftie person, hauing a peruerse, and wicked vnderstanding. The vttermost line or creast of the heares, if the same extendeth to the forhead: doth then note suche a person to be stoute, and somewhat wilde. This like is thus pronounced by reason of the hotenesse, and suche are properly applyed to the nature of Mars. The vttermost line or creast, if behinde the forepart of the heade (at which ended the begin∣ning of heares) discendeth towarde the nape of the necke: doth then argue such a person in wic∣ked matters, to be crafty, but in the good, lacking
discretion, and lecherous. Such a lyne from the forepart, when the same is farre higher from the nape of the necke: doth then demonstrate such a person to be slow, feare∣full, of an effeminate minde, and many times irefull. The heares of the head, yellow as Golde, doe declare suche to be right Sollistians: that is to say, of a prowde and hawty minde, and vaine glo∣rious The heares of the head soone hoarie, doe in∣dicate the lacke of naturall heate, or putred flewme: and these somtimes witnesse veneriall condicions. If a man by the Arte and skill of Phisiogno∣mie, maye finde to place in the forhead, and face, both Mercurie, and Mars: then suche (of skill knowne) be founde through the inclination, to addict their mindes to Alchymie, and in the same to inuent the great deceyte in mettalles, and false coyning of money, and imagine manye euilles pernitious: of which condition (being at Uenice) I saw two like beheadded, for suche a wicked fact, in the yeare. 1565. Whose bodies and heades (after the order of the Countrie) were immediatly burned with the scaffolde into ashes: but of these the elder and principall, was much more spiced with the notes of Saturne retro-
grade. Women by nature waxe not balde, in that the qualitie of them draweth néere, and is like to the nature of children. The gelded persons waxe not balde, in that they be chaunged into the feminine, or womanly nature: but few such (at this daye) be here with vs: except those by happe, caused through the in∣cision of a rupture. To conclude the horinesse, and whitish flaxen colour of the heare of the heade, is caused of a flumaticke qualitie, & such of nature, draw néere to the qualitie of women: as experience, like tea∣cheth of the same. Of the iudgement of the head, by the bignesse, figure, and disposition. The. xiij. Chapter.
SEing the heade of all other partes of man, is most open to be séene: it shall therfore be good to vtter largely of the constitution and forme thereof. Which the Philosopher seemeth to de∣stinguish and deuide into seuen formes, of these the first forme he vttereth to haue no imminen∣cie or bearing out before, but behinde: the second forme, that an imminency contayneth in the for∣part, and net in the hinder: the thirde forme, that the head againe lacketh an imminency before, & not behind, and that the same be formally round: the fourth forme, that the temples, in respect, haue a more bearing oute, then eyther the fore∣part, or the hinder: the fift forme, that it be in forme like to the Pine Apple: the sixt forme, that there be a greater distaunce from the eares before, then behinde: the seuenth forme, that it be in a most comely maner proportioned: and in these doe Gallen, Auicen, Auerroys, and diuers other learned agrée. So that the heade being eyther ouer bigge or ouer small proportioned, is nothing at all lyked of them: in that the same is corrupted, and hindered, of the proper vertue. For such hauing the like forme, when they approche vnto an vn∣derstanding, appeare euidently to be harmed and hindered. As a small heade is euermore corrup∣ted: euen so a bigge heade appeareth sometimes
good, and sometimes viciated and euill. But the best formed heade, alowed of the lear∣ned, is that, which hath an exact roundnesse, and is on eyther side a little depressed, with an immi∣nencie before and after: so that where the tem∣ples are, a certaine playnenesse may appeare: as by example, that a certaine balle of waxe made exactly rounde, shoulde be somewhat de∣pressed of eyther side: than shoulde that rounde forme (as the Geometricians affirme) most apt to receyue formes, aunswerable to proportion. For which cause, the more lawdable heade, is that, which hath a meane forme in the propor∣tion, and bignesse, and cōtaineth a decent round∣nesse, which besides enioyeth an imminency, be∣fore and after, tempered with a little compres∣sion or flatnesse. Auicen writeth, that the cause of smalnesse of the head in the creature, is the paucitie or small quantitie of matter: but the cause of bignesse of the heade, is the great quan∣titie of matter, being spermaticall. The braine after Rasis, ensueth and aunswe∣reth to the forme of the scull: for if the scull shall be small, then will the braine be like. & contra. The figure also of the scull, if the same be cor∣rupted, then is the forme of the braine like cor∣rupted. Besides the head in smalnesse superflu∣ous, must of necessitie be euill.
That heade is commended, which in bignesse is a meane, hauing a comly roundenesse: and de∣cent eminencie both behind, & afore: & hath from both the eares a little flatnesse: this Almansor. So that mans heade (among all other beastes) hath proportionally much braynes. The males (of knowledge vttered) haue more braines, than the females: although the effect may sometimes shew a contrarie to this. But of these which are seldome caused, or rather by accidence, is neyther Arte, nor science vttered. Mans heade (of the diligent search) is knowne to haue more ioyntes, than all other beastes. The man also is founde to haue more ioyntes, than the woman. The heade of a comely and due forme, is fashio∣ned lyke a hammer, in which the fore and hinder part beare out: for otherwise can this not make a due direction and gouernement: the reason of which is, for that the ventricles haue a due forme to receyue the quantities of spirites in euery place: as that the forepart to imagine and iudge, the hinder especiallye to remember. But the midle ventricle, when the forme of it is light∣ly compressed and flatted, then is the bethincking part so much the nobler, and worthyer: for that in the same small place, is the best vnitie, to di∣stinguish the congruent, from the incongruent, of the obiect consisting in the forepart. When
the forme of the heade afore is depressed, and den∣ted in, then faileth the iudgement of the creature: when the hinder part lacketh in the emmencie, or is depressed, then lyke fayleth the remem∣brance. There consisteth also a weakenesse in moouing of the sinewes, and by the consequent of the whole bodye: in that by the strength of the braine, is the strength like vttered of the necke, and sinewes. And as the largenesse of the shoulderpoynts, euen so of the breste, stanckes, and bones. Consiliator writeth, that the heade of a seemely forme and maner, doth encrease both sense, and vertue: and denoteth in that person both magnificencie, and a grauitie of witte. The head small & not in due proportion formed, doth argue the contrarie to these afore. So that when the heade shall be great, then will the braine be like bigge: in that the braine is the beginner and worker of all the senses. Againe, if the heade be great, then are the senses many: & econtra. To haue a most bigge heade (as Tarreus wri∣teth) and that in due forme: doth denote a comly∣nesse of manners, and good conditions in that person. The heade great, with a diuers forme pro∣portioned, and the sinewes small, with a comely forme of the necke: notwithstanding small, and the bones small: is a note of an euill composi∣tion
and forme of the braine. Such hauing a bigge head without due forme (are for the more part) Nidiots and fooles, and vn∣apt to learne, or to be taught: which signe and note is accidentally gathered of the Asse, hauing a big head. This also is verified, when as ye head, to the necke and body is not aunswerable, and proportioned orderly after nature. The heade bigge, and the necke small, is an euill signe: for that the vertue forming, lacketh in that creature, and the matter also is inobedi∣ent: of which ensueth a simplysitie of witte, and the lacke of discretion, in that person. The heade great, proportioned agréeablye to the bodye, or rather to the necke, so that the necke be strong and meanely bigge, with strong and bigge sinewes: not without good reason, and deserte, is the same laudable and commēded.
The heade Pineapple formed, after the con∣dicion of a sharpe vpright piller, in such maner, that the nether parte shalbe bigge and round, but the vpper part sharpe to a Pineapple fashioned: doth argue in that person, an vnshame fastnesse irefulnesse, gréedie catching, and rash boldnesse: which procéedeth through the hotenesse, and drie∣nesse of the braine. Such (for the more parte) are the formes, and conditions of the Ianewies, and many of the hypocriticall religious. The person which much sturreth to and fro, and not long abyding in a place: is noted bolde, and irefull: and such a person séemeth to haue a hote braine. The heade bigge, with the other signes deno∣ting witte, is an apte receptacle and place for good Artes: but otherwise is the same, when as the heade is great, and not aunswering to the o∣ther members. If the forme of the heade (as afore vttered) be¦comely, with the fore ventricle of a good forme and sufficient moyst, is then laudable: in that the attayning, and imprnting of kindes is by the moysture caused, but the retencion caused tho∣row the dryth, which is contayned in the hinder part. When the braine is great, then are cau∣sed bigge sinewes, which of that reason argue drinesse in the places: for these of theyr proper
nature be knowne colde & drie. And of thys the vertue memoratiue is made strong in retayning the kindes, and by that helpe reserueth them long. The heade with the middle ventricle, some∣what compressed, or flatted of eyther side: doth denote ye vertue of bethinking, to be in compow∣ning prompt and ready: and like in deuiding the same, which is attained, through the vnitie of spi∣rites, in that place gathered. The head spericall or throughly rounde, doth denote, a quicke moouing, vnstablenesse, for∣getfulnesse, small discretion, and little witte in that person: for this motion of the spirites, neuer ceasseth nor resteth: as in manye Frenchmen and Spaniardes, and the like in certaine Ger∣maines, hath bene obserued & noted. For when the forme of the heade is through rounde, then is the midle ventricle large, and the spirites working in the same so large, vntill these finde a large place, which in the meane time are not suf∣ficiently vnited: and on such wise is the vertue extimatiue weakened, by that the spirites are caried rounde about the boundes of the same. Insomuch that such men hauing the like formed heades, doe (of a proper qualitie, and condition) promise much, but performe little: these also are knowne, to be importunate, coutous, and enui∣ous,
thinking onlye of the present time (and the same slenderly) so that for the time past, and the same to come, these take no care, nor thinke any whit thereof. For which cause (the Phisiogno∣mer willeth) that no man assuredly trust, anye such persons, which especially be founde (after skill) to haue the bodie much chollericke, or me∣lancholicke: séeing such condicions in sundrie persons of like forme, hath béene obserued many times by the Phisiognomer, which were most true. Further he reporteth, that if anye of these happen in authority and beare rule: they are not onely seduced by light credite, but proue to be ra∣uening Wolues, and put forwarde themselues to vtter their crueltie, and (become in time) wic∣ked Tiraunts. The meaner sort of these, are gi∣uen to be robbers by the high way, yea, and mur∣therers of men, except their vertuous education, and fearing of God, doe otherwise contrarie these dispositions in them. He further instructeth, that if the habitude and forme of the abouesayde body be sanguine, then is the aforsayd qualities much abated in the same creature, so that such a subiect is but a litle inclined to like maners ano condici∣ons, through the goodnesse of this complexion. Here in this place, somewhat agréeing to the abouesayde, doth the Phisiognomer place an ex∣ample, for instruction sake, which is on this wise.
A certaine Almayne he noted on a time, being Secretarie to a worthie Prince, in that country, who in the time of warres being in campe with the Prince, espiedon a time by happe, a bodye Lowse créeping on his hose: which séeing, was much abashed thereat, and being in that amaze∣ment, required his man to take him off, saying to him scrupulously, that he in no maner wittingly would stea a creature of God. &c. The forme of this man, as the Phisiognomer, did diligentlye note him, was after this maner: he had a sphe∣ricall or very rounde heade, a narrow forehead, slender necke, thinne and narrowe shoulder pointes, loynes, and hippes, with the other parts, of the bodye weake and ill formed, and to these the breast narrow, and Marses line in the fore∣heade weake, and euill fashioned: sundrie other
notes he perceyued both in the handes and face, which for breuitie he omitted: but to conclude, the Phisiognomer founde by sundrie notes, that this faint hearted Secretarie, was not onelye fearefull, but light of beléefe, and brutishe, in conditions. The heade small must of necessitie be euill, in that such a person lightly falleth sicke, and with∣in is the braine little, with a straightnesse or narrownesse of the ventricles: in which, the spi∣rites drawne narrow, are so letted, that they can∣not orderly worke a due vse and effect: and these pressed togither are in such maner inflamed, and choked, that they neyther maye duelye imagine, dispose, nor remember. So that such persons like formed, are knowne to be fearefull, yea, irefull, and retayning ire long: through the intensed drienesse of the braine, and the distempered heate. These be also of a small iudgement, and vnderstanding, and neyther can orderlye dis∣cerne: they both compasse, and worke false mat∣ters, yea, euill speakers, bablers, and double ton∣gued: from which the Phisiognomer counseleth a man to flye & shunne, as he would auoyde his wicked enimie: except grace, and prayer, brydle and temper the effectes aboue vttered. The heade vnséemely long, and twhart fashi∣oned to an Organ pipe, doth not onelye denote
vnshamefastenesse, but an impudencie, and ∣ish conditions. The heade shorte, yet the same perfite rounde▪ doth by the (opinion of the Philosopher) denote such a person, not onely to be emptie, and voyde of honest giftes, & vertue, but lacking wisdome. The heade Pineapplelike formed, doth indicate vnshamefastnesse in that person: the rather, and of more likelihoode, if the other notes aunswere  this Consiliatore. The heade flat and plaine, doth argue that vice of ambicion, and sensualitie, in the person mightily bearing sway. The heade eminent or bearing out in the fore parte, doth like note a hawtinesse, and arrogancie in the creature: af∣ter the opinion of the abouesayde Phisosopher. The heade in the foreparte vallied, depressed, and holow: doth denote an irefull, and deceyte∣full person: but suche which haue the holowe of the hinder parte of the heade flatted: are noted after Arte, to be fearefull persons: applied to the kinde like. The heade bigge with a largenesse of the for∣head, and countinaunce vnto a Gyant: doth ar∣gue such a person to be slowe, yet strong in the composition of bodye, and gentle of behauiour: but that person (of the Philosopher) is reported vnapt to be taught, and to learne: and applyed
for that cause vnto the Oxe. The heade longe, and somewhat protensed or stretched out, to the forme of a hammer (euen as the heades of ye Swichyners, for the more parte are) doth indicate such a person to be reasonably fearefull, diligent, circumspect, and aforeséer in waightie matters, and affaires. The head right out formed, in the midle plaine, and in a maner flatte, being also of a meane big∣nesse: doth indicate such a person not to be one∣ly wittie, but stout, and of a great courage. The heade throughout well formed, doth note such a person, to possesse a singuler witte, to be one of a good aduisement, and consideration, yea liberall in giftes: but by the reporte of Con∣siliatore, this person sometimes will be feare full, and faint hearted. The head to be eyther small or bigge, is vnder∣standed and ment, according to the measure, and proportion of the whole bodye: this Albertus. The head shorte, doth declare such a person, to lacke reason, vnderstanding and wit: as reporte Palemon, Albertus, and Conyliatore. The heade in the hinder parte hollow, doth de∣note an irefull person, wilie, and deceytfull: and these according to the notes aunswering to the other partes, of the heade and bodye. And in whome you shall espie the temples ho∣lowe
of eyther side, such (by the agréement of the Philosophers) shall you iudge and pronounce to be cruell, deceitfull, and great discemblers, with other conditions scarcelye tollerable. These hitherto, of the iudgements of the heade▪ next followeth the iudgementes of the foreheade, after the rules and order of the Arte: as a mem∣ber and parte greatly to be regarded, both for the composition, and lines (worthie memorie) séene in the same. Of the forme, nature, and iudgement of the forheade. The. xv. chapter. THe face as Aristotle writeth, is that part on∣ly which euermore is bare, and this especial∣ly
in man. The forehead is that part or space of the face which properlye is betwéene the highest of the browes vpwarde, and the eyes downewarde. The breadth of the foreheade, beginneth from the roote of the nose, where the eielids doe ende: and reacheth vpwarde, vnto the garlande seam about the heade. The length of the foreheade is vnderstanded and ment, after the breadth of the bodye, which way the hearie sinewes are séene to stretch and runne. As the like maner and forme, manye of the best learned, the Phisiognomer obserued to haue. And at Rauenna, he behelde the ymage of that learned Dante, who had the like forme. Here note, that a man must consider all other partes, with the condicioned forme of the heade, and the agréement of the countinaunce or face, for otherwise is not this verified and true. By the rounde foreheade, shall you conceyue & vnderstand a certaine sphericall or very round eminencie, & bearing outwards: such a forme of necessity, must be graunted to lacke in the length of the foreheade. The cause of this is, for that the spirites in the same emptie place, are reuerbera∣ted and inflamed, and that the inflamation long continueth: Which reason and saying is con∣firmed, when such haue a shorte necke and chol∣lericke,
in that the inflamation of bloude is light∣ly caused and abiding. The forhead is an vtterer of heauinesse, mirth, clemencie, and crueltie: of which the prouerbe ariseth, that the flattering person, sheweth a smooth and smiling foreheade: the irefull man a gathered, knitting, and clowdie forehead. Aristotle affirmeth, the forhead to be the seate or place of modestie, and honour: and the same for the néerenesse of the imaginatiue vertue, which with the common sence in the foreparte of the braine, is placed as principall of the heade, by force of whose vertue, either heauinesse or mirth, comelinesse or vncomelinesse, are sodenly caried vnto the iudgement of reason, & by the same iud∣ged. Of this we name such to haue a shamelesse and brasen forehead, which put away or set aside all bashfulnesse and shame. The foreheade through the discending of all the sinewes from the brayne, to performe the sence, is as it were a certaine tower & fortresse, vnto whose hollownesse doe the fiue sensitiue si∣newes concurre of the outwarde sences, through whose helpe, from all the obiectes of the sences, at the seate of reason, is iudgement caused. The skinne of the foreheade, which with a certaine musculous, and thinne substaunce fast∣ned to it, is vnited or ioyned togither: that the
inner partes of the hands, and soales of the féete, with the tendons, doe agrée and worke togither. The foreheade, distinguished or deuided of the bones, lying vnder the vtter skinne, doth onely consist of two mouable skinnes: and briefly, the whole is lose in it selfe: and of the same, is vn∣doubtedly mooued, by a voluntarie motion. The skinne of the foreheade, doth mooue togi∣ther with the eie liddes, by certaine muscles and sinewes: at the opening, and shutting togither of the eyes. The musculous thickenesse, lying vnder the skinne of the foreheade, by which the eye browes are drawne vp, and the motion of the foreheade caused, hath his hearie fastnings tending downe∣warde: which cut ouertwhart, by an vnskilfull Chirurgian, doth after cause, that the whole skin of the foreheade, doth slyde or fall downe to the eyes. The plaine and euen forheade without anye wrincles, is the same which doth beare or bosse nothing outwardes: but contayneth or hath a certayne euennesse thorow out. And suche per∣sons are noted (of the Phisiognomer) to be con∣tentious, and full of variances: the reason is, for that the same signifieth a grosse skinne of the foreheade, and of the consequent, a like witte: and the hardenesse of flesh, which cannot be pla∣ced,
of which the rudenesse of vnderstanding en∣sueth, through the Organ not due proportioned. And such also be hote and drye persons, which is the cause of the tention of the foreheade: so that through the paucitie of vnderstanding, they be caused brawlers and contentious. In all matters, is their a certaine outwarde note, by which we finde those that are not answe∣ring to the eyes, yt is to say, the inward notes not séene. Of this appereth that the nature of the pro∣per matter hath his, and Philosophie naturall hath his, which it skilfully noteth. The person that hath a bigge foreheade, is slow, and dull witted, compared vnto the Oxe, in that the Oxe is a slowe beast, which hath a bigge foreheade. But the foreheade small, doth denote an vnstable person. The foreheade large, doth indicate such a per∣son to be inclined often to chaunge both minde and purpose: but if the foreheade be very large, then such a person (for the more parte) is noted to be a foole, of small discretion, and dull witted: as both Aristotle and Auicen write. The fore∣heade to be large (after the agréement of writers) is ment to be formed with a due quantitie, both in the length, and breadth. The foreheade rounde and fleshie, doth argue such a person to be irefull: if the same especially
be bearing or bossing out, and with this lacking discretion, dull and slowe: who of the Philoso∣pher, aptly applyed to the Asse. The forehead ouermuch standing forth, that the same séemeth bossed out in the middle: doth signifie the excesse of choller, and such (for the more parte) are disposed and inclyned vnto the Chollericke and hastye passions: as vnto the fransinesse, and furious hastinesse. A like to this that if the foreheade hath (as it were) a proper bearing forth, or knobbe bossing out, and certaine dentings in, or little furrowes to be séene: doth (by practise of the Phisiognomer) signifie such a person to be rashe, wylie, and false of promise: yea, this like (by the reporte of Adamantius) doth denote sometimes foolishnesse, and fransinesse or madnesse in that creature: so that the other signes and notes of the partes, aunswere and agrée. The foreheade little and narrowe, doth indi∣cate such a person to be foolish, and a small likely∣hoode in him to be taught, or to conceyue anye learning to purpose: yea nastie, sluggish, and a gluttinous féeder: applyed for these to the grun∣ting Sowe. But the foreheade small, that is thinne of skinne, and very narrowe, in a swarte person: doth denote him to be lasciuious, soone mooued to ire, ouer liberall, séeking desirouslye
acquaintaunce, and a note of small witte in him. Here note, that the foreheade small and ha∣uing a thin skinne, doth indicate in that creature subtill, and moouable spirites, & econtra. For the spirite, is a subtill substaunce, aereall, cléere, and produced of the lightest, and most thinne part of bloude, by which the vertue of life is ca∣ried, vnto the proper actions of the same. So that where the ouermuch thickenesse is of the foreheade, there of necessitie must the grosse spi∣rites be ingendred, which are not apt to meditate or conceyue déepelye, for the expulsiue vertue, which is weaker in that person. And the vertue vnited, is stronger or mightier, than the same dis∣persed: so that the spirites vnited, can not aptly discerne the congruent actions, through the ouer emptie, large, and flegmatick place. The foreheade ouer thinne of skin, and wrine∣led, doth argue the lacke of braine, and consump∣tion of the substauntiall moysture: as the like appeareth in aged persons: and in those, which by dayly and continuall sicknesses are wasted, and brought very leane. The foreheade long, doth witnesse suche a per∣son to be wittie, apt to learne or to be taught: yet somewhat vehement in causes, many times. For these, of the Philosopher, aptlye applyed to the fierce Dog.
new acquaintaunce, and a note of small witte in him. Here note, that the foreheade small, and ha∣uing a thinne skinne, doth indicate in that crea∣ture, subtill and mooueable spirites, & contra. For the spirite is a subtill substaunce, aereall, cléere, and produced of the lightest, and most thin part of bloud, by which the vertue of lyfe is caried vnto the proper actions of the same. So that where the ouermuch thicknesse is of the forehead there of necessitie must the grosse spirites be in∣gendred, which are not apt to meditate or con∣ceyue déepely for the expulsiue vertue, which is weaker in that person: and the vertue vnited is stronger or mightier then the same dispersed: so that the spirits vnited, can not aptly discerne the congruēt actions, through the ouer emptie, large, and flegmaticke place. The foreheade ouer thinne of skinne, and wrin∣kled: doth argue the lacke of braine, and consum∣tion of the substanciall moysture: as the like ap∣peareth, in aged persons: and in those, which by daylye and continuall sicknesses are wasted, and brought very leane. The foreheade long, doth witnesse suche a per∣son to be wittie, apt to learne or to be taught: yet somewhat vehement in causes, many times. For these of the Philosopher aptly applied to the fierce
Dogge. The foreheade square, hauing an equall and moderate largenesse, agréeable to the heade, and face, or according to the maner of the other parts doth argue such a person to be vertuous, wittie, of honest condicions, and of likelyhoode to be har∣die and couragious: for which (of the Philoso∣pher Aristotle) aptlye applyed vnto the Lyon. The foreheade playne, and wholye without wrincles: doth indicate suche a person, to séeke and be desirous of great honour, and the same a∣boue his reach and possibilitie to be compassed: being one also of small discretion, spitefull, and very irefull, or that continueth long angrie, ob∣stinate, and full of strife. A like to this, doth A∣damantius write: that the foreheade long, leane, and holow: to testifie suche a person, fearefull, craftie, and desirous of honour.
The foreheade that bosseth out vnto the edge, is of some allowed, especiallye if the same well aunswereth to the heade. But if such a roundnesse occupyeth, and causeth the smooth and playne stretching out at length of the temples, and that the same is bare of heare: doth indicate in that person the towardenesse, and worthynesse of wit, the desire of honour, and arrogancie, suche also valantly attempt, bolde and mightie enterprises: as the same noted sundrie times, of the worthye Phisiognomer Cocles. The person that draweth or knitteth togither the skinne, in the myddle of the forehead, with the ouerbroowes: is not onely noted to be wayward, and irefull, but gréedilie bent and fixed, to the hor∣rible excesse, and gréedy coueting of money, much to be detested: as Palemon, Loxius, Morbeth, Conciliatore, write. The foreheade (as Thaddeus Hagecius repor∣teth) stretched out playne and euen, and the same as one smilyng, doth argue such a person to bée a flatterer, and hardely to be trusted: as the same of experience noted: which maner of appearance the Philosopher Aristotle, doth attribute and ap∣ply to the kinde of the passion: in that the fore∣head thus stretched, throughout equal and smoth, is laboured (as it were) by a made or dissembling meanes. The same also is named of the Phisiog∣nomer
(and Thaddcus agréeeth thereto) a coun∣terfayted foreheade, when it thus appeareth wholy retched out playne and smooth. As by a like may well appeare in such persons, at what time they flatter: and in the Dogge fawning for an intent, which then maketh smooth the fore∣heade. The foreheade clowdie through wrincles, doth signifie such a person to be bolde, fierce, couragi∣ous, and terrible: compared of the Philosopher for the like, to the furious Bull, and Lyon. A meane condicion of the foreheade, betwéene the former vttered, doth by iudgement (of all writers) decently agrée: and suche a person hath béene noted (for the more part) to be gentle, ciuill, of an honest nature, and indued with good condi∣cions: as these, of experience noted, by the well practised Phisiognomer Cocles. The foreheade appearing in a sadde maner, with a heauie countinaunce: doth argue suche a person to be full of mourning and heauinesse, and applyed to the effect: in that such which wayle and mourne, haue then a heauie countinaunce, and be full of sorowe. The foreheade drawne togither or wrincled in the midle, doth signifie such a person to be irefull, and reuenging. The foreheade long, leane, and holowe: doth
denote such a person to be fearefull, craftie, and desirous of honour. The foreheade hanging downe, and shadowed as it were: doth indicate such a person much in∣clined and prone to shed teares: for which rea∣son, these of the Philosopher are aptlye applyed, to the kinde of the passion: and to this, doe the later writers agrée. The foreheade bigge, is alwayes caused tho∣rowe the bignesse of the bone, grosenesse of the fleshe, and thickenesse of the skinne: contrari∣wise the foreheade small, is through the thinnesse of the bone, fleshe, and skinne: as both the Phi∣losopher Aristotle, and Palemon, with others doe write. The foreheade appearing deformed, through the manye wrincles déepe, by which the same na∣med fowle: doth signifie a sorrow full person, and applyed (of Aristotle) to the kinde of the passion: in that suche, which sundrie times vexing, and gréeued in minde, doe then vtter and shewe a like wrincled, and deformed foreheade. The foreheade bare of heare (as Thaddaeus Hagecius writeth) and hauing a plaine and euen skinne, except the same within the vpper face aboue, or ouer the nose, doth signifie a malicious person, deceytfull and full of ire, yea, contenti∣ous many times.
The forehead clowdie or lowring, and wrincled yet in the mydle of the same more wrincled: doth togither indicate with the two best vertues (as both stoutnesse of courage and witte) the most hatefull vice of crueltie, to consist in that creature after the minde of the Philosopher. The foreheade very great, rounde in forme (by the bearing out) and bare of heare: doth not only argue (by the agréement of all writers) such a person to be hardie, and stoute, of will hardlye to be brideled, but a dissembler and lyare: the ra∣ther if the other partes aunswere. The foreheade long, with the countinaunce or face long, and slender, and chinne like slender and thinne: doth not onely (after the minde of the
Phisiognomer, and Thaddaeus) denote such a person to be rigorous and cruel, but bearing rule, to be a Tiraunt. The foreheade confused by wrincles, and the face appearing puffed vp, through an ouermuch fatnesse, doth indicate an vnstable, flegmaticke, groe, and dull witted person, by the agréement of Palemon, and sundrie other learned. The foreheade narrow, to be foolishe: and the same long in forme, vnapt to learne. This high swolen or bolned out, and rounde: to be a decey∣ner subtill, and wilye. The foreheade wrineled, to haue déepe cogitations, and burdened with cares. The same rounde in the bossing out, to be not onely enuious, but craftie. The foreheade large (after breadth) doth denote suche a person, not onelye honest condicioned, but frée of expen∣ces, and liberall in giftes: as Loxius, Philemon, Palemon, and sundrie other writers reporte. Certaine reporte, and rightly in the same, that the foreheade ouermuch wrincled, doth argue vn∣shamefastnesse in that persone: the reason is, when the vertue apprehensiue and conceyuing is weakened, the same then cannot orderly discerne the congruent, from the incongruent: of which insueth those that are wrought without shame∣fastnesse. The cause of this is, in that the forepart of the braine▪ is very moyst, and of the ouer much
moysture is this great wrinckling caused of the forheade. Yet note, that the wrinckling of the foreheade may like be procured of two causes, as of drinesse and moysture: sauing the difference is, that the same which procéedeth of drinesse, doth not occupy the whole foreheade: so that this signifieth ire∣fulnesse in that creature: and anger in the other person of a moyster qualitie. The reason is, for that the person discerneth not the same, which causeth and retayneth both the ire, and hatred, without due cause: and suche also are knowne (for the more part) to be full of variaunces, and strife, yea couetous, and euill tongued. Oh how many vaine Phisitians be there (sayth the Phisi∣ognomer)
which nothing at all regarde, nor care for the science of phisiognomy: yea, they in a ma∣ner wholy deride the professors of the same, tho∣row their simple trauaile, and studie bestowed in the science. Auicen reporteth in secunda quarti, Capi. 26. that necessarie it is for a Phisition by Phisiognomy, dilygently to consider in the face, eyes, and other members, the euill forme not na∣turall: and that he especially regardeth at the first whether the same forme & note be naturall, & ac∣cording to the indiuiduate like aunswering, so to pronounce iudgement. The like wordes in a ma∣ner, reporteth that worthy man Galen, in his first booke of complexions. Henricus and Guido, in a proper chapter of the Pockes write, that such hauing a short foreheade (as to length) and both the temples flatte, and chéeke bones large, be prone and apt to come vnto that impostumation or swelling in the throte, na∣med (of manye) the kings euill: for that in suche creatures the matter redily is deriued and sent to the necke: but this especially hapneth to chil∣dren, through gulositie and muche féeding, and both thinnesse, and moysture of bodye: yea the same the more verified, when as the heade (to the Iudger) appeareth bigge, and not due propor∣tioned. Conciliatour thus writeth, that the person
which hath an euen stretched, and smoth forhead, with a certaine shining in the same, is denoted to be not onely a flatterer, but deceytfull, so that hardly to be trusted. And manye like were the Bononians which Conciliatore obserued and no∣ted in his time. The cause of this tention and euennesse of the foreheade, doth the Phisiogno∣mer suppose to procéede, through the chollericke qualitie, for that by his drinesse the skinne stret∣cheth out plaine: but the cléerenesse or shining, doth denote the subtilenesse of skinne, and hu∣mours: and by the consequent, of the spirites: so that the like foreheade▪ doth argue a readie wit: but such be fayre spoken, vsing myrth and delecta∣ble wordes, to the ende of purchasing somewhat: for which cause aptly named worldly flatterers, and deceitfull through the moouing of the spirits. Such hauing wrincles playted or gathered to∣gither, in the foreheade right vp retching, especi∣ally vnto the angle of the nostrelles: are denoted to be persons full of care, and déepe thoughtes, bethinking waightie & serious matters, through the sadde humoure melancholie. Such hauing the foreheade parted (as it were) here and there, or the same rough in sight, or o∣therwise verie hollow in the midle (as if the same to a gutter dented in) with an euennesse through∣out, by a loasenesse of the skinne, appearing as
one smiling: be not onelye noted subtill, and ve∣rie craftie, but couetous and very neere or harde persons to deale withall: yea, this note perhaps in some, maye indicate foolishnesss. The foreheade muche awry formed, bearing out both high and rounde: doth declare suche a person to be weake of courage, neyther profitable to himselfe, nor to any other, impudent, lacking both reason and witte: as the gréeke authour Adamantius, writeth. The foreheade gathered and wrincled to a clowde, along the foreheade, or downe the midle of it towardes the nose, as if the skinne were plai∣ted: doth signifie such a person to be irefull, furi∣ous, and reuenging: applyed of the Philosopher
Aristotle, to the Bull, and Lyon. Such a person hauing a shadowed and lowe foreheade, with a pensiuenesse of looke: doth not onely argue a mourning and heauie minde, and giuen to much sadnesse, but sundrie times to bée irefull: if we maye credite the commentatour Gulielmus Nurice. That singuler Philosopher Ptolomeus paruus writeth, that the person hauing a long, high, and large foreheade, to be honest condicio∣ned, muche bearing, & suffering iniuries, yet of great likelyhode to increase in riches: this like, doth the learned Conciliatour reporte. The foreheade appearing euen and smoth, doth denote suche a person to be effeminate, both in courage and will: according to the agréement of Phylemon, Palemon, Loxius, Aristotle, Conciliatour, & the Gréeke author Adamantius. Micael Scotus vttereth, that whose foreheade in the temples, shall appéere as pued vp, through the grosenesse of fleshe: in suche maner, that the like person hath the chéekes filled with flesh: doth signifie him to be verye vnconstaunt of minde, prowde, irefull, and of a grose or dull witte: the reason of which is, the grosenesse of the temples, and fleshe: and of the awes and chéekes, doth ar∣gue the grosenesse of humours, and dominion of heate, in that the fame is cause of the irefulnesse,
and rudenesse of witte. Such did the Phisiogno∣mer alwayes sée, to haue a bigge heade, with the forme euill, and vnorderly proportioned. The foreheade that séemeth crooked in forme, and the same both high and rounde: doth signifie, or rather is an apparaunt note of folishnesse, and impudencie in that creature. These hitherto of the iudgement of the forhead: to which added (as matter agréeable) of the thrée principall lines, commonlye séene in most mens foreheades, with the skilfull iudgement of those, and other notes there appearing in sundrie subiectes: much furthering all suche as minde rightly to Phisi∣ognomate by this Arte.
The iudgement of certaine Lines seene in the foreheade. The. xvj. chapter. THe Phisiognomer reporteth, that there came vnto his vnderstāding and know∣ledge, a certaine skilfull Iewe, which coulde by Arte Phisiognomate and pro∣nounce great matters by the onelye sight of the face, but especially the foreheade: in diuining matters past, and to come. He also coulde vtter of riches, honours, and calamities: yea of the for∣tune and infortune, both of the Father and Mo∣ther, and many other matters besides. The same skill when he desired of ye Iew (by earnest suite to learne) he vtterly refused, and denied this request of his: so that forced hée was to vse sundrie que∣stions and disputations with him: by which at the length he perceiued and founde, that this per∣son was wholy ignoraunt of phisiognomy, so well Metaphoricall, as of the members, and planets: sauing onely by certaine lynes, which at the last through his industrie and labour conceyued. And in these (sayth the Phisiognomer) haue I founde and learned a singuler practise, & an infallible or most certaine truth, which I attained by a long time of practise. So that this worthie iewell, and most rare secrete, he purchased after the maner aboue vttered, not minding to hide the skill, but
rather furthering and vttering the same, to the vttermost of his power: which he thought most agréeable, to publish next after this chapter of the foreheade, as in a most apt place to insue. The instruction & knowledge of which is on this wise: first conceiue that in the flat & euen forhead shall you sometimes sée there seuerall lines, reat∣ching out the length of the foreheade: which after the minde of the Phisiognomer, doe importe and signifie thrée ages, that is to say, childhoode, youth and olde age. This childhoode doth he herè meane from byrth, vnto. xxv. yeares: and youth, from xxv. vnto fiftie yeares: and olde age, from fiftie to the terme & ende of naturall life: as the same hereafter shall playner appeare, in the condicion of the lines. But for a readier intelligence of the former wordes, conceyue this example here vn∣der demonstrated, which euidently to the eie vt∣tereth these thrée lines, representing the thrée ages, in most persons. To come vnto the matter,  two neather lines, being vnder the thrée principall, which make somtimes ye forme of an angle aboue: are attri∣buted, the one vnto Saturne, stāding on the right side, and that other vnto the Moone, appearing on the left side. Of these, that line also on the right side ascribed vnto the father: and the other on the left side, vnto the Mother.
So that in the same place, where these lines appeare whole, there (of knowledge) we affirme the good happe and fortune to be: especiallye, if these shewe and be strayte: in that such lines ap∣péering crooked, do eermore argue the contrary: and the same, eyther more or lesse, according to the strength, and weakenesse of them. Further, the thrée ages in all persons, are at∣tributed vnto the two vpper, and sixt planet Mercurie: as here vnder by this figure doth plainer appeare, liuely counterfeyted to the eye.
Of which the first, and neathermost towards the nose, is named Mercuries line, which repre∣senteth the first age: for that in such an age and time, all persons then be aptest to conceyue and attaine both learning, sciences, & handie craftes: yea, this is named of most men, the floorishing age, although the same somewhat wanton, and vnconstant. The seconde line vpwarde (named Iupiters) representeth the second age, which the Phisiogno∣mer nameth, the time of veneration, and wise∣dome: for that in the same age are the large
showe of decent condicions, & liberallitie vttered: yea both the stabilitie in religion, & discretions in men, and their laudable actions. Further, where vertues are embraced, vices left and detested. Where also is (in men) a fruitefull and commen∣dable witte vttered: where besides is the mother of honestie indicated: all which by Iupiters lyne are (after the agréement of sundrie writers) re∣presented, and expressed. The thirde line (after the minde of the Phisi∣ognomer) representeth a thirde age: which of all men is knowne, to be the time of sadnesse, and couetousnesse: yea the wearing out of pleasurs, and the ende of naturall life. If this line be for∣tunate, the same then doth indicate an increase by husbandry, lande, howses, and all such matters which appertaine vnto the office of olde age: so that to such a thyrde lyne, are all these agréeable, which are attributed to Saturne. Some perhaps will argue and say to the Phi∣siognomer, that this is the age of deuotion: to which I thus aunswere, that olde men, in verye déede be then more inclined and bent to serue God séeing that age is then dissolued, and become impotent vnto the wanton pleasure, & luxuries: through which these are the more prone, and dis∣posed vnto prayer, and the faythfull seruing of God▪
The time (to come to the matter) of youth, is knowne to be naturall, & not through endeuour, for which cause, a more affiaunce and trust, is to be had and founde in them for the more part. So that in the same place, where this line is broken, there the infortune is: as eyther sicke∣nesse, impouerishment, or any other hinderance. If the two neather lynes (next the nose) be whole, and that these, forme as it were an angle and cone aboue: doe then denote (as the Phisi∣ognomer hath many times experienced) that such persons to haue a notable fortune vnto the attai∣ning and purchasing both of riches, and promoti∣ons. Although few such there be, which possesse and enioye the lyke note. Further, the sayde two neather lines, vnder the thrée principall, are thus applyed: that is, the right line vnto the planet Saturne, and the left line, vnto the Moone. The right line also is at∣tributed to the father, but the left line to the mo∣ther. By which vnderstande that according to the presence and forme of the lines: so iudge of the fortune and infortune of that person. But when the sayde two lines, doe retch and méete into the forme of a triangle, and that there appéereth an ouerthwart line stretched and cros∣sing aboue the nose: yet in such maner, that the same formeth not with the others, a perfite try∣angle:
doth then denote a competent fortune vnto suche a person, and this according to the strength of the lynes there séene. For where these lines are broken of, lacking, or crooked: there they wytnesse and signifie the infortune to succéede▪ If a lyne appeareth in the myddle, vnder the lynes, in the Dyameter of the nose: doth then argue a singuler fortune, and the great increase of ryches. The Philosopher Ptholomeus paruus wry∣teth, that if one lyne, reacheth along the fore∣head, as from the right side vnto the left, doth then promise such a person (after nature) to liue thrée score yeres. If two lynes shall the lyke stretch a long the foreheade: doe then promise such a person to lyue vnto the age of thrée score and ten yeres. If thrée lynes the lyke, then vnto foure score yeares. If fower lynes the lyke stretched a long the foreheade, doe then signifie foure score and ten yeres. And if fiue lynes the lyke stretched a long, doe then declare a hundred yeres: as the learned Ptholomeus wryteth. If the thrée lynes aboue described, are crossed of other lynes, doe then denote hatred, troubles, and persecutions, for the more part. If the sayde crossings of the lynes, shall make
an angle, and that one lyne be bigger then the o∣ther: in such maner that the same stretcheth ouer the angle aboue the nose: doth then signifie that such a person hath enimies, but they shall not greatly harme him. But further of this forme, of the angle crossed, maye a man learne and vn∣derstande, in any worke of Paulmestrie: that vttereth matter of the quadrangle of the hande: as touching friends and enimyes: And euen the same is wytnessed, by the signes of the forehead. If neyther angle, crosse, or ouerthwart lyne, shall appeare on the forehead, doth then signifie a luckie continuaunce and glorie in workes, and a most happie estate, vnto the ende of lyfe. The sharpe crossing of lynes, to the maner and forme of a pinnacle: doth then demonstrate both housholde, and familiar enimies, or enimies of the owne kindred: as Morbeth the Cardinall wryteth. If any two lynes of the forhead, are néere ioy∣ning togither, in any part: doe then demonstrate discorde, and contention, with many persons. The comlinesse and good proportion of the thrée princypall lynes of the forehead: doth denote a worthy fame, and singuler wyt, as sundrie Au∣thors wryte, and the same affirmeth the Phisiog∣nomer. If many lynes are discerned in the foreheade,
then (so appearing) those are named the sisters of the three principall lynes: as wryteth the former Morbeth. If but one line only, is séene or doth ap∣péere in the forehead, then according to the maner and forme of the same, & place where that appea∣reth, with the age of the person, and dominion of the Planet, must a man like iudge. If no lyne at all shal appeare in the forhead: then by reason, no iudgement at all can be pro∣nounced. When in the breaking, those lynes appeare crooked in this maner, as the example here vnder of the one playner expresseth: doth then signifie the greater infortune to that person. As the lyke by obseruation was noted, in a certaine Italian, and sundrie others.
If any of the lynes appeareth crooked or ben∣ded vpwarde as a Bowe: doth then indicate the greater infortune: But if any line downewarde stretched, then the lesser infortune, is signified by the same: as Mantuanus and Cocles wryte. When in the crooking, any of the lynes shall be crossed, especially Marses lyne: doth then signi∣fie violent death, vnto that person: and this (ac∣cording to the positure, and place of the lyne) shall like be iudged to happen eyther in the seconde, or thirde age. The veynes verye bigge appearing, in the forehead: doe denote the excéeding qualitie of choller, and that suche a person to be excéeding yrefull. These hytherto of the iudgement, of the thrée principall lynes, appearing and to be séene (in a maner) in the foreheads of most subiects: which diligently obserued, and noted by due circum∣spection, shall in the ende finde thys rare and Golden secret, hid a long tyme from manye good wyttes, yea and of these sufficiently skilfull in o∣ther laudable Artes. And that this Iewell maye not appeare mutilate, and vnpersite, for the lack of more principles and instructions to further the same: I intend to publish a singular treatise very rare, and knowne but to fewe students, intituled Metoposcopie, or by a more knowne name, the
vewe and beholding of all the lynes appearing in the forehead, beginning orderlye from Saturnes lyne, vnto the Moones, written by a most lear∣ned Mathematican & Phisition, named Thad∣daeus Hagecius of Hagek: to which added vnto the number of thrée score examples, lyuely coun∣terfayted: that he by diligent trauaile, noted and obserued: which no doubt will much helpe, and further those, that minde to iudge on subiects, by the ayde of those faythfull instructions, and liue∣ly examples: published in this perfite maner, by that worthy man aboue named: for recompence of which trauayles, he in my (opinion) well de∣serueth immortall memorie, among other of the learned Philosophers: which commendation and oppinion of mine, I referre to the wisedome of the readers, at the comming forth of the treatise: in the meane time I wishe the readers, to vse these instructions aboue vttered. Next followeth the iudgement of the ouerbrowes, as a part belonging to the forhead: by which sin∣gular matter may be learned and knowne.
The forme and iudgement of the ouerbrowes. The. xvij. chapter. THe learned Phylosopher named Nuncius naturae, writeth in the second booke (de par∣tibus Animalium) that the ouerbroowes, and eie lyddes were ordayned for speciall helps to the face, as to ornate, and beséeme the same, with the auoyding of other inconueniences. The place of the ouerbroowes (as writeth Co∣cles) is a part of the foreheade, and formed of na∣ture in that seate, where the bones knit & ioyne togither. The ouerbroowes also were ordayned to man (as reporteth Thaddaeus) both for profite, and comelinesse sake: these for profit, that the moi∣sture
and sweat falling from the forehead, might (as a penthouse to the eies) so cast off the moisture destilling, and lyke the humours and moysture falling from the heade (through the same eei∣sing) shoote them of, without harme to the eies. The like wordes in a maner, vttereth the Phisi∣ognomer Cocles. The ouerbroowes (as reporteth Cocles) were appoynted by God and Nature, in the knitting and ioyning of the bones: for that in many olde persons they grow and waxe so long, that of ne∣cessitie, and for comelynesse sake, they must be clypped. The causes of the heares (as writeth the Phi∣siognomer) are noted to be fower: as the effici∣ent, the materiall, the formall, and finall. The ef∣ficiēt cause of the heares, is procured two waies: the one is naturall heate, which eleuateth the hu∣mours from the moysture of the bodye, and sen∣deth or carieth them foorth vnto the skinny parts. The other is the colde ayre, which both thickneth and coagulateth those humours, and reduceth them into the forme of heares. The materiall cause, is two wayes, the first is farre off, and is the corporall moysture: the second cause is neere, and is the earthly vapour or humour, which is e∣uaporated from the moysture. The formal cause, is the forme of the heares, as the length and
roundenesse of them. The finall cause, is ye diuer∣sitie of heares, as to the decking and beséeming of the bodie, like as are the heares of the ouer∣broowes, of which out intent is to write fully and at large in this chapter. The ouerbroowes haue a hidde vertue, to ex∣presse the affections of the minde: of which this prouerbe that the person rayseth or lifteth vp the ouerbrowe: ment by the same, that such a one to be arrogant, and prowde. And suche appearing lyke, doth the learned Thaddaeus, rightly name hawty, and sowre of countinaunce. The right ouerbroowe is more raysed, and ben∣ded, than the left: in that all the partes throughe the cause of moouing, doe decline and leane, vnto the vpper sight. The right kidney in lyke maner is knowne to be higher placed, than is the left: as the abouesayde Thaddaeus writeth. Such hauing the ouerbroowes erye hearie, be noted péeuish, and ouerthwart in wordes: the reason is, for that the much quantitie of heares, doth argue the great plentye of hote and addust matter, through the cause of heate and adustion: of which insueth, or is procured, the vncomelinesse of speech, through ye swiftnesse of words, and hasty talke. Their maners in like condicion be vnto∣warde, and eluishe: séeing the vnderstanding and worthy behauiour, is not caused, but through a
temperament, and depriuing of adustion. For of the great adustion, is the braine euermore heated: or a light cause heateth, through the notable heating: and by the consequent, suche be clatterers, and furious: and they neyther thincke, nor can thincke and direct in their words a good or right discourse. The ouerbroowes stretched vpwarde, if of the heares discende vnto the beginning of the nose, and vpwarde eleuated vnto the temples, doe de∣note the dominion of heate and drith: and suche are knowne to be craftie, & wicked of condicions. Conciliatore writeth, that whose ouerbrowes appeare whole, and not seauered of heares be∣twéene eche, are noted heauie and sadde persons, applyed vnto the similitude of the affection, and
passion: as both Aristotle, Albertus, and others reporte. Morbeth the Cardinall writeth, that whose o∣uerbrowes are stretched vnto the nose, and rech vpwarde to the temples, in such maner, that the heares spreade to eyther side of the browes: bée not onely noted simple, vnshamefaste, enuious, foolish, without fraude or deceyte: but vnsatiable and gluttinous, applyed to the Sowe. The ouerbrowes blacke, not much crooked, and deuided with a space, are most commended: for such ouerbrowes hadde our Sauiour Iesus Christ, and the chaste virgin his mother: as the singuler Nicephorus Preacher, and chiefe pa∣stoure of Constantinople church, and writer also of the ecclesiasticall hystories reporteth, in the end of his first booke. The ouerbrowes thinne, and of a meane big∣nesse, doe argue a moderation in that creature, and the goodnesse of humours: for suche hauing the like ouerbrowes, are noted to be ingenious, and searchers of déepe secrets: as both the Phisi∣ognomer Cocles, the learned Philemon, Concili∣atore, Albertus, and others agrée in the same. The Phisiognomer Cocles reporteth, that when the ouerbrowes appeare thicke of heares, and so plentifull or aboundaunt, that these (as the Phi∣losopher writeth) doe discende to the beginning
of the nose, and appeare through the same whol formed togither: doe then signifie great adustion: and such hauing like ouerbroowes, are melancho∣licke, and of an euill nature: yea wicked persons, and sometimes théeues, rauishers of maydens, Murderers, but deceyuers alwayes: and to bée briefe, all vices, and wickednesse, are comprehen∣ded and knowne in thse persons. Of which she natine Philosopher, in his mother tongue, wrote these warning verses, which folowe. NOn te fidare, de le gointae cigliae ne de le folte, se guercia lo luce, Che chi le porta, guarda non te piglie. impio danimo, ladro, falso, efello,
Cum bel parlare, suo tempo conduce, rapace lupo, cum vista dagnello. Non fu mai guercio, cum lalma perfecta, che non portasse, de malicia schermo, Sempre seguendo, la superba secta. These hitherto, Franciscus Asculanus. In these verses aboue noted, doth the Phy∣siognomer declare and report, that the squynt or gogle eyed persons, to be gréedie catchers, coue∣tous, dissemblers, and malicious: and in a maner so euill inclyned, as such hauing the ouerbrowes ioyned, through the heares thicke growing be∣twéene: and the lyke maye be sayde of those ha∣uing but one eye, so that the other partes are a∣gréeing. And generally these thinke all euils, if we may credite the Physiognomer. This gogling of the eyes, is caused manye wayes, as Auicen wryteth (tertia tertij capitu∣lo. 28. de strabositate) where he vttreth, that som∣times the gogling of the eyes, is caused through the mollifying and loosenesse of certayne La∣certes. &c. and after the same he reporteth, that this gogling is sometimes caused through a dry∣nesse, as the like hapneth in sharpe agues. &c. and this (sayth the Physiognomer) serueth aptest vinō our purpose: in that the same corroborateth the
drynesse, which is cause of the heares, and t causes also are assocyated, vnto the procuring of a wicked effect. And I neuer saw (sayth the Phy∣siognomer) the goggle eyed person, wythout a mightie heape of vices, full of fraudulent ini∣quities, and contumelious: and the like doe I af∣firme of the one eyed persons, hauing the other notes aunswering, as aboue taught. The auncyent Rasys affirmeth, that such ha∣uing much heare on the ouerbrowes, are noted full of thoughts, and very pesie, or most com∣monly sadde: and their spéeche vnséemely▪ and grose. So that this text confirmeth choller a∣dust, and melancholie humours: and is the cause also of many thoughts, and that such muse
and be thinke great matters. A like note the Phi∣siognomer diligently marked, in sundrie rob∣bers by the high way (as aboue reported) by the sayde Cocles. And such also are deorers of Maydens, théeues, and murderers for the more part▪ if their faces be couered with a palenesse, or wholy pale: and on sundrie like formed, the Phisiognomer pronounced iudgement by order of lawe, and death to insue: which not long af∣ter hapned, to the admiration of such which knewe of the same. An example of a notable théefe, and ingenious in stealing and robbing, who in the Physiogno∣mers tyme, was hanged for his wicked factes: doth he here place by the waye, for the better fur∣thering of such, as minde to iudge by the Arte, on
subiects like proportioned. Thys person, (to come to the matter) was figured, on thys wise: he was of a meane stature, leane and slender of body, & proportioned in the▪ members and partes of the same. The heares of his head black, cur∣led, thinne and long▪ the forheade square, and in the middle euen, the heares of the ouerbrowes bended, and thicke, and in the discending ioyned in the cone of the nose. The eyes were meane of forme, déepe standing in the heade, hauing glystering and firie spottes: the cheeks somewhat bearing out, through the helpe and meanes of the bones there placed. The face was long, the nose meane, as the same protensed vnto the mouth, and chollerick of forme, the part vnder the nose foucated: the mouth small, the lyppes thinne, and the neather (as the same were down∣ward) folded. The chinne extending to a sharp∣nesse, or in a maner sharpe downeward, & on the top foucated, and rounde, the bearde small and thinne. The colour of the face was whyte, shed or couered with a certayne palnosse, his pae in going like to the Pecockes, and that in a soft maner. His stature after nature, was rather vpright, than stouping or crooked: yet crookedly did this person walke by hymselfe, as one mu∣sing by the waye. His legges were slender, the féete small and fine, the héeles little and very flat:
he went verie séemely, and neate in apparell. The shoulder poyntes behinde, were somewhat bigge, and a little crooked. The handes fayre and comely, with the fingers long, and paulmes long. He was a person (by report of the Physiogno∣mer) of fewe wordes, yet quick of spéeche: and his actions for the more part, were done with much expedition, through a passing wyt, great boldnesse and courage▪ In as much as vnto the Physiognomy of the Planets, the Phisiognomer affirmeth, that the blacknesse of the heares of the heade, and thinnesse of them, and cryspidnesse, and quicknesse of spéeche, and motion of the body, and nose protensed and chollerick or hooked, these indicated that Marses vertue to beare swaye in him: for as much as in the respect of bodye, he had the breast large, and shoulder pointes bigge: which togither were a note of hotenesse▪ in that person. The thinnesse of the heares, signified a drynesse to be in him. His pase musingly, or as one full of thought, with the eye liddes drawne or gathered togither, and ouerbrowes ioyning, through the thicknesse of heares ouer the cone of the nose: the eyes hollow or déepe standing, and Peacockes pase. The eyes thus lowe situated did denote a Saturnine disposition in him: and thys especiallye the fewnesse of wordes, and hardnesse in vttering them. The longnesse of
face, with the chéekes like figured, as aboue vf∣tered: the lippes thinne, and colour of the face wanne, indicated a Mercuriall disposition, the forhead especially square. The ouerbrowes arcu∣ated, the lippes small, the sharpnesse of chinne, and the Fossils of them: the decking or euen dres∣sing of the heares, and fine apparelling of the whole bodye: fine féete, with the héeles small and flatte, indicated a veneriall disposition. The glys∣tering eyes and spottie, were by reason of the dryeth of the Animall spirites consisting in the brayne: For that the same fyrinesse and adustion procureth men (without the great grace of God) vnto theftes & robberies. Saturne also increaseth drynesse in that person: of the Sunne, the Moone and Iupiter I wryte not, in that I remembred not the notes agréeable, at the wryting of this. It suffiseth vs (sayth the Phisiognomer) that we onely wryte, howe Saturne and Mars beared swaye, and procured this person vnto theftes, Venus vnto gaming: & Mercurie was in place, in his genyture, which caused him to be ingeni∣ous. And hereof it succéeded, that this person had a small and thinne beard. To conclude, this con∣ceaue that the members which possesse a colde and moyste matter, the Phisiognomer attrybu∣teth to the Moone: the members which inioye a hote and drie qualitie, he applyeth to Mars: the
members which containe a colde and drie nature he applyeth to Saturne: the hote and moyst to Iupiter: the hote and drie more temperate to the Sunne. The hote and moyst members vn∣compact, and not much solyde and rounde, nor very loase, nor much erected and cléere, doth he attribute to Venus. The members long not protensed, and slender, are of Mercurie. Of the Saturnine and Martiall slendernesse, doth the Phisiognomer here omit to write, willing the iudgers in this Arte, diligentlye to consider the Saturnine lines, both in the foreheade and hand: and to learne the Phisiognomie of the Planets, before they enterprise to iudge on any subiect. In that the formes, colours, clenly decking of parts, & all other speciall members of the body, ae to be fully consydered and beholden: afore anye min∣deth to phisiognomate, on the proper indiuiduate. The Phisiognomer Cocles here vttereth an o∣ther example, yet easier to be conceyued, and vn∣derstanded of all persons, than the other aboue taught, which is on this wise. A certaine Gouer∣nour, named Valentinus Caeser, the sonne of a mightie man when he gouerned, which was a murderer, a great deceyuer, a breaker of true fayth, a spoyler of women, and a most great ly∣ar: had the eyes glystering, which signified that person to be gouerned of Mars: in the night
time he exercised reuels, banketing, and women: and this he folowed in the time of his most seri∣ous affayres: he séeledome gaue care or hearde any of his subiectes causes. He was a man giuen to be solitarie, and full of thoughts and musing, sometimes prodigall, & of no stable religion: he also was couetous, and fearefull, yet bolde in wordes, and indued with a singuler eloquence: in diuers publicke matters to be hearde, or in places of iustice he threatned: and this caused, tho∣rowe the disposition of Saturne and Mars, as a∣boue vttered. He was a person, hauing a most
detestable witte: especially about wicked busi∣nesses, which procéeded of Saturne, and Mars. The colour of the skinne was wan, and had an aquiline nose, which witnessed the disposition and nature of Mars. But at the méeting of the thrée vpper planets in Cancer, dyed that mightie man aboue noted: whome some reporte, was Pope A∣lexander the sixt, which seemed to be an enimie in ecclesiasticall matters (but in what maner) I cannot iustlye report. To be briefe, about the time of the death of this Pope, hapning at the great coniunction in Cancer, lost this man his gouernement, and sore vexed with a gréeuous sicknesse. And thus aboue his stocke and kindred aduan∣ced, was at that time infortunated, and throwne into prison. This person was most vile in déedes, and bolde in woordes in that the Satuurnine dys∣position bare sway in him. And of this it came to passe, that he was so great a dissembler, and de∣ceyuer of many: for when he was come vnto his vttermost cyment, he vanished as a smoke or va∣pour: in that Mercurie of the Alchymisters, was euill fixed and coniealed. But the salt Armoni∣acke, and salt Alkali, were seperated from the iuyces of the herbes. Such which be accustomed to weare gergious apparell, many  and Iewels; like to
time he exercised reuels, banketing, and women: and this he folowed in the time of his most seri∣ous affayres: he séeledome gaue care or hearde any of his subiectes causes. He was a man giuen to be solitarie, and full of thoughts and musing, sometimes prodigall, & of no stable religion: he also was couetous, and fearefull, yet bolde in wordes, and indued with a singuler eloquence: in diuers publicke matters to be hearde, or in places of iustice he threatned: and this caused, tho∣rowe the disposition of Saturne and Mars, as a∣boue vttered. He was a person, hauing a most
detestable witte: especially about wicked busi∣nesses, which procéeded of Saturne, and Mars. The colour of the skinne was wan, and had an aquiline nose, which witnessed the disposition and nature of Mars. But at the méeting of the thrée vpper planets in Cancer, dyed that mightie man aboue noted: whome some reporte, was Pope A∣lexander the sixt, which seemed to be an enimie in ecclesiasticall matters (but in what maner) I cannot instlye report. To be briefe, about the time of the death of this Pope, hapning at the great coniunction in Cancer, lost this man his gouernement, and sore vexed with a gréeuous sicknesse. And thus aboue his stocke and kindred aduan∣ced, was at that time infortunated, and throwne into prison. This person was most vile in déedes, and bolde in woordes in that the Sature dys∣position bare sway in him. And of this it came to passe, that he was so great a dissembler, and de∣ceyuer of many: for when he was come vnto his vttermost cyment, he vanished as a smoke or va∣pour: in that Mercurie of the Alchymisters, was euill fixed and coniealed. But the salt Armoni∣acke, and salt Alkali, were seperated from the iuyces of the herbes. Such which be accustomed to weare gergious appll▪ many  and Iewls▪ like to
women: or that be much delighted to weare and vse swéete powders, and pleasaunt Pomanders: are reported to be spiced with the disposition and nature of Venus. Whose heares of the ouerbroowes are descen∣ded downe warde from part of the nose, and ret∣ched vpwarde from part of the temples: is noted vnshamefast, and dull of wyt. For the vnshame∣fastnesse, procéedeth through a furious hotnesse, and ouermuch moouing: & the dulnesse, through the same cause: as Rasis, Palemon, Loxius, A∣damantius, and sundrie others affirme, and the Physiognomer with them. The ouerbroowes thinne of heares, and of a meane bignesse, doe insinuate a temperament,
through the goodnesse of humours: and through the seperating from verie much adustion. And such by report of the Physiognomer, are noted ingenious, and searchers of déepe secrets. That worthy man Rasis reporteth, that the ouerbroowes long, doe signifie arrogancie, and vnshame fastnesse in that creature: the cause, did the Phisiognomer aboue vtter. Conciliatore wryteth, that▪ when the heares of the ouerbroowes are stretched vnto the tem∣ples: suche a person is knowne to be nastie or vncleanly: and of some noted to be a mocker, and dissembler: which the Phisiognomer séemeth not to haue noted in his time. Certayne affirme, that the ouerbrowes long, doe argue suche a person to be arrogant, leache∣rous, and vnshamefast: which matters truely are increased, for the more part in olde age. As the Physiognomer▪ Cocles noted, in sundrie indiuiduates. The learned Auicen wryteth, (primo de animalibus) that when the heares of the ouer∣browes descend by incuruation or crooking, from part of the nose, doth signifie a sharpe, that is, a readie wyt and ingenious, in wicked and detesta∣ble matters or businesses. When the heares be stretched and crooke, to the outside of the eye cor∣ners lachrimall: such a person (by report of the
Physiognomer) is noted, to exercise iesting, and to play the iester, and to haue his felicitie there∣in: except education, otherwyse contrarie the same. The heares of the ouerbroowes, if they shall be stretched, and lye so straite as a lyne in length, and these long: doe demonstrate an euill, weake, and feminine minde: applyed by the lyke, to wo∣men. And these maner of eye browes (sayth the Physiognomer) doe I attribute to Venus: and such he sawe (for the more part) to be Cynedes: or else very lurutious. The auncient Palemon wryteth, that if the heares of the forehead or browes, be stretched vn∣to the middle of the nose, and that thicke appea∣ring, but vnto the partes which consist on eyther side, little: is an argument of magnanimitie, and of most singuler vertue of minde, in that crea∣ture. The heares in the same place stretched strayte out, doe denote such a person to be feare∣full, yet indued with deceytes, if we may credite Palemon. Auicen (primo de animalibus) reporteth, that when the ouerbrowes are stretched accor∣ding to a right lyne, doth signifie a femynine: minde: he also wryteth, that the heares of the o∣uerbrowes hanging downewarde, to signifie an: enuious person: the ouerbrowes crooking, doe▪
denote a weake minde, and féeble courage. Thē ouerbrowes so much crooking, that they appeare almost ioyned to the nose, doe denote a subtill, and an ingenious person. Such ouerbrowes (sayth the Physiognomer) declare a studyous per∣son: and applyed for that reason, to the Planet Mercurie. When the ouerbroowes shall be thinne, in the dyametre commensurated, & that these are large: this person (by report of the Phisiognomer) is noted, to be of a quick and readie vnderstanding. Some wryte, that if the ouerbrowes bended, are ioyned togither at the cone of the nose, doe argue a subtill, and a studious person. If these there knit (by the agréement of all wryters) doe wyt∣nesse a sadde person, yet not the wysest, as the Phisiognomer noted the same. Here the Physiognomer propowneth a so∣lempne Probleme, that may be demaunded, why the heares of the ouerbrowes, are more increa∣sed in olde age, than in youth: to which he thus séemeth to aunswere, that seing the generatiue vapours of the heares of the ouerbrowes, which are caried or sent forth, by the ioyntes of the bones, and in youth are compact, and well ioy∣ned, through the tenacitie of moysture: for that cause the vapours can not haue their free passage forth, seing the penetration in them at that age
is prohibited. But the moysture of the selfe same ioyned in olde age, is consumed and dried: wher∣of the bones are caused more open, and the va∣pours frée doe consequently ascende, through which the heares of the ouerbroowes are then procured to growe long. The heares of the ouerbroowes thicke, and so long stretched out, that they séeme in a maner to shadowe the sight: doe denote in that person, the excesse of heate. The ouerbrowes thin of heares, and the places much fleshie: doe signifie a flowe, and dull capacity, and coldnesse ruling in the prin∣cipall members: as the learned Thaddaeus wryteth. The heares of the ouerbrowes néere touch∣ing, and in a maner ionned togither, are noted to
be the woorste condition of all others: in that the broowes like formed, doe argue a wicked person, full of mischiefe, vngracious workes and déedes, and gyuen to wicked Artes. As the like, the lear∣ned Ioan. Indagines affirmeth, that he obserued in sundrie olde Witches, brought to the stake to be burned, that had the like ouerbroowes. The learned Physition Thaddaeus reporteth, that he obserued a ioly Capitayne, a farre traueyler, yea a Pyrate on the Sea, and rauisher of Maydens (in the Citie named Nymburge) thrée yeres be∣fore, he was cruelly slayne of the Lartarians: who had the like ouerbrowes, with the eyes glis∣tering, and fyrie spottes in them, hauing also an yrefull and fierce countinaunce, and wanne of colour in the face. That the forme of this person, maye neerer be vnderstanded and learned of the professors of the Arte, conceane this figure here afore demonstrated liuely to the eye. The heares of the ouerbroowes white (as re∣porteth Ioan. Indagines) doe argue an effeminate person, lightly beléeuing and foolishe. If the croo∣king of the heares declyneth vnto the temples, and vnto the bossing out of the chéekes, doth de∣note such a person to be negligent and foolishe. The ouerbrowes, if they retch out long, and ap∣peare thick of heares: doe signifie a person medi∣tating, and bethinking mighty matters, as the
Phisiognomer reporteth. The Physiognomer. Cocles here placesh an other example, of a certaine person that he noted (in his time) which by reason of the ouermuch hotnesse consisting in him, was knowne to be a a foole full of wordes, furious, yrefull, euill ton∣gued, and vnpacient, whose positure and forme of partes was on this wise. He had the heade pinaple like, the voyce lowde and sownding, quick of speech, and in stature small, musculous, San∣guine, yet tending vnto choller. The eares were great, the forehead bearing or bossing out, after a round maner, the ouerbrowes ioyned togither, and much hearie, the eies small, hollow standing, glistering, and fierie: the nose flatte and holowe
in the middle: the chéekes bonie, and somewhat flat: the mouth great, the lips thicke, and folded or turned outwarde: the téeth bigge: the chinne sharpe, and longe: the face long: the neck grosse, and shorte: small was the distaunce, betwéene the heart, and braine: by which appeareth, that the skill of the Anothomye, is very necessarie in this Arte. The shoulder poyntes were great and e∣leuated, with a largenesse of the breast: the part afore (named Methaphrenon) was eminent and fleshie, the Hipocondria great: the legges shorte and musculous: the armes long, and grose or bigge, the féete bigge, and articulated: the héeles great: the soales of the féete holowe: a swiftnesse in pace, and treading short. Hée bare the heade (by turning hyther and thyther) after the maner of the Hart: ouer all the bodye, he was most hea∣rie: hauing a redde colour in the face: which not∣withstanding was a darcke ferie. In the hands he hadde the Cardiacke, and middle naturall line, very large seperated, and were most redde: with the mensall line naked, and alone: in the paulme of the handes, were onelye thrée lines: with the rest of the tubercles, and other lines infortunated and depressed: that denoted a most beluine or bru∣tish nature, to consist in that person. For as much as Michael Scotus hath friuolusly written of the ouerbroowes, for that cause doth
the Phisiognomer Coeles, wittingly ouerpasse his sayings in this Chapter: considering they doe so farre disagrée, from the liuely Arte. And the learned Ioannes Picus, greatly discommendeth this Scotus, affirming him to haue written no weightie matters of importaunce, but rather tri∣fles, and of these full of superstition. These hy∣therto of the ouerbroowes, with the liuely exam∣ples described of ye Phisiognomer, much furthe∣ring all such as be delighted in the Arte: next to this doth he vtter, both of the vses, and iudgement of the eie liddes. The forme and iudgement of the eie liddes, and heares of the liddes. The. xviij. chapter.
ISydore writeth, that nature ordayned the co∣uer of the eies, or eie liddes, to defende the eies from outwarde harmes: as from flyes, moths dust, strawes, and such like, that might otherwise fall into them. The eie liddes also be the couers, with which the eies are couered: and (of Isydore named) the eie liddes, in that these ouer and hide the eies in satie. For the same cause, the like is to be learned and vnderstanded of the nature, and diuersitie of the heares: as afore in the other chapter, of the ouerbrooines. Here in this chap∣ter, hath the Phisiognomer diligently gathe∣red togither, the sayings of the learned Concili∣atore, and others, although but a fewe notes of them were to be founde. The eie liddes, which on the eie aproched nigh the angle, in the lacrimall part, if the ame be ex∣céeding small and thinne: doth denote the dispo∣sition of the maner, and malice of the forme. The cause of ye smalnesse of heares, doth litle the mat∣ter indicate. The thinnesse of the heares, doth argue the sub∣tilnesse of matter, that is, of the humours, and the dominion of choller. Such are knowne to be ma∣licious, vicious & wicked: yet consider diligently, all the other passions of choller. When that place shalbe fleshier, like to the Rites eien, then doth the same denote craftinesse, and an euill hotnesse, and
is also a chollericke foole. For which cause (sayth the Phisiognomer) beware of the chollericke, not regenerated of the holy Ghost. The lacrymall or inner corner of the eie, when the same is little and narrowe: doth signifie a craftie person, as Auicen reporteth, primo de Animalibus. The vpper eie lidde bearing out, rather blowne vp: then full appearing, and somewhat declining ouer the eie: doth argue that person to be hawne and disdainfull. If the eie lyddes doe doeline downewards, full and very thicke, especially when they be couered with a rednesse: doth indicate such a person to be a ruinous and wastefull drunkarde. The reason is, for that these signifie a weakenesse of the eies▪
and by the consequent, of the braine. So that through such a weakelsesse, the like persons feare the drinking of wine. As the same, Phisiognomer obserued and noted in many, haunting tauernes, and such oftē drinking Maulmesiē: of which one, the like was a certaine Countryman of his, be∣ing an exceeding quarter and drinker of Wines. That if the neather eye lidde shall be small, a narrow drawne togyther, in such maner, that it couereth but the whyte of the eye: doth denote the body to be gouerned of a drinesse of humours. If this like hapneth in any cause; of verte sharpe passions vnlesse nature hath so wrought the same (as Hypocrates wytnesseth) doth then pronounte death at hande.
The auncient Rasis reporteth, that when the heares of the eye liddes (so named of the bea∣ting of them) doe crooke downewards, or be na∣turally wrythed vnto one part: doe indicate such a person to be craftie, and a lyar. Why the liddes are placed on the eyes, doth Gulielmus Nurice thus define: that by them the condition and qualitie of the eyes, might the rea∣dier and better be defended and preserued from the outwards matters: euen as the sheath; on a sworde: for that cause, such a person which hath a grosser or thicker eie lidde, doth further sée from him: for as much as these preserue the light of the eyes, from the outwarde heate, and cold. And of this, manye beastes sée further off, than men:
and this caused, through the grossenesse or thick∣nesse of the eye liddes. The corners of the eyes, when they be dela∣ted, doe then argue a sicknesse or disease, of the eyes. And if these haue anye fleshie bearing out, doe denote dronkennesse: especially when the eies are bearing out, and the eye liddes be drye: as in many the like, the Physiognomer hath obserued and noted. The vpper eye liddes, couering the neather: doe argue (by the report of Conciliatore, Alber∣tus, and others) long lyfe. The corners of the eyes dylated and large, through the cause of a smyling eye: doth indicate a leacherous person: and this note, applyed (of the Philosopher) to Venus. The often beating, or panting of the eye lids, doth argue such a person to be feareful, and vexed often with a frensinesse: as Palemon, Loxius, and sundry others report. The eye liddes thinne (and in health) are best commended: For these declare, a lawdable minde, nighest approching to God, through an vpright behauiour. The iudgement of the spases, betweene the eye brovves: after the minde of Michaell Scotus. The xix. chapter.
THe spaces betwéene the eye broowes, néere ioy∣ning togither: declare that person to be a nig∣gard, enuious, verye much desirous of bewtifull things, hauing a straunge fortune, and more ri∣gorous than gentle in behauiour. The spaces betweene the eye broowes, if they be large: doe denote such a person to be of a dull capacitie, yet of a great boldnesse, verie trustie in neede, of a perfite & an vpright friendship: these hitherto Michael Scotus: if we may credite the agréement of these sayings. The nature and iudgement of the mouings of the eyes. The. xx. chapter.
THe Phisiognomers confirme their sayings, by the signes and notes of the eyes: in that the notes which are discerned in the eyes, be fi∣gures and vtterers of the affections of the heart. The eye is the instrumentall member of sight, whose qualitie is moyste, in a rounde forme figu∣red, with a certayne playnesse: and formed with seauen coates, and three humours, as wryteth the learned Sillanús (super nono Almansoris.) The passions of the minde, as trouble, mirth, loue, hatred, and such like: are especially decla∣red and vttered by the eyes: after the agréement of all wryters. The especiall colours of the eyes, are knowne to be foure: as the black, whytishe, variable, and
gray: as the worthy Canamusalis (in libro ocu∣lorum, cap. tertio) reporteth, and the like Ie∣suhalis. The rounde forme of the eyes, is better mo∣uing, perfiter, and vncorruptibler, through the lacking of corners: as al the learned agrée in the same. The cornered eyes, haue very often superflu∣ous moysture standing in them: as wryteth the singular Constantine, in libro oculorum. A perfite forme and condition of the eyes, doth denote an honest person: as wryteth Guli∣elmus Nurice, Conciliatore, Albertus & others. The eyes bigge & emynent, doe argue weake∣nesse, and a feeble courage: in that these be so cau∣sed
bigge, through the much aboundance of moy∣sture of the brayne: in which is coldnesse, that sheadeth a long by the members, and extingui∣sheth the bloud. So that such a brayne is colder, and moyster, than it ought to be: and in such a body should be the lack both of naturall bloude, and courage. And as the spirit and store of bloud, procureth boldnesse in men, euen so doth the cold and moyst qualitie, contrarie worke and cause fearefulnesse. Rasis reporteth that the eyes emynent & bigge: doe argue such a creature to be fearefull: and ap∣plyed to the Hare, Cunny, and Frogge. The eyes outward extended, doe denote (after the minde of Rasis) such a person to be foolishe: but the eies déepe standing, doe denote such a per∣son to be subtill, and of euill condicions, through the part of the wicked qualitie: yet such be of a good and sharpe sight, and sée further, than the emynent eyes doe: in that the visible spirite is more gathered in the déepe eyes, and the seing vertue stronger, yea the light is receiued in grea∣ter quantitie: as by experience is knowne in the Gunner, which minding to shoote strayt, winketh with the one eye: and like the Carpenter, in the laying of his lyne right: these hytherto Auer∣roys. But through the contrarie cause, such ha∣uing the eyes emynent be weake of sight, and sée
nothing so farre off. The large eyes tending into a breeth of the bodye, like vnto the eyes of the Parthians, doe indicate the moysture of body, in that creature. Such hauing the eies eleuated, and standing highe out, doe sée from them (as aboue vttered) but a little way: the cause is, in that when the eie is eminenter, it is then further distaunt from the braine: which is noted, the well spring of the eyes. So that through the farre distaunce from their spring, that is the braine, such eies are hin∣dered to sée farre: where otherwise the eies stan∣ding déepe, doe see sooner and further, yet such are noted to be of euill condicions. Further, conceiue that through the eminencie of the eies, diuers matters visible are represented: so that such in a
shorte time, can discerne and iudge matters. Such also are bablers wythout iudgement, through the forepart moyst: as afore vttered, of the forehead. And for that cause, are noted vnshamefast, and foolish: the selfe same (in a maner) doth the learned Asculanus (in his mother tongue) write in libro Cerbae, on this wise. Gli ochij eminenti, et in figura grossi Gli ochij veloci cum lo batter sermo, Matti e falsi, & de mercedae scossi. By which he concludeth, that such are without dyscretion, through the small discourse, and pau∣cytie of vnderstanding. He also vttereth an other kinde in these, as the eies moouing fast and quick, whych are a note of hotenesse: and argueth ire∣fulnesse, luxurie, and boldenesse: applyed to the Hawke, and Fawcon.
The slow moouing of the eyes, is a note of cold∣nesse: and declareth sadnesse, and fearefulnesse in that creature. Such which with the eies, mooue the eie lids togither, are weake, & of a feeble mind, as Palemon, wryteth. The eyes whych shut, and open togither: doe indicate a wicked & trayterous person. If water shall stand in them, doth then de∣note a studious person, and an earnest searcher of Arts: as writeth Aristotle, Albertus, & Phylemo. Conciliatore wryteth, when the eyes are dif∣formally mooued, as that one whiles they runne, and an otherwhiles cease running (although by these as yet) no wicked facte or michiefe be com∣mitted and done: in cogitation notwithstanding the minde is knowne, to be occupied with the like. And such generally, the Phisiognomer hath noted to be of wicked condicions: & prone through such a conioyning to come to a violent or euill death. Yea such a lyke note, hath the Phisiognomer of∣ten obserued, in many robbers by the high waye. The Philosopher Ptholomie writeth, ye the eyes yellow (so that the same procéedeth of no sicknesse) doe signifie such a person to be a deceyuer, and cruell: as the Phisiognomer Cocles obserued and noted, in sundrie Bawdes, and Murderers. Further such a colour, doth indicate the domi∣nyon of choller, wyth a most great adustion: of which occasiō, cannot otherwise be caused, but the
dominion of malignity. The eyes which swiftly mooue, with a sharpe∣nesse of sight, are noted théeues, vnfaythfull, and deceyuers: yea such a note, hath the Phisiogno∣mer experienced, and iudged many, which after were hanged. Of these one the lyke, was the sonne of M. Iulianus de Pontremulo, brought vp, and frayned couragiouslye (from childe age) vnder a valyaunt and pollitike Captayne, named Francesco Rouerso: on whome he pronounced iudgement, in the yere of mans redemptiō. 1492. And before the presence of M. Bartholomew (de S. Marino) a famous Chirurgian, and a most spe∣ciall
fréende of the Phisiognomers▪ And as this Cocles hadde afore pronounced and iudged of the yolig man, euen so came it to passe (through the lacke of grace) that he was hanged, in the yeare of our Lorde. 1496. And this Physiognomer on an other, named Tadeus Gudottus, pronounced a lyke iudge∣ment, which also for theft (as he reporteth) was hanged, by sentence of the lawe. For these are well knowne to haue a subtill wyt, and the same proner or readier vnto the euill. The like confir∣meth that worthie Conciliatore, where he wry∣teth, that the eyes swiftly moouing, and appea∣ring sharpe of looke, are noted craftie, vnfayth∣full and Theeues: as of nature, these are vtte∣red▪ The cause is, in that through the subtilnesse of wit, theft proceedeth, and the straunge decey∣uing. For the subtill wyt proceedeth, through the subtilnesse of humours, of which insueth the hot∣nesse of complexion, as aboue vttered. And the moouing, proceedeth through a hotnesse: so that when the hotnesse is great, then is the swiftnesse intensed. The looke fired, is not caused but of the uer∣much, and fired thought, and of the often desire to deceaue. By which reason, for two causes, are the like in suche a subiect, that is, the moouing; which the intensed hotnesse signifieth: the other
is, the sharpnesse of wyt, to the déepe cogitation and thought, to worke euill. The selfe same Rasis reporteth, where he wryteth, that whose eyes mooue fast, and be sharpe of looke, is a deceauer, craftie, and a théefe. Yet may here some argue, that Théeues are Melancholick: in that Melan∣cholie, procéedeth of a colde, and drye humour: for which cause, the contrarie of this is, as afore vttered. To the same, doth the Phisiognomer thus aunswere, that this is not alwayes certaine or true: in that there hath béene seene▪ (sayth▪ Co∣cles) that Martiall persons were Théeues, and robbers by the highe waye: and that those were founde Chollericke and Melancholick: as shall after appeare, in the Phisiognomie of the Pla∣nets, and great worke of Chyromancie (to come
forth) of the nature of Mars, yet maye it be, through the accydences of the minde, that these are caused Melancholike adust: which like, that the same is by accydence, the Phisiognomer ob∣serued and knewe of experience, in sundrie Bawdes, common Dysars, and robbers by the highe way, which applyed their mindes & wyttes in these. The wanne and yellow colour, both some∣times indicate the complexion or qualitie of chol∣ler adust: yet the same tending vnto Melancho∣ly. If to a whytenesse, to which a gréenisse is ad∣mired, heate inseweth, which of the Phisitions, is properly named a leadie colour, as wryteth Almansore, lib. secundo. capit. 1. So that this is a swartishe colour, if the same appeareth nighe so
a rednesse (or a rednesse mixed to it) which de∣monstrateth that the grosse bloud to beare sway, euen as the quantitie which approcheth to it, or as the rednesse which is mixed to it. This colour (by the agréement of the Phisitions) is as the colour of the lunges, when the same is newlye drawne forth of a beast, that is properly named wanne of colour. The same (of the lunges) which after the drawing forth, beginneth to putrifie, and swell vp, and a wanne or leadie colour appeareth in the same. Here note, that the Phisiognomer wylleth a man, to beware and take héede of the like coloured persons, in that these are verie euil, & wicked: if so be these in habitude (as Cocles re∣porteth) be not laudable or comely. Such a colour the Phisiognomer noted, in sundrie Cardinals, that were verie wicked in their déedes. Yea these of like colour he noted to be drunkards, luxuri∣ous, and practisers of false and wicked matters, without anye shame: as the like of experience, the Phisiognomer reporteth to haue knowne. He further wryteth, that the Melancholicke a∣duste, are leacherous, vnlearned, and exercyse swynishe condicions: when as their heades be spericall, or Pineaple lyke, and hauing fatte chéekes. Yea when the adustion is ouermuch, then such incurre and fall into a frensinesse. The Phisiognomer noted, yea he iudged (before the
learned) sundrie of a like complexion, that be∣came foolishe: and of these, two were Students at that time, who after the increase of this me∣lancholy, became foolishe, according to the iudge∣ment of the Phisiognomer. The eies small, doe argue such a person to bée peruerse, foolish, and faynt hearted, applyed of the Philosopher to the Ape: the reason is, in that when the creature is hotte and drye, he is then malycious of the humours and spyrites: and is a betrayer through the hotenesse and drinesse, proceeding of the Chollericke adustyon. For which cause, such are deceyuers, and partake of the Melancholye humours: of which feareful∣nesse, and foolishnesse ensueth through a drynesse. The déepenesse of the eies procéedeth through a drinesse, which dryeth vp the moysture of the mus∣cles
and lygamentes. Of which insueth a draw∣ing togither into the inner partes, and the braine to be exhausted. And the paucitie of the matter of the eyes, doth signifie in the moysture propor∣tioned, the dominion of drinesse and melancholye adust, or a drinesse adustyue: and for this, are fearefull, and deceyuers, lyke to the Ape: as the same experience demonstrateth. When the eyes are situated after length of the bodie (for that these naturally in mankinde, are situated according to the breadth of the same) this is then named monstrous, that is, not agréeable to nature: the cause of which is the great hote∣nesse, as afore sufficiently vttered. Of which a deceyuing and enuie insueth, through a daylye or continuall desire vnto the exercising and commit∣ting of euill factes, for the firinesse of ye spirits, and discrazed or disturbed braine. Of the same Rasys vttereth, that when the eyes shall be placed or si∣tuated as into length of the bodye, doe then de∣monstrate the like creature, to be subtyll, and a deceyuer. And one like to these (by the reporte of the Phisiognomer) was the brother of Hieroni∣mus Sauonarola, who in very déeede, was known to be a great seducer, and beguyler of the people: yea, a deceyuer of deceyuers, and the proper in∣uention of disceyte consisted in him, so that not a lyke knowne or to be founde in his time: thys
great deceyuer (as Cocles vttereth) for the more coloring and hyding of his frawdes, publi∣shed newe Statutes and Lawes for the people, in the riche Citye of Florence. The Physy∣ognomie of whome, was on suche wyse: he had a small heade, and the same in Pineaple forme: the eyes were, according to length of the body: the nose hooked, or like to the Eagles bill: the lippes thicke: the colour of his face was wanne aduste, and the neck leaning or bending to one side: and a note of the great hotnesse of his complexion was, that he coulde not indure to
weare on his head, any other vnder his Cap, then a fine and thinne linnen cloth, for that the heares alwayes shed of, howe thinne soeuer he went co∣uered on the heade: and balde he was (through this continuall shedding of heares) which argued the dominion of drynesse to consist in the fore∣part of the head. And throughout the whole bo∣by, he was (by report of the Phisiognomer) most hearie: a note also of great adustion, in that per∣son. For which cause (sayth Cocles) beware and take héede, of such false Prophets, or (that I may aptlyer name them) wicked deceyuers, thus complexioned & formed: but haue an eie especially to such, whose whole complexion is most adust. Rasis reporteth (in secundo ad Almansorem) that many spottes in the eyes appearing, doe in∣dicate an euill person: the rather, when the eyes shall appeare variable of colour, which signifieth the wickeder person. For the varieties of the eies procéede not, but of a hotnesse which cleuateth the vapours vnto the eyes: of which, how much the more the varietie of the eyes is, so much the more doth the same argue an intensed hotnesse. By that reason, howe much the more dyuers the spottes are, so much the more is the adustion: and by the consequent declareth the varietie of humours, and greater adustion, and this doth manifest the adustion of the spirite: of which the
great deceyuer (as Cocles vttereth) for the more coloring and hyding of his frawdes, publi∣shed newe Statutes and Lawes for the people, in the riche Citye of Florence. The Physy∣ognomie of whome, was on suche wyse: he had a small heade, and the same in Pineaple forme: the eyes were, according to length of the body: the nose hooked, or like to the Eagles bill: the lippes thicke: the colour of his face was wanne aduste, and the neck leaning or bending to one side: and a note of the great hotnesse of his complexion was, that he coulde not indure to
weare on his head, any other vnder his Cap, then a fine and thinne linnen cloth, for that the heares alwayes shed of, howe thinne soeuer he went co∣uered on the heade: and balde he was (through this continuall shedding of heares) which argued the dominion of drynesse to consist in the fore∣part of the head. And throughout the whole bo∣by, he was (by report of the Phisiognomer) most hearie: a note also of great adustion, in that per∣son. For which cause (sayth Cocles) beware and take héede, of such false Prophets, or (that I may aptlyer name them) wicked deceyuers, thus complexioned & formed: but haue an eie especially to such, whose whole complexion is most adust. Rasis reporteth (in secundo ad Almansorem) that many spottes in the eyes appearing, doe in∣dicate an euill person: the rather, when the eyes shall appeare variable of colour, which signifieth the wickeder person. For the varieties of the eies procéede not, but of a hotnesse which cleuateth the vapours vnto the eyes: of which, how much the more the varietie of the eyes is, so much the more doth the same argue an intensed hotnesse. By that reason, howe much the more dyuers the spottes are, so much the more is the adustion: and by the consequent declareth the varietie of humours, and greater adustion, and this doth manifest the adustion of the spirite: of which the
varieties of conditions procéede, and the mightie heape of vices. So that of the great varietie, is the honest and lawdable iudgement, debased or caused the woorser. The looke of the eyes like to the woman, cau∣seth the same disposition, as of such a complexion: and is the same in conditions as the woman, as luxurious, and inuericundious: for which cause such men of like nature, be luxurious, and inue∣ricundious. Of which Rasis reporteth, that when the looke is like to a childes, and that his whole face and eyes séeme or appeare as he smyled, this is a light hearted person, and giuen to mirth, without taking care of the affayres of the world. The eyes appearing wholy smyling (as one laughing) with therest of the face in like maner,
be flatterers, luxurious, & yll reporters or slaun∣derers. Some of this alledge a cause, and report that the mirch, and length of lyfe, to procéede of a good complexion: whose cause are the lawdable humours, and purenesse of them, through his a∣gréement. So that the cause of lyfe is hotnesse, and moystnesse: but of death, coldnesse and dry∣nesse. The complexion of yong men, is hote and moyst: but of olde men colde and drye: and the note of the same is, that such which coeate much, doe liue a short time: and the gelded after nature longer, than those not gelded: and the aged men which haue much fleshe, doe lyue longer, in that the causes of much flesh, is a hotnesse and moyst∣nesse. By which reason children, that are hote and moyst, be among other ages merrie, and ioy through their complexion: and be without cares of the minde. So that such, like to children in countinaunce, are the like in complexion: not be thincking earnest, or waightie matters. When the eyes appeare in rednesse to the burning coale, such a person is noted to be wic∣ked, and obstinate: the reason is, in that the fyrie colour, doth indicate a most intensed choller, by reason of the hotnesse: and he is vicious, and ob∣stinate, as appeareth in the verses in the first place.
Whose eyes be in colour lyke to the Gotes eine, is argued foolish: the reason is, that when a creature resembleth to anye beast, such a person is of the like nature, complexion, and condicions as in many places afore like vttered. So that such Gotes eine doe indicate foolyshnesse, & great sim∣plicity. The Phisiognomer many times looked on such a beast & found the eyes somewhat variable, with a certaine troubled matter about the ring & sight of the eie, which declared (after his iudge∣ment) a complexion very fiegmaticke, and watry, of which fearefulnesse, and foolishnesse insueth. The eyes which are like to the Cowes eyne, doe portende a madnesse to succéede in that crea∣ture: séeing the eies lyke to Cowes eyne in men, do argue a like complexion. For the complexion of
such a beast, is colde and moyst, of which the eyes are great: so that through a coldnesse and moyst∣nesse, is the slownesse and dulnesse of vnderstan∣ding caused, of which a madnesse and simplicitie ensueth. The eyes gray of colour (to the skie) drie sée∣ming, and dimmie: such a person (willeth the Phi∣losopher) that a man to eschue, so nigh as he may: for that this gray colour in drie eyes, is a note of wicked persons. The colour of the eyes, which re∣presenteth ye colour of Dile, doth witnesse a strōg person. The yelowishe colour of the eyes, doth in∣dicate a strong, and stoute person. The eyes ap∣pearing much blacke of colour, is denoted to bée of a harde nature, and fraudulent. The déepenesse of the eies, is through a drinesse, drying the mus∣cles and ligaments: of which ensueth a gathering into the inner partes (as afore vttered) and the brain exhausted. The eminencie of the eies repre∣senteth many obiects, of which a péeuish discourse ensueth, through a confusion of the obiects. If the eyes shall be small & prominent out, like to the Creauis eyne: doe denote the lewdnesse of conditions and foolishnesse. The reason is, in that the smalenesse of the eyes, doth wytnesse the pau∣citie or littlenesse of matter: but the emynencie of them, doth indicate the ouermuch moysture in the fore ventricle, where the spirites are let∣ted,
and of this lacketh iudgement. The emynen∣cie also of the eyes, is the cause of the represen∣ting of many obiects, insomuch that such a one, can not discerne the congruent, from the incon∣gruent: of which doth the pieuishe and beastly discourse insue, through the confusion of the obiectes. The eyes tending vpwarde, as the Oxe eyne, which (and with this) appeare redde, and are most great: doe indicate a most wicked person, lewde of conditions, a foole, a bibber, and a drunkard. The reason of this effect is, in that the same sig∣nifieth the weakenesse of braine: for as much as such a forme, procéedeth of a moyst brayne. And of the weakenesse of brayne, is the dronkennesse
caused, through the vapours ascending, which togither disturbe the braine. The same eleuation of the eyes, procéedeth by accidence: in that thys is caused through the ouermuch hotnesse, whose note is the red colour, or the red colour indicateth. For of an ouermuch hotnesse, is the disturbance (of the rationall spirite) caused: as the lyke we daylie sée, in the fyrie yrefulnesse of men. Such eyes the Phisiognomer noted, in the Citie of Viteberge, by one Nicholas a Barbier: which in a maner, was customably or daylie dronke. The eyes directed with the looke vpwarde, quy∣uering, and with a palenesse of countinaunce in∣fected, doe denote such a person to be of a fierce and an inhumaine wytte, of an enuious nature, and sometimes a murderer.
If anye by nature, hath the eyes appearing turned vpwarde: such a one of nature, is Lybi∣dinous: applyed to the maner appearing, in the dead bodies. And in persons at the instaunt coea∣ting, as wryteth Aristotle, in his Problemes. For the eleuating of the eyes, is by accydence: in that the same is caused, through the ouermuch hotnesse, whose note is, the rednesse of colour: of which is a troubling, of the rationall spirite caused: as we daylie sée, in the intensed yreful∣nesse of men. The eyes appearing retorte, if they tende to the right side: doe denote foolishnesse: but if these tende to the left side, then they pronounce incon∣tinencie: as the learned Palemone, in his Phisi∣ognomy vttereth. The extensed eyes, with the extension of the count inaunce, doe denote such persons to be ma∣licious, and wicked: the reason is, for that the same extension is procured of a drynesse, and hot∣nesse, through which the hote spirite is caused euill. He which hath the eyes like to the Asse, is noted foolishe, and dull of nature: the reason is, in that they be of a colde and drie qualitie, of which the impression of kindes is harde to enter: so that by the same reason, such are foolishe: re∣ferred after the maner, to the slowe Asse.
The woorser eyes are they, which haue ey∣ther whyte, blacke, redde, or any other coloured spottes in them: in that such a person, is lesse con∣staunt, then any others: yea so hardly to be trus∣ted, that rather to be shunned: except grace, and godly education helpe herein. And such a note, the Phisiognomer many times obserued and consi∣dered, in diuers Princes, Noble men, and iolye Lawyers, in authoritie. Here might a man que∣stion and demaunde, how it hapneth, that such a varietie of colours, appeareth in the eyes: to which the Phisiognomer thus aunswereth, that seing the eyes are verie cléere, and of a thinne substaunce, which is caused of the waterie hu∣mours consisting in them, of which the eyes are
formed: For that cause, doe the visiue spirites, declare their qualities in the eyes. That these al∣so are of a thinne substaunce, doth well and ma∣nifestly appeare in the 4w when h hath h : in that such a one doth then t4spe a yf & 4lking essagl, at the beholding of the same, with iedwbol t4spse: yea and at that tyme, doe suche cetinef drilchi ylineg in the readle: if a man may credite, the saying of the auncient wryters in this. The eyes appearing, as they were hidde in the heade, that is, standing hollow inwarde, doe further sée: and such a person these argue, to be suspitious, malicious, of a wicked yre, and per∣uerse condition: yet verie mindefull, especially of iniuries, bolde, cruell, deceytfull, a lyar, en∣uyous, leacherous. &c. as that Michael Scotus reporteth. The auncient Rasis vttereth, that many spots appearing about the sight of the eyes: doe wyt∣nesse an euill person: and the woorser are those spotted eyne knowne, if they be variable of co∣lour. The varieties of the eyes, doe no other∣wise procéede, than of the heate eleuating the va∣pours vnto the eies: and how much the more va∣rietie there appeareth of the eyes, so much the more doth this argue the inwarde hotenesse to be. Howe much the more variable, or dyuers in
forme, the spottes are, so much the more and greater, is the adustion of the spirites eleuated: of which both the varieties of conditions, and the great heape of vices procéedeth. So that of the great varietie, is the honest, and lawdable iudge∣ment, procured the woorser, of all likelyhood. Such persons which haue the eyes shyning, are noted to be lybidinous: and for the forme, ap∣plyed of the Phylosopher Aristotle, vnto the Cock, and Rauen. The eyes in rednesse, appearing vnto the bur∣ning coale: doe indicate a most wicked, and ob∣stinate person: and the cause is, for that the fyrie colour, doth witnesse a most intensed choller, by reason of the hotnesse: as afore vttered, of the Physiognomer Cocles.
He which hath meane eyes, declyning vnto the Celestiall colour (or to the colour of the skie) or vnto a blackishnesse: such a person is noted, to be of a perfite vnderstanding, faythfull, & saruisa∣ble. The lyke conditioned eyes, the Philosopher Aristotle commended highly vnto king Alexan∣der. And the same séemeth the learned Auicen to vtter (primo canticorum, de varietate oculorū) which argue a temperament: if so be the eyes appeare, to the colour of the Antymonye: for these denote, a sharpnesse and readynesse of wyt. The worthy Almansor reporteth, that those the learned name the better eyes, which appeare as (betwéene the black and variable) a meane: if with this, these are not much shyning, nor that
, nor Cytrynesse appeareth in them:  such eyes, do demonstrate a good nature, dis∣tion and wyte: The reason is, for that these  priuate and fée, from the adustion of choller,  adust Melancholy. The colour of the eyes celestiall, or vnto the Skie, and blacke, or a darke yellowe, whereas  spottes in any mane appeare, and are caused of moyst humours temperate, without any adul∣ti of which a spirite like to nature is repre∣sented▪  of wyt, and speculation  that creature, after the minde of Nun∣u naturae, and Conciliatore. The variable colour of the eyes, signifieth that the spirite of fight (in that creature) to be
the more and cléerer: and such the Phisiognomer alwayes knowe, and sawe to be well borne) that is, well complexioned, and that those o e Phi∣losophers, and searchers of Sciences, and déepe matters: of which one the like, wa that learned Philosopher, and singular searcher of na∣turall and hid secrets, named Alexander Achil∣linus a Bononian. And many others Cocles ∣ted, among which was that Dominicus usos Ariminensis, a man singularly learned▪ and a wytnesse bearer of the Phisiognomers Lbra∣tions. And Cocles neuer behelde, nor noted anye learned Lawyer, but that he had the eyes with∣out any spot in them. The worser eyes are they, which haue eyther the white, blacke, or redde spottes, or of any other colour in them, for that such a person (as is afore∣sayde) is to be mislyked: yet except herein those, which be pained with the web in the eye, of which the like hath béene knowne, both honest, and god∣lye in conuersation. Conciliatore vttereth, that the eyes variable, bigge, and graye in colour: if these shall be wyth redde spottes (especially dustie) and that the same be lyke vnto a corrupt blacke: and orderly mooue with the looke, to one side: doe denote a troubled minde, and vicious of fact: yet by nature bolde and ingenious.
By the eyes (not alwayes the whole eyes) but the blacke of them conceyue: in that it is the blacke onelye, which sheweth and vttereth the matters, that we sée. Whose blacke of the eyes be redde ouer, are so irefull at times, that such quight forget, what they doe, for the furious anger, they be in. It hath béene obserued, that in the white of the eyes, where veynes appearing, were filled with bloude, and waring redde, that such declared the person to be very irefull & hastie: as Phylemon, and the auncient Rasis reporte. When the one sight of the eye, séemeth or ap∣peareth farre greater, then the other: doe signi∣fie (by the agréement of writers) not onelye an
euill nature, but wicked condicions in that creature. The reddish spottes in the eies, but not very redde, and rather or more declining to a blacke∣nesse: so that to the beholders, these appeare and seeme blackish: doe denote such a person to be of a courtious minde, iuste, honest, and ingenious: by the agréement of the most Phisiognomers. The eyes which shine (as with little spottes of brightnesse) within: doe denote such to be clen∣ly, gracious, and well conditioned: as the Phisi∣ognomer of experience affirmeth. The eyes with spottes (appearing altogither redde) yet these not rounde, but rather square: and lyke to the fier shining, both within and be∣neath: and that the others behinde them are pale
and others also grayishe: and that the circles without the sight, compassing and inclosing, are bloudye: and that there is a bignesse of the eye: and that both the eie liddes, and apples of the eies doe mooue: doe argue such a creature, to be of a cruell minde, aboue all measure: a sheader of his owne households, friends, or kindreds bloud: yea deuising, and attempting all kindes of mis∣chiefes, and subuerting all maner of matters, with great disceyte and craft. For such were the eyes (by report of the Phisiognomer) of that most, wicked ; named Ezelinus de Romano, Such small spottes appearing in the eyes, how much the redder and lesser these shall be, so much the greater yre, iniuries, and detestable euilles, they witnesse in that creature: but the greater, and darcker spottes; doe diminishe these wicked  finally take them awaye; or abate these  as the most Met oposcopers, agrée in The black or bloudie spottes, in the blacke or swartish sightes of the eyes: doe witnesse a wicked person, and a poysoner: vnlesse grace  this. But the pale spots, do indicate such a creature to be  deceytfull, and somewhat incled vnto wickednesse. Here note, that howe much the colours of the spottes, be mightier: so∣much
the greater are their effects. For that by their darckenesse, how much the same be (as is a∣fore vttered) so much the lesser are the euil, and mischiefes: by the reporte of Rasis, Consiliatore Phylemon, and others. There be eyes (lyke coloured) to the Raine∣bowe, which if these are drie, doe argue madnesse but if the eyes be moyste, then doe they signifie magnificencie and wisedome, yet with  and pronenesse vnto the venereal acte. The  eies, lyke to water shining, do denote such a crea∣ture to be honest conditioned, gentle, and friend∣ly, after the minde of Ptholomeus paruus. The sight of the eyes, if the same shalbe black, and closed with the aforesaide cytrynesse: or that if this appeareth goldenist colour (as the Phisi∣tions write) doth indicate a fluxe of bloud, by the
neather partes, That Philosopher Ptholomeus paruus vt∣tereth, that the eyes bigge, and the ouerbroowes long appearing, doe signifie short lyfe, if other notes agrée with this: for such a note, had that Lodos de Blancis, a Bononian of noble birth: which the skilfull Phisiognomer Cocles  to be of a short peryode, by this, and other lyke notes that he considered: who in very  according to the coniecture, liued but a short tyme after: and sundrie others he iudged, hauing the like notes, that ended their peryode in a short tyme.
The person which hath the eyes long ∣ted, with the ouerbroowes long; such a person shal be learned, of a déepe vnderstanding, and ▪ yet by the agréement of the most Phisiogno∣mers, but short liued. He which hath the whitenesse in the eyes, tending vnto a blacknesse, doth  man, and liuing (by the report of the Phisiogno∣mer) in honour. The vpper eye liddees, ∣ouer the neather (as afore vttered) doe demon∣strate (of experience knowne) long lyfe. The eyes small and rounde, doe argue (after the minde of the Phisiognomer) such a creature, to turne willingly vnto the euill: so that the face withall, be couered with a palenesse: these hither∣to, Ptholomeus paruus. Whose eyes shall bée vehemently mouing, and a little quiuering or beating: doe indicate a most wicked person, in that a most inwarde hote∣nesse is declared: by reason of the spirites aboun∣ding, and flowing (vnto the compasse about) of the eyes. Of which the auncient Rasis reporteth, that the swiftnesse of the opening, and shutting of the eies, doth signifie a hotenesse in that creature. The eyes quicke and readie moouing, and sharpe of looke, doe indicate such a person, to be a gréedie catcher: applyed for the maner vnto the catching Hawke. That if the beating of the eye
liddes shal be often, doth then indicate a  creature. Whoe balles of the eyes are drawne or ca∣ried vnto one side properly, whether doth are ∣niformallye, or  mooued, doe  euill condicions, and a wicked person, from whom, iust cause is to  and e. For  these are, móoued vniformally▪ conceyue that his mynde is prone vnto mischiefes and wickednesse: and that the creature to bee polluted, with murders do∣mestical, wicked meaes and mariages: as were the Gestes, and mariages (by report of the aun∣cient)
of Thiesis, and Atrei, of M and I∣sonis, whose children were spoyled, and  as péeces, with the handes of the proper parents. But when the eyes are one whes turned to one side, an other whyles mooued backe, and these an other whiles stande still, such maner of wicked facts by them, are as yet not , although in minde and cogitation occu the lyke: as the learned Co, and Ptholomeus paruus report. The eyes bigge veyned, and drye appearing: doe argue a frensinesse present or to come: by re∣port of the most Phisiognomers. The hllow eyes smi, like such determined or purposed to worke deceys,  be the chéekes, the ouerbroowes and lippes, are mooued withall, do then pronounce the cogitations of wicked pur∣poses, and deceytes: If the eye liddes especiallye doe sometymes méete, and sometymes touche to∣gither, for then doe they denote a most wicked co∣gitation, to consist in that creature. The auncient Auicen (primo de animalibus)▪ vttereth▪ that the eyes trembling, doe signifie a lightnesse, that is, an vnstablenesse of minde in that creature. The eyes couered with a dumnesse, doe argue such a person to be indued with euill Artes, vn∣faythfull,
and vnodest in his doings. The eyes contrarie to the aboue sayde, are best: that is to say cleere through, and that no o∣ther signe of euill beo shall contrarie the ie▪ and such maner of eyes, th Palemon report, that the mightie ry the Empero h▪ The eyes cléere, of a bigge light,  that  with a graynesse, and ddynesse doe argue rashnesse, and madnesse▪ but if they haue a ma state, then doe these signifie, a good disposition of minde. The meannesse of the eyes, betweene the
black, & variable, is commōnded: yea among the other maners aforesayde: onlesse they be much shining, eyther verie cytrine in colour, or red. But spotted with bloude, doe argue suche to be rashe, and doing their businesses, which they (purposed afore) spéedily. The eies bigge and cléere, with a bright∣nesse shyning: doe  a person to be iust, apt to learne, afore seer, and a wyttie ad∣monisher or warner: and such like eyes, was the learned Socrates supposed to haue. The eyes ouermuch standing out, redde, and small: doe argue an  minde▪ and tongue, and an vnstable person in purpose. The abouesáyde Palemon reporteth, that the eies promynent or standing out, shyning, trem∣bling, and beating, and that these are small: doe witness such to be . , doe  to . writeth▪  suche a  bethincking a of wine, a wran∣ding couetous. Of such a meane forme wre the eyes of king Alexander knowne and reported to
be. And somuch is onely sayde of these, which as vnto the forme and standing of the eyes are re∣duced. The eies smyling and most great, doe denote such a person to be a dullarde, leacherous, and not carefull or prouiding for the tyme comming. The sad eyes are not altogither to be feared, for that (of the moysture) these are occupyed in cogitation: and doe denote the studies of honest Artes. That if with these, the ouerbroowes, and forehead be large, with a playnnesse congruent, and the eye liddes lawdable: doe witnesse an ho∣nesse, and lawdable wyt, gentle, and graue. The eyes sadde, and drye, and with this a roughnesse or wrinckling of the forehead, and an
earnest beholding of the looke, and casting down of the eye liddes: doe denote such a person to be hurtfull, cruell, & leauing nothing vnattempted. The eies somewhat moyst, and looking dread∣full: doe denote such a person to be prone to yre, sharpe, furious in talke, & in actions hastie: yea rashe and hastily speaking, and most wicked. But the drie eyes, doe denote vngracious and wicked conditions: when with this, these shall be decer∣ned small, and hollowe, doe denote woorser▪ then the abouesayde. The eyes, drie, and of a sadder looke: doe wit∣nesse such a person to be very gentle, and friend∣ly: as Palemon reporteth. The Philosopher in Methaphoricis vttereth, that from whose eyes, doe hang lyke to water drops: are knowne to be louers of Wine, yea they waxe balde, and referred vnto the passion: for that in such a disposition is the moysture, and feeblenesse of the braine declared: and most of the auncient, agrée in the same. In whome before the eyes like to drops ap∣peare, and shewe out: are noted to be louers of sléepe: and referred vnto the passion, in that such doe like hang (arysing from sléepe) which appeare in the eies: as the Phisiognomer hath often ob∣serued, in many subiects. Here conceyue, that the blearednesse of the
eyes is sed, through the gathe ther of gsse bloude▪ and of the  ∣m,  the eye de, and in the thin  compassing the eies, ingrossing or  them on such wise. The like (as afore reported) are na∣turally sléepers, and referred in like maner vnto the passion, or congruencie. Seing such a maner swelling of the eies is caused, through a long sléepe, after the Noone meale eaten. For when in sléepe the meate is digested, and by the consequent some fumes are eleuated vnto the braine: those fumes or vapours then, through the coldnesse of braine ingrossed, doe discende vnto the eyes, as aboue vttred: insomuch, that by such a meanes, a swelling of the eies rounde about appeareth: after the agréement of the Phisiognomer, and others. The blearednesse of the eyes, in regarding the disposition: doe denote such a person to be a bib∣ber, and dronkarde: if this like proceedeth, of no other cause. When these shall be, with a falling of the eies, doe then indicate such a person to be a louer of sléepe. Which also is referred vnto the passion, as both Albertus, and Conciliatore lear∣nedly report. The eies bigge, doe witnesse such a creature to be dull in conceauing, and slowe in the proper actions: applyed for the forme, vnto the Oxe.
The  small, are faynt hearted, and  of couage referred vno the apparancie and the Ap after the minds of the Philosopher Ast∣tle and Auicn. The eies being a meane, as betwéene the small and bigge appearing: doe signifie that person to be well complexioned, and of honest conditions. The meannesse of the eies in forme, doth in∣nate both a goodnesse, and purenesse of  in that treasure: after the agreement of sundrie wryters. Such which haue the eies hollow standing, are supposed to be malicious: applied for the forme, vnto the Ape: But such which haue the eies emy∣nent, are noted foolishe, and applied vnto the ap∣paraucie.
The eyes standing verie hollow, is worthie no commendation at all: but such eyes which stande hollowe, and that bigge withall, are not to be re∣prehended. The eyes hollow, and small: doe witnesse such a person to be mutable, deceytfull, a betrayer, and corrupted both with enuie and disdaine. The eyes hollow, looking, smylingly, doe denote such a person to be a bethinker of euils. The eyes standing a little hollowe, are bolde, and stowte, and applyed to the Lyon. But the eyes somewhat more standing out, are gentle: and applied to the Ore. The sight of the eies black, doth portende a slowe person, and a dullarde: by the report and a∣greement of all wryters.
The sightes of the eyes (in whose compasse about) like to little▪ Pearles shall appeare, doe denote an enuious person, full of wordes, feare∣full, and most wicked, as Rasis reporteth. The Balles and sightes of the eyes broade: doe indicate euill conditions, in that creature: as wryteth Palemon. The balles of the eles small, doe indicate euill, and peruerse conditions. And in whome you shall espic the circles, which are aboute the sightes, to be vnequall, such are knowne, and noted of expe∣rience, to be fooles. Haly Abbas (primo theoricae▪ capitulo. 24.) willeth a man to beware, that he be not deceyued in the knowledge of the blacke colour: for (sayth he) you shall see his eyes appearing with a sharpe looke, and vnto the same which he shall beholde, the eyes shining: as these in a maner were behol∣den, of some bright body right agaynst: and hys wordes are knowne to be vttered in a fumbling maner, and out of course or order. When the eies shall be thw appearing, and shall haue a sharpe Ague, do then denote, shortly after death: as the worthie Hyppocrates vttereth in his learned booke of secrets. If the eyes shall appeare (long open togither) doth indicate foolishnesse, and vnshamefastnesse: as the learned Albertus reporteth.
The eyes very blacke, doe argue such to bée fearefull: and this neuer fayleth the like. Yea these note such, to be gréedie of gaine: for the black colour very deepe, is knowne to signifie feareful∣nesse▪ as both the Philosopher Aristotle in Me∣thaphoricis, and the auncient Auicen (primo de Animalibus) wryte. The eyes appearing palishe, doe denote such a person to be prone to deceyte. The eyes not verie blacke, but to a yealow∣nesse declining; doe denote a good nature, and to be strong. The eyes eyther white or gray, doe denote such a person to be fearefull: and of the white colour, it seldome or neuer fayleth the like. The eyes blacke, notable in brightnesse, do ar∣gue
such to be euill conditioned, deceytfull, and wicked. The person which hath blacke eyes, and a little smiling withall, is denoted to be such a one that is greatly inclined and prone to all filthinesse. The eyes not very gray in colour, but to a séemely maner, like to the colour of ye Lions eies, doe denote such a person to bée of an honest na∣ture and good minde, and for the forme applyed to the Lyon and Eagle. The gray colour of the eyes, is here ment to be like vnto the colour of the Owle, or rather of the colour of the Iayes winges, which are chaungeable of colour. The eyes appearing veynie, doe denote such a person to be frantick; and applyed to the Goate. And veynie be those eyes named, which be full of small and very little lynes a length, much like to small veynes: through which, the colour of the eyes is chaunged. And such of thys are of a di∣minished imagination, which serueth to the vn∣derstanding and applyed to the shéepe. The eyes flerie appearing, are vnshamefast: and applyed for the forme to the dogge: and such also are gréedie catchers, and contentious. The eyes are then named fierie, when lyke to fire these shine, burne, and twinckle: So that the like persons kindled with yre, sée not, or if they sée, one thing séemèth two, in their sight.
Auerrois (in de sensu & sensato) instructeth at large, the causes. The especiall token of yre∣fulnesse, is the naturall rednesse in the veynes of the eyes. The diuers coloured eyes, doe argue such to be fearefull, and applyed vnto the passion: for that the like which are afrayde, become sodainly pale, & possesse through that feare an vnequall colour. Such hauing the eyes appearing or looking merily, are noted to be luxurious, and applyed for the forme vnto the Cocke, and Goate, or Rauen: that is, hauing the eies like to them, which chéere∣fully and louingly looke on any matter: for these then shew a certaine gladsome and merry looke. The eyes and chéekes red, doe signifie suche to be louers of wine, and drunkardes.
The eyes reddish, and drie, are stowte, coura∣gious, and hastie vnto yre. The eyes gray or troubled, doe argue such to be fearefull, and applyed to the Shéepe & Goate. The eyes meane, and lowe standing, doe de∣monstrate such to bée shamefast, and honest of conditions. The meane colour of the eyes, with the other notes orderly agréeing, doth not onely witnesse a goodnesse of sight, but a good vnderstan∣ding and knowledge to consist in that creature. The eyes standing out, and reddish, doe argue such to be libidinous, and gluttons. The eyes standing in a maner, short or smal, and bearing a little out: do indicate such a person to be couetous, very gréedie of gaine, and earnest∣ly labouring after the same. If he also draweth
or knitteth togither the foreheade, with the ouer∣broowes, to the middle of the same: such a person is then so much the couetouser, and more desi∣rous of gaine. The Woolfe is a east▪ gréedie, yrefull, wily setting vpon, bolde, and violent. And those par∣sones which to the kinde of this beast are applied, be on this wise: that is to say, hauing very croo∣ked noses, stretching downwards, ye ouerbrowes ioyning togither, rough heared, small eyes, and shutting often, somewhat hollowe standing, the heade small and rounde, rough heared in bodie, long heare on the heade, and fast compowned in legges: So that suche proportioned after this maner (aboue vttred) are crafty par∣sons, wicked, oying in the shedding of bloud, and prone to yre, or soone angrie. And thus the Phisi∣ognomer endeth with the matter of the eyes.
VVhat notes to be learned, in iudging of the face and countinaunce. The. xxj. chapter. THe faces of such wel borne and complexioned, are on such wise: that is, meane of composition in the chéekes, and temples, decing vnto a fat∣nesse. Such a creature (after Phisiognomie) is iudged iust, louing, faythfull, and of a good vnder∣standing. Of which Ecclesiasticus. xiij. reporteth, that mans heart altereth the face, eyther to the good, or euill. When Iacob by the face of Laban, found out the hatred towards him, hée turned then vnto his wiues, and sayde: I knew by the face of your fa∣ther,
that he is no more like in friendship towards me that he was yesterday. For euen his counti∣naunce, is a silent vtterer to me of his minde, the contrarie. The gladsomnesse or myrth of the face, procee∣deth of a merry heart: but the heauinesse or sad∣nesse of looke, is caused of a heauy heart. The face is often taken, and that simplie, for the naturall looke of any: but the countinaunce signifieth, the qualities of the minde: so that a de∣formed looke, is of a rare felicitie: as the learned Isidorus (ethimologiarum. xj.) vttereth. Whose face appeareth fleshie, is lightly coue∣ting: and applyed vnto the Oxe, as the Philoso∣pher Aristotle vttereth in Methaphoricis. Whose face by nature appéereth red, is shame∣fast and mery: but whose face appeereth pale of colour, the same by nature is knowne to be feare∣full: as the Philosopher Aristotle reporteth. The face appéering leane, doth argue a care∣full person, and sometimes a betrayer: as the learned Albertus, and Conciliatore vtter. The face seene fleshie, doth indicate suche a person to be fearefull, applyed for the qualitie to the Hart and Asse: as Aristotle, and the learned Palemon wryte. The face that appeareth small, doth witnesse such a creature to be faint hearted, and fearefull:
applied for the qualitie, to the Ape, and Cocke: as the learned Conciliatore reporteth. The worthie Conciliatore writeth, that whose face appeareth verie bigge, is noted (by the agrée∣ment of other wryters) to be slow and sluggish in the proper actions: for the same denoteth a much matter, and flewmaficke, not regulated: applied for the qualitie vnto the Oxe, and sluggish Asse. The face appearing very bony, doth witnesse such a creature to be laborious, fearefull, and of a colde nature, after the minde of the Phisiog∣nomer. The learned Palemon wryteth, that a meane forme of the face, as neyther to bigge, nor to small, is perfite good, and signifieth an honest per∣son: by the agréement of Auicen, Albertus, Conciliatore, and others. Whose face is iudged small in forme, is re∣ported to be a person vngentle in conditions, and a niggarde: applyed after the maner, vnto the apparauncie knowne. The face séene very fleshie, doth indicate a slug∣gishnesse of actions, foolishnesse, and ye great desire of coeating to consist in that creature: through the matter abounding of the fleshe, & grosse humors, not so flegmaticke, as afore hath beene vttered: in ye hotnesse there beareth sway, after the minde of the Phisiognomer. For which cause, such desire
vayne and impossible things: yea the lyke per∣sons by the report of Phylemon, are light of be∣liefe, and dayly studie or exercise them in eating, drinking, & in the wantō desire of coeating. If the others correspondent, shall be connexed, that is, the greatnesse of the two ventricles. The Philosopher Aristotle, in his treatise of Phisiognomie (of the members) vttereth: that he which hath a fleshie face, is indicated to be lesse sa∣pient, importunate, a lyare, and glutton. The person which hath a slender or leane face, is noted (after the minde of the Philosopher Ari∣stotle) to be circumspect in his doings, and argu∣eth a subtill vnderstanding, as the Mercurians, possesse and haue. That creature which hath a
long face, is knowne of experience, to be froward, and iniurious. The worthie Philosopher Aristotle vttereth, that both of horses and men, the same is knowne: that whose face is wrinckled of nature, and not by accidence, is begotten of féeble parents: for that the strength of the heart, where as the same is féebled, draweth the skinne togither. And is a note of the weakenesse of the principal members. The learned Palemon, and Ptholomeus Par∣uus write, that a leane or thinne face, doth wit∣nesse such a person, to be full of thought, & cares. The auncient Rasis vttereth, that such a crea∣ture, hauing ye face like to one drunken: is lightly ouertaken with strong drinke, & procured drunck, as the Phisiognomer reporteth of experience. The creature, after the mynde of the learned Rasis, hauing a modest, and shamefast face, is de∣noted to haue the like conditions, and to be gentle. An yrefull face (after Rasis) doth indicate yre∣fulnesse; which lyke happeneth to be found, both in other vices, and vertues: for that the face of like nature, to the lyke passion, is euen subiect ac∣tually to the same. The face marueylous rounde, doth innuate such a creature, to be foolish, but the same appea∣ring very bigge, is indicated to be slugguish in the proper actions, and of a dull capacitie.
A verye small face séene, doth argue such a person to be euill, craftie, a flatterer, a niggarde (for the more part) and fearefull. The reason sée∣meth to be, in that the smalnesse of the heade, pro∣céedeth of the matter of the humor, and subtill spi∣rite, with a drinesse: and through the euill compo∣sition, of which flattery is caused, and feareful∣nesse, which is a sister of tenacitie: as afore taught, in sundrie places. Conciliatore instructeth, that a deformed face, doth seldome argue good, and honest conditions. Nor a wrie countenaunce (of nature) can vtter (after the opinion of Aristotle) laudable actions, and conditions: nor such a creature (of experience knowne) is greatly fortunate. And this note, suffi∣ciently appéereth, of the congruent apparancie.
Whose face appeareth long, is noted vnshame∣fast, and iniurious: and this caused through the mightie hotenesse (after the opinion of the Phi∣siognomer Cocles which is cause of the length∣ning out of the same, that such through this, are so inuericundious. The person which hath blown temples, and that the veynes, and arteryes ap∣peare great: idenoted (after the minde of Rasis) to be verie yrefull and furious. The face fleshie, if with an euill fauourednesse formed: doth indicate such a creature to be feare∣full, and franticke at times: after the opinion of Palemon, and others. The face grosse, with a bignesse of the iawes, and rusticall looke, doth denote a dull capacitie, and rude nature, as the Philosopher reporteth. The face reddish of it selfe, doth witnesse such person to be rough or sturdie, and cruell. And if the cheekes be onely red, then iudge such a person to be often drunke, or at the least, often ouerséene with drinke. The learned Conciliatore wryteth, that the face small, and couered with a yealow colour, doth indicate such a creature to bée vicious, a deceyuer, and dronkard: as▪ Aristotle reporteth, that the same séemeth to declare. This verie of∣ten hath bene experienced, in the Phisiognomers time, especially in sundrie Princes, head Capi∣taines
of armies, Secretaries, and Imbassa∣dours, which (at that day) were supposed among them, both sapient and skilfull: that knewe wit∣tily to deceaue, and finde out a deceite. Whiles Cocles remayned at Rome, he there noted a most wicked person & leacherous: whose habitude in this place (by the way of an example) he mindeth to vtter & descrybe, after this maner. He was verie small or short of stature, in maner like to a Dwarfe, whose heares on the heade, were much in quantitie, and great: espe∣cially about the temples, were these séene black:
his face and countenaunce appeared rounde, and fleshie informe, the forehead bigge, and fleshie in like maner: the ouerbrowes great, through the much quantity of heares: the eies bigge tending outwarde: in the corners of which, were seene many firie spottes, his looke was sturdy and wild∣lie: the Pellicles about the eies, puffed vp: the chéekes were fleshie: the eares founde great: the nose bigge and shorte: in whose middle appea∣red a hollownesse, like vnto (the little Dogges) of Spaine. The nostrils were séene to be large open, the mouth (in respect of the habitude) great: the lippes in forme founde verie thicke: and tur∣ned outwarde, after the maner of the Mury∣ans the chinne discerned bigge and round: the colour of the whole face, appeared wanne adust: the bearde founde thicke and black: the necke knowne to be grosse, and liuely stirring: the téeth placed thick, or thick standing togither, and bigge appeared: the vnder chinne séene verie fleshie: the breast formed large, with great pappes: the armes short and fleshie, the handes short, and in like maner fleshy: the fingers small compouned, and muscled or brawned: the nailes séene shorte informe, pale, black, and rough: the shoulder pointes founde verie fleshie: the back (in respect of the constitution of bodye) large, and fleshie: the belly founde bigge to a Tonne: the Pecten
séene verie hearie, and thicke, or much in quanti∣tie: the diry discerned full of apparant veynes: the flanckes and buttocks were fleshie: the Pe∣ritoneon or space betwéene the legges, bearing outwarde: the hippes bigge, and seene fleshy: the legges (in respect of the personage) were slender: the féete small, and but a little brawned: the soules of the féete, were formed with an equall vpper face, or euennesse throughout, and fleshie: the whole personage was founde hote, and moyst: with a swiftnesse of pase in his going: the steps treding shorte, and the eies appeared protensed, and large open in the going: the spéech vttered verie quick: breathing strong, and thick togither: the whole body séene most hearie. As touching the forme of this mans hande: A the Paulme (through the flatnesse of the montes) was not hollow. B The life line was stretched out long, and red in colour. C The vp∣per angle was seperated. D The middle naturall lyne, was séene red and thwart in forme, and euil situated. E The mensale lyne was founde great, and with inordynate creastes. F The monte of Venus bearing vp full. G with the Sister of the lyfe lyne, situated on the monte. H There was a Tryangle, no where formed in the hande. Iu∣piters monte not lyned, and euill coloured, with the Character C. placed on the same Tubercle.
And on the back of that finger were lynes sëene, formed to a starre. I The Zone or girdle of Ve∣nus, in the proper place, appeared redde. K The Sunnes monte, euill conditioned. L Mercuries Tubercle, appeared obscure or darke shadowed. The Moones place . figured with such a charac∣ter. M The lyfe line was grosse, betwéene the thombe, and forefinger. Thus was this moste wicked man, formed in personage, and lyned in the hande. So that through such a habitude, he vsed both kindes of coei2ngt3, as well with the 2l1sm as 2le1smf: and other detestable matters he exercised, not here méete to be vttered. To conclude, he was the most vicious person, of all others, that euer the Phisiognomer vnderstoode, or knewe in his time. In a man the face remayneth, but the coun∣tenaunce doth alter: so that the countinaunce is named of the Latine worde Volando, which properly in Englishe signifieth a flying or vanish∣ing away. The countinaunce appearing sowre, through the forme and condition of the lippes, chéekes, forehead, and grinning: doth indicate such a per∣son, to be a foole, and frantick at tymes: by the report of the Phisiognomer. A cheerefull and smyling countinaunce séene, doth innuate suche a creature to be gyuen vnto
myrth, and to be lybidinous after nature. The face often sweating, and that of a light or small stirring: doth argue hotnesse, or a hote condition to consist in that person. And suche a creature is knowne of experience, to be leache∣rous, gluttonous, and a great féeder. Of which insueth indygestion, and a siknesse to come: as the Phisiognomer hath sundrie times noted. The face appearing valled or dented in, and rather more leane than fatte, doth innuate such a creature to be iniurious, enuious, a lyar, conten∣tious, cruell, yea a murderer: if the same espe∣cially be annexed vnto adustion, and that the co∣lour be eyther wanne, or yellowe appearing: as the same (the Physiognomer sundrie times) hath
obserued and knowne. And euerye countenaunce, when the same ap∣peareth full of fleshe, and fatte: doth denote (by the agréement of most wryters) such a creature to be sluggish, and giuen vnto pleasure and wan∣ton actions. The face appearing verie much awrye, leane, and long: procureth after the mince of the Phi∣siognomer) a rude creature in condition, malici∣ous, and enuious: and the same, affirmeth lear∣ned Rasis. A sadde countenaunce, doth indicate sadnesse, and heauinesse of minde in that creature: but the frowning looke, doth denote such a person, to be a bethincker, and an imagyner of déepe matters: yea wylie, fearefull in actions, and indeuoreth himselfe to be craftie. The face well proportioned, both in the forme of the fleshe, colour, and in the partes connexed: doth argue a lawdable lyfe or disposition, and flowing in vertues. Yet many men hath the Phi∣siognomer Cocles obserued and noted, which were néere vnto an infortune: whose looke or countenaunce afore (although it were, or séemed hid vnto the same time) yet their countenance after became difformable: so yt their faces were caused more difformable, then these to fore ap∣peared: and their eyes were drawne awrye, that
they séemed léering, with their eye liddes gathe∣red, and eye browes shed downewarde: and had the other notes to these aunswering. And the Phisiognomer this noted manye times: and the like he iudged of a person, named Petrus Capre∣olus: who succéeded, & came vnto the like estate, as the skilfull Phisiognomer Cocles had progno∣sticated of him. The face séene hollow, from the beginning of the forehead, vnto the ende of the chinne, that the
nose and mouth séeme placed, as they were in a valley, doth innuate euill conditions, especiallye if the same be with a wanne, or adust colour. For suche hath the Phisiognomer knowne, to haue béene murtherers, full of wordes, contentious, yea Pirates, and théeues. Take héede (sayth Cocles) that you be not de∣ceyued, in the iudgement of the leaprous: for as much as their eyes are round, & the veynes emi∣nent or bearing outward, & a cytrinesse of colour mixed vnto the rednesse: and such are caused ve∣ry quicke of styrring, and possesseth a straitnesse the Nosethrilles, with a most vehement or migh∣tie horcenesse: in such maner, that the like crea∣ture is knowne to speake, as it were in the nose. The Gummes also of such creatures, and the endes of their noses, are knowne to be eaten a∣way: their skinne besides is caused rough, and the heares of the ouerbroowes shed away: al which by the face, may artly be knowne: as the learned Arnoldus de villa noua, reporteth. A small face and countinance, doth witnesse a small and base witte. The countinaunce for∣med excéeding bigge, doth denote sluggishnesse in actions, a dull capacitie, and foolishnesse. VVhat to be noted and iudged, of the condition and forme, of the nose and Nosethrilles.
The. xxij. chapter. MAns face (after the minde of the Methapos∣coper) is thinne and verie passible, and no part there is of mans bodie, which like expresseth and vttereth the passion of the minde, as the face properly doth. Of which the minde altered by any cause, the Methaposcopers can readily espie and iudge. The passible place also of the face, are the eies which the Philosophers name to be the win∣dowes, and messengers of the minde, and next to these is the forehead. For we daylye sée in the place, that the veynes extenced in many subiects, when such are angred, do swell in a marueylous bignesse. The next part passible to these, is the Nose, in that the same is Cartilaginous (as with∣out
flesh) except that when the vertue of ingen∣dring, is mightie from the beginning of genera∣tion. So that this, before the other partes, cau∣seth mans face especially, to be eyther comelye, or deformable. When the nose is stretched and retching vnto the mouth, with a decent bignesse: doth then ar∣gue the bignesse of the Cartylage, and the multi∣tude or much quantitie of flesh, which compasseth the same Cartilage: in that the same cannot bée caused, but through a great hotenesse. For the property of heate is to dilate and lengthen out: so that the Nose, when the same is protensed or stretched vnto the mouth, doth indicate the com∣plection of the whole indiuiduate to be hote: of which both honestie, and boldnesse procéedeth, and is caused in that creature. The Nosetrilles bigge and large, doe witnesse the Testicles great: and that such a person to bée leacherous, a betrayer, deceytfull, a lyer, enuious, couetous, a niggarde, of a grosse witte, and some∣what fearefull, as certaine report: yet the cause of this matter, they alledge not, as the Phisiog∣nomer witnesseth. Here the Phisiognomer reporteth, that the na∣ture of heate is to dilate, but of colde to shrinke, and gather togither: so that through the large∣nesse of the Nosetrelles, is the cause of the hote
complexion knowne, of which the great testicles procéede, and luxurie in that creature: forthrough the multitude of Sperme, must the receptacle of necessitie be great and large, that the same maye receyue, and contayne the Sperme, or matter of the Sperme, vnto the digesting of it. Of the grosse humours, is the grosenesse & bignesse of members procured, & by the cōsequent are the spirits grosse: so that of this grossenesse, is the rudenesse of wit caused, as the Philosopher Aristotle vttereth (in libro. 2. de partibus Animaliū capit. 4.) of which a tenacitie, and couetousnesse insueth: in so much as suche cannot (through the same) rightlye dis∣cerne. The nose doth argue the qualitie of the heart: in that a big nose, doth indicate the hotenesse of the heart, and irefulnesse in that creature. And through this hotenesse (after the minde of Conci∣liatore) is the priuitie of man inlarged and cau∣sed great, as afore vttered. Of which, certaine reporte these wordes in Latin. Ad formam nasi, dignoscitur hasta Baiardi. By a lyke reason (sayth the Phisiognomer) may a man argue of the womans priuie place, vnder these wordes in Latine.
Nam mulieris pes est, signum oris verendae. The nose eyther bigge, or small: doth argue by the lyke, the mans, and womans  to be: in that the same being great, doth procéede of the grosse matter, and heate intensed. The 2Π of the 4552μ, is the note of . For the 2Π long, straight, and slender: doth like argue  to be: & econtra. The measure of  hif 2φ4, is the proportion & measure of the  of , in euery one. Of which a learned Phisition vttereth the same, vnder these wordes in Latin. Ad formam pedis, tu nosces portā mulieris. The smalnesse and thinnesse of the skinne of
, of a : is onely knowne by the condition of the  of the 4μh52 in eue∣ry one: for if the B1λ31 of the 4μh52 are B2γγ3: then doe they declare the like  or 1λ3B1 of the  to bee, if but , then likewise . &c. The Nosetrelles are the larger partes of the Nose, where the holes of breathing and smelling be séene, and by which, the humor of the brayne, is purged, The Nosetrelles of the Nose, doe like declare the genitours to be (if we may credite the Phisi∣ognomer) for if these be bigge and large, then like are the genitours of Man, iudged to be bigge and large: but if the Nosetrilles appeare small and narrow, then like are the genitours iudged small &c. Of which this rule seldome fayleth, except by accidence: as eyther through a sicknesse, or by the often tractions with the hande: which practise (as the Phisiognomer reporteth) is more commonly exercised of the Cynedes or effeminate persons: which by that maner of dealing, haue greatly in∣creased this member: as hée of experience, hath knowne in many. And he also vttereth of skill knowne, that in many persons, is the right hande bigger, than the left: in that the same (by his rea∣son) commeth oftner in vse. The Nose bigge and hawked to the Eagles
bill, doth argue suche a creature to be stowte, cruell, and greedye catching: for that thys procéedeth of a great heate. And such of this, are knowne to be yrefull, reuenging, and doing vn∣lawfull things. For this drawing togither of the nose, is caused by reason of the hotnesse: as eui∣dently appeareth in a leather skinne, throwne in∣to the fyre: which through heate of the fyre, ga∣thereth togither: so that of the same, suche ar knowne to be hote▪ and by the consequent Chol∣lericke, and stowte, by reason of the hotnesse bea∣ring sway. Also these for the other part & cause,
are yrefull and reuenging (as afore vttered) in that such workinges procéede, of an excessiue hot∣nesse. Of the Aquyline nose, doth the skilfull Asculanus write (in the mother tongue) after this maner, in his booke de Cerbae. LImpia forma cum laquilino naso, viuer desia de lo ben daltrui: Finche la morte vien cum limpio caso▪ Gentil magnifico fora de pietade, Semprediserue non guardando a cui: si come fera senza humanitate. This Philosopher Asculanus concludeth, that suche are cruell, and handling or working false matters: and procure or doe all things without any regarde of the right or wrong, euen vnto the death, and these without humanitie at all: for as much as such a Chollerick body, doth indicate a rauening minde and will. The experience of which, the Phisiognomer had many times, espe∣cially in sundrie Princes: and of these, one was an Italian king, whose fame was sufficiently di∣dulgated, and knowne to all Italy. But here ry∣seth a doubtfull question, worthie to be knowne: and the same is, which the Phisiognomer Cocles graunteth vnto, that there be two chollerick
subiects founde, hauing both Aquyline or hawked noses: and of these, the one knowne and founde to be, of a chollerick complexion, and the habi∣tude chollerick: the colour also of that creature, séene to be Cytryne or wanne aduste. But the habitude of the other person, knowne to be per∣fite, and of a good complexion, that is Sanguine: yet the same tending vnto choller. Of the first (in aunswering vnto this doubt) I say (sayth the Phisiognomer) that he is of an in∣tensed malignitie, by reason of the corroboration, throughe the same spirite, which is conioyned wholly in the Chollerick subiect, both of nature, and by accidence. By accydence (sayth Cocles) I speake, through the wanne colour, which signi∣fieth a colde complexion, and Melancholick adust: which that colour properly causeth. As the like, the Phisiognomer Cocles obserued and noted, in a certaine Italian Prince, which altogither was a wicked person, and causer of the destruction of much people, and a sower of discorde and de∣bate among many. But the ende of this creature was detestable, vnto the vtter infamie both of him and his lynage. But of the seconde and other person I saye, that when the habitude is Sanguine, it is possible, that of the Chollerick, to be made or caused Sanguine, and of the San∣guine Chollerick by accydence, when the ages
alter these. So that a man maye conclude, that when this in a Sanguine body, the same is then of a remissyue or qualified malignitie. The rea∣son is, for that the bloude is a snaffle or brydle vn∣to the choller, by which the malice of it is depres∣sed. And one (of like condition (sayth the Physi∣ognomer, was that famous Chyromancer Gala∣sius nigrisolus Carpensis: For as much as his complexion was knowne to be Sanguine, and a little flewmaticke: and verie effeminate he was: yet from the shoulders vpwarde, tending vnto the Chollerick qualitie: so that not frée he was, from the vices aboue noted. And sometimes is the same depressed, through the part of the complexion and composition, as afore vttered. The Aquyline or hawked nose (after the minde of Conciliatore) seene in a body verie Chollerick, that is, Cytrine or wanne aduste, is noted the wickedder conditioned: by the wordes aboue vt∣tered of the Phisiognomer. The Aquyline or Hawked nose, decerned in a Sanguine body, or of such a like qualitie, ten∣ding vnto Choller: is of Auicen iudged, not so euill. The Aquyline nose in ioynt maner ioyned to the foreheade, doth indicate suche a person to be stowte, and hardie: applyed after forme vnto the Eagle. This maner of ioynting or to be ioynted
vnto the forehead, is vnderstanded and ment of him which hath the emynencie or bearing out to∣warde the forhead, and such are named to be grée∣die catchers, of the heate and dryeth caused: and signifieth also such to be yrefull, violent in wrath and chollerick. Here the Phisiognomer taketh in hande, to describe Charles the French king, whose figure or picture naturally, and lyuely counterfayted with colours, by a singuler Paynter in a Table: was brought and shewed vnto the Phisiogno∣mer, for him diligently to beholde: which at the earnest request, and intreatie so did: & he further, learned, of a religious Hermit, the whole com∣position of this kings body, which was on thys wise. He had a bigge heade, the Nose excéeding hawked, and great, the lippes somewhat thinne, the chinne rounde, and pitted or dented in, the eyes bigge, and somewhat bearing out, the neck shorte, and not sufficient strong in the compositi∣on, the breast and back large: the loynes & flancks sufficient great: the belly fleshie: the buttockes reasonable large: the haunches and legges, slen∣der: yet sufficient bigge vnto the length: of the séete doth the Phisiognomer here nothing vtter. Thus in proportioning al the members togither, the Phisiognomer pronounced, that this mighti king, was short lyued: and that his death procée∣ded
by a Catherrall and féeble matter, fuming from the stomacke, and like discending againe from the heade to the stomacke, and of such cau∣ses aunswerable. &c. Althoughe some there be which report, that he dyed of poysoning. The Phisiognomers reason of this iudge∣ment was, in that his heade, nose, and breast, &c. were bigge, and indicated the multitude of mat∣ter, and the same inobedient consisting in him: through which the vertue ruling, could not direct the whole bodye, for his euill composition. Of
which is to be learned, that euery signe is a re∣presenter of his proper note: for as much as the same slendernesse in the hippes, signified the ver∣tue and strength of the braine, to be féeble and weake: and caused an euill qualitie, or condition of the sinewes: and disorder of the royall mem∣bers: without whose good agréement, it is im∣possible, that life coulde be long in that creature. He was also knowne to be luxurious, and the reason agréeable (is aboue vttred of the Phisiog∣nomer) which confirmeth that the nourishment, which ought by due nature to be conuerted and runne vnto the haunches, and legs, was by that maner of life, otherwise conuerted into Sperme. So that this king was of like nature and dispo∣sition, as aboue described of the Phisiognomer: yet the qualitie (as it should séeme) of lesser ma∣lice in the members, contrarie working vnto a hotenesse of the heart: and he was wanne of co∣lour, which by accydence signified the dominion of coldnesse and Melancholye to consist in him. And the selfe same (he reporteth)  the Aquv∣line or hawked nose, did somewhat depresse. But the emynencie or bearing out of the eyes signi∣fied, that the fore ventricle of the braine, was flewmatick: which to conclude, fortified (as he sayth) the shortnesse of lyfe: and according as the Phisiognomer had iudged on this king, euen
so he learned and vnderstoode, that a short tyme he raigned. The French king that raigned, in the Phi∣siognomers time, for his euill habitude, and com∣position of body, lyued and raigned but a shorte tyme: according as the skilfull Phisiognomer had iudged and pronounced, at the sight of hys picture, brought vnto him, earnestlye to vewe and beholde: the personage or counterfayte of whome, was on this wise: he had the head some∣what sharpe in composition, the forhead narrow,
the eyes appearing bigge, and emynent: the face shewed leane, the heares of the heade, séemed of nature short: the Nosethrils appeared large, and bearing vp, the lips shewed thicke, but the chinne appeared sharpe: the neck short, and slender for∣med: the shoulders shewed leane and narrowe: the armes and handes were decerned slender and long in forme: the epiglotis emynent: the furcle of the breast appeared narrowe, and the breast like narrowe in forme: the stature of this king, appeared rather crooked or stooping, then vpright: the body of this creature, was founde Cholle∣rick: the mouing of the eyes decerned, & knowne to be swifte, and rolled or tourned vpwarde in the motion: the legges (to be briefe) were séene slen∣der, in composition. As touching the laudable prayses of this king, the Phisiognomer founde not any iustly to report: in that his vices, were is knowne vnto many, and diuulgated (in a ma∣ner) euery where. But in returning vnto the purpose, there was an other Aquyline nose, which coulde not so well put in practise or exercise his gouernement, as the other aboue vttered: whose name was Co∣drus (a man knowne) to be a singular learned Poet in the Latine tongue, and had the fame and segnyoritie for the Gréeke tongue: whose corpo∣rature and personage was on this wise: he had
the heade congruently formed: the forehead was playne, and of a meane bignesse: the eyes stoode sufficient hollowe: and in colour like vnto the gray skie, not shyning or glistering: the nose for med like vnto the Eagles bill: the face founde long: the lippes séene reasonably formed, as these somewhat thinne: the chinne appeared dented in: the neck founde long: the Epyglottis emy∣nent: the shoulder poyntes large, and somewhat bearing out: the breast and haunches found slen∣der and narrow: the thighes, and shanckes séene small: yet these agréeable vnto the other partes,
of the bodye: the héeles founde flatte: the féete were long and slender. Of which notes Almansor secundus vttereth, that the sharpnesse of the nose, the long neck, the voyce sharpe, or small, and the comlynesse of com∣plexion, demonstrated togither a drynesse in that creature, through the part of the chollerick qua∣litie. But his composition of bodye, was founde small: and the place of the stomacke, decerned narrow: his digestion also of meate, was knowne to be both weake and small, through the little and narrow stomack: his hart was founde to be cold, through the length of his neck: hée was besides conetous and fearefull, which is contrarie vnto magnanimitie or boldnesse: in that the same pro∣ceedeth of a hote qualitie. Yet had thys person a readie wit, through the comely forme of the head: for as much as the knitting and conioyning of the spirites was laudable, by which, the decent Organe, aptly serued vnto reason: especiallye, for the eminencie of the foreheade in bredth: but the breast, the ribbes, the héeles, and the necke, were founde all effeminate, which (as aboue vt∣tered) be contrarie vnto magnanimitie: the A∣quyline or hawked nose indicated (as the Phisi∣ognomer reporteth) his couetousnesse: that so mightily (by his report) bare sway in him. Thus sayth he, a man must proportionate, all the mem∣bers
togither: for otherwise shall it be in vaine, to iudge or pronounce any matter at all (after the minde of the Physiognomer) on any subiect. The nose séene flatte, doth signifie such a per∣son to be luxurious, hastie in wrath, and faynt hearted: for the dominion of the moysture, and flowme in that creature: as the learned Conci∣liatore reporteth. Here concraue (sayth the Phisiognomer Co∣cles)
that when the nose appeareth flatte, then is a hotnesse and moysture indicated in that person: for as much as the hotnesse of the Aquyline or hawked nose, is caused with a drynesse. So that the flatte noses are procured through a hotnesse and moysture: in that the moysture causeth, the inlarging of the nose: of which such are knowne hote and moyst, that properly cause the luxurie in them. When any report such persons, that they are hastie in wrath, the same procéedeth (as the Phi∣siognomer reporteth) of an ouermuch hotenesse: and the inflamation of spirites moued and procu∣red, through the aboundance of matter: and of that inflamation (by the report of Cocles) is the prefulnesse caused in such. An other cause, shall here be vttered, in that the inflamation of the spirite, can not soone or spéedily be cooled, through the narrow passage: as shall appéere, in the mat∣ter folowing. Of which, the singular Philosopher Ascula∣nus, in the mother tongue, wrote these worthie verses ensuing. EL concauato è anchora il naso simo, ciascun di loro a la luxuria acosta: Piu del secundo dico che del primo. chi la subtile e ne lextremo aguzo,
Ouero rotundo cum obtusa posta: mouesi ad ira el primo come cuzo: Laltro e magnanimo, e dae graue stile. The person which hath a short nose, and the same flatte: is iudged (after the minde of the Phisiognomer) to be lasciuious: and as some wryte, to be a théefe. The nose séene short, the mouth formed small, and the teeth founde short and bigge: doe denote (after the minde of the worthie Conciliatore) a moyst and colde complexion. The sharpenesse of the nose séene, the necke founde long, the voyce heard small and comely: are apparaunt notes of a temperate chollerick qualitie: as the learned Rasis, the worthy Al∣bertus, Ptolomeus paruus, and other report, and Cocles with them. Here conceaue, that the nose formed broads in the middle, and appearing bended vnto the top: doth indicate such a creature, to be full of words, a lyar, and yrefull. The reason is, in that the same eleuation or rysing of the nose, and hollownesse vnto the middle: is procured of the chollericke qualitie, and paucitie of the Cartylage: For as much as Choller hath consumed that persons heate, and caused a drawing togyther of the
skinne in that part, as aboue vttered (of the A∣quyline nose) so that the partes, which shall not be impouerished or lessened (by the same) of flesh: is bicause the fleshy part hath a viscous and clam∣mie moysture, through which, the same is not so soone & lightly resolued. The cause of the yreful∣nesse in that creature procéedeth of choller, and through the passages hyndered, as shall after ap∣peare in the proper place. The Phisiognomer Cocles reporteth, that hée hath many tymes noted of experience in infinite subiects: & in all his life time, he neuer sawe any, which were not possessed with a heape of vices, especially for lying, or for theyr ymagining lyes: and this caused, by the Chollericknesse consisting
in them: for which cause, this Cocles willeth a man to beware, and take héede, of the felowship∣ping with such: as of all which (sayth he) experi∣ence in short time, will instruct thée perfite. The Nose formed sharpe at the ende, doth in∣dicate such a person to be a lyar, contentious, and yrefull: the reason is (as the Phisiognomer re∣porteth) in that such are of a chollericke qualitie, for as much as the leannesse, and sharpenesse of the Nose, doth for the more part happen, through the abundaunce of choller. The same ende also hath, narrow passages, in which the ayre can not passe nor enter, to coole the heart: so that of this, it long remayneth inflamed: which is cause of the contending, and quarrelling of that person. The lyke creature (by report of the Phisiog∣nomer)
was that Antonius, a learned scribe and notarie. Yea he noted many other Countrie men of his, to be lyke: among the number of which, Cocles obserued and knewe a iolly fellowe of the lyke nature, and conditions, named Vandinus de Fauentia, which was a betrayer of his curteous Lorde, and principall ayder, sonne vnto the noble Astorgius Fauentia: by whose meanes, and other mightie deceyuers aboute him, was this gentle Lorde by commaundement, conueyed or caryed vnto prison in Rome, and shut vp as close priso∣ner, in that goodly strong Castle, named Sancti Angeli: where not manye Monethes abyding, was lamentably murdered, of a most cruell Ba∣stard, by a headlong fall, as the Phisiognomer learned and vnderstoode: which wicked creature after the fact committed, miserablie pyned away, euen like an ymage of war, standing in the hotest Sunne. When the Nose shall bée meanely small, a little drie vpwarde, and at the ende raysed vp, and the neather part or ende, turned agayne vpward: or that his cleft be procéeding from beneath, vnto the part turned vpward, towarde the cone of the Nose: doth then indicate luxurie, or such an abuse of the bodie, not here decent to be vttered: as the learned Conciliatore in his Rubricke of Phisi∣ognomie reporteth.
The lyke of this, the Phisiognomer Cocles obserued and noted sundrie tymes, especiallye in one of the Senate house, of the noble citie of Bo∣nonie: which for reuerence vnto the noble house, & honesty sake, he refuseth to name. The cause is, forasmuch as such are of a moyst, and sanguine qualitie, tending vnto choller: and these vniuer∣sally (by report of the Phisiognomer) are luxuri∣ous, in both the kindes, euen as the same through the pricking forwarde of choller, which dayly in∣flameth the bloud. And the regitine nature of the whole bodye, mooueth or stirreth forward the expulsiue vertue, vnto the sending forth of ye noyous matter super∣fluous, and expelleth the same vnto the congruen∣ter
places, by the apt passages: and sendeth the same foorth vnto the rdy, in that it is the cause of the erection of it. So that such helpe forewarde themselues, by a proper industrie, not decent (for honestie sake) to be here vttered, when as the desi∣red subiect is not at hand. And ye apparaunt notes of these persons are, that such haue the nose bigge and blunt especially at the ende: and the nostrils wide and large, through the grosenesse or bignesse of the nose. The singuler Aristotle (in Methaphoricis) vt∣tereth, that such hauing ye nose bigge at the ende, are of an earnest and readie minde, vnto the con∣cupiscence of the desired act: such also are knowne to be base, and of no reputation, applyed for the
forme vnto the Oxe: in that such especially in the venereall act, are so prone and easily mooued, that they couet in minde what person so euer they sée, which especiallye is knowne to be true: for the actiue coeating as with women: for such after the sight of women, séeme in a maner to mourne vnto themselues: as the Bull doth after the Cow: and such (Asculanus reporteth) that they are yrefull. The selfe same note vttereth Rasis vnder these wordes: that whose nosethrilles are founde to be large, is argued to he a person luxurious. Such which haue the nose formed bigge and brode, are vnsesible, vnshamefast, vnapt to learne, and sluggish, applyed after the forme vnto the Sowe, hauing the like nose. The reason of this is, for as much as such hauing the nose grosser or bigger at the ende than in anye other part, and that large, are inuericundious, vnapt to learne, and vnsensible. That is, rude: for which cause, such are applyed vnto the Sowe, hauing the lyke nose, and the like conditions in a maner. The nose sharpe at the ende, doth denote such a person to be yrefull, applyed after the kinde vn∣to the dogge: as Conciliatore reporteth. He which hath a meruaylous short nose, doth argue such a person to be an accuser, and a pick∣thanke: as the skilfull Phylemon and Palemon report.
The nose formed sharpe at the ende, and the same thinne, yet vpwarde towarde the foreheade more grosse: doth denote (of experience knowne) that such a person hardly to remitte hys yre: ap∣plyed for the kinde (after the minde of Concilia∣tore) vnto the yrefull Dogge. The nose formed bloont at the ende, and round withall: doth indicate such a creature to be stowt of courage: applyed of the Philosopher Aristotle for the kinde, vnto the hardie Lyon. The same note by relation, sufficiently appeareth to moste men at this day. The ende of the nose séene small and sharpe, like to the forme of the birdes becke or bill, and generally long: doth declare such a person to be
hastie, foolish, and like stirring to and fro: as the learned Rasis reporteth, and of him compared vn∣to the birde. And the same like, doth the long, and thinne nose signifie. The nose verye retort, or the same turning backe or vpwarde, doth (for the more part) denote, the like peruerse minde, and conditions, to con∣sist in that creature. The nose formed from the forehead vnto the mouth a long crooking, and hard or verye stiffe: doth denote such a person to be vnshamefast, ap∣plied for the forme (of Aristotle) vnto the Rauen. And such were knowne naturally to be theeues, as Gulielmus Nurice reporteth. The lyke vttereth the Phisiognomer, that
suche a person is knowne manye tymes to be a théefe, and by the consequent vnshamefast: foras∣much as this exposition, is aptly aunswering or agréeth: and it appeareth lyke by the relation which he here vttereth, in that such (after ye forme) are applied vnto the Rauen. For the Rauen is well knowne, to be a wily and deceytfull Byrde, purchasing manye things by stealth, and hyding those in priuie places. The Nose founde rysing, and copping vp, to∣warde the foreheade, like vnto the Eagles beake: are noted to be stowt, bolde, and gréedie catchers: applyed of Aristotle (after the kinde) vnto the Eagle: and as the same in manye, hath of the Phisiognomer béene diligently noted. The Nose appearing hollowe, with the fore∣heade formed rounde, and eminent vpward, doth indicate such a person, to be luxurious: applyed after the kinde, vnto the Cocke: and this note sufficiently appeareth, by the relation. The nose formed great, yet in a comely ma∣ner throughout: doth argue such a person to be honest, and gentle conditioned, after the minde of Conciliatore. The Nose great, and at the ende appearing with an vnséemely bignesse: doth the like declare (as aboue vttered) that such a person, to be vnsen∣sible, vnapt to learne. &c. applyed for the forme,
vnto the Sowe. The Nose séene in the vpper part depressed, or flat formed: doth argue the féeblenesse of cou∣rage, and foolishnesse in that creature: and this besides is a note, of womanly lightnesse to con∣sist in him: after Rasis. The Nose on such wise formed, that the same from the foreheade immediately crooketh: such a person (after the mind of learned) Plato, Albertus, and Conciliatore) is iudged impudent, and a pri∣uie filcher: applyed for the forme, vnto the sub∣till Rauen. The Nose in comely forme crooking, doth in∣dicate an honest minde, and singuler witte: as the worthie Conciliatore reporteth, in his Rubricke of Phisiognomie, and Cocles the lyke.
Here conceyue (sayth the Phisiognomer) that the declyning of the Nose, on the laterall partes of man: as if vnto one side onely of the position, it shall decline: doth denote a hurt to happen, from the Girdle stéede, vnto the lowest part. But if the nose downewarde shall be deuided, on ey∣ther side, of the position: doth then indicate a sick∣nesse, or a stripe to happen: and this eyther of the primitiue, or antecedent cause. The nose at the ende, formed somewhat flatte: doth declare such a person to be bolde, and liberal: applyed for the forme, vnto the Lyon. The nose appearing red, with the roote and hole within, and bréedeth drawing vnto a swel∣ling, lyke to the Strawberry: doth argue such a person, to be a great drinker of wine, and often druncke: and such for the more part, are moyst of qualitie, and luxurious: especially if such a note be founde, in bodyes of a small stature: and this was a practise, first founde by the Phisiognomer Cocles. The Nosethrilles formed wide, doe denote such a creature to be yrefull: and this note pro∣ceedeth, of the ouermuch hotenesse of the heart: for how much the more open & wide these are, so much the greater yre they signifie. The singuler Conciliatore (in his Rubriek of Phisiognomy) re∣porteth, that such hauing the nosethrilles stopped,
are noted foolish, and of a small vnderstanding. The Nosethrilles (after nature) thinne, and verye large open: doe denote after the minde of the Phisiognomer) such a person to bée yrefull, cruell, and of a disdaynfull minde. The Nosethrilles formed thinne, and long retching, are by nature nere vnto birdes: but the same proportionally agréeing vnto men, is a note of lightnesse, and an vnstablenesse of mynde, as Conciliatore learnedly vttereth. The Nosethrilles appearing thinne and sharpe, doe witnesse such a person (after the minde of the Phisiognomer) to be full of complaintes. The part of the Nosethrilles, ioyning vnto the foreheade, if from the forehead extending, the same be with a comely composition, and that well
ioyning togither: in such maner, as this be ney∣ther to high, nor to lowe fixed of nature: but euen direct (as a line or creast) discendeth: doth then in∣dicate (by the report of the Phisiognomer) a man∣ly note, and courage in that creature, yea con∣stancie, and wisedome: applyed of Aristotle for the forme, vnto the hardie Lyon. But if the part of the Nosetrilles be lower or flatter, and that déeper than the abouesayde, doth argue the vn∣discreatnesse of minde, & weakenesse of strength, and courage: séeing the same is knowne to bée the note of a femenine lightnesse. If the Nosetrilles in the toppe directly eleua∣ted, extende whole: doe indicate an euill gouern∣ment and distemperaunce in that creature.
And such are those, which in the inwarde ende of the gristle be raysed vp vnto the creast, and doe so discende to the Nose: which when these be di∣rect, doe (after the opinion of the Phisiognomer) procure, the disorder of the tongue, in the vttering of speach and sounding wordes. The greater and wyder Nosethrilles simplie, are (of all the Metoposcopers) better allowed and commended, than the lesser forme of them. The lesser Nosethrilles, by the agréement of Plato, Phylemon, and Ptholomeus paruus, are naturallye ascribed vnto seruile wittes, ouer∣thwarters, wranglers, and to théeues. The Nosethrilles formed large open, do wit∣nesse such a creature to be addicted or giuen vnto myrth, and strong in the composition of bodie. The Nosethrilles séene very narrow, rounde formed, and as they were confusedly shutte togi∣ther: do witnesse (after the opinion of the learned Conciliatore in his Rubricke of Phisiognomie) foolishnesse, the vnaptnesse to learne, and the fée∣blenesse of courage in that creature. The auncient Rasis, and Albertus report, that the largenesse of the Nosethrilles, and the muche quantitie of flesh on the Iawes, and the little quā∣titie of heares on the chéekes, doe signifie a moyst complexion. The Nosethrilles appearing very blunt, doe
argue such a person to be foolishe: but the Nose∣thrilles formed final, do indicate a peruerse mind, and péeuishe conditions. The heares which growe within the Nose∣thrilles of man, if these be many, thicke growing, and bigge appearing: doe argue an vnstable minde, and grosse witte, as Conciliatore repor∣teth and the Phisiognomer Cocles of experience, affirmeth the same. If the heares within the Nosethrilles, are found fewe and soft: doe witnesse after the minde of the Phisiognomer a ready witte, apt to learne and honest condicioned. The iudgement of the forme and condition of the eares. The. xxiij. chapter.
THe eares declare the temperament, and pro∣portion of the principall members, and espe∣cially the brayne, which experience certifieth vs. For that the braine doth sometimes sende forth a noysome matter behinde the eares, of which is there ingendred and caused many tymes an im∣postume, and the same according to the diuersi∣tie of the humours. Of which the Phisitions name these, the clensing places of the members, and superfluities. The eares great, are ingendred and caused through the multitude of matter, in the begin∣ning of generation, of the strong vertue. And all such in a maner which haue great cares (as the Phisiognomer hath noted) are knowne to haue a short necke, and head sufficient comélye, and are Sanguine: and such for the more part ten∣ding vnto choller, or vnto grosse bloude some∣what adust. Such also are vnpacient, and lightly angrie. For which cause, the Philosopher repor∣teth, that such are foolishe, (this being excepted) that they are of a good minde and intention, that is, after the departure of the inflammation, and kindling about the heart: for as much as this de∣clareth a hotnesse of the hart, through the veynes & arteries, as in the Anothomy may wel be decer∣ned. And such are of a good memory, in that they
haue a séemely neck, being an expresser of the braine, and demonstrating a good disposition: and perhaps through the Collericke qualitie, is the retention of kinds, and through the qualitie of the sinewes, which are of a drie nature. After the quayling & abating of iniuries, such are of a good intention, in that these cause a good discourse: and noted to be long liued: for as much as in them is a good proportion, betwéene the heate and moy∣sture. And such a persō which possesseth a meane, is moderate in his actions. The selfe same is con∣firmed of the Philosopher, in lib. i. Animalium, cap. 11. Where he reporteth, that those which are most apt and readie in hearing, be well nurte∣xed and conditioned. Such (sayth he) haue a note of the best maners, which possesse meane eares.
The eares great, and directed aboue measure, are notes of foolishnesse, or that such to be bab∣lers: as the Philosopher Aristotle vttereth. The selfe same reporteth Auicen pri. de Animalibus: that when the first pulpe, that is, of the eares, is ioyned with the fleshe of the iawe, doth signifie a foole, and vaine person. The Philosopher also vttereth, in Methapho∣ricis, that such persons which haue small eares, like to the Ape: haue (of that reason) Apishe con∣ditions. But such that haue bigge eares, are no∣ted to be dullards, and applyed to the Asse. And if any shall sée a person haue the eares formed like vnto the Dogges, are noted to haue the best, and to be in a meane maner, these hytherto Auicen. So that such hauing the eares ouer small, are noted Apishe, that is, they haue Apishe conditi∣ons: in which a man may see, that malignitie and deceyte to haue dominion in them. Such hauing the eares ouer great in respect of the quantitie of body, are Asses, that is, fooles, and of a dull vnderstanding: as the former Aristotle reporteth, primo de Animalibus. Such hauing the eares meane in quantitie, is a good note, for that the same prooueth by the si∣militude, of the disposition in good Dogges. Rasis reporteth, that whose eares are bigge, is a foole, yet long lyued after nature: when the
eares are erected vp and very great: doe indicate the multitude of matter, and the same inobedient as to the due forme: and the dominion of dry∣nesse indicated, which is cause of the erection or standing vpright. The eares flexible or bending, doe demonstrate the proportion of heate and moysture: and the moysture is cause of the bending: as the like ap∣peareth in a skinne and woode, which when they are crooked or winded inwarde, are moyst, for o∣therwise are their partes broken, if we sée their matter to be drie. And of this it is, that Ptholo∣mie the Philosopher reporteth, that the eares great and bended downeward, doe denote riches. When the eares are very small, the paucitie of matter and weake vertue of the braine is sig∣nisied:
and the chollericke matter argued: of which the subtill spirits caused: so that such haue a wyt or be ingenious in euill workes, and are théeues, foolishe, and so couetous, that they desire all things. And through that coueting, such are luxurious: & vnderstanded perhaps of the immo∣derate appetites, and not of the power or force of the matter. The learned Palemon vttereth, that when the eares shall be promynent and verie great, foolish∣nesse and garrulitie is signified in that creature: and such are knowne to bée couetous. But the eares which are as they were cut, and verie short and parted, doth Loxius report, to attempt and commit a deceyte. The eares formed semicircularly, and creasts connexed, in the middle somewhat flatte toward the centre, and of a meane bignesse, which de∣cently stande to the heade, doe wytnesse a good∣nesse of nature. But the eares ouer rounde, sig∣nifie suche a person to be vnapt to learne. The eares long and narrowe, are reported to be the notes of enuie. The eares lying or standing close with the heade, are reported to signifie dulnesse and sing∣gishnesse, as Albertus vttereth: the reason and cause of the signification, is for that the hertue formatiue, when the Organes are directly for∣med:
or that the instrument of heate and the kinde quayleth or wanteth, causeth that the ma∣lice of the matter doth so inlarge the eares out of measure: or through the drynesse or scarcitie of the same, causeth them to drawe togither, and be narrowe, in respect of the due proportion: and of this can not gouerne the works of the spirite: but that the eares like insue, according to the plentie and scarcitie of matter, for as much as they thus proceede of the indiuisions of nature, these hitherto Albertus: I (sayth the Phisiogno∣mer) haue noted many olde men, and found them to haue great eares, and not small in that age. So that the small eares (after the agréement of most wryters) doe denote short lyfe: in thys agréeth Ptholomie the Philosopher, where he re∣porteth, that the eares small, be a note of shorte lyfe: and if the eares be hearie, doe indicate long lyfe. The reason is, that the smalnesse vttereth the paucitie of matter: and when these be hea∣rie, doe denote the matter to be sufficient strong in vertue, to heate the braine with a lawdable heating: in that the heares are caused through the vapours eleuated of the hotnesse of the heart, and all the other members. The eares hearie, doe pronounce a good and readie hearing, which is a note of the kinde and heate: and for that cause, I report the same. But
the eares perhaps of some man are ouer great, and of some small, of some meane, of some stan∣ding farre of from the heade, of some contrari∣wise lesse flat to the head, some being of a meane disposition: so that among these two, a meane of all the kindes which hitherto hath béene vttered, doe signifie a goodnesse of nature. Some report, that the eares gristly, doe indi∣cate such a person to be Melancholike, or of a Melancholike qualitie. But the eares great, doe denote the dominion of the Melancholike hu∣mour: as the like appeareth in the Hare, and Asse, which haue great eares, and are foolishe. So that such hauing the like eares, are of a lyke nature: and the Melancholike humours doe not
repugne vnto the length of lyfe. Conciliatore vttereth, that the forme of the eares, denoting the temperament, and goodnesse of nature consisteth alwayes of a semicirculare forme, and in figure of a meane greatnesse, and the creastes or lynes connexed, in the myddle somewhat flatte towarde the Centre, and stan∣ding séemely to the heade: For the contrarie po∣siture of the eares, doe denote a contrarie, to the abouesayde. The eares marueylous great, and standing out: doe witnesse foolishnesse, garrulitie, and im∣prudencie. Ptholomie the Philosopher vttereth, that the creature which hath thinne & drie eares, shall neuer possesse the welth of the worlde: and the same signifieth a complexion very chollerick, of which the exhauste intention procéedeth in the congruent workings, and argueth a most great vnstabilitie in that person. The selfe same Ptho∣lomie vttereth, that the person which hath equi∣nas aures, morietur dominus vel princeps. Conciliatore vttereth, that some report, that the eares small, do denote malignitie in that crea∣ture: The eares ouer rounde, to be vnapt to learne. The eares long, doe argue the person to be enuious. The broade eares fixed, in a right maner with the heade, doe indicate a slownesse in that creature.
The heares which are within the eares, if these be manye, thicke and long, doe indicate an earnest minde, in the desire of the actuall lust of the body. The signification and iudgement of the forme of the cheeke bones, and cheekes. The .xxiiij. chapter. THe balles of the cheekes, are the partes bea∣ring out, vnder the eyes: and these also named the chéeke bones: as writeth Gulielmus Nurice. The Iawes are the parts of the chéekes, out of which, the heares of the beard in man begin, and growe: as wryteth the learned Isydore, in lib. 11. capit. primo. The chéeke bones are often taken and named of the Phisiognomers, for the Iaw bones: and
lyke the worthie Constantine defineth them, and Conciliatore, in his Rubricke of Phisiognomie. The chéeke bones after Constantine, and Gulielmus Nurice, do especially declare the com∣plexion or qualitie of mankinde. The chéeke bones or chéekes, verye redde or ruddie appearing, yet myxed with a whitenesse tempered, and in substaunce formed not ouer grsse or fatte, but meanely fleshie: doe indicate a hote, and moyst qualitie, and temperament of the same: as Gulielmus Nurice, Phylemon, and o∣thers report. If the chéekes shall be white in colour, wyth∣out any rednesse mixed: doe signifie an excesse of the qualitie (especially of flewme) in that creature: as the Philosopher, Gulielmus Nurice, Conci∣liatore, and Cocles report.
The chéekes in substaunce, séene leave and thinne, and eyther swartishe, or cytryne in co∣lour: doe demonstrate a hote and drie complexi∣on in that person, or the dominion of an ouer∣much drinesse and heate, as appeareth in the chol∣lericke. But if the chéekes shall be, or appeare, as they were wanne in colour, and formed thinne in sub∣staunce, or séeme leane of fleshe: doe indicate the excesse of drinesse and coldenesse, to consist in that creature: as the lyke condition, appeareth in the Melancholicke. So that the chéekes (after the a∣gréement of Authours) are euident vtterers of the affections of the minde, and notifie his quali∣tie: for according to the affections of the minde, procéeding or caused eyther of a sodaine feare, or sodaine ioy, doe the chéekes sodainly become pale, or otherwise appeare redde: these hitherto Con∣stantine. The Phisiognomer Cocles reporteth, that when age commeth hastily on age, that such a person séemeth olde before the naturall time, then is the same a most speciall note of the shortnesse of lyfe, which in the face is apparantly decerned. But this rule hath his moste effectuous iudge∣ment, both in children and sicknesses, especiallye in the same, which the Phisitions name the E∣thicke or consumption of age, a sicknesse in very
déede, spéedily hastening death. The auncient Rasis reporteth, that whose fleshe of the chéekes appeareth grosse, and thicke compact: is noted to be of a grosse nature. The learned Conciliatore like vttreth, that the chéekes foed grosse and thicke of flesh, doe denote slug∣gishnesse in that creature, and to be an excessiue drinker of strong Wines: but some report vio∣lence, or a wicked will to consist in that person: which argument of the others, is rather to be al∣lowed than this iudgement, by the agréement of the most Phisiognomers. The chéekes formed ouer thinne of fleshe, doe argue malignitie, and wicked conditions in that person: as both Palemon, and Ptholomeus Par∣uus
write. The balles of the chéekes decerned soft, and long in forme: doe denote such a person, by the re∣port of the Phisiognomer, to be an importunate talker. The balles of the chéekes formed somewhat long, doe declare such a person, to be a trifler, and teller of vaine matters and newes. The chéekes are so named of the Phisiogno∣mers, forasmuch as in these, the téeth and heares are naturally ingendered. The Phisiognomer Cocles of knowledge re∣porteth, that the chéekes or Iaw bones, are emi∣nent from the vpper part of the mouth, wyth a length of the chéeke bones, through the part of composition: and such (of obseruatiō) are knowne to be malicious, especially in unlawfull▪ and in∣congruent matters: and these are applyed, for the part of the Iawes; vnto the Oxe and  . But if the Iawes shall be formed short, wyth such an eminencie or bearing out, from the upper part of the mouth: doe indicate such a creature to be malicious, an euill reporter, violent in actions, and enuious, this especially is verified, when as there shall lacke the substance of flesh, or the same appeare but thinne: these hitherto, the wordes of the skilfull Cocles.
The Philosopher Aristotle vnto the migh∣tie King Alexander vttered, that the chéekes for∣med full▪ with the temples appearing blowne: doe denote such a person to be conoios, hasty in wordes, and very irefull: the selfe ae repor∣teth Conciliatore, in his Rubricke of Phisiogno∣mie. The chéekes so small situated, that from the eies these séeme parted off: doe arguethe fulnesse of humours: and that the same creature (after the minde of the Phisiognomers) to be grieued with the burthen of them. The roundenesse of the chéekes formed after nature, indicateth enuie, and deceytfull condyci∣ons: to consist in that person: after the minde of Phylemon.
The full or rather fat chéekes, are significati∣ons for the more part, of a sluggarde, and drunc∣karde: if we may credite the auncient Phisiog∣nomers. The chéekes discerned soft, and yll fashioned, doe argue such a person (after the common pro∣uerbe) to be long tongued, importunate, and talkatiue, and this the Phisiognomer Cocles vt∣tereth of experience. The worthy Philosopher Aristotle, in Metha∣phoricis vttereth, that the chéekes appearing red aboue, doe witnesse such a creature to be a drun∣karde, or great drinker of wine: and referred vn∣to the similitude of the passion: in that such which latelye haue bene angred and vered, appeare of a blushing rednesse, especially about the eyes, kind∣led and caused in the beginning of the yre. The cause is sufficiently vttered afore of the Phisiog∣nomer, in the chapter of the nature of the face. Of the condition, nature, and iudgement of the mouth. The, xxiiij. chapter.
THe singuler Isidore (in. xj. Ethimologiarum capit. primo) writeth that the mouth is so na∣med in Latine Os: for that by it, as by a doore, all men naturally and vsually put in meate, and cast forth the spittle prepared: or for that all meates and sustenaunce passe by the same into the sto∣macke, and all wordes issue forth of the same, to the vnderstanding of mindes. To come vnto the matter, in the former chap∣ter it hath béene sufficiently vttered, that the big∣nesse of members procéedeth through heate, espe∣cially the mouth, which representeth the naturall and spirituall members: as of these, especiallye the stomacke. For howe much, the proportion of the stomacke is vnto the mouth, so much is the
proportion of the mouth, aunswering vnto the stomack: for that the inner members, are knowne of the Phisiognomers to be hote. Of which rea∣son, how much the intentiuer the heate is, so much the greater will the resolution of partes be. For where a great resolution consisteth, there of ne∣cessitie must insue, that a restauration aptlye be procured: which otherwise can not be caused, but through the benefite and helpe of meates, that ought to be in a sufficient quantitie: of which the spirites are actiuely ingendred, and these in great quantitie, which properly cause in that creature yre, boldenesse, yea quarrelling, and fighting. Of which it succéedeth, that the worthie Philemon, Palemon, Albertus, and Conciliatore report: that the creature which hath à great and wyde mouth, is a gluttonous féeder; yet hardie; and prone to fight. The selfe same wordes vttereth Rasis, that the person which hath a great mouth, is knowne to be a gluttonous féeder; and bolde. The mouth formed small, is noted to be of a feminine nature. But the mouth deterned great and wyde, doth witnesse yre, boldenesse, quarrel∣ling, and fighting: such also are knowne of expe∣rience, to be gluttonous féeders. The mouth formed ouerwyde, that the same appeareth, as it were wyder cut of purpose: doth
indicate suche a creature to be a gluttonous fée∣der, wicked, fieree, lightly mooued to fight, and cruell: who for the proper conditions, applied vn∣to the bruts beast. Certaine report, and Ptholo∣meus paruus with them, that these, are full of wordes, bosters, tellers of vaine tales and newes, enuyous, lyars: and after a maner, appeare starke foolishe. The mouth hauing a small clesing, and ope∣ning:
doth denote such a creature to be peasable, yet many tymes founde vnfaythfull, and faynt hearted: the reason of this contrarie, is the same which was aboue vttered of the Phisiognomer. The mouth in the proper sight or being, hauing a seemely quantity in the greatnesse, with the lips thinne, and appearing small in the closing: and to these, the eyes shewing smilingly, with the rest of the face agréeablie aunswering: doth indicate a libidinous person, a Cynede or an effeminate creature, and a lyar: as the worthie Conciliatore in his Rubricke of Phisiognomie vttereth. A small mouth in forme, appearing prominent outward, doth denote wicked conditions in that person, to be false in promise, and a betrayer. The mouth discerned small, hauing thinne lippes, doth witnesse a féeble minde, and courage: but this person deceytfully, and malicious.
Where or in whome the mouth shall appeare very farre bearing out, and rounde, with a thick∣nesse of the lippes, and that the vpper lippe fol∣deth outwarde: is for the forme (applyed of the Philosopher) vnto the Hogge: and signifieth by the agreement of Authors, that such a creature to be nastie, péeuish, cruell, and a foole: as the Phi∣siognomer of experience, hath many tymes noted. The best condicioned mouth, after the agree∣ment of the Phisiognomers, is when the same appeareth not ouer moyst: in that the moysture of the mouth, and lippes, doth argue fearefulnesse, and malignitie in that creature, as the worthie Albertus, reporteth: and the same the Phisiog∣nomer Cocles affirmeth of experience. The mouth that sauoureth swéete, especiallye in the breathing: doth indicate an honest person, wittie, both in the giuing, and retayning: warie, secret, coueting fayre thinges, and faythfull: yet easily ledde, eyther vnto the good or euill, through his light beléeuing: if we maye credite Michael Scotus. The mouth that sauoureth yll in the breathing, doth denote such a creature to be diseased in the Lyuer, besides of a grosse vnderstanding, lightly credyting, of a base wyt, a coueter of other mens goodes, lasciuious, deceytfull, a lyar, a teller of vaine matters and newes: if Michael Scotus,
may be beléeued. Whose mouth in the speaking, is drawne a∣wrie: is noted of experience, to be diseased with a rewme discending from the heade: yet is the same eyther stronger, or weaker procured, euen as in the doubling, vnto the o∣ther proportions: and this of obseruation, doth the Phisiognomer Co∣cles witnesse. The iudgement of the forme, and condition of the lippes. The. xxvij. chapter. AT the ende of the Iawes, are the lippes for∣med: which are compowned of a soft fleshe:
in that these by a double motion, are aptly mo∣ued: as in the one, by a proper maner vpwarde, and in the other by the motion downewarde: and these caused, by motion of the lawes, from one to the other, both in the closing and opening: which is the cause, why the lippes are named to haue a good, and perfite motion. The vtilitie of them (by the agréement of all the Phisiogno∣mers) is and serueth for the furthering and hel∣ping of spéeche: and that these may (through the helpe of the lawes) aptly and well close togither, for the better beseeming of the countenaunce. The colour of the lippes, towarde the ope∣ning of the mouthe is redde, thorowe manye veynes of bloude deryued vnto that place: the note of which is, in that these often, and much inquantitie bleede: and are of a light cause bro∣ken, and quickly or verie soone cut. The common hurtes there hapning, are especially cured (after the minde of the Phisiognomer) with the same, named of the practioners Mel Rosatum: for he reporteth, that he hath often experienced the same in many subiects. There maye notes also be gathered and con∣ceyued, by the colours of the lippes: for that the naturall colour, in the edges of the lippes (after the minde of Constantine) ought to be redde: through the thinnesse of skinne, which lightly of
the heate or colour of the bloud, receyueth a Rosie qualitie. Of which, as this worthy Constantine reporteth: that the rednesse of the lippes indica∣teth, the purenesse of complexion, and the vn∣myxing togither of troubled bloud: and the note both of the good, & strong vertue in that creature. The wannesse of the lippes, argueth the con∣trarie to the same aboue: in that the vertue of bloud, and naturall heat are lacking in that crea∣ture: so that such hauing the like lippes, are no∣ted to be sicke: as the worthie Rasis reporteth. When the lippes are formed bigge, these doe represent the multitude of matter, drawne vnto them through heate: and the grosenesse or big∣nesse of them, is caused through the grosse hu∣mours and spirites, of which the dulnesse of wit ensueth, and foolishnesse: procured by reason of the hotnesse, except the neather lippe be decerned loose hanging, and waterie running. But if the lippe be decerned vpright, and thick in forme, that is, compact or stiffe: in such a per∣son, doth the Phisiognomer (of experience) ap∣ply there the Planet Marse. A like reason the Phisiognomer vttereth, that when the mouth is formed great, if the lippes appeare loose and hanging: in that parte of the creature, is the Moone of him, and others aptly pplyed.
The neather lippe decerned loose hanging, and folding downewarde, and that the same ap∣peareth verie redde in colour: doth argue (hap∣ning in the woman) to be a most sure note, of the great desire vnto the veneriall acte, and vn∣shame fastnesse in that creature: as the same, the Phisiognomer Cocles obserued and noted, in a famous Curtysane of Rome, named Isabella di una: The like note séene in children, signi∣fieth that the creature in time, to growe and be∣come a Cynede or effeminate person: especially, if the countenaunce and eyes appeare smyling
and the creature growne vnto a ripe age: as the same the Phisiognomer Cocles reporteth, that he noted in a certaine noble man, of the like con∣dition. Briefely to wryte, all the other members according to the nature and propertie of them, are eache attrybuted vnto his proper Planet: as shall after appeare more at large, in the thirde booke of the Physiognomers to come forth, inti∣tuled the Phisiognomie of the Planets. The worthie Loxius, Phylemon, Plato, Aristotle, Albertus, & Conciliatore report: that the lips decerned chéerefull, and somewhat smy∣ling, hapning with a merrie countenaunce: doe argue such a creature to be wantonly disposed, and lybidinous: yea such sometimes are knowne to be craftie, deceyuers, and théeues: of which one the like, was that wicked Chyrurgian (a countryman of the Phisiognomers) named Se∣raphinus de pisis, that he diligently noted. The lippes of the mouth formed verie grosse, loose hanging, or ouermuch folding out: doe in∣dicate such a creature to be simple, lightly or soone credyting, & of a dull capacitie: these also denote a flewmatick humour moystening, to consist in that person: compared of Aristotle, for the forme vnto the aged Asse, hauing the like lippes. If the lippe within be séene not lyuely, or not
a fayre red in colour: doth argue a matter not regulated, and grosse humours to consist in that creature: of which a dull capacitie, and bellume vnderstanding ensueth: yea the same sometimes denoteth a sicknesse present, or that shall shortly folowe. The Philosopher Aristotle (in Methapho∣ric is) vttereth, that such which haue the lippes formed thinne, and in the edges appearing to hang loose out: in such maner, that the vpper lippe is séene stretched ouer the neather, at the closing and ioyning of the lippes: are denoted to be bolde, stowte, and of great courage: applyed for the forme, vnto the couragious Lyon. The like condition of these, may a man sée in the Mas∣tie Dogges of our Realme: which haue such hanging lippes, as to all men knowne. Such which haue the lippes harde, and thinne formed, and a bearing out decerned about the Canyne or sharpe téeth: doe indicate a rude vn∣derstanding in that creature, vnapt to learne, and furious in actions: applyed for the forme, vn∣to the grunting Hogge. The cause of these (as the Phisiognomer Cocles supposeth) is the pau∣citie of matter, and the dominion of dryth: in that the same consumeth the moysture of the lips, but thys about the Canyne téeth, it can not so wast or consume: for as much as the moysture
consisting in such a place, is knowne to be viscous and clammy. Such also by reason of the dryeth (sayth the Phisiognomer) multiplyed in the braine, are noted to be foolishe, and deceytfull: ap∣plyed after the maner, vnto the Swyne. So that whose lippes are decerned thinne and harde, and about the Canyne téeth bearing vp: such persons séene the like, are referred vnto the Swyne. The neather lippe decerned greater, than the vpper: doth denote such a creature to be vn∣apt to learne, simple, of a small vnderstanding, and foolishe. The heather lip séene swelled, vnto the sharpe or Canyne téeth: doth indicate such a person to be full of rancour, and malice, and contentious. Such which haue the lippes formed grosse, and the vpper hanging ouer the neather lippe: are denoted (by report of the Phylosopher Aristotle)
to be of a simple vnderstanding, of a dull capa∣citie, and foolishe: applyed for the forme, vnto the slowe and dull Asse. Whose vpper lip shall appeare promynent or bearing out with the gummes, doth wytnesse such a creature to be a louer of discord, and occu∣pying or busying himselfe in strifes, and contro∣uersies: applyed for the forme vnto the Dogge: these hitherto, borowed out of the Phisiognomy of Aristotle. Such hauing the vpper lip so eleuated, that the gummes, that is, the fleshe on the téeth, and the téeth themselues are decerned: are knowne (as the Phisiognomer reporteth of experience) to be full of variaunce, and contumelious, yea often rebuking: applied for the similitude vnto the Dogge, especially, and the same, according to the apparaunt congruencie séene. For the Dogge when he purposeth to bite, sheweth then the téeth by the gathering vp of the lippes. The lippes formed small and thinne, and the mouth decerned little: doe indicate the imbecilli∣tie of minde, and craftinesse to dwell or consist in that person. The auncient Rasis reporteth, that whose lips are decerned great: is denoted foolish, of a dull ca∣pacitie, and vnapt to learne. The selfe same doth the worthie Philosopher. Aristotle vtter, in hys
Phisiognomie of the members that such a person which hath thicke lippes, is knowne to be foolishe, and of a simple capacitie. The much bearing out of the lippes, doth wit∣nesse such a person (after the minde of the Phisi∣ognomer) to be foolish, ful of wordes, contentious, and hardie. Certaine report, that whose lippes shall be formed congruently thinne, and not much folded or turned outwarde: doth denote such a person to be secrete in all matters, warie, of a good perseue∣rance, yet yrefull at tymes, and of a singulare or readie witte. The cause is, for that the same de∣clareth a congruent matter, vnto the subtilnesse of the humors, and spirites, which is the reason and cause of the witte. But the yrefulnesse consi∣sting in that creature, procéedeth through the sub∣tilnesse of the spirits, prone and apt vnto the kind∣ling of it. Such hauing the lippes with the gummes, formed on the téeth prominent or bearing out: doe indicate an euill tongued person, a wrangler, yre∣full, and inclined to worke iniuries: for these pro∣perly referred vnto the Dogge: as the singuler Palemon vttereth. Whose lippes shall be séene well coloured, and these rather thinne, then grosse or thicke: doth sig∣nifie such a person to be well conditioned in all
matters, and lightly chaunged, eyther to the good, or euill, but rather prone vnto vertues, then vnto vices: as Michael Scotus vttereth: and there (af∣ter the minde of the Phisiognomer) is the planet Iupiter represented. Whose lips are decerned not sufficient equal or a like throughout, in such maner, that the one be grosser or thicker, than the other: doth witnesse such a person, to be more simple, than wise: and of a variable fortune, as certaine report. The Philosopher Ptholomeus paruus, vtte∣reth, that the outwarde lippes formed small, and somewhat folded or turned outwarde, doe denote such a person to be full of wordes, verie enuious, and an accuser. The reason is, for that the pauci∣tie
or smalnesse of the lippes, doth witnesse the small quantitie of matter, and the dominion of coldnesse: but the folding or turning outwarde of them, doth declare a drinesse, drawing togither the hearie sinewes: of which ensueth that the animall spirites are incongruent, vnto the decer∣ning of whatsoeuer is spoken: and the enuie through the same, procéedeth, and is like caused. The worthie Ptholomeus Paruus vttereth, that the vpper lippe folding or turning vpwarde, and the neather downeward: doe signifie a mise∣rie or wretchednesse of life, and vncomely condi∣cions. Of this the Phisiognomer saw, and found a singuler experience, especially in the poore▪ and néedie people. For the weakenesse of the animall spirits (sayth he) is signified, to consist in them: of which the witte properlye hath not place or rate in that creature. The lippes formed thinne, if the vpper be tur∣ned and folding outwarde, and the same lose han∣ging: doe denote such a creature, to be a decey∣uer, subtile, and a théefe for the more part. The lippes decerned grose or thicke, like to the Dogges: doe indicate such a person to be a deceyuer, an accuser, and wicked in conditions: these hitherto borrowed out of the Phisiognomie of Ptholomeus paruus. The lippes of the Moores are not to be iudged
vpon, but of those which well and are conuer∣saunt amongst them, and their qualities, there shal note: for which cause sufficient it is, to iudge in generall of those realmes, and countries, more knowne to vs. Of the forme, nature, and iudgement of the teeth. The. xxvij. chapter. THe canine or sharpe téeth of men, if these be long, fast standing, and bearing outwarde: doe argue such a person to be a glutton, irefull, fierce, and laciuious: applyed for the forni, vnto the Dogge and Boare. The cause I suppose (sayth the Phisiognomer) through the aboundance of the radicall moysture,
or spermaticall matter, which declareth a most great dominion of heate, and strength in the prin∣cipall members, of which a hasty dissoluing of the substaunciall moysture ensueth, that cannot be restored, but through the much eating of meate, whose plentifull substaunce this greatly néedeth: for which cause, such are inordinate as afore vt∣tered: and as the same appeareth by relation, in the Dogge and Boare. And such the Phisiognomer hath knowne of experience, to be wasters of their owne substance great drinckers, disceyuers, whorehunters, main∣tayners of harlottes, and murtherers, especiallye if anye other proportion aydeth and confirmeth the same. The auncient Rasis reporteth, that whose téeth are discerned weake, thinne sette, and small: doe argue the whole bodye to be weake: and both féeblenesse in that creature, and the shortnesse of life. The selfe same vttereth the sayde Rasis, in the buying of seruaunts: and the Philosopher Ari∣stotle vseth the same words, in his Problemes. The worthie Aristotle also reporteth (in se∣cundo de Animalibus) that such hauing the téeth thinne sette, are noted to be short lyued. The selfe same doth Rasis affirme, vnder these wordes. That whose canine or sharpe téeth are decerned long, and strong set, is argued to be a glutton, an
euill person, and vicious of bodie. The like wordes in a maner vttereth the lear∣ned Conciliatore, in his Rubricke of Phisiogno∣mie. That a noyse caused through the téeth, doth denote a frensinesse in that person: which lyke doth sometimes happen to children sléeping, when they are troubled with wormes, as the skilfull Phisitions report. The téeth formed bigge and broade, whether these stande inwarde, or are séene outwarde: doe argue a vaine person, lasciuious, simple, of a slen∣der capacitie, and hauing a bouine witte: for that the same witnesseth grosse spirites to consist in that person, proceeding of grosse humors. The téeth most drie, without anye moysture
decerned to stande in them, yea and wholy drie in a sicke person: doe denote death at hande: foras∣much as the radicall moysture is then consumed: and their bodyes remaine and are, as a Lampe without Oyle. In a healthfull bodie, the like séene, doe signifie a sicknes to come, and the same shortly. The téeth séene full of rewme, or a distilled wa∣ter from the head appearing in them: doe signifie a disease of the heade or stomacke, through the participation and occasion of the head, and lungs: causing this distillation from the heade into the nose and eyes, the Catharre, the Cough, the Squincie in the throte, and the impostume of the Iawes. But any of these, this procureth eyther more or lesse, according to the contrarie working of the members: as vnto the beholder, may eui∣dently appeare. Such beastes hauing the téeth indented lyke to a Sawe, onely drinke by licking with the tongue: but such hauing the téeth for∣med whole, doe drinke by supping, as the famous Philosopher Aristotle reporteth. The téeth formed small, and weake to chewe, both thinne set, and short appearing, doe indicate (after Michael Scotus) a feeble courage, a tender capacitie, fearefull, lightly perswaded, eyther vnto the good or euill, of a reasonable wyt, and faythfull: but as he wryteth, such a person is
short lyued. The teeth (after Michael Scotus) not euen formed, neyther in the bignesse, nor in the stan∣ding of the Gummes: so that there appeare of them narrowe, broade, thinne, and thicke téeth? doe denote a disoainefull person, enuious, bolde, warie, and of a readie wyt: if a man may cre∣dite this Scotus. The téeth formed verie long, and as they were sharpe, somewhat thinne set, yet strong in the chewing: doe witnesse (after the minde of Scotus) such a person to be a glutton, enuious, bolde, deceytfull, suspicious, a lyar, and inueri∣cundious. The téeth (as M. Scotus reporteth) appea∣ring
cytryne, or browne colour, whether these be short or long formed: doe argue such a person to be more foolishe then wise, a grosse féeder, light∣ly credyting, of a dyuers vnderstanding, suspici∣ous, enuious, a coueter of other mens goodes, and a lyar. The téeth formed bigge and broade, whether these declyne, or stande in and out, or that they appeare thicke, or thinne set: doe wytnesse (after M. Scotus such a person to be vaine, lightly cre∣dyting, simple, of a tender capacitie, a grosse fée∣der, lasciuious, and a lyar. The teeth decerned strong, and thick set: doe indicate (as Michael reporteth, long life in that creature, to be a teller of newes, selfe willed, a stowte person, lightly credyting, desirous of bew∣tifull things, and of a dull capacitie. The téeth decerned weake, fewe in number, thinne set, and small: doe indicate (after M. Sco∣tus) such a person to be weake of body, shortly∣ued, gentle, shamefast, tractable, trustie, lightly credyting, of a ready capacitie, and warie: these hitherto borowed out of the Phisiognomie, of M. Scotus. Of the condicion, and iudgement of the tongue. The. xxvii. chapter.
THe tongue is a member which is extended out of whyte fleshe, both harde and well mo∣uing, and this the colour and vse of it declareth: the rednesse which consisteth in it, is caused of many small veynes and little arteries, which pro∣céede and come vnto it, especially vnto the nea∣ther part of the same, through which this ap∣peareth in the neather part redder, than in the vpper: and this is knowne to be a spungie mat∣ter, full of powers: For experience instructeth vs, that the same is bloudie, in consideration that the solution of the continuitie of the same, is on∣lye cured in shorte tyme, with the simple Rosed Hony. The tongue not onely serueth for the cleane
and perfite vttering of wordes in smyting the teeth to cause the sounde of them, in the issuing forth: but the same also helpeth to distinguishe all maner of tastes, yea the letters perfitely to ex∣presse, as the learned Aristotle vttereth. The tongue folded or turned downewarde, and stutting or stammering: doth argue an hu∣morall laske of the belly: as the worthie Hypo∣crates reporteth, in. 32. Aphoris. sextae secto. Such encombred with this humorall laske, become stutters or stammerers, through the mat∣ter descending from the head, which entreth and is drunke into the Spungynesse, and lacertes of the tongue: and of this ingrossed or caused thick, through which enlarging, the same of necessitie must be shortned. So that of the same cause, such stut or stammer: yea Rasis reporteth, that the stammering, dothannuate the moystnesse of qua∣litie. Somethere be, which are caused to stut of nature: of which that noble Phisition Aetius wryteth. Such hauing the tongue tyed before, cannot perfitly vtter or pronounce the letter S▪ but sound the same like God: and such of the singuler Aetius, are named proper stammerers. The tongue tyed behinde, cannot pronounce the letters. R and T. as Galen reporteth: but breaking the letter R. sounde the same lyke to
the letter L. and such of him, are aptly named lyspers. The flixe named Diarrhaea, is a flixe or laske of the belly, with the onely shedding of humour, without an inflamation or exulceration: when the humours especially discende from the heade. So that when any vttereth the wordes with dif∣ficultie, it is then a note of Diarrhaea to molest that creature. With which disease, the Phisiog∣nomer reporteth hymselfe to haue bene encom∣bred in childe age: for as much as in many sub∣iectes, this sicknesse much molesteth and aboun∣deth in that age: but growne vnto ryper yeares, the same then seaseth. The stammerers (sayth the Phisiognomer) doe manye tymes feare, to drinke anye headdy Wine, in that these are so soone dronke, through the weakenesse of braine. Hereof it is, that the dronkarde so stammereth, and maffleth in the mouth, that he readily can not bring forth thys common worde or number, as (thirtie thrée) in no maner. For as much as the vapours of the Wine, are dronke into the Spungynesse of the tongue: of which this is enlarged, and hindered of the naturall site. The auncient Hyppocrates in suis Secretis vt∣tereth, that the heauinesse of the tongue, hapning in a yong man: pronounceth after the lightnesse
of the same sodayne death: the lyke witnesseth, the learned Galen. When the tongue is discerned grosse, bigge, and large: doth argue a rude wit: as the Phisi∣ognomer manye times noted: this also doth re∣present flewmatike humours, to consist in the braine of that creature, or in the other partes of his bodye. The learned Conciliatore reporteth, that the stammering, and often repeating of the fore silla∣ble and worde, before the full vttering and spea∣king of the worde, doth denote such a creature, to be prepared and prone vnto the Melancholie qualitie. The tongue by a swift motion drawne togi∣ther,
and through the corrupting and breaking of the wordes, causing a repiticion: doth witnesse such a person to be foolishe, hastie in wrath, and yrefull. This especially caused, through the mo∣uablenesse, and hotnesse of the spirites, hastening forwarde, the vtteraunce and pronouncing of wordes, without consideration. When the tongue shall be discerned so heauie as a stone, and in a maner appearing immoua∣ble: doth denote (after the minde of the Philoso∣pher) a sluggishe person, slowe in actions, and of a dull capacitie. The tongue discerned thinne, doth represent a subtill wyt, through the decent matter, both of the humour and spirite: although the same may declare a hote, and peraduenture a Chollericke qualitie, after the minde of the Phisiognomer.
Ptholomie the Philosopher vttereth, that the tongue decerned long, and red: to signifie wise∣dome: for as much as the same witnesseth law∣dable humours, to consist in that creature. In kysses (by report of the Phisiognomer) may much be knowne and found: For a certaine creature I sawe (sayth he) which thrust forth the tongue, nigh a paulme bredth: and the same sun∣drie times experienced in my sight, as a matter of admyration, and worthie to be noted. And of this is knowne to the wise, that the vertue of the muscles to be voluntarie. &c. The tongue séene whyte in colour, doth indi∣cate pouertie and myserie to insue to that crea∣ture, except mightier notes preuayle: as the sin∣guler Philosopher Ptholomeus Paruus repor∣teth. The learned Conciliatore wryteth, that the tongue decerned, as the same infected of the na∣turall colour: doth denote a weake estate & euill condition, to consist in that person: especially of the breast and belly. The person which hath such a long, grosse, and rounde tongue, that with the same thrust forth, he may easily licke the Nose: doth witnesse suche a person (after nature) to imitate the Oxe, in con∣ditions: as the same (the Phisiognomer diligent∣ly noted) in a neighbour of his.
The learned Auerrois (in de sensu & sensato) vttreth, that when the tongue hath drunke in, and receyued certaine humors, the taste of the same is then corrupted: and like is to be conceyued, of the instruments of the other senses. The tongue ouerfast speaking (as reporteth Michael Scotus) doth denote such a person to bée more simple than wyse, of a dull witte and vnder∣standing, lightly crediting, and conuertible, ey∣ther vnto the good or euill. The tongue that stutteth in the vttering of wordes (sayth Michael Scotus) doth indicate such a person to be verie simple, vaine, vnconstant, yrefull: yet from his yre easily brought and ap∣pease, and willing to serue. The tongue (as reporteth Michael Scotus) de∣cerned bigge and rough, doth witnesse a circum∣spect person, reasonably willing to serue, secrete to himselfe, disdainfull, a betrayer, vaine, a teller of newes, fearefull, and yet hauing a reasonable sufficiencie of many things. The tongue (as Michael Scotus vttereth) de∣cerned thinne, doth signifie a circumspect person, ingenious, yet lightly fearefull, soone crediting, and conuertible vnto the good, or euill. These hi∣therto Scotus.
The nature, formes, and iudgement of voyces. The. xxix. chapter. THe cause why in some persons, the voyce is heard bigge: in some vttered small: in some decerned bigge and small togither: and in some after a horce, and aspere maner: is for that (as the Philosopher vttereth) there are thrée principall conditions, that concurre vnto the voyce. The one is, the vertue of the lungs in forcing or procuring forwarde the breath, in reuerberating vnto the roote of the tongue, or vnto the pype of the lunges. The other and second is, through the ayre expel∣led againe, to reuerberate the same. The third is,
the pype of the lungs, vnto the roote of the tongue, where the ayre and breath is reuerberated. Of which, howe much the sounding vertue consisteth strong, to expell much breath, and the pype of the longes formed large, that the same receyueth great plentie of ayre: so much the greater and lesser, appeareth the voyce: but howe much the vertue appeareth weake, and the weason or pype of the lunges consisteth weake, so much the smal∣nesse and shrilnesse of voyce procéedeth: and the same insueth, according to the vertue moouing, and swiftnesse of the breath. The grosnesse of the voyce, procéedeth through the slownesse of moouing, in that creature: of which, howe much the vertue doth lesser mooue the ayre or breath, so much the more subtilnesse or smalnesse, and shrilnesse hath the voyce: through which, this procéedeth and is caused (after the minde of the Phisiognomer) the swifter. Howe much the more ayre or breath (sayth he) shall be gathered and receyued into the subiect, so much the grosser or bigger will the voice succéede and be, and the same procured through the slow∣nesse of moouing. The asper or rough voyce, procéedeth through a drynesse, of the pype of the lungs. But the horce voyce is caused, through a superfluous moysture, which descendeth from the heade, vnto the pype of
the lunges, which (as it shoulde séeme) so hindreth and letteth the breath to passe in that creature. The equalitie and swéetenesse of the voice, pro∣céedeth and is caused through a temperament of the pype of the lunges: when the same consisteth and is neither to drie, nor moist. For this is a note that the qualitie of the heart not to be resisting or letting, but that a proportion of all liuing thinges, may be founde and knowne: and in these, the fe∣males are decerned to be of a weaker and shriller voyce, than the males: except the Cowe, as the Philosopher (in quinto de Animalibus) vttereth. The person which hath a bigge voyce, is noted to be very iniurious: applyed for the forme vnto the Asse, as Aristotle reporteth, in Metha∣phoricis.
Such which séeme to forecall, beginning in a base maner, and ending small: are noted to bée yrefull, yet soone appeased and pleased: applyed for the forme vnto the Oxe, and vnto the comeli∣nesse of the voyce. Such which vtter the wordes now bigge, now lowe, and vnperfitely: are indicated to be feare∣full, applied for the same condition, vnto women, and vnto the comlinesse of the voyce. The persons which séeme to call and speake bigge, and the voyce not chaunged into a dyuers maner: are applyed of the Philosopher for the forme, vnto our great Mastie, and vnto the seme∣linesse of the voyce. The creature which is hearde to speake softly, without a retching of the voyce, are noted to bee gentill, and simple: applyed for the forme vnto the shéepe. Such which call or vtter the wordes shrillye, are noted to be irefull: applyed for the kinde and forme vnto the Goate: these hytherto out of Ari∣stotle, the like Albertus, & Conciliatore report, and Hieronimus de Manfredis, a countrie man of the Phisiognomers. The voyce vttered bigge, and distensed in the kinde, doth indicat a strong person: forasmuch as the same procedeth, through the plentie of heate. This grosse or bigge voyce, doth the Phisiogno∣mer
here meane, to be like to the base Organe pype. The person which vttereth a slowe, and bigge sounde of the voyce, is iudged to be quiet, tracta∣ble, gentle, & merie: of these, certaine are knowne to be verye iust, and vpright creatures, in theyr dealings, after the minde of the Phisiognomer. The voyce decerned bigge, yet the sounde of wordes perceyued very corrupt: is an apparant note of a franticke creature, iniurious, and a glutton. The strength of the voyce, ensueth the large∣nesse of vaynes, and multitude of the spirites, which altogither are caused of heate: as the Phi∣losopher Aristotle reporteth. The persons possessing a bigge voyce, and that heauily or bassely calling: are indicated to be apt persons, to beare iniuryes and wrongs: applyed for the forme, vnto the asse. Such creatures which call or beginne bigge, and ende in their wordes with a small voyce, are denoted to be both yrefull, and pitifull at tymes: yea soone pleased, and tractable: applyed vnto the Oxe, for the forme of the crie: the reason of thys, is often taught afore. Such a person which hath a grosse, high, and sounding voyce: is reported to be eloquent, bold, fierce, and valiant in armes, or a warriour.
The voyce decerned small and lowe, doth indi∣cate such a creature to be fearefull, and enuious. By this low voyce, is here ment (sayth the Phi∣siognomer) the small and faint voyce: and not the bigge, in any maner. Here conceyue, that the voyce is diuers of sounde, forasmuch as the voyce is a sounde with an ymagination, by the mouth of the creature, vt∣terod to demonstrate any effect. But the sounde is any kinde, procéeding of the sounding, which vnto the hearing procureth a passion. And the speach is a thirde kinde, hauing a diuersitie, vnto either of these. The voyce decerned small, soft in the hearing, and in a broken maner: doth witnesse a woman∣ly
fearefulnesse to consist in that creature, and to be effeminate. The voyce heard slowe, doth indicate (after the mind of the Philosopher) such a person to be slug∣gishe in actions, rashe at tymes, and impudent. The voyce decerned weake, doth argue a straightnesse of the arteries, and paucitie of the spirits, which are especially caused by the meanes of colde. The voyce decerned soft, without retching, doth indicate such a person to be gentle, and trac∣table: applyed vnto the shéepe, for the similitude of the voyce: euen as the others, applyed vnto Beastes of lyke condition. The voyce hearde grosse and highe, doth indi∣cate a hotenesse of the heart and lunges, and a largenesse of the wesand, that both fréely draweth and expelleth the ayre or breath, without impedi∣ment: for which cause, the voyce heard lowde, doth denote such a creature to be talkatiue, bolde, and contencious. The Philosopher Aristotle (in de secretis secre∣torum) vttereth, that whose voyce appeareth a meane, betwéene a smalnesse, and bignesse: is no∣ted to be a person sapient, a foreséer, true, and iust, and these through the contrary cause. Such a person which is decerned quicke of spéeche, especially if he hath a shrill voyce, is de∣noted
to be a creature yrefull, obstinate, foolishe, importunate, a lyar, and euermore euill conditi∣oned. But if the voyce shall be perceyued or decer∣ned grosse, or rather bigge: doth signifie such a creature to be yrefull, hastie, of an euill nature and condition. The creature which hath a swéete and plea∣saunt voyce, is iudged (of the Philosopher Ari∣stotle) to be enuious, yrefull at tymes, and mar∣ueylous suspecting. The delectablenesse of voyce, decerned in a proper subiect (as the worthy Palemon) vttereth, doth indicate a dull capacitie and foolishnesse: yet a stowtnesse of courage, to consist in him. The quicknesse and hastinesse of wordes or spéeche decerned, as the (learned Albertus) re∣porteth, doth argue a hote complexion, to consist in that creature. The like do Phylemon, Loxius, Palemon, and Conciliatore vtter, vnder these words: that whose voyce is heard, grosse, & bigge vttered, is reported to be yrefull, rash, and hastie in his actions, and supposed to be of an euill na∣ture: the reason of these (is reported of them to be) through the vntemperate hotnesse. The person hastie in spéeche, especially when he hath a small voyce, is reported to be wicked, a foole, importunate, a lyar, yrefull, and euer∣more
of euill conditions. Whose voyce shall be decerned pleasaunt, (as afore vttered) is iudged enuious, and suspi∣tious: the reason hath bene opened in another place, for as much as the same is effeminate. Further the delectablenesse of voyce, doth denote small wisedome or simplenesse, and veneriall con∣ditions. The auncient Rasis reporteth, that the voyce decerned bigge, doth indicate the whotnesse of complexion, but the small voyce, doth witnesse the coldnesse of complexion in that creature. The voyce perceyued rough or horse, like vn∣to the Cranes: doth testifie an enuious person, and one that retayneth a mischiefe or grudge, secretly in the heart: the same person also is by re∣port of the Philosopher Melancholik in qualitie. Whose voyce shall be decerned, not fully vt∣tered or spoken with a long breath: is noted to be a vile person, through the coldnesse of the heart, and peraduenture with moystnesse applyed. The creature which hath a verie bigge voice, is noted to be a seruaunt, vnto his owne belly. The reason of this is, for as much as the graue or bigge voyce, procéedeth through the debillitie of vertue, which cannot breath out the sufficient plentie of ayre, to moue the muscles of the breast: of which insueth sluggishnesse, that such a per∣son
of the same, can neither apply his wyt to any studie, nor frame or exercise his bodye with anye corporall or painefull labor. They which vtter the voyce, in cutting of tha breath: doe promise liberally, but performe little, and such are knowne to be deceyuers. They which are decerned to vtter the voyce (as it were) by a moouement of the breast, stur∣dily bigge: are denoted to be manly, yet vnapt to learne, and stowte of courage: applyed for the forme, vnto the Lyon. They which haue a slowe, and bigge voyce, are denoted to be quiet, and merrie: such also for the more part are knowne to be iust persons, and gentle conditioned.
They which are heard to sounde the voyce shrill like vnto byrdes, are noted to be prone vnto the veneriall acte, vnstable and vaine. A breathing decerned small and faint in voice, doth innuate such a creature to be sadde for the more part, frowarde and suspicious. The creature which mooueth often himselfe, and speaketh with the moouing of handes, is thought vncleanly: yet of a readie wytte, and quick vtteraunce, and sometimes knowne to be a deceyuer. But he which refrayneth from the mouing of handes when he speaketh, is of a per∣fiter vnderstanding, of a good disposition, and of a sounde counsell. The person which speaketh and soundeth the voyce through the nosethrilles, is affirmed to be full of wordes, a lyar, malicious, enuious, and ioyeth in the harmes of another: and such a crea∣ture doth imitate the nature of the Ducke. This the Phisiognomer obserued and noted, in a certaine countrieman of his. Further the voyce, heard vehement, and ma∣king a noyse, as a sounde vndecently mixed, doth denote an vniust person, violent and bearing ha∣tred in heart. But the voice decerned slowe, doth indicate a sluggishe person in actions and some∣times hastie. And whose voyce in the middle, ap∣peareth a meane, as betweene the▪ smalnesse and
grosenesse, is accompted sapient, a foreséer, true and iust. The condition and iudgement of laughter. The. xxx. chapter. THe minde, after the opinion of the Philoso∣pher, is much delighted with laughter: yet the ouermuch laughter, is named of most men, a laughter out of course, and argueth besides a small vnderstanding and simple wyt. Of which, the common Prouerbe ryfe, and often divulgated of the wise is, that in the mouth of a foole, much laughter consisteth: the like re∣porteth
Catullus, that singuler Poet, in thys Sentence. The laughter light moued, not framed in place: Bewrayth a fooles folie, in iesture and grace. Here conceaue, that through the Milte for∣med bigge: such a creature is procured to laugh much: & otherwise is it, when in the contrary ma∣ner, as some report. And ye learned Isidore (in. xi. ethymolagiarum) vttereth, that the Mylt to be so named of the supplying of ye same: which properly lyeth on the contrary part of the liuer, to the ende the same should not cōsist or remaine emptie. The Gaule is knowne to be an apt receptacle & blad∣der in the creature, which by due worke of nature sendeth or receaueth into it the choller. The Mylt also some suppose to be the procurer and moouer of laughter, seing by it we are especially caused to laughe. By the Gaule (if we may credite Iy∣dore) are all creatures moued vnto yre: by the hart, to conceaue déepely matters: by the lyuer, of the qualitie moued vnto loue: through which foure elements, euery lyuing creature (sayth he) is sustayned. So that the persons which sufficiently laughe, are denoted (after the agréement of wryters) to be beninge and gentle, quyet, beloued (for their
curteous behauiour) of all persons, yet lightly endamaged or harmed, although such are smally carefull for any: and these besides are of an ap∣paraunt comlynesse (sayth the Phisiognomer) ap∣plyed vnto the Sanguine, and Iouiall persons. The creature which reasonably laugheth, is argued to be giuen to myrth, and one of a good qualitie, and that ioyeth much in the veneriall acte: especially, if the eyes appeare smyling. The ouermuch laughter exercised (as Aristo∣tle vttereth vnto king Alexander) remoueth re∣uerence, and hasteth olde age in that creature: for trouth, with such willingly (sayth the Phisiog∣nomer) is no societie or felowship to be vsed: in that these lack wytte, and are nothing at all se∣cret:
yet these (after some wryters) are reported to be seruiceable, and painefull in their doings. Such persons which are séene sildome to laugh, are indicated to be of a déepe vnderstanding, and knowne faythfull as certayne report: and this of the Phisiognomer obserued, and noted in sundrie honest and vertuous persons: which he knewe to be searchers, of déepe and hid secrets. The cause euidently appeareth, and is knowne to be a déepe thinking and reatch, which consisteth in the crea∣ture, that remoueth the laughter. Of which, such a creature that much and often laugheth (as a∣boue vttered) bethinketh or museth on no seri∣ous and déepe matter, nor maketh anye solemne, or wittie discourse with himselfe. Certayne of the auncient report, that the crea∣ture which is hardly procured to laugh, is affir∣med to be wittie, a foreséer of matters vnto him∣selfe, nyggardly: and verie studious in the Arte, which he daylie exerciseth: yet suche a creature (sayth the Phisiognomer) is prone to be a surmy∣ser, and yrefull. The person which is heard to laugh lowde or a highe, with a certaine noyse decerned in the laughter, is indicated, by the report of some wry∣ters, to be inuericundious: and rashe in actions. Such a creature, that (without cause pro∣cured) laugheth, and in his laughing, séemeth of∣ten
to coughe, or gape, or to draw the head awry: is indicated to be variable of purpose and minde, enuious, lightly or soone credyting, and conuer∣tible eyther vnto the good or euill, as Loxius, and Phylemon report. The learned Conciliatore in his Rubricke of of Phisiognomie vttereth, that the creature coughing when he laugheth, or is at the instaunt encumbred with the hardnesse and shortnesse of breath: is iudged to be inuericundious, fierce, and a Tyraunt: as the like, the Phisiognomer Cocles obserued and noted, in a certaine Prince of Lumbardie. Certaine of the worthie Phisiognomers re∣port, that whose chéekes are discerned often is
smyle, is denoted to be of an euill minde, of a per∣uerse cogitation, and a lyar: and such persons generally, or for the more part, are malicious, & dissemblers: so that these are not friendly to be trusted, but rather to be doubted, if we may cre∣dite the Phisiognomer: when the like especially is matched, and ioyned with other accydences of the minde: and that their eye lids appeare wrinc∣kled togither, with the eye browes ioyned, or in a clowdie forme gathered: such are then shedders of bloud, murderers, robbers, or théeues by Sea, and lande: as the Phisiognomer often obserued and noted in many, which were the like. The creature that smyleth vnto himselfe when he talketh: is indicated to be foolish, and of a sim∣ple vnderstanding, as the like the Phisiognomer obserued in a certaine Italian: and such are re∣ported to abounde, in the Melancholick qualitie. The chéekes decerned wrything in the laugh∣ter, as they were so procured in the derision of an other: doe witnesse such a person to be arrogant, deceytfull, couetous, a lyar, yrefull, and a be∣trayer or vtterer of secrets. The person that lightly laugheth (sayth Mi∣chael Scotus) is denoted to be simple of vnder∣standing, vnstable, vaine, lightly credyting, of a dull wyt, grosse in féeding, and seruicable, yet in factes or actions not secret.
The creature that sildome laugheth, and sée∣meth soone to haue done: is argued after the minde of Michael Scotus, to be stable, warie, nyggardly: yet of a good vnderstanding, secret, faythfull, and glorious in his actions. The condition and iudgement of thē breath. The. xxxi. chaprer. THe much breath, doth argue the aboundance of the spirites, & econuerso: whose cause pro∣céedeth two wayes, the one through the smalnesse of the lunges: and the other, through the default and straightnesse of the breast. Of which, the crea∣ture much breathing, is of great strength, and courage: by reason of the heate resoluing the moysture, especially that dewie moysture, after the minde of the Phisiognomer. The breath sent forth in due course and order,
that is, betwéene (the great and small, appearing) a meane: doth indicate▪ the quietnesse of heart, and a man in minde well pleased, as the Philosopher reporteth. That person which sigheth without cause, and fetcheth the sighes déepe and long: doth wit∣nesse the Melancholie to come, and that mightie to perseuer in that creature. The breath appearing cut betwéene, being af∣ter an order, which in the ende through straight∣nesse of the breast commeth forth with a heate, and sighing: doth argue such a creature to be en∣combred with thought, and the disquietnesse of minde: And the same to be mixed to some euill, if the head especially shake withall. That person which with the sighing, draweth the eyes awrie, is iudged (after the minde of most wryters) that he then bewayleth the mat∣ter come vnto minde: deuising with himselfe in what maner he may aptliest bring about, and compasse or atchieue the same. The creature which breatheth with a certayne noyse, through the larger opening of the nose∣thrils: doth then indicate crueltie, brutishe furi∣ousnesse and violence to consist in him: which of Aristotle, is applyed to the passion. The breath passing forth troubled and thicke, as if the same were after a course of running, or
through some strong accidents: doth then denote such a person to be violent, vnaduised, hastie, and yrefull. When the breath shall be decerned short, and thicke, and through a much cutting off, stopped betweene: such a creature (of the Philosopher Aristotle) is iudged fearefull, weake of courage and strength. That person which (with the sighe and counte∣naunce) séemeth as he were bereft, with a cer∣taine godlynesse and pittifulnesse: suche a one (sayth the Phisiógnomer) is iudged to be then ta∣ken, and wrapped, wyth the furious passion of loue. The singuler Philosopher Aristotle vttereth,
vnto the mightie king Alexander, that when sayth he, you shall sée a person much and long to∣gither beholding: yea and earnestly looking on your face: and that when you againe behold him so looking, is of the same abashed, and therewith blusheth, and giueth especially (at that instaunt) a sighe against his will, and that teares appeare standing in his eyes: such a person vndoubtedly loueth and feareth you. But if you sée the con∣trarie vnto this, then iudge that creature to re∣garde you little: and to be one, that is both enui∣ous, and disdainefull. The breath decerned lowde, cut betwéene, and the sighe appearing the like, doth witnesse sorow, and heauinesse, for some losses happened to that creature. Hipocrates, Galen, and certaine other Phi∣sitions report, that the breath perceyued passing forth colde, by the mouth and nosethrilles, in a sharpe sicknesse: doth innuate death, shortly after to ensue. The Philosopher Ptholomeus Paruus vtte∣reth, that he which often wéepeth for no cause reasonable, shall alwaies be poore and néedie. The breath (by the report of Michael Scotus) comming out so soft, that the same can scant be heard, doth denote such a person to be greatly en∣combred with thought: which conditiō of thought,
the eyes in a maner will declare. The breath which is decerned sometymes still, and within a good while after, is drawen (and fet∣ched in) ouerfast: doth argue such a creature (as that Scotus writeth) to be then occupyed wyth a present great heauinesse of the minde. The head if it shaketh, as he sigheth (according to the minde of Scotus) then for the weight of the matter euill handled, and euill spoken of, it ar∣gueth him to be sorie. If he doth the like, wyth the eyes intentiue or steddie looking, such a person bethinketh him ra∣ther of the euilles, than repenteth him: as Mi∣chael Scotus wryteth. The breath heard light, breathing out by little
and little, without noyse: doth denote (after the minde of Scotus) such a person to be of an vpright minde. The person which is heard to breath lowde, and smileth withall: is iudged (of Michael Scotus) to be furious and a drunkarde. Such a person decerned breathing, troubled, and thicke, as though he had lately runne, is de∣noted to be wilfull, foolehardie, yrefull, and of a wicked minde, desiring all thinges what he séeth, and talking all things that he heareth. He which breatheth on highe, and that the breath séemeth to passe through the Nosethrilles thicke and quicke: doth argue such a creature (af∣ter the minde of Scotus) to be fearefull, and sorow∣full. Such also are noted to be effeminate, when as the other notes fortifie the same. The breath so comming forth, as if the subiect were encombred with the hardnesse of fetching breath, such a creature is reported (of Michaell Scotus) to be simple, of a peruerse minde, full of woordes, and desirous of all things that he séeth. The forme and iudgement of the chinne. The. xxxii. Chapter.
THe chinne decerned very long, doth argue the abundance of matter, in that by reason of the ouermuch hotenesse, the same is lengthned out: of which such are knowne to be yrefull, cruell, and hastie: yet these sometymes are founde to be full of words, and sometimes boasters of themselues, as both Palemon, and Constantine write. Such which haue the chinne formed small and short, are persons especially to be eschewed: for
besides the other conditions consisting in them, such are vncurteous, yea rather rigorous, full of wyles and enuious: for these (of Palemon) aptly applyed vnto the Serpent. Here conceyue, that Phisiognomie, and Paul∣mestrie, are more manifested of experience, than by reason: yet somewhat may be vttered, of the principaller members: which expresse the great∣nesse, and smalnesse of matter, from the begin∣ning of generation. If the chinne shapeth or be formed into a round maner, doth indicate effeminate conditions, and a féeble courage: in that this is, a feminine note: as vttereth the auncient Pythagoras. For the mans chinne (after nature) ought to be formed, in a square maner, and not round. If the vnder chinne be séene so fatte, that the same retcheth downe to the throte, doth indicate most great luxurie, to consist in that creature: if a pitte or hole, be especiallye decerned in eyther chéeke. The chinne formed of a decent or comely big∣nesse, doth denote such a person to be prone vnto the veneriall act: yet iudge him, to be much bound vnto God, for the giftes lent him. Here conceyue (sayth the Phisiognomer) that the chinne ought to be formed neyther to rounde, nor ouer sharpe: but in a meane maner vnto a squarenesse.
The chinne decerned ouer long, doth innuate a most wicked creature, very talkatiue, and a whis∣perer, yea his mynde altogither occupyed wyth deceytes: as the lyke, the skilfull Phisiognomer obserued and noted, in a certaine French man, which was very malicious, a great deceyuer, and excéeding couetous (as all of that nation) bewray themselues to be: especially prone, vnto fraudes, and great deceytes. The chinne at the lower ende, séene so de∣uided, that the same expresseth a double forme, in suche maner, as this be not to muche or to déepe dented, in the middle: doth then argue (as certaine report) deceytfull conditions, to con∣sist in that creature. But this knowne to be a note
of Venus in that place, (after the minde of the Phisiognomer Cocles) and such a person lyke for∣med, shall purchase with men, great fauour, and grace. As the lyke Cocles experienced, in many subiectes, which were knowne to be lasciuious, & that haunted the companie of harlots: yea these wyth the Cynedes, had sundrie tymes doing, and suffering. There be some which haue a pitte for∣med on bredth, and by an equall lyne stretching, as on length, that more coroborateth the Phisi∣ognomers sentence. The chinne formed so crooking vp, that the lippes séeme as they were standing in a valley: doth denote the rudenesse of witte, vnfaythful∣nesse, wicked conditions, and sometymes such are knowne to be théeues: vnlesse olde age causeth the same, through the losse, & lacke of many téeth. The singuler Aristotle in tertio de Animali∣bus vttereth: that such which haue the chinne de∣uided, do lesse waxe balde, and shed lesser or fewer heares, than other creatures. The chinne formed sharpe, and thinne or slen∣der, through an emptinesse or lacking of fleshe: doth indicate a bolde, and stowte or couragious person, and disdainfull. The chinne decerned large & bigge, through the much quantitie of fleshe: doth witnesse (after the minde of M. Scotus) such a creature to be quiet, of
a meane capacitie, dull of witte: yet faithfull, se∣cret, and conuertible, eyther vnto the good or euill. The chinne formed sharpe, and sufficiently full of flesh: doth denote (as Michael Scotus reporteth) such a person to be of a good vnderstanding, loftie minded, and one that féedeth sufficientlye, and bolde in actions. The chinne formed, as the same were parted in two, by a certaine valley, or denting in: doth argue (as Michael Scotus vttereth) that person, to be of a grosse witte, vaine, lightly crediting, a great surmiser: yet congruently seruiceable to another, quiet, and secrete (for the more part) in his doyngs. The chinne decerned sharpe, and thinne in the quantitie of flesh: doth (after Michael Scotus) de∣note, such a creature to be bolde and couragious, a quareller sometymes, and fighter, yrefull, dis∣dainefull, weake in strength, and contented (after
a maner to serue, for the reliefe of liuing. The chinne séene crooking vp, with a hollow∣nesse in the knitting of the Iawes, and leane of fleshe, that the same appeareth, as it were formed sharpe: doth witnesse (after the minde of Scotus) such a person to be wicked, enuious, of a simple witte, a niggarde, deceytfull, soone angrie, yrefull, a surmiser, bolde, prowde, a threatner, a betray∣er, and a théefe, these hitherto Michal Scotus. The condicion, and iudgement of the Beard. The. xxxiij. Chapter. THe bearde in man (after the agréement of the auncient wryters) beginneth to appeare in the neather Iawe, which so ascendeth towarde the
Temples, through the heate and moysture, caried vnto the same, from the forepart of the heade, drawne from the genitours: which draw to them especially, the sperme from those places: whose note is, by reason the spermaticall veynes do dis∣cend vnto the same place: as the lyke appeareth in them, which ouermuch exercise coeating, whose faces by the meanes, are after mightily crazed and altered. As touching the womans testicles, in that these are but weake, for the same cause are they knowne not to be bearded. And suche women which are found to haue these hoter than the common sort, haue also somewhat of the re∣flexed matter, from the same place: whence the Sperme most chiefely commeth. This reflexed heate (sayth the wise Conciliatore) draweth with it the moysture, of which in them are engendred the thinne and small heares of the Bearde: and thys especiallye verified in them, which vse of∣ten and verye much coeating. For which cause the Sanguine bodyes, that haue a thinne Beard, and meane of length: are indicated to be crea∣tures, which often and greatly desire to coeate, through the dominion of the heate and moysture, consisting in them. The bearde in man, after the minde of the Philosopher, beginneth to spring out and appéere, after .xiiij. yeares of age: these by little and little,
appearing from day to day: and then beginneth the heares to appeare and growe on the 23u3rp s2cilp, of both the kinds. Here conceyue (sayth the Phisiognomer) that such heares doe procéede and appeare through the superfluousnesse of meates, and the fumosities of them, which dayly ascende on high vnto the partes of the Iawes: much lyke to the smoke of an O∣uen heated, that passeth so long through the
thincks of the same, vntill those passages, through the heate are wholy stopped, that no more smoke can after passe through them. Euen the like, doe the fumosities of man issue forth, into the maner of heares: which are properly named the heares of the Bearde. The colour of the Beard, doth sometymes ex∣presse the qualities & quantityes of the humors: yet hitherto hath not the same béene heard of, that any man saw, a flaxen white bearde: for as much as the flegmaticke humor, is not founde so migh∣tie, as to engender heares of the lyke colour, through the depriuing and lack of naturall heate, to leuate the sufficient matter vnto the engen∣dring of the lyke coloured heares. Here perhaps some will argue and affirme (sayth the Phisiognomer) that there is sundrie tymes séene women bearded, yet these are not founde of a flegmaticke qualitie, but rather the same doth happen in that the humors are so subtil, that of nature such are procured to be hote. For out of these creatures doe heares spring, yea they sometymes appeare on their Iawes: but proper∣ly these appeare about the mouth, where the more heate doth abounde: and such a woman (séene the lyke) is named of all men bearded: here conceyue (sayth Cocles) that the like woman founde, is iud∣ged to be verie luxurious through hir hote, and
moyst qualitie: of which the lyke creature séene, is not onely noted strong of nature, but to be of a stowte courage, and manly in hir factes. The persite woman, is knowne to be suffici∣ently naked of heares, especially about ye mouth: such a creature after Phisiognomie, is reported and iudged to be of a good qualitie: that is to say, bashefull, fearefull, honest, weake of courage, gentle of behauiour, and obedient.
Here (sayth the Phisiognomer) doth a solemne doubt arise, and the same is, why men are séene bearded, & not women for the more part: which doubt séemeth to be put forth, by the learned Gu∣lielmus Nurice: to which Cocles aunswereth in this maner, that the same maye be gathered to procéede, of the efficient, the materiall, and finall cause: for as much as these properly serue vnto an ornament, and comely bewtifying of the wo∣man: and in euerye kinde, the Males are séene comelyer bewtisted with the same, than the Fe∣males. Which condition of the heares, properly serueth vnto a defence of the iawes in man, that the woman (for the like defence and necessitie) nothing néedeth: at the least so much as the man: through which, the sense of féeling, is knowne to be of greater force in man. So that the man by this reason, may better indure to go barehea∣ded, and naked in other partes, in the bitter colde weather, than the woman: and suffer greater stormes on the bodye, than she maye, without harme to insue. A strenger reason maye be ren∣dred and giuen of the effecient, and materiall cause, seing the Males in generall, are knowne to be whoter than the Females. For which cause, the fume in men, that is the matter precuring the heares, is founde both more, and mightier, than in women: which seing the same is knowne
not able to be consumed: for that cause (God and nature togither) ordayned two apt places in man, for the passages of them: as the one by the head, & other fitly by the chinne & iawes: which forme the beard of man. Which maner fumes consis∣ting in the woman, for as much as they appeare not to be so many and mightie, as well knowne they are, to rest in the man: for this cause, are these properly and naturallye sent forth, by the heade. And a note of the like effect, we sundrie▪ times knowe and sée by women founde of a hote and moyste complexion, that appeare bearded: we sée contrariwise, that in the colde and dry men these (for the more part) haue verie little or no beardes. By which reason we gather (sayth the Phisiognomer) that the séemely beard, waxeth not in the gelded person: for as much as those partes haue then loste the benefite of their hotter qualitie, through which, these shoulde engender the hote humours and fumes, that properly are the matter of the heares in them. And by a like reason, of the former wordes it appeareth: that the thicknesse of the beard, and great hearinesse in generall, is an euidente note and iudgement of the substantiall heate and moysture, and of na∣turall strength consisting in that creature. Here may this argument also be propowned, that seing children are knowne to be hote and
moyst, why they waxe not bearded as men: to which doubt the Phisiognomer thus answereth, that the smokie superfluousnesse, which is the es∣peciall matter of the heares, that issueth forth of the heade, and other partes of the bodye doth in them passe, and serue to their increase, and nou∣rishment: the like wordes in a maner, appeare afore vttered by the singular Constantine. Conceaue (sayth the Phisiognomer) that how much the plentie and force of heate consisteth, so much the more store and quantitie of heares suc∣ceedeth in that creature. For which cause, a man must carefully beware of those persons, which ouermuch abounde in the most great store, and plentie of heares on the bodie: when the complex∣tion of such, is especially founde adust. The Phisiognomer Cocles wylleth a man to beware of those persons, which haue a red beard: in that the same coloured bearde, indyeateth a heape & an abundance of adustion, and a mightie hotenesse to consist in these creatures: through which, such are knowne to be luxurious, decea∣uers, and lyars: and in them (by report of the Physiognomer) doe the principall heape of vices rest: vnlesse that grace & godly education, séeme otherwise to contrarie the abouesayde. The bearde decerned comely, and well fashi∣oned: doth innuate such a creature to be of a good
nature, of reasonable conditions, congruent to all thinges, and manered after his bringing vp. Contrariwise iudge of them, which haue the beard not séemely formed, or euill fashioned in the length: as appeare thin the gelded persons, which after these are depryued of their genytours, be then greatly chaunged, from the nature of men, into the condition of women: as reporteth Ari∣stotle, in libro de Animalibus. The singuler Phisiognomer Cocles, obser∣ued and noted in sundrie subiects, which hauing long and séemely beardes: came after certaine yeares vnto a frensinesse, and some of them to be starcke foolishe. The Phisiognomer also reporteth, that he ob∣serued and knewe sundrie creatures, which pos∣sessing and hauing verie long beardes, fell from their estate, and were oppressed with myseries, and these in his time: yea he knewe and vnder∣stoode of certaine noble persons, which were ex∣pelled their proper country, and of these especially in the precincts of Italie. The like iudgement (sayth the Phisiognomer) may in a maner be vt∣tered, of the beard decerned soone hoarie: as afore was taught, in the chapiter of the heares in ge∣nerall: for as muche as their nature then is knowne, to drawe néere vnto the womans. Of which, the Phisiognomer Cocles willeth
and warneth the Princes, & noble persons with him, to beware and take héede of such persons wearing verie thicke and long beardes: in that their faces then can not bewray or open the passi∣ons of the minde, nor the chaunging or altering of colours, can perfitly be decerned in these: so that their deceytes, and coloured pretenses, may be couered and lye hid by that meanes. Yet doe I not disalowe the wearing of long and thicke beards altogither, but that the same may be law∣dablie, and verie well be worne, without anye such cryme to be founde, and lying hidde there∣vnder. For well knowne it is, that sundrie Realmes alowe, and customablye weare long beardes, as the Medians, the Grecians, the Ger∣maines, and sundrie other Countries, through
the general influences of the heauens, which pro∣cure or cause newe condicions, and alterations of apparayle: as the Phisiognomer like obserued and noted, of the force and effect of the great con∣iunction, that hapned of the vpper Planets Sa∣turne and Iupiter in his time: which thus met togyther in the yeare of our Lorde. 1484. and in the last degrée of that signe Scorpio: whose mightie effect in generall contynued, vnto the yeare of our redemption. 1504. and to the tenth daye of Iune. To these, that fearefull Planet Mars, which bare a swaye with them, in these, twentie yeares togyther; denoted (as he repor∣teth) lamentable commotions, bloudie baftailes, the euersion of kingdomes, hastie tumultes of the people, newe kings elected, conspiracies at∣tempted, dissemblings intended, wicked treasons procured, pittifull burnings exercised, grie∣uous spoyles forced, the wasting of countries attempted, with other grieuous and lamenta∣ble matters, long to report. &c. sayth the Phisiog∣nomer.
The forme and iudgement of the throte. The. xxxiiii. chapter. THe throte decerned cléere and whyte, whether the same be leane or fatte: doth innuate such a person to be vaineglorious, fearefull, enuious, lasciuious, prone to lying, congruently warie, & circumspect in that he doth: yet verie yrefull, and long hating, if we may credite Michael Scotus. The throte séene leane and thinne, in which the veines appéere: doth argue (after the minde of Michael Scotus) such a person to haue a harde fortune, to be fearefull, sluggishe, a grosse féeder, lightly crediting, weake of courage, and conuer∣tible eyther to the good or euill.
The throte decerned rough, doth denote an vnconstant person, a trifler, full of wordes, and one which presumtiously talketh: applyed for the forme to the birdes. If the canell bone of the throte, with the sin∣newes, be seene eminent, and that the same be lightly moouing: doth indicate such a creature, not onely rashe of his tongue, but occupied in hawtie cogitations. And when this person hath well bibbed, and filled himselfe with Wine, doth then mourne, and is also suspicious, prone to yre, and of himselfe by propertie, a sadde dronkard. The canell bone of the throte séene eminent or bearing out, doth indicate a sluggish person, in∣iurious, and slow in his actions, after the minde of the Phisiognomer. The canell bone of the throte well fashioned, and comely in sight: doth innuate such a person to be strong, stowte of courage, nimble in actions, and indued (by report of the Phisiognomer) with wisedome. The condition and iudgement of the necke. The. xxxv. Chapter. COnceyue (sayth the Phisiognomer) that the necke is sometymes taken and vsed for the whole, conioyned to the head, in the forepart, and
like in the hinder part. But this sometymes vsed and taken for the hinder part, in the diameter or space, where the cares are scituated: and this part of him is deuided into two partes. So that the part néerer to the heade, is named the nape or hin∣der part of the neck: that is, the toppe of the ncke behinde, where the beginning of the sinewes is placed. Yea the nape or hinder part of the necke, is vsed or taken with some practicioners, for the whole necke, as hereafter a lyke matter shall bée alleaged and vsed of the Phisiognomers. But the Phisiognomers in their iudgements, doe distinguish the necke, and nape in the hinder part: for in the fore part, they take and vse the weaʒande, the throte bole, and whole throte vnto
the roote of the conioyned, according to the minde of the Philosopher. The lyke wordes vttereth Isidore, in libro. 11. cap. 1. This named the necke, in that the same is formed stiffe, and rounde as a piller, to beare vp the heade: whose forepart (of him) named, aptly the throte: and the hinder part not without good reason, the necke. This singuler Isidore reporteth, that such a person hauing the necke formed bigge, not by reason of the fleshinesse, but through cause of the bignesse of bones, & the sinewes: is denoted strong of bodie, applyed for the same, vnto the male kind, and according to the condicions of the spirite: in that the male after the kinde, is knowne to haue a bigge and liuely neck: the same neyther short nor formed to long: which (by agréement of the most Phisiognomers) indicateth a hote qualitie, and boldenesse to consist in that creature. The seconde note séemeth to be, that such ha∣uing the necke formed long and slender, are iud∣ged to be feminine in condicions and weake of courage. The necke decerned bigge and liuely, as aboue vttered: doth denote the strength of the Braine: and by the consequent, a hotenesse of the heart: as all men are lyke knowne, in their kind. The necke séene long and slender, doth signifie the contrarye, vnto the abouesayde: that is, the weakenesse of body, and to be faint hearted.
Such hauing the necke formed bigge, through a fleshinesse, and not by reason of the bignesse of the sinewes, and bones (and as Rasis addeth) found hard and strong: are knowne to be yrefull, applyed for the same vnto the apparant congru∣encie, of the yrefull Bulles prouoked or styrred to yre, which then haue such a forme and condition of the necke: and as Rasis addeth, such also are knowne to be rashe, and hastie in their déedes. The neck decerned sufficient bigge, not by rea∣son of the fleshinesse, but through cause of the si∣newes, and bones, and sufficient long séene: are reported to be bolde, and stowte of courage: ap∣plyed for the forme, vnto the stowte Lyon. This especially is verified, when the heade, and necke,
is orderly proportioned, in such maner, that the same be of a meane bignesse, as the learned Con∣ciliatore, and Constantine write. The forme of the heade, if the same shall be of a meane bignesse, and the neck formed somewhat bigge: doth indicate a goodnesse of the qualitie, and disposition. If the heade shall be decerned small, and the necke seene bigge, doth denote the abundaunce of matter, and the superfluousnesse of the same: the lacke also of the vertue performing, in the due proportion. Such a heade (as certaine report) is many tymes grieued with much paine, and the Cephalicke passion. The necke decerned verie long, and slender (as aboue vttered) is iudged fearefull, applyed for the forme vnto the Hart: in that the Hart is knowne to be a beast very fearefull, and hath a very long neck, and small formed, in the respect of his body, and greatnesse. Yet the necke formed slender, and long, and that he beareth the same vpright in his going, doth indicate not so much fearefulnesse to consist in that creature, as aboue reported of the Hart. The necke séene very short, doth innuate such a person to be a deceiuer, and very craftie, applied for the forme vnto the Woolfe. And this note here taken of the apparant maner séene, both in men
and beastes: in that a person, minding subtiltie to set vpon an other, whether the same be his emmie or otherwise attempting vpon pleasure: doth then wylily drawe and shrincke in the necke, for the more shortning of the same, that he maye not so soone be espyed in the stealing vpon: as by a lyke we dayly see in the Catte, when the (wyth the necke shruncke in) stealeth by little, and little, on the Mouse. Certaine report, that the necke formed long, signifieth the féete to be long: and the necke séene slender, doth indicate the feete to be slender. The neck formed behinde hollow, & depressed or déepe in: doth denote a weakenesse of the sinewes, and sicknesses to ensue, according to the knitting of it in that creature. The necke formed very fleshie, doth witnesse such a creature to be a lyar, and vsing filthie ex∣cesse: and a meane necke séene, doth indicate the goodnesse of nature, to consist in that creature. The nape of the necke, next vnto the heade be∣hinde, if the same be founde hearie: doth innuate such a person to be strong, and stowte of courage: in that this note appeareth to be a hotenesse, con∣sisting in that person. The neck formed long, and hauing a meanesse in the proportion: doth indicate malice, and in∣dignation to consist in that person. And certayne
report, that such a creature to be a foole, weake of strength, fearefull, and full of wordes. The necke decerned verye bigge, with a cer∣taine length, yet the same not seene very fleshie: doth denote a strong person, stowte of courage, a boaster, and prowde: as Conciliatore reporteth, in his Rubricke of Phisiognomie. The neck formed stiffe and strong, doth argue such a creature to be yrefull, hastie, and vnapt to learne. The good disposition also of the mynde, and humanitie: they say negatiuely to concurre, vnto such an operation. The necke with apparant sinewes, and euill formed, doth witnesse (by the report of the Phi∣siognomer) a foolish person, and vnapt to learne. The necke decerned so louse, that the same sée∣meth to leane vnto the one side: doth innuate such
a creature to harme those, that are not able to re∣sist, wilfull, and deceytfull: as the learned Con∣ciliatore reporteth. Such that aboute the ioynt of the necke aboue, are séene ouer fleshie, be those which haue the knot bearing out, and the neck hardly moouing: and be also without féeling, to exercise the same orderly: yea such are knowne to be dull, & vnapt to exercise good workes: yet these in the euill or wicked, acti∣ons & to do iniuries, very prone and forward: as a∣fore in another place, the Phisiognomer obser∣ued. And certaine Apostates and Princes, this Cocles sawe and noted, that mooued their neckes, neuer vnto the right, nor left side, without the moouing of the whole bodye togither: and such were knowne to be double tongued, dissemblers, and very wicked. But such which haue the con∣trary to this, shall you iudge (sayth he) to be of a contrary disposition, that is, honest conditioned, and gentle of behauiour. The necke formed long, with a largenesse in the positure: doth denote such a person to be yre∣full, and vnapt to learne: applyed for the forme vnto the grunting Sowe. The neck decerned bigge and fieshie, with a certaine shortnesse: doth argue such a person to be a foole, and a verie great féeder. When a certaine bearing out shalbe betwéene
the knytting of the shoulder pointes, and begin∣ning of the neck, that the growing out of the knottes be sharpe: doth inoicate such a creature (for the more part) to be prowde, and arregant: as the Phisiognomer Cocles obserued and noted many the like. The neck declyning or leaning vnto one side, doth innuate such a creature, to be of a dull ca∣pacitie, and vnapt to learne. The neck bearing to much vpright, doth ar∣gue that creature, not only to be vnapt to learne, but high minded, and selfe willed: and one that will not be admonished, of nothing he doth. The neck decerned stiffe, and as the same were immoueable: doth like declare such a person, to be vnapt to learne, and vndiscréete in his doings, by which note (for ye more part) such are knowne to be fooles. The difference betwéene the moouing, and not moouing of the neck, is easily decerned: so that the necke appearing fast or stiffe, or quick moo∣uing, doth witnesse the more foolishnesse to con∣sist in that creature: but if the same appeare stiffe, and in a maner fixed: doth demonstrate, dull capacitie, and the vnaptnesse to learne. That you may not much erre, the Phisiogno∣mer doth here discouer and open, that there be some (which minding to hyde this note) in them
the rather to beguile the iudger: doe vse custo∣mably and oftentymes in the daye to rubbe, and chafe well their neckes with a warme lynnen cloth: whereby these maye moue and turne the heade hyther and thither, somewhat the easier in couering by such meanes their foolishnesse. As the like note the Phisiognomer obserued in a cer∣taine Citizen of Bononia, in Lumbardie, which creature besides as he talked, manye times smy∣led to hymselfe. So that by this appeareth, that the stiffe turning of the necke: is a note, of the proper foolishnesse to consist in that creature: by the report of the Physiognomer. The nape of the neck from the ioynt vnto the heade decerned rough: doth denote such a person
to be verie rude conditioned, and luxurious. But the whyte neck séene rough, doth signifie a Bel∣luine vnderstanding, and rude wyt: as Concili∣atore reporteth, in his Rubrick of Phisiognomy. The neck bending vpwarde towarde the head, doth demonstrate such a creature to be arrogant, stubburne in actions, and voyde of honestie: as the learned Conciliatore, in his Phisiogno∣mie vttereth. When you shall decerne a loosenesse of the neck, with a certayne gathering of the lippes vn∣to a laughter, and that the eyes appeare out of order in the rolling, with a certaine lightnesse of countenaunce shewed, in the sitting or standing of the creature: and a trembling voyce to rest in him, doth not only indicate an effeminate minde: but euill conditions to consist in hym, after the minde of the Phisiognomer. The neck decerned bending toward the breast: doth innuate such a person to be much encom∣bred with cares, and thoughts: yea this creature sometimes occupied with niggardship, and some∣times moued (with that euill vice) of malignity. The neck also is varied (sayth the Phisiogno∣mer) according to the knitting of the other mem∣bers in man. The neck séene bowing downewarde, as the learned Conciliatore (in his Phisiognomie) wri∣teth,
doth indicate a foolishe person, a niggarde, frowarde at tymes: and knowne he is to be ney∣ther simple, nor of an vpright minde. The neck decerned leaning vnto the right side, doth denote such a person to be wyttie, of séemely maners and conditions, and circumspect in the actions that he attempteth or goeth about. But the neck séene leaning vnto the left side, doth ar∣gue such a creature to be currishe or churlishe, rashe in his actions, and foolishe: as the learned Conciliatore reporteth, in his Rubrick of Phy∣siognomie. The necke formed strong, and very bigge, whether the same be of length, and that this hard∣lye turneth: doth innuate such a person to bée a gréedie proller, and gatherer of goodes togither, howsoeuer the same be. The necke decerned crooking (after the bredth of the bodye) as eyther from the right, or the left side: doth denote suche a creature to be full of wordes, deceytfull, wily, and vnfaythfull: as the same, the Phisiognomer Cocles obserued in ma∣ny subiects. For which cause, this Cocles warneth a man, especially to eschew the felowship & com∣pany of such, which of nature are wrte necked: & haue a drawing in, or narrownesse to be decerned betwéene the shoulder poyntes: in that these are knowne to be wicked persons, enuious, fraudu∣lent,
and hypocrytes: as the same, the Phisiogno∣mer Cocles obserued, in sundrie of the obseruant brothers in his tyme, and in many Melancholicke persons. The necke formed in a meane maner, both in the bignesse, and length: doth demonstrate such a person to be strong of nature, apt to learne, and of a singuler witte: but these oftentymes are knowne to haue a subtill or craftie witte, and to bée deceytfull. The condicion and iudgement of the shoulder poyntes. The. xxxvi. chapter.
HEre conceyue (sayth the Phisiognomer) that such persons hauing the shoulder poyntes suf∣ficiently distant from the knottinesse or spondile of the neck, which first appeareth aboue ye shoulders, where the shoulder poyntes or necke are conti∣nuated, and not to neare ioyned to it: are of a good nature, and hauing rype or good senses: and by the consequent of a good vnderstanding. The Philosopher in Methaphoricis, vttereth a reason of this, saying: that the shoulder poyntes beeing sufficiently soluble, that is, sufficiently distant from the spondile or knottinesse: in such maner, that the space betwéene them, be equall: doe de∣note that such indiuiduates, readily receyue, that is, easily the sensitiue motion. For these haue the note, or sensitiue power easily mooueable, that is, lightly reducible from the power, vnto the act of perceyuing. But such which about the spondiles of the necke, appeare hidden: are noted to be per∣sons lacking witte: forasmuch as these hardlye (being soluble) which about the knottinesse are de∣cerned weake, to receiue the motion of the senses. The shoulder poyntes decerned sufficiently distaunt a sunder, doe denote such a creature to be liberall after nature, applyed for the same, vnto the decent apparancie and forme: for that lyberalitie, aunswereth and agréeth to suche a forme: and the like formed, are the shoulder
poynts of the Lyon, by the report of the Phisiog∣nomer. The shoulder pointes séene néere ioyning to∣gither, doe contrariwise signifie niggardship, and vncurtesie to rest in that person. The shoulder pointes appearing sufficiently distaunt a sunder, and decently spaced from the knotte, or ioynt of the neck: doe argue such a person to be of a simple perceiuerance and vnder∣standing, and by the consequent knowne to be a dullard: as the learned Aristotle wryteth.
The shoulder poyntes (after the minde of the Phylosopher) well brawned with an eminencie or bearing out of the fleshe, and these strong for∣med, are applyed after nature, vnto the Male kinde. For as much as the nature of the muscle is to possesse the ingendred hotenesse strong, and of the reason of the heate is this procured, to in∣crease the forme of the members, according to euerie Dametre. The shoulder points decerned bigge, & large in forme: doe indicate a hotnesse to consist in that creature. The strength of euery person consis∣teth in the sinewes and bones: for which cause when the muscles are sufficiently formed fleshie, then must néedes insue a mighty strength, to con∣sist both in the sinewes and bones: of which, the spirit conioyned in such an habitude or body, may well exercise, and attempt or doe strong actions, if néede requyreth. Of which, Rasis reporteth, that the shoulder pointes decerned large, doe indicate a strong per∣son, of an honest minde, of good conditions, and perfite vnderstanding. The reason of this appée∣reth, in that through the bredth of the shoulder pointes, the muscles are indicated to be large, and strong: which procéede from a strong begin∣ning, that is in the braine, where the beginning consisteth of the sinewes, and the seate of the spi∣rites.
So that of necessitie, this must néedes in∣sue, that the forme of the heade to be capable vn∣to the retayning and possessing the goodnesse of senses: as the Phisiognomer vttereth, of hys skill and practise knowne. The muscles formed weake, and yll compow∣ned of strength, that the shoulder points appeare in a maner flatte, and peraduenture matched or couered with a softnesse of fleshe: doe argue a flegmatick qualitie, of the contrary nature to rest in that creature: as afore vttered in the proper place: and if these appeare and be without a soft∣nesse, they import the like qualitie, after the mind of the Phisiognomer. Of which Rasis vttereth, that the shoulder pointes formed thinne: doe indicate the smal∣nesse
of wit and vnderstanding. The Phisiogno∣mer Cocles reporteth, that he knewe and sawe sundrie women in his time, which drew by Arte, and through their bestiall indumentes, the shoul∣der points so néere togither, that they formed in a maner the like, vnto O ventris, in the part be∣hinde: and they garnished or bewtified these, with Cosmeticall waters. This Cocles also noted sundrie Italians, and fonde French men, which he aptly nameth (by that byworde) Hermaphro∣diti: that vsed and exercised the like practise, with their shoulder pointes. A matter which séemeth in my opinion incredible to be exercised of any faith∣full christian, but the Phisiognomer séemeth tru∣lye to vtter, what he sawe and knewein sundrie places.
The bearing of the heades of the shoulder pointes verie farre out: doe denote foolishnesse to consist in that creature: which maner, Aristotle reporteth vnto king Alexander: to be a note of rygorousnesse, and vnfaythfulnesse to dwell in that person. The Phisiognomer Cocles vttereth of experi∣ence knowne, ye he sildom saw any person, being
crooke backed, which were of a good nature: but that these hauing the like bearing out, or bunche on the shoulders, were rather trayterous, and verie wicked in their actions. And such (sayth the Phisiognomer) were knowne in his time, to be the founders of all wicked deceites, yea wylie vn∣der myners and gropers of the people, and had a deepe retching wyt, and wylie fetches, in wicked actions. So that it seemeth impossible after na∣ture, that such deformed persons shoulde possesse in them laudable actions: for as much as the spi∣rite connexed in such an habitude, doth yeelde a retrograde forme and propertie: which (sayth the the Phisiognomer) is knowne for the more part to be Melancholike. For which cause, a man ought carefully to beware and take héede, of fel∣lowshipping or kéeping company with such infor∣tunate persons, for the aboue sayde reason, and worke of nature. For these (sayth the Phisiog∣nomer) are the lyke to be eschewed, as a man of skill would refuse and shunne the company of a person lacking any principall member of the bo∣dye. And the like Aristotle (in secretis secreto∣rum) vttereth, that a man ought diligently to be∣ware, and take héede of an infortunate person, lacking any speciall member, as he woulde of his proper animie daungerous. The prouerbe like warneth vs to beware, of
the creatures marked: & in an other place, of the persons marked in anye member, that a man trust not them. The reason is, for that the spirites like insue vnto the forme of the body, so that out of an euill shaped bodie, can no lawdable actions procéede or be caused, as afore vttered: and this of him vttered Phisiognomically. The Philosopher also vttereth, that the great number of children liuing, is cause many tymes of the yll happe of parents. For these lacking pro∣uision, for their naturall sustenaunce, are caused to worke mischiefes not tollerable by lawe. For the Phisiognomer learned, and saw sundry times that diuers fathers of many children, not able to prouide sustenaunce for them, were constrayned through great néede to steale, through which prac∣tise exercised, their children like endeuoured, for the helpe of their parents néede, and confessed a lyke matter at the place of execution. So that the Philosopher giueth or sheweth this, not as an in∣forced precept, but rather perswadeth, that in the cause of a necessitie, the same to be procured as a rule in miserie: which to the beholder may lyke appeare. And the Mother Philosopher Asculanus vttereth, a summe of the matter afore taught. Ben se voria plicar li cinqui rami, Metendo el primo fra le do piu apresso,
Dicendo hor toi poi che tanto mami, Poi laltre cin{que} del sinistro tronco, Voltare in verso gliochij de si stesso, Chi mai si fida in rosso guercio e cionco. By which he concludeth, that no trust is to bée had, in those women and men, being red of co∣lour, and gogle eyed, or one eyed, and bunch bac∣ked also: the reason is alledged in the same booke, where he reporteth these wordes. Quando tu vidi quisti zoppi e glombi Impio fo el segno de la parte, Et anche quisti cum li flexi lombi, Defecto corporal fa lalma ladra, In pegiorando dicon le lor carte Sonno superbi, e de la mala quadra. The Phylosopher Aristotle, in Methaphori∣cis vttereth, that the shoulder pointes not in due measure formed, are noted to be craftie and de∣ceytfull: applyed vnto the passion, and feminine kinde. But the shoulder pointes well proportio∣ned in due measure, doe indicate a faythfull, iust, and strong person: yet the relation of the com∣mensuration, must be reduced vnto the good mo∣tion, and good necessitie, that is, vnto the good
complexion, which is caused of the good birth, and good forming of the nutrytiue or formatiue ver∣tue in that creature. So that this is to be redu∣ced, neyther vnto the Masculyne, nor feminine kinde: but rather to be applyed vnto the good or euill qualitie of the body. The shoulder pointes well formed, both in the length and bredth: doe denote a good disposition, and nature, to consist in that creature: after the minde of the learned Conciliatore.
The shoulder pointes decerned thinne, in the composition of nature: doe signifie such a person to be a nyggarde, couetous and fearefull in at∣temptes or enterprises. The shoulder pointes formed (of nature) vn∣equall, doe like indicate the vnequall actions, and that such a creature, to be of a dull capacitie. The shoulder pointes séene thinne, and leane of fleshe: doe wytnesse (as Michael Scotus re∣porteth) a weake person, féeble of courage, feare∣full, not well bearing or induring earnest labour, lightly credyting, quyet of behauiour, and con∣uertible eyther vnto the good, or euill. The shoulder pointes formed large, and bigge through the fleshe: doe signifie (as writeth Michael Scotus) a strong person, and faythfull, yet a nyggarde, of a grosse wyt, and féeding, sim∣ple, well induring painefull labour, féeding suffi∣ciently, and willingly, and desiring quietnesse. The shoulder pointes appearing bonded in∣warde, doe innuate (after the minde of Scotus) such a person to be warie, sluggishe, and after a maner ingenious, secret, and an vnder groper of men. The shoulder pointes decerned flatte lying, in a maner to the body: doe signifie (as affirmeth Michael Scotus) a simple person, a nyggard, la∣borious, modest both in his talke, and féeding, and
quiet of behauiour: yet credyting lightly, and conuertible eyther vnto the good or euill. The shoulder points decerned vnequall, that the one be bigger, or larger than the other: doe denote a sluggishe person, of a grosse wytte, of a dull capacitie and vnderstanding, simple, grosse in féeding, yea a nyggard, deceytfull, a betrayer, bolde, and hardly credyting: if we maye credite Scotus in these. The shoulder pointes séene farre bearing out, doe wytnesse suche a person (as affirmeth Michael Scotus) to be of an open lyfe in his con∣ditions: that is to say, vaine, simple, vnsta∣blē, a lyar, enuious, bolde, vn∣shame fast, and a brawler.
The iudgement of the Armes. The. xxxvij. chapter. THe Armes so long, that the handes reache vn∣to the knees, doe denote the subtilnesse of wit, arrogancie, and the desire to rule. Aristotle re∣porteth, that these notes séeme to signifie bolde∣nesse, honestie, with a liberalitie. The lyke long armes some suppose, that the mightie king Alexander had. Nor it is vnlike to that, which the sonne of Zacharie affirmeth,
that in some to argue arrogancie, and in other some a desire to rule, & gouerne, and both a bolde∣nesse and stowte courage. The selfe same reporteth Albertus in de Ani∣malibus, and in compendio suae Theologiae: and like Hierommus de Manfredis, and the learned Rasis. For that lengthning out, and longnesse of the armes, procéedeth of the great heate of the heart, with a moysture proportioned: which is the cause of the lengthning out: as may well be comprehended by the former wordes of the Phi∣siognomer. When suche a length or longnesse, is ex∣tended vnto the thighes or hammes: doth innu∣ate wicked conditions, and such to ioy in others harmes: in that those persons vndoubtedly, are maruellous enuious. And some affirme (that this note) doth argue fearefulnesse, to be a louer of dis∣corde, and ignorant. Such which with a gréedie desire to meate doe bring the mouth to the handes, being especiallye caused through the shortnesse of the armes, and euill forme of the handes not orderly wrought: are iudged to be wicked, and enuious: for that enuie is the daughter of coldnesse, and drinee, the Planet Saturne ingendring hir. The armes thinne or slender, if they shall bée weake, doe witnesse a rude person, and vnapt to
learne. The armes bigge, through the bones, sinewes, and flesh: doe indicate a strong nature: and if the veynes appeare, doe then declare a hote qualitie. When the armes are bigge, with soft fleshe: doe then demonstrate a womanly nature. The Phisiognomers reporte, that the armes very hearie: do denote such a person, to bée luxu∣rious. Aristotle vnto king Alexander wryteth, that when such a person (whiles he talketh) mooueth the handes to and fro: is iudged enuious, a de∣ceyuer, and one pleasant in wordes.
Such a person which refrayneth moouing of the handes, whiles he talketh: is argued to bée of a perfite vnderstanding, well disposed, of à sin∣guler witte, and readie counsaile, verye com∣mendable: the reason doth the Phisiognomer vt∣ter in the chapter of the paces. The perfite length of euerye person (after the minde of Albertus, in compendio suae Theolo∣giae) in accounting from the top of the forehead, and beginning of the creast of the heade, vnto the sle of the foote: is noted to be so much (these be∣ing of sownde limmes and composition) as is the space decerned, betwéene the two endes of the middle fingers, the armes right retched out. The armes so long, that béeing stretched out, reach to the knees, which seldome so happeneth, doe then denote such a person to be liberall, bold, high minded, of a gréedie desire, weake of bodie, simple of witte, foolishe, and vaine glorious, as wryteth Michael Scotus. The armes ouer short, in respect of the stature of the bodie: doe signifie a contentious person, vnthankefull, bolde, enuious, prowde, foolish, and a niggard, as affirmeth Scotus. The armes bigge, through the bones, sinewes, and much fleshe: doe signifie a person sufficient strong, prowde, of a light cause presumptuous, enuious, desirous of bewtifull things, and lightly crediting: as wryteth Michaell Scotus.
The armes fatte and brawned, doe signifie a person vaine glorious, coueting pleasaunt things, and more foolishe than wittie, in the doyng of things: as witnesseth Michael Scotus. The armes very hearie, whether they be leane or fatte, and soft of flesh: doe argue a leacherous person; of a weake capacitie, weake of bodie, very suspicious, and craftilye malicious, as wryteth Michael Scotus. The armes verye naked of heare, doe denote that person to be of a weake capacitie, long an∣gry, lightly crediting, vaine, lasciuious, a lyar, lightly deceyuing, warie in the euill, and but weake of bodie: as affirmeth Scotus. The forme and iudgement of the handes. The. xxxviii. chaprer. THe regytyue nature of the whole bodye, for∣med the hande, with the paulme long, and the fingers in séemely length, through the goodnesse of the matter regulated, as the like in many crea∣tures appeareth: in such maner, that the same is sufficiently prepared and formed vnto the doing of all workes, that is, to be wrought: and in ex∣pressing the mightie force of the members, and
singularitie of the wytte, the iestes and other skilles in euery creature. This also formed of na∣ture as a strong helper, to retche and take vnto it all such things which are néedefull: so that this necessarily and aptlye serueth, both to take and doe. Isy dore learnedly vttereth, that this part is named the hand, for that the same is the officer & presenter vnto the whole bodye: and is the same which presenteth and ministreth meate vnto the mouth: which thus ministred: is after caried into all the partes of the body. This Authour nameth the paulme, to be the hande with the fingers stretched out, and the hand séemely drawne togither, to be the fiste of the creature. Those braunches of both the hands, are pro∣perly named the fingers, which in number, are knowne to be ten, and decently matched or ioy∣ned togither: For these we sée (sayth the Phisiog∣nomer) that they both haue a perfite number, and a most decent order in their standing. The proper names of these, and their offi∣ces, shall here briefly be touched: as first the same (so named the Thombe) in that this among the others, rendreth or gyueth a vertue and power: the seconde aptly named the shewing or pointing finger, and the saluting: for that with the same,
we in a maner salute all persons, and expresse with it most matters. The thirde properly named the infame, or middle finger, being the longest, which is much occupied about the lowe, and clen∣sing place. The fourth artly named the ring fin∣ger, for that on the same, the wedding ring (for the more part) is worne. The fift rightly named the eare finger, for that with the same we daylie emptie and cleanse the eares: as to most men knowne, and exercysed the like at this day. The learned Formica wryteth, and of skill knowne, that it behooueth a man to learne and knowe first the quantitie of the hande, after the qualitie, substaunce, and condition of the same: for as much as the accydent notes yéelde and giue to euerye skilfull person a great perseueraunce and vnderstanding, to knowe and pronounce what these tende vnto: as reporteth Aristotle, in primo de Anima. The bignesse and shortnesse of the fingers, doe argue the paucitie or smalnesse of matter, and a flegmaticke qualitie: and that nature coulde not dispose and guide: of which the spirites then bée like to that nature. And of this such are noted foolish: and of the same mynde, is both Rasis, and Conciliatore and, Ptholomie the Philosopher. Formica wryteth, that verie necessarie is it to know, that the bignesse of the hande doth some∣tymes
procéede of great labour: and for that cause, such which labor much, haue bigge handes. Yet these sometymes, are bigge of nature: and then caused through the bignesse of the bones, and sinewes. Such a person whether the same be man or woman, is naturally strong. The same sometymes procéedeth, through the grossenesse of fleshe: and then such are drunkardes, lecherous, and (naturally) procured vile persons. If any hath the handes bigge, and fingers (a∣bout the endes of the nayles) sharpe: doe denote such a person to be deceytfull, and couetous. Forasmuch as the Phisiognomer hath expres∣sed, in this hande herevnder placed, the most lynes knowne: and giuen names to them in the Latine tongue, with letters added to eche, for a better conceyuing, and knowing of them at any tyme. I, of this occasion thought good, whereby (this di∣ligent trauaile of the Authour, might not appeare frustrate vnto our natiue Countrie men) as to english all the lynes, there séene: and placed them in the forme of a briefe Table, with the letters of the Alphabet annexed to eche lyne, that they may readier be founde and knowne in the sayde hand, liuely figured to the eye. A vitae linea, signifieth the lyfe lyne. B Soror vitalis seu Martia: is the sister of the life lyne on the mont of the Thombe.
C Cerebri linea, representeth the head lyne. D Soror Cerebralis, is the same stretching nere, in the paulme of the hande. E Veneris & genitalium linea: is the same named of some the Table lyne, or the lyne of generation, and strength of the bodie. F Saturnia: appeareth to be a sister lyne com∣ming from the wrest, and retching in manye handes, vnto the Mont of the middle finger. This also of some, named the line of felicitie. G Iecoraria, is the liuer line comming from the life lyne, which retching vp in ye hollow of the hande, performeth the Triangle in most handes. H Via lactea: is a lyne many tymes found on the Mont of the hand, retching vnto the Mont of the eare finger, named of some, the tayle of the Dragon. I Cingulum Veneris: is a lyne, which begin∣ning betwéene the ring and eare finger, is ex∣tended betwéene the middle and forefinger, after the forme of a halfe circle. K Carpus vel restricta: representeth the wrest of the hande, which seperateth it selfe, from the arme. L Hypothenar: representeth the breast of the hande: applyed (for the nere effectes) vnto the Moone.
M Solaris linea, Via solis: is that lyne, which comming from the Mensall or Table lyne, reacheth vnto the roote of the Ring finger, straight, déepe, and whole. The accidentall lynes, which eyther encrease, or diminishe the significations of the principall lynes: with all other lynes, and notes, that hap∣pen in the hande, shall shortly be vttered in the great worke of Paulmestrie to come forth. Of which is to be noted (after the minde of the Phisiognomer) that the fore finger, middle finger, ring finger, and eare finger, haue thrèe ioyntes a péece, which (if in euery ioynt) happen but one line, suche a person shall sodenly die: as Auctours write. But if there shall be two lynes equallye distant, then is it a good note: for that these signi∣fie an honest and faythfull person. If in the middle ioynt of eche finger, shall bée onely one lyne, and in the other two ioyntes, two lynes: doe denote, that such a person shall léese one of his eyes. These hitherto Formica. Ptholomie the Philosopher wryteth, that the handes bigge, and thicke skinned: doe denote a person, not contented in mynde. The learned Rasis vttereth, that the handes nymble, and slender: doe demonstrate a singuler witte, a good vnderstanding, and the subtilnesse of humors.
The handes slender and very long: doe argue tyrannie, and foolishnesse, in that person. The Philosopher Ptholomie affirmeth, that the handes of diuers colours: doe demonstrate such a person to be leacherous, and cruell: and the lyke doe the slender fingers (more then is de∣cent) denote foolishnesse. The skilfull Formica reporteth, and the same a truth: that such a person, which hath the fingers endes broad: is iudged faythfull, and a good com∣panion. Such a person, which hath the Table in the hande large, and the fingers slender and long, is iudged to be subtill in a naturall facultie, and apt or giuen to play on instruments. Such a creature which hath the table in the hande narrowe, and the fingers bigge: is aptlye disposed and giuen, to wryte well: and shall die of an impostume. Such a person which hath the handes not ouer∣bigge, nor ouer small, but well proportioned to the bodie: doe denote that creature to be well con∣tented and quieted, in all his accidences. If any hath the handes small, the same crea∣ture is reported to be of a womanly nature, in his déedes: vnsatiable, and hatefull after the kind: as now louing, and now hating, so that seldome there is any assured trust to be had in him.
If any woman hath manly hands, such a crea∣ture hath a bigge midriffe, and bigge bellie port intumescent: and such a one maye lightly con∣ceyue, yet bring forth no perfite childe. If any hath bigge handes, and fatte: do argue such a person to be, of a dull capacitie and witte. Such a woman hauing the like handes, doth ear∣nestly desire the laerenev act. If any hath the handes slender, is denoted to be a parson nymble, and readie in his doinges: and that he much delighteth, in womans companies. If any hath hollowe fingers, and these euill fashioned, and not well ioyning togither: is iud∣ged to be a person prone to pouertie, and vncon∣stant in his wordes: so that he performeth little, in his déedes: as the same the Phisiognemer no∣ted in one (named Seraphinus de Pisis) a Phisi∣tion. Such a creature, which hath the fingers, not standing close togither, or not straight out lying: doth signifie a miserable lyfe, and pouertie to suc∣céede. The reason of this is, through the euill pro∣portion, which formeth not there a good vnder∣standing: but an euill, and inordinate. The fingers formed little, doe denote suche a person to be a dullarde, enuions, and a foole: after the agréement of Authors. The learned Morbeth (the Cardinall) in hys
paulmestrie wryteth: that the fingers long, and slender, and well proportioned togither: doe argue an apt and readie wit, especially in handie crafts: yet doe these demonstrate, an euill gouernment, through which ensueth, that such are miserable and poore. Vt in politicis patet. If the fingers shall be much or wyde standing a sunder, doe denote pouertie, and miserie to in∣sue to that person: as the same the Phisiognomer often noted, in such persons, which begged from dore to dore. Certaine report, that the fingers very short, and little, doe denote such a person to be strong, and wittie: which reason séemeth not to the Phi∣siognomer, simplie to be allowed. The hands bigge, if the fingers be ouershort, doe argue such a person, to be an ouerthwarter, de∣ceitfull, & a théefe: after the agréement of writers. The handes crooked and slender, doe denote such a person, to be a gluttenous féeder, and full of woordes. Certaine report, that the fingers euill propor∣tioned, as bigge, and sinall, with the paulme of the handes crooked: doe indicate an enuious per∣son, a wretch, couetous, and a foole. The reason of this is, forasmuch as the grossenesse doth indi∣cate much quantitie of the matter, and a little of the naturall heate, not mightie to stretche out:
through which the creature is denoted, to be an earthly drie person, and rude, by reason of the o∣uermuch drinesse. And he is iudged to be a foole, through the lacke of naturall heate, and moysture proportionable: and by the consequent, the same argueth him to be couetous, through the crooking of the handes. Morbeth in his Paulmestrie vttereth, that the woman hauing small handes, and bigge fingers at the endes: is iudged prone to luxurie, and of a dull capacitie. A certaine Authour of a small Paulmestrie re∣porteth, that the woman, which hath a short paulme of the hande, in respect of the bodie: shall be grieued with the harde deliuerie of childe: and this onely caused, through the straytnesse of hir 23u3rp 2clip: which length is aunswerable to that length, which is on the backe of the middle finger, nigh the first ioynt, comming by the Paulme, euen vnto Rascetta, or the wrest. Or thus playner, the length of this 2cilp, is aunswerable to the iust space, which is from the roote behinde the middle finger: vnto the wreaste of the hande: and this do4bl2d, is the iust mea∣sure of r3h 2toof, vt dicunt & recte. A certaine wryter (whose name the Physiog∣nomer knewe not) reporteth, that the handes short, bunching oute, and slender, doe denote
such a person to be a scoffer, and a glutteneus fée∣der. The cause of which matter is, the ende of the sinewes, which (through a drynesse) is drawne togyther, and bowed inwarde, and thereof croo∣ked or bunched out. Of which men crooked at the endes of partes, through the daylie exercise about fyre, or by a sicknesse, these well and true repor∣ted: yea these well drinke and eate. When the ende of the little finger shall not reache vnto the vpper ioynt of the ring finger: (vnlesse the same be otherwise shortned of some accydent) is then thought a perfite note of a Ba∣starde: as the same the Phisiognomer hath noted in many, but this warily to be iudged. If the fingers bende at the toppes, doe denote such a person to be enuious, and conetous: and such are craftie, and false of promise: applyed to the . But when these bende inwarde, then contrarie iudge. If the thombe bendeth towarde the fingers, and the fingers like towarde the thombe incly∣ned, doe argue such a person to be couetous, and malicious. And this disposition of the members proceedeth from the spring, vnto which it ensueth as afore vttered. The creature which of a custome, vseth to holde the hande straite out, and the fingers (at length) stretched: is iudged to be a person feare∣full,
full of wordes and vaine. If any vseth to holde the hande, most com∣monly shutte togither: signifieth such a person to be prefull, and hastie in his wrath. The fingers small, and slender in a man: doe denote him, to be a foole: as certaine of know∣ledge report. If the fingers be short and bigge: doe argue such a person to be bolde, and enuious: as For∣mica wryteth. When the fingers are well compowned, of a comely forme and séemely length: doe indicate honest conditions in that person. He which in talking moneth much, clappeth the handes, and hath many stures besides: is noted to be a fayre speaker, enuious, and a deceyuer. Certaine report, as that auncient Hermes, that the shaking or quiuering of the handes, in a healthfull yong man: doth demonstrate such a person, to be soone angrie. For this procéedeth of a great heate, and moouing forwarde of the spi∣rites. If this shaking or quyuering of the handes, shall be verie strong, the same is a note of a cor∣rupt qualitie: and such a person is lightly angry, melancholicke, desirous of manye and dyuers things, and malicious. The handes hollowe in the paulmes, with a
goodnesse and emynencie of the Montes, and pro∣portion of the lynes: is an assured note of long lyfe. But if contrarie to this, you finde the hand: then the contrarie iudge. The fingers of what forme so euer they be, with the ioyntes grosse or bigge, doe indicate mi∣serie and infortune, as the Phisiognomer hath many times noted. Here conceaue, that by the forme of the fin∣gers, a man may like distinguishe thrée ages in euerye creature, as the Phisiognomer afore taught and vttered in the Phisiognomie of the lynes séene in the forheade. In holding the handes vpright and close to∣gither against the lyght: marke where any open place appéereth, & at that age the infortune of the creature shal happen. This maner of accounting must begin from the first ioynt of the force & mid∣dle finger: in procéeding like, vnto the endes of the fingers: & on such wise consider a long, from fin∣ger, to finger, where any open place is: for at that age, where the ace signifieth, shall the infortune come: and on suchwise may the fortune, and in∣fortune of the thrée ages, be knowne and founde. If the closing, or shutting togither of the fingers be whole, with a most comely forme of ye ioyntes, doth denote a singuler fortune to that person, es∣pecially if the annexed doe aunswere the like.
The learned Albertus and Conciliatore write, that when the fingers be so full and rounde, that lifted vp before the eye, a man can not sée be∣twéene them: do indicate a couetous person, and malicious. If the fingers stretched out, these bende to∣warde the backe of the hande: doe argue such a person to be vniust, subtyll, and wittie, especially if the fingers be slender. If any, whiles he walketh, doth of a custome, shutte the thombe within the fingers: is noted to be a couetous person, as the like the Phisiogno∣mer obserued in a certaine Lbarde. The fingers long, doe like argue the length of the eares, of the lyuer: and the bignesse of the fingers, doe like denote the largenesse of the eares of the lyuer: But the slnesse of them, as Albertus reporteth, doth lyke signifie the: eares of the lyuer to be little: the selfe same vt∣ter, Auicen, and Galen, in libro . If any shall haue redde handes, whether the same be manne or woman: is of nature noted▪ Sanguine, and luxurious: as wryteth the lear∣ned Formica, and the same a truth knowne. Ptholomie the Philosopher vttereth, that the creature which hath the vpper ioyntes of the fin∣gers grosse or bigge, and turning backwarde: doth denote that if he shall then be iteh, within a
periode, & a certaine tyme after, to become poore: or else by some other infortune, shall be shorte lyued. The handes crooked in the length, is a note (as some Authors wryte) of sodaine death: and this in sundrie hath bene noted. For as much as some are founde to haue sixe fingers on one hande, as the two last towarde the eare finger: in like maner lyned, yet in the greatnesse dyuers, the ioyntes and nayles séemely formed, and pro∣portioned through the goodnesse of matter. And the first person which I sawe and considered, be∣fore the presence of M. Iulius Vitalis, was a Iew named Helias: After him many others, whose names for breuitie the Physiognomer omit∣teth: and this person he behelde, in the Citie of Bononie. Thus briefly, the Physiognomer Co∣cles endeth this Chapiter of the hande, and fingers: crauing pardon of the rea∣der, if the same be eyther vn∣perfitely or superuously handled. The forme and iudgement of the nayles of the fingers. The. xxxix. Chapter.
THe prince of the later wryters, both of Phisi∣ognomie, and Paulmestrie, affirmeth, that the nayles (and the same a truth) are produced, or doe procéede of the superfluities of the heart: in that the heart is founde to be the nobler member of action: So that by them, is somewhat to bée vttered. He also reporteth, in differentia. 54. that the nayle is a bodye extensed thinne, produced & cau∣sed of the superfluities, and hardned on the fingers endes, for a speciall helpe to them being there situated; and groweth on the fingers endes and toes: as the heares, vttermost of the skinne, doe occupie on the bodie. And Auicen vttereth, that the nayles both on the fingers and toes, were ordayned in the endes of these members, the better to strengthen: for to take, and holde things firmely, and to couer the flesh at the endes: which ioyntly being well mat∣ched, giue a more strength. This well appeareth, in that if any of the small bones be lacking at the endes of any of the toes, or fingers: then like doe the nayles, lacke at the endes of those members: as the same may euidently appeare, in any large scarre on the fleshe, where after groweth no heares to be séene. The maner also of the origi∣nal & cause of those nayles, is proportionall to the production of the heares, through the grosser su∣perfluities
not so much adust. The nayles playne, white, soft, and thinne, reddish, and sufficient cleare, doe indicate a singu∣ler witte in that person: and this is one of the notes, which very seldome fayleth: forasmuch as such nayles, doe procéede of the best qualitie, as Albertus reporteth: so that the spirites which produce the nayles delated (from the heart) are cleare and thinne: through whose superfluitie, are the nayles engendred. The nayles rough, and harde, doe denote such a person to be prone to the venereall act: as the learned Morbeth reporteth. The nayles ouer short, doe argue wickednesse in that creature. And lyke the blacke, small, and bending nayles: doe argue imprudencie: compa∣red to the gréedie catching fowles. These also af∣ter the minde (of the Phisitions) with a leannesse of the fingers: doe witnesse a consumption of the bodie. When the nayles fall of, without cause: doe threaten the leaprie to come, or euen at hande: as the learned Conciliatore vttereth. The childe borne without nayles, or hauing them but weake: doth witnesse the mother to haue vsed the dayly continuance, or ouermuch eating of salt: as witnesseth the Philosopher A∣ristotle, in septimo de natura animalium. cap. 4.
The nayles in the middle déepe, grosse or bigge, and thicke: doe denote a rude person, and know∣ing little: especially if the flesh about the fingers endes be high, and grosse. Ptnolomie the Philosopher reporteth, that the nayles long, doe signifie pouertie to that person, and to liue in bare estate or beggerie, all his lyfs tyme. The same is confirmed of Pontius Gal∣licus. Certaine authours affirme, that whose nayles of the fingers, of the left hande, growe faster than the right: doe witnesse pouertie: the lyke if the nayles be without colour. I much maruayle (sayth the Phisiognomer) that all the legitimate authours doe affirme: that the white prickes in the nayles: to signifie happi∣nesse, and friendes: which (as it shoulde séeme) hath many tymes béene obserued and noted, and iudged of the Phisiognomer, by the order of the fingers: as thus, the white prickes séene in the Sunnes finger, doe signifie the encrease of honor, worship, offices, and friendship with noble per∣sons. &c. The reason of this is, forasmuch as these denote a good humour, and benigne, presupposing there a good qualitie, and vnderstanding: of which a good discretion, and curtesie ensueth: so that such persons through the same, do attaine friends and commended of many. The lyke pricks founde
in the little finger: doe denote friendship with the Mercurians: and that Mercurie to be well pro∣portioned, and stronge, in that place aboute. & similia. But the blacke prickes séene in the nayles, and chiefly in the middle finger, doe argue harmes, persecutions, imprisonment, and all kindes of de∣trimentes, that may happen to any: as the same the Phisiognomer vnderstood of a certaine friend, which noted the lyke in many persons. And these he reported to like succéede, according to the diuer∣sitie of the fingers: forasmuch as the infortune, and losse of richesse happened after the positure of them on the fingers. But some Autours report, that these doe indi∣cate hatred. The reason of this is, through the ex∣cesse of the drie Melancholie, which then aboun∣deth: and lacke of the naturall heate, which fay∣leth. So that the blacke prickes, doe alwaye de∣monstrate, that the colde Melancholie, and an earthly drynesse to insue. Yet it séemeth to mée (sayth the Phisiognomer) that experience maye contradict the same, séeing I haue alwayes séene (sayth he) that the blacke and white prickes on the nayles to come, and passe awaye, within a fewe dayes: and that these to be caused, of determinate effectes: which otherwyse can not procéede or be caused, but through the Periode and course of the
Planets, in certaine yeares and monethes: as shall appeare in many places of the Phisiogno∣mie of the Planets, to come forth. The signification and iudgement of fee∣ling, after Phisiognomie. The. xl. Chapter. THe Philosopher (in libro de regimine princi∣pum) reporteth, that ye sence, which consisteth in the hand, is the actiue or palpatiue vertue, and the course of them resteth in the heate and colde, rough and soft, moysture & dryth. And it is a ver∣tue contayned betwéene two skins, of which, the one is in the vpper face of the bodie, & the other, in the same which belongeth & cleaueth vnto the fleshe: so that when eche of these sences is attay∣ned: which God by his mightie vertue, hath mi∣nistred to this kinde: thinne skinnes so light as the Spiders webbe arise, and come from the roote of the braine: and are as a fine scarffe and thinne Curtaine to this kinde: insomuch, that when the same is presented, which eche sence hath: and the same commeth vnto those skinnes, which are in that substaunce of the braine: the passages then of all the sences are gathered with the yma∣ginatiue vertue, which representeth these to the cogitatiue vertue, which consisteth in the middle
of the brayne: that it may beholde these, and both gather and studie in the figures and examples of them, that it may knowe in them the nociue and innatiue, and that the same may be wrought ac∣cording to measure, which procéedeth or commeth to it of them. And as Auerrois (in de sensu & sen∣sato) vttereth, that the féeling is iesh: and is pro∣per to al instruments of the senses: this considred, that these nothing possesse of all the senses in the acte of them, which they properly comprehend, but the instrument of féeling: which is compowned of the qualityes, which it comprehendeth: and for that cause doth this not comprehende, but the in∣tensed matters, through his temperament: and for the same reason, howe much the temperater the flesh shall be founde, so much the more doth it comprehende the simple qualities, as heate, colde, dryth, and moysture. For these doth man inioye farre aboue other liuing creatures, and is of fée∣ling better and sensibler, which especially is decer∣ned by the hande (as the fleshe of the paulme) and the flesh especially of the fore finger. But the tongue (at the ende of it) hath no taste in the act: and for that cause, when the same is imbybed and filled of certaine humors, the taste then is corrup∣ted: and lyke is to be conceyued of the instru∣ments, of the other senses. The selfe same vtte∣reth Albertus (in libro de anima) where he wil∣leth
to conceyue that the skinne is wouen with sinewes very small, and wyth hearie veynes contayned wythin the same wouen, wyth which the Lyuer, and bowelles are wrapped: that these maye defende them from outwarde harmes: and for this, the skinne in beastes, is ve∣ry thicke, and hearie. For that the same hath not anye protection or outwarde defence: but the skinne in men is thinne. For which cause it is pro∣tected and succoured by garmentes, from winde, colde, and raine. Séeing the skinne compowned of the sinewes, is naturally white: for that cause is the propertie of the sinewes procured, that ye same retcheth out and draweth in, & is white in coulour: but the rednesse of bloud, passing by them, appea∣reth to the eye. So that whose colour of the hande or face is white or redde (as Phylemon vttereth) and of a good féeling: doe denote the faythfulnesse of minde, constancie, and truth: & this confirmed, if a commensuration or comelinesse of forme con∣sist in the other members. These hitherto vttered of féeling, shall here suffice. The condition and iudgement of the backe bone. The. xlj. chapter. THe backe bone great, that is, in the length and bredth, doth argue strength of the creature: and the royall members to be strong, and natu∣rall heate mightie, as afore vttered: especiallye
when the ridge or backe bone is musculous, and without a softnesse of fleshe decerned, is for the same applyed, vnto the Masculinitie. But if the back bone be founde narrow, and compassed with soft fleshe, that person is iudged of a feminine ac∣tion: forasmuch as the rest is narrow, & the royal members féeble in heate: and their actions are knowne weake, & féeble in conditions, yea these haue a dead minde or faint courage, applyed vnto the feminine kinde. Of which Rasis reporteth, yt the largenesse of the back bone, doth argue such a person to be strong, arrogant, and furious in yre. The backe bone narrow, and couered wyth soft fleshe, doth denote such a person to be effe∣minate. The crookednesse of the backe, doth innu∣ate the wickednesse of conditions: but an equali∣tie of the backe, is then a good note. These hither∣to Rasis. The learned Conciliatore vttereth, that the back bone large, and well brawned, and strong of bones, is applyed to the man kinde: and in the contrarie maner to the woman kinde. The back bone crooked, if the same be couered with soft fleshe, and slender in the gyrting place: doth denote such a person, to excell in naturall giftes, and to haue verie great pleasure in hun∣ting. Yet some affirme, that the crookednesse of
the backe, to declare the wickednesse of condi∣tions. The thinnesse of the backe, doth denote that person to be of a contentious nature, & spitefull. The back large and vnextensed, doth denote strength, arrogancie, and the vehemencie of a strong yre. The neather part of the back bone, if the same lyeth broad to the buttocks, & be compassed with a soft fleshe, doth indicate an effeminate person, compared to the woman. But if the same ap∣peareth long, and shall ende sharpe at the ende, doth argue wantonnesse vnto the veneriall act, yet with a temperauncie, & fearefulnesse. Such also hauing a great, large, and strong ioynted back, are reported strong: & econtra. But broad, thinne, narrow and flatte, doe indicate weake∣nesse. These hytherto Conciliatore. Certaine report that the backe bone hearie, leane, and verie much eleuated or bearing out, from the equalitie of partes: to denote such a per∣son to be vnshamefast, malicious, rude, of a dull capacitie, weake, of small labour and sluggishe. Whose back bone is decerned bigge, and fatte, doth argue such a person to be variable, sluggish, and verie craftie, or full of deceyte. The backe bone thinne, long, and leane, doth signifie such a person to be weake, of a light cause
fearefull, vaine, contentious, and verie light of beliefe. The backe bone from the shoulder poyntes, vnto the gyrdlestéede, when it is short, and suffi∣cient broade: doth denote such a person to be ha∣stie in the veneriall action, as the Phisiognomer oftentymes noted in sundrie persons. Here con∣ceaue that the backe bone, is ment and reckned from the shoulder points, vnto the gyrdlestéede. Of which, is to be noted, that if the back bone be large, doth then argue the breast, the ribbes, & flanckes to be large, & of necessitie it ensueth that the composition of Nucha, & the neck to be strong, with a decent forme of the head. And the inner members haue their receptacles great, and the knittings of the motiue sinewes, are of a due pro∣portion. Et econtra contrarium denotatur. By the loynes (the ingenious Phylosopher Aristotle meaneth) from the gyrdlestéede, vnto the begin∣ning of the buttockes. So that when the same place hath a largenesse, doth argue strength in that creature: through the plentie of mus∣cles: and such are delighted in the hun∣ting of beastes: and applyed to the Lyon, and Greyhound in the forme.
The condition and iudgement of the breast, throte, and pappes. The xlij. chapter. THe breast is that part, which conteyneth the spirituall members: for that in it are certaine partes conteyning, and certaine conteyned. The partes conteyning are fower, that is, the fleshe, the brawnie part, the pappes, and the bones. The partes conteyned are eyght, that is, the hart, the lungs, the pannycles, the ligaments, the sinewes, the veynes, the arteries, and Hysophagus. The Phylosopher Aristotle vnto king Alex∣ander vttereth, that the largenesse of the breast, and bignesse of the shoulders, and back: doe ar∣gue such a person to be honest, bolde, of a readie vnderstanding and wyttie. The worthy Conciliatore reporteth, yt when the neather part about the weysande, the shoul∣ders, and breast, shall be euill distinguished and flatte: doe signifie the rudenesse of wytte, and foo∣lishnesse: and that such a person not to be apt, to attayne any speciall handie craft. When the weysande beneath, shall be farre dystant from the shoulders, and large: doth de∣note such a person, to be of a féeble courage. The weysand being a meane, doth then argue
such a person, to be honest conditioned, & strong. These hytherto Conciliatore. Here conceaue that the weysande appearing emynent, and large, doth denote an effeminate person, especially if he be double chinned. The breast large, and well proportioned, with the other parts large, is a most perfit & true note to be conceyued in euery creature, forasmuch as this largenesse of the breast, is proper to man. The breast thinne, and weake compowned, doth argue a weake courage and will, after the minde of certaine Autours. The breast thick couered with fleshe, doth de∣note such a person to be vngratefull, as the Phy∣siognomer reporteth. Whose breast is mightily bending in, and that the Muscles so procéeding, that through these are caused (lyke to an hollownesse) doth denote a peruerse person and wicked. When this is verye emynent, the heart of such a person is hote, of a small vnderstanding, & daylie wéepeth, or singeth. Rasis affirmeth, that the qualitie of the heart, if it shall be hote: doth argue the pulse to be quick mouing and often, and the breath fast. Much heare seene on the breast, and thick, and that in the féeling the same perceyued hote: such a qualitie of the heart, doth demonstrate that person to be bolde, sturdie, and verie yrefull.
The composition of the body, both in the big∣nesse and smalnesse, is to be considered: for that the same demonstrateth the qualitie of the heart. So that the breast formed bigge, doth argue properly the hotenesse and bignesse of the heart: and this the more confirmed, if (with the same) the heade appéereth small, or that it be not bigge: which if it shall so be, a man néedeth not to haue regarde vnto any other signes. In like maner, the brea formed small, and the heade appearing séemely, or but meanely bigge: doth demonstrate by that reason, the smalnesse of the heart, & coldnesse of the qualitie in yt creature. If the bignesse of the breast, appeareth to aun∣swere vnto the bignesse of the head: or yt the smal∣nesse of the breast shall be proportionally formed to the smalnesse of the heade, then ought a man to haue regarde vnto the other notes. The colde qualitie of the heart, doth procure a weake pulse, and féeble breath: through which the breast is caused to possesse fewe heares on it, & those but small: so that the breast by the meanes, is found colde in the féeling. The person being of such a qualitie, is noted fearefull, and stuggish. The qualitie drie, hath a hard pulse, and is the∣rowout the bodie brawned, & swartish of colour. The breast also thinne of fleshe, but the veynes apparaunt, and hearie of bodie, and the skinne
both thick and harde. But the moyst complexion, doth cause a soft pulse, the breast naked of heares: the fleshe also softe and gentle: and such a person is noted effe∣minate. The complexion or qualitie hote and drie, cau∣seth a harde and quick pulse, and the same often: and engendreth much heare both thick & stiffe, on the breast, and on the thighes. The breath also out of the same qualitie, procéedeth both great and often: and the whole bodye besides is in the féeling decerned hote, and brawned, and the vey∣nes apparaunt. The person being of this quali∣tie, is noted yrefull and obstynate. But the qualitie decerned colde and moyste, worketh the contrarie to these aboue vttered: these hytherto the wordes of the auncient Rasis. To come vnto the matter and purpose (sayth Cocles) that is, when the breast is founde well compowned, and orderly formed, doth indicate strength, manlynesse, boldnesse, the others lyke, and aunswering, which properly belong vnto the man, as the Philosopher Aristotle meaneth: and such a habitude ought not to appéere much fleshy, nor so soft in the féeling, as the softnesse of the woman. The lyke wordes vttereth, the singuler Phy∣sition Galen: that the bodye appearing not ouer
fatte, nor ouer leane, and contynuing the lyke: doth argue such a person to lyue long: yet the body decerned rather leane than fatte, is the more commended, and doth lyue longer: after the a∣gréement of the learnedst Phisitions. The veynes of fatte bodyes, are euermore de∣cerned narrowe: whereof such appeare to haue but a weake and small breath, and little bloude consisting in the speciall partes of the bodye. Of which, such growing elder in yeares, are reported to be short lyued: and to be abreuiated lyfe, tho∣row a fewe, and these small accydences to insue.
When any considereth a subiect, let him first (sayth the Phisiognomer) marke the condition of the breast, after the forme of the head, and other members of the body. For if the breast be for∣med large, and bearing out, and the head séeme∣ly bigge, with a shortnesse of the neck, doth then indicate the hotnesse of the heart, so that there appeareth a nakednesse of heares: which after nature doth procéede, through a largenesse of the powers consisting in that creature, that properly can not retayne the matter of the heares: or else of the occasion, that the straightnesse of the passa∣ges be so narrowe and close, that these let the is∣suing forth of the heares, after the due propertie and course of nature. As touching the leane bodies after nature, these are in a contrarie maner formed to the fatte: for as much as their principall members are knowne to be open, and able (by the report of the Phisiognomer) to indure but small matters, and traueyles. But the persons knowne of a temperate qualitie, & dyeting themselues dainti∣lye, or rather after discretion, that these maye so waxe fatte: are by that meanes procured, that their veynes and arteries are caused strong, and indure large. Of which, their heate (by that rea∣son) is not so soone extinguished: as the singuler Phisition Galen vttereth. So that such an habi∣tude
with the Phisiognomer, is accounted law∣dable, and this generally ment in all the body. Here conceaue (sayth Cocles) that the heart in man, is cause of all the workings, if the principal members are duelie formed: of which, the good∣nesse and malice of minde insueth, according to the positure of dyuers partes in the creature. The contrarie of this is to be iudged: when as the neck is long, the breast large, with a much quantitie of heares, as in sundrie places afore vttered. The thinnesse of flesh on the breast, with a due proportion of the other members: doth argue hotnesse of the heart, and by the consequent, a warlike boldenesse: as appeareth in the cholle∣ricke. And as the lyke, by the former words afore may be gathered. Of which, the authoritie of Flauius Vegetius witnesseth, that the yong man fitte to be trained vp in the warres, must haue a quick, & readie eie, an vpright necke, large breasted, the shoulders brawned, or fast of fleshe, the handes and fin∣gers strong, wyth longer armes, after the forme of the body, a meane belly, the legges sufficient fleshie, and strong sinewed, and rather meane, than tall of stature: for that a strong and hardie Souldiour, is more to be preferred, than a tall & bigge person. And of this diligent héede must be
gyuen, to the proportion of the members. ¶ The forme of the pappes is to be considered: which (as it is written) are compowned of white flesh, hauing many kernels, & little holes like to a spunge, through the veynes, arteries, & sinewes: and of this, they be ioyned with the heart, the ly∣uer, and the braine, with the generatiue mem∣bers. If the pappes of anye man séeme to hange
downe, (in a maner) like to the womans, and compassedwith soft fleshe, doe denote effemina∣cie, and intemperancie. The Philosopher Ptholomie reporteth, that hée (which on the left side, of the breast) hath a bigge fleshie Mole, high out, and round, with one, or many heares on it, doth then promise the in∣crease of riches and honor. This experienced of Pontius Gallicus, & of the Physiognomer Cocles. Such women which haue bigge pappes, and shorte: are denoted sluggishe, and rammishe of smell, as some affirme.
Such women which haue no veynes, appea∣ring on the breasts, are vnfitte to giue suck vnto children: For that such a positure doth argue a flewmatick, and an inordinate matter. Such wo∣men also are of a rude nature, and beastly: and giue sucke with paine, through some gréeuous accydence. The pappes of (a meane bignesse) not soft, and the veynes apparant, and straight out: doe ar∣gue a good mylche Nurse: especially if hir skinne be swartishe in colour. The pappes small and leane, or slender tho∣rowe drynesse: doe denote such a woman, to be weake of body. When the pappes beginne to arise, then doe they denote, that (such shortly after) to be prouo∣ked vnto the veneriall acte. The pappes sufficient bigge, and full (after Galen) doe argue a perfite digestion. The forme and iudgement of the hol∣lownesse on the breast. The. xliij. chapter. THe ingenious Phylosopher Aristotle doth Phisiognomate of the noblenesse of the part of the breast, which commonlye is decerned be∣twéene the breastes. The same properly named
Methafrenon, where frenes and the Midriffe con∣sisteth: and this is a pellicle, deuiding the region of the naturall members, from the region of the nutritiue: which through a lyke deuision, is the same named the Midriffe (as it were parting or deuiding in two) and knitte or fastned, to the back bone and breast, in the compasse of the breast, ha∣uing a circuler forme. This hollow place of the breast, is here ment of the Phisiognomer, where the heares common∣ly grow on men, and right agaynst the Midriffe. The person which hath this part of the breast, appearing bigge, sufficient fleshy, and brawned: is (of the Philosopher) noted strong according to nature, and applyed of him to the male kinde. The creature which hath this part appearing weake, not fleshie, nor brawned: are denoted fée∣ble, and weake after nature, and applyed for the forme, vnto the female kinde. Such a person which hath this part so bending in, through the méeting there of the muscles, right agaynst the furcle of the two semicircles méeting at if, that they cause there a déepe hollownesse or pitte in the middle of the same: doth denote such a person to be euill conditioned, and not to felow∣ship withall, rude, and of a disdainefull nature. But the maner of his disoayning, he couereth and hydeth, for that he is close minded, as touching his
malicious stomacke: which he subtilly cloaketh, by his dissenibling woordes. The Phisiognomer Cocles, noted a certaine husbandeman in his tyme, which had the Metha∣phrenon so hollow standing in, that a man might well haue hidde, the whole fist in the same: who he diligently noted and knewe to be euill condi∣tioned, especially a wrangler, contentious, and double tongued. He which hath this part appearing eminent, is noted to be very yrefull: in that the bearing out of this part, procéedeth through the ouermuche heate of the hart, and of the same cause is mooued, to be verye yrefull, as reporteth Galen in libro Tegm. and through this yrefulnesse caused to bée forgetfull of himselfe, vndiserete, and vnaduised of that he doth: and applyed for the nature and propertie vnto the horse, for that the horse hath such a forme of the breast, and is of a vehement furie, as Aristotle vttereth. This part consisting a meane, in the hollow∣nesse, that is, the Methaphrenon, neyther to high bearing out, nor to deepe formed inwarde (as the breast plate of a harnesse) is a laudable note, after the minde of the Phisiognomer Cocles: and such a person, sayth he, is knowne to be of a temperate qualitie, and well conditioned. The selfe same vttereth Conciliatore, and the
lyke taught in the Chapter of the signification of the breast. The condition and iudgement of the ribbes. The▪ xliiij. chapter. HEre the Philosopher doth skilfully instruct a man to Phisiognomate by the disposition and forme of the ribbes, and learnedly vttereth cer∣taine notes of these. The first note is, that such creatures which are decerned to be well ribbed, be accounted (after skil knowne) to be strong: and applyed for the forme, vnto the male kinde. But such séene and founde weake ribbed, are denoted féeble of strength (after nature) applyed for the forme, vnto the female kinde: which are knowne (sayth the Philosopher) to haue but small and séeble ribbes, and weake muscles. The Lyon (of all beastes) is the strongest, and perfitest compowned in his partes: yea he for the proper composition, néerest agréeing vnto mans forme. The discription of whose forme, the lear∣ned Aristotle Artly vttereth, in this maner. That he hath a mouth sufficient great, the face formed square, and not very bonie: the vp∣per Iaw equally hanging downewarde, the nose more grosse than small, the eyes hollow standing,
and very rounde, nor to much protensed: but the meanesse moderate, the ouerbrowes sufficient great and broade, the forehead formed square, and in the middle of it, somewhat hollowe denting in, vnto the ouerbrowes, and nose: vnder the fore∣heade, the same as a clowde consisting: but aboue on the foreheade, neare to the nose, hauing the heares appearing inclined: the heade in a meane maner formed: the necke of a good and séemely length, & the same grosse & innodated: the heares in colour yealow, not plaine, nor much crysped: the partes which are cituated next the ioyntes of the shoulder poyntes, well proportioned and spa∣ced, rather than neare conioyned: the shoulder poynts appearing strong, and the breast iuuenile: the Methaphrenon also appearing large, and the backe sufficientlye compowned: the hyppes or haunches appearing not fleshie: the thighes and shanckes strong formed, and well sinewed: the whole chyne of the backe throughout compowned strong: the whole bodie (of knowledge) decerned to be well brawned, and sinewed, and not founde very moyst: the pace that the Lyon treadeth, is knowne to be neyther swist, nor verie slowe: In pace also he walketh stately, and mooueth the shoulder poyntes, as he treadeth. Such a condi∣tion of the mans bodie, formed according to these, is denoted laudable, and to be strong, and suche
persons like formed after nature, are knowne to giue fréely, and to be liberall, yea stowte of cou∣rage, louing and coueting victorie, gentle of beha∣uiour, and iust in dealing, louing besides those, with which they associate: these hitherto Ari∣stotle. Such persons (sayth the learned Conciliatore, in his Rubricke of Phisiognomie) which are strong and well ribbed, be denoted liberall, & frée of giftes, bolde, desirous of victorie, gentle in be∣hauiour, iust in actions, and louing wel those, with which they fellowship. And applyed for the forme, vnto the Male kinde: in that the same hath great ribbes, through the largenesse of the breast, and bredth of the backe: which properly procéedeth, of the nature of heate. Forasmuch as the nature of heate (as afore vttered) is to encrease and dilate the forme of the members. Such persons which are founde weake and small rybbed, are knowne of experience to bée féeble of strength, and after nature, applyed vnto the female kinde. Such persons which appeare to haue the ribbes much couered and compassed wyth the great quantitie of flesh, that these séeme swolen or puf∣fed vp withall: are argued to be ful of ydle words, and foolish in actions: as both Almansore, and Conciliatore report. And for the like forme, aptly
applyed vnto the Oxe, and Frogge, hauing such condicioned rybbes. The rybbes of the woman formed narrowe, and the flancks like: are especially caused, through the lacke of naturall heate in that creature. The auncient Rasis vttereth, that the smal∣nesse, and thinnesse of the ribbes: doth innuate in that creature, the debilitie and feeblenesse of coeating. The condition and iudgement by the notes de∣cerned, in the quantitie of the space be∣tweene the necke vpward and the Nauill downeward, vnto the mouth of the stomacke. The. xlv. chapter. THe Philosopher Aristotle doth Phisiogno∣mate, by the quantitie of the partes, which are betweene the nauill and necke, and the mouth of the stomacke: saying on this wise, that suche persons which haue the same space larger, which is from the nauill, vnto the bottome and ende of the breast: than that cōsisting from the end of the breast, vnto the neck: are iudged gluttenous, & of a dul perseuerance. The reason (why such are re∣ported to be gluttons) is, for that such haue a big belly, and great stomack: & a great stomak (ayth
the Philosopher) requireth much meate or foode, by reason of the great quantitie, and not of the qualitie: of which, these (by an earnest desire) co∣uet, to eate much meate. And such are knowne to be of a dull vnderstanding, and perseucraunce, through their mightie filling of meate, more than néedeth: which, of the same, procureth weake senses in them. But such a creature which hath the space, consis∣ting from the nauill vnto the breast lesser in dis∣tance, than the same which is from ye breast, vnto the neck, hath (by the report of the Phisiognomer) a great or large stomack: the stomack here ment, for ye proper belly: of which this person is knowne (of obseruation) to be weake of body, & short liued. The reason of this is, in that the bellye, or ra∣ther the stomacke consisteth colde, through the smalnesse of the same: of which, this ventricle or stomack (sayth the Phisiognomer) doth not or∣derly and well digest, but rather ingendreth su∣perfluities in it: and of the same, such are prone vnto diseases or sicknesses, and to be short lyued. And the multitude of sicknesses procured in that creature, are occasioned and caused through the intensed hotnesse, which the same purchaseth, and by the meanes of the bowelles, and other mem∣bers néere placed: that hastily drawe from the stomack, the meate by a force vndigested.
The learned Aristotle also vttereth, that when this space aboue described, shall be decer∣ned equall, such a positure and condition of the lyke, is commended highly of hym: for that thys argueth, a due proportion of the members, con∣tayning in them an apt, and good digestion in that creature. But a contrarie to these (aboue vttered) doth Aristotle report, that such persons which haue the partes from the Nauill downewarde (as vn∣to the belly) larger appearing, than the partes which are consisting vnto the breast, as vnto that named (Pomum granatum) are denoted féeble, and weake persons of bodye: and of likelyhoode to be short lyued, for the reason and cause aboue reported. Such persons which haue that space larger, consisting from the ende of the breast, vnto the neck: than that extended from the Nauill, vnto the poynt or ende of the breast: such (after the minde of the Phylosopher Aristotle) are deno∣ted strong, wyttie, and of a readie vnderstanding. Gulielmus Nurice in his Phisiognomie repor∣teth, that the like wordes (in a maner) to be vt∣tered of the singuler Aristotle, where he wry∣teth, that when the partes consisting from the nauill downewarde, shall be decerned larger than these, which are appearing from thence vn∣to
the breast: are iudged to be weake of body and short lyued. The condition and iudgement of the inner partes, which are consisting from the nauill vpwarde, vnto the begin∣ning of the stomack. The xlvj. chapter. IF the (Hypocondria) or inwarde partes so na∣med, shall be decerned harde in the féeling, and sufficiently or well compowned with bones: doe witnesse the Masculynitie: and that such per∣sons to be fierce, cruell, and quarrellers, or figh∣ters: as the auncient Palemon, Albertus, and the learned Conciliatore vtter. Such Hypocon∣dria (doe certaine report) that the worthy Plato possessed: yea the like creatures (as Albertus, and Conciliatore report) are applyed vnto the fierce Lyon. But if these partes (named Hypocondria) shall be decerned to be couered with a soft fleshe: these then (sayth the Phisiognomer Cocles) doe denote an effeminate minde, and womanly cou∣rage to dwell or consist in that creature: and the lyke affirmeth Conciliatore, in his Rubrick of Physiognomy. Such which shall haue these partes weake bo∣ned,
and wrinckled, and compassed with a thin∣nesse of fleshe, like vnto the Hypocondria of the Ape: are of the Philosopher iudged wicked of be∣hauiour, and full of shrewde or euill turnes: ap∣plyed for the like condition and forme vnto the Ape. The signification and iudgement by the notes of the belly. The. xlvii. chapter. THe Phylosopher Aristotle doth here instruct, howe a man maye Physiognomate by the ha∣bitude of the belly: in that the belly is knowne to be the same, which receyuing the meate (as Isy∣dore reporteth) doth throughly digest it, and con∣ueyeth the excrementes forth, that be superflu∣ous, for which cause, this of nature formed, bea∣ring and appearing outward. Suche which are sufficient fatte aboute the bellye, that is, well brawned, and that the bel∣lye beare not to much outwarde: are denoted strong after nature, applyed for the forme, vnto the male kinde. And such a condition of it, is re∣ported to be naturall: so that the composition of the belly (after the minde af Constantine) is for∣med fleshie after nature, yea hotte, and moyste: and this, through the occasion of digestion proper∣ly. Of which Rasis vttereth, that such creatures
which possesse bigge bellies after nature, are no∣ted to be libydinous, great féeders, and that spée∣dily digest meates. Such creatures which are decerned in a con∣trarie condition to this, as hauing flatte bellyes, not sufficient brawned, and these founde soft: are denoted and iudged to be weake of body, and for the forme, applyed vnto the apparaunt congruen∣cie. In that we commonly sée (sayth the Physiog∣nomer) that such possessing leane bellyes, procée∣ding of anye accydent, as eyther of to much fa∣sting, or of a sicknesse caused, or procured other∣wise of any accydentall cause: are argued to be vnapt to learne, and to conceaue déepe matters, yea weake of body and courage. And howe long soeuer such continue in the like passion, and so long they tende or leane vnto the womanly con∣dicions and courage: after the agréement of Ari∣stotle, Albertus, Conciliatore, and others. The learned Aristotle doth also vtter, in secre∣tis secretorum, that he which possesseth a bigge belly: is denoted and iudged to be an vndiscréete person, prowde, foolishe, and often desiring to coe∣ate, for the hotnesse resting in him. A meaue proportion and forme of the bellye decerned, with a narrownesse of the breast, doth indicate such a creature to be of a déepe vnder∣standing, of a good discretion and wytte, of an ho∣nest
conuersation and trustie. For a meanesse of the belly (sayth the Phisiognomer) is procured of a hotnesse, proportioned in that creature, of which, lawdable spirites insue. Where the Phy∣losopher vttereth, wyth a strayghtnesse of the breast: this is here ment to be formed with a pro∣portion of the same breast: for if this should be compowned with an ouermuch largenesse, it woulde indicate a hotenesse of the heart in that creature, to hinder vnderstanding. Of the same minde and iudgement (by the report of the Phi∣siognomer) is the learned Loxius, where he wyt∣nesseth, that such a forme of the belly is knowne to be soft. Conciliatore reporteth that the bignesse of the belly, doth denote an ouermuch desire vnto the veneriall acte. Whose stomacke and belly are decerned fleshier, are reported to be strong. He also affirmeth, that the belly soft in youth, doth witnesse: that the same in many to become flatte & drawne togither in olde age, & econtra: of which this lyke, doth indicate a heauinesse in olde age. The learned Aristotle vttered vnto the mighty king Alexander, that ye person hauing a great belly, to be vndiscréete, foolish, prowde, & de∣siring to coeate. A meanesse of the belly decerned (as aboue taught) with a decent narrownesse of the breast: wytnesseth a déepenesse of vnderstan∣ding, and readie counsaile in that creature. These
hitherto Conciliatore. The bignesse of the bellye, procéedeth of the great heate, reuerberating in the emptinesse of the same: especially, vnto the region of the ge∣nitors. In that (as it is sayde) the vertue Morall or intellectiue, is not scituated in a body ouer hot: and of this, such are procured to be vndiscréete, and foolishe. Such also are noted to be great drin∣kers, gluttonous féeders, and delighted in slug∣gishnesse: and gyuing their minds much to luxu∣rie. As hath bene noted in sundrie persons, which ledde an easie lyfe. A hearinesse decerned on the belly, doth argue such a person to be full of wordes: applyed for the forme, vnto the kinde of birdes: in that it is knowne, that the propertie of such, which are thus hearie on the bellye, to be talkatiue, and full of wordes: and this note onely conceyued and ta∣ken, of the chattering of birdes: which through their light spirites, are thus mooued to chatter: and the lesser birdes are knowne much lowder to sing: and to haue many more notes, as the Nigh∣tingale, and such lyke, which are so procured and caused through the subtilnesse of their bloud, and lightnesse of the spirites: in that these are of an ayreall nature, through which, they are so lightly mooued vnto myrth, and diuers desires, which in theyr many songs, and chaunging of notes, ende∣uour
to expresse. And the Cockes of those kinde, more exercise song, than the Hennes doe, foras∣much as they are formed hoter, and by the conse∣quent haue subtiller bloud, and lighter spirites, than the Hennes. And that hearinesse, or manye more feathers appearing on theyr bellyes, procée∣deth through the abundance of the heate vapora∣tiue, in that the same more aboundeth in this place, through the digestion there bearing grea∣ter sway: whose note is, that the fleshe of theyr bellyes is found farre swéeter, and more sauerie in taste, than any part of their bodyes besides: so that of the lyke causes, sundrie men are knowne to be very hearie on the belly. Of which, to con∣clude, in that these possesse a subtill bloud, and light spirites, through the light motion of bloud, and the spirites. For that cause, are diuers fanta∣sies in those subiectes, lightly procured and con∣ceyued in minde, which, of them vttered in theyr speach, and talke. So that of these, a certaine rea∣son of the cause appeareth, why the chattering, and many wordes in them, doe indicate a heari∣nesse to consist about their Bellies. The Phisiognomer knew sundrie persons of the like condition, which were very leacherous, and that much desired to frequent the same. And the lyke condicioned creatures (sayth Cocles) are these knowne to be, which possesse or haue but a
short space, betwéene the heart and braine: espe∣cially, if such are found Collericke. Thus by dili∣gent considering the notes, in this Arte taught: maye a man attaine, vnto manye other hidde se∣crets of this Arte, not here vttered. Here note, that Ptholomie the Philosopher, and Pontius Gallicus wryte, that he which hath one line on the nauill, doth signifie knowledge, and skill in Artes. He which hath two lynes vnder the nauill, is iudged to be a person, which shall haue many wiues. If thrée lines be séene vnder ye nauil, than doth it denote, yt such a person shall haue ma∣ny children. If foure lines there appeare, then doe they promise long lyfe, vnto that perso. And if fiue lynes be there séene, then doe they denote great aduauncement, or great honour, vnto that person. But if any vnder the nauill, shall haue two vn∣equall lynes: is then iudged to be a person so wic∣ked, that there is little trust to be had in him. &c. The iudgement of that 235r 2cil named n2tc2. The. xlviij. Chapter. HEre the Philosopher doth instruct to Phisiog∣nomate by the dispositions of the Pecten: for the Pecten is the neather Pubes of the man or woman, in which the heares grow on ye mentula: of this, the Philosopher vttereth thrée notes. He which hath the n2tc2 2p1rsh, that is to say, 2p1rsh beneath, and large aboue: after the maner
of a shielde, and well boned, without ouermuch fleshinesse, are noted strong: & such are applied, to the Male kind: after the mind of the Philosopher. Such hauing the n2tc2p, of a contrarie condi∣tion to that afore: as much fleshie, fatte, and well boned: are weake persons: and applyed (after Aristotle) to the female kinde. Suche hauing the n2tc2p ouer leane, as if the same were so dryed vppe by the heate of the Sunne, are euill conditioned: and applyed vnto the Ape of lyke disposition, as well in minde as in the bodie: the same reported of Auicen, libro se∣cundo de Animalibus, and the lyke vttered of Aristotle, and Albertus. The learned Conciliatore affirmeth, that such which haue a bonie n2tc2p, and protensed into a sharpenesse, are denoted strong persons. The skilfull sr2r2hc2l affirme, that if the breast bone in the mm455 shall be thinne of fleshe, and protensed into a sharpenesse: is then iudged to be l5ftr5h to 2t124c ht355: and that r3h 2353r 2cil also, to be 2rgl. Further conceyue, that the hammes hearie, with a thicknesse of heares there growing: doe witnesse luxurie in that person. And when the same is there, with a thinnesse of heares: doth then through (the littlenesse or smalnesse of them) argue the contrary: and signifieth also the domi∣nion
of coldenesse: as the same well appeareth in the place, where further (and more at large) is written of the nature, and conditions of the heares. &c. And these of the pecten, that I maye not séeme to stande long (in the rehersall of mat∣ter) shall here suffice. The iudgement by the notes of 2hc 2ryd and s3clt2st. The. xlix. chapter. THe reason why Aristotle hath not entreated of this part, is for that he wrote but a briefe instruction, in maner as an introduction of the sci∣ence, which he comprehended in a fewe lynes, so that an Epytomie onely of the same he wrote: yet Conciliatore somwhat intreated of the same, as I shall vtter (sayth Cocles) and whatsoeuer is here added of vs, the same by experience was knowne and founde. Rasis reporteth that the gelded person, is euill conditioned, in that he is a foole, couetous, and presumptuous. But the person not gelded yet borne without s1l35c3ts2t, or at the least, hauing them very smal, is then conditioned, much lyke to the gelded per∣son. Such a person which neuer had bearde grow∣ing
on the chinne: is farre worser conditioned. Such persons which haue the s4l5c3ts2t not a like, are noted great fornicators: as Ptholomie the Philosopher, and Pontius Gallicus affirme. But such persons which haue them bigge, are denoted luckie, and fortunate, as Ptholomie the Philosopher wryteth. Such persons which shall haue them equall or alike: shall attaine vnto a happie fortune: as Conciliatore affirmeth. Such persons which haue them very bigge, with the 2l1t3n2g the lyke: are denoted foolishe, sluggardes, and Asses: I neuer sawe, sayth the Phisiognomer, that such hauing a great 2dyr, were euer ingenious vnto vertues: but rather that such came, vnto a lamentable lamenesse and miserie in the ende: as Conciliatore vttereth. These séene hanging on htgn2l, doe denote li∣beralitie, yet weaknesse to 2t124c: as Ptholomie affirmeth: and the like Pontius Gallicus. Aristotle (in lib. de Animalibus) wryteth, that he which hath a verie bigge 2l1t3n2g, through the spirits, not mightie to discend, vnto the due place: and through the coldenesse of them, and through the often and longer 2gn3ln1h of them: is there∣by caused weake to 2t124c. Aristotle affirmeth, that the 3l5c3ts2t ought to 23l 2r2n vnto the fundament: and of this, men do
not so much desire, to 2t124c in the Summer, as in the winter time. If vndecently the sinester of the s3lc3ts2t, shall be r2ggb, than the right: such a person shall then beget (altogither) women children: in that he is, of a colde qualitie: as Conciliatore vttereth. Conciliatore in his Rubrick of Phisiognomie vttereth, that the 2ltn2g 2ggb, doth argue such a person to be a dullarde, and a foole. And like the crooke backed, or suche which possesse a great bunch on the backe. And such also short of bodie, haue (for the more part) a 2ggb 2l1t3n2g. Ideo Matronae solent (vt plurimum) famulos similis staturae eligere. Solent enim fortitudinem secundum aliorū membrorum conglutinacionem ostendere. Qui habent mentulam cum venis crassis & apparentibus, sunt calidae Naturae: & saepe, illis accidit vlceratio virgae, vt notaui (inquit Cocles) & curaui, cum oleo omphacino, & ro∣sacea aqua, & parum cerusae, & aliquantulum Camphorae, in forma line amenti, aliter tali∣bus accidunt vlcera putrida. Cuius rei causa, est imbibitio materiei, quae influit propter ra∣ritatem & latitudinem meatus, quia verenda sunt complexiones calidae & humidae. Et ni∣mia fatigatione calefit, & excoriatur virga sic complexionata. Inquit Conciliator.
The learned Aristotle reporteth, that the 2lt3n2g uum found excéeding long, doth hinder con∣ception, yea the same perhaps already performed: this may also through a lyke occasion, destroye it. And not vnlyke (sayth the Phisiognomer) doth this many tymes happen, that no conception at all is procured: when as the same is decerned o∣uer small, and short in respect of the whole bodie. The reason why the ouer length is not commen∣ded nor apt vnto conception: is for that the gig∣nitiue spirites in that creature, are knowne to be weakned, through their long iourney consisting in the way. The iudgement of the haunches and hippes. The. L. Chapter. HEre the Philosopher instructeth, to Phisiog∣nomate by the dispositions of the haunches or hippes. First the hippes bonie, so that they be great and bearing outward, and sinewed: and that the hippes be bigge (by reason more) of the bones, and sinewes, than of the ouermuch fleshinesse: do then argue such a person, to be both strong and hardie. The selfe same vttereth Rasis, where he repor∣teth, that when the bones of the hippes shall bée bearing outwarde: doe then denote such a person, to be hardie. Here Rasis meaneth the same, when
as the Hippes are well brawned, and bending to the out part: For then is it a note, of strength in that person. And the Phisiognomer hath noted, that such runne light, and swift on the grounde, and are great goers of iourneyes. Michael Scotus hath truely vttered in this, which I much maruell at (sayth the Phisiogno∣mer: seing in all his Phisiognomie he hath so mightily erred, not knowing what he wrote, as a person euill experienced in this Art: although hée durst attempt to vtter manye matters. But to come to the matter, the hippes founde sufficient fleshie: doe signifie a strong person, hardie, and no lesse prowde: as the same well appeareth, in the Gelding, Faulcon, and Cocke. Michael Scotus vttereth a seconde note, that such hauing the hippes bonie, yet in such maner that the bones appéere not bigge, but much fleshy, with a smalnesse of the sinewes: doe declare the lyke persons, to be weake of strength: and ap∣plyed to the female kinde. Rasis vttereth, that the hippes hauing much fleshe outward, doe argue the lousenesse of them, and weakenesse of strength. Conciliatore reporteth, that the bones of the hipprs tended and bearing outward: doe denote strength, and a manly courage in that person: vnlesse a womanly fleshinesse in them, doth other∣wise
happen. A slendernesse or thinnesse of the hippes, doth signifie such a person, to be a louer of women, fearefull, and weake of body. The hippes bigge, and well brawned, full, and solyde: doe argue such a person to be strong. The hippes bearing outwarde, through the ouermuch fleshinesse: doe denote a weake person and feeble of courage. The hippe bones bearing out (after a maner) doe argue strength in that person. Rasis also vttereth, that when the haunche bones are tended or beare outwarde: doe demon∣strate much strength, and a manly courage, in that person. The slendernesse, or thinnesse of the haunch∣bones: doth signifie such a person, to be both weake of strength and fearefull, and a louer of women. Aristotle (in libro de secretis secretorum) wri∣teth, that the largenesse of the legges and ancles, doth signifie a strong person. These hytherto of the hippes, may here suffise. The iudgement of the knees. The. Li. chapiter. HEre the Philosopher Aristotle doth Physiog∣nomate, by the dispositions of the knées: and
vttereth sundrie notes, as touching the condition of these: that such persons hauing the knées for∣med slender, are denoted to be feare full: and ap∣plyed for the forme (as he reporteth) vnto the ap∣paraunt congruencie or comlynesse of the same: in that the apparaunt maner agréeing by great studie, may be named the apparaunt congruen∣cie: for as much as the same agréeth with the na∣turall maner in causes, and in the name proper. The Philosopher also vttered vnto the mighty king Alexander, that the much quantitie of flesh decerned about the knées, and the same soft: doth indicate the weakenesse of strength, and féeble∣nesse of courage, to consist in that creature. And this caused through a weakenesse of the sinewes: which by reason of the moysture, loosing the lyga∣ments of the ioyntes, is like procured. And such persons (as the Physiognomer reporteth of expe∣rience) through the weakenesse or debilitie of the ioyntes, can not so well indure to beare anye waightie burdens, nor doe anye other lawdable workes, in which the force of strength consisteth or is requyred. Such creatures also are knowne to be so féeble of body, that they can not long in∣dure to walke on foote, at the least anye reasona∣ble distaunce: yea these besides are knowne to be effeminate. For the superapparaunt maner is the same, which hapneth of purpose, with dili∣gence
and studie: as the lyke these inioy, which studie of a speciall purpose, to procure and cause themselues amyable, and gracious to men: or worke otherwise, besides the contrarie dispositi∣ons: in that the maners or apparancie of such, are knowne to be accydentall: but these which are not wrought and caused of a set purpose, may aptly be reduced vnto the minde, euen as an action natural. And on such wise may their notes, of the conditions super apparaunt be demonstra∣ted: as the like vttered of the maners apparant. And the reductions a like caused into these, as the same in purpose consisteth: and as afore of the Phisiognomer (in manye places) it hath béene taught. Michael Scotus in his Phisiognomie vtte∣reth, that the knées full of fleshe and fatte: doe indicate a fearefull person, lyberall, vayne, and of small labour. The sayde Michael Scotus reporteth, that the knées leane and thinne of fleshe, doe argue a strong person, bolde, well induring labour, se∣cret, and a good goer on foote. The learned Albertus, by the authoritie of Aristotle vttereth, that the knées which in them∣selues are turned, as they (in a maner) knocked togither: are applyed to the femynine propertie: vnlesse this may otherwise happen, by reason of
the exercise. As the like is to be séene in Bakers, Porters, and such like persons, which carrie hea∣uie burthens: in whome such a note is not natu∣rall, but by accidence: for that cause, this note is ineffectuous. The learned Conciliatore reporteth, that the knées appéering louse (as they were seperated) frō the rest of the bodie: doe denote such to be weake in their going. Such hath ye Phisiognomer séene and noted to haue gone with the toes, and knees turning towarde the siluester part, that is, out∣warde, and their knées tended vnto the domesti∣call part, that is, inwarde. And such persons euer∣more are effeminate, and for the more part Cy∣neds: as the Phisiognomer experienced in many subiectes, and founde the same to be like. Such also are of a péeuishe nature, that aptly they may be attrybuted to women for their like. Thus I thinke, sufficient vttered of the knées. The iudgement of the shankes and legges. The. Lii. chapter. HEre the Phylosopher doth Physiognomate by the shankes, and vttereth thrée notes, by the tryple disposition of the shankes conceyued. The first note is, that if the shankes shall be si∣newed, brawned strong, and bigge: not by rea∣son
of the fleshinesse, but rather by reason of the greatnesse of the bones, and sinewes: doe argue such a person (after nature) to be strong: applyed after forme to the Male kinde. Aristotle vttereth a seconde note, that the shankes slender, and slnewes strong, doe denote a leacherous person, light, and vnstable in moti∣on. And thys note here conceyued of the byrdes, hauing the like legges: which for that according to life are light and vnstable, and haue but a little of the earthly grauitie, yet much of the ayreall lightnesse. Insomuch, that these are vnstable, and not tarying any time in one place. Conciliatore vttereth, that the shankes slen∣der, with a weakenesse of the sinewes: doe denote such a person to be fearefull: as afore vttered, in sundrie places. A thirde note, the Phylosopher vttereth: that the shankes ouer bigge, by reason of the ouer∣much fleshynesse, and not with an equallitie or iust proportion, so that beneath the ancles, these are bigge and fleshie, as the womens are: doe de∣note such a person to be weake of strength, grosse wytted, of a dull perseueraunce, vnshamefast, and hatefull, as wryteth Rasis. To the same ad∣deth Aristotle, that hauing the like shankes, are applyed to the apparaunt comelynesse of them: which apparauncie is to be vnderstanded by the
contrarie: in that the apparauncie is a comli∣nesse, to haue the contrarie disposition and forme in the fleshe: as that the same be moderated, or meane proportioned, and not out of forme. The singuler Philosopher Aristotle, vnto king Alexander wrote: that the thinnesse and slendernesse of the legges: doth argue a weake person, and ignoraunt. But the bignesse of the legges, doth signifie a strong and stowte person: and this (of the bignesse) is here ment when as they be well boned, strong sinewed and brawned. The legges slender, sinewed, and rough (after Aristotle) séeme to indicate, the earnest desire to the veneriall acte. Forasmuch as their nutry∣mentall matter is conuerted into Sperme, and applyed vnto byrdes. The shankes ouer bigge and yll fashioned, doe denote an odible, and vn∣shame fast person. Albertus reporteth that the legges soft, are notes of an eeminate nature. Antonius Cornazanus, in his booke de re mili∣tari concludeth, that the legges rounde filled af∣ter length, doth argue manlynesse, in a yong or freshe Souldiour. Conceaue also, sayth the Phisiognomer, that the legges verie hearie, with much heare about the Eiurp Ecalp, doe signifie such a person to be verie lybidinous, and applyed for the forme, to brute beastes.
Such which are hearie vp to the hippes, and the like on the partes downewarde, are noted to be much and often desiring o coeate: as vttereth Aristotle, in libro de animalibus. The shankes so fleshie behinde, that they beare out (in a maner like) to a woman with childe: doe denote a filthie temperament, in that crea∣ture: as wryteth Conciliatore. Michael Scotus wryteth, that the shankes soft of fleshe, doe denote a semynine nature in that person. The shankes bigge, through the bones, fleshy, and hearie: doe signifie a strong person, bolde, warie, trustie, of a grosse witte, sluggishe and of a dull capacitie, as affirmeth Michael Scotus. The legges stender, strong sinewed & rough: doe denote a gréedie desire, vnto the veneriall acte: for that their nourhing matter, is conuer∣ted into Sperme: and applyed to the byrdes, as wryteth Michael Scotus. The legges slender, and not sufficient hearie, doe argue a weake person of strength, fearefull, of a good vnderstanding, faythfull, seruiceable, and syldome such are leacherous: as affirmeth Michael Scotus. The legges euermore naked of heare, doe signifie a chaste person, weake of strength, and lightly or soone fearefull: as affirmeth Michael
Scotus. The legges verie hearie, doe signifie a hearie person, about the Eiuirp Ecalp, leacherous, sim∣ple, often vaine, vnstable, and abounding in euill▪ humours: as wryteth Michael Scotus. The iudgement of the ancles. The. Liii. chapter. HEre the Phylosopher instructeth, to Physiog∣nomate by the ancles of the féete: and vtte∣reth two considerations of the notes, according to the two dispositions and formes: which with their relations appeare of the wordes and say∣ings in the text. Such strong sinewed, and well brawned about the ancles, are noted strong after nature, and applyed to the Male kinde. Such much fleshie, and weake sinewed about the ancles, are iudged weake of strength, and courage: and applyed after nature, to the female kinde. But as touching the seconde disposition and forme, in distinguishing these better: Rasis vtte∣reth, that when the ancles shall be bigge, as tho∣rowe a fleshinesse: doe argue such a person to be a dullarde, and vnshamefast. Conciliatore reporteth, that such which shall be strong sinewed, and well brawned about the
ancles: are denoted strong, and bolde: and con∣trariwise the shankes and ancles bigge, and euill formed: doe demonstrate suche a person to be weake, a dullarde, and vnshamefast: these hi∣therto Conciliatore. The ancles bigge, through the fleshinesse, and much bearing outwarde, doe signifie a weake person, of small labour, fearefull, warie, fayth∣full, and tractable: as affirmeth Michael Scotus. The ancles hauing verie apparaunt sinewes, and strong: doe demonstrate a strong person, bolde, prowde, and stowte: as wryteth Michael Scotus. These hitherto of the ancles, shall here suffice. The forme and iudgement of the feete. The. Liiij. chapter. HEre the Philosopher doth Phisiognomate, by the condition of the féete: and deuideth them into foure partes. As touching the first dispositi∣on, he vttereth that such hauing the feete suffici∣ent bigge, strong sinewed, and well brawned: in such maner, that the sinewes and muscles ap∣peare, and that the greatnesse of the féete appea∣reth, by reason of the bignesse, both of the bones and sinewes, and not by occasion of the muche quantitie of fleshe: doe indicate a strong person,
bolde and stowte: applyed for the forme vnto the male kinde. The Phisiognomer Cocles vttereth, (that the bignesse of the feete signifiyng the like aboue sayd) ought not to be conditioned, or possesse an ouer∣much fleshinesse: in yt (according to Rasis) the féete hauing much flesh, or appearing very fleshie, and that these are formed fast or harde in the composi∣tion: doe innuate such a person to be of a dull vn∣derstanding, & slender capacitie: applyed for the imperfiter vnderstanding, vnto the female kinde. The singuler Philosopher Aristotle (in libio de secretis secretorum) vttereth, that the féete for∣med fleshie: doe denote such a creature to be foo∣lishe, vnaduised, and a moouer or procurer of iniu∣ryes to men. The feete decerned small and slender in forme, doe signifie such a person to be strong, and stowte of courage: after the minde of Nuntius Naturae. The learned Aristotle also reporteth, that such hauing the féete formed contrarie vnto the first maner, as appearing narrow in the bredth, in which the ioyntes séeme not to appeare: are de∣noted weake of strength, feeble of courage, and to be effeminate. The féete (sayth Cocles) which are decerned slender, and in the forme appeare amiable: in such maner that these are found rather more soft, than
strong: are applyed according to the passions of the minde, vnto the female kinde: that is, such haue the naturall conditions attributed vnto the female kinde. The auncient Rasis vttereth, that the féete for∣med small, comely, and fayre: doe demonstrate such a creature, to be prone vnto the veneriall act, or a leacherer, myrrie, full of ieastes & sportes: the causes of these dispositions, are the complexio∣nall qualities consisting in him. Here conceyue (sayth the Phisiognomer) that the hotenesse and moysture in euery creature, are the speciall causes, procuring the bignesse of the féete. But the coldenesse is knowne, to be the con∣sequent cause, occasioning the smalnesse of féete. Of which according to the diuers forme, and con∣dition of the féete, are the diuers qualities aun∣swerable caused, and doe lyke insue: as a like of this reason, afore vttered in many places. Such which haue the toes, and the nayles of them crooking, lyke vnto the Haulkes tallons or clawes: are denoted (after the minde of Aristotle) to be deceyuers, théeues, violent catchers, and filthie talkers. The like iudgement is to be giuen of the fingers, and nayles so crooking. For the Phisiognomer alwayes obserued and knewe these, which possessed the nayles and fingers thus proportioned and formed; to be of a Chollericke
qualitie: yet this note I saw (sayth he) to be law∣dable, in iolly warriours, and right good souldiers, and in those which by Marses beame seemed to be gouerned, in their great attemptes. Certaine report (sayth the Phisiognomer) that Aristotle here meaneth, by the vnshamefast per∣sons, these naturally theeues, violent prollers, and euill tongued. I affirme (sayth Cocles) that by the martiall théeues, the Philosopher doth meane the worthie souldiars: forasmuch as such which liue and applie their wittes and minds in the warres, exercise none other then warlike attempts (after the maner of the common spoylers, and théeues) in purchasing great booties and spoyles, here and and there, whether these attaine it by right or wrong, after a warrelyke custome, as we daylye sée. And as further in the Phisiognomie of the Planet Mars shall be vttered, and in the positure of Mars in the hande. &c. to come forth. The toes decerned close ioyned togither, do de∣note such a person, to haue a naturall scowring or flixe of the bellie: and such a creature applyed for the forme, vnto that kinde of Quaile (which sée∣keth his foode by freshe waters) for his often and much durging. Rasis reporteth, that when the héeles are séene small in forme, doe indicate such a person to bee weake of strength, and fearefull.
The héeles decerned bigge, and fast of flesh: doe denote such a person to be strong, and bolde, as the former Rasis vttereth. Albertus and Phylemon report, that the brest of the foote when the same shall be formed fleshie, and not hollowe: in such maner, that treading with the same on the earth: it séemeth to lie with an euen vpper face of the sole on the grounde: doth innuate such a person to be craftie, and ma∣licious: for this is a note of the colde flewme a∣bounding on the forme. And this easily receyueth formes, in asmuch as that the same is of a lyght cause mooued of the weake moouer. And of this is the craftinesse in that subiect caused. The Philosopher Aristotle vttereth, that whose inner part of the sole of the foote, shall not be de∣cerned hollow, but on such wise filled, that with the whole foote (in the treading) the same toucheth the ground: is denoted to be a creature wilie, mu∣table, and full of deceytes. When the breast of the foote shall appeare hol∣low, and in a contrary maner vnto the first: doth signifie by the contrarie, of such a condition, the goodnesse of vnderstanding, and a good compositi∣on well directed, and the goodnesse of conditions. When the hollow of the foote, shall be with a leannesse: doth portende the Melancholite, and consumptions, in that creature.
The learned Conciliatore vttereth, that t féete thicke, and short, doe denote such a person,  be strong and hardie. The feete verye long, doe denote such a person to be deceptfull, and wicked, as wryteth Conci∣liatore. The féete excéeding meane, both in the thin∣nesse, and shortnesse: doe demonstrate a wicked person. The soles of the féete, seemely compowned with fast fleshe: doe denote such a person to be strong, bolde, and a good iurneyer, or goer on foote. The feete soft, through the large filling of the skinne aboute: doe demonstrate such a person, to be a deceyuer. The feete crooked, and hauing the soles verye hollow, and wrinckled: are persons to be shunned, for that such are craftie, and wicked in their doo∣inges. The soles of the féete, euen a lyke: doe denote such a person, to be weake of strength, and a euill goer on foote. The héeles slender and soft: doe argue such a person to be weake of strength, and fearefull. The héeles bigge, and fast of fleshe: doe denote such a person to be strong, and bolde. The soles of the féte, and héeles long, and filled with flesh: doe indicate such a person to be foolish,
and péeuish: especially i the toes be soft, & large. Whose compasse of the feete is hollew, is ar∣ued to be a person cyrcumspect, wittie, & honest. The féete hauing a much quantitie of fleshe, with a hardnesse compassed: doe denote a péeuish vnderstanding, foolishnesse, and a louer or preu∣er of iniuries. The féete small, fayre & tender: do argue such a person, to be a fornicator, and setting by himselfe. Certaine Authours report, that having the toes close ioyning: doe eyther denote the fluxe, or scowring of the bellie, or the stincke of sweate, and rammish sauour of the bodie, in that person. The auncient Rasis vttereth, that when the handes, and féete shall be amiable, and small: doe declare the condition of the whole bodie, to bée weake, and the heate of the same to be but small. The worthie Albertus reporteth, that suche women which haue long féete: are aptest, and doe lightly conceyue with childe. These hitherto, suf∣ficiently vttered, of the féete. The iudgement to be giuen of the motions and walkings in generall. The. Liiii. chapter. THe Philosopher (in▪libro regimine principum) vtterereth, that the ouermuch swiftnesse in treading, doth argue a hote qualitie. Such a per∣son
which treadeth and goeth a very soft pase,  of a colde and flegmaticke qualitie. But he whi treadeth and goeth a meane pace, is of a tempe∣rate qualitie. The paces large, and slow: doe procéede of a lawdable discourse, and that such a person shall prosper (for the more part) in his workes, and déedes, as the Phisiognomer obserued in his Pa∣trone Alexander Bentiuolus, the sonne of Iohn Bentiuolus, the second of that name.
The shortnesse of the paces, doth imiate the contrarie, that is, frowarde conditions, and to be euill disposed in his workes. The selfe same confirmed of Rasis, where he vttereth that the paces large, and slowe or softly, doe denote a friendly person, and the paces quick and short, to be a hastie person, and very carefull in all his businesse, yet is he ignoraunt to bring them about, and to ende them. That famous Albertus reporteth, that the pace of a man procéeding of the inclination of nature: doth demonstrate of the same, what the qualities of the minde, and conditions are. Such which treade by long paces, in their go∣ings: are noted bolde of courage, and strong, after the minde of Albertus. Such hauing disordered paces, are denoted to be of an euill disposed minde, niggards most com∣monly sad, and disquieted with many cares. Such encombred with a meruellous sorrowe and hea∣uinesse, treade with contrary paces from the for∣mer. And if such bée craftes men, then are they close minded. The swiftnesse of pace, in bearing the bodie vpright, and in a séemely parsonage: doth argue a quicke witted person, and subtill: and one which better beginneth matters, than endeth them. The creature which mooueth the eyes quicke,
and often shutteth them togither, and bending wholye the bodie as he goeth: is iudged to be very fearefull, a niggarde, craftie and full of de∣ceyte. If any through the swiftnesse or fast going, hath a troubling of the eyes, the heade stedeilye standing, and breatheth fast: such a person is de∣noted to bée bolde, vnconstant and very craftie. Such treading with short paces, and hastening or quicke: are argued to be weake of strength, fearefull and niggardes.
When the handes and féete, mooue togither, with the bodie, in the going (and that séemely) and softly, they be caryed, and mooue: with a little de∣clyning, both of the head, and necke, after a séeme∣ly maner, is iudged (after the minde of the Phisi∣ognomer) to be a person strong, bolde, and vali∣aunt of courage, applyed to the Lion: as hath beene noted, in sundrie persons. Such a person the Phisiognomer noted that worthie Hanniball Bentiuolus, the sonne of the mightie Iohn Ben∣tiuolus; his singuler benefactour. A slowe pace by nature, doth indicate a dul∣nesse of witte: except some mightier notes, con∣trarie the same. If any hath a curious slownesse of pace (that sometymes staying) turneth the head, and looketh about him: doth bewray such a person, to be high minded. Such which in the moouing and going, haue the shoulder poyntes brawned straight out, and large: are boasters, aud full of wordes: applyed, to the horse. Such, which mooue the shoulder poyntes, and that these shall be crooked, are noted wittie per∣sons: applyed to the Lion. Such which turne the féete thwartly (or in a contrary maner) in the going, that the toes séeme to crosse, one before the other, and make (the
forme of a tryangle in a maner) by that maner of going: and that through their weake legges also such doe stagger, as though these were bro∣ken or loose in the ioyntes, are conditioned to the woman, as certaine report: such the Philosopher in the chapiter of the shankes, doth affirme to be hatefull, and inuericundious. Whose pase shall be slowe in going, doth argue such a person to be weake of strength, and of a dull capacitie. The mouing of the Nose, with the mouing of the Muscles, and cheeke bones in the going, doth denote such a person to be yrefull: and con∣trarie to this in the going, that the nose turning vpward, doth like argue such a person, to be yre∣full. Such which lift vp the shoulders, in the going diforderly, or that the one member be bigger then the other: are windie, and troubled as it were, with a certaine kinde of Melancholie. This note is especially verified, when as the neck is leaning vnto one side: as the like the Phisiognomer ob∣serued in a certaine Scholler, and countrie, man of his, and in certaine of the Religious. Such which shrugge to and fro with the bo∣dy, and rubbing themselues, and if these proper∣ly be eloquent: are noted mightie flatterers, and dissemblers: applyed to the Spaniell: which part∣lye
for feare, and partly for reliefe at his masters handes, doth so shrugge togither, and fléere or sawne on his master. Of which, these (as I may terme them Spaniels) are with dyligent care and héede to be considered, in that the greater part of them, séeketh and attempteth treasons. Albertus and Conciliatore, doe partly affirme this. Of these was one Seraphinus a Pisis, a per∣fite Chyrurgian. Such which go with a leaping or dauncing pase, and bearing out the buttock, and with the countenaunce borne vpright: are noted to be Cy∣neds and womanly persons. Such whose knées bende in the going, doe ey∣ther fall vnder the thraldome of seruice, or else into some great miserie.
The reason of this is, in that the debilitie of the sinewes, doth portende the weakenesse of brayne, and by the consequent, the imbecilitie of vnderstanding. Such which treade on the toes, in (such sort) going outwarde with them, that the héeles séeme to make an angle behinde: are noted of a wo∣manly nature, yea and Cyneds: especially if the knées séeme to knock togyther, and bende in the going. Such which haue an artificiall pase, and by measure goeth, or that swiftly, and their eyes mooue quick, with a smyling countenaunce: for the passion, are mooued vnto euerye difference of the position. Such a person which hath a chyldshe looke, when he beholdeth anye pleasaunt thing: these shal you suppose to be giuen (or at the least prone) to picking and stealing. Such a person which hath the pase of that fowle named a Storke, with the shoulder pointes and necke drawne togyther in the going, and wyth the like positure of the eyes: is iudged like in conditions to the Storke. Such which sometimes looke to the earth, with a clowdie and froing foreheade, and the upper eye liddes drawne togither, and that the eyes sometimes turne vpwarde, with a bearing vp∣right
of the heade: are noted to be wholly occu∣pied in wicked deises and thoughtes. Such which with straight, and strong legges, doe orderly go: are noted bolde, and vnpacient: yet is boldnesse, with a valyauntnesse of courage signified. Such which with a quicker pase, and more disorderly are hasting in their pase: are noted rashe, and foolishe. Such which treade and go (after the maner of the Hart) with the heade and eyes, vsing the aforesayde walking in these: are not onely iudged to be vnstable, but to dye an euill death. Such which for the more part, go so nycely on the toes, that scarcely any dure is séene on the outsides, of the reast of the shooes: are argued to
be of a womanly nature, and that these to be Cynedes, and such which exercise and follow the veneriall conditions: especially if the féete be a∣myable, small, and with flatte héeles. Such which treade with strong, and fast soales of the féete: are noted strong and manly: vnlesse the body otherwise be weake, and that the knées bende in the going. These hytherto of the nature and iesture of the pases, and going, shall here suffise. The iudgement of the hearinesse, in diuers partes of the body. The Lv. chapter. FOr as much as a great doubt in iudging, pro∣céedeth through the diuersitie of the hearinesse in persons: the Physiognomer thought good, to vtter here the words of the singuler Phylosopher the worthye Conciliatore, and other learned in the same. First Aristotle (in Methaphoricis) wryteth, that such persons which haue hearie legges, are venerions, applyed to the Goate. Such which be verie hearie, about the breast, and belly: are alwayes wauering of minde, and vnconstaunt: applyed to the byrdes, which haue the breast and belly like hearie, after the kinde. Such which be verie naked of heare on the
breast, or at (the least) haue verie little or fewe heares to be séene: are iniurecundious, persons applyed vnto women. Such which be not much hearie, in the partes of the bodye, but in a meane: are noted honest persons, and of a good nature. Such which haue the brawne of the shoulder poyntes hearie, are noted (as afore) that they ne∣uer continue stable of mind: applyed to the birds. Such which haue the backe, or chyne of the backe very hearie, are noted inuericundious and leacherous persons, applyed vnto beastes. Such which haue the necke behinde hearie, are argued to be liberall persons, and stowte: applied to the Lyon. Such which haue a sharpe chinne, are persons of an honest minde, and nature: applyed after the forme to the Dogge. Such which haue the heares of the eye broowes nere ioyning togither: are sadde persons, and co∣uetous: applied vnto the similitude of the passion. Such which haue the heares of the eye broowes shed ouer the nose, and spred vpwarde vnto the temples: are denoted foolish persons: applyed for the forme to the Hogge. Such which haue the heares vpright on the heade, are noted fearefull, applyed vnto the simi∣litude of the passion: in that persons fearing,
their heares doe then start vp. Such which haue the heares of the heade, very crisped: are also fearefull, and applyed to the passion. Such which haue stiffe, and very crisped heares on the heade, are lyke denoted fearefull. Such which haue the heares of the heade cris∣ped, or curled at the endes, are persons honest con∣dicioned. Such persons which haue a high foreheade, are noted liberall, and stowte: applyed for the forme to the Lyon. The heade long, wyth the heares growing downe deepe on the forehead, and nere to the nose: doe argue such a person, to be liberall: applyed vnto the decent comelinesse and apparancie of the same. The worthie Conciliatore vttereth, that hea∣res growing within the eares: doe denote such a person, to be quieke of hearing, and reasonablye conditioned. If on the necke behinde, and the heade, and back, shall be much heare séene, such (by the agree∣ment of authours) are argued to be strong, bolde, and stowte of courage. It is also reported, that such hauing the necke behinde hearie: are noted liberall, applyed for the forme vnto the Lyon.
Much quantitie of heares consisting on the shoulder poyntes, and necke behinde: do witnesse phnesse, and an obstinate minde: and with this to be vnconstant, applyed for the condition to birdes. Such hauing the breastes very hearie, or but thinke of heares: are inuericundius or impudent persons, applyed for the kinde vnto beastes. Such hauing the breasts altogither without heares, are applyed to women. But such are applyed to men, or named manly, which haue their backe partes hearie. Such a person, which shall be onely hearie on the breast, is noted a constant person, and well sticking vnto his worde and promise: and the Phi∣sitions report, that the same note, to declare a hotenesse of the heart. The much quantitie of heares on the bellye from the nauill downewarde, doth indicate such a person to be luxurious, vnstable, and a great fée∣ber by nature: applyed for the forme to birdes. Such which haue the legges hearie, are venc∣rious: applyed for the similitude to the Goate. Such bodyes couered (in the partes) with a muche quantitie and long heares, are denoted fierre, cruell, and vnapt to be taught: these notes are here conceyued of the accidentes of the same matter, taken wholy of the outward appearance.
Nowe resteth onely to Phisiognomate by the actes, and doings of the same subiect. Philemon reporteth, that the man which hath a much quantitie of heares, in most partes of the bodie: is declining, vnto a brutish nature. He which hath a decent quantitie of heares, on the backe of the hande, especially about the nether part, and aboute the thnie, and on the fingers: is iudged to be a person, of a good quali∣tie, and honest nature. The ouermuch hearinesse, on the handes: doth denote such a person, to be wauering, and vncon∣stant: applyed for the similitude to birdes. Such a hearinesse, if it he scattering, and dis∣orderly: doth argue an vordinate qualitie, and an euill nature. Uery little or fewe heares on the handes, to be séene: doe denote a weake bodie, and a feminin or womanly nature. The handes quite (without heares) to be séene: is a note of euill conditions, and to be a presump∣tuous foole, and an effeminate person. And this the worser, if he hath no beard: for then is he com∣pared, to the gelded person, and his conditions. If the heares be decently small, on the backe of the hande, towarde the neather side, and vpwarde on the backe of the foure fingers, and vnto the two first ioyntes, of the fingers, and that they be
fewe in quantitie, small, and of a chaungeable co∣lour, doe argue a readie witte, subtill, and a déepe vnderstanding. The iudgement of the stature, and quantitie of the bodie The. Lvj. chapter. INasmuch as vnto the whole bodie briefely be∣longeth to vtter (Plinie and Solinus report) that the perfite boundes of the length and large∣nesse of the bodie, haue not as yet béene discribed of any: yet doe the Phisitions witnesse, that the naturall length of mans bodie to be seuen foote: and that the valiaunt Hercules was founde to be within this bounde. And that the largenesse or breadth of his bodie, to be lyke so much: for howe much the distaunce is, betwéene the two endes of the middle fingers (the armes and handes) stret∣ched out: and so much is the distance betwéene the crowne of the heade, and sole of the foote. By this reason also (the olde wryters) named man, the little worlde: in that if a circle were drawne a∣bout him, he woulde then be founde as wholye round. For which cause, if any person doth excéede this quantitie of length, he is then noted to be tall and long of stature: but the person which lacketh of this, or is lesser of stature (then this discription
aboue) is then noted short of personage. And whose length and bredth, are not a lyke, is named yll shapened of personage. So that the quantitie euermore of the partes, or of the whole bodie (in respect of a meane) ought to be applyed vnto the measure of the whole bodie. The Phylosopher Aristotle, doth Physiogno∣mate by the quantitie of the bodie, as by the , and bignesse of the fame: first a tou∣ching the quantitie of the bodye verie small, he reporteth, that the small persons in quantitie and stature, are of a readie and quick wyt: & prompt in attayning anye thing, and passing both in the conceauing and knowing of matters. And this in as much as to the quantitie of body absolute, & in as much as is by reason of the space, in which the fame is: to which Gulielmus adding a rea∣son of this matter reporteth, that those in which the aterall bloude, and both the spirite and na∣turall heate spéedily and forthwith procéede from the heart vnto the braine, and vnto the cogitatiue vertues: those are of a sharpe and prompt wit, in taking, and generally in conceauing. And this in as much as by reason of the space, in which such a motion is: and I here name that an apprehen∣sion or conceauing, and knowledge: and of that knowne, iudgement and discretion: of which ma∣ner and condition, are the persons small or little
of quantitie. For in those (as the Physiognomer affirmeth) the bloude, the liuely spirite, and na∣turall heate hastily and swiftly procéede, and are moued from the heart vnto the braine, or vnto the cogitatiue vertues: in which such a motion is on the small, and short space: and euen the same is in very small persons, in as much as by the quantitie of the body. Although the Phyloso∣pher séemeth in the first, to Physiognomate by the smalnesse of the body, in comparing vnto the chollericke complexion, or the hote and drie qua∣litie. And the Philosopher meaneth, that al∣though the smalnesse signifieth a sharpnesse of wyt, and the goodnesse of perceyuing, in as much as is of that quantitie: yet by reason of the com∣pleion, maye the contrarie be. For the small which are of a drie qualitie, which he meaneth, vsing hote and drie meates: and such which a∣bounde in the hotnesse of body: as if he sayde, the small chollerick in qualitie, and in whome a dry∣nesse and superfluous hotnesse consisteth, and that lesser beare sway, doe performe little or nothing, that is, they are alwaies vnapt or vnable vnto the performing, and perceyuing, especially vnto the well iudging or decerning. For the motion of the bloude and spirites in them is ouer swift, and by reason of the smalnesse of the space, and ouer∣much hotnesse causing them cursible, that they
neuer can consist in the same, as this in perfitely perceyuing and knowing. In the second, the Phi∣losopher instructeth to Phisiognomate by the greatnesse of bodye, in comparing the same vnto the cold complexion and moyst or flegmatick. In the thirde the Phylosopher vttereth, to Physiog∣nomate by the smalnesse of bodye, in comparing the same vnto the colde and moyste complexion. And he meaneth, that the small which are of a colde and moyst complexion: are perfite, that is apt vnto the performing: although the bloud and spirite in these are moued vnto the hart spée∣dily, for the smalnesse of space: yet neuerthelesse caused vnmoueable, by reason of the complexion or coldnesse, in that moysture restrayneh, the dryth and heate: and thus of the short and swift motion of those spirites, by reason of the space: and in a slowe maner, by reason of the moysture of those spirites, shall the motion be caused com∣mensurated, and both a meane and temperate, apt vnto the perfourming: In the fourth he Phi∣siognomateth by the greatnesse of bodye, by a comparison vnto the hote and dry complexion: in that such are perfite and quick in conceauing. Al∣though in those the space of motion be great, yet the bloud and spirite in them are verie swift moo∣ning, by reason of the great heate: and on such wise in these, is a temperament of motion cau∣sed,
and are apt vnto the performing. Here is to be conceaued, that although the hote and dry, and generally the chollerick, are of a difficill or hard conceauing, and of a dull wytte, by reason of the dryth, which hardly receaueth: neuerthelesse the chollerick bigge in bodye, are more perfite, and apter conceaue then the small in quantitie of bo∣dy. For when these giue and apply their wit vnto the conceauing and attayning of any thing, they long retayne the same with them: and although they haue the spirite and bloud moueable, yet for that the space of the motion is great, for that cause, before any other thing or matter occurreth, they first conceaue and take, & strongly retaine. For a more drynesse than moysture, consisteth in the hinder part of the braine of this creature. So that drinesse hath the propertie to attaine and receaue with difficultie, and when this hath re∣ceyued a forme, the same purchased, it retayneth for a long tyme: which contrarie is of the moy∣sture. For the moysture or moyst braine behinde doth lightly receaue a forme, and soone looseth the same: in that the formes which are imprinted in the moysture, are not preserued any long tyme: but soone vanishe awaye. And for as much as the chollerick small in body, doe not so long consist in any maner, that any forme in their spirite can be fixed: yet are these neuerthelesse noted perfite, as
is afore vttered. For the learned Aristotle here meaneth, that the more chollerick in bodye, are perfite simplye, but this vnderstanded in the com∣parison vnto the chollerick small of bodye. The Sanguine of complexion, and bigge in body, are very perfite: in that they be of a temperate moyst qualitie, and of a good receyuing, and retayning. In the excéeding, the Phylosopher doth Phy∣siognomate by the quantitie of the body, betwéene a verie small and verie bigge, as vnderstanding of a meane. Of which such hauing bodies ouer∣much excéeding in greatnesse and heigth, or ouer∣much lacking in the smalnesse of bodye and sta∣ture, are perfite by hap: in that these sometymes are on such wise, & sometimes in a contrarie ma∣ner: according to the same, as they are dyuersly complexioned. So that by the consequent, such o∣uer small, and ouer bigge are vnperfite, in as much as vnto the extending: which maye be on such wise, and otherwise in the ouer small forme: so that the vnperfite is, as euery variable contin∣gent or hapning: For that cause in stature and quantitie of bodye a meane: which are neather ouer small, nor ouer bigge vnto sense: are the ap∣test to perceyue and knowe. The Phisiognomer further vttereth that the person which is not of length, and largenesse a like is noted to be one, not in a due forme propor∣tioned.
Indagines briefely writing, of the stature of man alleageth an example out of the hystoryes: of one Maximinus Emperour, who for his no∣table and monstruous talenesse, was of this found and iudged to be of a oull capacitie, and foo∣lish▪ And of the same arose this prouerbe, which is (Climacis Aegiptia, & Caliga Maximini) And that applyed now to men, of a great and huge sta∣ture, hauing euill propertyes, and conditions, and had in contempt for their rude maners. Sundrie others the like, might here be vtte∣red, which for breuiti (sayth Indagines) I omitte: yet is it well knowne to all men, that such which be of a monstruous talenesse, are euermore of a dull capacitie, simple witted, and in maners rue: especially if they be leane, and very long of bodie, with the necke reaching forwarde, lyke to the Storkes necke. In the Court of Frederick the third, & Charles Emperours did the worthie Indagines, note certaine persons very tall, and maruellous leane: who in conditions, were knowne to be verye fro∣warde, and foolish. And from these persons, do not such much differ, which go crooked or sowping. Here a man might aptly applie, the olde pro∣uerbe, which affirmeth, that seldome anye séeth, the long and tall person wittie, nor the short per∣son,
méeke and pacient: yet the person short of  die, is noted to be of a readie witte, apt to attaine things, and in the ende very skilfull in many mat∣ters. And this onely ment by the quantitie of the bodie, and not of the qualitie, in that the same of∣ten falleth out the contrarie. The person decerned meane of stature, and rea∣sonably fat, and in the other members and parts decently formed: is noted to be ingenious, and prudent, and doth his businesse with expedition. These hitherto Iohn Indagines. Michael Scotus wryteth, that somewhat may be declared by the stature of man. First the sta∣ture long, and sufficient vpright, and rather leane than fatte, doth argue that person to be bolde, high minded, presumptuous, vaine glorious, to much of a will, long angrie, sometimes lying, and in many thinges malicions. The stature long, and sufficient fatte, doth sig∣nifie a strong person, yet lightly vnfaythfull, de∣ceytfull, of a dull witte, selfe willed, a surmiser, vngratefull, and circumspect in his doyngs. The stature very long, leane, and slender, doth denote a foolish person, much selfe willed, weake to labour, stowe, a great féeder, lightly créediting things to be compassed, as he wisheth them, and often lying. The stature short, and bigge, is a note of a fleg∣maticke
qualitie, and that such a person to be en∣uious, suspicious, more simple than wise, easilye perswaded to beleeue things, long angrie, vaine, and well contented to serue. The stature short and slender, and sufficient vp∣right: is a note of a chollericke qualitie, and that such a person to be naturally circumspect, of that he doth, ingenious, bolde, high minded, vaine glo∣rious, of a good memorie, and vnderstanding, se∣cret, and a great surmiser. The stature which bendeth naturally forward, and not of age caused: doth denote a warie per∣son to himselfe, a niggarde, laborious, a grosse fée∣der, long angrie, not lightly créediting, secrete, and yet of a dull witte; and euere or erull. The stature or personage, which bendeth back∣ward: doth signifie a foolish person, of a small vn∣derstanding, and of an euill memorie, vayne, a grosse féeder, and easily perswaded, eyther to the good or euill. These hitherto, out of Michael Scotus. A perfite instruction, in the maner of iudging. FIrst consider, that a man may not hastily pro∣nounce iudgement, of any one note alone, but gather and marke diligently the testimonies of
all the members: and if there happen to thée, to appéere diuers notes, and that vnto diuers effects: then leane by the councell of the Phisiognomer, vnto the mightier, and worthier part. In that the qualitie of the whole bodie, consisteth of the qua∣litie of the partes. So that by one note onely, a man may not argue and iudge the affection or na∣turall motion of any person, but by sundrie togi∣ther. Wherefore when thou wilt pronounce the happes to come of any person, to be eyther grea∣ter or lesser: then the same iudge, after thou hast throughly learned and vnderstanded of his na∣ture and conditions. And in marking and obser∣uing this way of iudging, thou shalt seldome erre. As by example. If any hath the notes of a wicked person, & threatned to come vnto a miserable end: yet if such wickednesse doth then but a little moue him, then may it be coniectured, that such a person hath well maystred his wicked affections: con∣trarye to others, which (for the more part) hap∣pen to come vnto cruell torments, or sustaine long imprisonment. And an other example, that if anye hath the notes of an yrefull person, and that anger doth then but little disquiet him: then is it to be thought and iudged, that he hath well repressed and brideled the passions of yre: and euē ye like iudgement may be giuen, in all others. This also marke, for a sure note in this Art,
that the good and séemely forme of eche member, doth denote a good composition and strength of the body, whether that member be small or bigge, in respect of the bodye. And the formes of the members well proportioned, doe denote vertue: but euill fashioned, doe argue an euill conditio∣ned person. Yet the more open and manifester signes are they, which be caused & appeare in the principal∣lest places, and these named the principallest, that are about the eyes, the forhead, the head, and the face. But the seconde and next place is the same, which is knowne to be about the shoulders, the breast, the belly, the legges, and the féete. But the last, is the part which is to be considered about the belly. But the generall difficultie or hardnesse of these, consisteth of the iudgement, euen as the like doth the same both in the Arte of Astrono∣my, and Phisicke practise depende. And of this Galen affirmeth, that the Physiognomer maye erre in his iudgement, for dyuers causes: First, in that to any one note▪ a man may not trust: ex∣cept the same be proper of it selfe, as is aboue de∣clared. Therefore no one note alone maye be ta∣ken of any speciall parte of the body: in that by the nature of one particuler, doth not the nature of man in generall consist. In the second there is errour caused, for that to the alteration of nature
and age, they doe not sometymes agrée, in that there be notes, which sometimes declare the mat∣ter rather past, than to come: like as in the per∣son of thrée score yeares olde, which may be hea∣rie: that doth then argue his leacherousnesse to be past, and not present to be affirmed. And sun∣drie wryters affirme, that the notes gathered by the fore part of the bodie, are knowne to be migh∣tier then those conceyued of the hynder part, as witnesseth Hypocrates, who willeth first to be∣holde and note the face of the sicke. And others al∣so affirme, that those to be the mightier notes, which are taken of those members, by which the passion is exercised: as the notes which doe vtter and declare the yre of the breast, and ribbes, which is exercised by the heart, within those parts placed. Further in that by the shoulders, armes, legges, and féete, strength is exercised: therefore are the mightier notes for strength, gathered and taken of them. And thus of the other members, gather and iudge in the like maner. But here for a playner vnderstanding of the Art, and that you may learne howe to iudge by the lyke, shall here be propounded an example or two, and thus ende the worke. First this person (by whome the example is giuen) shall be imagined to be of a meane stature, yet rather vnto a smalnesse, than vnto a bignesse
of personage, and that the heade to be vniforme, and agréeable in proportion vnto the bodie, the necke bigge and liuely, the heares on the heade meane, yet rather thinne, than thicke, crisped and not plaine, the foreheade of a comely forme, with vigilant eyes, rather more inwarde standing, than outwarde situated, and rather small than bigge, being of a gray colour to the skie: the face rather long than rounde, and rather bonie than
fleshie, the chéekes not full puffed vp, but of a meane bignesse: the eares rather small than big, the nose chollericke or lyke vnto the Eagles bill: the nosethrilles rather large than narrowe, the mouth rather bigge than small, the téeth great and thick set: the lips like vnto the Lyons, so that the vpper lippe be somewhat thicke, and the nea∣ther lippe somewhat bigge, yet not louse hanging: the chinne long, and rather sharpe than rounde, and the vnder chinne not palliolated, the whole body rather bony than fleshie, the shoulder poynts comely formed, the breast large with the reast of the bodie proportioned: the haunches brawned, with a good fastnesse, and bending somewhat out∣warde: the legges rounde and séemely brawned in the partes, the féete séemely bigge and not small, the héeles comely formed: and in pace goeth vpright, and in a séemely forme of length: and whether he be polled or not polled, it forceth not: and that such a person also of propertie, rather de∣clyneth vnto the good, than vnto the euill: and that in all his attempts, he procéedeth with a stoutenesse of courage. In this seconde example, shall be vttered the forme of a stowte and furious person, whose members of the bodie ought to be thus propor∣tioned: first the heade sharpe or rounde, the nose flatte and hollowe, the middle part or chest of the
breast bearing outwarde, so that there be but a small distaunce betwéene the heart and braine: the necke short, the eyes fierie, and spotted, the distaunce great (from the place of the stomacke) vnto the nauill of the belly: the fatnesse of the bo∣die fast, and not louse: the voice bigge and lowde, with a quicknesse of speach: and treading quicke, with a swiftnesse of paces: the bodie most hearie, and well bearded: the armes long, wyth ap∣paraunt veynes: the handes rather bigge, than
small: that if slender, yet not ouer slender of body, and that the reast of the members of the bodie, be well proportioned: and that he be not long, or tall of stature (for fewe such be hardie) and not Crane legged, nor hauing the Pecocks pace. To con∣clude, the Phisiognomer doth here giue warning vnto generall Capitaynes of an host of men: that they choose (in no case) any vnder capitanes, which possesse effeminate members, and bée like con∣ditioned: that is to saye, delighted in pleasures and banquettings: in that such souldiours (for the more part) fighting vnder their ensigne, were knowne to be put to the worse, and driuen backe, vnto the great discomfort of the whole host: which experience Cocles had, and obserued in diuers and sundrie battayles, in which, the lyke Capitaynes (seruing for the onely desire of their belly, and couetousnesse of money) brought their Souldiours vnto a like lamentable end, and miserable destruction. And thus an ende, of this worke of Phisiog∣nomie.
A briefe rehersall of the notes of all the mem∣bers, with their significations, in the forme of a table. Of the heade. FIrst the heade bigge, doth denote a dull person, and applyed to the Asse. The heade little to bée foolishe, and applyed to the Dogge. The heade meane of bignesse, doth argue a good witte natu∣rally. The head Pineaple sharpe, to be vnshame∣fast, and a boaster. The heade short, and verye rounde, to be forgetfull and foolish. The head long in fashion to the Hammer, to be prudent and wa∣rie. And in the forepart of the heade, a hollownesse: to be wylie, and yrefull. Of the foreheade. The foreheade small, to be vnapt to learne, vn∣constant: and applied to the Sowe. The forehead very bigge, to be slowe, and applyed to the Oxe. The foreheade rounde, to be of a dull perseue∣rance, yrefull: and applyed to the Asse. And being somewhat a plaine foreheade, to be circumspect: and applyed to the Dogge. A square formed fore∣heade, to be bolde: applyed to the Lyon. The foreheade smooth and euen, to be a flatterer: ap∣plied to the fawning Dogge. The forehead bigge wrinckled, to be sturdie, and bolde: applyed to the Bull, and Lyon. A low forehead, to be sad: applied
to the passion. A long foreheade, to be a flatterer: applyed to the Dogge. A high foreheade, to be li∣berall, applyed to the Lion. An ouer wrinckled foreheade, to be vnihamefast. And puffed vp in the temples, to be high minded, yrefull, and of a rude witte. Of the eyes. The eyes small, to be faint hearted, applyed to the Ape. The eyes bigge, to be slow, and tractable: applyed to the Oxe. The eyes hollow standing, to be enuious, and wicked: applyed to the Ape. The eyes standing out, to be foolish: applied to the Asse. The eyes somewhat hollow, to be stowte of cou∣rage: applyed to the Lion. The eyes somewhat bigge, and a little eminent, to be gentle: applyed to the Oxe. The eyes very wide open, to be im∣pudent. The corner of the eyes fleshie, vnto the nose ioyning, to be malicious. The eyes of length, to be craftie, and a deceyuer. The eyes bigge, and trembling, to be desirous of women: applyed to the passion. The eyes small and quiuering, to bée shame fast, and yet a louer. How much the bigger eyes, & so much the lesser malice, yet the more foo∣lishnesse. The eyes thwart wrything, to be deceyt∣full, a niggarde, and yrefull. The eyes bigge out, to be foolish, fearefull, faint hearted, and vnshame∣fast. The eyes disorderly moouing, as one whiles running, and an other whiles staying: to be rash,
disquiet, and troubled in minde, wicked, and a bryber. The eye liddes quiuering, to be fearefull: applied to the passion. The eyes swiftly moouing, with a sharpe looke, to be fraudulent, vnfaythfull, and a théefe. The eyes stedfastly looking, to bée troubled in mind, and a deceyuer. The eyes situa∣ted as into a length, to be monstruous, a deceiuer, and enuious. Little bagges or bladders, swelling out from the eyes, to be great wine drinckers, ap∣plyed to the passion. Little bladders swelling out before the eyes, to be great sléepers: and applyed to the passion. Of the nose. The ende of the nose bigge, to be desirous of that he séeth: applyed to the Oxe. The ende of the nose bigge, and turning vp, to be without discre∣tion, and sluggish: applyed to the Sow. The ende of the nose sharpe, to be of a fierce yre: applyed to the Dogge. The nose round, being blunt at the ende, to be stowt: applyed to the Lyon. The nose rounde, with a sharpenesse at the ende, to be wa∣uering of minde: applyed to the byrde. The nose wholy crooked, from the foreheade downewarde: to be vnshamefast, and vnstable: applyed to the Rauen. The nose crooked lyke the Eagles bill, to be bolde: applyed to the Eagle. The nose flatte, to be leacherous, and hastie in wrath. The nosethrils large, to be yrefull: applyed to the passion. The
nose stretched long, to the mouth, to be honest, and bolde. Of the eares. The eares small, to be a scoffer: applyed to the Ape. The eares bigge, to be a dullarde: applyed to the Asse. The eares hanging, to be a foole: ap∣plyed to the Asse. The eares of a meane bignesse, to be faythfull, and honest conditioned. The eares ouer rounde, to be vnapt to learne. The eares long and narrowe, to be enuious. The eares stan∣ding, verye nere to the heade, to be a dullarde, and sluggishe. The eares hearie, to be long liued, and quicke of hearing. Of the face. The face fleshie, to be slowe: applyed to the Oxe. The face leane to be carefull, and circum∣spect. The face very fleshie, to be fearefull: applied to the Asse, and Hart. The face bigge, to be slowe: applyed to the Oxe, and Asse. A narrow face, to be a niggard. The countenance looking downeward, to be an hypocrite, and wicked. The face hollows without any bearing out: to be contentious. Like to a drunken countenance, to be lightly druncke: Like to an yrefull countenance, to be yrefull: and applyed to the apparancie. Like to a shamefast countenaunce, to be shamefast. The face defor∣med, and a wrie, to be euill conditioned. The face long, to be vnshamefast. The face of a small cause
sweating, to be craftie, leacherous, and a great féeder. The face very little, and rounde, to bée foo∣lish. The face long, and leane, to be bolde: verie crooked, long, and leane, to be malicious: larger from the foreheade, vnto the iawes, to be a lyar. Narrower from the iawes, vnto the chinne: to be enuious, and contentious. Of the lippes. The lippes thinne, hanging one ouer the other, to be bolde, and hardie, applyed to the Lion. The lippes thinne, and harde, to be yrefull, and vnapt to learne: applyed to the Sow. The lippes thinne and soft, to be stowte: applyed to the Lion. The lippes bigge, that the vpper hangeth downe ouer the neather, to be foolish: applyed to the Asse. The vpper lip bearing out, that the gummes be séene: to be a wrangler, and spitefull: applyed to the Dogge. Of the chinne. The chinne sharpe, to be faythfull: applyed to the Dogge. The chinne small, and short, to be en∣uious, and cruell: applyed to the Serpent. The chinne in a maner square, to be honest cōditioned. The chinne long, and downewarde sharpe, to bée a craftie fellow. The chinne rounde to be effemi∣nate: applyed to the woman. The vnder chinne hanging low downe, to be leacherous. The chinne hauing a pitte, or deuided at the ende, to be a wily
person, and libidinous. Of the bearde. The woman bearded, to be leacherous. The woman hauing no bearde at all, to be honest con∣ditioned. The mans bearde ouer hearie, to be Me∣lancholike, of a naturall cause. The beard séemely formed, to be of a good nature, of a naturall cause. The bearde vnséemely fashioned, to be of an euill nature, of the contrarie cause. The colour of the eyes. The colour red aboue, to be yrefull: applyed to the passion: very blacke to be fearefull: which the propertie of the colour giueth: blacke and yealowish of colour, to be honest conditioned: ap∣plyed to the comelinesse thereof. Gray or white, to be fearefull: which the propertie of the colour giueth. A darke yealow, to be honest conditioned: applyed to the Lion. And fierie to be vnshamefast, yet full of myrth. Uariable of colour to be feare∣full: applyed to the passion. And shining bright, to bée luxurious, applyed to the Cocke, and Rauen. The colour of the face. The colour redde aboue, to be shamefast: ap∣plyed to the passion. The chéekes red aboue, to be louers of wine: applied to the passion. The chéekes & nose of the liuers rednesse, to be most detested. The colour of the breast. Of a fierie colour, to be yrefull: applyed to
the passion. The colour of the whole bodie. Uerye blacke of colour, to bée fearefull of courage: applyed to the blacke Moore. Uerye white to be fearefull: applyed to the woman. Swartish of colour, to be meanely strong: yealow of colour to be honest conditioned: applyed to the Lion: verie red or ruddie, to be wilie, & ingenious: applyed to the Woolfe. A verie pale colour (except it be of sicknesse) to be fearefull: applied to the pas∣sion. Of a hunnie colour, to be sluggish: of a natu∣rall cause. Of a firie color, to be long angry, hard to be pleased, and very furious. And pale (not pro∣céeded of ouermuch studie) to be vicious, & wicked. Of the teeth. The sharpe téeth, if they be long, fast, and bearing outwarde: to be a great féeder, yrefull, and wicked, applyed to the Dogge, and Bore. The téeth bigge and broade, to be simple witted, vaine, of a dull capacitie, and lasciuious: applyed both to the Oxe, and Asse. Of the voyce. The voyce lowde and bigge, to be iniurious: applyed to the Asse. The beginning bigge, and en∣ding small, to be yrefull: applyed to such which crie oute, and to the crying of the Oxe. The voyce small, soft, and broken, to be fearefull: ap∣plied to the woman. Bigge and high, to be verie
yrefull: applied to the mastie Dogge. A soft voice without reaching, to be gentle: applyed to the shéepe. The voyce small, and lowde, to be yrefull: applyed to the Goate. Of the necke. The necke bigge, to be strong: applyed to the man. The necke slender, applyed to the woman: bigge and fleshie, to be yrefull: applied to the Bul. The necke meane, to be stowte: applyed to the Lyon: long and small, to be fearefull: applyed to the Hart. The necke verie short, to be wyly: ap∣plyed to the Woolfe, and Catte. Such sufficient strong, about the knot or ioynt of the necke, are wittie, and of a good capacitie. Such there weake, to be dullardes. Of the breast. The breast bigge, and well fashioned, to bée strong: applyed to the man. The breast large, and well compact, to be strong: applyed to the Lion. Hearie on the breast, to be vnconstant, and bolde: applyed to Byrdes. The breast without heare, to be vnshamefast or else fearefull: applyed to the woman: very fleshie to be vnapt to learne, and sluggishe. The space from the throte bole, vnto the bottome of the breast, larger than from the bot∣tome of the breast vnto the nauill of the belly: to be wittie, and of a good capacitie. The pappes fatte and hanging downe in men: to be weake and effe∣minate.
A bigge péece of flesh bearing out on the left side of the breast in the forme of (a Léekes heade, or sinewe sprung vp) and that there be one, or many heares growing on it: is then an argu∣ment of honour, and riches as Ptholomie wry∣teth. Of the shoulders. The shoulders fashioned bigge, to be strong. The shoulders euill fashioned, to bée weake of strength: well compowned, to be liberall: but weake compowned, and bearing vp thinne, to bée a niggard. The shoulders bearing sharpe vp, to be deceytfull. The shoulders broade, to be strong, and of a good capacitie. And narrow, to bée a dul∣larde. Of the stomacke. Such fatte about the stomacke, to be strong. Such not fatte, to be weake. The bellie bearing out bigge, to be a great féeder. The bellie small formed, to be of a good capacitie. And hearie from the nauill downewarde, to be full of woordes: ap∣plyed to Byrdes. Of the backe. The backe narrowe, to be weake. The backe bigge formed, to be strong. The backe large, to be strong, and high minded. The backe crooked, to be a niggarde, and yll condicioned. And equally formed, or in a meane, to be of a good nature.
Of the armes. The armes very long, to be strong, bolde, ho∣nest, and gentle. The armes short, to be a procu∣rer of discord, and leacherous. The armes hearie, to be vnconstant, & leacherous: applyed to byrdes. Of the handes. The hands short, and very bigge: to be rude, and a dullarde. The hands fatte, with the fingers like: to be a théefe. The handes small, to be vnconstant, and wilye. The paulmes of the handes, vnto the wrestes broade, and narrow vpwarde, to be a ry∣otter in his first age. Of the nayles of the fingers. The nayles large, smooth, thinne, white, red∣dish, and cleare withall: to be wittie, and of a good capacitie. The nayles narrow and long, to be cruell, and fierce. The nayles rough, and rounde, to be prone vnto the veneriall act: applyed to the propertie. The nayles very short to be wicked: ap∣plied to ye property. The nayles smal, and crooked, to be a gréedie catcher: applyed to the hawke. The nayles verye little, to be a craftie beguiler. The white prickes of the nayles, to be wealthie, and to haue manye friendes. The blacke prickes in the nayles, to be hated: applied to the naturall cause. Of the nayles of the toes. The toes and nayles crooked, to be vnshame∣fast: applyed to the Byrdes. The nayles thinne,
and well coloured, to be of a good witte, and ho∣nest condicioned. The toes ioyning close togither, to be fearefull: applyed to the Quayle. Of the nauill. The space large, from the bottom of the breast, vnto the nauill: to be dull of capacitie, and a great féeder: applyed to the naturall cause. The space equall, to be wittie, and honest conditioned: ap∣plyed to the naturall cause. The stomacke from the nauill vnto the breast fleshie, to be wicked af∣ter Polemone. The same space soft, and well compact: to be stowte, and high minded. Of the ribbes. The person well ribbed, to be strong: applied to the male kinde. The ribbes narrow, and weake compowned, to be weake: applyed to the female kinde. The ribbes filled aboute (as they were blowne vp) to be full of wordes, and foolish: ap∣plyed to the Oxe, and Frogge. Of the loynes, and Hypocondria. The person well loyned, to be a louer (of the hunting) of wilde beastes: applyed to the Lion, and Dogge. The Hypocondria thinne and flatte, to be fearefull: applyed to the Frogge. The Hy∣pocondria fleshie, vnapt to be taught. Of the haunches, and hippes. The bones of the haunches bearing outwarde, to be strong: applied to the male kind. The bones
of the haunches slender, to be feareful, and weake, applyed to the woman. The hippes well sinewed, to be strong: applied to the male kinde. The hippes fleshie, to be weake: applyed to the wo∣man. Of the Pecten. The Pecten very hearie, to be libidinous, yet prosperous: applyed to the naturall cause. The Pecten very thinne of heare, to be chaste: applied to the naturall cause. Of the buttockes. The buttockes sharpe, and bonie, to be strong▪ applyed to the male kinde. The buttockes fleshie and fatte, to be weake: applyed to the woman. The buttockes dried in fleshe, to be euill condi∣tioned: applyed to the Ape. Of the legges. The legges bigge sinewed, and brawned, to be strong applyed to the male kinde. Small sinewed, to be libidinous: applyed to Byrdes. The legges bigge and euill fashioned, to be vnshamefast. The cawfes of the legges bigge, to be an euill mane∣red person. The cawfes of the legges soft, to bée most effeminate. The legges slender to be dull of capacitie: yet this fayleth often in the learned students. The cawfes verie bigge bearing out, to be sluggishe, and rude manered. The cawfes meanely bigge formed, to be wittie, and honest
conditioned. Of the knees. The knées bigge, to be an effeminate person: applyed vnto the excessiue appearaunce of them. The knees verye slender, to be fearefull: applyed vnto the excessiue appearance of them. The knees bending forwarde, to be effeminate: applyed to the woman. The knées fatte to be fearefull: yet liberall. The knées leane to be strong, and hardie. Of the ancles. The ancles strong sinewed, and brawned, to be strong: applyed to the male kinde. The ancles much fleshie, to be weake: applied to the woman. The ancles broade, to be strong: applyed to the naturall cause. The partes about the ancles, o∣uer fleshie, to be foolishe: applyed to the propertie. The héeles very slender, or thinne, to be fearefull: applyed to the propertie, and condition of them. Of the feete. The féete strong sinewed, and brawned, to be strong: applyed to the male kinde. The féete weake sinewed, and small, to be effeminate: ap∣plyed to the woman. The inner partes (of the soles of the féete) not hollowe, but so filled with flesh, that they make no hollownesse at all in the steppe on the ground, is noted to be craftie: ap∣plyed to the naturall cause. The féete bigge and fleshie, to be foolishe: of the naturall cause. The
féete thicke and short, to be weake, of the naturall cause. The feete slender, and short, to be wicked, of the natuall cause. The féete ouer long, to be wily, of the naturall cause. The féete fleshie, and hard, to be a dullarde: of the naturall cause. The féete small, and fayre formed, to be a fornicator: ap∣plyed to the▪ propertie of the note. The féete much hearie, to be leacherous, and bolde: applyed to the naturall cause. The féete naked of heare, to bée weake of strength, and courage: of the naturall cause. Of the hearinesse of the partes. The legges hearie, to be venerious: applyed to the Goate. The breast and belly very hearie, to be vnconstant: applyed to the Byrdes. The shoul∣ders hearie to be the lyke vnconstant, and applied to the Byrdes. The back very hearie, to be cruell: applyed to the beastes. The necke behinde hearie, to be liberall, and stowte: applyed to the Lion. The heare of the eye browes ioyned togither, to be a sadde person: applyed to the passion. The heares of the eye browes growing downe warde towarde the nose, and spreading vpwarde vnto the temples, to be foolishe: applyed to the Sowe. The heare of the heade standing straight vp, to be fearefull: applyed to the passion. The heare of the heade very crisped to be fearefull: applyed to the Moores. The heares crisped at the endes, to be
strong, and bolde: applyed to the Lion. The heares turning vp, in the vpper part of the foreheade: to be liberall, and stowte: applyed to the Lion. The heares of the head plain, to be simple. Much heare of the heade, and thicke: to be an euill conditioned person. Of the going, and moouing. The pace slowe and long, to be wittie, and strong. The pace slow and short, to be wittie, yet weake. The pace long and quick, to be strong, yet foolishe. The pace short and quicke, to be both foo∣lishe, and weake of strength. The shoulders ben∣ding forwarde in going, to be high minded: ap∣plyed to the Lyon. The person going with the knées & féete turning in, to be weake of strength: applyed to the woman. In the talking, wrything, or shrugging the bodie, hither and thither, to be a flatterer: applyed to the fawning Dogge. Lea∣ning vnto the right side in the going, to be a Cy∣nede: applyed to the excessiue appearance. The eyes quicke moouing, to be gréedie and quicke catchers: applied to the Hawke. The eyes quick and often moouing, with a eddinesse of the bodie: to be wittie and of a readie vnderstanding: ap∣plyed to the condition of the passion. Of the personage, and stature. The person verye small of personage, to bée quick witted, and prompt in attayning any mat∣ter:
of the naturall cause. Such verye bigge of personage, to be of a dull capacitie, and thereof hardly conceyuing: of the contrary cause: after Aristotle. Small of personage, and of a hote, and drie qualitie chollericke, to be vnapt (readilye to conceyue) and to iudge, or decerne any matter rightly. Small of personage, and of a colde and moyste qualitye: to bée apt to conceyue, and readily to decerne, of the contrary cause. Bigge of personage, and of a hote, and drie qualitie, to be wittie, and readily to conceyue. Bigge of perso∣nage, and of a colde and moyst qualitie, to be dull of capacitie: of the contrarye cause. The perso∣nage euill fashioned, and very tall of stature, to be dull of capacitie, and euill conditioned: applied to the forme. The person of a comely perso∣nage, and meane of stature, to bée wittie, and honest conditioned: applyed to the naturall cause.
An admonition vnto the gentle Reader. THe same consider and note for a generall rule, that the significations and iudgements afore vttered in manye places of this Booke, doe chiefely extende, and are ment rather to happen and come to passe on the brutishe sort: which for the lacke of grace, and being not regenerated by Gods holy spirite, these in such maner, are mooued to fol∣low their sensuall will and appetites. For by a naturall frailtie, proceeded from our forefather Adam, euery crea∣ture (after nature) is drawne, and allured vnto the lyke dispositions, and passions of the minde. But to be briefe, the creatures which are regenerated through the holye Ghost, doe not onely endeuour to mortifie their fleshlye appetites, but seeke to put away and correct all other inor∣mities, and vices resting in them: although there still con∣tinueth a frailtie to sinne, and offences daylye committed, euen of the wise: which for that we bee so intised of the flesh, no marueyle is it (sayth the Phisiognomer) that so manye insue, and followe the like steppes of sundrie sentences pronounced in this Art, the more is to be lamented: that these so bestiall, shoulde bee thus com∣mon amongst vs, as we day∣ly see and know. Finis.
A briefe treatise of the signification of Moles, seene in any part of the bodie: writ∣ten by the Greeke Autor Melampus. FIrst, if the man shall haue a Mole on the foreheade, doth indicate that hée shal possesse much wealth, and riches. The woman hauing a Mole on the foreheade, doth demonstrate that she shall eyther gouerne, or else come vnto a high dignitie. If the man shall haue a Mole aboue the ouer∣browe, doth argue that he shall couple and ioyne in mariage, both with an honest, wealthie, and vertuous woman. The woman hauing a Mole in the same place, doth denote that she shall ioyne in maryage, both with a riche, fayre, and comely person. If the man shall haue a Mole on the ouer browe, then let such a person refraine from ma∣riage altogither, or all his lyfe time: for that such a person (if he marry) shall haue fiue wiues, in his life tyme. The woman hauing a Mole, in the like place: to haue likewise so many husands (as the man wyues) in hir lyfe tyme: as Melampus writeth. If the man haue a Mole, on the nose somwhat
ruddie, and another the like in the priuie place: doth indicate, that such a person to be ouer much giuen, to the veneriall act. The lyke Mole séene, eyther on the nose, or eye of the woman, and that she hath the lyke on hir priuie place: doth signifie the same, that is a∣fore spoken of the man. If the man shall haue a Mole, ouerthwart the nose: doth denote that he shall wander, hither and thither, through Countries and Cities. A Mole the like standing on the womans nose, doth portende that shée shall traueyle on foote, through sundrie Countries, and that she hath the lyke Mole besides on the priuie place. If a man haue a Mole, on the gullet or throte, doth demonstrate, that he shall become very rich. If the woman haue a Mole, on the neather iawe, doth indicate that she shall leade hir lyfe, in much sorrow, and paine of the bodie: bicause she hath that within the bodie, which shall hinder hir from the teaming, or bearing of children. If the man shall haue the forme of a Mole, on the tongue: doth demonstrate that he shall marry with a rich, and beautifull woman. If eyther the man, or woman, shall haue a Mole on any of the lippes: doth portend, that he, or she, to be a great féeder, and a glutton. If the man shall haue a Mole on the chinne,
doth argue that he shall be riche, both in the sub∣staunce of money, and in possessions. The woman hauing a Mole in the same place, doth indicate that she shall come to the like welth, as the man: and that shée hath besides, the same lyke Mole, right aloft, or agaynst, the mylt. If a man shall haue a Mole in any of the eares, doth argue that he shall be rich, and much reue∣renced, and spoken of. If the woman shall haue the same, and that in the lyke place: doth denote the lyke good happe, and fortune to hir: and that besides she hath, the lyke Mole placed, on the thigh or hammes. If the man shall haue a Mole on the necke, doth promise that he shall become very rich. If the woman shall haue a Mole so placed: doth indicate, that the lyke good fortune, and wealth, shall ensue vnto hir. If the man shall haue a Mole, in a maner be∣hinde the necke: doth demonstrate that he shall be beheaded, except God (through earnest prayer) preuent the same. If aswell the man, as the woman, shall haue a Mole on the loynes: doth demonstrate a weake and poore kindred, and to be alwayes néedie. If on the shoulders of the man, shall be séene a Mole: doth signifie imprisonment, and sorrowes of the minde.
If the man shall haue (as is aboue sayde) a Mole on the throte, doth promise that hée shall marry, both with a rich, and beautifull woman. If the woman shall haue a Mole on the same place, doth signifie that she shall also marry, both with a wealthie, and a verie fayre, or comelye man. If eyther in the mannes, or womans handes, shall a Mole appeare, doth denote the prosperous good lucke, and enioy of children. If eyther the man, or woman, shall haue a Mole on the breast, doth threaten that he, or shée, shall be much harmed by pouertie. If the man shall haue a Mole on the place, right agaynst the heart: doth denote him vndoub∣tedly to be wicked. If the woman shall haue a Mole, on the left breast, then pronounce the lyke iudgement, as of the man. If a Mole shall be séene, eyther on the mans, or womans belly: doth demonstrate that he, or she, to be a great féeder and glutton. If a Mole in eyther the man, or woman shall appéere on the place right against the Splene: doth signifie that he, or she, shall be much passio∣nated, and oftentymes sicke. If eyther the man, or woman, shall haue a Mole on the bottom of the belly, doth argue much
debilitie, and to be often sicke. If a Mole in eyther the man, or woman, shall be séene néere to the priuie place, doth denote that he, or she, shall be vnspeakable desirous, and vn∣saciate in coeating. If eyther the man or woman shall haue a Mole on the 23u3rp r2bm2m it selfe, doth portend, that he shall beget men children: and she contra∣riewise, beare women children. If a Mole shall appeare on that part (aboute the 23u3rp r2bm2m) in eyther the man, or woman: doth denote the great increase of riches, and much wealth. If the man shall possesse a Mole, on the knée, then he shall obtayne a comely, and wealthy wife. If the woman shall haue a Mole, on the right knée: doth signifie hir to be both honest, and ver∣tuous. But if a Mole appeareth on the left knée, then such a woman shall enioy many children. If the Man shall haue a Mole, on the ancle of the foote: doth denote that he shall take vpon him, the womans part. And the woman hauing a Mole the like placed▪ shall take vpon hir, the mans part. If eyther the man, or woman, shall haue a Mole on the foote: doth promise the great good lucke, and enioy, of many children. To conclude (this is to be learned) that the notes or Moles, séene on ye right side, eyther of the
man or woman: doe euermore denote honestie, and riches: but on the left side, to be harmed with calamities, and continually poore. FINIS. The conclusion to the gentle Reader. THus after the possibilitie of my skill, haue I perfourmed my booke, though not altogither in so learned an order as I woulde, to please my Countrimen withall: for well I knowe that no∣thing doth more content, and satisfie the eares of men, than to vnderstande and knowe straunge matters, and the hidde properties and natures consisting in vs, which this worthie Art of Phi∣siognomie liuely setteth foorth. In the same I haue vttered such pleasaunt matter, as I thinke both delectable to reade, and necessarie to the fur∣therance of the singular Arte. If to some men I shall séeme not fullie to haue satisfied theyr de∣sires herein, according to their expectation, or not haue so cunningly handled the same, as the liuely matter it selfe offereth, and is worthie of: in re∣spect of the great commoditie that this laudable Arte bringeth, and causeth in a common weale,
being throughly knowne to men. I referre mée then wholy to the learned correction of the wise, beséeching them friendly to giue knowledge vnto the Printer, or to me, & being detected of my fault, will willingly correct and amend the same: for wel I wote, that no treatise can alwayes be so worke∣manly handled, but that somewhat sometymes may fall out amisse, contrarie to the minde of the wryter, and contrary to the expectation of the reader. Wherefore my petition to thée gentle Reader is, to accept these my traueyles, wyth that minde I doe offer them to thée, and to take gently, that I giue gladly, in so dooing I shall thinke my paynes well bestowed, and shall bée en∣couraged hereafter to trust more vnto thy cour∣tesie. I may here compare my selfe with two or thrée examples, not altogither impartinent to my pur∣pose. It is written of one Falarus Thebanus, a Capitaine, who béeing in the fielde with his Ar∣mie, readie to giue battaile, notwithstanding, hée was marueylously (at that instaunt) vexed with a sore disease of the Lunges, yet couragiously hée set vpon his enimies, in the ioyning of which bat∣taile, he fought himselfe, and béeing then stroken on the breast with a speare, his griefe ceassed, and was for euer after healed of the same. A like example to this, we haue of Mamillus
Bubulus, King of the Tuskanes, who hauing a stripe in the necke, there remayned behynde a péece of yron, which through the smalnesse of it, coulde be by no meanes got out. He on a tyme, ryding on hunting, his horse happened to ouer∣throwe him, the fall was so boystrous, that the little péece of yron flewe out of his mouth, and so was healed. As those two, Falarus, and Mamillus, béeing both diseased men, were contrary to their expecta∣tion healed of their griefes: euen so I béeing weake in skill, and in knowledge, and therefore doubting my successe, yet boldely aduenturing this my booke into print, shall by your gentle ac∣cepting of it, contrary to my desert, be released of my feare. But I feare me, I shall not be so hap∣pie, as eyther of these were, but rather chaunge that fortune with Cornelius Rufus, who drea∣ming he had lost his eye sight, and that one did leade him, in the morning when he awaked, found himselfe blinde in déede: euen so I in doubtfull maner dreaming of Momus, when I least thinke of him, shall finde me encountered of him: for what fault is there so small, which Momus will not finde. If the learneder sort brought vp al∣wayes, vnder Minerua, are sometymes touched of him: much more I who neuer tasted of the learned Lake, but rather alwayes rudely taught,
among the Smithes of Vulcanus forge, muste néedes be stung of him. Séeing therefore I doe halfe perswade my selfe, that I shall not obtaine the friendly countenaunce of all men: yet I doe not doubt, but the wise, will giue me their good worde, and will consider mine intent, as it is in déede, that is, to please the common sort, for whose onely sake, I haue taken these paynes, and haue published this booke: and will not so much regarde the yll, or well handling of the matter, as my good intent. And therefore (gentle reader) once againe I craue at thy handes, the thankfull accepting of these rude labours of mine: and thus the fauor of God, be with thée al∣wayes. FINIS.
The Bookes and Treatises of mine sundrie tymes printed. 1 An Epitomie of the whole Arte of Phisiog∣nomie, gathered: and imprinted by Iohn Way∣land for me, in the yere of mans redemption. 1556. 2 A pleasaunt Almanacke inuented for these thrée yeares, as 1560. 1561. and 1562. vttering such necessarie matters, as yearely are published, and these in a most ample maner, with a Table for the rysing and setting of the Sunne euery day in the yeare, seruing especially for London: and wor∣thie rules (named extraordinarie) for the weather, and other husbandly rules for the common sort, right profitable. This imprinted twise by Tho∣mas March, dwelling neare to Saint Dunstons Church. Anno. 1560. 3 A pleasant Treatise of the interpretation of dreames, gathered part out of the learned worke of Ponzettus, and part out of the Gréeke Author Artemidorus, with many new additions, helping the booke: and this imprinted a thirde time by Thomas March. Anno. 1567. 4 A briefe treatise of Gardening, instructing the apt ordering, preparing, and sowing of the Garden, with sundrie profitable helpes and re∣medies agaynst the noyous wormes, beastes, flies, &c. that commonly annoy Gardens: increa∣sed
by me, and imprinted a seconde tyme by Tho∣mas March. Anno. 1563. 5 A pleasant Treatise, intituled, naturall and artificiall conclusions: imprinted twise by Wil∣liam Copland, in the yeares. 1567. and 1568. 6 A little Treatise of the interpretation of dreames, fathered on Ioseph that godly person. &c. with a fewe Probleames added in the beginning of it, aunswering to the matter: and imprinted by the sayde Copland, in the yeare of our Lord. 1567. 7 A large discourse and Hystorie of Garde∣ning, by me a thirde tyme increased, in which is not onely vttered a number of pleasaunt secrets, néedefully to be knowne in a Garden, but the Phisicke helpes that the herbes serue vnto, and that easie to be prepared, annexed orderly: to which in the ende added, a profitable Treatise of the hunnie Bées, and of the commoditie of theyr hunnie and waxe purchased, with other secretes opened in the same, seruing to Phisicke and Chi∣rurgerie right profitable to be knowne: and at the ende of this, an other fruitfull treatise added, intituled, certaine husbandly coniectures of the state of euery yeare, in the forme of an euerla∣sting Prognostication, with rules as profitable for Cattaile, as lessions for the benefit of health. &c. and thys imprinted by Thomas March. An. 1568. 8 A fruitfull Treatise, intituled the Contempla∣tion
of mysteryes, contayning muche laudable matter, néedefull to be knowne, in this our time vnto all ages: and imprinted by Henry Denham dwelling in Pater noster rowe. Anno. 1571. 9 A Contemplation of Mankinde, contayning a large discourse of all the members and partes after Phisiognomie, from the heade to the foote: and a Treatise in the proper place added, of the iudgement of certaine lines séene in the forehead, purchased by earnest traueyle of a skilfull Iewe: and in sundrie places of this booke, hath the Phi∣siognomer learnedly added, many notable and straunge examples, that giue a great light, helpe, and furtherance, vnto the professors, and yong students of this Art: with a Treatise of the signi∣fication of Moles, séene in any part of man or wo∣man, written by a Gréeke Autor, named Me∣lampus: and imprinted by William Seres, Anno. 1571. The bookes of mine in a readinesse to be imprinted, and resting with the Printers. 1 A delectable Treatise, intituled the Ieweller of inuentions, conteyning certaine marueylous, and of these profitable, and pleasaunt practises, gathered out of certaine worthie wryters: and
this in a readinesse wyth the Printer Henrye Denham. 2 The second Tome of the worthie Treasures of Euonimus, contayning the perfite wayes in drawing many excellent waters for the preserua∣tion of health, & the distilling of Oyles out of most Spices, wyth the attayning of manye royall baulmes, and Oyles out of the Brimstone, Ui∣trioll, and Ambre, verye comfortable to man, the purchasing also of Potable Golde, with the sun∣drie newe inuentions of Aqua composita, and other laudable matters to long here to write. For the better helpe and furthering of these, the Prin∣ter of his part hath endeuoured to beautifie the booke to his great charge, with sundrie excellent Furnaces, and rare formes of bodyes, the rather that many Oyles and waters, may the cunning∣lyer be drawne: and this looke for at the handes of Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster row. 3 A profitable booke, contayning large princi∣ples, and fruitfull structions, for the ignorant in the Latine tongue, that be desirous o attaine the delectable commodities of Astrologie, in deuining vniuersally of most matters: with many laudable rules of Astronomie, seruing for saylers, and to other worthie purposes. This worthily named, a Methodicall document, into the singuler skilles of the celestiall motions: which remayneth in a
readinesse, with the late wife of Edward Sutton. 4 A proper Treatise, intituled the Myrrour of Tyme, in which manye singuler predictions of dearth and plentie for euer, are vttered in a di∣uerse maner, and a large discourse of the Comets, with their significations at the appearaunce, and the threatnings generall of the Eclipses, both of the Sunne and Moone, happening in any of the twelue signes, with extraordinarye rules for the weather, not the like hitherto published of none: besides profitable instructions, for the preseruation and health of bodie. &c. This also re∣mayning in the handes, of the sayde wyfe of the late Sutton. 5 A delectable Treatise, contayning manye fruitfull Probleames or demaundes, and their Apt aunsweares, as touching sundrie phisicke poyntes about the state of bodie: and rules after the maner of Probleames, that vtter the cause of the more death of persons hapning in the Equi∣noctials, and Solsticis, with other Probleames that vtter the causes of straunge appearaunces in the ayre: gathered by a singuler man named Ponzettus, out of the Arabians, Gréekes, and auncient Phisitions in Latine. This in a readi∣nesse, with the Printer Thomas Marsh.
The Bookes which remaine with me fully ended, and neare brought to an ende. 1 A paradoxall Compasse, contayning a large description of all the celestiall Cyrcles of the Sphere: a marueylous order taught in the moti∣ons of them, with the infinite vses that these serue vnto, for the knowledge of the true distaunce of places: besides a larger description of the places situated and lying néere to the North pole, and how temperate and habitable the places are their founde to be: a further discription also of places toward the South pole, howe habitable they are: and a large description of the Celestiall ymages, lying aswell on the North, and South side of the Equatour, as of the Ecclipticke: with the rysing and setting, of the fixed Starres. &c. gathered out of the best and latest wryters in our tyme, and in a maner readie to the printing. 2 A proper Treatise for the iudging of vrynes, contayning a playner and easier Methode for yong practitioners in Phisicke, than hitherto hath béene published of any: to which for clenly helpes, sundrie pleasaunt cautelles added, and these profi∣table in iudging: which is in a readinesse, to the printing. 3 The guide of the Matrone, contayning many
singuler practises for the skilfull midwife, in the bringing a bedde of daungerous birthes, and of these desperate, both with the instrument, and learned medicines: to these the occasion why so many marueylous formes of monsters, are con∣ceyued and borne: and the remedies for the most diseases hapning to women, learnedly taught, and of singular practise knowne: besides a liuely garnishing of all the partes of women, from the heade to the foote added, in a more skilfull maner, than hitherto hath béene vttered of any: and these practises purchased of manye iolly Dames, and Countesses of Italy. Such minded to haue a pri∣uate Copie written out of this worthie worke, let them resort vnto Maister Barkers shoppe, or Mayster Walleyes in Paules Church yarde, and there they shall vnderstande of the Authour, with whome they may common, when the worke is fully brought to an ende. 4 Two pleasaunt Bookes of Paulmestrie, I haue traueyled to set forth into Englishe: in the first, doth the Phisiognomer and Paulmester Cocles, go about to conuince the false principles, and vaine reasons of one Anthiocus Cesenatis, in placing of the Planets in the hande: with other vaine arguments very friuolous, that this skilful Cocles seemeth to confute, both by his Authorities alledged, and experiences knowne: and this hand∣led
in Dialogue maner, as betwéene the maister, and the scholler. In the other, hath Cocles be∣stowed great diligence, in gathering togither the opinions of manye wryters, and placed manye handes liuely figured, with his experiences an∣nexed, for a player conceyuing and vnderstan∣ding of the Art: which booke, he here séemeth to name his great worke of Paulmestrie. That if any be minded to haue a priuate Copie of these two bookes, let them resort vnto maister Barkers shoppe, and there they shall common with the Author. 5 A pleasaunt Treatise of Metoposcopie, or a diuining and iudging on all the lynes séene in the foreheade, written into sundrie Aphorismes, for a readier instruction vnto such as be desirous of the skill of this Art, vnknowne to many: to which is adioyned. lx. examples liuely counterfeyted, accor∣ding to the diligent obseruation of the Authour: who appeareth to be a learned Doctor of Phisick, and singuler Mathematicane (as Myzaldus, and others witnesse of him) named Thaddaeus Ne∣micus Hagecius, of Hagek. This in a readinesse to the printing, yet if any be desirous to enioy a priuate Copy of this, let them resort vnto maister Barkers shop, and there they shall common with the Translatour, and knowe his minde for the writing of the Pamphlet.
6 A proper Treatise, intituled the Phisiogno∣mie of the Planets, gathered out of the best wry∣ters, by a singuler Chirurgian, destiller, Phisiog∣nomer, Chiromanticer, and Geomanticer, named Bartholomew Cocles of Bononie: for the vse and commoditie of his deare, and especiall friend M. Alexander Bentiuolus. &c. This in a readi∣nesse, to the Printing. The two seuerall Treatises which I promised to set forth, as the one of Phisick, conteyning spe∣ciall secretes, in the drawing forth of Oyles out of the seuen Mettalles, and other simples, for the vse of Phisick: and the other a last part of Alexis Piemont, to which I promised besides the skilfull practises, to annexe sundrie newe inuentions, in the drawing of many costly Oyles, and waters: to be applyed as well inwarde for the preserua∣tion of health, as outwarde for the liuely garni∣shing of partes, with the colouring of the heares of the heade yealow, or flaxen of colour. This tra∣naile, haue I fully accomplished, in the seconde Tome of the Treasure of Euonimus: and added many other newe inuentions, and secretes, that are not to be founde in the Latine Copie: this (as afore vttered) in a readinesse with the Printer. 6 A proper Treatise, instructing the daunge∣rous tymes of the ficke, according to the Moones course throughout the twelue signes: written by
the auncient Physition Hypocrates. To this an∣nexed a pleasant Treatise, intytuled the agrée∣ment of Phisicke, with Astrologie: and this in a readinesse, to the printing. 7 Certaine learned secretes of Phisicke, hel∣ping the most diseases that happen from infancie, vnto olde age: with many newe, and care inuen∣tions added, as the lyke not exstant. At the ende a singuler Treatise annexed, for the letting of bloud out of any veyne of the bodie, after the in∣structions both of Phisicke and Astronomie, with the skilfull iudgement of the bloud let out, in the knowledge of sundrie diseases: and other secretes profitable to be knowne: this in a readinesse to the printing. 8 The manifolde and rare practises of the A∣strolobie, inuented by the learned Stoflerus, and others, is in a maner readie to the printing: to which in the ende shall be adioyned, the ysagogi∣call introductions, and rules of the Ephemerides, gathered out of the best writers: and fieldes Tables of Domifying, for the latitude of London, shall be annexed in the proper place of this Treatise. FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Wil∣liam Seres, dwelling at the West ende of Paules Church, at the signe of the Hedgehogge. Cum priuilegio ad imprimen∣dum solum. Anno. 1571.
