s3921a s2814b 99830689 35142
VI. SEVERALL VICTORIES OBTAINED By Major-Generall Browne, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, and Col. Fines, AGAINST The Kings Forces neere Oxford, on Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday last: with severall Lists of the names of the chiefe prisoners of the Kings party which were taken: viz. 6. Colonells and Majors. 9 Captaines. 11. Lievtenants. 14. Colours and Ensignes. 53. other Officers. 540. killed and taken. 600. and odd Armes. 590 Horse. 3. Barrells of powder, be∣sides other Ammunition. WITH All the particulars, and manner of each fight, and the most materiall Collections of the Letters which cme from Lievte∣nant-Generall Cromwell, Major-Generall Browne, and the rest that were sent from the Army. Published according to Order. LONDON, Printed for Robert Austin. 1645.
Six severall victories obtained against the Kings Forces neere Oxford, by severall Fights, on Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday last. ON Tuesday the 22. of Aprill, 1645. there were quartered between two and three thousand of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes horse about Oxford, to stop the Kings Artillery and Carriages from passing out, which were ready in Oxford (with a convoy) to march (as intelligence was given) towards Rupert. And Liev∣tenant-Generall Cromwell having intelligence that they inten∣ded to passe through Shotoverwood, drew towards Wood∣stock and so thereabouts towards Islip, to be ready to attend their motion, in case they came that way. On Wednesday the 23. of April, Lievtenant-Generall Crom∣well had intelligence of about 100. horse and foot that were marching towards him, and that evenning some of our men shewed themselves in a smal partie, which drew the enemy near, and command was given by Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, that all our Forces should be in a readinesse, and upon their watch all the night for feare of the enemy, which was carefully done, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell himselfe being in his own
person (to incourage them) all the while with them, for there came intelligence that the enemy intended to watch for an op∣portunitie to take our forces at an advantage, and then suddenly to fall upon them, of which they much presumed: but found our men too vigilant for them. On Thursday the 24. of Aprill, Lievtenant-Generall Crom∣well fell upon them neare Islip (where were a Brigade of above 1000. under the command of the Earl of Northampton) consi∣sting of his own Regiment, and the Lord Wilmots Regiment, beat them at their own game, fought with them with much gal∣lantry (though the best horse the King hath.) And at the second charge entred their whole Body, disordered them, which was followed with so much valour that in short time they totally routed them, and pursued them above 3. miles, killed and took 200. and odd, & about 60. were drowned by making such speed to get over a water. We took also 400 Horse, and 3. Colours, about 20. Officers, and divers Armes, and wounded many of their men besides, who fled into Oxford, and some into Blech∣ington-house. But Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell sent away his prisoners and marched against Blechington, and summoned Colonell VVindebank to surrender that Garrison, which after some dispute about it (being strong surrounded) it was surren∣dered to Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell upon condition for the souldiers to march away with their lives; Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell took there 250. Musquets, 70. Horse, 100. Pikes, and other Armes, 3. barrells of Gunpowder, with Match and other Ammunition. On Friday the 25. of April, our Horse were divided into se∣verall Squadrons, both for conveniency of quarter and also to attend the motions of the enemy, and Colonell Iohn Fines quar∣tered towards Wilcot, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell with his own Regiment drawing betweene him and Oxford, and this day some straglers of the enemies were taken prisoners.
On Saturday the 26 of April, Major-Generall Browne ha∣ving notice that Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Horse were so neere him, drew a partie out of Abingdon to march that way, to be in a readinesse (if occasion were) who marching towards Long∣worth, had notice of a partie of the enemie to be about Buck∣land, so they marched that way, but the enemie was gone to∣ward Farringdon; but Major-Generall Brownes Forces fol∣lowed them so close, that they fell upon them, and took a Cap∣taine, and 3 other Officers, and 10 Prisoners, with which they intended presently to returne towards Abingdon; but having intelligence of another partie of the enemies that were coming from the Devises, intending (as was supposed) for Oxford, Scouts were sent to find them out, and having discovered them, Major-Generall Brownes Forces marched unto them, fell upon them, and took a Colonell, a Sargeant-Major, 3 Captaine, 3 Lievtenants, and divers other Prisoners; besides Horse, and Armes, and carried them to Abbingdon. The same evening Colonell Fines (with his Regiment) ha∣ving intelligence of a partie of the enemies that were come neere Witney, drew towards them, and with much gallantrie fell upon them, and took from them 120 Horse, 3 Colours, 40 Prisoners, and 50 Armes. The same night newes came into Abingdon, that that day, viz. Saturday the 26 of April, Colonell Windebank was brought before a Councell of War in Oxford, about the furrendring of Bletchington-House to Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, and that divers great persons in Oxford were much inraged against him, taking it very ill, that a Garrison of so great consequence to them (as they value it) should be so soon lost; in so much, that it is beleeved Col. Windebank will be put to death for it. The same night Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell had intelli∣gence, that a partie of the enemies Foot (under the comm of Colonell Sir Henry Vaughan, formerly a Member
House of Commons; but since one of the Juncto,) were about Witney towards Farringdon; wherefore hoe drew that way, intending to fall upon them the next morning, if hee could reach them. On Sunday the 27 of April, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell sent out Scouts to discover the motions of Colonell Vaughan, and receiving advertisement where he quartered neer Bampton-Bush, hee marched on that way, parting his Body into severall Squadrons, and with valiant courage marched up close to them; the enemies having little courage to fight, (so terrible is the ve∣rie name of Cromwell to them) begged quarter for their lives, which was granted them; and so Lievtenant-Generall Crom∣well took there Colonell Sir Henry Vaughan, their Commander in chiefe, 2 Lievtenant-Colonels, 1 Sargeant-Major, 5 Cap∣taines, 8 Lievtenants, 8 Ensignes, 1 Doctor, who was Chap∣laine to them, his name is Dunse; 20 Sargeants, and other in∣feriour Officers; 230 Prisoners, and about 200 Armes; some powder, match, and Ammunition, with such provisions as they had. The rest of the day was spent in the publike worship of God; and thanks was given to the Lord (thorowout those our Armies, which were within hearing of the great victories:) for the same. On Munday the 28 of April, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell marched towards Abingdon with his Prisoners, and about one of the clock being come within three miles of Abingdon, and some congratulations with Major-Generall Browne; he sent his Prisoners to Abingdon, and a Convoy with them, himselfe marching to Yeilford, having a further designe, whereof (if God permit) he hopes to give a good account in few dayes, for he is full of action, and performes all with much gallantrie, even forgetting himselfe and his naturall rest, to do the Kingdome hfull and opportune service. so indeed all his Souldiers, with one resolution, doe
equally expresse so much valour for the good and safetie of the Kingdome, as can be expected. Thus have I in briefe given you the sum of each dayes pro∣ceedings of those severall victories, which God hath been plea∣sed to give to Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Forces, and Major-Generall Brownes on Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday last. And for your further satisfaction, here followeth a perfect List of the particulars of each victorie. A List of the particulars of each victorie, as followeth: I. A List of Lievtenant Generall Cromwells Victory neere Islip, the 24. of Aprill. 1645. 200. and odd kild and taken. 60. Drowned. 400. Horse taken. 3. Colours taken. 20. Officers kild and taken. Their whole Body routed. II. A List of what was taken ut Bletchington by Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, the 24. of Aprill. 1645. 250. Muskets. 70. Horse. 3. Barrells of powder. 100. Pikes, with other armes. III. A List of what was taken by Major Generall Brown (neere Farringdon) the 26. of Aprill. 1645. 1. Captaine. 3. Other Officers. 18. Prisoners. 14. Armes.
IV. A List of what Major Generall Browne tooke of a party coming from the Devizes towards Oxford, April 26. 1645. Colonell Conquest. Serjeant-Major Bamfield. 3. Captains. 3. Lievtenants, and other pri∣soners. V. A List of what was taken by Colonell Fines at Witney, the 26. of Aprill. 1645. 3. Colours. 10. Officers. 120. Horse. 40. Prisoners, and 50. Armes. VI. A List of what was taken by Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, at Bampton-Bush, the 27. of Aprill. 1645. Colonell Sir Henry Vaughan, one of the Junto, and Com∣mander in chief. Lievtenant-Colonell Lee. Lievtenant-Colonel Littleton Serjeant-Major Lee. Captain Powell. Captain Webster. Captain Lee. Captain Lewis. Captain Lister. 8. Lievtenants. 8. Ensignes. Doctor Dunse, Chaplain to Col. Vaughan. 20. Serjeants, and other infe∣riour Officers. 230. Prisoners. 200. Armes, with some bar∣rells of powder, match, and other provisions. FINIS.
