A309aA R209863 43077441 151500
AN ACCOUNT Of the Late Engagement at Sea, ON THE Coast of Spain, BETWEEN Two of Their Majesties Fifth Rate Frigates, WITH Two French Men of War and a Privateer, AS ALSO Several Rich Merchant-Men; the Strand∣ing one of the French Men of War, and taking Three other Ships Richly Laden; with great Numbers of Prisoners. In a Letter from a Merchant at Falmouth to his Frind in London. Licensed August 28. 1691. ON Thursday last, Arrived here two Dutch-Men of War from Tor∣bay, being sent from our Fleet by Admiral Russel, with Or∣ders to Cruise between the Dead-Man and Ʋshant, but they at present remain here for a Wind. This day Arrived here the Spanish Alliance, in 7 days from Corronna, she carries 26 Guns, and is very well Man'd; in her way outward, she met on the 6 Instant with a French Man of War of 23 Guns, who had with her as Prize, an English Ship of 300 Tuns, bound home from Boston in New-England, very Richly Laden, and which she had taken some days before; when the French-Man of War and Alliance came up with each other, the former (after a few Shot) not liking the Game, soon quitted the Engagement, making all the Sail she could away, by which our Frigate soon Retook, and possessed themselves of the New-England Man, and in her a great many French Seamen Prisoners.
On the 14th, They came up with a French Snow, a sort of Privateer so called of 18 Guns and as many Parteratoes, who being extraordinary well Man'd, held a Brush with the Alliance, between 5 and 6 hours, but having her Main-Mast brought by the Board, and most of her Rigging miserably Shattered and Torn, she had recourse to her Oars, of which she had 36, by the help of which she got clear, but as they hear, was a te∣wards Stranded. On the 10th Instant Arrived at Corronna the Spanish Expedition, she brought in with her a Dutch Fly-Boat of 250 Tuns, very Richly Laden, and a French Ship of 80 Tuns, both which she took from a French Privateer of 20 Guns; after considerable resistance. On the 17th Instant, The Spanish Alliance came out of Corronna, in Company of a Dutch Privateer of 26 Guns, and they both made a mutual agreement, that whatever Prizes should be taken by them in their Voy∣age to England, they should be equal sharers. In their Voyage they gave Chase to a French-Man of War of 30. Guns, but could not come any nearer to her, then just reach her with there Chase Guns; soon after they came no with a French Merchant-Man of 16 Guns, and 300 Tuns, Bound from Martinego, and very Rich, which they took, after a very small Resistance, and sent her  Flushing in Zealand. This Ship came out in Company of 21 Sail more, under the Convoy of 3 Men of War, the Admiral of which, as they Declared, carried 60 Guns. Here are lately come in, about 15 Sail of Stragling Ships from Virgi∣nia, Antega, Martinego, &c. The former came from Virginia on the 20th of June. Captain Daniel Commander of one of these Martinego-Men,  his Voage about 80 Leagues West of the Western-Islands, had the boldness to give Chase to a French Vessel of 100 Tuns and 10 Guns; and after a sharp Dispute took, notwithstanding the Ship seemed to be of a better Force than his, but he is a bold daring Man. These Successes has so Flushed our Packet-Boats, that they are Resolved nothing shall miss them that they are any ways capable of Mannaging; and that they are resolved every Man to Perish, rather then suffer there Ships to be taken. This is all that offers at present, either for News or Trade, from your Obliged Friend and Servant, &c. LONDON, Printed for J. Weekly, in the Minories, near Tower-Hill, 1691.
