A4145 E181_17 99859347 111421
THE ATACHMENT EXAMINATION AND CONFESSION OF A French-man upon Christmas day, concerning Trechetie intended against London, upon Tuesday, Decemb. the 27, 1641. Also the Examination and Confession of seven Papists, who were taken by the Watch on Friday night, and brought before the Magistrates, who said there should be an alteration suddenly. WITH A REPORT FROM Abbington towne in Barkshire, being a Relation of what harme the Thunder and Lightning did on Thursday last, upon the body of Hum∣phrey Richardson, a rich miserable Farmer. With an exhorta∣tion for England to repent. Also how the barne of the aforesaid man was burned downe. Warranted by Iohn Andrewes Esquire. Iustice of peace and Coram living in the same shire. London, Printed for William Bowden, 1641.
THE ATTACHMENT Examination, and Confession of a French-man, vpon Christmas day, 1641, Vpon Christmas day being saturday, did a Frenchman take water at the Parlia∣ment staires, to be conveyed to London ridge, but by the way he thus reported to the water-men, that it would be a bloudy day for London, either upon the next day being sunday, or else upon munday, which the water-men hea∣ring, they made no answer, but so soone as they ame to land, they ceazed upon him, sending for the constable, who because it was Sermon time they carryed him unto the Church, and then had order from the Church-wardens to keepe him in the vestry, untill the Sermon was finished, which he did. Sermon being ended, the Church-wardens and others asked him, if the Report concerning him were true or no, he answered, that hee could
not deny what he had spoken, for there was four men of no meane quality knew it to be true as well as himselfe. Whereupon hee was carryed before Sir Iohn Lentall, who resolved to have him further exa∣mined before the Honourable Court of Par∣liament. A true Report from Abbing towne in Barkshire. WHat we have deserved at Gods have for our sins, is not to be disputed; for why, our wickednesse doth dally abound, ann our sins are laid open before him. Religion claimes his due, and Truth doth sue Iustice, our consciences doe accuse us, and our Mrrors doe witnesse against us, the Lord of host the God, we have very much offended. O consider, oh man, that although God should lay his greatest affliction upon thee, yet hast thou deserved it, should he send the plague, as he did in the time of King David, it were but thy desert, should he send Famine, as he did to Ieru∣salem, or should he send the sword, as hee did to the Germaines, yet were it but thy desert.
O then consider oh man, how gracious God hath bin unto thee, and although he hath touch∣ed thee; yet hath he not wounded thee to the heart. I speake to English-men, which in some measure have received afflictions. First of all by the Pestilence. Secondly by the sword abroad, and it is to be feared, that unlesse we speedily repent, worse things will happen vnto vs. Ierusalem had many warnings, and wee have had no lesse, Germany had some signes, but we have had more: we had once a Iudah which cut of the head of proud Olopherns, curbing the in∣solency of papisticall spanyards, who thought for to have brought to confusion: we had once a Salomon which ruled his people wisely, and now have we the issue of David sitting upon the Throne, which delights in peace, piety, and equi∣tie. And yet cannot we be centented, nor will we be ruled, but delight in Errour. Luxury, and Pride, also here is Covetousnesse too much wor∣shipped amongst us (my expression is to be ex∣cused) wuich brings me to a story vvhich I hope will be read by all those vvhich are affected to that strayne: I meane thr Divels Trafficke, for Avarice; as once a wise man said is no other∣wise.
In Bark-shire in the towne of Abbington lived one Humphrey Richardson a very rich Farmer, his riches did more abound then his goodnesse: as will be approved by this ensuing story. This yeare, the Lord be praised hath bin suf∣ficiently supplyed with wheat and grayne, which the aforesaid Miser perceiving, & had very much Land and plenty of corn, he resolved to hoard up his store untill a scarcity should come, like unto the rich-man in the Gospell, he was resolved to build greater barnes, but see how God prevented him. Vpon Thursday being the 23. of December, was a very great storme, with much Thunder and Lightning, being apparent also in London. That very day did the Lightning ceaze upon the barne of the aforenamed Miser, and burned up all his corne, and hee himselfe going about to get men to quench the fire was flaine by a Thun∣der-bolt: by which let all Misers take warning, and not delight to make a scarcity of plenty, least God shew the like judgment upon them. All this is warranted by Iohn Andrewes Esq; Iustice of Peace and Coram, living in Ab∣bington.
THE Eamination and Confession of seven Papists, which were taken by the Watch upon Friday night. THere were also taken upon Friday night by the watch seven lusty fellowes, who when they were brought before the Ma∣gistrates and examined where they had beene. they most peremptorily answered at Masse: then they asked them, if they were not Confe∣derates with those villaines which invented and plotted treachery against the City, they answe∣red no, buttere long they should find a great al∣teration. FINIS.
