B1446B R231209 99897256 135191
Ʋnum Necessarium: OR, CHRIST's Justification OF MARY'S CHOICE; AND OF HIS SERVANTS Wrongfully Accused: CONTAINING A Resolution of many weighty Cases of Conscience. Viz. Indifferent Things, Obedience to the Higher Powers, &c. With some Refle∣ctions on Popery, and a brief Account of the ma∣ny Cruelties committed by the Papists. By Richard Baxter. LONDON, Printed for J. Salusbury, at the Atlas in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1685.
—  1654 stoph. Scheibleri Philosophia comperdiosa — Oxon. 165 ic. Burgerdicii. Institutionum Logicarum. Lib. duo — Caut. 1668 pondani in Aristotelis Organum Greco Latinum, Com. — Bsil. 1585 b. Velthusii de initiis pimae Philosohiae lib. — Lond. 16 istophori Scheibleri de Anima lib. — Masp. 16 . Galssendi Exercitationes adversus Aristotelicos — Amst. 16 thasais Meisneri Philosophi sobria 3 Tomis — Hess. 16 w. Brerewood tractatus quidam Logici — Oxon. 16 ed. Lossii Odservationes Medicinales — Lond. 1 domaei alaei ac Cyp. Soarii Rhetorica simul compacta — Frank. 1 n. Fustachii summa philosophiae quadripartita — Colon. 1 istotelis Stagiitae Organum Graec. & Lat. — Han. 1 n. Mori Enchiridion Ethicum — Lond. 1 rgii Dounami in Rami Dialecticam Coment. — Lond. 1 pomnjemata Logica Physica, per Jo. Prideau — xOxon.— hi Wardi in Hobbii Philosophiam Exercitatio — Oxon. 1 Burgersdicii Institutiones Logiae — Can. 1 . — Cat 1
THE PREFACE. IT is not a needless Subject which I here offer about needless or less needful things. Little do most men think how much of their Wisdom or Folly lyeth in their right or wrong valuing and using things lawful, and that have an inferiour sort of Goodness; and how much their Salvation or Damnation is here∣in concerned. Men are condemned for an Evil Love, but not for the
Love of Evil as Evil: Nature is against that. To love a lesser Good too much, and a greater too lit∣tle; to love the End but as the Means, and the Means as the End, is an evil Love; Non malum volumus, sed malè: It is the Act that is evil when the Object is good, either indeed, or in the Ap∣prehension of the Lover. He may will Hurt, as Hurt to another; but it is as conceited to be some good to himself. Apprehension of Good or Evil, that is, practical Judgment ruleth the Wills and Actions of the World; of how great Moment then is it to have a truly informed Judgment, and to have Teachers that will thus truly inform us; not about matter of meer Talk and Dispute,
that little concerneth us, but about that which is good or evil to ourselves, and to know indifferent things to be indifferent: It is the pernicious en∣mity of the fleshly Appetite to the Soul, that it byasseth the practical Judgment and Will to take things in∣different to be good and desirable, and almost necessary; and a small sen∣sible good to be a great one, and a great good which displeaseth Sense and Appetite, to be small, if not a hurtful Evil. And indeed the Holy Ghost hath told us, Rom. 8. 5, 6, 7, 8. That this is the difference betweeen the truly godly and ungodly, That one is spiritually minded, and the other carnally; that is, one savoureth things spiritual, and judgeth of things ac∣cording
to spiritual Reason and In∣terest, and loveth and chooseth them for spiritual goodness; but the Car∣nal have no such Gust, Judgment or Love, but value things as the Ap∣petite and Interest of the Flesh in∣clineth them. Be they both of the same Calling, Education and Profes∣sion; if both were Pastors of the same Churches, and Preachers of the same Doctrine, yet this difference is at the Hearts of spiritual and car∣nal Men; and it usually appeareth to others in their Lives: If they be publick Persons, they will shew men what things they value, and what gain it is that they pursue. The Flesh loveth not Mortification, nor the Cross; it is always against spiri∣tual Laws and Life, and spiri∣tual
Worship and Persons, so far as they cross their carnal Interest. He that will worship God that is a Spirit, in Spirit and Truth, must have a Judgment that most valueth spiritual things, and place his Love and Hope on spiritual Delights and Happiness. A carnal Mind that sa∣voureth only carnal things, and nei∣ther is, nor can be subject to God's spiritual Law, will hardly relish spi∣ritual Worship, or a spiritual kind of Life. One of the greatest signs of an Hypocrite is, making a great mat∣ter of little (wordly and fleshly) things, and making a little matter of great things. All the things of the Flesh and World are things in∣different in themselves, or almost
indifferent, further than their Rela∣tion to spiritual good doth make them become good or evil; good if they further it, and evil if they hinder it. But the Hypocrite is never indif∣ferent toward them; he feeleth no great need of spiritual thoughts, spi∣ritual Counsel, or Discourse, or Prea∣ching, or Books, or Company: Per∣haps he can bear them, but he can be without them; and doth nei∣ther much desire them or delight in them. A History, or Romance, or merry Jest, or Game, is pleasant∣er to him. But his Thoughts are serious for his carnal Commodity, Pleasure and Reputation; what he shall eat and Drink, and where∣with he shall be cloathed. If his House, his Maintenance, his Meat
and Drink be not such as the Flesh desireth, especially if it be put to Streights and Sufferings; his Sense of it is as quick, and his Complaint as serious as if he were half undone, or it were some great matter at least that he complaineth of. The Com∣plaints and Tears of many that are in some Streights or Sufferings, should cause wiser Tears from serious Be∣lievers, to see men so miserably car∣nal, like Children that cry for a Pin or a Feather, as if they had lost their greatest good. Seriousness is it that sheweth what is next to a man's Heart. It is Seriousness and Earnestness a∣bout fleshly Vanity, and want of Seriousness about things Spi∣ritual and Eternal, which is the
Temperament and Character of the Hypocrite. And here I would intreat some that I hope are godly, to forbear so suspicious and disgraceful a course, as they are openly guilty of; I mean, when they talk so concernedly and eagerly about their Meat, and Drink, and Cloaths, and every fleshly thing, as if their Hearts were set upon it. Passion and chiding if all be not as their Fancies or Appe∣tite would have it, doth shew that they are dangerously diseased at least. This Meat is not well drest, and the other is too little or too much; and that Sawce is not rightly made, and something or other is still amiss: And all these are talkt of as seri∣ously, as if the fleshly Appetite were
the Man. In a word; the more se∣rious any man is about great things, the more indifferent he will be about things indifferent: And the more indifferent a man is about the great∣est things, the more earnest and se∣rious will he be about things in∣different; and vice versâ, the more serious he is about things indiffe∣rent, the more indifferent he will be about the One Thing Necessa∣ry. Taking great things for small, and small things for great; necessary things for indifferent, and indifferent or smaller things for necessary, is the Folly, and the Sin, and the Damnation of the Ungodly. And because all men will do as they are, it is also the Corrupter, Troubler and Divider of the Christian Societies,
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Conversation; and the Confounder of the World: Of which Faith and se∣rious Godliness is the Remedy, which valueth and useth all things as they are. Septemb. 29. 1684.
THE One Thing Necessary: OR, MARY'S Choice Justified. LUK. 10. 41. Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art carefull and troubled about many things; but one thing is needfull. HAving long ago published some Sermons on the One thing need∣ful, in a Treatise called, A Saint or a Bruit, I find by more experi∣ence than I had then, that it is more ne∣cessary to say something on the former part of the Text than I thought it was: I then lived among poor labour∣ing honest People, who had indeed some
temptations from outward wants, but lit∣tle from wealth and superfluities, nor had leisure to waste time upon so many trifles, as I see rich and idle Persons think they have. It is here very considerable, 1. That the Author of this Reproof, was one who was not to be suspected to mistake through ignorance or want of love to Mar∣tha: And though he lived in a low man∣ner, and not as the rich, yet it was not because he wanted such things, that he blameth the minding of unnecessary things. For he was Lord of all; and for our sakes he became poor, yet suffered as rich men that are supposed to be usually the greatest sinners. He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death. Isa. 53. 9. 2. And that his Reproof was very Se∣rious and Compassionate, repeating her Name, Martha, Martha. 3. The Person Reproved, was not a wicked, fleshly, worldly Person, but one that was beloved by him, and a religi∣ous Believer. 4. The matter which she is reproved for, is partly positive expressed (being carefull and troubled about many things,)
and partly implyed as privative; not preferring the one thing needfull at that time so much as she should have done: Which implyeth, 1. That the many things were needless, or less needful things. 2. That they took up both her unseaso∣nable time, and the cares of her mind, unto her trouble. I need no more words to convince you, that Christ here teacheth us this Lesson, viz. That Care and Trouble about many need∣less or less needful things, hindering them from the due minding of the one thing need∣full, is a sin which Christ reproved in Mar∣tha, and therefore blameth in all others who are guilty of it. Here, I. Let us consider what Mar¦tha's sin in particular was. II. Whether we are not like to be more guilty of the like. III. In what kind this sin is usually committed. IV. What are the excuses for it. V. What is the evil of it, which deserveth such Reproof. VI. What use we should make of Christs Reproof. I. Martha's Sin (already mentioned) was over-much Care and Trouble about
her Table for Christs Entertainment, while Mary sate hearing his holy Dis∣course; which shewed that she had less Appetite than Mary to the Holy Doctrine of Christ, that could easilyer be with∣out it. 2. And that she over-valued the lower part, his bodily entertainment. Yet there were these extenuations of it, 1. It was not doing any sinful work in it self. 2. It was not needless in its time and measure. We are allowed to pray for our dai∣ly Bread; and here is no mention of any superfluities or excess: And so wor∣thy a Guest deserved the best Provisi∣ons; and it's probable that Martha was the chief House-keeper, to whom it most belonged. And no doubt it was a work of Love and Honour to Christ: Yet though it was for his own Person, and had such excuses, Christ would not take part with it, or forbear to blame it. And indeed one half of her fault lay in blaming her Sister that was wiser, and chose better than her self; and Christ spake this as much to justifie Mary, as to blame Martha, as the following words shew.
II. And if we judge but by her quali∣ty and case, and ours, we are far li∣ker to be thus culpable than Martha was. For, 1. That Countrey was poor in comparison of ours, and had not half the Temptations to many needless things, as we have by our Riches and their ef∣fects. 2. Christ would not have endured such Vanities and Excesses as we are usu∣ally guilty of. 3. It's like Martha that was so Fa∣miliar with Christ, was less addicted to Vanites than we now are. 4. Our Common Vanities, for which few of the better sort blame themselves, have no such extenuations or excuses as the Case of Martha had. III. But we need no more to convince us, than to name some of the many in∣stances, in which our sin is far, yea, very far worse than Martha's. 1. How much of most mens thoughts and time, is taken up with the needless cares to grow richer, and be better pro∣vided in the world? from one end of the year to the other, how great a pro∣portion
is thus laid out? Cannot we serve Gods Providence, and labour in our Callings, and do our Duty with∣out such a measure of Care and Trou∣ble? Into how narrow a conpass do worldly cares and troubles cast Gods Service, and mens cares and thoughts of their endless state in the hearts and houses of most men! These thorns and briars are so rank and plentiful, that they choak much of the Seed of the Gospel, and make true Godliness and Heavenly Delight to wither away and come to little. 2. How many needless Cares and Trou∣bles have most, about Gods part and Pro∣vidence, which belongs not to them; fearing what may befall them, lest they should be poor, or oppressed, or suffer by others; when they should spend those thoughts in caring for their Duty, and trusting the Love and Faithfulness of God? And no other care will avoid their suffering. 3. How much needless, yea and bruitish thoughts and works, have many to please and gratifie their Appetites? What a base and yet costly service have they that serve a greedy throat, and a beastly fan∣tasie?
Had God taken away many mens Health and Appetite, that meat and drink had been loathsome to them, it had been a Mercy to many such; who by the Pleasure that they have in these, are made slaves to the flesh, and sinks of shamefull sin, and the foot-ball of temptations, and live under continual wounds of Conscience, and when the Cup is absent, they are sinning in their imaginations and desires, and are con∣triving how the next meal or day to gratifie their Appetites again: I speak not of the reeling befooled Drunkard, or the spewing Glutton, but of them whose Care is for Throat and Belly, that make a great matter of the pleasing or dis∣pleasing of their Appetites, and think and talk of it so seriously, as if it were some needfull or important thing; that are displeased in mind if their throats be not pleased, and they fare not sumptu∣ously or deliciously every day: When the poor Israelites had not tasted Bread or Flesh for many years in a Wilder∣ness, nor so much as the Aegyptian Oni∣ons, but only Manna, they are killed by Gods Justice because they murmur∣ed; and when they asked Flesh, its said,
They asked Meat for their Lusts, Psal. 78. That is, For their meer Appetites, with∣out necessity, for life or health: but how much further do most go now, exceed∣ing even the Princes or great men in Israel in the matter and manner of their dyet, (as I believe the most in England do) and yet never blame or suspect themselves! Turks can forbear Wine at Mahomets Command, and the Rechabites because their Father bid them; and if the Physician forbid Strong drink or Wine to the Sick, they can forbear; but sensual sinners will rebel against God for their desired bait, and their heart and thoughts are set upon it. 4. How much also of many vain Peo∣ples thoughts and care is spent about needless Ornaments of Apparel? Do we need any other Proof than the opening of our eyes in the Streets, yea, in the holy Assemblies, as well as in places of evil fame: Dives is noted by Christ to wear Purple and Silk, or as we trans∣late it, fine Linnen; and then those that were gorgeously Apparelled, were in Kings Houses; but how few here of the vulgar, yea of Servants, affect it not now, that can but procure it! If
the highest do but take it up, inferi∣ours quickly strive to immitate them: In my short time, the Garb of England is so changed, that but fifty years ago, men would have gazed at such as paint∣ed Indians or outlandish Strangers, or ugly Ruffians, that had gone as most civil and religious People do in this Ci∣ty now. Paul would have forborn Wine and Flesh while he had lived, rather than his liberty should hurt his weak Bro∣thers Soul: But if the Scandal of our Pride or Gawdery do make many weak Persons turn Quakers to fly from it, how few for to avoid this, would a∣void the most gawdy and effeminate, or ruffianly fashion of Cloaths or Hair? And instead of receiving Reproof from such Quakers, they are hardened the more, because of the weakness of their reprovers. I am loth to name those gawds with which especially the Fe∣male Sex do openly shew their Vani∣ty, which tell all beholders what need∣less trifles take up much of their time, and cost, and care: And, alas for mens stupid Folly; All this is while thousands want Food and Rayment; while whole Countreys are impoverished by cruel
Wars, when dreadful Flames have con∣sumed our Wealth, and rebuked our Pride, and humbling Diseases have shew∣ed us what flesh is, and when our dai∣ly feeling tells us it is perishing, and while we are going to a loathsome Grave, and see the Dust and bones of those whom we are following; and the plain warnings of Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6. and many such stand in the Bible as cyphers to them. 5. How many needless things take up the rich, about their Houses, Fur∣niture, Retinue and Entertainments? espe∣cially those that are most Proud, and most Curious and Vain. Conveniencie must be a pretence for sinfull cost and la∣bour; Handsomness or Decency must be a pretence for needless charge in furni∣ture, while the Poor goe almost na∣ked; Cleanliness must be a pretence for their Servants spending much of the day and year in needless Vanities, which might be much better spent: Not to be accounted Careless or Ʋncleanly by o∣thers of the like Vanity, seemeth ex∣cuse enough for a multitude of need∣less Curiosities: To find poor People work doth pass for an excuse, for imploy∣ing
Servants and Tradesmen in making and providing all these Need-nots, as if they might not have been better im∣ployed for the common good, and en∣couraged to learn some better Trades; as if they knew not how narrow a Cof∣fin, and little furniture must shortly serve them: The report of good House∣keeping and Entertainments must justifie the Excesses and chargeable needless su∣perfluities of the rich. 6. What needless Cares and business have many to avoid the contempt or hard thoughts of others! How near goeth it to a proud Heart what is thought and spoken of them! And their avoiding of contempt must be the reason of most of the fore∣mentioned Vanities, in their Dress, their Houses, their Retinue, and the rest; when alas they have another kind of Judgment to prepare for, and they and those whose thoughts they so much re∣gard, are almost dead and Dust alrea∣dy. 7. What a deal of some mens Care and Thoughts are spent in needless con∣trivances for Power and Greatness in the World! what works find some Achi∣tophels and Hamans for their minds! As
if it were needfull for a man to fall at last from a higher place than the rest about him; or to have his will fulfilled by all others; or to have the Souls or Lives of many to answer for; or to be stronglyer allured to the damning Love of this World than other men; or to be envyed by many; or to be a Ruler of others, before one knoweth how to be Obedient to God, and to rule him∣self: And O what worse than needless troubles, even horrible wickedness doth this Ambition lead many to! even to be the Plagues of the Earth, and incar∣nate Devils, by bloody Wars and cru∣el Oppressions, Desolations and Perse∣cutions. 8. Yea some of lower rank have such imperious idol Wills, that nothing must cross them, or be said or done by any about them, but as they would have it: And yet it's two to one but so many per∣sons and things will cross them, and go quite contrary to their wills, as that their disease will be their continual tor∣ment: And they will be like one in Win∣ter that cannot bear the cold, and yet must bear it, or like a poor man that is a Servant to his Appetite, and hath
not wherewith to please it: or like one that dwelleth by the Sea, and cannot bear the sight of the Waters, or in a Wood and cannot bear the shaking of a Leaf. Such worse than needless trou∣bles doth an Idol Will produce. 9. And how much time is lost in vain and needless talk; about things not just∣ly pleasing, and no way profiting our selves and others! A vain Tongue being the Index of a vain Mind, as if Mind and Tongue had no higher or better Subjects or Imployment. 10. And in this City it is not a lit∣tle time that is taken up with needless Sports and Recreations: I will not honour the Gamesters trade with so soft a Name as Needless Work; Nor the Play-houses, nor the houses of excess and lust: But if Cards, Dice, and Stage-plays had never been branded and condemned by the An∣cient Canons of the Christian Churches, and did not notoriously bear the marks of Temptation and much gross folly and sin, yet Vanity and Needlesness should be enough to make men, that believe another World and the shortness of this Life, to abhor them, and better spend their time. There is a sort of Pleasure
and Recreation that is needful: That which fits us best for our necessary works and duty, preserving by motion the health of the body, or refreshing the weary Spi∣rits of hard Students. But God hath left no man in such a penury of Re∣creation, but that he may find more use∣ful, profitable, manly, time-saving and safe ones, than Gaming, or Stage-Plays, or Romances, and such ensnaring befool∣ing unprofitable Time-wasters are. 11. And among all the needless de∣ceitful vanities, unprofitable Studies and Arts are not the least: When Cornelius Agrippa had streined his Brain to such Curiosities that he passed for a Conju∣rer, and had written a Commentary up∣upon Lullius his Arts after many others; he concludeth all with an honest and Christian like Treatise, De Vanitate Sci∣entiarum, commending the Study and Practice of Gods Word as the only true Wisdom: And though I have marvel∣ed at the Carthage Council, which for∣bad the reading of Heathens Books, I ne∣ver wondered that mens Excess here∣in should be rebuked, nor that Paul call∣ed men to beware lest they were deceiv∣ed by vain Philosophy, and to avoid op∣position
of Sciences, falsly so called: Lan∣guages, Logick, Metaphysicks, Physicks, Mathematicks, &c. have their use; But he is a Learned man indeed who right∣ly applyeth them to that use, and se∣parateth the needfull from the needless part, the certain from the uncertain, truth from falshood and presumptuous Conceits; the plausibleness of the thing inviteth many to waste their time in unprofitable Studies, who durst not have spent it in Play-houses and Gaming; and yet I doubt to many it will prove no better. Qu. But the doubt is, What are these needless sinfull things; That seemeth needless to one that is not so indeed, or to another? Cy∣nicks call Decencies, and Ornaments, and Conveniencies, and Pleasure, needless. Ans. 1. That is needless which doth no goood. 2. Those things that do more hurt than good. 3. Those things which answer not the cost and labour which is bestowed for them. 4. Those things that are good, but hinder and deprive us of a greater good,
which we may well spare, but are hin∣derances to the one thing necessary, which we cannot spare; all these are certainly needless, if not worse. But because vain Persons are hardly Convinced, 'till God by Light or Fire do convince them, I will help them by these few questions following. Qu. 1. Is that act which you plead for, a thing which God doth any way Com∣mand you, directly or indirectly? If not, how can it be needfull to you? you will say, Are there not some things Indiffe∣rent and lawfull, which are no duties? Ans. 1. There are natural things which are not moral; (either Virtue or Vice) as your Health or Sickness, and such things as are Gods works and not yours; of these I speak not. 2. There are Actions of your own which are meerly na∣tural, neither commanded nor forbid∣den, and that is all those which are no matter for Rational choosing or refusing, such as have no moral use; as wink∣ing with the eye, which foot I shall first put forward; which of two equal things, in meat, drink, Apparel, &c. I shall take, (not choose;) when it is needfull that I do one, but it's perfectly indiffe∣rent
which: But the things which I am speaking of are of no such nature, but such as belong to Rational choice, and are accordingly chosen by you. Qu. 2. Would your Consciences trou∣ble you for it as any sin, if you omit∣ted the thing which I call needless? I suppose not. Qu. 3. Is it to please God as an act of Obedience that you do them? Is your Cu∣riosity, and your vain Attire, and the rest forementioned chosen to please God, or to please your fleshly Sense and Phantasie, or the World? Qu. 4. Will it be any hurt to you, or real loss, if they be omitted, or be denyed you? Qu. 5. Have you got any thing by them already, or not lost more than you have gotten. Qu. 6. Are they things that the better, or the worser sort of Persons more mind and plead for? whose De∣lights are Cards and Dice, and Plays, and vain Fashions? Is it the most Hea∣venly, or the most Fleshly Persons that are most eager of them, and most use them? Qu. 7. Do you find that they more
help or hinder you in Prayer and other holy Exercises? especially your hea∣venly Delights? Qu. 8. How do they relish with you when you think of Death and Judg∣ment? Are they a comfortable part of your Preparation? Had you rather then review and answer for your time spent in these, than in greater things? If you will but set Conscience to an∣swer these Questions, methinks you should soon perceive your selves, what things they be that are needless, and therefore not to be chosen, and conse∣quently unlawfull. But that you may see that I drive you not to any extreams, I shall negative∣ly add, 1. I do not number all our thoughts, care and labour for our Bodies, Chil∣dren or others, about things need∣full and convenient, to be these needless things. 2. Nor is our diligent labour in a constant Calling needless; he that will not labour, St. Paul saith, should not eat; This is a part of our Obedience to God, Six dayes shalt thou labour. 3. Nor is it needless to labour for
more than we need our selves, that we may have to give to him that needeth, and to do good to others. 4. Nor is it needless to do our best for our bodily health, to fit our Bodies to be able and chearfull servants to our Souls: That Food, that Recreation and Pleasure, which is necessary to fit Body or Mind for Service, and the work of a Christian Life, is not vain. 5. All men are not called to the same kind of Labour and employment; that is needfull to one, which is not to a∣nother. 6. The lowest things which we do in Obedience to God, if it were but sweeping the Streets or Chimneys, is not to be numbred with the needless things, but rather a comfortable exer∣cise of Humility and Obedience. But every man must prefer the great∣est thing. IV. What are the common excuses of this Sin? Obj. 1. Some say, that it is but few Persons, at least not all, that are fitted for, and called to great employments; they that cannot do greater matters, must do lesser.
Ans. All are not called to Govern Kingdoms, nor to be Teachers and Pa∣stors of the Church; but all have some Talent, which they must use and an∣swer for; and all may do somewhat which tendeth to the common good; the Servant or Labourer that Ploweth, Soweth and Reapeth, doth serve the Common-wealth; and if his Master live idly, and spend his time in Gaming, Plays, or other vanity, can he excuse it by pleading a greater incapacity than his Servant had? A Mason, a Carpen∣ter, a Tailor, a Sweep-chimney, do that which is needfull to be done; and shall rich men live idly, and do no good, because they are rich? Obj. 2. I was not bred up to labour, they that were bred up to it, must use it. Ans. If you were not bred up to some Calling or Employment, profitable to your self and others, you were bred in sin, and then it's time to break it off; Idleness, with Pride and Fulness, are noted to have been Sodoms sins; and will you not amend, because you were bred in sin? can you bear the doom of the unprofitable, slothful Servant, Math. 25? Or will it excuse you because you
have been slothfull from your youth? Obj. 3. God doth not require toil and labour from those that are rich, and need it not. Ans. God doth not require the same kind of labour from all; but if he give you more than the poor, he requireth not less but more from you; that is, your constant diligence in more profi∣table work; else you may as well say, That God is the Governour of none but the Poor, or that he looketh for least Ser∣vice, where he giveth most wages. Your labour is not only to supply your own needs, but to profit others, and for the common good. And the more you do in way of Du∣ty, the more you receive and profit your selves. Idleness is your own loss to Soul and Body. Obj. 4. Men need Recreation and Re∣laxation. Ans. What do you need it for? Is it not for your work, and your health, to enable you to work? Use no more than furthereth your health and work, and that shall not be called needless. Obj. 5. Little things are usefull in their places; Christ saith of some such, These
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Ans. No doubt but there are things good and needfull of several degrees; all are not of the most needfull kind: But what's this to that which is not needfull? or that hindereth more need∣full things, as afore described? Obj. 6. Old men are incompetent Judg∣es of the case of Youth, as not having their inclinations to Sports and Pleasures; and all men, especially Divines and Law∣yers, and such like grave men, who are themselves taken up with greater matters, are incompetent Judges of the affairs of Wo∣men, their Cloaths, their Furniture, their Expences and their Imployments, and are apt to call all needless, which is below their work. Ans. Yet Christ thought himself meet to judge of the choice of Martha and Mary, and Solomon to give directions to Women, and so did St. Peter and St. Paul: Old men were once young, and know what youthfull inclinations are, and grave men that live among Women, see their business, and know their rea∣sons: And if all sorts of persons shall judge Ministers, Lawyers and Judges in∣competent
to judge of their Tradings, Actions and Affairs, and so appropri∣ate the judgment of them to them∣selves alone, then all persons will by their own judgments be alwaies in the right, and none will be capable of a∣mendment; the Proverb is, A stander by may see more than a Player; but it is con∣fessed that a just Judge must hear and consider the whole case. Obj. 7. We shall be derided if we are singular. Ans. Will God deride you for obey∣ing him? hath not he said, Be not con∣formed to this world? You will be deri∣ded and persecuted too by wicked men, if you will be true to Christ, to God∣liness, Sobriety and Honesty, and is that a good reason why you should be sensual, worldly and ungodly? V. But what is the sin here Repro∣ved, &c? What harm is it to be thus carefull and troubled about many things, that are not comparatively needfull? Ans. 1. To preferr little things be∣fore greater, and thus to imploy our selves, is a wilfull debasing of our Souls, which should be exercised about that
which is answerable to the dignity of their natures; as it is a debasing of a Prince to use him as Beggars, or in sor∣did work; and as it were below a wise man to talk at the rate of Fools and Children; so is it a debasing of a Soul that is made for things of endless con∣sequence, to imploy it upon needless trifles. Pride maketh men think well of themselves, and look high in the world, and disdain to be set low in mens thoughts, words or employments; and yet when God commandeth them to look higher, they choose a low and sordid life. 2. It is a wilfull contempt of the most excellent things: God and our Redeem∣er, Grace and Glory are before us, and should be remembred and sought in the first place; and it is a contempt of them, needlesly to turn from them our minds and time to vanity: The mind of man is not infinite, but narrow, and cannot be employed on many things at once; if it be taken up with trifles, it cannot choose but neglect greater things: And for God, and Christ, and Heaven to be set by, while we play with toyes, is profane Contempt.
Obj. We cannot be alwaies thinking of God and Heaven. Ans. But you must alwaies be serv∣ing God in one kind or other, and al∣waies doing that which tends to Heaven; as you are not all day medi∣tating of the Light, but you are all day using it. 3. This taking up our minds and time with needless things, is a great injury to our selves, by neglect of our own great∣est benefit and necessities: Did but men know what they have to mind and seek, it would be their speedy cure. Alas, we are all behind hand in our great and necessary business; and these Tri∣flers usually are more behind hand than others: They have more to do of un∣speakable consequence, than all their time and diligence will serve for, as it deserveth, (having lost so much alrea∣dy) and yet have they so much to spare for trifles? O that these Loyterers knew their necessity and their work. 1. You have a God to know, of whom you are too gnorant; you have his Word and Will o know, which you are yet much un∣cquainted with. 2. Do you know what
it is to get, keep, use and strengthen a lively belief of the Word of God, and the unseen World? 3. Do you know what it is to get assurance that God is your reconciled Father, that Christ and Salvation are yours? that you are truly sanctified, and shall live in Heaven for ever? 4. Do you know what it is to get the Heart in Love with God, and to long after Commu∣nion with him in Glory? 5. Do you know what it is to get down all the lusts of the flesh, and watch against all the snares of sense and vain imagina∣tion, and to escape the love of these alluring pleasures, and the danger of particular sins of sensuality? 6. Do you know what it is to subdue all your carnal affections and passions, and to get in their stead a zeal for God, and to be fervent in his Service? 7. Do you know what it is to get above the love of Riches, and to escape all the snares of Covetous desires? 8. Do you know what it is to keep a holy govern∣ment of your thoughts, and to employ them in their proper work? 9. Do you know what it is to rule your tongues, in forbearing evil, and using them for
that which they are made for? 10. And do you know what the spiritual, sin∣cere and constant use of all Gods Wor∣ship is, Word, Prayer, Sacraments, &c? 11. Do you know what it is to re∣new Repentance for our renewed sins? 12. And to keep down all Pride, and to walk humbly before God and man? 13. Do you know what it is to love others as your selves; to do as much good to all mens Souls and Bodies as you can? 14. And what it is to dis∣charge all the duties of your several relations, to all your superiours, infe∣riours and equals? 15. And what it is to find out the corruptions and deceit∣fulness of your own hearts, and well to understand your selves? 16. And what it is to understand the nature and danger of all Satans temptations, and to escape or overcome them? 17. And what it is to obey all the motions of Gods Spirit? 18. And to use all our daily Mercies well? 19. And to bear Afflicti∣ons patiently and profitably? 20. And to be above the love of this body and life, and ready to dye? 21. And to live in the joy and comfort which be∣seemeth the Children of God, the mem∣bers
of Christ that wait in hope of end∣less glory? Do but understand what all, or half this is, and conscionably do it, and then spend the rest of your time in Cards, Dice, Playes, vain Adorn∣ings, Curiosities and other trifles. 4. Consider also that Time and Life are very short and very uncertain, and therefore not to be spent on needless things by one that standeth at the door of eternity. 5. The experience of other men should move us: All right repenting men, and most dying men, wish that their time had not been so wasted, but spent on that which was necessary to the great ends of life. 6. Conscience telleth most that have not seared it, that at Death and Judg∣ment we are like to wish that needfull things had taken up all our time. 7. It is a wrong to our great Creator and Preserver, that we should thus wast our time while he maintaineth us, as if he gave us Life and Mercy for such Vanity. 8. The Example of Christ and his Saints, is a reproof of all such Vani∣ty; we find not that they thus spent their thoughts and time.
VI. The Uses we should make of this, are these: I. Parents may hence learn, for what imployment they should Educate their Children in the World, what they should teach them, and to what Trades and Callings they should set them; not to such as will spend their Lives in Vani∣ties; but such in which they may be most usefull to themselves and others in the world: Not that all can be of the best or highest Callings, but all should be educated for the most use and service, and all employed in the best which they are fit for: It is a de∣basing of your Children to intend them for no better than to live at ease to get money; a Heathen would tell you, that usefulness to the Common-wealth is more to be regarded, and a Chri∣stian knoweth that the serving of God in the greatest profiting of our selves and others, must be preferred. II. Let us all review our lives, and see here how much we have to repent of; and let us see also what cause of lamentation we have for the common
guilt of all sorts, against these and such like words of Christ. But to prevent your misunderstand∣ing of me, I first profess that I intend not to make you Cynicks, or Supersti∣tious, nor to perswade you that it is necessary to your Salvation to live nasti∣ly and undecently, nor that it is any part of your holiness or perfection to be singularly sordid, and to avoid things comely and convenient, as some old Hermits and Anchorites, and divers Popish Saints seemed to think: I am not drawing you to imitate that present Sect among us, that set up at first with a holiness which consisted much in for∣bearing Cuffs, and Bands, and Hatbands, and Ribbans, and saying Thou instead of You, and withall in open reviling the most faithfull Ministers. It is not a superstitious Touch not, Taste not, Han∣dle not, Col. 2. 20, 21. I am commend∣ing to you: But I fear lest the con∣trary common extream be much more dangerous: I would not speak against your smallest convenience, so far as it became not a time-wasting Snare, and hindred not your Heads, Hearts and Lives from greater necessary things. I
know that when St Paul speaketh of∣ten for providing things honest, and liv∣ing honestly, he meaneth things decent and of good report; to expose ones self, purposely to be laughed at, as St. Francis and such others are said to have done, is no just exercise of Piety or Humility. But alas what a doleful Spectacle is it, to one that believeth whither we are going, to see what it is that most men are doing, and what it is that they leave undone! I am not now speaking of the time that is spent in direct evil; but little do men know how dangerously they sin in spending too much in things that have some good, and in preferring Conveniencies and small bodily Pleasures and Commodi∣ties, before the great and needfull things; who can doubt but it was a decent and good thing for Martha to make Provision for Christ, and to attend and serve him? Are not most of your un∣seasonable Cares and Troubles, about much smaller matters than this? but at the time when greater things should be done, even these are culpable Cares and Troubles; much more those many
little trifles, which only Pride and Fol∣ly calleth needfull: And verily we have all so much of this necessary work to do, that leaveth us little room or time to spare for things which most men spend much of their Lives in; so great and urgent are our main concerns, as should make every wise man study diligent∣ly to put by as many of the less di∣verting matters as he can: He that had Money to lay out for his ransome, or for his life or necessary livelyhood, would spend little on small matters, 'till he were sure he had enough to spare. Hearken but wisely to God and Con∣science; foresee whither you are go∣ing, and what you have to do, and of what inconceivable importance, and then consider whether you have room and time for all or any of those divert∣ing trifles which are the chiefest care and business of the unbelieving carnal world. This needless business plainly sheweth that you have low and little Souls: As Children playing in the Sand shew their difference from men that apply themselves to manly business, so your over-business about your Ornaments,
Dresses, Complements, Rooms, and many such trifles, doth tell others (whether you will know it your selves or not) that you have both Childish understandings (and worse because you are at age) that set too much by lit∣tle things, and that you have too much carnality of affection, when you have so much mind of trifling Need-nots: And worst of all it plainly sheweth that you greatly want a sounder belief and deeper Sense of your great business and interest in the world, and live not in the sense of the nearness of Death and things Eternal, as wise Be∣lievers should still do. I am not saying, that you should al∣ways have the sinful fears and sadness, which the Sentence of Death doth bring on most: I had rather you were quite above these to the last: Nor do I say that you should always have just the same kind of passions, or do all things just in the same manner, as you ought to have and do, if you were sure to dye to Morrow. But I must say, that you should have the same Wisdom, and the same esteem of God, and of the World, of Soul and Body, of Heaven
and Earth, of Eternity and Time, of Duty and Sin, of Necessaries and Tri∣fles, as you will then have; and the same holy affections, and diligence, and pra∣ctice of Life, which this Wisdom will then teach you to wish that you had sooner had. O let there not be too great and shameful a difference between your Living and your Dying Thoughts. If your Father, or Child, or Husband, or Wife, were on their Death-bed or going to Execution, would not all be ashamed of you, that should hear you talk to them about Cards, or Plays, or fine Cloaths, or Laces, or greater worldly Toyes than these. Yea, if you were taken up your selves about your own Ornaments, Dressings, Curiosities, and troublesome Triflings, who would not say that you were disgracefully senceless of your own and your dying Friends Condition? O Promise not your selves more time than God hath promised you: Dream not that you dwell further from the Grave than you do: You know not what it is to live as Christians or as Men, if you know not that all our Life should be spent in our best preparation for Death. Though you must do much which you
would not be just found doing, you must do nothing but what you can then Com∣fortably review, nor spend a moment in that, which then you must wish that you had not spent it in. And whether time-wasting trifles and Need-nots, will be comfortably remembred then, by one that hath Reason and Faith, and had so little time, and so much to do with it, methinks it might be easie to fore∣see. Verily, if you spent your time in no greater matters, than in getting Gold and worldly Glory, Crowns and Kingdoms, meerly for your Flesh, and the greatest Pleasures of a carnal transitory Life, you will in the Everlasting review, be confounded and tormented in remem∣bring your self-abasing folly. And are your many little trifles then of more worth to make you a just excuse? Gen∣tlemen, Ladies and Gentlewomen; do not only bear with me, but be willing and thankful that I deal plainly with you, when it is not for me, but for your selves: It is such as you that are most ordinarily and excusably guilty of this Sin and Folly: The poor Labouring Countrey-man and Tradesman indeed
is unexcusable that will be diverted from the care of his Everlasting state, even by his most lawful and necessary La∣bours: But usually their guilt is less far than yours, in all these following respects. 1. That which they do is profitable to the Common-wealth; and so is good, and part of their duty in it self consi∣dered. To Plow, and Sow, and Reap, and make you Bread and Drink, and Cloaths, &c. But what good cometh to the Common-wealth by your Curi∣osities, and Vanities, and Plays, and Complements, though decency, and cleanliness, and handsomeness, and a∣voiding contempt and reproach be vain∣ly pretended for them. They gather, and you waste: They are the Bees, and you are the Drones: They labour, and you consume it on your Lusts and Fan∣cies. God bid them labour six daies, but he never bad you make such a stir for meer unnecessary vanities. 2. Necessity is some reason for what they do, though it be no good excuse for leaving undone greater things. They must maintain themselves and Fa∣milies, and pay you your Rents: But
what necessity have you to waste thoughts and times about your many unprofita∣ble Toyes? Martha had some excuse, but you have none. 3. God giveth you more Wages, and therefore doth expect more Work: You are Stewards of more trust, and there∣fore have more to give up an account of. 4. They can say, [Christ and his A∣postles and all good men have laboured and done such things as we do;] and it is part of his Law, that if we will not work we shall not eat; and Solo∣mons Mother, a Queen, and he the wi∣sest King by her teaching, describeth the Virtuous Woman to be one that worketh willingly with her hands on Wooll and Flax, that riseth before day to look to her houshold, and her Can∣dle goeth not out by night; and eat∣eth not the Bread of Idleness;] (when too many of the Rich do eat no other.) The labours of your Tenants have such Presidents as these. But have you any such for your needless formalities and toyes? Did Christ or his Apostles spend their time in Prating of unpro∣fitable things, or in Idleness, or Plays,
or Gaming, or in Childish neatifying their Bodies, or such like? was St. Pe∣ter of your mind when he wrote to Christian Women, 1 Pet. 3. 3. That their adorning be not outward, of Plaiting the Hair, and of wearing Gold, or of put∣ting on of apparel, but the hidden man of the Heart; in that which is not corrupti∣ble, even of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in Gods sight of great price? That is, regard that which is precious, and a∣dorneth you in the sight of God, and affect not neatness or costlyness, to make you seem either Rich or Comely in the sight of Man, but cloath your cor∣ruptible flesh with cheap and easie plainness, as beseemeth those that are going to the Grave. It is not Appa∣rel, but Ornaments that he forbids, and a vain desire by our Apparel to seem somewhat higher or handsomer than we are to men. Perhaps you will say, that Christ and his Apostles were poor men, and therefore neither Patterns or fit Judg∣es for you: Ans. But yet they shall judge you, whether you will or not; And they who tell men by their lives, that they take not their Doctrine
or example for their Rule, or Christ for their Governour, shall find that unbelief and rebellion are not the way to their Justification. But though they that are gorgeouslly cloathed then dwelt in Kings houses, do you but read the 31. Chapter of the Proverbs, and take there the Counsel and Pattern of a Queen and King, and I will reprove you no more. And you that are so regardful of the thoughts and eyes of men, and whose Pride maketh so great a matter of your reputation, that all about you be sight∣ly and lyable to no contempt, why do you not most regard your reputation with the wisest and the best: St. Peter before told you what are the precious Ornaments in the sight of God: And wise men and good men come nearest to God in all their estimations. Who will bestow much cost or time, or hire Servants, to trim themselves, or their Houses, for Children or Bedlams to look on and admire? None but such as your selves do think ever the better of you for all your costly or troublesome curiosities; Wise men look at you as at Players, or Morice-dancers, some
with Laughter, and all with pity; and think, what empty Souls are these that mind such little Childish things? And seeing common reason tells you, that a mans dignity or baseness lyeth in the dignity or baseness of the things which he mindeth, hopeth for and seeketh, and of the work in which his Life is spent, why will you set your selves so sar below your poor Tenants and labouring Servants, as to choose imployments so far baser than theirs? That is basest which is most vain and of little benefit to your selves or o∣thers: Your Plowman, your Baker, your Brewer, your Cook, yea your Chimney-sweeper live upon more use∣ful employments, than some rich-vain-curious-idle persons. And as all sin blindeth and befooleth sinners, it's two to one but these self-abasing persons will distaste what I say, as thinking that it is against them. When common reason might tell them that all this that I speak is for them, even for their Honour, their Commo∣dity, their Conscience, and their Sal∣vation. Should I perswade one that selleth Pins and Points, or the Scavin∣gers
that carry out Dust and Dung, to become Merchants that trade for Gold and enriching Merchandize, few of them would be so sottish as to think I speak against them, to their dishonour or their loss. And still I confess that many little things are needful in their place and season: We should miss Pins and Points if we were without them. Dirt and uncleanness must be swept and washt away: Garments should be warm and comely: Rooms that are convenient are desirable; comely and stately build∣ings and furniture for Princes and Ru∣lers are a due Ornament to Magistra∣cy, and splendid Cities and Temples are an honest imitation of the great and glorious works of God: Sweet harmony and melody exhilerate the Spirits for and in Gods Holy Praise. All his Mercies should be used to fit us, to serve him with gladness, and joyfulness of heart. It is not a Cy∣nical Life that I plead for, but a base and childish life that I am dispraising. When comeliness and decency, and cleanliness and reputation is made a pretence for such trifling away your
own and your Servants time, and set∣ting up such toyish trades and employ∣ments, as nothing but your own sin∣ful disease and folly could keep you from being ashamed of, and your Con∣sciences from accusing you for. I am ashamed to name over the trifles with∣in doors and without which I mean. But Satan is subtil as well as mali∣cious, and knoweth that all fish bite not at the same bait: Crowns and en∣larged Dominions are the diversions of some, who think their designs are high and honourable, while they go to dam∣nation with more applause than world∣ly Peasants: Brave Speculations and pleasing Knowledge of things unne∣cessary are the bait of others, that scorn to neglect God and cast away their Salvation, for such low and lit∣tle things, as the Wanton and the Glutton, or Drunkard do. Yet these that are pleased in satisfying their Ap∣petites, think that they make a wiser bargain, and have somewhat more in∣stead of Heaven, than sick brained Childish Women, that have no better in exchange than things and businesses which I am ashamed to name.
O that God would awaken all our Reason by a lively Faith, to see where we stand, and what is before us, and with whom we have to do, and how little transitory things of the flesh do signifie to a sound understanding. We should then see that Time and Life are of greater use, than to be plaid and fool'd away. Every moment of it would then appear to be very preci∣ous, and of great use. Whereas that is vile, which is good for nothing but vile employments: That hour which is useful for no greater work, than your tri∣fling Need-nots, is of no greater worth than the work which it is for. Had you no more to do with it, how unde∣sirable were life: Surely the gain or pleasure of an idle or a trifling life, will never compensate the cares and troubles and sufferings which we must all undergo. Were a Prince, Judge or Doctor set up as a Picture only to adorn a Room, or as a Mawkin to frighten away Crows from the Corn or Garden; this were not useless, yea it were better than many of your time-wasting vanities: But sure it would be a great debasing of such persons, as
scarce worth the cost and trouble of living. The Scripture tells us indeed, that Man walketh in a vain shew, and that Verily every man at his best estate is Va∣nity; yea, all under the Sun is Vanity and vexation of Spirit: But all this is said only of man as seeking a Felicity in this world, and of all that he is and doth, with no higher respect than to the present Prosperity and pleasure of the Flesh: But there are greater things offered us which are not Vani∣ty, even the pleasing of God, and the fruition of his Love and Glory for ever; and were our life and time devoted to these high and noble Ends, were our waking and sleeping, our eating and drinking, our health and sickness, our labours, yea and our needful recreati∣ons, employed for these, and measured accordingly as means hereto, they would be holy and comfortable, and the low∣est things would be thus honoured and precious: They that are stedfast and unmoveable, alwaies abounding in the work of the Lord, do find their la∣bour not in vain, 1 Cor. 15. 58. The same House, Goods, Money, Food, Ray∣ment,
Time, as used by holy Believers and by carnal Worldlings, &c. differ more than we can now conceive; HOLINESS TO THE LORD is the name of the one, and VANITY, VEXATION and SIN of the other. But alas, man who as a shadow pas∣seth away, doth set his heart on tran∣sitory shadows, and dreaming, and seeming, and Stage-employments and enjoyments make up his hypocritical life and comforts: His Religion is na∣turally ('till Grace amend him) but Shew and Ceremony; his heart-work, and house-work, and publick-work is little but Shadow and Ceremony; Time is spent, and Money spent, and Talk spent, and Thoughts spent upon Shadow and Ceremony; Servants are imployed too often also in wasting their time, to serve their Masters Fancies in meer Shadow and Ceremony: You can see and hear but little that is better, or of greater use in many rich persons dai∣ly conversations, in their retinue, in their splendid houses and curious adorned rooms, or any thing even of that which commandeth their hearts and time, and in which they place their dignity and
pleasure; 'till either Grace happily, or Death miserably awake their wit, and then they cry out, All is Vanity and Vexation; O that we had better spent our time! This their way is their folly, and yet their posterity approve their say∣ings, Psal. 49. 11, 12, 13. And still others rise up that tread in their unhallowed steps; and Satans Kingdom can truly boast of an uninterrupted Succession, even from the daies of Cain, 'till now. I shall end with some Directions how to judge of Needless things. 2. And an answer to some Cases of Conscience. I. 1. All things are culpably need∣less which answer not the cost, and la∣bour, and time which is laid out up∣on them: You may judge by the good which they are like to do. 2. Those things are culpably need∣less, which are but to serve a desire or humour, which we have no need to please; if the Lust or Fancie be vain, the Means that serve it can be no better; whether it be the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or pride of life, which are not of the Father, but of the World. Men say, We delight in this or that, in curiosity, in costly or time-wasting
sports, or such as profit not their bo∣dily health, in gawdy dresses or such like; and why may we not gratifie our delight? why it is supposed to be a needless unprofitable delight, proceeding from a vain Fancy, which should rather be cured than pleased. 3. All things are much more culpably needless, which proceed from a Vicious sinful humour, desire or lust; Make no pro∣vision for the flesh, to satisfie the lust there∣of, Rom. 13. 13, 14. To mind the things of the flesh, is enmity to God, and to the minding of spiritual things, Rom. 8. 6, 7. Unnecessary sensual delights corrupt the Soul, and strongly turn down the mind from God and holy Pleasures; and the mortifying of such fleshly Lusts or Pleasures, is no small part of our Religion. 4. All those are culpably needless and worse, which are preferred before truly needful things; and which are against them, and shut them out, or take up that same time and room which they should have; if you have any thing of greater moment, which should be done at that same time, whatever hindereth it is va∣nity and worse; and therefore there is
no cure for vanity of mind and life, till men come to know their great ne∣cessities, and important business which they have for all their thoughts and time, even the regard of their end and all the means, the duties of their spiri∣tual and temporal Callings, and see that they have no time to spare. II. Qu. Is it lawful to be of a Trade which serveth the Humours of vain Persons; as to make Cards, or Dice, or Stage-Playes; or vain Attire, as Ribbonds, Periwigs, and such like? Ans. 1. These things are of very diffe∣rent Natures: Some of them, as Stage-Playes, Cards and Dice, (though Instan∣ces may be devised in which it is possible to use them lawfully) are so ordinarily used sinfully, and so seldom well; that the Trade that maintaineth them may well be supposed to be a Trade of main∣taining Sin: And, had I a Son, I had rather he begg'd his Bread, than have such a Trade. But Laces, and Ribbonds, and fine Cloaths, and Feathers, and di∣vers such things, have (among some that they are fit for) a more ordinary law∣ful use; and therefore I cannot say, that such Trades are sinful. 2. But yet be∣cause
they are of so little benefit to the Common-wealth, and so very frequent∣ly used to serve a vain and sinful Lust and Fancy: I take it to be a Sin for any one to preferr such a Trade be∣fore one that is more blameless and pro∣fitable, though the Person might get more Money by it. 3. And they that will use such a Trade without Sin, must necessarily be so careful in distin∣guishing of Customers, and not pro∣miscuously sell to all who they perceive will serve their Sin by it; that it will much diminish their Gain. The Case is much like an Ale-seller's or Vint∣ner's, which is lawful in it self, but must be used with so much distinguishing care, as I doubt few practise, lest their Gain be hindered: And therefore a safer Trade is much to be preferr'd, which is not a continual Temptation. Qu. 2. May a Servant dwell with and obey such a Master, or Lady, or Mistress, as will command them to spend much of their time in Trifles and Vanities, that are but to please a proud or curious Fancy? Ans. 1. It must be supposed, that ma∣ny times Servants, through Sloth or Edu∣cation, misjudge those things to be need∣less
or evil, which are not such; and think that their Superiours should com∣mand them no other labour than what they like themselves: In this case their Errour will not justifie their Neglect Persons of Honour and Dignity may lawfully go much further in employing their Servants in Dressings, and Adorn∣ings, and Attendance, and in washing and rubbing Rooms, and such smaller things, than lower Persons, from whom it is not expected, and to whom the marks of Wealth agree not, though none must be inordinate. 2. In meer doubtful Cases Servants are not the Judges of their Governour's Commands and Business; and where they are no Judges, and know no Sin, they must submit. 3. Sometimes that which is sinfully com∣manded, may be lawfully and dutifully o∣bey'd. As it is a Sin in a sick Man to be pee∣vish and hardly pleased, and to command many needless things to a Servant in that peevish humor; when yet (they being law∣ful things to be done) the Servant may be bound to obey them. A Patient may sinfully be humorous in his Expectations▪ when a Physitian may yet lawfully please
his Humours for his Health. A Child may faultily cry for something, when the Nurse may without fault give him that which he cryeth for, to quiet him. All is not forbidden the Servant to do, which is forbidden the Governour to com∣mand. 4. But all that is Sin in the Doer must be forborn; and to serve and cherish the Sin of others when we may choose, is sinful. 5. Therefore in such Cases, though it be lawful for a Servant to do many need∣less things (not forbidden him by God) when commanded, it is unlawful to choose such a Service, in which he shall be so em∣ployed, to spend his time in Vanity, to satisfie a Ruler's Pride and Humour, un∣less it be in case of true Necessity, or pro∣bably to attain a greater good, which will compensate all the Inconvenience. As if a Pirate or Tyrant command me to say some idle Words, or do some needless Action, or else my Friend or I should be murthered; in this case they are not idle, or needless, or unlawful, but a Duty; which voluntarily chosen, would be a Sin. Obj. By this you will make it a Duty to obey Papal Commands of idle Ceremonies, if
we doubt, or if they he not things forbidden us. Ans. 1. God hath not left us to so much liberty how to worship him, as he hath left us about our Houses, and Dresses, and common things. 2. The Pope and his Ministers are un∣lawful Governours, as setting up an un∣lawful Church Policy, even a universal humane Ecclesiastical Monarchy (or Ari∣stocracy, as the Conciliar Party hold) and therefore we owe them no Obedience even in lawful things, and it is a Sin to become their Subjects. 3. Doubting whether real Sin be Sin, will not make it no Sin, nor change the Law of God. Should Men be uncertain whether Rebellion, Schism, Fornication, Perjury or Lying be Sin, they may not therefore do it, though it were com∣manded them; for no one hath true Au∣thority to command them. 4. But if really the thing be lawful to be done, we must do it, if commanded by such as have true Authority to do it, though they mistake and sin in the Rea∣sons, Ends and Manner of their Com∣mand. 5. If a lawful Magistrate or Ruler sin∣fully
command [Say such or such a need∣less word, or do such a vain Action, or wear such a vain Habit (not forbidden us by God) or else you shall be silenced, banished, imprisoned] it ceaseth to be vain in the User, when it's made neces∣sary to such ends, though it be sinfully commanded. But what God forbiddeth must never be done. Qu. 3. May the Husband and Master bear with sinful Vanities in his Wife and Servants, in his House? Seeing he is the Ru∣ler, is it not his Sin to tolerate them? Ans. 1. It is undoubtedly his Sin to consent, or not to remedy it, if he can do it by lawful means. 2. It oft falls out that not only needless Toyes and Vani∣ties, but some downright great Sins, can∣not be hindred effectually without so great Inconveniences and Mischiefs, as that such hindering becometh an unlawful means. If a Man have a Wife so passionate or un∣quiet, as that no means would restrain her Tongue or Hands, but turning her away, or using such Violence as is unsuit∣able to a Conjugal Relation; he must patiently endure her Sin. If he have a Wife that will fall into some dangerous Disease, or grow distra∣cted,
if she may not Please her Pride in Apparel, or sinfully waste much in vain Expences, or may not use an unruly Tongue to sin; or at least, if the restraint would cost the Husband so dear, as would by unquietness unfit him to serve God in his place; in this case it is no sinful To∣leration to endure it: He is far from consenting to it; he only restraineth not that which he cannot restrain: For what a Man cannot do by lawful means, and without doing more hurt than good, it must be said, that he cannot do it at all. And so much as a Man may lawfully give to purchase his own Peace and Quietness, or to cure his Wife of such a Disease or Distraction; so much he may lawfully suffer her to spend (though sinfully) to prevent it, as long as he disowneth the Sin, and would remedy it, if he could by lawful means. Obj. If you tell Women this, some will give their Husbands no Quietness, and some will waste their Estates in Sin, or vain Ex∣pences, to satisfie their Lusts. Ans. 1. We must use no false Doctrine for the preventing of such persons Sin: If it be true, some Men have need to know it. 2. It's possible that some Rates
of Expence or Suffering, may be greater than the preventing of the Wives Cala∣mity and its Consequents are worth; and in such cases it cannot be so prevented. 3. And I hope the Case is so rare, that most Women's Pride, Exorbitancy and Passion; and the Sins thence proceeding, may be restrained by other means, at easier rates. Obj. 2. But by this you would inferr, that Evils may also be tolerated in the Church, if so far in the Family. Ans. Consenting to any Sin, is sin, and so is doing that by promoting or tolerating, which signifieth Consent; but not to hinder that which we cannot hinder by lawful means, and without doing greater hurt than good, is no Consenting, or sinful Toleration. Papists that are for burning and banish∣ing Dissenters, yet confess this, that they must tolerate them, when else they should more hurt the Church by what is done against them. It is no Sin to bear with the greatest Sin in the World which we cannot reme∣dy, much less with humane common frail∣ties, in which all mortal men must bear with one another, or else forsake all Love and Peace.
And this Objection mindeth me humbly but earnestly (though almost hopelesly) to desire all Governours to take notice, that the Pastoral Govern∣ment of Christs Church (being exerci∣sed under him, who calleth it his Spouse and Body) is very like the Go∣vernment of a Husband over his Wife, which must be done by no means incon∣sistent with Love and Conjugal offices and Communion to the last. And there∣fore if men must bear with so many and great offences and inconveniences, yea and sufferings in and from a Wife for their houshold peace and quietness, let them consider whether for Church-Peace much evil is not to be endured when it cannot be lawfully hindered. And if humane frailty and darkness be such, as that few persons living have the same apprehensions of many or most things, and Husband and Wife about their ordinary affairs, will daily manifest such difference of opinions and humours, as must be born (or they must bear much worse,) let Pa∣stors consider, while we agree in all things necessary to Salvation and the common peace, how much diversity of
sence, and consequently of practice, must be endured in the numerous difficulties of Religion, by them that know the way of Peace: And whether they that will not bear a little, are not prepa∣ring to bear much. And perhaps if the Roman Clergy had not been so much against Priests Marriage, the ex∣perience of their Families, and what differing apprehensions and actions must there be born by Conjugal Love, might have better taught them how far to bear with differing opinions and pra∣ctices in Religion, instead of their un∣christian, inhumane Laws and Practi∣ces, of burning, exterminating, and ruining all such as their Judgments shall Stigmatize as Hereticks. Qu. 4. What are to be taken for sinful needless Studies, which Scholars should a∣void? Ans. 1. There is great cause to put this question, considering how many years are this way lost, and how little it is repented of, and how much is still owned and applauded by men of greatest reputation. The Case may be resolved by the
same Rules before given. 1. All Learn∣ing and Studies which are not worth the cost and labour. 2. All that do but serve that vain desire of Know∣ledge, which first tempted Eve to Sin. 3. Much more all that which is but to serve mens sinful Pride and worldly designs; And it were well with many Students if their Learning (or Science falsly so called, saith Paul) became not more plentiful and dangerous matter of Pride and self-deceit, than fine cloaths and trifles do to Women. 4. All that is worse than vain, which keepeth out greater and necessary things, and turneth the mind from Holiness and Heaven. But the same Knowledge in its pro∣per place, and used in due subordina∣tion to the greatest things, and as a true means to the true end, is good and holy, which otherwise placed and used is doting vanity, and delusory dream∣ing; as too many ungodly Students will find to their cost when it is too late. Therefore a sound Judgement and Holy will, by right intention of the end and true discerning the aptitude of means, must resolve this case, and
most of such cases through all our lives. Happy is he that is wise in things spiritual and of everlasting con∣sequence to God, and to Salvation, though the World should deride him as unlearned or a fool. And woe to him that is honoured for wit and po∣licy, for many Languages and a rolling Tongue, for the prudence of Achitophel, or the Learning of Aristotle, and hath not Wisdom to live to God, to resist temptation, to escape damning sin, and to save his Soul: It will do him no more good in Hell, that he was cry∣ed up for a Learned, or Wise or Re∣verend man on earth, than it will do to Dives, (Luk. 16.) that he was cloath-in Purple and Silk, and fared sump∣tuously every day, and had his Porti∣on and good things where Lazarus had Sorrow and Contempt. More than one of the most famous Schollars, have at last cryed out, that All Learning is Vanity, save the Knowledge of God in Christ, our duties, and our spiritual and endless benefits and hopes. I have told you of many evils that come by the preference of unnecessary or
less necessary things, but one remain∣eth to be noted, which the Text ex∣presseth in Martha's instance: while she is over-careful and troubled about ma∣ny things, which were then less neces∣sary, she thinks her Sister should have been of the same mind, and done as she did, and grudgeth at her and accuseth her to Christ, as if Mary's work had been less necessary than hers: which sheweth us, Observ. That they that choose unneces∣sary or less necessary employments, are apt to account Religious exercises less necessary, and to censure those that choose them. The wrong censuring of Mary's choice and work, was as much of Martha's fault as her own worst choice and needless trouble. Those that sin against Knowledge, and confess that they do ill, are often desirous that their Children and Friends should do better: But they that think their Sin is their Duty, will censure those that sin not with them, as if it were Sin to fear Sin and avoid it. And no wonder: For, 1. That which is true to one, is
true to another; and that which is best to one, as a common duty, is best to another: and it is natural to us to desire that our Friends should know what we know, and choose that common good which we choose, and avoid the errour, Sin and Misery which we avoid: Our Love to Truth and goodness will make us desire that they may be common: And our Love to our Friends will make us desire that they may be happy by choo∣sing what is best: And the Love of our selves maketh men desire that o∣thers may be of their Mind and way: As God first loveth himself, and next that which is most like himself, so na∣turally doth a selfish man: Though a holy man as such first loveth God, and then that which is likest God; yet when he erreth, he thinketh that to be like God which is not. And then even the Love of God also will be abused to the promoting of errour, and the an∣gry censuring of Truth and Duty. No doubt but Martha's Love to Christ himself was abused by her errour, to censure her Sister that did not serve him in the way that she thought then most necessary.
2. And when several things are con∣trary or inconsistent, the over valuing of the one, must needs cause the under∣valuing and rejecting of the other; the weighing down of one end of the bal∣lance will lift up the other: As all men that are earthly minded are so much the less spiritual and heavenly, and he that loveth the world hath the less love to God, so they that over-value unneces∣sary things, will naturally grow into a greater disesteem of things truly neces∣sary; contrary things cannot be both at once preferred (in the same respect) when unnecessary things seem necessary, inconsistent necessary things will seem un∣necessary. All this we see verified constantly in our experience, in mens judging both for themselves and others. 1. Mark any that grow more in loving and caring for Ʋnnecessary, Worldly, Flesh∣ly things, and you shall find that they grow more indifferent to Prayer, and to all holy exercises that employ the mind; a little of this will serve their turns: Mark them that over-mind their Ornaments, their Conveniencies, their Ap∣petites or their Worldly gain, and you
shall see how heartless and dead they grow towards God, and Holiness, and Heaven; when shadows seem substances, the substance goeth but for a shadow: A little of God will serve them, when a little of the World will not serve them; and spiritual things lose all their sweetness, when fleshly Pleasures and Hopes grow too sweet. 2. And you shall see that such Per∣sons do judge accordingly of others: Their love of Vanity maketh serious Religion seem a vanity to them: When they are over eager for the Flesh or World, they judge Gods Servants to be over earnest in Religion; when we wonder what they can find in an emp∣ty world to take up all their thoughts and hearts, their talk, labour and time, they wonder what we find in Religion to take up ours; as we say to them, what needs all this adoe for Vanity? cannot you have Food and a Grave without this over-much care and trou∣ble? so they say to us, [What needs all this adoe in Religion, cannot a man be saved without so much violence and stir? is God so ill natured that no less will please him? Thus God must be thought to be like
them, Psal. 50. and to leave his holiness when they leave theirs, (or never had it) and to grow indifferent and reconcileable to sin when once they love it. And when serious Godliness is thus rejected by themselves, it first seemeth in others to be but a needless honest Su∣perstition, the effect of a weak Judgment, and a timerous and trembling heart; and afterward they grow on to call it foolishness, and entitle it as Christ did Martha's Case, A care and trouble about many unnecessary things: And from thence many grow to think it evil; and from thence to think it the most insufferable evil, and to take serious Conscience of our du∣ty to God to be the greatest rebel against Kings, and the greatest troubler of the Land, the greatest Schismatick, and the most dangerous Enemy, and most intol∣lerable Plague; and so they proceed to hellish malignity and cruel Persecution: This is the natural Progress of over-va∣luing and over-minding needless things. 3. And alas, not only the history of thirteen hundred years, but the notice of our own age hath told us, that even in the Churches the same Cause hath produced the same Effect, when many
needless and troublesome things are over∣valued and thought necessary; Mary is accused, and her hearing so much Preach∣ing, is taken for the effect of Idleness or itching Ears: In the Church of Rome where things first called indifferent have been preferred, true Knowledge, explicite Faith, spiritual Worship, and a holy Life, are taken to be necessary only to some few Votaries, or Saints that are to be Canonized as wonders, and not to all that will be saved; and a mass of Ce∣remonies hath shut out mostly serious Preaching, Praying and Holy Living; their Tree beareth sometimes only Leaves, and at other times the Pricks of Thorns and Thistles. Images pre∣tended to be for the honour of depart∣ed Saints, are cherished where Saints and sanctity are hated; as their Fore∣fathers the Pharisees, Mat. 23. They build the Sepulchers of the Prophets and righte∣ous men, and condemn those that mur∣thered them, and keep holy-dayes in ho∣nour of them, and go on implacably to kill those that imitate them, and to do as their Forefathers did that Persecuted them. Ceremony is become the Substance of too many mens Religion, and an
Image and Shadow of Faith and Godli∣ness, Justice and Charity hath taken place of Life and Substance. Too ma∣ny Churches are filled with Statues and Carkasses instead of real Saints: The Shell which is but to keep the Kernel, is valued in its stead, and the Kernel cast away instead of the Shell. The Letter which is for the signification of the sence, is first taken up as enough without it, and then turned as an enemy against it; and the oft repeated names of Jesus, and Mary, and Saints are used, first instead of holy love to Jesus and Saints, and then to cherish a malignant murderous hatred of them that are Saints indeed within their reach. It was St. Dominick and such other of their holy men, that promoted the murder of real Saints, even of many thousands, if not hundred thousands; Do but call them Hereticks, Waldenses, Albigenses, Lutherans, Zuinglians, Calvi∣nists, Hugonots, Bigots, Lollards, Whigs, Puritans, and then Conscience is as loose and free to hate, revile, imprison, si∣lence or murder them, as if they were so many Robbers or Rebels, or as bad as their Accusers and Persecutors feign
them. Paul doth foretell that in the last daies some shall be haters of those that are good, and , Devils, which we trans∣late false Accusers, and yet have a form of Godliness, while they deny the Pow∣er. Diabolism begins in false Accusation, and proceedeth to the cruelest Persecuti∣on; what on earth can be liker a Devil, than first to Print such horrid lies of the Servants of Christ, as they have done of Luther, Zuinglius, Bucer, Calvin, Beza, and the reformed Churches, and then to torture and burn such as Hereticks, and to make it a Law and part of their Re∣ligion to compell Princes to do the like in all generations to come, and even to burn the Bones of the Dead, as they did by Bucer, Phagius and Wickliff; yea, to murder them by thousands, as in France, and by hundred thousands, as in Ireland; and all this began with the overvaluing unnecessary things, worldly Pomp, and Power, and Wealth, and Pleasure, and Images, Ceremonies and Formalites? What dreadful work was made about lmages, against the East∣ern Emperours! how many Councils of Bishops were the Authors of Schism and Rebellion for them! and at last
for them did the Pope rebelliously cast off his Sovereign, and cut off the We∣stern Empire from him, and give it (as if it had been his own) to the French: To this day, do but speak a∣gainst their deified Wafer, or their Mass of Ceremonies, or their adoring Ima∣ges, or their false Doctrine, or their Papal or Prelatical Tyranny and Usur∣pation, and you presently deserve to be painted with the Picture of Devils, and after the torment of the Inquisi∣tion to be Cursed from Christ, and Burned to Ashes; and all this as for Christ, the Church and Faith. And the German Interim told the World whither the overvaluing of things called Indifferent doth tend, when the Church∣es were deserted, the Ministers silenced and persecuted, and sadly divided among themselves, and the Reformation almost overthrown; and all because the Pastors refused to conform to a Book compiled by the Emperour's Command, by a few self-conceited Bishops, pretending to be moderate Reconcilers, obtruding divers of the Romish Formalities as the means of the Peace and Concord of the Churches. It would grieve ones Heart to read what
Confusions this imposed Book, called the Interim, did cause. But alas, they are not the only Instan∣ces of the calamitous Effects of the over∣valuing and obtruding unnecessary things. As the Ruines of Troy long told Spectators what a War for one Helena, a beautiful Whore did cost that part of the World, (which became the Subjects of the famous Poems of divers Ages;) even so the Ru∣ines of the Eastern Churches, sometime the most great and famous in the World, and now the Habitation of Owls and Ser∣pents, deluded Mahometans, with some ignorant, sad, oppressed Christians, pro∣claim to all that read, hear, or see them, what are the fruits of striving about unne∣cessary things, even about worldly Pre∣eminence and Wealth; which Patriark should be greatest, and which Bishop should sit highest, and go first, and have his Will, and pass for the most Ortho∣dox, or have most Followers; and a∣bout ambiguous words, who it was that spake wiselyest, and who should make the words of other Mens Creeds and Pro∣fessions; (for the Trade of making Lit∣turgies which whole Nations or Provinces must be confined to, was not set up till
after that of making Creeds:) In a word, Church-Wars; 1. About the Jurisdiction of Prelates; especially, whether Rome or Constantinople should be the Chief; 2. And about hard and doubtful words; 3. And about Images and Ceremonies; have laid East and West in the Condition of Aposta∣sie, Desolation, Shame and Slavery, in which with Amazement we see them at this day. And what are all the religious Wars, Murthers and Cruelties exercised for, by the Papal Party, but that one Prelate and his Confederates may be the Masters of all the Christian World, and may have their Wills in all religious Matters directly, and in all Civil Matters in order to the Religious; and that all their Laws may be obeyed, their Formalities used, and their Words believed? Killing, burning, tormenting, confoun∣ding, seem not too dear to accomplish this. Behold how great a matter a little Fire kindleth! Who would think, that never before saw it, that a little Gun∣powder should blow up Houses, as it doth? And who would have thought that so many Churches, Kingdoms, Lives and Souls should have been blown up, or ruined, as they have been, for the
unnecessary Domination, Wealth, For∣malities and Ceremonies of the Cler∣gy. I have often, too often heard Preach∣ers themselves, instead of a Sermon, pour out Scorns against those that preached and lived more seriously, strictly and holily than themselves: And I have too oft heard the Common Rabble revile them that were most careful and diligent for Salvation, as a company of Precisians, Puritans and Hypocrites: And I have thought with my self; Have these Men found better and greater things to lay out their own Care, Time and Labour for? And alas, I perceived that instead of God, and Christ, and Holiness, and Hea∣ven, they had nothing to take them up, but Vanity and Vexation; their Bellies, and their Purses, and their Walls, and their Titles, and their Pride, and Lust, and selfish Wills; and are these more ne∣cessary than Mary's Choice? Mark what those Persons are saying and doing every day, who think Serious Godliness to be over-doing; and you shall see, that instead of it, some are doing nothing, and some worse than nothing; wasting their short time, deceiving and destroying them∣selves and others.
And indeed it is not possible that any one that is a serious Christian himself, and hath tryed truly a holy Life, should think it needless, or make it a matter of Reproach to others. But we grant, that particular Duties may be misplaced, and Prudence is necessary to know their time, and length, and manner; and it's possible, both that a Mary may sometime here im∣prudently over-do, and that a Martha may by mistake be quarrelsome, and accuse the Innocent, that yet is not against serious Piety it self. Therefore I think meet to annex these two Cauti∣ons to the Hearers in this Case. I. Do not presently take your selves to be truly godly, because some others accuse you of over-doing, or of being religious over-much. Every one is not a Saint that is derided for Sanctity; every one doth not sincerely preach, hear, pray, or practise, that is derided for these things: If you have no better Evidence of Grace, than that some call you Puritans, Precisians, or such like, it will be an insufficient Evidence. 1. Bad Men will deride those that seem holy, though they are not so. 2. And good Men in their faulty weakness, may
misjudge of the Circumstances of your Duty, and unjustly blame you, and yet you may not be sincere in the main. 3. And you may actually mistake in Cir∣cumstances your selves, and deserve the blame that is cast upon you. The Pha∣risees were over-strict for the Sabbath, and in avoiding Publicans and Sinners, and thought Christ too loose: Judas pretendeth more Charity to the Poor than Christ had. That is not rightest which seemeth strictest, but that which is most agreeable to the Law of God. Though some misapply Solomon's words, Eccles. 7. 16. Be not righteous over-much, neither make thy self over-wise; as if it had been written against serious diligent Obedience to God, and true proper Righteousness and Wisdom; yet we must know, that it was written by the Holy Ghost, and not in vain. A Pharisaical Superstitious sort of Religion, and Ob∣servation of vain Traditions, and a zeal∣ous Strictness which God never command∣ed, is a Righteousness equivocally so call∣ed, and it is over-much: Such is much of the Popish Righteousness, and such is the affected Austerity of several Sects, old and new. Touch not, Taste not, Han∣dle
not, are oft a humane counterfeit Righteousness, which God doth neither require, nor accept. As God liketh not a Popish Charity, that killeth or tormenteth Men in love to God and Religion; so nei∣ther doth he like those Superstitious Au∣sterities which destroy our own Bodies, and disable us from chearful Thankful∣ness and Obedience; which maketh So∣lomon say, Why shouldst thou be desolate, (or destroy thy self?) That is good which is fitted to do good. All Grace and Du∣ty is for Edification. II. And as every one is not truly Godly who is derided as Godly by the prophane, or blamed for some super∣stitious strictness, so you must not take every one for malignant or ungodly, who speaketh against such strictness, as either is real superstition, or seemeth so o worse to him. For, 1. If you are guilty of supersti∣tion, it is a friendly office to shew you your mistake: 2. And if you are in the right, and another that is in the wrong misaccuseth you, in many Cases his errour may stand with Love to Truth and Holiness in the main: Every one is not ungodly who misreproach
s with the Anabaptists for Baptizing nfants: Or with the Antinomians as etting up the abrogated Law; and so of many others. As men differ in udgment about Gods Law, they will ccuse each others differing Practice: But opposing Serious Godliness as such, is another thing. And indeed it is usual with malig∣nant enemies of a holy Life, to make themselves a Religion of Formalities, and Imagery and shadows, to quiet their Consciences while they resist the Truth, that it may not seem to be an act of impiety and malignity which they do, but an opposition to the faults of others. But the Use which you should make of this Lesson, is this: Take heed lest you be tempted to an over-valuing of any unnecessary or less needful things, whether it be Wealth, and Honour and Fleshly Interest; or else any formali∣ties, or things indifferent about Reli∣gion, lest before you are aware (as Imagery stole away the Hearts of the old Idolaters from God, so) these should secretly consume your holy zeal, and turn your Hearts from the Life
and serious exercise of Religion, and worshipping God in Spirit and Truth; and afterwards draw you to condemn that zeal and diligence in others which you want your selves. We have Bo∣dies as well as Souls, and must have a just regard to bodily necessaries; and a care that our Bodies do their duty: But let the Body and it's Interest keep their place: Remember how far it is below the Soul, and use it, and all it's interests accordingly. The least things that are good are not to be de∣spised: But alas what work is made by preferring little things! The Traditions of their Fathers, their Tithing Mint and Annise, their Washings, their building the Sepulchers of the Prophets, their Domina∣tion, Pomp and Ceremonies, did pass with the Pharisees instead of the great things of the Law, and Sacrifice went before Mercy, Truth and Judgment; yea and became a Cloak for devour∣ing Widows houses, and for Persecu∣ting and Silencing the Preachers of the Gospel, and for Slandering and Murdering Christ himself. What Ruins this hath made in Souls, Churches and Kingdoms, I have
already told you: Know therefore wherein Gods Kingdom doth consist, Rom. 14. 17, 18. And what and whom God bindeth you to approve, and learn what this meaneth, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, that you may not de∣ceive your selves or condemn the guiltless. Even Martha will murmur at her dear Sister and accuse her, if she be her self but tainted with this ill disease. But whose part doth Christ take, and which of them doth he justi∣fie? The Defendant Mary, and that 1. With a Compassionate reproof of Mar∣tha, 2. With the Reason of Mary's Justification, 3. And with a Sentence of Blessing added to her defence: Whence we learn, Doct. 2. That when wiser Christians and their better Choice and work, are ac∣cused by them that preferred less needful things, Christ will be the Advocate and Judge, and will defend and justifie the wrongfully accused. He will in this Case take the accused's part.
Martha accuseth her Sister to Christ, she expecteth that he should blame her as neglecting her duty, and leaving all the trouble and care on Martha: But Christ doth not answer her Ex∣pectation, but justifieth the Wise and Innocent. Reas. 1. For it is his Office to be both the Advocate and the Judge: And he will do it in perfection, without er∣rour or injustice. He well knoweth who is in the right, and none can deceive him by false Accusations or false Witnesses. 2. He is so nearly related and deep∣ly obliged to defend the Innocent or Just, that he will never fail them. They are his Members, and his Love engageth him: He spared not his Life and Blood for them, and will he not speak for them? They are his purchase, and interest, his peculiar redeemed ones, and will he forsake his Interest, and his Own? 3. Indeed in plain Justice he is bound to justifie them against such injurious Accusations: For it is he that command∣eth
them to do what they are accused of: It is for obeying him: If it were a fault, it would be his that bid them do it. Nay how much hath he done to bring his Servants to that Holy Choice and Faithful Duty, which in the world they are commonly accused for! Alas we were not forward to it of our selves. It was not we that made the Law, which so strictly forbiddeth Sin, and commandeth Duty: The Bible is not of our making: It is not we that made the Law, to Love God with all our Heart, and Soul, and might, and our Neighbour as our selves; not to take his Name in Vain, to worship God in Spirit and in Truth, &c. And it was a high∣er cause than our own power, which taught us and inclined our Hearts to obey these: Many a Message did Christ send us, by his Bible, Ministers and Spirit, before we were heartily drawn to yield: Many a daies Patience did he use, and many a threatning to drive us to it, and many a Mercy and Pro∣mise to draw us, and many a Book and Teacher to Instruct us, yea and many an Affliction to Correct us; And will he not justifie us for that which
he so earnestly commandeth us, and with so much ado doth bring us to o∣bey? Did he come into the world, and live and dye, to save his People from their Sins, and purifie to himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works, (Tit. 2. 14.) and will he forsake them when they are accused for obeying him? Where shall we meet with a man of any common honesty, that would do thus by his poorest Servant? And shall not the Judge of all the Earth do righteously. For our parts, if we are accused for Serious Piety, or any duty which Christ commandeth us, it is his command that was our reason and obligation, and which we have to alledge for our defence. If that have not Authority and Truth enough to justifie us, we have no o∣ther Justification. Indeed Christ should forsake himself if he thus deserted us: He should take the blame upon his own Laws, yea and on all the works of his Grace and Spirit, and all that he hath done to bring us to that which the world and our flesh was so much against. 4. He defendeth his Disciples against
the Pharisees Accusations on Earth, and will he afterward forsake them? 5. He hath appointed the great day to judge the World in Righteousness, even the secrets of men, and to bring all things open into the manifesting light, even all Truth and Falshood, and all the hidden works of Dark∣ness: Therefore undoubtedly all Truth, all Righteousness, and all that is of God, shall be fully Justified, and Gods Truth in all, when false Accusers shall be all found Lyars. Ʋse. This being then so plain and sure, I would commend the Considera∣tion of it to several Sorts, and in seve∣ral Instances. I. To the Accusers of the Godly for their Duty to God. II. To the Accused. III. To those that are yet in doubt what Cause to choose. I. The unjust Accusers of Just Men are of divers degrees or sorts. 1. Some there be that only accuse
them in their Thoughts, and take them to be guilty when they are not. 2. Others go further, and too easi∣ly believe false Reports from others; and then think that they are allowed to tell what they have heard, and so to vend such false Reports. And if they can but say, either that it was a great Man, or a Learned Man, or a Minister, or a Reli∣gious Man that said it, they think that their Calumny or Back-biting is no Sin: But much more, if many such report it; and yet more, if they heard none con∣tradict it. 3. Others there be, that because it serveth their Interest or Design, or plea∣seth their malignant Minds, do make it part of their business purposely to car∣ry about such Reports, and perswade as many as they can to believe them, and plead down those that contradict them. 4. Others go further, and are the first Devisers, or the malicious Increasers of the slanderous Reports themselves; not only the Spreaders or Carryers, but the Fathers of the Lies which they send about by others. 5. Yet some go further, and studi∣ously
and maliciously publish them in Pul∣pits, or in Print, to draw the World and Posterity to believe them; yea and this as for God, and as for the Church and Truth; as if it were but the detecting of Heresies or Lies, or dangerous Faults or Practices of others. 6. And yet further, some in most Ages and Countries, in Offices and pla∣ces of Judicature, who should be the Pillars of Justice; do pass false Senten∣ces against the Just, and pronounce them guilty, and persecute and oppress them by their unrighteous Punishments. 7. And yet worse; some slander not only the Persons, but the Cause of Truth, Piety, and Righteousness it self, and make false Laws and Canons, calling good evil, and decreeing the common slandering of the Truth, and the punish∣ing of the Innocent, because they will not break the Laws of God, and please proud mistaking Men before him. To all these Sorts of Accusers of the Just, I would give (would they hear me) this following Advice. 1. I advise you to stay, and think well of the matter; and be sure that you have throughly tryed it, before
you venture to pass your Judgment. It is not so small a matter as you think to wrong the Just, and say, I was mis∣taken. And especially will you be first sure what side Christ will take, and whether he will be of the Accuser's mind. And Christ hath so fully told us his mind already in his Word, that we may certainly foreknow what Judgment he will pass. 1. Do you accuse Men for pretending to the Spirit, and to be holy? Why Christ hath said, that, Except a man be born of Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter in∣to the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3. 6. And, Without Holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. And, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Rom. 8. 9. 2. Do you accuse godly Men for Sin∣gularity, and for differing from others in their Religious Diligence and Zeal? If they differ from the Common Faith of Chri∣stians, or single themselves from the Communion of Saints, or from the Love and Concord of Believers; Christ will not justifie them in this: For he hath said; A man that is an Heretick after the first and second Admonition, avoid, Tit. 3.
10. And, By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another, Joh. 13. 34, 35. And, Mark those that cause Divisions and offences contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, Rom. 16. 17. But if it be differing from Unbeliev∣ers, or ungodly Men, or formal Hypo∣crites, by a holy Resolution to live whol∣ly to God, and obey his Laws, whoe∣ver be against it; if this be the Singu∣larity you mean, Christ is engaged to bear them out: For it is he that hath commanded this, and said; Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you, Joh. 15. 14. If ye keep my Command∣ments, ye shall abide in my Love, v. 10. Except your Righteousness exceed the Righ∣teousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 20. Mat. 5. 47. What do you more than others? He purifieth to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. Lot differed from So∣dom, and Noah differed from all the old World. The wise differ from the foolish, and the righteous from the wic∣ked; or else there would not be here∣after so great a difference as of Heaven
and Hell. What is a Physician good for, if he make not his Patients to differ from the sick? And what came Christ to do, or how is he a Saviour, if he make not his Disciples differ from the ungod∣ly World? Even a Philosopher would not set up a School, but to make his Scholars to differ from the unlearned. 3. Is it for so much Preaching and Hearing, that you accuse Men? It is possible indeed to do a Duty unseasona∣bly, and to over-do in one thing, when it causeth the Omission of other Duties. But certainly Christ that so strictly com∣mandeth his Ministers to Preach, and as they love him, to feed his Flock, will justifie them for so doing. How shall they believe without a Preacher? and how shall they preach unless they are sent? Rom. 10. And he that said, He that heareth you, heareth me, and that here justifieth Ma∣ry's Hearing, will justifie all others in the like cse: For he hath bid us (by Solomon) to get Wisdom as the principal thing, Prov. 4. 5, 7. To incline the Ear, and apply the Heart  it; to cry after Knoledge, and lif up the voice for Ʋn∣derstanding;  as Silver, and search for hr  for hidden Treasure.
Prov. 22. 3, 4. Hear Instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not. Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the Posts of my Doors. For who∣so findeth me findeth Life, and shall obtain favour of the Lord; Prov. 8. 33, 34, 35, 36. 4. Is it for much Praying that you accuse Men? Why Christ bid his Dis∣ciples Pray alwayes, and not faint, Luk. 18. 1, 2. And, Pray continually, 1 Thes. 5. 17. 5. Is it for so much a-do in their Families, in the Religious Education of their Children, and reading the Scrip∣tures, that you accuse men? Why it is God that hath said, Deut. 6. 7, 8, 9, 10. and Deut. 11. 18, 19, 20. These Words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy Heart, and thou shalt teach them diligently to thy Children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy House, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou lyest down, and when thou risest up, &c. An Angel was sent from Heaven unto Cornelius when he was fasting and praying in his House, to signifie Gods ac∣ceptance, and tell him further how to be saved. Daniel would rather be cast to
Lyons, than forbear Praying in his House for certain dayes, when the King and Laws forbad him. You may easi∣ly know then which side Christ will take. 6. Is it for scrupling things which others scruple not, and taking that for sin, which others say is none, and so not doing as others do, that you accuse Men? If they mistake, and think that to be Sin which is not; Christ will justifie their desire to please him, and their fear of sinning, but he will not justi∣fie their mistake. But if it be Sin indeed, whatever Men call it, he will justifie our avoiding and abhorring it. He that dy∣ed for Sin, would not have us love it, nor run into the consuming fire from which he came to save us: It is a fear∣ful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. The Accuser may call it Folly, and precise Scrupulosity; But God saith to Man; Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding, Job 28. 28. If we sin with others, we must suffer with them. 7. But perhaps it is for not keeping their Faith and Religion to themselves, but making so much a-do to propa∣gate
them, that you accuse Men. Indeed Paul, speaking of the know∣ledge and belief of the Lawfulness of law∣ful unnecessary things, saith, Hast thou Faith? have it to thy self before God; Rom. 14. 21. That is, enjoy thy own Knowledge and Liberty, but use it not so as to tempt and ruine others. But surely it is Christ that hath said; Ye are the Lights of the World, that must not be put under a Bushel, Mat. 5. And, He that gathereth not with us, scattereth abroad, Mat. 12. 30. And, Whoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father, &c. Mat. 10. 32. And, With the Heart Man believeth unto Righ∣teousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation, Rom. 10. 10. We must love our Neighbours as our selves, and therefore desire and seek their Sal∣vation: He that seeth his Brother have need, (for his Body) and shutteth up the Bowels of his Compassion from him; how dwelleth the Love of God in him? much less if he have no pity for Souls. While we have opportunity, we must do good to all men, Gal. 6. 10. The slothful Ser∣vant that hid his Talent, is condemned to utter darkness, Mat. 25. What do
we in the World but to receive good, and do good? And how little Goodness is in that which tendeth not to men's Salvation? What are we made, redeem∣ed, and preserved for, but to serve God, and seek the good of our selves and others? You accuse not men for giving Money to the poor and needy; and is not Holiness much better? If Money be better than Grace, not only Simon Ma∣gus was excusable, but Caesar might be a greater Benefactor than Christ. Do you believe a Heaven, and do you ac∣cuse men for seeking to help men to at∣tain it. Unthankful miserable Sinners, that accuse men for endeavouring to save them from Sin and endless Misery! were they drowning, they would not accuse men for labouring to save their Lives. None but mad men strive against those that would heal or help them: But it is here no wonder, when the Saviour of the World was as madly and unthank∣fully used by such Sinners: How can we expect that he will accept our help, who despiseth or refuseth Gods? 8. But perhaps it is their Zeal and Earnestness in Religion that you accuse; and think that they should be, as you
call it, more moderate; that is, indif∣ferent and cold. Indeed imprudent passionate Rashness, and erroneous Zeal, and factious Vio∣lence, which is more for Self-Interest and Self-Conceit, than for the Truth and Cause of Christ, is a thing which he will never justifie: If James and John have such a feaverish Zeal, he will tell them, You know not what manner of Spi∣rit ye are of: Where an envious, stri∣ving, masterly Zeal is, he tells them it is not from above, but the wisdom which it pretendeth to is earthly, sen∣sual and devilish, tending to Confusion and every evil work. Christ is no Pa∣tron of Popish, Tyrannical, Persecuting, Destroying, Hurtful Zeal; but sure∣ly he will justifie the Zeal of Love, and of good Works: Not zealous slandering, railing, and false cen∣suring; but zealous Preaching, Pray∣ing, and Praising God, and a zeal∣ous Diligence in all that he command∣eth, and a zealous care to mortifie fleshly Lusts, and avoid Sin, and escape Damnation, and to glorifie God. It is a base Contempt, and dishonouring of God, and Christ, and Holiness, and Hea∣ven;
to think or speak of them, or seek them, with a cold indifferency, as if they were but common needless things! How eagerly do worldlings seek the world, and proud men strive to climb in∣to some Honour, before they fall into the Grave and Hell! How violently do many earthly Rulers strive to enlarge their Dominions and have their Wills, though by the ruine of Countreys, and the blood of many thousand Innocents! How hot are all these worldly men, (even Popes and Prelates, that say they be∣lieve a better World) against all how wise and holy soever, that are against their worldly Interest! How fervently did they cry against Christ himself, Away with him, Crucifie him! How fu∣riously did they gnash their Teeth at Ste∣phen, and stone him! and cryed out a∣gainst Paul, Away with such a fellow from the Earth, it is not sit that he should live! The Devil is earnest to de∣stroy us: The zeal of Infidels, Papists and Church-Tyrants is burning hot, and no reason, no worth or innocen∣cy of the just, will serve to quench it. And is it only Gods service and our
Salvation, that must be coldly mana∣ged and sought? Is it only that which we are born for, and live for, that must be thrust behind the door, or done as if we did it not? Is it Heaven and Hell that must be jested with? and Souls that must be ventured for a lit∣tle wealth or lust, or our endless hope cast away for nothing? Idols that have eyes and see not, deserve no better ser∣vice than the Hypocrites imagery, and stage Religion: But do you think the God of Love and Glory can be loved, honoured or obeyed too much? None but the Atheistical fool can think so! How quickly, how certainly will you all wish, that God and your Salvati∣on had been loved and sought with all your Hearts, and Strength, and Time, and that he that is All had had your All, and that you had been as Holy as the holyest of Men! O Hypo∣crites, that daily pray that Gods Name may be hallowed, his Kingdom come, and his will done on Earth as it is done in Heaven; and yet accuse those as doing too much, that alas fall far short of the lowest of all the heavenly inhabi∣tants!
9. But perhaps they are accused for not serving God just as men command them, and not being of the Religion of those that are uppermost. This hath indeed been the common accusation. But 1. God is uppermost, and will be: Therefore they are re∣solved to be as near as they can of his mind that is uppermost, and will prevail. 2. Christ went against the Rulers of his time: and commanded his Apo∣stles so to do, and so did they, and so did the Church for three hundred years, and in much of the World ever since. 3. Must we have as many Religions as Princes have? And must we change our Religion as oft as we change our Countrey? Must a man be a Heathen under Heathens, and a Mahometan un∣der Turks and Persians? and a Papist under Papists, and a Socinian under So∣cinians? and so on. If not, how shall we know which Princes Religion it is that we must be of, and which we must refuse, but by the Word of God, which we must ourselves discern, (using the best helps of Teachers that
we can get?) We thank God that we have Rulers that so far own Truth and Righteousness as they do; but even the Apostle, saith, They were not Lords, nor had Dominion over their Faith, but were their Helpers, 2 Cor. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. As Stewards of the mysteries of God. 4. Why do you honour the Martyrs, and keep Holy-daies in remembrance of their sufferings, who dyed rather than they would obey man against God, if you think we must alwaies be of the Rulers Religion? Did the three Witnesses so? Dan. 3. or Daniel himself? c. 6. The com∣mon case is much like Daniels, Dan. 6. 5. [We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the Law of his God]; Which they did, for Praying when the Law forbad him. They could find no fault with Christ and his Apostles, but for not observing their Traditions, and for worshipping God contrary to the Law, and doing contrary to the decrees of Caesar, Act. 18. 13. & 17. 5. Mat. 15. Gods Law is perfect: Mens are not so: Though we cannot our selves at∣tain perfection in understanding or pra∣ctice,
yet we will choose and set before us a perfect Rule, even the perfect Law of the perfect Ruler of the World. If we must be all of the Princes or States Religion, where one Countrey hath the true Religion, many will have a false one: And when we are right in one point, we may be wrong in ano∣ther, our Copy being so. 10. But perhaps it is Errour, Sin, Se∣dition, Sects, Schism, Scandal, that you accuse Men of: If that be it, if you do it truly, and do not slander them; certainly Christ will not justifie them in these. 1. If you accuse them falsly, he will justifie them. 2. If they have sinned, and truly believe, and repent, and amend, he will pardon them through his meritorious Righteousness and Sacrifice, and will make them and pronounce them just. 3. And he will justifie in them all that is his own and good, notwithstanding their pardonable Infirmities, and will not make their faults greater than they are, but will see the willingness of the Spirit when the Flesh is weak. If malig∣nant Men will see the Mote of a Cere∣monious
Errour or frailty in their Brothers eye, and call it a Beam, because a Beam is in their own; Christ will not joyn with them in their Malignity and Injustice, but will bid him cast the first Stone that is without Sin; Joh. 8. 7. 4. And yet he will not justifie the least sinful Thought, or Word, or Deed, nor the least faulty imperfection in their Faith, Love or Obedience: For no man hateth any of these so much as Christ doth, in whomsoever they are found. Do you cry out against Errour, Sedition, Rebellion, Disobedi∣ence, Schism, Divisions? So doth Christ, and so do all his true Disciples: We all agree with you in this. But if the Question be either, Who they are that are herein guilty? or, In whom any Sin is reigning, wilful and unpardoned? here see that you go not beyond proof: For Christ will not own the Condemners of the Just, nor confirm any mans un∣righteous and malicious Censure. 2. And as I advise you before you accuse any, to know whether Christ
be of your mind, and will be against them, or will take their parts; so next I advise you, as you love your selves, to think well how great a Sin malignant and false accusing is. 1. It sheweth much of the Devil in your Hearts, whether you see it or not, it is no better: He is malicious, a Mur∣derer, a Lyar, and the Accuser of the Just, and Slanderers are called by his Name, , as aforesaid. 2. If it be for Christ's Cause, for Truth or Righteousness, or done in Ma∣lice, against Godliness or Faith, Christ taketh it all as done against himself, Mat. 25. For it is not only against his Servants, but also for their obeying and serving him: It is he that command∣ed them, as is aforesaid. 3. You set your self against the Office also of Christ; He is the Advocate of his Servants, He hath undertaken their Defence, and do you think to over∣come him? it is he that justifieth us, (for all that Faith, and Zeal, and Ho∣liness, for which we are accused and persecuted by the world) and who then shall condemn us? It is he that is for us, who then is he that will be
against us? shall we not be more than Conquerors through him whose power hath conquered for us, and whose vi∣ctorious Love will not forsake us? Rom. 8. 34, &c. Remember in what a manner he said, Act. 9. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against the Pricks: And to him that offendeth one of those little despised ones that believe in him, that it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the Sea. And it is not only to the gross Per∣secuting Accusers of the just that I give this Advice, but I beseech you all to take heed of any rash Accusing of the Just; for the wrong is most to God himself, and the hurt to you, and Christ will be against you. 1. Some there are, that when they have by Ignorance, or a stretching Con∣science, for worldly interest consented to some sinful practices, are led by that same unhappy interest, to justifie first what they do themselves, and then to accuse all those as Erroneous, Pre∣cise, or Schismatical, that are against their choice and practice: Most men
that live in sin for interest, do think that they must be secured from the accusations of Conscience, and the dis∣grace of sinning, by justifying their sin, and accusing those as the sinners that are against it, and dare not sin as much as they; but how sad a defence will this prove at last, which so much add∣eth to their Crime! 2. There are some on the contrary, that in ignorance having taken a Duty or a lawful Practice for a Sin, (as Bap∣tizing Infants, Singing David's Psalms, Praying constantly in Families, Observ∣ing the Lords day, Praying oft in the same words, Communicating with some faulty Churches, or such as these men condemn, and such like) they hereup∣on become the rash and false accusers of those that be not as erroneous as themselves; thus did the Pharisees by Christ and his Apostles; thus did the Jewish Teachers, Act. 15. that said, Except ye be Circumcised and keep the Law of Moses, ye cannot be saved: Thus did the Jewish Christians against Peter, Act. 11. 23. They contended with him, saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and didst eat with them: And after his mi∣raculous
Conviction by this censori∣ousness, they drew him to that Separa∣tion which Paul doth blame him for, Gal. 2. 12, 13, 14. and Barnabas and o∣thers dissembled with him, for fear of the censures of these erroneous men; for it is not the least mischievous effect of these false Accusations and Censures, that they frighten many weak Christi∣ans from duty and into sin, while they hear that this or that is no duty, or is some heinous sin, and have not the un∣derstanding to try and judge, they are carryed away with the name and noise; and some such as Peter and Barnabas walk not uprightly, but step out of the way for fear of displeasing them, or being accused by them as others are; and it is not a little shame, guilt and suffering that this course hath brought upon the Ministers themselves. 3. And there are some that here more hainously offend, Familists, Rant∣ers, Seekers, Quakers, and too many more; that while they are guilty them∣selves of lamentable errours, fear not to accuse almost all the Churches of Christ on earth, as if they were not his Churches at all, and had no true
Religion, Ministry, Ordinances, and were not to be communicated with. The Pa∣pists that burn men as Hereticks for the Truth, I think accuse not so ma∣ny of Christs Ministers and Church∣es, nor so deeply as some of these Sects do; yea and father this malignity on the Spirit of God: But Christ will de∣fend and justifie his Churches against all these false Accusers. O litle do either Papists or any o∣ther Sectaries know how hainous a crime Christ will take it, to accuse the greatest part of Christians on earth, as being Hereticks, Schismaticks, or no true Churches, or having no true Re∣ligion, or part in Christ or in his Spi∣rit; and for a worldly Faction on one side, or a sick-brained, self-conceited Sect on the other side to appropriate the title of the Church or Saints to themselves alone, and say to most of the Members of Christ, You are none of his! If to accuse falsly one man when his estate only is concerned in it, and that before a single Judicature, be so great a Crime as Scripture maketh it, what is it openly before God and the World, rashly or falsly to accuse whole
Churches and Countreys of Christians, yea the faithfullest of Christs Ministers, with bitter scorns, as many of the a∣foresaid Sectaries do; yea, almost all the Church of Christ, in this and al∣most all former ages! For my part, (though some censure me for it) I am afraid of too bold Censuring even of Pa∣pists, or of honest Heathens, such as were Antonine, Cicero, and such others that never heard the Gospel of Christ. II. My next advice is to those that are thus accused by others, about Reli∣gion, or of Sin. 1. Do not presently justifie your selves, because you love not to be blamed; rash self-justifying may be more hurtful to you, than other mens rash accusing you. Errour and sin is not so rare a thing, even among good men, that it should be taken for hard measure to be judged erroneous; or sinners; Who knoweth his secret faults? Psal. 19. We must daily Pray, Forgive us our Trespasses! Little do most know how great a number of falshoods
are received into the minds of most good Christians in the world, yea of the best, much more of the more ig∣norant sort; and therefore we have great cause to be still cauteiously suspi∣cious of our selves; and it is a mer∣cy to have notice of our sins and er∣rours, from whomsoever, Friends or Foes. Trie therefore, lest it should prove an errour or sin that you are accused of; confess it not to be such, because another calleth it such; but yet let him know that you are willing of his help for your information and Conviction. It is supposed that none of us love errour as errour, or sin as sin, or any evil as such; it is no evil that is the object of a sinners will and choice, but a misplaced good, even a lesser good set a∣gainst or instead of a greater; (as the Creature instead of the Creator, and Corporal instead of Spiritual, &c.) We do not love and will malum, sed male, not evil, but evilly: It is not the thing loved that is evil it self, but the act of Loving it, (or doing it:) The Fruit that Adam did eat was not evil, but eating it was; Meat, Drink, Pleasure∣able
Objects, Beauty, Money, Lands, Honours, are all good, but the inor∣dinate Love and Use of them is the evil. Our nature therefore giveth this ad∣vantage to our Monitors; we would all be delivered from evil as evil, and there∣fore thankfully accept their help. Humanum est errare; how little doth that man know himself, or what man is, who taketh it for an injury to be supposed to have Errours: But to de∣ny necessary saving Verities, or to be un∣willing to see our Errors by finding out the Truth, or proudly to defend them, because we have once owned them, and to be rash and confident propaga∣tors of such errors, and to rage against wiser men that are against our folly, and ignorantly to cry them down as ignorant, and to charge all this on the Spirit of God, this is an unchristian and inhumane sort of erring. Try therefore with a due suspicion of your selves, left your accusation should be true, and you be found in the mi∣stake. The same I say when you are accu∣sed of any Sin: Alas, Sin is not so rare
a thing with any of us, but that we may well fear and try the case, lest we should be guilty. 2. My next Advice is, Take heed lest you go about to interess Christ in any of your Sins or Errours, or lest you expect that he should justifie them. It is a great∣er Sin which many erring men are guilty of in this kind, than is com∣monly perceived. It is well that men would do that which God owneth if they knew it; but it is dangerous to say, that he owneth what he abhorreth: To father Falshood on the God of Truth, and Sin on the God of Holiness, is a fearful Crime. God that would not en∣dure false Fire, Lev. 10. or to be wor∣shipped like an Idol, no nor to have ho∣ly things prophaned, will much less en∣dure to be made the Father of Lies and Wickedness. 1. Consider, that this is to set him a∣gainst himself who is the God of Truth and Holiness. 2. This is to use his Name against his Word, which is the Word of Truth and Holiness. 3. This is to put him in the place of Satan, and to father on him the De∣vils
works, who is a Lyar, and the Fa∣ther of it. 4. This is it which the false Prophets are so heavily threatned for in Scrip∣ture. 5. This is to fight against God's King∣dom, and the Grace of Christ, and the work of the Spirit in his own Name. 6. This is the direct Breach of the third Commandment, Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: A Lie, and Vanity oft signifie the same thing in Scripture. This Sin is of the nature of Perjury, which is appealing to God, as owning and approving a Falshood; and do not they so that falsly say, God saith this, and that, and the other thing in the Scripture, and by his Spirit in me, which he never said, yea, which no one so much abhorreth as he; and will you father on God that one thing which he hateth? God tells you that he will not hold him guiltless (that is, he will notably condemn and punish such) as thus prophanely and audaci∣ously take his Name in vain, or use it to patronize a Lie. I am often near trembling, to hear some of our Tremblers, yea and some
others, abuse abundance of plain Texts of Scripture, and expound them with palpable falshood, and deny the Arti∣cles of the Christian Faith, about Christs Person, his Intercession, his Coming a∣gain, his Laws, his Kingdom, his Judg∣ment, and pouring out many heathen∣ish and gross Errours, and fathering all this with raging Confidence on God himself, and saying, I am sure this is true; the Spirit infallibly tells me so; God speaketh it in me; I no more doubt of it, than whether I live; He that doubteth is damned; the light within me assureth me that this is true, and the meaning of the Scripture. O patient God! O sinful Man! O subtle Serpent! O dark un∣happy World! O pitiful Professors of Faith, that will be changed or shaken by such hai∣nous Sin, as if they heard an Oracle of God. Our God is Love, and yet he is a Consuming Fire: Take heed what you say of him, and what you father on him: If Pride, Blindness and Deceit do car∣ry you to blaspheme him, your Con∣fidence will not make Christ justifie it.
3. But I further advise you: If in∣deed it be Truth and Duty which men accuse you for, even such as Christ in the sacred Scriptures did prescribe, doubt not but he will justifie you against all Accusers; and let this satisfie you however you are slandered, against all. As, if your Sins were few and small, there would be less use of a Saviour to forgive them; so, if your Slanders by malignant Lyars be few and small, you will have the less use for Christ to justifie you. If it be, All men that revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsly (or lying) for Christ's sake; Blessed are ye, saith Christ, Mat. 5. 11. And if you believe him, you may rejoyce and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven; and so persecuted they the Pro∣phets before you. How many things are here to be observed? It is supposed to be Lyes that are reported of you; and this not of one sort only, but all man∣ner of Evil; as if you were impious against God, uncharitable and unjust towards men, Hereticks against Truth, Schismaticks against Unity, Rebells and
disobedient against Authority, and all the rest: And of all these have the Just been ordinarily accused; and this is not by some one exasperated Person in a Corner, whom few believe, but by all men, that is the common voice of de∣luded Adversaries; and it is not only belying, but reviling, yea and persecuting; yet must you not only be patient, but joyful and exceeding glad, because it is for Christ, and he will justifie you, and give you a great Reward in Heaven. Here is a noble work for Faith, to learn and practise this Lesson of Cross-bear∣ing, Hope and Joy. The Judge is at the Door, who seeth us, and all our Case, and is more concerned in it than we are: Be not too hasty for a full Vindication! Cannot you stay till the Assizes? Were it not that Slanderers hurt others and them∣selves, how small a matter were their thoughts and words to you? Will a ma∣lignant thought of a dying worm de∣ject you from any real Honour or Fe∣licity? Is it in the power of a lying Tongue, or of many, how high, or how credible soever esteemed, to deprive you of your Innocency, or the approbati∣on of God, or your Adoption, or Christs
Justification, or your everlasting Glo∣ry and Reward? Do you trust Christ for your Souls, and cannot you trust him with your Names? Is God your God, and is not his Approbation enough for you? Is Man nothing to you, who is posting to Dust and Judgment, and yet cannot you bear his lying words or thoughts? How will you bear the Cross of Martyrdom, which is to die for well-doing, under the reputation of Malefa∣ctors, if you cannot bear false words or thoughts? If you say, It is the Truth that is dishonoured through my Dishonour: I answer, 1. God is sufficient to vindicate his Truth: Every slanderous mouth shall soon be stopped, and God will be pro∣ved true, and all men Lyars, Rom. 3. 2. And he hath promised to bring forth your Righteousness as the Light, your Names shall rise as the Morning-Sun, when the most malignant Darkness seem∣ed to bury them. Christ is not in Hea∣ven reputed a Blasphemer, nor a Re∣bel against Caesar; nor is Paul there ta∣ken for a pestilent Fellow, or a mover of Sedition among the people; nor the Cross of Christ for Foolishness or a Stum∣bling-block,
nor are true Christians there reproached, or excommunicated as Hereticks or Evil-doers. Of how small regard is the Judgment of Man to him that fully trusteth to Christ's Justification! which you may be sure of, so far as the Scriptures truly under∣stood do justifie you. III. My next Counsel is, to those that are unresolved which Cause or side is right, and to be chosen, whilest most men are Accusers of each other: One talk∣eth against this thing, and another a∣gainst that, one against this Doctrine, and practice, and another against that, and so many Parties accuse all the rest, that it distracteth ignorant Persons. Either the things which they differ about are such as Christ hath told us his mind of in the Scripture, or not; if not, then pity and bear with the Contenders on both sides; interpose not your Judg∣ment rashly, but let every one enjoy his own: Paul and Barnabas, as well as Martha and Mary, may differ about Persons and Circumstances of Duty: But if Christ have already decided the Case, let that determine you: What
need you more? Is the Controversie whether God or Man should be first obeyed? whether Heaven or Earth, Christ or the Pleasures of Sin should be preferred? whether we should live after the Flesh, or the Spirit? In all such cases it is easie to know what Christ doth judge. I hope you do not think that he will take part with the sensual, or the covetous, or the malignant Enemies of a godly Life; nor that he will turn to the Oppres∣sors or Persecutors of the Just; nor that he will renounce his own Word, because any men, how great or Reve∣rend soever, misapply it, or contra∣dict it; nor that he will call Drunken∣ness, Gluttony, Worldliness, Idleness, Filthiness or Pride, by gentle, extenu∣ating, deceitful Names, though the guilty and impenitent do so. Some would perswade you that Christ and his Spirit could not speak so much sense as to become intelligible: And though every Friend can intelligibly write you his mind, yet Christ could not, or would not; and that you may understand Poets and Orators, Virgil, Horace, Cicero, Seneca; and Philosphers,
Lawyers, Physicians, Historians, yea the voluminous Statutes of Lawgiv∣ers, and Canons of the Church; but the Holy Scriptures you cannot under∣stand: But it is not reproaching Christ that is the way to have him justifie your Cause or you. Though ambiguity of words make Scripture, as all other Writings, so far difficult as to need some Skill in those words to him that will understand them; and though a car∣nal blinded mind cannot (savingly in love and lively sense) receive the spi∣ritual things of God, yet men shall shortly be convinced, that the Light of the World was not invisible, though the Darkness comprehend it not, and that the Wisdom of God hath spoken intelli∣gibly, and in all necessary things you may certainly know which part Christ ta∣keth. But alas, Christ is unseen, and there∣fore little regarded by multitudes who customarily honour his Name. As a∣mong the Turks, we blame not him that rather asketh what the Emperour or Bashaw commandeth, than what Maho∣met commandeth; so these that honour Christ but as the Turks honour Mahomet,
do far more regard which side their Landlord takes, or which side such a Lord, or Bishop, or Prince is for, than which part Christ is for. O Sirs! You would all fain have Christ to be your Advocate at last: As ever you would have him be for you then, be now for that which he is for, and hath foretold you he will justi∣fie. O that you were all but truly willing to know what it is that Christ is for, (whether for a holy, or a world∣ly or fleshly Mind and Life); and that you were but resolved to be for that which Christ is for, as far as by diligent search you can know it. I should hope then that he would not leave you to damnable mistake, but help you to understand his will for your Salvation. Ʋse. And here you may see, that it is false Doctrine which some men con∣fidently preach, that There is no such thing as Christs justifying his People a∣gainst false accusations; As when we
tell them, that against the accusation of being finally Impenitent, Ʋnbelievers, Ʋnconverted, Ʋnholy, they must be ju∣stified by their own personal Repentance, Faith, Conversion and Holiness, or not at all; they have no shift against the plain Truth, but to tell us, that we have need of no such Justification: The Devil will have something else to do, than falsly to accuse us. But on the con∣trary, 1. Is not the Devil the Accuser of the Brethren? and is he not the Father of lies. Is not his Name Diabolus, a false accuser? 2. Doth he not set the wicked on his work in this Life, falsly to accuse the faithful, and their Faith and Du∣ty, that it may reflect on God him∣self? Yea, through the remnant of ig∣norance and Sin, Christs Servants too oft falsly accuse one another, as un∣sound, Erroneous, Heretical, &c. Yea darkness causeth good mens Conscien∣ces too often falsly to accuse them∣selves. And is it not Christs Office to be the advocate of the just? and in ju∣stifying them to justifie himself, and his Cause and Truth; Rom. 3. 4, 26. And
is it not much of the work of that glorious day, to bring all hidden things to light, and to justifie his cause, and Servants against all the false accusati∣ons that ever were brought against them? and thus to shame all falshood and unrighteousness, and to judge the World in truth? 3. Was it not a false accusation that Satan brought against Job? and did not God very solemnly justifie him against it? Is not Satans Kingdom upheld in the World, by making men in all Na∣tions believe, that Believers are decei∣ved, false Believers, and that Christs Ser∣vants are wicked, Hypocrites, the Plagues and Troublers of the Earth? And is there not a day to justifie them against all this? 4. If we are not justified against false accusation, we are justified a∣gainst none at all: For Christ will not justifie us against the Truth. It is Ju∣stification by Plea and Sentence that we are now speaking of: Justification sometime signifieth making us just, and sometime Judging and maintaining us to be just. The first doth make an unrighteous and ungodly man just, by
converting him, and giving him Re∣pentance toward God, and Faith to∣wards our Lord Jesus Christ, and pardoning his Sins, and giving him right to the Heavenly Inheritance: This is our first Constitutive Justifica∣tion. But when God hath thus made us just by the merits of Christs Righ∣teousness, 1. He virtually by the Law of Grace doth pronounce us just, and this against the curse of the condemning Law of innocency. 2. And in Judgment Christ as our Advocate will maintain us just. 3. And Christ our Judge, will judge us just, against all that can be brought against us: But how far just? Not such as never sinned; nor such as by imputation of his Righteousness are by God accounted never to have sinned; nor such as never deserved death: But such as are not to be condemned to pain of sense or loss, but have right to the free gift of Life Eternal, because Christ for them satisfied Justice, and fulfilled all Righ∣teousness, and merited all this for them, even Forgiveness, Grace and Glory, and they being penitent Believers have part
in him, and sincerely obeyed him to the Death. And if it were never so true, that no actual false accusation would be ur∣ged against believers, yet is it true that we shall be justified against even a virtual and possible accusation: And where there is not so much as this, there needeth no Justification by Plea, by Wit∣ness, or by Sentence. And if we are accused to have been Sinners, it is not to be denyed; If it be said that our Sin deserved death, it must be granted: But if it be said, 1. That we were finally impenitent unbelievers. 2. Or have no part in Christ. 3. Or had no pardon of Sin. 4. Or had no right to Life Eter∣nal. 5. And therefore are to be condemn∣ed; all this being false, Christ will ju∣stifie us against it; and against all o∣ther false accusation of Men or De∣vils. Doct. Last. Christ doth not only plead his own Righteousness for Mary's Justifica∣tion, but justifie her choice of the better
part, and decree that it shall not be taken from her. I. Indeed all the good that we have is his own as the giver, though some be also ours as the actors and possessours: And Christ will justifie all that is of himself: Nothing but good cometh from Infinite good, or him that came to destroy the works of the Devil. They that accuse our Grace or Duty, accuse Christ, his Spirit and his Law: And will he not justifie himself? (But of this before.) II. He that praiseth his Servants Ho∣liness and Duty, and will praise them in Judgment, doth so far justifie them. Mat. 25. Well done, good and faithful Servant! Yea, he that calleth Eternal Glory, their Reward, and the Crown of Righteousness given by God the righteous Judge, to such as have fought a good fight, and finished their course, and love the appearing of Christ; and he that is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that o∣bey him, and will judge all men ac∣cording to their works, and pronoun∣ceth them Blessed that do his Com∣mandments, that they may have right
to the Tree of Life, (2 Tim. 4. 8, 9. Heb. 5. 9. Rev. 22. 14, &c.) doth sure∣ly so far justifie this personal obedience and righteousness of theirs. But he justifieth only against false ac∣cusations; and not against the charge of culpable imperfection. And do they therefore talk wisely that say, It is no Righteousness, and no Justification, be∣cause it is imperfect? Doth any wise man pretend to personal perfect Righteous∣ness? And doth not God many hundred times in Scripture call that Righteousness and equivalent which is imperfect? And will he justifie or save any that hath no such Righteousness? Christ was perfect∣ly righteous for us, to merit the par∣don and Salvation of Believers, and the acceptance of their imperfect Righte∣ousness; and not to bring any to Hea∣ven that hath no inherent personal Righteousness. There are some that seem by their arguing to think that so much honour as we give to our Holiness and Duty, so much we take from Christ, and to praise his Saints is to dishonour him: (And yet these men love and look for praise.) But wise men will not believe
that the greatness of the Gift is a dis∣honour to the Giver, or the excellency of the House or Work a dishonour to the Builder or Work-man, or the recovered Health of the Patient a dishonour to the Physician; else what a dishonour will our Salvation be to Christ, when we are per∣fectly holy, without Spot or wrinckle, and have no Sin! It will be then by the Communication of his Holiness; as Motion, Light and Heat is from the Sun; and so it is now though we are imperfect: God accepteth, praiseth, and in tantum pro∣portionably justifieth our imperfect Righ∣teousness for the sake and merits of his that was perfect. I never met with any of this mind, but if one accuse them of less than Infi∣delity, Impenitence, Impiety and Hy∣pocrisie, they will seek to justifie them∣selves: And why will they justifie themselves in that which God will not justifie them in? What Friend of Christ will not justifie the Generation of the Just, when Malignants call them all deluded Hypocrites? and I know no sober man but expecteth that every Judge should justifie the wrongfully ac∣cused and their Cause.
Obj. To justifie a good Cause is not to ustifie the Person. Answ. Untrue. It is not to justifie him in all Respects, but it is to justifie him as to that Cause. Obj. This is but before men. Answ. God doth more hate the con∣demning of the Just than any man doth. Obj. This is but as to a particular Cause, and not an universal Justification. Answ. And the justifying of a Believer and penitent obedient Saint by his Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience, is but the justifying him in that particular Cause, which is the medium of his part in Christ; the merit of whose Righte∣ousness and Sacrifice procureth the par∣don of all his Sins, and his right to the free Gift of Life eternally, and so far justifyeth him against the guilt of his Sin, and the Condemnation of the Law. He that is not first made a penitent Believer, and justified against chargable Infidelity, Impenitence and Hypocrisie, shall never be justified by Christ's Merits and Sentence against the Curse and Pe∣nalty of the Law. II. But Christ doth not only justifie Mary and her Choice, but decree that it
shall not be taken from her. For, 1. He hath by his Covenant given the best and greatest things, and that for ever to every one that will but thank∣fully accept and choose them. 2. And what he offereth and promi∣seth he decreeth. 3. And what he decreeth and promi∣seth he performeth. For, who is it that should take it from her, or from any Believer? Or, who shall separate us from the Love of God? 1. Not the Malice of Satan; else no Believer should be saved. If the Devil could deprive us of the Gospel, or of Grace, it should be surely done: If he could have kept the World from being redeemed by Christ, it had never been redeemed; if he could keep men uncon∣vinced, unconverted, and unpardoned, he would surely do it. 2. Not any of his malignant Instruments, for God will not give them power to make a godly man ungodly, and the De∣vil hath no such power to give them. 3. Not the Envy of erroneous Zealots, or uncharitable Hypocrites. The Prodigal shall not be turned out of Doors, because his elder Brother envieth his Entertain∣ment.
The Envy of the Jews shall not hinder the Blessing of the Gentiles. Re∣solvedly choose the best, and you shall have it. Ʋse 1. O that all men would take this sure and necessary direction of Christ for the choice of their Comforts, Hopes and Happiness: All men had rather be happy for ever, than for a little while; and what else but Holiness and Heaven, Christ, Grace and Glory will be such a durable Felicity? Will you choose the favour of great men, and hopes of Pre∣ferment and worldly Honours; and can you say, that this shall not be taken from you? Will you choose Lands and Mo∣ney, and the Prospering of your Endea∣vours in growing rich; and can you say that these shall not be taken from you? Will you choose Mirth and Sport, and fleshly Lust, and the pleasing of your Ap∣petites and Fancies; and can you say that these shall not be taken from you? Must not Life it self be shortly taken from you, and therefore all the Pleasures of this Life? If these things be your Choice,
Christ hath already foretold you wha you may expect, Luk. 12. 19, 20 Thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be re∣quired of thee, and then whose shall all these things be which thou hast provided? So is he that layeth up Treasure for himself, and is not rich towards God. And, Luk. 16. 25. Son, remember that thou in thy life time re∣ceivedst thy good things, and Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented? Wherefore then do you spend money for that which is not Bread; and your labour for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently to Christ, and eat that which is good, and let your Soul delight it self in fatness: Incline your Ear, and come unto him; hear, and your Soul shall live; and he will make an everlasting Covenant of sure mercies with you, Isa. 55. 2, 3. Labour not for the Food which perisheth, but for that which endureth to everlasting Life, which Christ will give you; Joh. 6. 27. Lay not up for your selves Treasures on Earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal; but lay up for your selves Treasure in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust do corrupt, nor Thieves break through and steal; Mat. 6. 19, 20. The time is short, therefore weep and rejoyce;
buy and possess, and use the World as though you did it not; for the fashion of this World passeth away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. O be not as the wicked who have their portion in this life, in the treasure of their Bellies, Psal. 17. 14. For their hopes soon perish as the Rush that groweth but in the mire, and as the Spider's web, and as the giving up of the Ghost. Flesh will fail you, and the World will fail you; But God will be a never∣failing Portion to all that do but sincerely choose him; Psal. 73. 25, 26. If you drink here, you shall thirst again, and if you eat here, you shall hunger again; but if Christ and his Spirit be your meat and drink, you shall hunger and thirst no more for ever. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. O do not prophanely sell such a Birth-right for a Morsel; you shall have no better than you choose; shew not your selves unworthy of eternal life, by pre∣ferring known vanity before it. If you lost Heaven because you could not have it, and would have a Christ and Holiness, but could not, your Case would not be all so bad, as to be the wilful refusers of your own Salvation, and lose it because you would not have it. Do not say, We
would be saved, if you would not be saved from your Sin, and have that Holiness and Communion with God which is your Salvation; and do not say, we would have God and Christ, and Holiness, if the Pleasures of Sin seem better to you, and you choose it first: You may as well say plainly, We will have no God, no Christ, no Heaven, as say, We had rather have the Pleasures of Sin; and you may as well say so, as choose so, and do so. There are some deceived Libertines that think that every good desire is the mark of a justified Soul, especially, if it be accom∣panyed with a willingness that Christ's Righteousness should justifie them, and a belief that it will do so, though they love sinful pleasure, profit and honour, better than God and Holiness, and Hea∣ven, and had rather have the Felicity of an Epicure, than of a Saint. But Christ himself hath judged contra∣rily: He saith, He cannot be his Disciple that loveth any thing more than him, Mat. 10. Luk. 14. 26. 23. And he that will have this Pearl of greatest price, must think nothing too dear, but sell all that he hath to buy it; Mat. 13. 46. To be Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers of God, is the brand of the worst
times and persons; 2 Tim. 3. 4. Let any man that can shew us one Promise of God for the saving of any that seek not first God's Kingdom, and its Righteousness, Mat. 6. 33. and labour not chiefly for the food that pe∣risheth not; and loveth not God above the World, and Holiness more than the Plea∣sures of Sin. If this be not so, where can you fix the difference between the justified and them that perish. Would God make such a difference in the World to come, if there were none here? Doth Christ and his Spi∣rit do no more noble a work in sanctify∣ing Souls than so? If one may be justifi∣ed that loveth one sinful Pleasure better than God, and Grace, and Glory, why not he that loveth another, and another, and all? If Fornication, why not Glut∣tony? If Gluttony, why not Drunken∣ness? If Drunkenness, why not Cove∣tousness, and Ambition, and all evil? But Paul saith, Eph. 5. 6. Let no man de∣ceive you with vain words; for because of these things cometh the wrath of God on the Children of Disobedience. And, Without Holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. Not every one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall shall enter into Heaven; no, not those Be∣lievers
that prophesied, and did wonders, and cast out Devils in Christ's Name, but only they that do the Will of God: To the rest he will say, Depart from me, ye work∣ers of Iniquity, I know you not. How oft is it said, that all shall be judg∣ed according to their works? and Christ so describeth his own Judgment, Mat. 25. Can any Man believe? Jam. 2. and 1 Joh. 3. and 4. Rom. 8. 1, to 14. Rom. 2. and a multitude such Texts, and yet believe that a bare belief that Christ's Righteous∣ness is imputed to us, will prove any one justified who loveth his Sin better than God, Grace and Glory; and consequent∣ly, that Christ's Members differ but im∣putatively from the Children of the De∣vil; for wherein is a wicked man worse than the godly, but in this? He that loveth the World (more than God) the Love of the Father is not in him! Why, may not Life or Pleasure separate us from the Love of God if we love them better? Rom. 8. 38, 39. Nay, he loveth not God at all in a pro∣per sence, who loveth him not as God; and he loveth him not at all as God, who loveth him not as better than the plea∣sure of Sin, but only as a lesser good. Obj. To love God above all sinful pleasure
is the fruit and ripeness of Grace, but the seed doth not reach so high. Ans. It's true, if you call preparatory Grace that seed; but such are in no justi∣fied state; but it is not true if you mean by the seed any thing proper to a justified man, as all the Texts fore-cited shew. Obj. What can the strongest Christian do more than love God above all? Ans. Among those that love God above all, and Holiness more than Sin, there may be an hundred different degrees; one may love him so much as to long after him and delight in him, and contemn all vanities, and overcome temptations much more easily and effectually than others; and another may do these more faintly, hardly, and with less delight. Obj. Doth David, Peter, and the Dis∣ciples that all forsook Christ and fled, love him better than life at such a time. Ans. 1. We must distinguish between the rational Will, or Love, and sensitive Passion. 2. Between the Habit and the Act. 3. Between the ordinary course of Action, and a particular extraordinary Action. The weakest true justified Christian loveth God above the Creature, and
perfect Holiness above sinful pleasure. 1. As to the fixed Inclination and ha∣bit of the Soul (which is the Divine Nature.) 2. And in the ordinary Act or ex∣ercise of his Rational Love, and deli∣berate choice, and the seeking endea∣vour of his Life. 3. But not alwayes with the most pas∣sionate sensitive Love. 4. And passion (of fear or creature-Love) may in an extraordinary act both weaken the activity of Rational Spiritual Love, and bear down the ex∣ecutive power into outward contrary sinful acts: But the predominancy of the holy nature will shew it self, in raising the Soul from such a fall, and causing it the more to hate and fear the Sin. There is difference between a swoune and death, and between an In∣fant and an Image: And so there was between the falls of David, Lot, Peter; and a wicked man, that had rather keep his Sin than leave it, and loveth such pleasure more than God. Ʋse. 2. Be thankful then, Christians, for that Grace of Christ which caused
you to make the wisest choice; even of that which is the real durable feli∣city, and shall never be taken from you. Had you chosen Houses they might have been burnt: Had you chosen wealth or worldly honours, they might all have been taken from you; yea all would certainly have left you in distress. Men might have taken away your Estates, your Liberties, your Lives, but not your God, your Christ, your Heaven! They may take away your Bibles, and other Books; but they cannot take away your Grace: They may shut you out of the Synagogues, but not out of the love of God: They may imprison you, banish you, cut out your Tongues that you can neither Preach nor Speak; but still your Souls may have Communion with God: A Tertullus may call us Pestilent Fel∣lows and Seditious; Schismaticks may call us the Schismaticks, and Hereticks may call us the Hereticks, and Hypo∣crites may call us Hypocrites; but none of them can make us what they call us. They may with some (by Gods Per∣mission) take away the Reputation of your Innocency, but not your Innocency it self. When a mans food is but on his Table
it may be taken from him; if it be but in his Stomack, he may cast it up: But it is safer when it is digested and turned into his substance. So may your Teach∣ers, and Bibles, and Churches be taken from you, but not the Law and Gospel which is written in your Hearts, and be∣come a spiritual nature in you: What Triumphant challenges doth St. Paul make, Rom. 8. 37, 38, &c. Who shall be against us? Who shall condemn us? What shall separate us from the Love of God. The power of Men and Devils cannot do it. Death it self the last enemy shall not do it. He will dissolve this frame, and lay our Flesh in dust and darkness, and take away from us all the pleasure and possession of this World, but none of our chief good! Tyrants may deprive us of such things as they choose them∣selves; but not of that which we have chosen! If the Devil had said truly, Mat. 4. and Luk. 3. 6, 7. All this power will I give thee and the Glory of them, for that is delivered to me, and to whom I will I give it: he might have said also, From whom I will I take it away? But sure he is no giver of Grace or Glory, and therefore cannot forcibly take them from us. Nay,
by taking Life and all from us, men shall but hasten our perfect fruition of what we choose. Malice may snarl, and rail and slander; but cannot abate the Love of the Father, the Grace of the Son, the Communion of the Spirit, or deprive us of expected Glory. Let not then worldly fury think that it hath undone us by taking away world∣ly things. They were none of our choice, nor our Trust, nor Treasure. If we are true Believers, our Treasure, Heart and Conversation are in Heaven: Let Thieves get in and Steal it thence if they can. Papal Usurpers may pretend Peters Keys to shut out all that obey not their Domination; But while God is our choice, and we shut not out our selves from Heaven, they talk more to their own hurt than ours, and can never take our chosen Treasure from us. Ʋse. 3. But if none can take it from us, Let us not cast it away our selves. All that Men and Devils can do against us, is but by allurements, or fear or other temp∣tations, to deceive us into self-destructi∣on, and to cast away that our selves which none can take from us. Great
disputes we have about free-will and per∣severance; whether it be possible to fall away? But it is past dispute with men that believe the Word of God, that we have such Freedom, as that Christ, and Grace and Glory are freely offered to our accepting choice; and that he that truly chooseth them shall have them, and that all that choose them not before that pleasure of Sin which is set in com∣petition against them, shall never have them; and that it's just so far possible or impossible to fall from Grace, as it is possible or impossible for the Will of one that hath Grace to change: So far as your serious choice continueth, you per∣severe; and so far as you change it, you lose your Grace. While you plead for the impossibility of the ill changing of your own wills, confute not your selves by your actual change: But when you feel them again pleased with the forbidden things of the Flesh and World, and your appetite to holy pleasure groweth dull and cold, me thinks you should per∣ceive that in your selves there is no im∣possibility of a change: If there be any, it is out of you, in God: And no doubt but a change of his decree and
will is impossible. All the doubt is, whe∣ther he have decreed that no Gracious will shall change. It is certain that be∣ing so very mutable in our selves, that we could not persevere were we left to our selves, we are all under many and great obligations, to keep our selves in the Love of God, Jude 21. and to continue in the Love of Christ, Joh. 15. 9. And we have need of Commands to abide in Christ, and he in us, Joh. 15. 4. And need of threatnings of destruction if we fall away, Joh. 15. 6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and his wi∣thered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned; 1 Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall. Heb. 4. 1. Let us fear lest a promise being left of entering in∣to his rest, an of you should seem to come short of it. And all Gods threatnings are the objects of our belief and fear, Heb. 10. 26, 27, 29, 38. If we sin wilfully after the knowledge of the Truth, there re∣maineth no more Sacrifice for Sins, but a certain fearful expectation of Judgment, and fiery indignation which devoureth the adver∣saries: Of how much sorer punishment sup∣pose ye shall he be thought worthy, who hath
trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and done despight to the Spirit of Grace.—If any draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him: Which is the same with Ezek. 33. 18. When the Righteous turneth from his Righteousness he shall die, & 18. 24. Yea, God seeth it meet to give us the Comforts of the faithful still conditio∣nally; Rev. 2. & 3. To him that over∣cometh, &c. He that endureth to the end shall be saved. Col. 1. 21, 22, 23. If ye continue in the Faith, and be not moved a∣way from the hope of the Gospel. All this tells us, that notwithstanding Gods unchangeable decree, the care and diligent labour to persevere, is our duty, and that falling away must be our fear, and that there is no such impossibility as excludeth this care and fear: And that so far as it is impossible to fall away, so far it is impossible not to fear fal∣ling away, with a preserving watchful fear: And how far a known impossibility is the object of due fear, I leave to fur∣ther consideration. God hath put us into the hands of Christ, in whose care and trust is our
chief security: But he hath also trusted us, or put our perseverance and Salva∣tion more in our own hands than in any others, and so far that if we do not un∣do our selves by wilful and final neglect or refusal of offered Grace and Mercy, we are safe. Choose Christ as Christ, and God as God, choose Grace and Glo∣ry before all the Vanities of the World, and before all the pleasures of Sin for a season, and stand to this choice unto the end, expressing it in faithful victo∣rious endeavours, and then neither Men nor Devils, Life or Death, shall take your chosen Treasure from you. Obj. I can easily keep up a resolved choice of God, and Holiness and Heaven, but I cannot so constantly keep up the rejection of fleshly pleasures, and Profit and Honour, which would be for the time preferred. Ans. The worst man would have God and Heaven so far as to give him the desires of his Flesh, and keep him from all pain and misery: But is it not a plain contradiction, to say in proper speech, I would have God as God, that is, as Best, but I would have pleasant Vanity as better? I can easily love my Wife as a Wife, but I cannot forbear loving Harlots
better? I can resolve for temperance, but I cannot resolve against Gluttony and Drun∣kenness? I am resolved for Truth, but not against Lying. Just such is that, to re∣solve for God and Holiness, but not a∣gainst the Pleasures of Sin which alie∣nate the Heart from God. Obj. But how doth a man choose God and Holiness in the hour of his Sin, when he is choosing forbidden pleasure? Ans. The act of Sin is not a choosing God and Holiness, but somewhat that is contrary: But every act of the will which is against God and Holiness, is not a rejecting of them, or a retract∣ing of our choice, nor inconsistent with it; but perhaps only an interruption of the exercise and an abatement of the degree; Play-fellows may draw a Child to disobey a Father for love of play, and them, when yet he doth not forsake his Father, nor love them better; but only forgets him, or abateth desire through the di∣version of the Sport. Qu. What is it that is our Duty in or∣der to the unchangeableness of our own Wills and Choice? Ans. 1. Trust not your selves too far: The will goeth not against the minds
apprehensions; and a mans mind is a very dark, weak, mutable thing: What a Temptation, or a subtil Wrangler or Argument, or a new thought may do upon us, we do not well know. Pre∣sumption seldom escapeth danger. A wise man feareth and departeth from evil: Confidence in your own understand∣ing, goodness and stability, is the prog∣nostick of backsliding. 2. Away from the Temptations which do most strongly allure the flesh: To be over-pleased with things temporal and sensible, turneth the Heart from things Spiritual and Eternal. To desire a more pleasing condition to the flesh, is to de∣sire stronger Temptations, and greater danger to the Soul. 3. Think much and seriously on the great and certain things which first converted and resolved your Wills: They are the same, and as good now as they were then, and you should know them better. A man that loveth and chooseth rationally, knoweth why he doth it: And the fixing and renewing of your knowledge and belief, is it that must fix your Love and Choice. The greatest things forgotten do not affect us.
4. Flatter not your selves with the hope of living long on Earth, and look not at Death and the following Life as a great way off. The power of temp∣ting Vanities lyeth in mens hopes of long enjoying them: To a man under the sentence of present death, they have little power. And the best things that seem far off, do not much and power∣fully affect us. Live therefore as dying men, and you will have the mind and choice of dying men. 5. See that your Meditations and Be∣lief be practical, and brought close to the Heart: And take not bare thinking of God and Heaven as enough, but know that holy thoughts fall short of their use and end, if they come not to the Heart and Life. It is not the Speculative dispu∣ting Christian that hath the fixed Will and Choice, unless he be also a hearty practising experienced Christian: He that hath a heavenly heart and conversation, and hath felt the power and sweetness of things spiritual, will hold them fast; when bare hear-say and opinion will let them go. 6. Depend in the constant exercise of Faith and Prayer, upon the Love of the
Father, the Grace of the Son, and the Communion of the Holy Spirit, and seek to please God as your greatest plea∣sure, and so live by the Faith of the Son of God, that you may say it is Christ that liveth in you, Gal. 2. 19, 20. And then none can take you out of his hands, nor separate you from the love of God, Rom. 8. 38, 39. nor take your chosen portion from you, In a word, that your choice may be unchangable, you must firmly trust to the unchangable promise of the unchangable God, for the unchangable Kingdom, as purchased by Christ, and our title seal∣ed by his Spirit: The World and the Flesh must be crucified, dead and buryed to you by the virtue of his Cross believ∣ed, and you must be risen with him to a heavenly mind, and hope, and conversa∣tion: Every weight must be laid by, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, Heb. 12. 1. And we must not look back to the forsaken world behind us, but press for∣ward for the prize unto the Mark, Phil. 3. Looking still to Jesus the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross and despised the shame, and is set down
at the right hand of the Throne of God: We must consider him that endured such contradiction of Sinners, lest we be wea∣ry and faint: We must count nothing dear to us that we may finish our course with joy; and must know by faith that our labour is not in vain in the Lord, if we would be stedfast and unmoveable, alwaies abounding in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. We must serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear as for a Kingdom which cannot be moved; and all this in dependance on the Grace of Christ, Heb. 12. 28. Considerate men know by sense and experience that this world is Vani∣ty and Vexation: If we know also by a living constant Faith, that a better world of holy joy is the near and certain por∣tion of the faithful, it will fix the will in a resolved choice, and we shall not be like prophane Esau that sold his Birth∣right for one morsel; and the Living Eternal God will be eternally our Life and Joy, to whom all the Blessed with Christ shall give Glory and Praise for ever. Amen. FINIS.
3  noae Capane a Philosophiae onars partes quque — Edw. Brerewoodi Tractatus Ethici sive Can. in Aristot. de moribus. — Oxo —Ejusdem tractatus quidam Logii — ib 6 Ger. & Arn. Bootii Philosophia naturalis reformata — Dub H. Lud. Castanaei synopsis distinctionum Philosophicarum & Theol. — Lon 8 Adr. Heereboord meletemata Philosophica, optimae editionis — Ams 9 Greg. Reisch. Margarita Philosophica — Basi 0 Chr. Scheibleri Metaphysica duobus libris — Oxo 1 Jo. Scoti Expositio & quaestiones in Physica Aristotelis — 2 Hen. Mori Enchiridion Metaphysicum, cum Figuris Aeneis — L 3 Joan. Buridani Commenarii in Aristotelis Ethica — Oxo 4 Joan. Despauterii Commentaria cum amplissimis Commentariis — Lugd 5 Jac. Primirosil destructio Fundamentorum Medicinae V. Fort. Plempii — Rot 6 Collegli Conimbricensis Commentarii in Aristotelem. 4 vol. — Col. & Mong. 7 Joan. Heeferi Loci communes Juris practici cum variis praejudicatis — Franc 8 Corpus Juris Canonici Notis & Appendicibus illustratum — Lugd 9 Fran. Clerk praxis in curiis Ecclesiasticis, per Tho. Blad — R. Zouch Elementa tiae & des —
