B3247 E632_9 99865613 165873
A BLOUDY FIGHT IN IRELAND: BETWEEN, The Lord Deputies Forces, and the Earl of Casclehaven's; Wherein, were 1300 kild and taken prisoners; the whole Army routed, and all their Ordnance, Ammunition, Bag and Baggage taken. ALSO, Major General Masseys advance into Brunt Island, against the Lord Generals Forces, the manner of the Ordnance playing for three days together: And a perfect Narrative of the proceedings of both Armies. TOGETHER, With Major Ceneral Montgomery's advance Westward, and what happened upon our Forces march to meet him. Published according to Order. June. 16th. LONDON, Printed by R.W. for George Horton. 1651
The persect Copies of several remark∣ble Letters, sent from very emi∣nent persons in Scotland. SIR, I Know your expectations are much raised concerning us; all ears are greedy to hear something from hence, that may give rest to their dis-setled hopes. But it will be our wisdom to reflect upon former experiences; It was never better with us, then when we were stript of al human advantages, and in a submissive posture of waiting upon God. That hath been our old Refuge in all our straits, and we alwayes found it to be of blessed use. It may not seem strange to any, that we are exercised with difficulties and disapointments; Thereby God hath manisested forth his glory, & accomplished his great desines. Some hasty spirits may think it too too late, ere we enter upon Action: But to such we say, that we have learnt to hang upon our God, and to observe his Providences. When the Enemies motion gives us an opportunity, we shall not be backward to make
use of it. We have received very credible information, that they are very near unto sme sudden Atempt; The com∣mon fame is for England; but we cannot tel what to judge of it. Their Parliament yet continues; nothing of moment hath been produced; A late Act is put forth, for the bring∣ing in often thousand Bowles of meal into their stores at Sterlin. There is much endeavouring to repeal the Act of Classes; but it is not effected; the K. is unwilling to disoblige any Pry; or to doe that which may occasion Factions and Animosities. Besides the Levies that are going forwardin the North, they are busie in raising men in the West to re∣cruit their Army. We have at last condescended to return their Records unto them; They would have done us little good, and some blemish might have lien upon us, they pre∣tending a breach of promise. We are very sensible of little miscarriages, though their dealings towards us are very unhandsome. Yet, we believe that Wariston will not again return unto them, he dis-relisheth their present conjunction and designs; and he will either retire into some corner within our Quarters, or else get a pass for Foragin parts, Col. Cowper a Nottinghamshire Cavaleir, is gone unto the Enemy, and they have bestowed a Regiment upon him, Colonel Alured is also commanded hither out of Galloway and the horse that were Eastward at Dunbar, &c. are come to Edinburgh, and are in their Tents between Edinburgh and Leith. The Enemy contiruis yet in their Leaguer in Sterlin-Park: they are still raising men Northward, and also as many as they can from the West; which speaks as if they intended a party for the security of Sterlin, and their Body for England, Edinburgh, June 5. 1651.
The true Copy of a Letter, from an Eminent Com∣mander in the Army. SIR, SOme few days since, a party of Scots horse (a∣bout a thousand in number) fell into some of our out quarters, and took divers horse, and some few prisoners; Whereupon, we having about 60 Wa∣gons out; which were sent with a small Convoy to carry provisions to Boyhal, we were doubtful lest those horse should have notice of them, and so sur∣prize them: Hereupon, by order from the Gene∣ral, some Regiments were appointed to be drawn out, to secure the said Cariages, in case the Enemy should attempt any thing against them; but before they had marcht many miles, they met the Wagons returning, having safely delivered the provisions: But the Enemies designe was against Conworth, where they took a whole Troop of Dragoons horse which they found grazing without any Guard; but the Captain and his men are all in safety. The King of Scots is still at Sterling, where there is a Commit∣tee of War continually sitting. They are still pur∣ging the Officers of their Army, and have put out the Earl of Wems, and put in a notorious Cavleir to command in his place. Middletons additional for∣ces are not yet come up, till when, it is conceived, that Lesley will not march with the Van, lest they should leave those parts too naked. They have not hitherto made any attempt against us, but if our forces use means to invite them to engage, they will have one trick or other to divert it.
There is great want of money amongst the Scots, and Committees sit in each County to collect Assesse∣ments, but the people are very backward in their payment. The King and Parliament have agreed to nul the former Act against Malignants, and conclu∣ded that the name of Malignant should be buried in Oblivion; and do take in those Cavaleirs now, that formerly were made uncapable by that Act. The Town of Dundee hath contributed largely to their Kings assistance, and given him a very stately Tent, and sixe Brass peeces of Ordnance; and have also at their own charges, raised him a compleat Regi∣ment of horse. Massey is very active, and hath in∣vented divers Fire-works, and other warlike En∣gines, and is also contriving to make several great Guns of Leather, to be always with the Horse. He doth likewise employ men to make certain Fire∣works to be carried on the top of their Pikes, to gall our horse with, when they attempt to charge them, with divers other destructive instruments; thinking with the help of these, to destroy us; but our trust is onely in the Lord, who is of power to abate their pride, asswage their malice, and con∣found their devices. Edenburgh, June the 7. 1651. Another Letter from a person of good Quality. SIR, THe last Lords day in the morning, we had an alarm in our quarters, from the Scots, whom
we heard were abroad with a strong party; And we were inform'd, that they intended to seize upon our Magazine and Garison in Hamilton; whereupon it was concluded at a Councel of Officers, that Com∣missary Gen. Whaley, with six Regiments of Horse, should secure that Garison, which he forth with did, and brought off all the men, Ordnance, and Ammunition, the Enemy facing them all the time, yet not daring to attempt any thing against them. The Scots have generally taken the Sacrament, and their King hath given Sir Robert Montgomery com∣mission to raise forces in the West, who came as far as Kilmenock, and Dumfrize, and took divers Dra∣goon horses which were negligently left at grass, and some few prisoners; but hearing of Major Ge∣neral Harisons advance, he made no stay in those parts. A party of our foot were design'd for Brunt Island, but the Enemy having intelligence thereof, Massey was commanded to secure that Island; Ad∣miral Dean, hath continually for three days together made about 100 shot against the Royal Sconce, and received as many from them, but neither of them did much execution; We daily expect to engage with the Enemy, but there is small probability they will be drawn to it, unless necessity compels them thereunto. Edenburgh, June the 9. 1651. The Copy of a Letter from Ireland. Sir, I Received yours of the 18 of May, and it is a great comfort to us, to hear your affairs
go on so prosperously in Scotland, for the Enemy reported here clean contrary. In my last, I certi∣fied you, how the Lord Deputy Ireton had taken the field, and that he was marching with a gallant Army against the Rebels; who hearing of his ad∣vance, declined engagement, and endeavoured to weary out our men with tedious marches; but they beeing old souldiers, and iur'd to hard∣ness, were rather sttengthened then tyr'd: Inso∣much, that Cast ehaven (who commanded in chief) seeing they should be necessitated to fight, chose out his ground, and expected our approach: Our Army being all come up, they were drawn in∣to a Body, and fell pell-mell upon the Enemy; the Fight continued very fierce for two hours, but at last the Rebels began to retreat, and give ground; which our men perceiving, persued them so fierce∣ly, that they totally routed their whole Army: We had not numbred the prisoners at the close of my Letter, but I conceive there was about 500 kild upon the place, and some 7 or 800 taken pri∣soners, amongst whom were divers persons of qua∣lity, Castlehaven himself very narrowly escaping. We also took all their Ordnance, Ammunition, and Wa∣gons, and persued them (doing execution) to the Lady Dungerveys House at the mouth of the Shan∣non. My desire to be the first that should present you with these glad tidings, made me impatient to wait for particulars; but my next shall present you with a perfect List of the Officers Names, and the number of men and Arms that were taken. Intreat∣ing you to excuse the haste of Your friend, H.O. FINIS.
