B3294 E311_27 99861203 158904
THE BLOODY TREATIE: OR, Proceedings between the KING and Prince RUPERT. As ALSO, Between Pr. RUPERT and Capt. PICKERING. Who hath brought in 4. of the Kings Collonels, to the Parliament; With the whole proceedings of Ruperts perambulation from the King at Newark, and his return to Woodstock with 400. Horse. And how cruelly they used Captain Pickering during the Treatie; who by the help of Collonel Willis, Collonel Honywood, Collonel Fisher, and Collonel Roulston, is now returned safe to the Parlia∣ment, and hath brought them in from the KING. With Ruperts Letter to the King, about a bloody massacre. Die Saturn. Decemb. 13. 1645. Appointed to be printed, and is published according to Order. LONDON, Printed for J. C. 1645.
Sunday Octobr. 26. 1645. Prince Rupert, Generall Gerrhard, and Sir Richard VVillis, came into the Presence when the King had almost dined. Prince Rupert came in discontented, with his hands at his sides, and approaches very near the King. Whereat His Majestie present∣ly commanded all to be taken away; and ri∣sing from the Table, walked to a corner of the room, the Prince, Gerrhard, and VVillis, presented themselves before His Majestie, and first VVillis spake after this manner. VVillis. WHereas your Majestie bath put me out of this Commands, and placed another in my room, which tends very much to my dishonour, who have been alwayes ready to spend my bloud in your service; my humble suit is, that I may know my Adversaries, and be brought to a fair triall, to answer what mine Enemies shall bring against me.
Prince. By God this is done in mallice to me, because Sir Richard hath been alwayes my faithfull friend: it is not e∣nough that I must undeservedly suffer, but all my friends must suffer with me. Willis. What I have done, hath ever been in loyalty to your Majesty, for it hath pleased your Majesty to place the Prince as Generall over me: I hoped that in obeying him, I have served your Majesty, and not done any thing to disserve this dishonour. King. Say no more: this is a time unseasonable for you to command here. Ierr. All that Sir Richard Willis desires is very reasonable, for if Gentlemen be put out upon every occasion and asper∣sion, it will discourage all from serving your Majesty. King. What does this concerne you? you for your parts have received honour, as much as any man, and I did not thinke you would have come to me in this manner. Ierr. The same persons that have worked out Sir Richard, may worke out me; and so they have partly already, having been the cause that I was put out of my command in Wales. King. Its false: the reason that you stayd not there, was because you were not able to subsist, the Scots approaching to besiege Hereford. Ierr. I was able to make good Army and Garrisons against the Scots. King, Tell me I lie. Prince. I beseech your Majesty let not Sir Richard suffer for being my freind. King. By God he doth not. Prince. Then I defire he may be restored to his com∣mand. King. It shall not be: I know what I have to do.
Prince. By God the cause of all this is Digby. King. Tis false. Gerr. I am sure, and can prove that Digby was the cause that I was outed of my command in Wales. King. Whosoever saies, it lyes. Gentlemen I am but a child so you esteme of me: Digby can leade me by the nose, but you shall find — Prince. I wish that Digby prove not a traytor at the last. King. By God Digby is an honest man, and they that say otherwise are in effect traitors. Gerr. Then we must be all traitors. King. Perhaps you have spoke the words: otherwise you would never have come and raised such mutinies, and that publickly. Gerr. No we are your Majestyes most loyall subjects, and we will spend our blood to serve your Majesty. King. Where was a mutiny if this be not, and what do you tell me of spending your blood for me: by God I hazard my life for you, and what I do, is for the good of my people. Willis. I beseech your Majesty be pleased not to thinke that we come in any mutinous way, for we are your Majesties most obedient subjects. Gerr. I by God to lay our lives at your Majesties feet. King. Why do not you obey me, but come to expostulate with me? Gerr. Because your Majessie is ill informed. King. Pardon, me I am but a child, Diggby can leade me. where he list! what can the most disperate Rebbels say more. Prince. Will you be pleased to restore Sir Richard Willis to his command. King. No by God, not a bit. I know what I have to do. Willis. I never appeared disloyall to his Majesty
King. I doe not say you have, but you and some with you, have notheen so wise in my service, as you might have been. VVillis. I am disgtaced every where, boyes point at me; I have nothing to live upon but my reputation, and thats now gone, for no cause given to your Majesty. King. What have I left to me, I am sure the Rebels have possessed themselves of all my goods, Towns, Magazines, &c. Gerr. I beseech your Majesty to consider of that which Sir Richard proposeth. King. Gerrhard keep your selfe well, and doe not mediate for others. Prince. I beseech your Majesty to grant me your gracicus leave and passe to goe beyond Seas. King. Oh Nephew, it is of great concernment, and requires consideration. Here the Prince said something concerning Bristoll, whereat the King said, oh Nephew! and stopt there, and said no more. Prince. Digby is the man that hath caused all this distracti∣on betwixt us. King. They are all Rogues, and Rascals, that say so; and in effect Traitors: that seek to dishonour my best subjects. Here Gerrhard bowed himselfe, and went out. The Prince shewed no reverence, but went out roundly with his hands at his sides: all the Train following them, and the King left in private, with Sir Richard VVillis. Sir richard told the King, that a Corporall and tenne boyes, were able to doe his Majesty as much service, as all his Majesties Commissioners at Newark, Prince Rupert sending for Passes to goe with his atten∣dants beyond Sea, it was granted by the Parliament, and he passed through our quarters with all relpect to Worcester; he
desired to come to London and passe this way at his pleasure; but that was not thought fit: Captain Pickering was sent to treat with him, and 50 l. was allowed Captian Pirkering for his journey, but he may now be glad he hath got off safe with the expence of fourscore, besides the affronts, and abu∣ses that he hath received at Worcester; and the danger he was therein. At Captain Pickerings coming to Worcester, having had a Passe from the Governour, he expected to be used as a Gen∣tleman, and as a souldier; but found it not. The Princes were civill towards him, but the Governour abused him unwor∣thily; and as soon as he came thither, set a Guard upon him; and not only so, but some officers in Worcester came into his chamber, and severall times affronted him, and called him Rogue, and other affronts they put upon him; and had he not had stiends there, he had bin in danger not to have got a∣way. But that that is no wonder they should so affront an officer of ours, for they doe much raile against the King himself, and use very base words against his Majesty for keeping them so poor. Prince Rupert seeing that he could not obtain his own ends in procuirng leave to come to London, to remain in our quar∣ters, so long as he pleaseth; he would not treat any further, but with his brother Maurice, Gen. Gerrhard, and about 400 in all, marched from Worcester, and robbing, and plunder∣ing the Country as they went, continued their journie to Woodstock, not presuming to go into Oxford as yet, the reason of which is not yet knowne; it being concived to be only a plot, all this while: and every thing they do frame to cheate the world by making a taigned shaddow, of that which is not; yet Colonel Pickring kept on some correspon∣dencie
with some Gentlemen in Worcester, about their coming in, who offered to take the oath never to be ayding or assisting to the King, only to have passes to go beyond sea, to serve in other warres; and were it so that these Gentle∣men had not helped Captaine Pickering, he had not then got away, but was by the enemy kept prisoner in Worcester, and that for the space of 5 weeks in all from his first coming thither, till the time he got away. Captaine Pickering ha∣ving before sent some officers to our quarters elsewhere, brought away 4 Coll. now out of Woreester, at his coming away: viz: Col: Wilsis, Sir Rich: brother, Col: Hunniwood, Col: Flesher, and Col: Ralston, who have been active men for the King; but are now so low, that they are forced to desire passes to goe beyond Sea to some other wars, where they may live by the sword. One of these Collonels is left sick by the way, the other 3 came with Captain Pickering to London, who did all tender their persons to him before the date of the day according to the Declaration was expired, what the rea∣son is of Ruperts removing at Woodstock, and that he goes not in to Oxford, is not known, bu probablie it is either to goe on with the design carried on by agreement on all sides on the enemies part, or else because he dare not goe to Oxford till he knowes his Majesties pleasure, but some letters Prince Rupert hath sent to the King to Oxford about some design in hand. It is said that Rupert tenders a Massacre or bloudy blow to be gi∣ven in the Kings behalfe (some where) to redeem himselfe into his Majesties favour, if it may be accepted; they are in a desperate con∣dition, and working desperate designs; the Lord direct them, and prevent all their bloody plots, and conspirscies; some say that the eleventh of this month was the farall day intended, but was after prorogued; but God is our protector, who hath and will defend his people that trust in him. Soli Deo gloria. FINIS.
