B3278 E675_15 99865876 166302
BLOUDY NEWES FROM SEA: BEING A perfect Narrative, and exact Relation, of the great and desperate Engaging, between Two hundred Sail of English and Dutch-Men of war, upon the Coast of Scilley: With the man∣ner how Gen. Blake, and Sir George Ascue, drew their Fleet into Battalia; the Re∣solution of the Hollander; and the number of ships taken by the English. Also, the chasing of divers ships to the Downs; the taking of some English by Captain Bradshaw; the sinking of the London Faulcon; the number of ships surprized in Sole-Bay neer Yarmouth; and above one hundred sail of Colliers com∣ing into the Downs, bound for LONDON. With the seizing of all the ships and goods belong¦ing to the English Merchants at St. Mallows in France; And the Kings Proclamation to all his subjects. London Printed for G. Horton, 1652.
Bloudy Newes from Sea. SIR, ON the 9th of this instant Septemb. Gen. Blake, and Sir George Ascue called a Councel of Officers to consult about the engaging of the Dutch Fleet; And accordingly with great alacrity and mutual affection it was resolved to fight them; in pursuance whereof, his Ex∣cellency gave direction for a squadron of ships to be drawn forth, to be commanded by valiant Capt. Coppin, who sailing to∣wards them, soon surprized about 18, laden with Salt, Wines, strong-water, and other rich Merchandizes, & bound from Nants;
About two in the afternoon, the whole Navy advanced; and within ten Leagues of Scilley they discovered the enemy, who made a shew as if they would immediatly fight; but towards the evening declined En∣gagement: The next day they appeared a∣gain in sight, but keep off at a distance; so that the Gen: is in dayly pursuit of them; Their lying off at the head of our fleet is thought to be in policy; for by a Scout that we have taken, we are informed that Mich. de Ruttier their Admiral is resolved to fight us, onely he waves the dispute, until the coming up of Vice-Admiral Evarson from Zealand, whose Mariners are said to be famous both for courage and policy. In the interim, we have taken ten more of their Merchants, viz. The Lyon of Flushing, the Prince, the Hopewel, &c. each ship carrying between 20 & 30 Guns. Several Merchants ships having staid at
the Isle of Wight for a convoy, at last ob∣tained one from Portsmouth; and being all bound for London, they had not been long at sea, ere they met with the Holland Fleet between Beachie and this Town; but the Frigat and a ship bound from Morlaix be∣ing most to the windward than the rest, kee∣ping the shore close, run aground; the rest being a head of them got away: These two being run aground, the enemy left them, & followed the rest above two hours; but all in vain, for they got safe under our Castle, and the other two got cleer off the next Tide. About which time, the Batchelor and Ann frigats gave fight to four Dutch-men of War, but being not able to maintain the dispute, declined engagement, and recovered Mary sound, getting off safe, though above 100 Guns were fired at them. The famous ship called the Faulcon of London, laden with Iron and Lemons from Bilbo is sunk neer the Lands-end.
By the KING. WE have with unspeakable grief of heart long be∣held the distractions of this our Kingdom; Our ve∣ry soul is full of angnish untill We may find some remedy to prevent the miseries which are ready to overwhelm this whole Nation by a civil War. And although all Our endeavours tending to the composing of those unhappy differences betwixt U, Our Unele, and Cozen the prince of Conde (though purued by Us with all zeal and since∣rity) have been hitherto without the success We hoped for; yet such is Our constant and earnest care to preserve the publike pee, that we shall not be discouraged from using any Expedient, which by the blessing of the God of Mercy, may lay a firm foundation of peace and happinesse to all Our good Subjects. To this end, observing that ma∣ny mistakes have arisen about the expelling of the Cardi∣nal, which happily may be prevented for the future, We have thought fit to propound to you, That some fit per∣sons may be by you inabled to tret with the like number to be authorized by Us, in such a manner, and with such freedom of Debate, as may best tend to that happy con∣clusion which all good men desire, The peace of the King∣dom: Wherein as we promise in the word of a King all safety and encouragement to such as shall be sent to Us, if you shall chuse the place where We are for the Treaty, which we wholly leave to you, presuming of the like care of the safety of those We shall imploy, if you shall name another place; So We assure you, and all Our good Sub∣jects, that (to the best of Our understanding nothing shall be therein wanting on Our part, which may advance the
true Catholike Religion, securing the Law of the Land, (upon which is built as well our just prerogative, as the propriety and liberty of the subject) confirm all just pow∣er and priviledges of Parliament, and render Us and Our people truly happy by a good understanding betwixt us and Our subjects. Bring with you as firm Resolutions to do your duty, and let all Our good people joyn with us in Our prayers to Almighty God for his blessing upon this Work. If this proposition shall be rejected by you, We have done Our duty so amply that God will absolve us from the guilt of any of that bloud which must be spilt. And what opinion soever other men may have of Our power, We assure you nothing but Our Christian and pious care to prevent the effusion of bloud hath begot this motion, Our provision of Men, Armes, and Money, being such as may secure us from further violence, till it please God to open the eyes of Our people. LEWIS, Rex. This Declaration being presented to the Duke of Or∣leans, it was with great alacrity resented by his Royall Highness, yet notwithstanding, many giddy-headed and factious spirits there are, who desire to be obnoxious to this present Treaty: Which to prevent, the new Cardinal of Retz doth take great pains, and endeavors what he can to mediate Affaires, not sparing his tongue or pen to come to an Agreement.
We have received further advertisements that the English and Dutch fleets are en∣gaged, and that a bloudy conflict hath hap∣ned, divers ships sunk, and many taken; the dispute being maintained with great resolu∣tion on both sides; but no just particulars can be given at present, by reason they are stil in continual action: Providence some∣times smiles upon the one: and soon after frowns upon the other. We have taken a∣bout 30 of the enemy in all; and many of ours are taken by Captain Bradshaw neer the Western Channel. The Patrick and Francis, two of the Scots Kings frigats, do much infest those Coasts: The like doth the enemy about Yarmouth Roads, who desperately atempted the taking of two ships riding at anchor in Sole-bay; Upon which sad tydings, we received this com∣fortable news, that 100 sail of Colliers are coming into the Downs, bound for London. The French at St. Mallows have seized on all the ships & goods belonging to the English Merchants. FINIS.
