B4810 E1040_5 99866914 168947
Britains Glory: BEING A RELATION OF THE SOLEMNITY Wherewith the English Nation Residing in LIVORNE, Entertained the Joyful Tidings of His Sacred Majesties Happy Return to His ROYAL THRONE. JULY 13. Stilo Novo. LONDON: Printed for Edw. Farnham in Popes-head Alley, 1660.
Britains Glory. THE News being arrived by a Corriere dispatch'd from London to these Merchants, of his Majstis appearance at the said place, and of the magnificent preparations there made for his entry, confirmed by the printed paper; There were in this City appointed four persons viz. M. Henry Brown, Walwin Guascon, Thomas Goddard, and Gilbert Seerl, These with Joseph Kent superintendent, chose other Counsellors, to con∣sent and resolve what was needful for a demonstration of the Nations gladness and resentment of his Majesties Recovery. After the expense of some days by a great number of labou∣rers, and direction of Engeniers was framed in midst of the Pi∣azza a losty Fabrique, supported by four great Columns curi∣ously wrought with Carv'd work, and Painting, which with o∣ther Inventions added Splendour to the Show on the dayes of Feasting. The first of those three chosen for that purpose being Wed∣nesday the 13th. July. The design was proclaimed early in the morning from the mouths of a 150 Chambers. About ten of the Clock began a peal of Ordnance fir'd a∣board seventeen English Ships within the rode, which lasted all day, during which time the harmony of Trumpets was heard throughout the City, who with Peach-colour'd-Banners attended the Prizes; by Intervalls refreshing themselves at the Merchants Habitations, who generally for these days kept Open house. About dinner time, the Feast being that day in that of Mor∣gan Read Cons; the arms of the King were with great rejoycing reared; at which action, as also on the arrival of the Deputys and Captain of the Merchant Ships were fired 20 Chambers, the like at Mr. Dethicks, where were entertained the Commander of the men of Warre and other Gentlemen, and every health proclaimed
by their report, on a sign given by their Butlers of its pro∣motion. Neer seven at night they began an orderly March along the Great-street, where they were encountred by a multitude of strangers, whose curiosity had made leave their own home to view our English, who richly accoutred their Hats laden with ribbon of no mean price, where through the Gold and Sil∣ver the silk seem'd to peep and ow its peach colour for the King. At the house of Mr. Wil. Mico in the said great-street was seen the Portrait of the King in a rich frame under a Canopy of Da∣mask Within Mr. Dethicks appeared a great square Lanthorn ha∣ving on one side painted the Kings Arms with the French Motto, Dieu et Mon Droit, and on the other a flourishing Oak with golden-fruit, on the Boughs were placed three royall Crowns with this inscription, Floret querous, Rex amplius. At Mr. Sidny's was another Lanthorn Octangular with the Atchive∣ments of the Kings of Great Britain, and on the contrary side a Dragon devouring Cromwel: others of this nature were seen at Mr. Child his house and many of the Nation. From Mr. Mollish and Brown's was continually distributed bread and wine to all comers, and along the Neighbourhood to the house of Charls Longland was scattered money and com∣sets, being a place of great concourse for the indigent rabble, whom the Souldiers could not impede from mustering in troops. The Feast ended. the Pretenders entred the Lifts, being 12 Lads habited in the English Livery, who placed on a row, the sign being, given made triall of their Active running, and the Prize was given him, shook first Hand with the Goal, being some ells of damask embellisht with Ribbon and a Sattin pendant, whereon was portraid the Kings Arms. This ended gave way to the Bonefires, which were kindled, as also a train to 150 Chambers & numerlesse Rockets; besides which on the Fabrique (where were fixt lights on all sides to discover the rarity of the Painting,) were plac'd fire Serpents affording a delightfull though irregular motion in the Ayr; and
after the Consumption of divers Gironels or Fire wheels suc∣ceeded two Pyramids stuft with Fire-work with exquisite or∣der, the Windows and Turrets of the English shining with Torches and Candles burning some hours together. Wednesday the 14th was renewed the firing the Chambers, the distribution of Bread and Wine, and scattering Comfets and Money, with the loud-mouth's Guns roaring from the Ships. About four of the Clock appeared a Triumpham Charriot, on the Piazza drawn by Horses, upon it was seen a woeddy meuntain, thereon a gilt Oak rich of Silver leaves, and on the Boughs three Crownes Royall beset with Pearl, in the midst of this Chas∣riot richly girdled with a fair Gallery with four silver infants at the corners, sate the Majestique statute of Peace, about her lay scattered Arms and the neglected implements of Warre; On the front of the Gallery was written this verse. Arbor honoretur, cujus nos Vmbra tuetur. To' th Stock wee'l homage yield Whose shade doth prove our shield. This no small Pageant being born twice round the Piazza was at last setled to the publique view of the people, and right a∣gainst the place of the forementioned motto, sprang from the foot of the said Hill two Fountains of Wine, which continued running for all comers during the Feast. Under the greatest Pageant, on a great Pedestal of the same work stood a fair statue of the King richly adorned and glit∣tering, by the mixture of Gold interwoven in the habit, on the top of the said Pile was a St. George on horseback with Launce in rest in a posture of wounding an Over-grown Dragon under him. At Mr. Mico's was added the portraiture of General Monck plac'd beneath that of the King, with addition of many Tablets with Motto's and fireworks, & a continual clangor of Trumpets. The hour for the race being come, the Great-street swarm'd with Ladies, strangers, and Citizens, who in their Coaches were seen loaden with those additional attractives of bravery. Not inferiour was the appearance of 12 English Cavaleers, bravely mounted, their Horses-mains plaited with Ribbons, who accompanyed the Prize for that day, which was Cloth of Gold, and a banner with the Kings Arms; while this was condu∣cting
before the Judges, the Deputies were seen with a high Civility presenting Poems wrought in honour of his Majesty, to the Ladies and Gentry. After this the Bridles of six high metald Barbs were slipt, whose eager spirits not brooking delay, did not precisely start on the sign given, wherefore none could rightly be judged Victor. In the evening Torches and Lanthorns were alighted at each mans door, the Chambers had again found their voices, and the fire works were renewed on the Pageant. After this the Triumphant Chariot was brought from the Pi∣azza, and conducted by a number of Torches before Mr. Mico's dore, by whom were made an Noble Invitation, the street by the multitude of Torches resembling noon day; From within the Chariot was heard a Symphony of divers instruments, and by exquisity Musitians were sung divers Ayrs to a Person of Qua∣lity in that House, whereof the crowd were partakers. The harmony ceasing, the Banquet was prepared, to which came the Governour of the Arms with the fficers, and sundry Merchants of the City It would swell this relation to a volume to describe the magnificence of the Supper, the delicacy of the Pare, and generosity of the Wines tendred to the Palats of more then 50 guests. Twas indeed extraordinary, and no less to see so many Glasses of sundry shapes and several walks (like-Chessemen) whose Leader was one of six foot high, and of an indifferent Capacity. It hapning that on this day was Celebrated the Festival of the Grand Dukes Nativity, in honour whereof the Nation had orde∣red the English Ships to proceed on firing their Guns, which they did. To the encrease of this Mirth the Governour of the Arms being at the Banquet on purpose began six-glasses to the Health of his Majesty, and in demonstration of the unspeake∣able joy possessing his Highness of Tuscany, for his Majestys happy return to his Royal Throne, the sign being given, the Guns from over the Collonels gate and the Pisan (which had been si∣lent 40 years) began; and so round the Town rang a Royal Peal, which being so unexpected, caused no small astonishment to the Company, who in requital began that of the Grand Duke,
which was proclaimed by the thundering of the Guns aboard Ship, which continued almost all night. Thursday the 15th, Barbaresco (a Gent: Groome) pretending that his Horse who had got, and kept the start of the rest the day before was voted Victor, and deserved the Prize notwith∣standing the dispute; wherefore the Judges were or dered to consult with the Governour & Auditors; after many depositions they bandied, the result was that the starting not being fair were should runne again the next day. The Triumphant Chariot being brought on the Piazza to its station, the Conduits were again opened, whence the thirsty were satiated. At noon the Nation, were invited and plenti∣fully Feasted at Mr. Mellish and Browns, where was daily distri∣buting Bread and Wine, and scattering Money to the poor, and also the Health of his Majesty and Royal Family went round, to every one were fired 32 Chambers, so that the incessant noise seemed a continued Battel; Others of the Nation were feasted by Mr. Serle. The hour of seven at night being ordained for a Prize of Cloth of Silver, the reward of the nimblest rowers at Sea, peo∣ple swarmed at the Boca or Port, on the walks leading to the Fortress and Mould were Coaches cram'd with Ladies, though many were got into Felucca's, and notwithstanding such a presse of Boats that carryed people, the Competitors were scarce discern'd. However twas infinitely pleasing to see so many smal Vessels ordered in Squadrous, which with their continual firing made it seem a Sea fight which lasted two hours. After sun-set the Bonefires were renewed and 200 Chambers shot off. On the Grand Pageant besides Rockets and Gironels (as were on the foregoing nights) fire was given to a dreadful Dragon, from whose jawes and eyes flew such a quantity and variety of flame that it was esteemed the finest rarity had yet been seen. The Livornesi desirous to augment the Pastime of that night, had framed a Pageant drawn with horses richly trapped, which a∣bout night when the fireworks ceased they brought on the Pi∣azza guarged with men in rich Liveries and Torches: This they fixt at the Governours door. Thereon was a beautiful Pile
or Structure representing the grot or den of Sleep circled with Golden Stars, therein were exquisite Musitians in habit alike with fair Plumes making a consort of voice to the Harmony of divers Instruments Represented, Sleep awakened by so loud Ac∣clamations for the present Joy, and courting certain Gentle∣men to participate, which they did by an addition of Musick. Which device being so suddainly put together was lit∣tle inferiour to the rest of the Inventions. This Pageant having made its Exit, the English Nation to ho∣nour the Governour brought another of theirs upon the Piuzza attended with a Cavalcata and store of Torches, placing it before the Palace, where with excellent Musick the time was spent till midnight. The Festivals had ended here but the second Prize still de∣pending, another race was agreed to be runne on Friday the 16th, which coming at the horu appointed the steeds were ranked, and on the Trumpets sound they fairly started and ranne, the premio assign'd the Deserver. But because the conclusion of these Rejoycings would not have suted with the magnificence they were begun if only this Race had been the Period; About sun-set was seen in the Piaz∣za another Pageant whereon the King Arms were elevated and of a large dimension, and when the light had fully given way to darknesse, the Gironels and other fire-works on the upper part played. After them a great quantity of Reckets wherewith the said Armes very Artificially were compassed, whence very often they dispersed pretty fancies, the splendor of Lights and Torches being as the former; so this night as Mr. Sidneys. For the close, fire was put to a great Gironel which in form of a Diadem Crown'd the said Arm's, which in a moment vented so many flames, at once covering the Piazza, as if fire had rani'd from Heaven, with which and the general applause of the multitude the Show was ended. FINIS.
