B5241 E1841_3 R209632 99868497 170451
ARNALDO, OR, The Injur'd Lover. An Excellent new ROMANCE. Written in Italian by the Excellent Pen of GIROLAMO BRUSONI. Made English by T. S. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at the George in Fleetstreet, near St Dunstans Church. 1660.
To the Noble young BARONET Sr. JOHN SALUSBURY OF LLVENNY. Most Honoured Sir, THE High Ascendent, of your so Juvenile and Early accomplish∣ments, as they attract the Admi∣ration of all, so they advertise your Friends in particular, what Cal∣culation
their Hopes may make, of the Generous Influences your Meridian-Perfections, will one day impart to your Country and Family, in the Happy Conjun∣ction of Experience with your present Eminent Qualities. But this is not the onely Auspi∣cious Prognostick of your Grow∣ing Excellencies, to such as have any Acquaintance with your Illu∣strious Family, and remember either the assiduous Education you have received from your most Excellent Lady-Mother; or the Hereditary Virtue, to which by a long Descent from your Brave Ancestors (as Sr. John
the Strong, Sr. John the Loiall, and Sr. Thomas (as your Ho∣noured Father's Works speak him) the Learned) you are Heir Apparent, and Tenant en le Taile. But, Brave Sir, to overpasse, in this Place, that Just Tribute, which I can never sufficiently render to your Merits, much lesse when confin'd to the brevity of an Epistle; It is your Fame, that hath brought the Injur'd Lover (after his Travells, through Ita∣ly, France, and Spain,) to im∣plore from your Generosity that Protection, wherewith you may at once change both his Name and Fortune.
And be pleads that his Addresse is most properly Directed to you, Sir, in that the Subject of this Story, is a Seasonable Lecture to such Young Gentlemen, upon the many Malignant Influxes, evill Women have upon the Honour and Happinesse of such, who in∣cautelously converse with them. Now, to conclude, Honoured Sir, The vouchsafe of your Patro∣ciny, and Courteous Reception of this, will encourage me to expedite my intended Translation, of the Life and Labours of your Ho∣nourable and Learned Ancester, the Famous John Salusbury, Lord Bishop of Chartres, and
Minister of State to Henry the Second. Whose Discourse judici∣ously treating of the Vanities of the Court, is almost ready to be Prest for your Service; A work, which will be more suitable to your Improving Gravity, and more proportionate to the extra∣ordinary obligations of, Worthy Sir, Your most humble Admirer T. S.
To the Most Illustrious, and Most Excellent Lord, the Lord Don GASPARE DI TEVES And GUSMAN. Marquesse of Fuentes, Lord of Lerena, Ve∣nazuza, Arrucas, of the Isles of Montelion, and Guadalupe; Perpetual Patron of Victo∣ry, Commandador di Colos, in the Order of St. Jago, Perpetual Chief Justice, and Grand Secretary of the Citie of Sivil; Gentle∣man of the Chamber to his Catholick Maje∣sty; His great Master of Horse for the Field, one of his Council, his Ambassador Extraor∣dinary to the Princes of Italy, and Ordinary to the most Renowned Republick of Ve∣nice. Most Illustrious, and most Excellent Lord; IT is now a good space since that I found my self engaged to pub∣lish
to the world, the Obligations, which I owe to the Merits of your Excellency: And I began a few years past, to confesse in part, this my engagement in the Dedication of my Mercury's Grove to your Excellency: But that Work having incountred a gale of adverse For∣tune, which detained it in the Presse untill now; I have been presented with an occasion of pub∣lishing, out of Complacency to o∣thers, this little Piece, a birth of the more happy years of my youth; and being unwilling to let it escape, without satisfaction in this also to my obligation, I have made it to bear in it's Front, as it's Tutelar Numen, the most renowned Name of your Excellency. Nor ought this work, because it contains the calamities of a Lover, equally in∣jur'd
by Love, and Fortune, to be therefore though unworthy of your Excellencie's perusall; for the Loves of this Knight being made Legiti∣mate, by Virtue and Constancy, they merit the Reading, and with∣all the Compassion of all Noble and Generous Souls, that know, and knowing can tell how to ma∣nage so Noble and Generous a Pas∣sion, in terms of Honour and Fide∣lity. And to whom more proper∣ly doth this Romance belong, fraught with the Passages and Adventures of Love, and Fortune; of Courtesy, and Honesty; of Magnanimity and Generosity; than to your Excel∣lency, Mirrour of all the Noble Vir∣tues, and Endowments, that render your Excellency Honourable, and Considerable to any, that have at∣tained the least knowledge of, or
acquaintance with them? Be plea∣sed to accept the Loyalty and the Love of this Knight, which with Reverence consecrates to the Im∣mortality of his Glory, that Fide∣lity and Obsequy which constitutes me, Your Excellency's most humble and most obliged Servant Girolamo Brusoni.
A BRIEF ACCOMPT Of the Book and Author. THe Injur'd Lover, or Arnaldo, (whose Story is here presented) in part of Com∣pensation for the hard usage he found from the Frailer Sex, hath met with a more kind enter∣tainment with all the Nations, whose Languages have since spoke his Adventures. He was for Countrey and Quality a Grecian of Regal Extraction; and having as he con∣ceived been more hardly dealt with by Women than his innocence deserved, and experimenting the dangers that result from Converse with that Sex, yea even from the most vertuous of them, though not alwayes through their fault; He, in charity to bold and unheedy Youth, who are most obnoxious to their Malignity, desired his friend Philiternus to commit his Life to Writing, and commend it to their Observation. Which Injunction Philiternus faithfully dis∣charged by Penning this Relation in the Greek
Tongue, from whence the Gravity of some Spani∣ard condescended to teach it that stately Language, wherewith Mr. Herberai, an excellent Personage was so well pleased that he converted it into French, which Translation being approved of by Bartol. Marassi, a Florentine, he made it Italian; and from his Copy Claud. Holiband above three∣score years since turn'd it into English. But the Story being as yet but two Books; and, as we may suppose, much castrated in its undergoing so many Transmutations, our Worthy Author Girolamo Brusoni, a most Ingenious Italian, lighting upon the French Translate, and think∣ing so excellent a Subject ought to be improved to a greater heighth, it being of so universal benefit, and being thereto pressed by Signi∣or Michiele, a great Wit of his Acquain∣tants, he set upon the Augmentation, and per∣fecting of the same. Which being done many years since, was lost, together with sundry his other youthfull Composures of the like nature, in some troubles wherein this our Author was imbroil'd. But about six years since, not hearing by any means of his lost papers, (as if all conspired to make this work absolute) he, in his Maturer years, again re-assum'd his Resolution of pur∣suing this design; and, as he obtain'd leasure from more urgent Affairs, out of the few Notes he had left, compleated this Discourse; wherein
yet, according to his own words, He hath made a Spiggot of a Launce. So that this Work having encountred so uni∣versal an Acceptation, whil'st imperfect (in comparison); and being now Ornify'd by the Polite Pen of one of the most refined Wits of Italy, it cannot misse of a Correspondent wel∣com, as it is now a second time compleated for English Perusal. But this by the way, from him that hath been at the pains of this last Translation; That it is against both his Opinion and Custom to multiply this kind of Reading, which ought to be used moderatly, as Sauce, not substantial food, the end of Romantick Poetry, being 1. Either to at∣tract the Curious and Carelesse Eyes of such, who can be no otherwayes induc'd to cultivate their wits, and inform their Minds; or 2. To Re∣create (not without some profit) the over-intense Spirits after more serious Reading; or 3. To Reprove Powerfull Vice without danger to the Mythologist; or 4. Lastly, to Affect those with Vertue thus set off by Fable, whose Luxuriant Fancies cannot descend to the looking on more plain Morality. This, from the Authority of my Honoured Lord Broghill, and the Apologies of the two Renowned Knights, Sir Philip Sidney, and Sir John Harington, is the substance of what can
be said in behalf of this kind of Poetry. Which Rules being observed, the pains I have been at may be admitted this Publication, and the Rea∣der's perusual with equal safety and delight. I could tell thee, what Affinity this Fiction hath to our present Revolutions in State, and in∣stance in the Maxims here and there scattered for thy search; but that were to Anticipate thy Curiosity, and pervert the primary design of Thy Friend T. S.
ARNALDO; OR THE Injur'd Lover. BOOK I. THe day had already began to dawn upon the Mountains tops, when getting out of the poor Lodging wherein I had past the precedent night with reasonable tranquillity, I began my journey; and the Sun had not in∣creased so far as to make a full disclosure of his face to mortals, when finding my self at the en∣trance of a very spacious Forrest, into which my Horse thrust himself, and through abstruse and disconsolate tracks, penetrated into its most secret retirements, I set my self in the heat of that illustrious Planet's Meridian-rayes, un∣der the leavey-shade of a lofty Platan, to repose me near the pleasant murmure of a little rive∣let,
which, dilated into sundry windings, sought to empty it self into a River, with which the Forrest was in a manner wholly inviron'd. It was not long that I had there sate, before the pleasant whisperings of the Aire and Brook had reconciled my eyes to sleep, and that I made my head to lean on the Root of that Platan; and scarce had I given up my brows to a languid slumber, when sleep represented to me the ap∣pearance of a young Lady. I fancied, that with a behaviour sufficiently obleiging, she en∣quired of me my name, quality, and the occa∣sion of my journey: But I not having (oppres∣sed by an unusual lethargy) knowledge, or power to find words to satisfie her demand; the Apparition, offended at my fatal taciturnity, smote me on the breast with a Serpent: Thus, saith she shall I be sure to know who thou art; and suddenly disappear'd. I by this time awaking with a lowd cry, found my heart perplex'd by a cruel passion, and my face no lesse covered with tears than with sweat. Having there∣fore deposed the muddinesse of my face in the clearnesse of the water, and forded the delight∣full rivolet, I felt my passions augmented to that heighth, that they oppress'd my spirit, and equally set at liberty the reins of my Horse, and those of my Reason; nor took I any other food then what my griefs administred, to whose mer∣cy fortune had abandoned me. Thence, just at the time that Sol, leaving the lownesse of the Valleys, retreated his rayes to the tops of the Hills, I came into a place that had an Ascent; from which there represented it self to my eye
the prospect of a great Plain, in form of an ar∣tificial Theater, which, incircled on every side by the Forrest, dignified its Center with a stately Pallace, berounded with a well proportioned fronte of little Cypresses, which expected the favour of time, to increase with their umbrage the melancholinesse of that Seat; which, covered with black Marble, made a fair but mournfull disclosure of its Grandure. I therefore fix'd my eye full of admiration upon that strange Edi∣fice; and whil'st the curiosity to know the in∣habitants of so lugubrious a place, led me out of my former track; I saw issue out of the oppo∣site part of the wood, a Troup of men, which in the sadnesse of their habits, and langour of their deportment, declared themselves very much grieved. There went before this compa∣ny a Knight, who by his own appearance, and by the Garb of his followers might be presumed Lord of the rest, as, with his sighs, and the abun∣dance of his tears he made himself believ'd more then all others afflicted. He breathed from his pale and meager face a most lamentable pensive∣nesse, which tormented the hearts of the behol∣ders, so much the more forcibly, by how much the more unsuteable so mournfull a look ap∣peared to so courteous an aire. In the mean time the melancholy Knight, drawing near to the place where I, for the unexpectednesse of the incounter, had made a halt, and raising his eyes to steal a look; he discover'd me: although at the first accost he appear'd somewhat mov'd, yet with a gracefull smile he clear'd up the tem∣pest of his face, constraining me with a sweet
violence, to take, in his Heremetical habitation, a short repose. Thereupon, taking me by the hand, he conducted me with a very slow pace towards the gates of his house; over which I, who being a stranger made curious observations of the things of the place, saw a gilded scroul, in which with black Characters was ingraven these words: O man! that chance, or curiosity, Hath drawn this most unhappy lodge to view, Know 'tis own'd by such who onely death persue, And, (dying every moment,) cannot dye. Having with mine eyes run over, and with my mind lightly considered these Verses, we en∣tred into that disconsolate Mansion, wherein all things represented objects of heavinesse and grief; since the Hall and Chambers, hung onely with black furniture, wrought in the heart a sad melancholy, which almost bereaving a man of himself, in despight of all he could do did constrain him to shed tears. Over the Nieces of the doors of each room, there hung after the use of Italy several goodly pictures, but in as much as the representation that they made of Tragi∣cal Loves, did in a great measure impair their delightfulnesse; the eye might not be fix'd on them, without the prejudice of the mind, of∣fended by the strange sight of those miserable occurrences. Being left for a little space by the courteous Knight, to repose my body in a Cham∣ber lesse-sadly furnished, he returned himself in person to invite me to Supper, which by reason
of the hot season I found was prepared with real Magnificence in a very spacious Hall; where no sooner arriv'd, but carually casting my eyes on the Walls I there observed, covered by a thin Vail, a Magnificent picture, in which I dis∣covered depainted a young Lady, whose face seem'd to be descended to inform the Graces with all the proportions requisite to render it a breathing picture of beauty. Her complexion did onely mourn with dolorous appearance: a Vermillion stream of bloud, which trickling from her breast, transfixed by a little Dagger, ran to stain with mournfull drops her Attire. I was just about to vent by my mouth in words the curiosity of my mind to know what this picture did signifie, when it entred suddenly in∣to my thoughts, that perhaps from her took birth the deplorable cause, which held that house buried in so profound a silence. Yet by that modest respect which ought to regulate the a∣ctions of men well-descended, in another man's house, I refrained for that time to satisfie my curiosity, and sate down at Table with the Knight, where, besides the singularity and abun∣dance of the cheer, I admired the marvelous or∣der of the service, proper to a great Prince. Supper being ended, and finding the time con∣venient, I introduced a modest discourse tend∣ing to the satisfaction of my desires; with which I so mov'd the Knight, that he gave me no an∣swer but in these few words. Pacify you first the Ghost of Belisa with acquainting me Who you be, and the occasion of your journey; and then I will likewise to morrow (it being now
time that you retire to your repose) satisfie your curiosity. I obeyed him, but not without occasioning in him strange astonishment at so unwonted adventures. And the Knight assert∣ing a fatal necessity in his request, entertained me a short space in superfluous Complements of excuse, but not with superfluous Testimo∣nies of his incomparable generosity. Performing therefore the injunction of the Knight, he withdrew with a discomposed coun∣tenance into his Lodging, and I also was, with treatments of singular courtesie, attended and served, in the apartment prepared for me. There at last being left alone, I went to bed, assaulted by various thoughts, occasioned in me partly by the things I had heard, and partly by those which I did expect to hear the next day: and that which did not a little foment my inquietude, was, the reverberated memory of my absence from that person, which being more dear to me then my own life, I shall sooner want a Soul in my breast, then suffer my love to diminish in the least. Yet in the end wearied with long watching, I lightly accommodated my eyes to repose: but scarce had sleep distended his pleasant wings over my sen∣ses, when, first by a soft murmure gently struck and warbled, and after by a lamentable Musick, I was so awakened, that it was impossible for me in all that dismal night to receive the sweet∣nesses of Lethe. Thereupon I gave my self to hearken if I could know what so lugubrious a song might intend, in so late an hour; and knew in the end that the Knight my Host was the un∣happy occasion of that lachtimous ditty; af∣flicting
himself in renewing the rewfull me∣mory of his misfortunes, accompanied in this sad office by his servants, who, too tender in the affects of their Master, did increase with their vain plaints that grief, which they ought rather with mature prudence to have tempered. So long was the mournfull harmony of those no∣cturnal sacrifices, that I at last more moved by wearinesses than pity, desired nothing else but only that the Sun, dissipator of vain phantasms, which in the night obnubilate the phancies of mortals, would rise and illuminate the hemi∣sphear; and already it (become compassionate of my wailing) almost began to dart the Horizon with his rayes: When the Knight entering in sud∣denly and domestically into my Room, invited me to be a spectator of the Divine Ceremonies, which in a little Temple adjoyning to his Pal∣lace he did celebrate. Being come thither, I re∣sted no lesse stupified with the richnesse of that edifice, which in the concisenesse of its Gyre emulated the sumptuosity of the most renown'd Temples of the World; than with the singulari∣ty of its Architecture, which seemed to have dis-embowelled it self to render it a miracle of Art. This admirable Chappel was, in the exteri∣our circuit, of a spherical figure, berounded with Columnes of black Marble, upon Pedestals of brasse, and with Chapters, and Arches of the same matter marvelously wrought. In the spaces be∣tween the Columnes, and over the Arches, which supported a front of double Cornishes, there was placed, in proportionate distances, sundry Sta∣tues, Historical and Fabulou, some of Porphyr,
others of Allablaster and Brasse: but the summity of the roof, wrought with Marquetry into little foliages of Marble, inclosed a great Statue which by its aged face, by its wings disjointed from the shoulders, and by a dyal put in his right hand, represented an Image of the Temple. On the West-side, was situate the Magnificent and lofty Gate by which men enter to Worship; in whose prospect towards the East, did glitter an emi∣nent Altar of purest Marble, inchased with most precious Jemms; and such, and so much was the splendor, which from the Carbuncles, Chry∣solytes, and Crystals did beam forth, that with∣out the help of windows, which might impart the rayes of the Sun, it sufficiently illuminated that religious dwelling of the Divinity. On the o∣ther parts South and North, hung in equal pro∣portion two exceeding large pictures, lesse rich indeed in Jewels than the Altar; but frauded perhaps with greater cunning, since it seemed (to who intentively beheld them) that the Painter and the Carver had strove in formalities to give the World a marvelous excesse of Art; so excel∣lently were discovered the draughts of the pen∣cil, in giving life to the tele; and so rarely were imprest the touches of the chizel in inlivning the Marbles, that they served as an Ornament to the tele. The Walls were covered with ex∣ceeding black & splendid jet, and the pavements did even shine with the black Marbles which were laid upon them. In this noble Chappel was erected, more than two foot above the floor, a Sepulcher of polite Alablaster finely historified with divers impresses of Love, bordered and gar∣ded
with little leaves of Myrtle and Cypresse: about which with Greek Letters, which did seem just then dictated by a pensive Amorist, his Pen being placed upon the last Character, with a grace able to inchant Souls; was read these verses. This Sepulcher upon the Theban shore, (Since it to th' bones he could not consecrate Of fair Lucinda, whom he did adore) Arnaldo ri'd unto her Ghost ingrate. Now, whil'st the Priests went about with Sa∣cred Rites, and pious Oblations to appease the anger of the offended Divinity; I sometimes suf∣fered the curiosity of my eyes to wander after the guidance of fancy about the things, which there within did offer themselves to the mind to be considered: and with so much the more inquie∣tude, by how much, through the small know∣ledge I drew from thence, the desire of behold∣ing them came to foment. The Divine functi∣ons ended, the Knight, after having augurated to me that day to be happy, took me by the hand and led me out of the Temple, dismissing the people which did follow him, and carried me all alone through a narrow path into the Forrest; just where a little Mountain dividing it self into three equal parts, did form with natural plea∣sures the prospect of a delightfull Theater. There did issue from its foot a transparent rivolet; but so scant at that time of water, that it did reveal to the negligence of the eye, all the secrets of its bottom. There were seen through those fresh streams little fishes to sport themselves among the candid pebles. But about the moistned banks
did grow as in well ordered knots, a hundred va∣rieties of odoriferous Herbs, embroidered with a thousand sorts of flowers, which opening as it were their breasts to the ruddy morning, did emit the aire of so delicate a perfume, that it had power to efface in great part from my heart the annoyance, which through the past waking, and through the dolefulnesse of the things which I saw, was there so deeply rooted. The back∣side of the Tripartite hill overspread with Oaks and Pines, by nature dispersed and disposed with a negligent art, did overshadow some very green Meadows, which in the middle of the Forrest, haply through the benefit of the neighbouring Brook, renouncing to the commerce of the plants, did conserve in their pleasant largenesse the roots of the flowers inviolate. In one of these the Knight sat down, and I placing my self over against him, after many sighs in a languish∣ing and sad tone, he gave beginning to his Narra∣tion after this manner. From the first Original, which it may be you will not believe, I must de∣rive to you, most dear guest, the dolorous relation of my uncomfortable disadventures: and though the mind abhorreth the remembrance of past griefs; yet because notwithstanding custom hath converted grief into nature, I shall fully make relation of as much as I shall think necessary, that you may be able another day to manifest to the World the cruelty of a woman, and the dys∣asters of a Lover abused. I was born (Philiternus) in the famous Citie of Thebes, Queen of Boetia, of a stock both generous, and nearly-allied to the Royal family, with replicated bonds of con∣sanguinity;
and from my birth had given me the name of Arnaldo (for thus my father was called himself: a Knight no lesse renowned in the Counsels of State then in the matters of War). Being grown to boy's estate, the puissant King Agenor my Uncle would have me dwell in his Court, to be brought up in the noble Company of his sons, whence I learnt in a little space the qualities convenient to a Knight of great birth; nor did I indure much labour to attain to the highest Dignities of the Court and King∣dom; nor was I envied (if it be lawfull for me to say it) by any; having preobliged the affe∣ctions of all hearts, with the affability of my manners, with the complacency of my con∣ditions, and the profusenesse of my riches: I obtained in gift from Heaven a Wit, greater then my Fortune. Now it befell for my fatal dis∣ease that I being with the Court in Thebes, there pass'd from this life to a better Osiander, a princi∣pal Knight and well deserving from the Crown; whose obsequies the King himself was pleased to honour with his presence, with all the flower of the Nobility of his Kingdom. Oh that do∣lorous Dagger wounded me to the very heart, with the mournfull remembrance of that most unfortunate day! Among the other friends of the defunct Cavalier, which assisted at his Funeral, there was a young Lady his daughter, which be∣sides her being very beautifull of face, and com∣placential of deportment, with so pitifull a deje∣ctednesse did bewail the death of her father, that each circumstance in the Ocean of those tears made shipwrack of a heart. She had disordered
with her tender hands her silver tresses, whence one part of them descending on her shoulders, in precious Rings did incatenate the mind of the Spectators in stupor of her extream beauty: the other but ill retained by her hair-laces ran to bathe themselves in the dolefull floud of sor∣row, which overran the face, ambitious perad∣venture to inrich with Pearls the nudity of their Gold. Thence her amiable face appeared a Sun which arose from the Sea with locks moistened with celestial Dew, and even had usurped the property of the rising Sun, whil'st that fair face obfuscated by the Clouds of perplexity suffered it self to be seen without offence of the behol∣ders, whereas in the noon-tide of cheerfulness there was no eye so firm as to be able to sustain without peril of blindness the reflexion of its splendors. As soon as on this prodigious Creature I fix'd my looks, I presently felt a fatal shivering to seise my Soul, which calling my bloud to the succour of my heart, left my face overcast with a mortal paleness. And well might it be that he seemed dead, from whom one onely look of Lu∣cinda had ravished his Soul: Fair Lucinda was she called, who was the happy cause of all my de∣plorable unhappiness. I desired really to fly from that perilous sight; my mind being desirous to avoid the mortal danger which I foresaw; but Pity, a chaste companion that never separates from Love, recalled me to compassionate the grief of the weeping Damsel, by little and little introducing into my mind, and impressing in my heart those languishing beauties of which they finally became an Idolater, though they be
now reduced to ashes; the sparks of my love live notwithstanding, and shall live perpetually buried in those Cinders. That magnificent Funeral being ended, and having waited upon the King back to his lodging, I incontinent returned to that Temple, in which I had left my Soul deposited under the credit of Lucinda's beauty; and Love was for my misfor∣tune so courteous, that I had an opportunity of incountring her, whil'st among the sad troup of her Allies she returned to the forsaken house of her father; into which being entred she carried with her, and included between those blessed Walls, my perplexed spirit: whereupon remain∣ing almost an exanimate Carkass, I withdrew my self with a slow pace to my house, without knowing where I was, or whither I went: but onely that the privation of my spirit, transmi∣grated into the object beloved, made me with re∣iterated stingings to know, that yet I remained without a Soul in the World of the living. Be∣ing come there, I withdrew, with the violent companion of my new thoughts, from the con∣versation of my familiars; conceiting (unexpe∣rienced that I was) to find in solitude a com∣fort for my pain: but it did the more foment it; and I perceived in the end, that retirednesse from the commerce of people, wrought no other in me than a perplexing multitude of torments. Sleep & Appetite to food forthwith left me; and seeing my self lost in a Love upon my own ad∣vice, without hope, I began wholly to abandon the care of my health: So that in a few dayes I seemed wholly altered from my self in the eyes
of the world. I sometimes attempted to suppresse that fervent amorous passion, which did afflict me; but the more I forced my self to conceal it, the more invigorating it self, did it blaze out with greater impetuosity: whence, my malady continually increasing I saw my self in a little space reduced miserably to perish in the arms of melancholy and desperation. But Necessity, the discreet inventer of healthfull contrivances, would have me live for my hurt, suggesting to me that I ought not utterly despair of my health: since that, though the sight of and speech to Lucinda was not by fortune permitted me; I might notwithstanding easily be able to pene∣trate her meaning, finding among my Pages a youth which by being formerly a servant to her father, had accesse to the house with much liber∣ty, and without suspition. Whereupon I made known to him more with tears, which unawares betrayed my constancy, then with words, the in∣ternal grief of my heart, and I desired him he would follow his wonted visits more frequent∣ly; and report to me what he could discover of the person and wit of Lucinda. The Page obeyed me with sufficient discretion and modesty; and observing for some time what seemed to him op∣portune to my interests, he thrust me on finally with his perswasions, to write a Letter to my fair Enemy in this manner. I had rather most lovely Lucinda that you should draw the truth of those griefs which in∣viron my Soul from the sight of me; than, in the dead Letters of this Paper, you should discover their appearances: But although the black lines
of the ink cannot sufficiently expresse the abun∣dance of the tears, which the bitternesse of my dysasters distil from my heart; I shall at least at∣tempt thereby to manifest to you in some part the cruel passions of my Soul, which, hereto∣fore transfused into your beautifull breast, stands expecting from your goodnesse some gale of grace, which may suffice to keep it alive. Be therefore pleased to know Madam, that from that day, which you celebrated in the Temple the exequies of your most worthy father, I re∣mained in such manner fettered by the inchant∣ments of your Divine beauty, that when you re∣turned to your house to consumate with flouds of tears the paternal funerals, I retired to my Chamber to commence with the deluge of my plaints the celebration of the grief of my heart, which I had left inclosed in the radiant Sepul∣cher of your fair eyes. I will not deny Madam, but that I have striven to force my self to cast off the yoak of servitude, which the Soveraign Ma∣jesty of your looks hath imposed by vertue of Love upon the liberty of my spirit: but in sum the insuperable power of your beauty binding my Reason with Adamantine cords would have me follow chained, the Chariot of its triumphs. I set my self therefore to love you, because de∣stiny hath commanded it; and will love you eternally because my Inclination imposeth it. I request no other of you Madam, but onely that you would please to accept the sacrifice of my affections, which all contracted in one sigh of Love I offer to the Idol of your super-humane beauty; and that you would not at least deny
me the happiness of your presence, that I may in the consolation of your celestial remembrance sweeten the bitterness of my sufferings, and that you may discover in my mortified looks the lively pledges of my fidelity. ARNALDO. Having written this Letter & consigned it to Diffilus the Page, and instructed him in the man∣ner with which he should transact the message to Lucinda, I retired into the solitude of my Closet, strongly assaulted by fear and hope to expect the issue. Diffilus went, and by good for∣tune observed that Lucinda accompanied by a Girle her slave, was busied about her feminine imployments; he suddenly accosted her, giving her my Letter, intreating her to receive it. But she presently clouded her face, to which the mind imparted the sudden motions of its dis∣pleasure; and beholding him with a fierce look commanded him presently to get himself out of her sight, and never dare to do the like to her, as he tendered his life. But the cunning Groom that knew the anger of a beautifull woman to be just like the stop of a Noble Courser, not a jot affrighted by those angry appearances, multi∣plied his intreaties with no lesse affection than discretion: whereupon Lucinda seeing her self importuned with so much prudence, and being unwilling to yield to so affectionate an assault, arose to retire into some more private room, where it was not permitted Diffilus to follow her. Whence he perceiving of her intention, just as she was rising up to depart, cast the Let∣ter
into her bosom with so civil a behaviour, that she was necessitated to take it. An unhappy ne∣cessity for me; since as if it had been a Viper she presently tore it, reducing it to smoak and ashes. This unhappy accident, related to me by the Page, gave me easily to understand what I might expect from this my unfortunate Love. My tor∣ments therefore did in such manner increase, that I esteemed nothing but death able to deliver me. Thence I became so much an Enemy to my self, that my pain, become familiar to me, left me to fall irrecoverably into a Gulf of desperate thoughts; among which miserably consuming my dayes, there came to me one morning Diffilus, a curious observer of the actions of Lucinda, to tell me she would be the following night in an adja∣cent Temple, to celebrate the rites of a grand so∣lemnity: It ran in my mind that I might perad∣venture be able (hid amongst the nocturnal um∣brages, and covered with womans apparel) to weave a pleasant snare for my proud enemy; from which if I should get no other, I should at least with discourse in some part vent my grief, and perhaps that Love would second with greater successe the lively force of my words, than he had done the dead Characters of my Letter. This proposition being resolved on, and the night de∣sired being come, I drest my self in a sute of Be∣lisa my sister, and with the onely attendance of Diffilus, who in like manner habited did conduct me into the Temple; and just in the place where he knew Lucinda would sit, he placed me. And though the tendernesse of my age, which then scarce passing the eighteenth year, had not yet
covered my face with the first down; and the un∣certain twilight, which in the nocturnal dark∣resse the burning Tapers formed, did exceedingly favour our design: I kept neverthelesse with pre∣text of the coldnesse of the winter-season my face covered with a Vail, to avoid the curiosity of the eyes of them, who frequent the Temple for no other end, than with their looks to lay siege to Ladies. Scarce was I setled in that place, when Lucinda appeared accompanied with so numerous a train of servants, that I e∣steemed it a thing almost hopelesse to get any occasion to speak to her. Now while she was approaching to my seat, me-thought that my heart skipping within me, would have leapt out of my breast; and they that at that time had ob∣served my face would have judged me mortally wounded; it was at that instant overspread with so strange a palenesse. Yet in the end Lucinda was come close to me, and by the singularity of my dresse and deportment, believing me to be a Lady of great quality; courteously saluting me, she sate down close by me: But what I answered to her civil Salute, I cannot remember; my spi∣rits being at that time lost in consideration of the presence of her, who was the sole cause of all my enthusiasms, so that they were disabled to all external functions. Yet recollecting by little and little my banished forces, more by the benefit of the nights obscurity than by any violence I knew how to offer on my self; being assisted also by the sollitude in which Lucinda re∣mained (the croud of her servants being with∣drawn into several parts of the Temple) I be∣gan
plainly in this manner to expresse my mind. Dear Lucinda, if Fortune shall but grant me as much ability to expresse my torments, as you have power to make me feel them; I should re∣pute my self no lesse fortunate then you be fair. It will therefore concern your affability not to regard the confusion of my speeches, but to con∣sider the afflictions of my heart, that compels me to pronounce them. I know not, courteous Madam, what profit you can expect from my ruin; nor what good you can extract from my evil. The tearing of my Letter was truely an impetuous motion of an offended mind: but the continual rending of my heart can be impu∣ted to no lesse then an excess of cruelty. If this agree to a beautifull Lady, I leave you your self to judge. And what excuse can you find that may stand you instead to defend the severity of your treatment towards him, who loves you above his own life, or rather that as to his Ter∣rene Goddess, consecrateth upon the Altar of his fidelity, his heart in a perpetual Holocaust? You might easily, Madam, openly discover in my languishing looks what be the torments occasio∣ned no less by your beauty then by your rigour: and yet the suffering them grieves me not a jot, I am onely displeased that you are not pleased to accept my sufference; Sweeten, I implore you, with the drop of some favour the bitterness of such severity: for that Lady spots not the can∣dor of her honesty, which with a single syllable of courtesie favours the affects of a noble Cava∣lier her Adorer. Other favour, Madam, I re∣quest
not of you than verbal. It sufficeth me you be still served by honouring me with the Title of your Slave, and some declaration that my services are not indifferent to you; bles∣sing me now and then with a compassionate look. It's but a poor word, it's but a transient glance to one, whom it may recal from death to life. Thus proceeded I with a languishing voice, intermingling my prayers with my tears: But Lucinda (I believe that indignation would not permit her before, to reply) when she perceived me thus run on, with a trembling and discompo∣sed voice (a sign of great agitation of spirit) thus interrupted me. Arnaldo, I answer at this time to your propo∣sitions to the end you deceive not your self in the judgement you may passe upon my intenti∣ons, and lest perhaps presuming upon my si∣lence, you may not nourish some fallacious hope to your prejudice and my own dishonour. I shall know of a truth that you love me, if with desisting from your unadvised enterprize you will cease to trouble me. It is not for me to teach you what means you should use to cure this amorous infirmity: but if you be but as dis∣creet in your desires, as with your sighs you pretend to make me believe you are passionate; you would be able of your self to investigate the same. I use not to you that tigour which I ought, be∣cause I reverence your birth; but provoke me not in coming in this form, for you shall draw with security little satisfaction from your bold∣nesse.
Consider therefore, and remember that deceivers are wont to fall into the Nets of the deceits they intended for others. This answer of Lucinda was like Oyl, which, powred upon my burning heart, made the flame of my dolours to soment the more, since the more her words diminished my hope, the more they increased my desire of possessing her. Thence by considering the Divine beauty of her countenance, and by hearkning to the grace of her celestial discourse, ravisht out of my self, I re∣tained not in me any part of life, but onely Me∣mory, which attentively waited if it might be able to draw any thing of benefit from that con∣gression. But she neverthelesse having done speaking, and making as if she would be gone, if immediatly I did not obey her, I retired most dis∣consolate out of the Temple, and being returned to my house, I shut my self into my Closet, and there reasoned to my self. Miserable Arnaldo! What hope can be able still to flatter thy disconsolate heart to mislead thy tormented spirit? Perceivest thou not, O wretch, that thy unbridled desire having led thee too high, menaceth thee with some miserable precipice? And canst thou with open eyes be∣hold this ruin, without procuring to thy self at least that assistance which reason offers thee, of freeing thy self from the snares of this perfidious Love, which onely to render thee unhappy is come to disturb thy peace with his importunate furies? Alas! Alas, too vain are my thoughts, and too rash my purposes. It's impossible that I can ever heal this amorous infirmity, if beauty it
self, which bred it in my breast do not cure it, But not daring to hope that; what remains but that I miserably perish? My disconsolate spirit! wherefore stayest thou any longer in this thy miserable abode, now that it is become a ruth∣lesse Hell of uncomfortable afflictions? Unfor∣tunate Arnaldo! When thou beginnest to want strength, thou beginst to augment thy torments; and instead of seeking a Salve to thy evils by the constancy of a generous Cavalier, thou losest thy self in the weaknesse of vulgar Lovers! And how long hast thou served Lucinda, that she ought to give thee her Love? With the price then of a few moneths of servitude wouldest thou go about to purchase the reward of her fa∣vour? The gifts of Love are not obtained with so little labour. And again: Ladies desire to try the fidelity of their servants with slighting them: but after the Tempest of contempts, follows the serenity of favours, which they concede to their faithfull Lovers. Love therefore thy Lucinda; and since thy passions are not of a kind that do offend the Laws of the World or of Heaven, hope that the World and Heaven ought to assist thee in pursuing the end of thy servid and honest Love. Thus, agitated betwixt divers purposes, and lacerated by various skirmishes of different af∣fects, I knew not to which part, either of hope, or of desperation, to betake my self: but like a ship in the main Ocean tost by the winds, and as∣sauled by the Waves, I lived incloistered in the solitude of my Lodgings, without ever going out of the storm of my sadnesse, grief, and sorrow: I
obscured by the Clouds of sundry perturbati∣ons, all light of the knowledge of my unhappy state, and bereft my self of all the directions of reason to arrive to the Port of Consolations, by the unsafe complacency I took in my Enemie's beauty. Arnaldo; or, the Injur'd Lover. Book II. FOr as much as the King saw me not to ap∣pear any more in Court, and understanding in part my new affliction; thinking perhaps to please me, he elected me maintainer of a Justing which he had proclaimed for the approaching feast of the Spring. And though I was at that time more disposed to retirednesse then to the company of Gallants; yet because I would not displease the King, I accepted of it. Thereupon, my Soul flattered with I know not what gale of alacrity, I not onely prepared my self to the de∣signed enterprise▪ but communicated my reso∣lutions to a certain number of youthful Knights, and we agreed upon a most capricious Mask to present at the feast which, the night following the Turnament should be celebrated in the Roy∣al Hall. But for as much as the desire of glory did not ease my heart so much of the weight of its afflictions, that they did not still presse me down to the center of melancholly; being got up with the Aurora of that fatal day; I would have
the sadnesse of my habit accompany into the field the sorrow of my mind. So mounted on a Thracian Courser, I appeared in a military po∣sture, armed with black Arms, with a Cassock of black Velvet imbroidered with studs of Pearl: an embleme of my tears. The creft of my Helm was dignified with no other ensign, than a mournfull Plume of sable feathers. But in my shield I had caused to be depainted a Limbeck from which did drop-in divers parts of the distil∣led water with this Motto: And within burneth. Now whilst the elected Knights prepared to the course, I vaulted upon my Horse before the Scaffold of the Queen, and raising my eyes by chance, I saw my fair Lucinda, which upon an adjoyning Scaffold wrapt in her mournfull Man∣tle (in those Countreys they wear the mourning for their Parents a compleat year) darted through those Clouds the luminous rayes of her Divine face, and menaced with death, who ever through too much boldnesse should have attempted to fix their looks, on the immortal Sun of that glit∣tering beauty. What befell me upon so unexpe∣cted and astonishing a sight, if ever you have been a Lover, you are able to judge. I think I should never have remembred the affair that had called me into that place (I was so besides my self), if Lucinda taking notice of my stupefaction, with a sudden fiction of talking with another Lady of her acquaintance, had not, in depriving me of the serenity of her face, made me to forsee the tem∣pest, which began to rise in my heart, which, calmed in part by the consideration of my duty in so great an occurrence, I in the end gave be∣ginning
to the Tilting; of which as the incoun∣ters and accidents were various, so it would be necessary I should expatiate in a superfluous dis∣course if I should recount them all: It shall suf∣fice to tell you, that my successe in that adven∣ture was such, as I was not able to desire more with my vows to Fortune for the increasement of my glory: if love of glory had been able at that time to open a way in that breast which knew no other affect then the love of Lucinda. The Turnament being concluded with the day, and accompanied with the applause of all people to my house, I disarmed, and masked my self with the rest of the Knights my compani∣ons; and came into the Hall appointed for the Ball, where, in the presence of the King, the dan∣ces were begun. My consorts each of them ha∣ving took out his Lady to dance, I withdrew my self apart, more then ever troubled with my fears, and distracted by my griefs to see my self poor in that good of which I had so much need, and rich in that evil which I did so much abhor. Yet fi∣nally, (thrust forward by that desire, which, en∣kindling in my Soul, did set me all on fire) I drew near also with trembling feet to my fair Lucinda to invite her to dance, with almost a cer∣tain credence of being refused. And truely the suspension of that Lady confirm'd my belief: But yet in the end constrained by generosity, and by the accustomed frequency of such passages, she courteously gave me her hand. But what pas∣sions did not torment my wretched heart, seeing my felicity so nigh me, and the remedy of my in∣felicity so remote? The dance being ended,
which made me with its turns to experiment in my Soul, the turning of Ixions wheel to torment me; Lucinda, (perhaps annoyed with my pre∣sence), sate her self down so near the Queen, that it was impossible for me to speak a word to her: wherefore withdrawing (almost in despera∣tion) into a Ward-robe of the Kings, I assum'd a resolution to try my Fortune again by writing. And thus amidst the confusions of my spirit I in∣dited upon the Paper these confused words. Arnaldo to Lucinda. LUcinda, If I was granted as well the means to redressing my misfortunes, as I have occasion of expressing them; I am certain I should be more con∣tented, than now I find my self agrieved: But see∣ing you have bereft from my heart all feeling of con∣solation, though not from my mind all sense of good judgement; have patience also, I beseech you, if I write to you that which doth not please you. But what can I write, since I have written and said so much already of my passions and miseries? Let it suffice you to know, that except you be in the end moved with commiseration of my passion and suffer∣ings, you shall in a short time see the date of my life terminated in my death. And yet, alas, you might with more ease, if you so pleased, collect the infinity of my sufferings, from my words and from my tears, which abound in my eyes, the speaking mirrours of inamoured and languishing minds. I am truely mise∣rable, since the more constant my fidelity is, the more remisse you are in vouchsafing it a recompence. And whereas you think, that by giving peace to my life
you must proclaim War against your virtue; I will not desire you to do any thing, nor will I speak any thing that may offend you. It shall content me, if you but onely vouchsafe sometimes to cast your eye on my torments, so that the sweetnesse of your looks may al∣lay the sharpnesse of my sorrow: for by this slight fa∣vour you may easily obtain pardon for the many in∣juries you have so often done me. For this onely, be not I beseech you so mortal an Enemy; for if you desire I should dye, I also will not much desire to live; and so we may with little labour both receive satisfaction: where as on the other side denying me this, the memory of your cruelty and my death would be eternalliz'd. I verily believe, that if you would but follow for a little the impulse of reason, you should see how that it's an act unworthy of a noble, and courteous Lady, to torment those that offend you not; unlesse you can call offence my constancy in loving you, and the resolution I have taken of alwayes ser∣ving you. But if you continue in the same opinion which you have formerly exprest, remember a little, remember, Lucinda, the sufferings that I undergo: I am confident that if my torments were but considered by you according to what they are; you would ra∣ther repent them, then perpetuallize them with so much severity. And really it's a strange thing and almost incredible, that you had rather be cruel to those that love you, than be served by those that adore you. For, did you but condescend to consider the sorrow you return me in recompence of the ser∣vices I tender to you, I assure my self, that you would plainly see how in glorious it is to insult in my ruin. I conclude this my passionate discourse, words being superfluous after that my presence hath pre∣sented
you with so many demonstrations of my tor∣ments. Look upon me onely, look upon me, O beauti∣full occasion of all my dysasters: least otherwise, de∣prived of the blessed gales of your serene looks, the desperation which I have of my life, provoke me to sollicit the death so much desired by ARNALDO. THis Letter being written and seal'd, I re∣turned into the Hall, where coming in a certain throng near to Lucinda, I put it in the slieve of her upper Garment; and withdrew to observe how she would entertain it. But for a long time that I had watcht her, I could observe nothing: Whereupon I flattered my self with the hope of some prosperous successe to my at∣tempt. I was therefore so distracted with this perplexity of thoughts, that I either answered nothing, or else besides the purpose to those who entertained me with some discourse of the pre∣sent Occurrences, either of the Ball, or Court. And he that in that instant had toucht my breast, might easily have felt the palpitations of my heart caused by desire, and perplexing fear, the daughters of a desperate Love. The time being come at last, that (the Ball be∣ing ended) every one retired to their own house, observing that Lucinda would take leave of the Queen, I waited on her, disguised in an unknown Garb, not onely home to her house, but into her Chamber, without being able to observe any thing in her that contributed so much as an
atome to my hope. Hence being little inclined to rest for that night, I dispatcht Diffilus thither at the same time, to bring me back some news of the fortune of that Paper, which I had adven∣tured in the slieve of Lucinda: but he could hear nothing good or bad. Whereupon my natural vigour diminishing by this fixt application, and my grief encreasing, continually scalding my heart in the inextinguishable flames of sighs, I became wholly melancholy and solitary, never desiring to see the face of the Sun more, out of my Chamber. Hereupon Belisa my sister, moved to compas∣sion of my misery, as one who felt a great part of it her self; sitting down close by me one day, she weeping said. Ah! my dear brother, I, intreat thee to acquaint me with the fatal cause of this grief, which so much afflicts thee. Seest thou not that thy affliction is my torment; and that the love I bear thee, makes me to live for thy sorrow a most unhappy life? Thou hast many times confest thy self to be my debter, and that thou wouldest recompence my love with a reciprocal affection; But you deny me that with your actions, which you confirm to me with your words. You know very well, that such like dissimulation ought not to have place near me: make therefore my breast the depository of thy passions. And to whom wilt thou commit them, if thou wilt not intrust them to me? Do but think that if thou desirest death, I will not wish for life; If thou hatest pleasure, I will love sorrow; If thou delightest in trouble, I will be displeased with repose: so
that thy malady and my torment are one and the same thing to excruciate my heart. If there∣fore you desire to ventilate your passion, with whom better can you do it then with me, that am never sparing in wishing your good? I am sure that discharging one part of it upon me, we shall together be the better able to bear it. For if thou hast a desire to weep, I will weep: if you will comfort your self in your grief, I will ex∣pedite my consolation: and if you desire to conceal and nourish it, we two can be better able then thou alone to hide and feed it. Shew not, I pray thee, so little confidence in her which hath nothing in all the world that is not thine; and make it believed in the end, that thy dissimulation cannot falsify my judgement; whilest thy tears and thy sighs, thy sadnesse, and thy solitude accuse me, and too plainly discover, that which you seek with such care to hide and conceal. It's certain, death ought to be lesse powerfull then brotherly love; and that therefore death it self shall be most welcom to me, when by it thou shalt come to acquire a joyfull life, since that I see thee arrived to that passe, that thou canst not long continue alive. But I had rather you would assume the spirits of your generosity, and cheer up your self, con∣sidering that fortune is alwayes an Enemy of the happy, and favourable to the afflicted: and therefore she being by nature fickle and incon∣stant, whereas it befits the fortunate to fear, I would have thee accustom thy self to hope in her vicissitude. She ever causeth new actions for the tryal of our minds, because her puissance
is better known by the prosperous, then by the calamitous. Reserve not therefore thy anxious solitude to thy self alone: for, if greater is the evil that's hid, than the evil that is manifest, thy communicating of it to me may afford thee some succour. I intreat thee, dear brother, I intreat thee, let the Key of my counsel open for thee the Door of thy comfort and health; the peril that's concealed being alwayes greater in every occurrence, then that which is disco∣vered. Speak to me therefore, if you love me, and love that we should live together, whether it be dolefully or cheerfully. Here Belisa sighing, held her peace: I reply'd. Thou hast so afflicted me (dear sister) with thy passion, that in some measure to comfort thee, I must be forced to tell thee what I am unwil∣ling to disclose. I pray you, before I reveal my condition to you any farther, not to trouble your self with any superfluous care, because I shall see an end of my dayes, before you shall see a beginning of the remedy to my dysasters. Know therefore (sister) that, more by impulse of strange Fortune, then by any act of my own will, I was compelled to stoop to the Laws of Love, by which Fortune hath desired to make me acquire so much with the merit of my ser∣vice, that to my torment I have felt the ingra∣titude of her I served. My misfortunes have already taken so deep impression in my heart, that Fortune in vain forceth her self with her slow revolutions to bring any Medicine of com∣fort: so that if death in the end do not succour me, relief will come too late from other parts.
I will not then despair of life, even in a conti∣nual death; and therefore I pray thee, dear sister, rather to comfort then afflict thy self, that thou hast a brother, which knows how, and is able to undergo (conquering himself) so many troubles. For if yet you desire I should be comforted, and you would do me a good office; let me never see thy face so delug'd in tears: for if tears could mitigate my passion, mine alone would be sufficient; whereas thine do but increase my torments instead of contributing relief. In brief, I was born to languish, thou to rejoyce: and therefore attend to thy Jollities, which better sute to the feeblenesse of thy Sex and to the tendernesse of thy years; and leave this sor∣row to me, as more corresponding to virile for∣titude, and to the proof of my constancy. For if you will deport your self otherwise, I shall believe that you love me but little whilest you persist to afflict me with your sadnesse, redou∣bling the grief which is of it self but too heavy to be supported. Comfort thy self yet, com∣fort thy self Belisa, for thy consolation will be a great part of my redresse, when I shall receive thy joy as a sign of the love thou bearest to me. Belisa, seeing she could not get any thing out of me of what she desired, determined to let me alone, and inform her self better by other means. But, I having already imparted this my mis∣adventure (without acquainting him with the occasion) to a Knight my friend; (not so much because I held any great confidence in his fideli∣ty, as because of the vicinity of his house to that
of my fair Enemy: considering that from every part my pains increased, I resolved to vent my passion to him afresh, fancying the encounter at least of some occasion of comforting my self sometimes in the sight of her, who though I did not see, yet had stuck so many darts of grief in my breast. I caused him to be sent for to my Chamber, and seeing him so compassionate of my adversities, as that he made a shew he would subvert the world to relieve me; I, as one who easily believed what I desired, said unto him. Friend Jersus, If I go about now to discover to thee that, which I have so long concealed, of my afflictions; yet believe that I am constrained to it by the high confidence I hold of thy loy∣alty, and the love thou bearest me. Besides, if hitherto it hath been a vertue to bury my griefs in silence, at the present it is a vice; since, after so long a siege of torments, I must yield to the assaults of Love and Death. And from what may I better request succour in such anguish to the distraction of my tormented heart, than from thy fidelity, and from thy courtesie, whilst that death pursues me, and that life rather of∣fends then helps me? This cruel assault began (dear friend) from that day on which the father of Lucinda died, for then died in me all light of content; never knowing what truce or peace was to an anxious mind. For, Love seeing me so free, and disengaged from his Laws, that I derided his power, resolved to assault me with all the force of his Empire; and though vigo∣rous and great was my defence, he had fought with such sharpnesse and assiduity, that I was
deprived of all succour of reason, or of despera∣tion, and I saw my self come to that passe that I was forced to render my self to the discretion of his tyrannical indiscretion. And if thou thinkest (dear Jersus) that I talking thus, am out of my right senses, believe me, friend, it would be the greatest of my felicities to be deprived of judgement; as the greatest of my infelicities comes from the knowledge of, and inability to redresse, my dysasters: Whereas if I were de∣prived of understanding, as I could hope no good, so I would fear no evil; but being free from the tumults of passion, and the Wars of the senses, I would live full of inward tran∣quillity. Behold me therefore reduced to so miserable a state, that I know not whither to have recourse for succour in these last minutes of my life, unlesse to the candour of our friend∣ship, which, with the Arms of thy counsels, and thy courtesie, are able to raise from about my Soul the tedious Leaguer of my living death, and dying hopes; The adjacency of thy house to that of my fair and inflexible Enemy, may at leastwise stand me in so much stead, as to open to me a door of escape, either by means of hope or despair. The reality of thy Amity (which in necessity is best-experimented and known) may be able with the prudence of thy advice and indeavours, wholly to set me free: for I know very well that thou hast more desire to gratifie me herein, then I have to entreat thee to it. Having thus said, I held my peace, and Jersus promptly replied; Friend Arnaldo, I might
justly be offended at the diffidence, which thou shewest to have so long had of my Loyalty, concealing thy troubles from me, and revealing them just now, when by the Laws of Love thou wast bound to suppresse them. What hast thou got by thy silence, which hath deprived thee of the benefit thou mightest have acquired, and drawn upon thee that mischief thou didst not merit? I shall neverthelesse forbear to ag∣gravate thy grief with superfluous loquaci∣ty, being my self but too much troubled for thy afflictions, which the sense of Pity and the bond of Amity hath made common to me. Thou sayest, The beauty of Lucinda destroyes thy life, and she it is doth also ruin my health; for as much then, as I know no difference be∣tween my will and thine: since that thou re∣quirest my counsel in such an exigent, assure thy self that if my advice might but as much avail thee, as thy malady torments me; thou wouldest immediatly be free, from all sense of either perplexity, or pain. Yet to tell thee my thoughts plainly, it doth astonish and grieve me to think, that thou shouldest voluntarily consent, that the greatnesse of thy courage should be foild and overcome by a thing so weak and contemptible; and that thou which wert wont to bear the victory from the bravest Cavaliers in the world, should'st be overcome by a Feminine feeblenesse. And for the further increase of my disgusts, I see that thy Soul is that which falsifieth thy faith, and tenders thee in a manner a rebel to reason: for thou makest thy self the minister to thy own servitude and
calamity. Fly therefore such extreams of Love, which transport thee to an extream un∣worthinesse: not that I would have thee ba∣nish it wholly from thy knowledge (there be∣ing no lesse peril in too much solicitude to avoid it, then in too much assiduity to pursue it) but that thou esteem it, fear it, seek it, and contemne it with a generosity and liberty worthy of thy noble bloud, and of thy great Soul. For if Love be of it self a deceitfull af∣fect, do thou also deceive him; his Laws being such, that he, who loveth least, obtaineth the greatest recompence; and who serveth most, re∣ceiveth the greatest ingratitude. In sum, I consent that thou shalt follow Love, but not make thy self his Slave; and that thou despise him not, but much lesse that thou trust him at any hand. Consider that hope in easie things deceiveth, in difficult betrayeth; and that For∣tune gives an unexpected issue to all humane affairs: and therefore seeing it's the cause of thy sorrow, do thou also deceive it in making it the means of thy joy. For I assure thee, if thou wouldest follow my counsel (now that I re∣quest thee) thou shalt easily by this means ob∣tain that, which thou shalt certainly lose by going to my house; in which neverthelesse thou art absolute master, when, and how thou plea∣sest. And certainly thou hast done thy self great wrong to delay so long to contribute to thy comfort: knowing that thou art more lord of my will, then I am of my own house: and for that cause I am obliged to serve thee in all oc∣currences wherein I may be usefull. I shall
say no more, for words are fruitlesse, where my thought is onely of comforting thee, and not to perplex thee with talk. And therefore now, if you so please, let us go to make a tryal of my Wit, and of thy Fortune. Thus said Jersus, but whilest I hear'd him talk so sinisterly of Lucinda, I felt my heart e∣qually to boil with disdain, and my mind to freeze with suspition and jealousie: Yet with dissembling speeches he sought to make me be∣lieve that superfluity of Love would make me rave in my thoughts. So I partly distrusted him, & partly assured my self that in regard of our an∣cient friendship he would observe that which he promised. Seeing therefore that he had so freely offered me his house, I resolved to go live there for some dayes: but I soon found my self fru∣strated in my hopes, for with all the diligence I could possibly use, I could not in all the time I stayed there, come so much as once to the sight of her, for whose sake I had removed unto that Lodging. Hereupon Belisa, afflicted in my pre∣sent peril, by the consideration of my future pain, at last investigating the cause of my mala∣dy, she changed her course of life, and without making me in the least privy to her design, began to frequent the house of Lucinda, with whom she had before upon some other account contra∣cted friendship; so that one day she being ente∣red into discourse with her, finding her in a good humour, she thus spake to her. I intreat thee, my friend, that using thy pru∣dence thou will not blame me for that, which I am about to tell thee, presuming rather to me∣rit
applause then reprehension; whil'st my com∣passion of another's misery excuseth my shame. Dear Lucinda, my deplorable brother Arnaldo, for his great affection to thee dayly increaseth his affliction, impaireth his health, impoisoning even those remedies which should restore him to it. Not that I have the least intimation from him of his Love, having alwayes denied the true cause of his torments: but yet I have been so sollicitous to sift out the truth, that I have come to know, that thou onely art the cause of his misery, and mayest become the re∣storer of his life. I have for this reason re∣solved to strain modesty, to provide (if I can possible) for his safety and my sorrow. And I professe, that if I did not see his life in danger, thou shouldest not have known the least hint of my trouble. Moved therefore by a compas∣sionate zeal for his conservation, and to redresse my own calamity, (because wanting him, who in the quality of an onely brother supplieth the place of my deceased Parents, I should be left solitary and disconsolate): I come to in∣treat thee, that thou wouldest not at once with his life, annihilate my consolation, & decollate our family; acquiring to thy self instead of a perpetual glory, an eternal infamy for thy cruelty and his death: for certain I am, he can∣not, so ill treated as he is, prolong his life be∣yond the date of a few moneths. O consider, I beseech thee, consider, how much thou art oblig'd to him, whil'st the more thou slightest him, the more he loves thee: and onely desi∣reth death, because thou art displeased with his
life. Herein, while he for love of thee joyes in his torments, and none know that thou art she which so much afflictest him, thou art doubly ingaged to him; and therefore at last relent into commiseration of his so great indu∣rance, and permit not his fidelity to perish by thy ingratiude. What though thou art not pleased to receive him to the honour of thy conversation, wilt not thou therefore gratify him at least with an answer to his Letter? And if yet thou wilt not do it, by instinct of a grate∣full mind towards him, yet do it, dear Lucnda, for courtesie towards me: who, in so doing, of a faithfull friend that I am, thou shalt oblige me to become thy perpetuall slave. Let it content thee that it's now two years, that I have languished under these sufferings, and restore me, since thou maist do it without trouble. Lucinda presently replyed: My dear friend and companion; Thou hast no ground to fear that thou hast in any kind prejudiced thy Mo∣desty, whilst the pitty of a Brother and the confidence of a Friend absolves thee of all suspition, and frees thee from all aspersion. For though thou hast in part offended me with thy propositions, thou hast also satisfyed me with thy honest innocence: there being more cause thou shouldest grieve at thy brother's mis∣fortunes, than for any fault thou mightest commit against my person. It exceedingly grieves me that I cannot give thee the satis∣faction which thou desirest, for although the misery of thy brother afflicts me, yet I cannot
apply my self to give him a remedy; that be∣ing a thing would reflect upon my reputation, to which I ought to have greater regard than to his health. And thou art not ignorant, how much the honour of a woman is diminished, when to succour Lovers they forget them∣selves. Request me not therefore to do that, which thou canst not do thy self: and I would it had pleased God, that thou didst not desire of me a thing impossible for my power to effect, and thou shouldest soon see how much I love thee by my removing thy trouble. Heaven knows how oft it hath grieved me, that this my beauty hath been the occasion of so much mis∣chief to Arnaldo: How oft I have condol'd his tears when I considered, he importuned me to a thing I could not grant. Believe me, friend; that I have a greater desire to acquit him of his maladyes, then thou hast to request me. And if by any other means, than that of my ho∣nour, I might give him ease; believe me, I would more freely offer it, than he should de∣sire it. But because his acquist cannot be, but with my loss; he ought to content himself with the goodwill I conserve towards him (of which I desire thee to give him assurance,) as also the grief I suffer for the pain he indureth. Do thou also excuse me, beloved Belisa, if I concede not to all that thou wishest; because I am not permitted, with a Salvo to my honour, to grant thee any advantage; and rest secure that in all other occurrences, thou shalt al∣wayes find me most ready at thy beck. After some other such like passages, Belisa re∣turned
to me, and to comfort me said, that she came from visiting Lucinda: but hiding from me her fatal answer, she wisely endeavoured to make me hope that which she had been deny∣ed. But perfectly perceiving by her silence, how ill she had succeeded in her attempt, it came in∣to my mind to penetrate yet farther into the brest of Lucinda. I fain'd therefore that I had no desire to think more of her life, since she ca∣red so little for my duty; and prayed Belisa, that the next time she saw her, she would give her to understand this my resolution, of seeking for the time to come to learn to be my self, that I might not do so much to my prejudice in the love of a person, that was to me so ingratefull. And Belisa having promised to content me, I proceeded to instruct her, punctually to ob∣serve that Lady's countenance and behaviour upon the reception of my message; because I could better from this then from her words, be able to comprehend the truth of her intentions: And above all, that she should note well the change of colours in her face; for by them com∣monly the affects of the mind, and impressions of the heart do manifest themselves. From the manner also of her speech, either deliberate, or hasty, I would have been able to draw some ob∣servations of her thoughts; (for from speaking with leisure or liberty, with anxiety or celeri∣ty, much may be collected of another's purpo∣ses;) which may but ill be dissembled by the external appearance. Belisa writ these adver∣tisements in her memory, against she should see a convenient occasion to meet with Lucinda;
and finding her on a time alone, she bespoke her in this manner. Lucinda, if my propositions shall asmuch offend thee, as they make me blush, impute to the inconstancy of humane desires this my im∣portunity, occasioned for thy service, rather then the relief of my brother: who, in short, seeing that he reaped no profit of his services, and that they encreased thy contempt of him, hath resolved to put himself upon an impossi∣ble enterprize, which is, to cease farther to incommode thee with his amorous Passions: yet, impossible as it is, he will attempt it, ma∣king his absence a medicine for thy homicide, and his death; for he hopes to obtain that by this voluntary exile, which thy presence per∣mits him not to find. But, if even thou also shalt consent to this resolution, I assure thee, friend, that I shall procure my death rather then survive this misfortune. And thus I shall come to be betrayed by you both, whom I so much love, like mortal enemies; dying not for having offended you, but for having too much affected you. Can it be possible, dear Lucinda, that thou wilt be so cruel to such a fidelity as my brother professeth to thee, and so ingrateful to such an Amity as I bear to thee? And how canst thou ever possess her Will entire, whose Life thou rendest in pieces? How canst thou nourish a legitimate correspondence of friend∣ship with her, thou so inhumanely transfixest? Oh reform at length with new Laws such thy implacable obdurateness, which thou falsely callest zeal of honour, when as that Ladie doth
not in the least offend her virtue, who corre∣spondeth to the legitimate Affection of a Knight, which loves, and serves her according to the stablished Laws of Heaven, and Nature. I hope I pretend not to have thee decline the least punctilio of thy virtue; but I verily be∣lieve, that if thou wouldest grant me what I ask, thou mightest glory in having, with a small benevolence, restored to life, two per∣sons otherwise dead. There is nothing doubt∣less lost of thy reputation, whilst thou dost but prevent the perdition of a Knight that adores thee, and salve the misery of a Dame that loves thee. Make them therefore but on∣ly to understand in two words, that thou art not pleased with his departure, and that thou art displeased with her dispair. It is but a small matter I beg, the writing of two lines of com∣plement, for the reprieve of two lives, with∣out prejudicing thy self. Here Belisa concluded her discourse by the commencing of her tears, giving Lucinda time to reply in this manner. I intreate thee to cease these tears, and sweeten the bitterness of thy grief; for I shall do all I can for thy sa∣tisfaction and comfort. But I would to God I were for the present without a tongue, that I might not speak for love of thee a thing so op∣posite to reason. Thou oughtest not to glory in the power that thou hast over my heart; for if in this particular I shall commit any errour, thou onely art to be blam'd; having with thy loving importunity forced me to do what I would not. I suspend therefore my resent∣ments,
that I may content thee, desiring thee onely to accept my good will, and not to slight my gifts after thou hast once received them: it being an ordinary custom of men, highly to e∣steem things difficult to attain, and despise them when gotten. I will write to Arnaldo, but look to it, that he hereafter adventures not to desire any thing farther of me; for I assure thee, that by seeking to make greater acquists, he will lose what he hath acquired. For I confesse unto thee, that I repent already of my promise, which yet, since it pleaseth thee, I cannot retract. Write I will, but I had rather the earth had opened to swallow me, than it should have entered into my mind, in this to have gratified thee. This said, Lucinda took her pen, and with great discomposure of mind, writ to mee in these words. Lucinda to Arnaldo. I Believe, Arnaldo, that my letter will find you more merry then it hath left me sad: But thou wouldest not have an occasion to complain of me, if now when I moved this hand to write, it had been dryed up, rather then render its liberty at another's perswasion to give thee, not being in the least in∣debted to thee, too pretious a pledge. Yet notwith∣standing, I would not have thee presume, upon my present writing to thee, that it is because thou hast been offended at my past silence. Receive this my let∣ter therefore with moderate resentments: wisely dis∣sembling thy joy at this thy good fortune; as thou hast done the vehemence of thy Love. And above
all, remember Arnaldo that when men go about to publish such like Victories over women, they make a sacrifice of their honours, exposing them to the ca∣lumnies of contumelious tongues. For if thou knowest what thou standest in need of, thou shouldest also re∣member, what is fit for me to do; having alwayes in thy eye, that to comply with thee, I am become of a Lady a Slave, or rather an enemy to my self; for when thou shalt sing of thy glory, I shall be condoling of my faults. O how many times have I took my hand off from this paper with a resolution not to write to thee! But alasse! what should she do, that cannot defend her self from thy importunities? Go to, rest at last from thy troubles, take a resolution of thy doubts, and glory in that thou hast no more occasion of contrast. I have understood by thy sister, that thou wilt travel into some other Country, at which I am greatly displeased; for who cannot be instrumentall to the good of another, should avoid all occasions of doing them harm. I yet (to con∣fess the truth) have judged that this thy invention, is rather feigned then real: so that if thou intend∣est to deceive me, Loe now thou hast done it. But I must tell thee, that in deceiving me thou hast co∣sened thy self: and that thou shalt not be a jot the better for the tricks you Lovers make use of, that you may triumph in deceiving the constancy of those infortunate maids, that trust you. Boast not there∣fore in thy subtilty, and believe me not to be such a fool, as I think thee in this particular. In short, I would have thee know, that its more out of com∣passion of thy sufferings, then for any fear of thy de∣parture, that I am perswaded to write to thee: or rather for pitty of thy Sister, whose sorrows, as evi∣dences
of the torments she suffers for thy sake, I have been no longer able to indure. Of all this I thought good to advertise thee by this my letter, with which I desire you to rest content, without pretending to any further advantage: otherwise thou mayst chance to lose that, which for the merits of thy Sister thou hast acquired. Comfort thy self therefore within thy self, and suffer me in peace; for although thy departure would displease me, I intend not never∣thelesse that thy stay shall turn to my prejudice: and especially have a care it enter not into thy thoughts to desire to see, or speak with me, that so thy importu∣nity impose not upon me a necessity of displeasing thee afresh by my denyals. Use thy discretion and live happily. LUCINDA. THis letter being writ and delivered to my sister, Lucinda withdrew, and Belisa run to seek me, to give it to me. I received it with the same joy, a Miser would have entertain'd a Treasure; or the Mortally-sick-patient, a health∣full Medicine; not being able almost to suffer my self to understand this good Fortune. At last, I awaking out of my stupor, Belisa re∣counted to me the discourses held with this Fair one; the which having understood, I set my self with a high attention to the reading this let∣ter: but he that should have then seen my face shining with a new colour of pleasantnesse, might thereby have collected how much virtue and vivacity those inanimate characters had in∣fused into my dead soul. Yet this my joy was
of no long durance, for I did presently prove in my self how true it was, that high soring flights are near the most precipitous falls, I being past from a supream content, to an extream despera∣tion. Thus I stood a good space, fighting be∣tween joy and grief, without knowing to which part to betake me; for when I thought to take heart, the little hope I had did not permit me; and if I thought of afflicting my self, the good will I seemed to see in Lucinda, did not suffer me. Wanting therefore the counsel of others, I resolved to answer her Letter in these words. Arnaldo to Lucinda. LUcinda, your Letter brought in its first ap∣pearance an inexplicable pleasure. But the joy I took in seeing it, is vanished in reading it, by the re∣turn of a greater confusion of sadnesse. Thus that Pa∣per which [sealed] promised me remedy, [open] con∣firm'd me in my misery: so that judging by it of your intention, I saw my ruin nearer then my relief. But if, Lucinda, you write to me, how that you compas∣sionate my misfortunes, wherefore do you all you can to afflict me? your words correspond not with your actions; but as crafty as you are, you at the same time thrust me away with your heart, and flat∣ter me with hope; and bespeak your self resolved never to put an end to my torments, but with my death. Wherefore use you such dissimulation with him that adores you? Ah! Lucinda, I had far ra∣ther that you were doubtfull of my sufferings, then that believing them you should not seek to remove them. And what am I the better for your advice,
To use your favours moderately, if you your self cancell and provoke them, in the same instant you bestow them? If you were but as willing to cure my maladies, as I have been patient to undergo them, my Passion would not have any thing in it wherewith to torment me: I having alwayes veiled my flames with a perpetual silence; whereas your favours come so difficultly from you, that almost as soon as they are born they languish to my greater prejudice. If therefore it be true that you desire my satisfaction, depose your severity: if you would that I should be∣lieve you, lay aside this dissimulation. Content your self that you have robbed me of the better part of my life, and that I am now running upon my own ac∣cord to death, without desiring me by these fallacious hopes to prolong my life, to endure every minute a centuplicated death. In short, since the more my faithfulnesse shews it self, the further I am from my reward, and you have resolv'd that I die; die I will. And because that in this place, seeing my self so afflicted by your cruelty, I cannot behold others jollity without a multiplied and Tantalizing torment; I will go die in a place so remote from all humane conversation, that the name of Arnaldo shall never arive to the notice of any man. Yet before I depart, I beg of you this onely favour to see you; and because you shall not think that I request any thing of you, unbefitting my Honour and your Reputation; I in∣treat you to do it in so open a place that malice it self can find no occasion to censure you: and this also more for your own service then for my satisfaction; that so in my discoloured complexion you may read the power of your beauty; of which I am a perpetual Idolater: consecrating my self an eternal Slave of
Love, vowing to reverence and adore you to the last minute of my life. Yet I herein deny not the Deities to be adored and supplicated. Condescend you there∣fore to vouchsafe me a favour, which shall redound more to your glory than to my content: Till then I render you most humble thanks, for the honour done me with your Letter, and, prostrate at your feet, I humbly kisse your hand. ARNALDO. I Return'd this answer to the fair Lucinda, but never received the least counter-sign, either of repulse, or acceptation of my request. I had therefore recourse anew to the help of Belisa, to the end she might obtain me a favour so passio∣natly desired. She went to her, though with some blushings; and after many words forced her to be content to let me see her in a certain place of great resort, where as if talking with my sister I might meet her, without suspition of any cor∣respondency. The day and hour appointed being come, what I said, and did, in that incounter may be more easily imagined then exprest. I am sure, I felt all the time of that expectation so great a content∣ment, that my misery changed into felicity, for so much desired, and so little hoped for a victo∣ry. In sum, so jocund apprehensions did at that time rejoyce my mind, that although I had nothing, I did not desire a more advantagious Fortune. Now judge you, dearest Stranger, what joy I found, and felt then in speaking to Lucinda of my pains, and by supplicating her to have pi∣ty
on me, and to give me at last some honest re∣compence for my constant fidelity. Our dis∣courses though they were not long were many, and we came to this conclusion; That I should not stir from thence, and much lesse that I should let any one know my interest in her person. Alass! I see now that this was a plot of her wonted Feminine dissimulation, that she alwayes desired secresie in Love; and in vain did I com∣fort my self in it: and yet it was no other then a mark of her unfaithfull mind, that being not yet arrived to the end she designed for my ultimate destruction; she would not have my departure deprive her of the friendship of my sister, whom she used, to deceive me; nor that the publication of my pledge, should discredit the basenesse of her intentions, whil'st slighting a personage of Regal Extract, she set her affections upon a Knight of vulgar Birth and Fortune. Such ma∣lice lodg'd in the heart of a young Lady, To de∣ceive him that lov'd her, to betray him that ador'd her. Arnaldo; or, the Injur'd Lover. Book III. THus saying, the Knight sigh'd from the bot∣tom of his Soul, and holding his peace some space, he continued his discourse in this manner. Dearest Guest! already the Sun hath ascended half of his Carier above the Horizon; it would
be therefore good counsel, for this time not to weary you with the Narration of my sinister ad∣ventures, but that in the umbrage of these meadows we do a little refresh languishing na∣ture. Having scarce so said, he with a little sil∣ver-whistle gave intimation to his people of what he desired, and that Forrest was in a short space peopled by the noble attendants of the Knight. Where, near a Fountain by him made in that part, (it being his own ground) with black mar∣bles, sadned by the representation of tragical oc∣currences, the Table was prepared. Here Ar∣naldo having by the mirth of the banquet, and by the pleasantnesse of the place given way to some sentiments of delight, began to ask me of the news of the world, and of the principal Courts of the Grecian Kingdoms. And the first that appeared on the scene of our discourse was the Duke of Sparta, with whom having had some familiarity in the quality of Senators, he admired to hear him risen by the help of his Enemies to such a Grandure. It is not to be wondred at, said I, because when Heaven will punish men for their faults, it is so ordered, that the instruments of the offence are changed to them into instruments of chastisement. The impieties of former Princes have been so high, that they mixed the Antidotes with the poyson of their Crimes. Wo be to the world, said Arnaldo, if the like measure should succeed in all Principalities. And yet (added I) it seems the passages of these ages do authorise this verity with a manifest proof. Behold Thrace, with its King murthered & strangled! Behold Macedon without legitimate Heirs, with Migdonia, & Thes∣saly
revolted from the Crown. Consider Ep rus, turned upside down with the ambition of those which the interests of State, and the obstinacy of the late King, made to be ingrafted (injustly, as being Bastards) into the stem of the bloud Royal. Turn your eies to the Princes of Illyrium; who be∣ing exiled, depressed, & extinct in the prime flower of their greatnesses, all that vast Province is de∣solate, and burnt up by the fiercest flames of War. And, crossing the Seas, behold Cyprus with its Princes exterminated, (a barbarism unus'd through all ages) even by the hand of the infa∣mous Hang-man: and, thence running through all the Provinces of our Climate, ye will find but-too-Authentick to the detriment of many people, this Maxim, That the instruments of evils, are turned by the justice of heaven into instruments of chastisements to Delinquents. The Knight stood some time suspended at this my Discourse; but I, that against my will had set my thoughts and Discourse upon such à Subject; took occasion from thence to divert my talk, and commended the goodly fountain (which did spout out of the Horn of an Acteon, transformed into a Stag) its sparkling Crystals, saying: Now that we treat of the mischiefs, which so much at present scourge our Kingdoms; I know not courteous Sir, whe∣ther you have ever made reflexion on this other truth, That all the evils of men ordinarily take rise from women, nor so much from the bad as from the good; whence, with reason, a noble Wit wit,
From chaste Penelope as oft doth rise War, famine, and all sad calamities; As from the Spattan-whore's adulteries. Yea, verily, I have considered (answered Ar∣naldo) that almost all the evils, which at present pester our Kingdoms, if they be well regarded will be found to take their birth from women. It's a high consideration, said I, and worthy of the sublimenesse of your Ingenuity. But, with your leave, let us onely observe what is represented to us, in the gracefull Statue which dignifieth this regal Forrest: and it is, that the major part of the calamities of men take their birth as did that of Acteon, from the curiosity of looking on other mens wives, and from the wickednesse withall of those Females, that Metamorphise their hus∣bands into Acteons. It is very right, said the Knight; Nor hath the Justice of Heaven a heavier scourge for mortals then that of Feminine wickednes: while men in the mean time on the other side, by no other way so head-strongly rebel against Heaven, as by the Love of women. Of which, though from a divers cause, I can render you most ample testimony, since that having with so much fidelity Idolized my unfaithfull Lucinda, in all that time I lived in such a dotage, I never re∣membred either heaven, or my self; and I am now reduced by her means after a thousand deaths of intolerable dysasters, to live a life more painfull then death. Thus said the Knight; when, upon the instant, hearing a mighty noyse in the Forrest, we all set
our selves to guess what might occasion it. The ser∣vants of the Cavalier had already catch't up their Arms for our defence, when we beheld to rouse on the left side of the Fountain a goodly Stag, of an extraordinary bignesse, which in a full carier fled the eminent peril, threatned him from the persecutions of a Huntresse. But stumbling up∣on some Vessels for the service of the Table, which stood in the entrance of that Track, he hapned to fall precipitously into a little pit of the Meadow, where the Huntresse over-took him, and stuck two mortal darts into his flank and head, with such a dexterity that like lightning at the drawing of the Bow they vanish'd. Having made the blow, the beautifull Lasse cast her eyes on the Table, and congi'd with a gentle smile, dying the face of the Knight with a noble blush; and began to proceed on her way. But Arnaldo, rising to answer her courteous Salute, with great affability intreated her to sit down, to take with us a short repast, after that her victorious chase. The Damsel turned about, smiling with a grace able to inchant Souls with Love, and said; Some great prodigy is hapned in the world, now that the Enemy of conversation invites Strangers to his Table. But I cannot receive the honour you exhibit to me, being expected by my company on the other side the River to Dinner. Arnaldo in∣terrupted her. You will arive too late, it being above three miles off; but if you will please to favour us with a short stay, we will also wait up∣on you thither. I give you humbly thanks, re∣plied the sprightly Virago; but that would be too much trouble for you, to passe beyond the con∣fines
which inclose you in this salvage habitati∣on. But it's a good prediction, that seeing guests now with you in strange garbs, I may think, that you will at last put an end to this inhu∣mane solitude, which deprives the world of the glory of your person. This saying, with ex∣pressions equally free and generous, she bore us company at dinner, and out of temperance scarce tasted any of the dishes, taking a little cup of water from the fountain, to shew how little our nature is content with, and how the worth of women is inhanced by their absti∣nence. This done, she took her leave, and would not by any means suffer either the Knight or his servants to accompany her, onely saying, She recommended the prey to him; for being taken in his jurisdiction. The fair Hun∣tresse being gone, I was even dead with desire to know her Quality: for the air of her looks, and the freenesse of her deportment, made me plainly perceive, she was more then a meer Denizon of the forrest; but the Knight foresee∣ing my curiosity, which peradventure he read in my eyes, he obligingly said; Behold, most dear guest, our discourse confirmed with a new proof, that from women, and from good women, are occasioned all the calamities of men; since for so courteous, virtuous, and innocent a Maid, many persons are at this instant endangered, and many families ruined. This fair young-one was born in the Isle of Negroponte, of a very noble family, and con∣joyned by kindred to the Royal blood. Being grown to fourteen years of age, her parents dy∣ed,
and she remained with three sisters more, un∣der the tyrannicall government of her brethren; who having designed her against her will, and contrary to all reason, to a manner of life little pleasing to her, as being a lover of Liberty, did thereby occasion to themselves extream misfor∣tunes. She was for her singular beauty loved and desired, by the most accomplished Gallants, and noblest Knights of that Court: but she, (yet neverthelesse with a soul truly generous in so young a Ladie) did not scornfully despise, but courteously refuse the service of all the o∣ther Cavaliers; declaring her self to like onely the Services of Callisthenes, a young Gallant, noble of blood, and more noble for ingenuity; but of so slender a Fortune, that he could scarce sustain in any splendor, the Nobility transmit∣ted him from his Ancestors. This application of the Damsel, highly displeased the Brothers; for having already advantagiously marryed the eldest sister, they designed to bury her, together with these younger, according to the use of those parts, in the perpetuall solitude of a secluse life in the Country, with a title incapable of the marriage-freedoms. Nor did they long defer this their tyrannicall resolution, having con∣fined the fair Argosthenia and the other innocent creatures, in a house built upon the top of a mountain, in a situation almost inaccessible, being incircled on every side with forrests and mountains of their own jurisdiction. Hither Argosthenia being come, instead of attending the imployments abhorred by her genius, she began, like a new Diana of those woods, with
her bow and boar-spear, to disturb the peace of the wild beasts, which in great abundance shel∣tred themselves in that solitary and desart place: being content, though absent from her beloved Callisthenes, with that manner of life, in which yet at least she satisfied the naturall incli∣nations of her generous freedom, being far from idleness the fomenter of vain thoughts, in the tender youth of Maids. And this her life also dis∣pleased her brothers, which would have her in e∣very thing conformed to their capriccio's, to re∣move from her all hopes of marriage: The young Virago seeing her self persecuted also in that hon∣est liberty, and not brooking upon any terms to be deprived of that freedom of mind the hea∣vens had granted her, conceited, inexpert as she was, that the onely flying into some other part, would instate her into such a benefit. So having before in her hunting acquainted her self with the tracks of those forrests, she got away one day with an old shepherdesse from her other si∣sters, and, disguised in the habit of a young shep∣herd, made towards the sea-shoar; where, in a little fisher-boat, she crost the Straits, dis∣imbarking in Boeotia, and accidentally met upon the coasts a company of Ladies, which there entertained the time in disports: And she arri∣ved in so fortunate an hour, that, liking well the deportment of Olympia, an antient Lady, and free also from all the Laws of Matrimony, she discovered to her the secret of her quality, in∣treating her privacy and assistance. Olympia, be∣ing taken with the noble confidence of the Maid, carried her to Thebes, the place of her abode,
and took her into the place of a daughter: and the greatest part of her Dowry, lying within the circumference of this my Forrest, she often cometh hither with Argosthenia, delighting much, to see her with such a freedom and cou∣rage to war with the wild-beasts. But the Brothers mist their Sister, just at the instant that Callisthenes, either for desperation of seeing his Princesse condemned to that soli∣tude, or for the interest of his study, and chiefly by the impulse of his destiny, was gone to Athens; they judged falsely, that she was fled with him, and which was yet worse, for to mar∣ry her selfe, according to her inclinations. Here∣upon, of three that were there, they commiting to Aristheus the second of them, the care of re∣venging upon the innocent Calisthenes the pre∣tended injury, he past immediatly to Athens; and seeking of Calisthenes, he happened to his ill fortune, to encounter him just as he was en∣tering into the house of the Embassador of Ma∣cedonia, where he, and his three Assassinates fell upon him in the dark to murther him. Calisthe∣nes, which would have expected any thing in the world, rather than to see his enemy Ari∣stheus, being taken unprovided, he recommend∣ed his safety to his flight, but in vain; for be∣ing struck by the ruffians with two stabbs, one in the side, another in the head, he fell upon the threshold of the house; where in a short space he expired, an innocent Victim of the guiltlesse Argosthenia. In the interim the whole family of the Embassador making thither at that noise, and seeing the Law of Nations violated,
which held the persons and houses of publick Ministers in sacred veneration, they fell upon Aristheus and his confederates, with such reso∣lution, that though they long defended them∣selves, they also became a sacrifice to the be∣trayed Calisthenes. The news of this Tragedy passing into Negroponte, the Father and Faction of Calisthenes, though far inferiour to that of the Brethren of Argosthenia, raised against them notwithstanding so fierce a tempest of civill war, that they proceeded almost to the subduing that great City; but at last the families of Cali∣sthenes, and the confederates with their parents were extirpated, and her younger brother also slain; a great part of whom, have been ever since banished and dispersed over all Greece. And these so deplorable miseries, took begin∣ning from this one prodigious Creature, she having not any way contributed to it, unlesse by a necessary flight to conserve the liberty of her mind. Here the Knight held his peace, and I repli'd; But if an innocent Damsel be the occasion of so many mischiefs, Of what ruines may not a lewd woman make her self the instrument? Lucinda may in part testifie it, added Arnaldo: Though yet (Heaven be praised) she hath been more un∣wise than unfaithfull; for if she had been onely ungratefull to me, I had had no cause of com∣plaint, Ingratitude being a Dowry inseparable from her Sex in such a degree, That women al∣wayes love those that slight them, and abhor those that adore them. But she desiring for her own designs to add subtilty to her infidelity; she
happened to plot a miserable ruine, not so much to the prejudice of me, as to the detriment of Her self, and her Lover. Here the dinner end∣ed: The Knight arose from the table; and with a gentle pace took a walk under the shades of the Forrest, through the same track which was made just before by Argosthenia: and I seeing him taken up, would not with my curiosity in∣terrupt his contemplations, but left him; when he himself was pleased to continue the Tragicall narration of his amorous adventures. Pro∣ceeding thus. After I had parted from Lucinda, with ha∣ving for a supreme favour kist her hand, I was in so jocund an humour, as that if I had at that instant the Empire of the whole Universe, (and, I know, perfect Lovers will believe me) offered me in lieu of my contentment, I would have parted with it for the one half of my satisfacti∣on. Whereupon Belisa also taking comfort in my contentment, for the better continuing it, she intreated me to go, for some dayes, to a Country-Seat of hers, but a league distant from the City of Thebes: whither, because the place was very convenient for hunting and hawking, she sent many Falcons, to try if this new exer∣cise, joyned with the favor received from Lu∣cinda, had been able to restore me to my former health and strength. I entertained the time a few dayes in this retirement, beyond measure satis∣fied with the courtesie shewed me by Belisa, who investigated all the means possible to make me merry; but it was for no long time, in regard the Fates ordained the moments of my
joy to be short, and the continuance of my mi∣sery to be lasting. It hapned therefore, that I be∣ing to go out one morning very early a Hunting; whilest I prepared my self to mount my Horse, some sinister Auguries would have predicted to me the vicinity of my misfortune: for the morn∣ing, of clear and serene became on a sudden clou∣dy and dark; and a Gray hound which I loved ex∣ceedingly ran between my Legs, and began a dreadfull howling. But I, that was now all jo∣cund, and frollick for the favours received from Lucinda, valued not a straw all these presages, but would pursue my enterprize: and took a Falcon on my fist, and rid abroad into the fields: And here I was suddenly surprized with a strange shi∣vering at the remembrance, that from the time of my being in the house of Jerson till then, he had fled my company, and look't strangely on me. And as I did think that the melancholly life I led, might have estranged him from my familiari∣ty, I yet felt some confused impressions of ter∣rour in my Soul, which pointed at some thing of more sinister adventure. Now while I stood musing in this conceit, my poor Falcon fell dead from my hand to the ground and now I was certain that this Omen foretold me some great evil touching this my friend; remembring at the same time, with more then ordinary compassion, the yelling my Gray-hound made in the morning. And here∣upon I desired to return back to the house; when, (I know not how) I lost my way, and, casually lighting upon a little hillet, I discovered a rural habitation of Lucinda's, from whence I thought I
heard a murmuring noise of Musical Instru∣ments, which reverberating in the concave of those Mountains, sent forth different Eccho's: Which thing seemed very strange to me in the house of a maiden-Lady, especially in that sea∣son, and in such a place. Thereupon, with my Soul more then ever clouded by the passion of sorrow which afflicted me, I came back at the shutting in of night to the house of my sister. Who using at other times to meet me at the in∣ner porch, was not now any where to be seen. I hereupon went to seek her in her Chamber, where I found her so dejected and sad that she could not utter a word. And I, in like manner, seeing her in that state, durst not ask her any thing, being fearfull of understanding some dis∣pleasing news. Yet at last, forced by Love, and my obligements, I intreated her to acquaint me with the occasion of so unaccustomed, and pro∣found a melancholy. At which she began so ve∣hemently to weep, that it was not possible for her of a long time to speak distinctly. But yet the extreamity of her grief being in part di∣minished, by the vent she gave it in her tears, in the end she said; My dearest brother, Jerson and Lucinda have assassinated us both, Jerson having long served me, with pretext of obtaining me, (for other way he knew he had none) through the merit of thy friendship and of Love to mar∣ry him; hath betrayed me to espouse Lucinda: And Lucinda, now when she seemed most com∣placent to thee, hath most perfidiously deceived thee to marry Jerson. And so we are both wound∣ed in the most sensible part of our reputation;
without possibility of pretending to a satisfa∣ction equivalent to such an injury. When I understood this news, Belisa being able no lon∣ger to continue her discourse, I interrupted her with so profound sighs & shrieks, that I thought thereby to breathe out my dolorous Soul. And I verily believe, that 'tis impossible for a man to die of sorrow, since I am able to live under the afflictions of such disgraces. Yet indeed I was wounded with what resembled death. Anon af∣ter I returned to my self, and rent the Letter sent me by the inflexible Lucinda into a thousand bits, entring into such desperation, that even to the tearing my hair from my head, I committed the most indecent acts of womanish weaknesse: it being but too true, That a Soul overpassionate in the love of a woman, changeth his manly courage into effeminate cowardice. I forbare for some dayes to efface this grief out of my breast, till I might assure my self of some constant resolu∣tion. Then cloathing all my family in mourn∣ing, I sent Jerson a Chartel of Defiance in these terms. Arnaldo to Jerson. JErson: To the end the world may know how lying and deceitfull the professions have been that thou hast past to me in private, I am resolved to publish them; that thy punishment may serve for an exam∣ple to other Traitors like thy self, not to abuse with such enormities the name and faith of friendship. Remember therefore that among the other things of importance which I trusted to thy fidelity, one was
that of my Love to Lucinda; in which thou hast many times made such offers to transact to my satis∣faction, that though thou thy self didst serve her, thou oughtest to have renounced her for love of me; finally, under the confidence of a friend, thou hast robb'd me, fraudulently bearing away the prize due to my services, transgressing the Laws of Friendship and Knight-hood; and, constituting thy self infa∣mous, and a Traitor, thou art become a blemish to the Nobility of thy bloud, and a reproach to the glo∣ry of thy Ancestors, when as the scope of thy actions should have alwayes been Honour and Vertue. Now, that thou mayest receive the condign correction due unto thy sordid actions, I would have thee know, that with such Arms as thou shalt chuse, I am rea∣dy to give thee thy death, or to compel thee at least to confesse that thou hast committed the greatest villany and infidelity, that could fall into the thought of man. Therefore chuse Arms at thy pleasure, and when I receive thy Answer, I will appoint thee the field, and day of Decision. ARNALDO. Jerson received this Defiance, and pausing up∣on it some time, in the end he answered me in this form. Jerson to Arnaldo. ARnaldo: I have seen thy Chartel, and if thy deeds shall correspond to the vaunt of thy words, I hold my self already for overcome, and stoop to thee as my Conquerour: But I hope, that this Affair will succeed otherwise, and thou shalt find more of
strength in my Arm, than I have found infamy in thy Paper. Thou biddest me remember our past friendship, and I, through my over-much remembring of it, have married Lucinda: for, knowing how averse she is to thee, and knowing thee to be re∣duced to extremity, I resolved to ease thee by cut∣ting off all thy hope of ever enjoying her. And if, before thou hadst proceeded to defame me, thou hadst hearkened to my reasons, I am confident that thou thy self wouldest have commended my resolution, undertaken for thy safety. But, because that my words, now that thou art past to the publica∣tion of these secrets by taxing of my honour there∣with, might be falsely ascribed to the fear of thy sword; know, that I pretend not to excuse my self in the least; and that I am ready to quell thy haughti∣nesse, and to defend my right, by Arms: It being my custome with such as thou, to say little, and do as I ought. The choice therefore I am to make of Arms, to force thee to recede from thy false opi∣nion, shall be thus: We will be, on Hors-back, Armed at all points, except the right arm, which shall be bare; the Lances shall be equal, and each wear two swords. The Horses likewise shall be barded, and have their Testerns and Guards for their necks. Choose thou as thou pleasest the time and place, for I will meet thee with assured hope to tame thy pride, and make thee swallow thy lies, as there is reason I should. JERSON. WHen Arms had been thus denounced a∣gainst me, I went to the King, to whom having related my cause, and the treachery of Jerson, he freely granted me the field. The day
destined to the battle being come, we both pre∣sented our selves before the King, and took the wonted Oath, and our Arms being view'd by the Judges, we entred into the List: where we en∣countred in our Carier with such impetuosity, that we easily knew the little advantage we should get of each other. Jerson therefore, be∣ing no lesse dextrous than skilfull in hors-man∣ship, assaulted me on the arme that was naked, giving me a dangerous wound I must needs say, I struck him onely on the Visour of his Cask without doing him any hurt. Yet neverthelesse the Launces flew in pieces: then we presently took our swords, and began to assault one ano∣ther with such resolution, and our fight endured so long, that the eyes of the Spectators were as weary of beholding us, as we were with fighting. Yet in the end the lot fell in favour of the right, and Jerson was dismounted and slain: and so Lu∣cinda's infidelity came to be known, and my cause approved. Yet neverthelesse, esteeming his own honour, and that of his house, more than life, he would not in any case confesse his default, but preferred a valiant death before a shamefull and dishonourable life. Thus Lucinda in the space of a moneth after her marriage, made in my con∣tempt, and to the betraying of my sister, became a Widow, Jerson was chastised, I a Conquerour, right was vindicated, and infidelity punished. Here the Knight having stayed his discourse, I congratulated with him so glorious a victory obtained over so perfidious, together with so valiant, an Enemy. Then the Cavalier sigh'd from the bottom of his heart, and said. Too dear I
paid, Noble Stranger, for so famous a victory; for in acquiring to my self the applause of valour, I came to procure an infinite deal of sorrow: having eternally lost her whom I hoped to win in so great a field of courage and fidelity. For, not being yet cured of my infirmity, I made over∣tures by divers friends & kinsfolks (so was I in∣amoured on her) to Lucinda, that entreating she would pardon the offence done her upon the ne∣cessity of honour against my will, she would con∣sent (though now she was not worthy of my bed and company) to receive me in the room of her deceased Consort. To which being alwayes averse, she shut her ears, setling her self in this cruel approbation, not onely of not gratifying me with marriage, but of not surviving her be∣loved Jerson. Seeing therefore that I spent all my attempts in vain, I would for my last proof, and ultimate disgrace, make use of the person of Belisa: Who, though she was very unwilling, yet knew not how to deny at my request to seek to so ill-beloved a woman, but try'd to see if at her entreaty she would receive me into favour; which, besides bloud, and fortune, having also made my self a known Superiour in valour to her deceased husband, I was not doubtlesse un∣worthy in a second place to possesse her affecti∣ons. Lucinda understanding by the mouth of Be∣lisa such like remonstrances, she disturbedly said to her: My friend, follow me, and I will give you the answer you require of me: So they went together to a building of the Ladies, separated from the common offices of life, and, entring the same according to the freedom of our Countreys,
they came just into that part, where Jerson lay enterr'd in the hereditary Sepulcher of her greatest Ancestors, founders of that structure. Whither being come with her Governesse, and other Ladies of her acquaintance, Lucinda first stedfastly beheld the Sepulcher, and after turning to Belisa, tartly said. See the nuptials prepared me by your brother! And that saying, with a sharp Dagger which she carried hid in her slieve, she barbarously stabb'd her self in the breast, to tranfix in her life my Soul, and the comfort of all my hopes. She did not die presently, yet did not survive many hours, so desperate was her resolution to be a perpetual companion in death of him, whose company she had enjoyed but few hours in life. The horror of such a spectacle, put such affliction and terror into the mind of Belisa, that it being accompanied with the fear of seeing me also fall in her, as not desiring to survive this her death, she fell into a deep swound, in which she long continued, like one really dead; & being not able to resist so great a dysaster, she also ended the course of her dayes with a short ficknesse, in the most goodly flower of her youth, and hath left me Heir of a perpetual death; few nights passing me in which she comes not to disquiet my sleep with horrid apparitions and discourses of death. I think therefore that the end of my calamity is not far off; for but yesterday she appeared to me about break of day, telling me, that there would arrive at my house, (and you are the dearest Guest) from the Western parts a Stranger, which would one day transmit to the memory of Poste∣rity
the Tragical History of our miserable ad∣ventures; And bring me withall a change of my fortune, which I am certain cannot be but by changing this turmoyled life into the tranquil repose of death. Arnaldo; or, The injur'd Lover. BOOK IV. HEre stopt the Knight, and I subjoyned. I would have you hope for more fortunate Auguries, which not my arrival in these parts, but the benignity of destiny shall present you with, gentle Sir; which is that which the information you have given me, hath just now infused into my mind of the beautifull Huntresse, through whose tracks we now direct our steps. For if I deceive not my self in the little knowledge I have taken, more from the experience of Mun∣dane revolutions, than the study of any abstruse sciences; I see not onely in your looks, but read also in the internal tablet of your heart a mar∣vellous correspondency of Genius between your noble person, and that of Argosthenia. And, Who knoweth but that Heaven, which by the means of women hath effected the greatest benefits in the World; hath sent this fair Stranger out of Ne∣gropont into Baeotia, for no other end but by the assistance of her person to terminate your suf∣ferings; taking you from this dolefull solitude wherein you are unprofitable to others, and a burden to your self, to transport you to a place,
and estate worthy of the dignity of your bloud, and the grandure of your mind? Here the Knight stedfastly beheld me with si∣lent seriousnesse, letting loose unawares many profound things; whereupon I prosecuted my discourse, saying. Negropont already bewails the ruine of the stock of its Princes, reduced into the sole person of Doricinia: Periander, elder bro∣ther of Argosthenia, to whom by primogeniture that inheritance doth belong, hath given the final period to that family: For, rebelling in an amorous disdain against the Durchesse, who ei∣ther to conserve her self free and independent, would not marry; or for that she knew Periander to be of too turbulent a Genius, and two tyran∣nical a disposition, had refused to make him her husband; he hath for the same merited exile from Negropont, as a reward of his insurrections; and according to the report, which goes of him is dead in the Isle of Andros, whither he had be∣took himself with the deplorable Reliques of his Rebellion. The eldest sister likewise of Argosthe∣nia is without any of the fruits of her Matrimo∣ny: so that if Heaven permit that also the Dutchesse should run the great Carier of death without legitimate issue; the government of that Noble principality would descend directly to Argosthenia: And what would you say, gentle Sir, if you, changing your fortune with the mu∣tation of your life, should passe, by the means of so prodigious a Lady, from the desarts of Boeotid to the Throne of Calcides? And whereas now you lye buried an unprofitable burden to the world in the Sepulcher of a Forrest, you
would return to live in publick, to the glory of our age? What pretend ye to with such anxie∣ty, for an extinguish'd Beauty, that you so much love her? Is it haply with hopes to re∣vive her, that she may again return to torment you? That's an enterprize wholly unworthy of your prudence; For Lucinda shall never re∣turn more to the earth. And although the Fa∣bles of antiquity might be renewed, and she should rise again, Do you presume, peradventure, that she with her nature changed, would rise fa∣vourable and faithful? It would be a folly to im∣magine it. For a person dead, therefore, which first with betraying you for another person, and after with dying, hath thereby confessed her self unworthy of you, would you cast away your self by leading a life, no better than a perpe∣tuall death; depriving your illustrious family, this Kingdom, and your self, of the glory of your prowesse, to the good of mankind? Such gifts of Heaven so prodigally showred down up∣on your gentle person, ought these, I say, to be so miserably abused by a vain passion, to the unexpressible detriment of your renowned blood, of the age, and of your self? Ah Sir, re-assume at last, reassume those generous spirits, which your birth instilled into your breast, and by your birth, Heaven; and if so miserable a losse of your high honours, hath been overpast by a weak inamoured youthfulnesse; let the glori∣ous reparation of a maturer age, dart out of these shaddows into the noble serenitie of brave enterprises: For if in youth its a less shame to err; more glorious also will the redresse of
those errors appear, which would environ your temples with the crown of a most noble princi∣pality. To this mutation of life and fortune, the benigne Ghost of your sister counsells you; and to this, by the aid of Argosthenia, Destiny inviteth you; which, for no other cause, per∣mitted that you should be deprived of Lucinda by her own Infidelity, but for to open you the way, which she would perpetually have shut up to you, of passing from the desarts of Boeotia to the Throne of Negropont. Arnaldo seemed whilst I was speaking, by his deep sighs, and by the admiration, exprest in his face, partly to approve my sayings; where∣upon, when he saw me silent, he added, Friend, In a short compasse you have comprised things very different, and worthy of greatest conside∣ration. In that part therefore which pertains to the invalidity of my griefs for an exanimate and faithlesse beauty, the cause of so many miseries to me; I should easily be brought to acknowledg my simplicity occasioned by a false opinion fix∣ed in my head by youthfull Vanity, and a me∣lancholly constitution that took root in my birth, and is now almost converted into Nature, by the infelicity of my tragicall adventures. But of the novelties succeeded in the Principa∣lity of Negroponte, of the exile and death of Periander, and his sister, and of the right of Argosthenia to that Crown, as also of the pre∣tension I might nourish towards her person, it's not necessary we should discourse with such confusion, and haste; but rather let us find out a time and place to inform our selves of necessa∣ry
contingences: For though we should sup∣pose that I did propound, and that Argosthenia should not reject this match; yet it would be good to know, if the Dutchesse would consent, that a Lady, who is not known so much as to be in the World, should succeed her in the Prin∣cipality. And, were we certain she would ac∣knowledge her, and consent that she succeed her, yet is it a question whether she would per∣mit her to match her self into the house of a strange Knight; which may pretend by right of blood, to the succession of the Kingdom of Thebes. Here Arnaldo held his peace, and I replied: Sir, He who too critically distinguisheth in grand enterprizes, doth frustrate them before they be half effected. It's good therefore that prudence take place, but yet it's necessary to leave something to the arbitrament of Fortune. Argosthenia already holds by birth a right to aspire, after the Dutchesse, to the Crown of Cal∣cides, nor can all the violence in the World de∣prive her of this right of nature. She liveth not at present at the Dutchesse's disposall, which as yet doth not know in what part of the world she is conceal'd; or rather hath forgot all thoughts of her person, as if she had never been born. Let us say nothing to the young Lady of this se∣cret, and let us onely with the help of Olympia, drive on your marriage with her; for, this done, we shall have time enough afterwards, of dis∣closing so grand a secret, and of imparting the truth to the Dutchesse; who when she shall hear that she is already espoused to a Cavalier so
well accomplished, will have no occasion for which to repute her unworthy of Succes∣sion to the Principality, through the suspitions which their flight might beget in the minds of the people, as if that, for actions unworthy of her, she had fled from Negropont. Then, as to the right of birth which you also pretend to the Crown of Thebes; the interests of State will de∣clare in your favour: giving you a ground to hope one day by means of this match, if not in your person, in that of your descendents, to unite all these Provinces under one onely Crown; For although, by reason the Kingdom of Thebes is far greater than the Dukdom of Ne∣gropont, there might some obstacle arise from the fear of becoming of a Soveraign State, a subsi∣dinate Province, there would not want oppor∣tune means to adjust such differences by assu∣ring the Calcidonians that they should never be commanded by Theban Ministers as subjects, but should be alwayes governed as a free State, by persons of the Royall Family. But such like considerations are at present unseasonable; and it shall suffice to know, that there never want evasions and pretexts for Soveraigns, where∣with they may satisfie the pretensions of the people. The point on which your prudence ought to insist, is, to rouse your self out of this unprofitable obscurity; and to procure the al∣liance of Argosthenia, before that the news from Calcides of her family do arive to her notice. Leave the rest to the care of Heaven, of Fortune, and of your own Valour. Arnaldo hearing this, replyed: Friend, He
that adviseth to any enterprize, should know, above all things, how to investigate the means requisite to execute it. If you think a Marriage with Argosthenia, to be a good act in me; I will confesse that she al∣ready is possest with some inclinations in fa∣vour of my person; and that Olympia being my Mother's sister, may promise us all good suc∣cesse. To you I refer my self, and because we are just at the bounds of my Forest, and upon the passing into that of Olympia, I will return to my house, and you may, as Conductor of my people, who cary Argosthenia her prey, intro∣duce your self into the acquaintance of that La∣dy. That will suffice, and this will serve you for a Token of security with Olympia, that you treat with her by my consent about such a pro∣position: And so saying, he took a Diamond from his finger, and put it upon mine. I received it, and taking my leave of the Knight, forded the Brook, with the conduct of four servants, which carried to Argosthenia, upon a rurall Barrow of sticks, the Stagg that she had slain. As soon as I had set foot upon the champain, I thought that the liberty of the open air did re∣plenish my soul with unusuall resentments of joy, in such manner, that they wholly removed the remembrances of all past dysasters, fixing me onely in the thoughts of my present occasi∣ons, giving me a certain proof of the bounty of Heaven, being so far separated from my Native Country; in that, though my heart was not, yet at least my fortune was changed by the alte∣tation of the Climate.
I came by Sun-set to the house of Olympia, a proud Structure, which would better have enno∣bled a great City, than such a salvage habitation; I found her buried in an abysse of grief and tears, for the wanting, the joy of her eyes, the fair Argosthenia; which losing her way (as was supposed) after the chase of that Stagg, which we brought life-lesse to her house, was no more seen of all that day. Whereupon dispatching all her people in search of her, she sate alone with her women to condole the suspition of some un∣expected dysaster. I was so much surprised at this spectacle, that I lost in the very enterance of my design the thread, by which I was to weave the webb, recommended me by the Injur'd Lover; for that was the name, which out of those woods was born by Arnaldo. Yet I com∣plemented with the Lady in terms befitting her nobility and my duty, endeavouring to comfort her, but in vain: for night had already enrob'd it's self in gloomy shades, and her domesticks were returned from the quest of the Lady, with∣out any news of her person, which precipitated her into such grief, and drew from her so great lamentation, that it would have moved to pitty the insensible hardnesse of stones. Whereupon, being grown desperate at this incounter, be∣cause the summer season permitted me to travel in the night, the servants of Arnaldo being dis∣mist, I disposed my self never to return thither without having first learnt some tidings of the lost Lady. I had observed in my walke with the Knight, the hollowings of barbarous voyces in certain parts of the Forrest; but, transported by
the current of our discourse, I took no great notice of it for that time; seeing that none of the Cavaliers followers were in the least moved at it, or exprest the least alteration: So it came in∣to my thought to re-passe thither. And though I wanted the clue of Ariadne to guide me, in the night, through the Labyrinth of such thickets: yet I made use of some observations I had made in some groves of Italy, to know the tracks of men and beasts, and I resolved pre∣sently to depart. But I had scarce set foot in the Forrest, when me-thought I heard the mur∣mure of passengers; whence, not certain whe∣ther they might be men or beasts, I layd hold of my sword, and securing my head with my Helmet, I withdrew my self behind the root of a vast Oak, encompassed by a little thicket of young Oakes, newly grown, to observe the pas∣sages of this encounter; it being a piece of fol∣ly, rather than valour, to run into perills and dangers, without any reason or necessity. And scarce was I provided with that sanctuary of se∣curity, when I perceived, more by the sound of the ear, than by the discernment of the eye, that they were men that passed that way, and I fancied to hear one of them say: We have made a good booty, but it will be necessary we get out of these Purly's before day, otherwise we run a hazard of being discovered. Hearing this, I began presently to imagine, that this prey was no other than Argosthenia. Hereupon letting them scarce passe so far as not to discover me, I put my self into the path they took, to follow them.
But scarce had I gone three hundred paces, when they stopt at the mouth of a Grott, where they endeavoured to take away some impedi∣ments of loggs and stones, which barracado'd it; the which while they were intent to do, one of them felt himself wounded with so sound a blow, that crying he was slain, he fell goaning to the earth. And whilst another of the knot would require of him, What was the matter, I saw him also ran through the brest with a boar∣spear, and tumbled close by the other. There re∣mained two others, the which stept back, and drew their swords, putting themselves upon their defence, asking, What Devill was descended down there, in the little space they had been gone? Then Argosthenia skipt out of that Cave with a spear in her hand, exclaiming: Ah Traitors! It's the Justice of Heaven that smites you. Now I have untyed those hands your villany bound. And that saying, made at them, and hurt one of them in the face: and after that, leaping over those obstacles of blocks and stones, betook her self to flight, through those tracks, wherewith she was very well ac∣quainted; The two Assassinats seeing that, ran after her to stay her: hereupon, seeing that now was the time to discover my self in relief of that Lady; I pursued them, reproaching them with that barbarism. Argosthenia heard me before the Assassinates, and, animated by that unexpected succour, she turned head against them with admirable undauntedness; so that the two ruf∣fians being engaged betwixt the Ladie's spear and my sword, they could not escape their deser∣ved
deaths. Howbeit they did not dye unre∣venged; for I received a blow upon the fore∣head, upon the border of my murrion, and a deep stabb in the left arm, and hand. Argosthe∣nia in like manner, had a reverse so great upon the head, that if it had fallen edgewise, as it did flat, all the hope of Arnaldo had faln to the earth, with that blow. Yet did she fall in a swound; whereupon, I not knowing in so great a destitution of all things, with what other ar∣gument to provide for her, whispered some charms softly to her, and made her come to her self; but so ill she was, that she had no appre∣hension of her self. Yet in the end re-assuming her proper knowledge, she requested me to tell her, Who I was: and having told her, she ex∣prest an inconceivable satisfaction, and cour∣teously presenting me her hand, arose from the ground, saying; Let us walk Sir, for I be∣ing very well accustomed in the wayes, will bring you in lesse than an hour to the house of Arnaldo; for to that of Olympia I will return by my self as soon as day breaks. No, Madam, an∣swered I, It is convenient that we go first to that of Olympia, for she is submerged in an ocean of perplexities for fear of you. After you have obliged me for my life, you would al∣so overcome me in Civility, answered the Lady. But that you shall not do; for you had need to have your wounds drest, if you well observe your left arm, and I feel nothing but a slight blow on the head, which amounts to nothing; so that it's requisite, that we go to the neerest house. And beside, I would not that the fami∣ly
of Olympia should see you with me, whilst the aire of your face, and the fashion of your de∣portment falsifie the modesty, which otherwise I see in your countenance, & observe in your man∣ners. I then interrupted her: These considerations are of no effect, now that I am just come from the house of Olympia to seek you, and must treat with her about some affairs, which I hope will succeed to your satisfaction also. Here the La∣dy leaping with a sudden alacrity, said; And what is it? Perhaps you bring me some news from Negroponte? Is it happily that the Tyrant my brother is dead? I would have you, Madam, retain more comfortable thoughts, answered I; Be to your brother what will, you shall not want a fortune, if you know how to entertain it. Calamities I conceive I may expect (replied the young Lady) in this my miserable life, onely made tolerable by my Genius, which will not give place in any respect to fortune, and as the misadventure even now hapned to me may give some proof: but of fortunate adventures I nei∣ther apprehend them, nor do I hope for them. And how then (said I) came you into this danger? I know not very well (said the youthfull Lady) how to relate it, yet I shall acquaint you in brief, with that which befell me: and (by the way I must tell you) I have ever observed hither∣to, that I am most merry when I am accosted with some unexpected dysaster. Departing therefore from your Company somewhat joyed, for having found the Cavalier Arnaldo in a manner of car∣riage and looks, unusual to his lugubrious me∣lancholy,
I forgat my way: but I had not gone above a thousand paces, when I saw these villains start out of certain craggy places; and before I perceived my self assaulted, I found I was bound, and carried to the Grot, whence I am now escap't. Which, having served heretofore either for an habitation of people, or for some reli∣gious Rites, within is very commodious, and ca∣pacious enough for eight or ten persons. Here, I had, just before I came to you, left this my Hunting spear, and one of my upper Garments, recommending them to a shepheard which ac∣companied me, to run the faster with my Bow after the Stag, which I slew at your feet. Here also these men tied me faster then before, that I might not make use of my hands, blocking me up in such a manner as you might have easily ob∣served, getting together a great number of logs and stones, to fill up the mouth of the cave. With what intention they did this, they would not tell me. Onely I collected, that they would expect the night to take me hence unobserved, and carry me to Thebes; for as much as I suspe∣cted this Crime of Treason was descended from Diambres, a principal Cavalier among the Thebane Nobility; who having long served and solici∣ted me in vain, seeing the uglinesse of his face and the rudenesse of his disposition could not dispose me to affect him; he would have ravished me, to obtain that from me with violence, which he could never possesse himself of, by Love. Seeing my self therefore included in this Ca∣vern, Necessity, the wise School-Mistresse of our safety, taught me the manner how to break my
bonds; for I drew neer the edge and points of some stones, and I endeavoured in such sort to fret the cords and strings (that bound my arms to my sides) against them, that so getting these loose first, I might break also those that tied together my hands. Seeing my self at liberty, and with my spear, I skipt with such joy, that I thought every minute a thousand years, that the Ruffians delayed to clear the enterance of the Grotto, which work I often attempted my self, but I found it altogether impossible, by reason of the too great bulk, and heavinesse of that Barricado of Trees and Stones accumulated by the strength of four men, which a weak woman was not able to remove. Now, praised be the Heavens, that by their benignity and your succour, I am again in possession of my liberty, for I would certainly far rather die a thousand times, than see my self in the power of the deformed Diambres, whom I hate more then death. I would not for that time multiply Complements to ascribe her liberty to her own valour, more than my slow succour; but seeing her pause at these words: But Madam, said I, all are not Diamrbes's, so that you should desite to live always single. And even this peril which you have just now run through, ought to advertise you to provide for the secu∣rity of your person; (which being so beautifull will be ever obnoxious to treacheries) by chu∣sing a husband worthy of you. Here the spright∣full Lasse with an inconsiderate gesture of pure freedom, void of all deceit, said; Sir Knight, if you peradventure be he, which by believing to have obliged me, shall desire me for your wife;
content your self, that I tell you, that I shall ever confesse my obligation; nor do your qua∣lities a jot displease me: but having already de∣dicated my Soul to another, it is not conve∣nient I bestow on you this miserable part of my self, which though fair that it is, may by a light indisposition be soon deformed, and chang'd in∣to uglinesse. Hereupon I rejoyced exceeding∣ly at the so ingenuous freedom of the Lady, and added; Madam, I assure you, I have not spoke for my self so much, because my destiny hath already bound me in other Chains, as because I am conscious of my incapacity of such a favour, exceeding the slendernesse of my fortune; but I have spoke to other ends more worthy of the Nobility of your birth, and the generosity of your spirit. You wrong your self said the Lady, and withall offend my modesty; for had I my Soul at liberty, and you should then nourish such pretensions, I would not a jot respect Fortune, but would consider your accomplishments, and my obligements: for other then your self, I am sure you treat not for; being a Stranger, newly ar∣rived in this Countrey, & having never known me before to day, I am confident you speak for none but your self. Let us turn our discourse to some other matter, and content your self, that there passe between us onely a bare correspondence of sincere friendship, and pure endearments. You honour me too much, gentle Madam, said I! And in so short a space of time, as I have known you; I am presented with an occasion to intreat your favour in behalf of another. And what is he, said Argosthenia? One that perhaps
will not displease you, added I. But I would first treat with Olympia. The Lady sigh'd, and said, Olympia is my Lady, but I am Lady of my self in this particular. Therefore tell me what you are to say to Olympia; for besides that your suit concerns none but my self, I pretend no∣thing from Olympia, and may pretend much from my own family. I added, The Knight my Host is he that desires you for your self, and that will shew you the reason also of that which he ex∣pects from you. The young Lady sigh'd, and gave a sudden start, saying to me, Arnaldo? Yes, Ma∣dam, said I: At my perswasion he desires you to succeed with a more propitious fortune in the place of his ingratefull Lucinda. So then, sub∣joyned Argosthenia, I am doubly obliged; in my life, and in my contentment: without having done any thing to oblige you to so generous, and endearing favours. It's the duty of all high∣born Souls (said I) to procure the benefit of an∣other, especially of Ladies of your quality. When you please therefore Arnaldo shall be your husband, and I a servant to you both: Bro∣ther rather, said Argosthenia; for to a Gentleman of so noble, and generous qualities, a title so ignoble & vile as that of servant doth not agree. But how may I believe you (excuse my indiscre∣tion being transported beyond my self) that Ar∣naldo commissionated you to such a treaty? I sud∣denly replied, Behold here, Madam, this Ring (and presented it to her) which you have often seen on his finger, and this he presents you as the pledge of his passion. The Lady took it with a smile, saying; Now my obligements to you are
so incomparable, that I want a conceit to appre∣hend them, and language to thank you for them. Tell Arnaldo that Argosthenia was born either to be enjoyed by Arnaldo, or else onely by death. Choose he what he pleaseth, for I am content, whether it be with him, or with it. You shall do me the favour to carry back to him this Collanet (and pulled it from her neck) with my Picture, that he may keep it so much the neerer his heart, as he is the heart of my breast, the spirit of my Soul. Then, in giving it to me, she stayd her hand on mine, adding, Sir, Argo∣sthenia cannot give you a greater proof of the obligations she professeth to owe you. I then kist that hand of this courteous and ingenious Creature, acknowledging such ho∣nours to be infinite favours: assuring her, to the utmost of so inconsiderable a fortune and ability, a perpetuall observance and fidelity to her person, and to the Knight her Spouse. Whether it was the obscurity of the night, (become greater by a little misling shower which began to bedew the tracks of the Forrest); or else the apprehension of the things we discours∣ed of I know not, but so it happened, that Ar∣gosthenia led us out of the way, nor did she perceive it, till that being tired by the walk, she took notice she was nigh to the murmure of a Brook, which begirt the Forrest about; whereat being surpriz'd with a chilnesse she said, Sir, by my carelesnesse, we are so wandered out of our way, that we are above seven miles from the house of Olympia, and four from that of Ar∣naldo. To return at this hour, and from this
place, into the Forrest would be an exposing our selves to a manifest peril of our lives, being we must passe through some great Valleys inhabited onely by Wolves; and if we would crosse the Brook, and walk towards the house of Olympia, we must also wander three miles in the Forrest along the Banks of this River, before we can find a place to ford it; it being very large as you see, and full of quick Sands and Rocks in these parts. Pardon me, I intreat you, this errour commit∣ted casually against my will; and do me the fa∣vour to lend me something to cover my head, that the rain may not ulcerate my wound, which I find to be already much swelled. Hearing her say so, I pulled from under my Coat a large Taf∣faty Scarf, and presented her with it, and also a Handkerchief, expressing my grief not to be so much at the missing of the way, as at the pains which thereby she was put to. Upon which the Lady replied: Yet cannot I do any thing to shew the sense your obligements impresse in me; though I would willingly dedicate the better half of my dayes to return part of that acknow∣ledgement, which the Laws of gratitude doth with justice exact for so supream a favour, and so high a content, as your presence hath possest me of. But that which adds to my grief, is, that you, having need of repose, and remedy to your wounds, do by this foggy aire of the night exasperate them afresh. Whilst she was talking thus, and her hands were imployed about the binding up and co∣vering her head, her foot slid by reason of the slipperinesse of the ground, occasioned through
the excessive rain that had faln, and so she tumb∣led into a deep plash of water, made by the ri∣sing of the Current in that part. It was the goodnesse of Heaven that she should fall di∣rectly upon her feet, otherwise she had ran the danger of bruising her self, on certain splin∣ters of the stump of a tree, cut down upon the bank of that river. And it was also a happy turn, that the charity of the neighbouring stream did reflect some little duskish light in the aire, that I might thereby find out the way to recover her from that precipice: The which I finally did, though with great difficulty; for she through the fright of the fall was so bereft of force, that she was altogether unable to walk. Being forced therefore by necessity, as if she had been a little Child, I took her in my arms; and she, weeping with tendernesse, for her faster-sitting put her left arm about my neck, saying to me; Sir, Necessity violates all Laws. I am in your arms, but I am Arnaldo's spouse; Let it please you therefore that this imbracement be of a sister to her brother, to whom she confesses to owe her life a thousand times. I being moved with pity, and the gene∣rosity together of the young Lady, was almost ready to weep, replying; I know very well Ma∣dam what a Gentleman's duty is towards a Lady of your merit; and to a friend, of the quality of Arnaldo. Make the same accompt of me, as if I were truely that which you please to term me, your brother; since age consents not that I call you daughter. So I will, I as∣ssure you answered she; and resting for feeble∣nesse one cheek upon my head, made me think
her so light, that I scarce felt the weight of her body. Walking in this manner, about half a mile, my ear was alarm'd with a slow murmur of humane voices; whereupon hearkning towards that part I perceived they were fisher-men, which casting baits to the fishes stood silently expecting, that they would run to the same to swallow them. Making therefore to the brink of the Brook, I called them to waft me over to the Champain. They, like rude and simple people, very unwil∣lingly consented to it, as loath to deprive them∣selves of the sorry prey which they expected in their Nets. Whereupon perceiving this their wretched avidity, I invited them by a promise of rewarding them with a benefit more worth then a hundred such fish. They hearing that, turned their Boat to the place where we were, & to our misfortune landed us on the other side. To our misfortune, I say: for having with the dawn of the new-born day discovered at a little distance from us, the Towers of a Castle founded upon a little Hill, just when that Argosthenia ha∣ving received part of her strength, might be able to walk, we directed our steps towards that place with hope to find harbour and relief; I for my wounds, Argosthenia for her weaknesse. But scarce had we begun to mount the rise of the Hill, when on the instant there came towards us out of the Gate of the Castle, a tumultuous Troop of persons, some on Horse-back, and some on foot: among which Argosthenia having disco∣vered Diambres, with a look betwixt furious and disdainfull, she betook herself to frightfull and
trembling shrieks. Ah! Sir Knight, said she to me, We are lost. And why, said I? Argosthenia would have answered, but what through fear, & what through anger, she could not pronounce a word. The behaviour of the Damsel put the people into a suspition, so that they descended towards us: but on the other side she was, by watching, and by travail, and by the things that bound her head so transformed, that it would have been no easie matter to know her. By this time she knew this to be the Jurisdiction of Diambres, which removing thither to effect her rape, had just at that instant received advice of her taking, and of her flight (with the death of his assassins) by a Wood-man, which passing through the Forrest at midnight, to provide some Wood for his occasions, had found one of them, yet-half-living upon the ground. He suddenly hereupon took horse with his people, intending to passe over into the Forrest, and cause the dead bodies to be buried, that his attempt might not come to light: since the fact being committed in the Territories of Arnaldo, a Knight of the bloud Royal (besides his fear of that Cavalier, which would defend his right with Arms) he might thereupon come to be accused as guilty of High-Treason in the bloud of the Princesse. Discovering me therefore, together with her; he presently imagined the truth, for we being fled we knew not whither, were taken in the Net we sought to avoid. Hereupon he commanded his servants suddenly to surround us and take us; I seeing the enterprising of an escape to be de∣sperate, being alone, wounded, and unprovided
against a hundred persons, and being unwilling to forsake the young Lady: onely said to her, that she should not fear, but dissemble that she knew any thing that he had been the contriver of her ravishment; and meet the misfortunes of that imprisonment with a smiling face. Diambres knowing the Lady though thus disguised, was transported with an inconceivable joy; com∣manding his Steward to execute what was to be done in the Forrest: and he returned himself into the Castle, and caused us both to be put in Chambers apart, but yet neer to one another, co∣ming first to examine me to know who I was, and whence I came, and what interest I had in Argosthenia. I replied with an unmoved coun∣tenance, telling him the truth of my condition, and as to the Lady, I said, I held no other rela∣tion to her person then what the duty of a Knight exacted of succouring her, finding her pursued by two assassins to abuse her, as I past through the neighbouring Forrest towards The∣bes. Diambres rested satisfied with my freedom, nor would he take notice of the villains, for fear of discovering himself, but left me with a doubt∣full brow, going to Argosthenia; whereupon per∣ceiving already that there was but a Wall be∣tween us, I set my eyes and ears on work, to find out some crevice, whereat to hear that which past about Argosthenia. And fortune was pleased so succesfully to assist me, that I found under the Tapestry that the Wall was cleft, for that there had been a door which was now made up: I be∣gan with a Rowel of a Spur to scrat away the Lime, to make a hole. Which done, I found that
the carelesnesse of the work-men in stopping up that door, had thrown in some bits of stones, and rubbish, covering them over with onely one layer of bricks. I was at this transported with joy, and seemed to leap into Heaven, promising my self now a correspondency with the young Lady, and to observe all the proceedings of Diambres. Yet notwithstanding, I could not for that time, with∣out making my self heard, learn the least intelli∣gence of his treaty with her; but in the silence of the ensuing night, I opened a breach by the remove of 2 stones amongst the rest of that rub∣bish, and called Argosthenia to me; who told me very good news, that Diambres, though other∣wise rude and bestial, being civilized and instru∣cted by Love, and, as he said, by my Modesty and Generosity, had behaved himself in very civil manner towards her, hoping to reduce her by courtesie to admit him for her husband. Yet he had conceived a great jealousie of me, for having observed on her finger the Ring of Arnaldo, he feared that there had passed some kind of con∣tract between us. I comforted, and counselled the Lady according to that, which I judged op∣portune to her present condition, and so left her with a mind, full of tranquillity, to take her repose, for whose consideration more than for any other reason, I then became exceeding pen∣sive.
Arnaldo; or, the Injur'd Lover. Book V. THe morning ensuing my departure, news ar∣rived to the ear of Arnaldo, that Argosthe∣nia was lost, and that the Cavalier his Guest could not be found in any place, whereupon he dispatcht all his servants to seek for them through all the Forrest. Who having in vain all that day traversed those Labyrinths, could learn no other tidings of them, than that they had found upon the place where fell out the bloudy Conflict, the Mantle and Bow of the Lady, the earth stained with bloud, and the grasse so tram∣pled round about the place, that it was an easie matter to suspect, there had hapned some hot en∣counter of persons that had sharply contended for her sake. The Knight was at this relation seised with a strange shivering; and though the night began to approach, he took with him his Arms, and four men appointed in Garbs be∣tween courtly and martial, to go himself out of the Forrest to trace out farther intelligence of those things, which were reported to him by his domesticks. Getting therefore out of the Forrest at the time when night began, taking advantage by the Sun's absence to usurp upon the dayes serenity, he came to understand upon passing the River, that which the Fisher-men had related to divers
persons, how that they had about break of day, ferryed over to the other shore, a strange Gentleman with a young Lady in his arms. He hereupon went in person to that place, and finding the fishermen, he strictly examined them, demanding of them the marks of the per∣sons: And perceived they could be no other then Argosthenia and Philiterus. The Knight remained at this intelligence very sad; nor did he know what to think of me; for Argosthenia being in my arms, put strange apprehensions of suspition in his head of some default, whereas in all reason, it was most probable, that either I was retired with her to the house of Olympia, or gone away from him without her. On the other side, understanding that we were both wounded, he comforted himself, how that yet we could not be very far off. Next being informed, that we were gone towards the Castle of Diambres, and that many of the people of the place were that day seen to go into the Forrest, fording and refording of the Brook; he imagined the very truth touch∣ing that Knight. And resolving in his mind to be revenged, he went about midnight towards the Castle, to observe the actions of th'inhabi∣tants, and gather something whereby to satisfy his suspition. The Pallace of that Knight was founded above the wall of the Castle, with four Towers, in one of which that did jet out over the Mote, that was but narrow and dry, Argo∣sthenia and I were confined. But I, that in those finister incounters had passed two nights with∣out sleep, was then buryed in a profound slum∣ber;
whereas Argosthenia, kept awake by her amarous cares, heardsome little noyse of horses and men, which surrounded the outside of the Castle-ditch. Thereupon, ravished either by cu∣riosity, or by the impetuosity of a Lover's Soul, which felt it self neer it's proper seat; she ran to the window, and though the night wanted the light of the Moon and most of the Stars, as being overcast with gloomy clouds; yet she thought she knew Arnaldo, by his mourning habit. But behold, just as she was ready to cry out, to let him know of her being there, Diambres entered into her Chamber, onely with one woman, which lighted him; whereupon, she being called that way by the noise, and by the light, she became the most ashamed Lady in the world: because covered onely by a pure fine smock, she discovered from head to foot the delicate proportions of her most beautifull bo∣dy. Diambres beholding, in that her confusion, the goodliest piece that ever Nature framed, he forgot his honest purposes, and already breathed with thoughts of the pleasures of Love: where∣upon demanding, not knowing what he said, What she did at that hour at the window; she observing by the dejected nesse of his looks, and by the sighs he sent forth, his intentions, coura∣giously replyed, I looked on my husband, Where? said Diambres. Where he was, said Argosthenia. And, Who is he? added Diambres. One, said Argosthenia, that can make thee trem∣ble from head to foot; and when he shall know where I am, and the wrongs thou dost me, he will make thee and this Castle fly into the air as a sa∣crifice
to his revenge. Is this thy husband that sleeps so neer thee (said Diambres with a disdain∣full smile) haply a Monarch of some vast Em∣pire? This is not my spouse, (subjoyned Ar∣gosthenia) he is my brother by honour and for∣tune. Shall Mars or Mercury then be thy hus∣band (replyed Diambres) that you stand at this time of night looking on the Stars in Heaven? Be he who he will (said Argosthenia,) know, that if you, forgetting the duty of a Knight, should use any violence to me, my spouse will revenge me of you, to the last drop of your blood. And therefore leave me in peace, for these are not hours seasonable to be in a maiden's chamber. Diambres knew not how to behave himself, now hurryed on by his lust, now re∣tained by his duty; so that for fear of some∣times one thing, sometimes another, he could not resolve on any thing, believing that the La∣dy spoke in that manner, not because she was really espoused, but in a womanish flourish; and that if so be she were marryed, that fortune could befall none but me. Here his sensuall ap∣petite being overcome by the incounter of such beaut yes, he laid hands on the innocent Lady, whereupon she, provoked by a rage full of real generosity, suddenly snatcht the Candlestick out of the womans hand, and flung it in the face of Diambres, with such a force, that it made him stagger, and thus being freed from his hands she flew out of the chamber, and ran wandering up and down the house, till she find∣ing a hollow place under a staire-case, leapt in, and there conceal'd her self, to expect with the
day some opportunity of fortune, either to escape, or at least to dye with a boldnesse wor∣thy of her birth and courage. But Diambres finding himself in so ill a plight, and not da∣ring for shame to cry out, returned to his own chamber to have his wound searched, giving or∣ders, that without his expresse command none should open the gate of his Palace, or of the Castle. The morning following, there was a very ac∣curate search made in every place, but Argo∣sthenia could not be found: which so displeas∣ed Diambres, that blaspheming, he threatened to reduce that house to ashes, to burn her in it, being most assuredly confident, that she could not be gone from thence. The night being come, at the time when all were buryed in silence, Argosthenia came forth of her concealment, returning upon her own accord to her prison, and shutting her self in, she came to call me. I having past that day among a thousand perplex∣ed thoughts of her losse, ran to hear her, and understood what had befaln her; but whilst I stood musing of some plot, to save her from eminent ruine, and all in vain: She said to me, Sir, confiding in your faithfulnesse; I will sin∣cerely tell you what I think. If you shall like it, well: if not, I am prepared to dye, as I have lived, nobly. I desire you would study to open a hole so big in this wall, that I may get through into your prison. The meat they bring you, will suffice us both; and for your bed, I will content my self with a small corner at your feet. As for the rest, I will assure my self of
your ingenuity, that you will treate me as the spouse of Arnaldo, and your sister. In the mean time, who knows, but that Arnaldo may have some hint of our imprisonment. I having seen him last night to surround this Castle? Which if it be so, rest assured that he will not be want∣ing in his duty to his Spouse, and to a Cavalier to whom he is so much obliged. When I saw there was no other way for her safety, but this, I sighing, said, She should be obeyed, putting my self also in perill of death for her safty: for as to the preserving her secret and honest, I knew well enough what I was to do. This said, I strove to break the wall without making a noise, which I easily did: this done, and she having on her side gathered all the rubbish of that breach, she crept thorough into my cham∣ber; where being entered and got upon her feet, she threw her arms about my neck, and weeping, said, Dear Brother, If I should dye for you a thousand times, I could not pay the thousandth part of the obligements I owe you. I innocent∣ly kist her forehead, intreating her to favour me with the continuance of the same excessive con∣fidence, for the regard of her own and my re∣pose. I already know, said she, both who you are, and what I do: Speak no more of it; nor trouble me; for I know you would sooner dye than fail in your fidelity to Arnaldo, or in your respects to Argosthenia. Here ending our dis∣course; we made up that breach in the wall the best we could, and tempering the lime in water, so daubed up those bricks on my part, that the fraud was very hard to be discovered. Which
done because the Lady was half dead with fa∣mine, and I was slightly served by reason of my wounds, she was constrained for that time to content herself with a few slices of Cytron and a little water. By which being reasonably re∣freshed, she lay down to sleep with a wonderfull Modesty and honesty on one side of the bed, and seeing me about to rest my self on the contrary part, she would by no means permit me to do it, protesting to me, that if I did, she would perpetually stand upon her feer. Hereupon, not to contend with her, I also took a part of the bed; confining my self between the bounds of modesty and honour, not so much as to look towards that fide which she had made choice of for her repose. We past away eight dayes in this manner, with much felicity; for Diambres necessitated by his wound, not onely to keep himself reti∣red but also free from the air there resorted none to my chamber, but onely a Page at the hours of dinner and supper, and a Chirurgion once a day. In which time, which I ordered to be very short, Argosthenia lay hid in a chest, or under the bed. Withall, I had so wholly indeared the Page, a boy of fifteen years, of good extracti∣on, of a facetious Genius, and great Soul, that he used me with all the civility that I could de∣sire. He delighted above measure to hear me relate the singularities of strange places, and had an ardent desire to travel for some time into Italy; And because I on the other side extolled, for merit, not for adulation, his Composures in Verse and Prose, he could have been con∣tent,
to have been continually talking with me. But I excused my self by the necessity of rest, to which I pretended my wounds obliged me, and I kept him, for Argosthenia's consideration, at the greatest distance I could. I omitted not nevertheless for those few moments, which he staid with me, to ask him of the news of the place, and came to know, that (I could not tell how) news was carryed to Arnalod's ear, that the Lady he sought, could no-where be found, he not being able to learn the Tyranny of Diam∣bres, and that he accused me of her rape; and was gone to Athens; whither Diambres to co∣ver his own villany had caused it to be given out, that I was gone. This blow of injurious calumny, striking at my faithfulnesse, and the honour of Argosthenia, transfixed my Soul with great anxiety; whereupon to clear my inno∣cence, and comfort Arnaldo with the possession of his Mistresse, I resolved to bestir my wit, to free me from that in just and wretched capti∣viy. I began, in order thereunto, to under-feel the Page, if when Diambres should restore me to liberty, he would accept of my company to transport himself into Italy. I would it would please Heaven, replyed he, I might be so happy. And were it so (subjoyn'd I) that Diambres for his own interests, would not free me from this misery, would you find in your heart to see me alwayes thus unhappy? Euristhus sighed, and said; When there may be found any way, that without prejudice to my reputation, I may leave this service, there should not be that thing in the World, which I would not do for you.
I will content my self with little enough (an∣swered I) and I will so dispose of things, that you shall not onely depart with a Salvo to your re∣putation, but also with a considerable augmen∣tation in your honour and fortune. And to omit, that the being instrumentall in deliver∣ing an innocent Cavalier, unjustly oppressed by a barbarous Tyranny, might acquire you the commendation of a more than vulgar generosi∣ty; I am able to participate to you the glory of an act, of such a grandure, that you your self will confesse your incapacity of such a felicity. But, because I love not to use many words, where works of valour and fidelity are expe∣cted, resolve with your self to be my compa∣nion, in a grand Enterprize, which though it should succeed unhappily, will have you heir of an immortall renown; and then let us con∣sult of the manner to effect it. Sir, said Euri∣sthus, I am at your devotion, Command and you shall be obeyed. Than said I, it would be necessary you provide me some deaf files, to file the barrs of a window, and silk enough to make a ladder, to reach to the Mote of the Castle: stick not at the cost, for I can re pay you to your full satisfaction. Here the youth re-joyn'd, Sir, My condition of a Page in ano∣ther mans house, permits me little ability of serving you, according to the generosity of my spirit, receiving so poor a stipend from my Fa∣ther and Master, that it hardly sufficeth to buy me clothes. I will receive therefore what you please to consign me, with assurance of a faith∣full disbursment. What need more words?
Before three dayes past, with the help of Euri∣sthus, and of our coin, we were furnished with tools, and silk, sufficient for our design. The files we sawed the grates with, and, of the silk, by the help of Argosthenia, we composed the ladder for our escape; Euristhus I instructed to go forth of the Castle, without any alteration in his deportment, and to expect me about mid∣night on the bank of the Mote. Which he most punctually obeyed. And seeing, that although the gates were shut, yet there was neither guard no centinel in that Castle; when about the fourth hour of the night, we heard the signal of his arri∣val, we absolutely removed the bars of the win∣dow. Then fastning the ladder to a hook, and in∣structing Euristhus in holding of it stedfast to the earth: Argosthenia was the first which descend∣ed, howbeit she courteously contested with me, to have had me gone down first. She succesful∣ly descended to the middle of the ladder; but lighting there upon a beam, accidentally jetting out from a window, she so intangled her person and garments, that she could not possibly go up nor down. Seeing so unlooked-for a dysaster, I was almost in dispair of saving her; for if there should any rumour be raised in that part, she could not have been able to escape in such a conjuncture, from a second and more grievous captivity, to the indangering of her life: To call and instruct Euristhus how to assist her, I might not, for fear of being over-heard. Where upon, I resolved to venture my self, to relieve her. So that tying my Arms, which Euristhus had privately conveyed into my chamber, to a
long string of silk, I let them down to the ground, to be ready at hand, upon any occa∣sion; then I nimbly made another rope of the sheets, towell, and any other thing that came to hand, and fastned it to the bars of the win∣dow, yet remaining, letting my self down; stopping at one knot after other, till I came at Argosthenia, now more dead then living, with grief and fear; and dis-intangled her, cut∣ing and loosing her garments and hair from those impediments; and accompanyed and sustained her, till she got to the bottom. Whither be∣ing come, and having put on my Armes, we im∣braced in a most endearing manner, for mutuall joy of each other's escape; and rendering Euri∣sthus the merited applauds of his Fidelity, we made by large paces towards the Forrest; for though it were our intent, to take the way to Athens, yet, on the contrary, considering the faintnesse of Argosthenia, and how that when our escape was known, we should be infallibly pursued, in danger of being overtaken; we de∣termined to secure our selves in the intricate∣ness of the Forrest's Labyrinths, and to go from thence streight to the house of Arnaldo, as well to know some thing of his person, as also to provide our selves with Horses; for I had a par∣ticular desire to recover mine, which I intend∣ed not to leave at any rate in those woods, ha∣ving travelled with him above six hundred miles. It was our fortune, that the Brook, through the drynesse of the season, was very shallow, and that Euristhus, by long practice, was acquainted with the easiest and securest
fords. Euristhus went through bare-foot first, and I followed him, bearing that dear and sweet bur∣then, the beautifull Argosthenia in my armes. When we arrived on the other side, Euristhus was ravished to see the maid I carried to be Ar∣gosthenia, I having told him at the first breaking of the business to him, that she was a young lass of the Castle, that taken with my person, had desired to follow me in that escape: And desiring to say very much, he could speak just nothing through the stupefaction the strangeness of that adventure had reduced him to. So travelling gently, because we were unwilling to engage our selves by night in Valleys inhabited by Wolves, we approached by break of day to the melancholly Mansion of Arnaldo, which now by the departure of its Lord was become the fit seat of a Forrest; there not being left behind of so ma∣ny people, more than the Priest that officiated in the Temple, and those inferiour servants which ordered the Orchards, and drest the Stables un∣der the supervision of a Bayliffe. Here I found it confirmed that Arnaldo, deceived in the false report of my flight, was gone to Athens to seek me: therefore I desired onely thus much, that they would furnish us with necessaries for that voyage, and to dispatch news to Olympia of our deliverance, with an account of the accidents befaln us with Diambres. I desired that Argo∣sthenia for her greater decency, and convenience, would take along with her some grave woman; but she would not agree to it, saying; that for the matter of her own person she alone sufficed, for other things the diligence, and assiduity of
Euristhus was more then enough; for indeed he served her with profound affection, celerity, promptness, and reverence. So making Euristhus to Arm himself, and taking a good Guide, we tra∣vailed succesfully by small journeys towards A∣thens, till such time as coming to the Bank of the River Asopos, we met with an unlucky ac∣cident prepared us by malicious fortune. Diambres being informed of my flight, and that of Euristhus, and, which seemed yet more strange, of Argosthenia's, who by the marks left be∣hind, was known to have been the Guest of my prison; he determined to be revenged at any rate, not so much for any impulse of hatred and pas∣sion, as for self-interest, to the end we should not divulge the excesses of his barbarous incivili∣ties; with representing them moreover to the King of Thebes, to the extream endangering of his Exile, and the confiscation of his goods. Un∣derstanding therefore, either by conjecture, or report that we had taken our way towards A∣thens, and confident, that in respect of the deli∣cacy of Argosthenia, which he presumed to be my consort, we would go but slowly, he conceited he might overtake, and retake us unexpectedly in the confines of the Dominion of Attica. He selected for this purpose eight, or ten, of his bravest servants and swashes; and went (not as yet healed of the blow on his face) with all pos∣sible velocity to that place; and had (for his, and our misfortune) chance so propitious to him, that he came upon us when we least expected. In the place, where we came to ferry over it, the stream was exceeding large with many whirle∣pits,
and shelves very dangerous to the Passen∣gers, so that there was no passing from one side to another, but onely with a little Boat that was there, scarce capable of a man and a horse. Seeing this necessity, for to make way for the others, I entred first with my horse. I would have had Argosthenia to have been wafted over with me, instead of my horse, but the Ferry-man would not permit it, affiming that it was a dan∣gerous thing to passe over horses without the cu∣stody of their masters. I went over therefore alone, and the Wherry was returned to fetch the young Lady and her Palfry; but she was scarce come to the middle of the River, when, behold Diambres, with his face, and those of his follow∣ers covered, arrived upon the same shoar: and ha∣ving a sight of that which he went in search of, he cried to the Boat-man, that upon pain of death he should return back with the charge he conducted. Euristhus, by his voice & deportment knowing his master, being all this while on foot, and by that means unobserved, leapt into the water to swim: and I also perceiving that the Ferry-man amused with the menaces of Diam∣bres, turned the Vessel to make towards him, prickt forward my horse into the River to im∣pede his intention; and Argosthenia on the o∣ther side, presented a Dagger to his breast, threat∣ning him with death, if he did not perform the work he had begun of wafting her over: In the same instant Euristhus also got up to the Boat, and attempting to leap into it, he had almost like to have submerged it with his weight. But it being held to rights by the Art of the Steers∣man;
I came to graple with him, and drawing my sword, forced him to direct the Boat not to the shoar, but along the stream of the River, letting it drive at the pleasure of the current, till it came to touch at an Islet, which I had discovered, di∣stant about half a mile, where I promised my self secure refuge. He obeyed, notwithstanding the cries and protests of Diambres; and I perceiving my horse began to want ground under his feet, spurd him back to shoar, giving first to Euristhus the end of a string that I had about me, that the Ferry-man should not deceive me, by turning as I stood on land the Vessel to another part. Thus we walked about three hundred paces, being followed on the opposite Bank by Diam∣bres. I had a thought, that the Bark should take the right arm of the Channel, which was very broad in that place, to the end Argosthenia, de∣fended and hid by the Isle, might land with se∣curity, and free her self from the eminent peril, without Diambres his being able to pursue us in our journey; but the young Lady spying by chance a youth behind me, that carried a bow and quiver like a hunts-man, she began to call out: To land, to land! Stay the boy, stay the boy! I obeyed her, and stopt him, making him to stay with me; and the Water-man, against his will, brought his Boat to shoar. Here the fair Ar∣gosthenia came out of the Boat, and with the help of Euristhus (because he would not lend her them) took the bow and quiver from the youth, and looking pleasantly upon me with a smiling aspect, said: Dear friend, the River is so broad in this place, that scarce discovering my enemy,
I cannot shoot at any certainty: yet I will try my fortune. I, interrupting her, said: I beseech you Madam, be pleased not to tempt blind for∣tune with any advantage; Content your self, you are safe, and that before our enemies can get their passage over, we shall be in a place where they cannot hurt us, the confines of Attica be∣ing hard by: That we may do: however, said she, give me leave to let fly one Arrow. I told her, she might do as she pleased: and she presently drew the Bow to shoot. When just at the in∣stant we were diverted with a neerer danger, by the appearance of a Knight which came out of a Track, made dark by the umbrage of Trees, and leading to the River side: he was attended by two other persons on hors-back; which discovering us busied in that confusion, ran upon me with his sword drawn, crying, Ah, Traitor! It was the goodnesse of heaven, that the horse I rode on should hear that noyse, and that voyce; so that I leapt aside that I might avoid that blow, which threatned me with death, Argosthenia hereat lost not a with of time, but let fly at my unknown enemy the Dart prepared for Diambres: yet the confusion and haste with which she shot it, made her misse the mark, and instead of the Knight, to hit his horse in the head over the left eye; where∣with, what by the smart, and what by the fright, he was put into such a fury, that running his crupper against a Tree he tumbled himself, and the Knight into a Ditch, which separated the road from the fields. His Companions precipitously leapt from their horses to help him, amongst whom I discovered
the face of Cadmus, Page to Arnaldo, and by him guessing that the faln Knight must needs be his master, (which by means of his gray Cloaths, and his concealed face half-hid with his Murrion, was wholly unknowable at the first sight) I a∣lighted also to his assistance. Argosthenia cried, Kill the Traitour; but I, that was of an opinion very different from that of hers, seeing him bu∣ried in mire, in danger of a speedy surrender of his life; assured his servants that I came to help, not kill him, and putting our selves upon an attempt to draw him out of that misery, we did effect it; but he was so bruised, and in so bad plight, that he scarce knew in what part of the World he was. I was at this spectacle so moved with lively resentments, of Pity, Grief, and Love, that I could not hinder the escape of some tears through my eyes. But, who can aptly describe the sorrow of Argosthenia, now that she knew her espoused husband, and saw him in so deplorable estate, af∣ter so cruel an attempt upon my person, and a hazard of his being slain by her own hand: She knew (and perceived by my looks) that he had been deceived, whereupon flinging her self upon him, and with tears imbracing him, she said. Oh! unfortunate Knight; what Devil hath bereft you of judgement, that you go about to kill him, to whom you are obliged for your life, safety, and honour? Do you thus pay your ingagements to this Gentleman? Wretched Arnaldo, miserable, even in your felicicy. The Cavalier, more dead then alive by so grevious a fall, knew not what to say, seeing Argosthenia upon him, and me so
near in a posture, that without words did accuse him of his crime, committed through too preci∣pitate pievishnesse, and superfluous jealousie. The first words that he could distinctly pro∣nounce, was to disswade Argosthenia from so o∣pen demonstrations of her affection: afterwards re-assuming by little and little his infeebled for∣ces, (though he had his body miserably macera∣ted) he strove to get upon his feet, to walk to∣wards the houses of the Island, where there was a retirement destin'd to the use of Travellers: but when I acquainted him with the peril he ran into of meeting with Diambres, the occasio∣ner of all those misadventures which we now suffered; he boil'd with such resentments of in∣dignation and fury, that almost forgetting his pain he said: With-draw Argosthenia a little, that I may in this river wash off the smears of the dirt, and change my Cloaths, and then we will resolve upon the course we shall steer in our voy∣age. We did so; And it chanced that the water was ve∣ry warm, for that the Sun had but just then began to decline its Meridian; so that he found some ease of the smart, which the fall had strangely caused in the nervous part of his hips. Refresh∣ing, and re-apparelling himself, he would have begg'd a needlesse pardon for his mistakes of me, and a brief Narrative of all our adventures. But expecting every minute Diambres at our backs, I called him back to other apprehensions, telling him; That but for the thoughts of Argosthenia's preservation, which for that time was more op∣portune, I would give my advice, to go (not∣withstanding
the disequality of number and dis∣advantages of strength) to meet Diambres, and chastise him for his barbarous Tyranny: but be∣cause I will not put it to the hazard of leaving her alone in an unknown Countrey, at the dis∣cretion of sickle Fortune; it behoves us with the frost of prudence to allay the ardor of gene∣rosity, and betake our selves to counsels more cautelous than couragious. Therefore let him di∣vert, though not for ever avert, his merited chastisement. As neer as I can judge, he is not now far off, and perhaps by this time is landed in the Island, and ready to recover this shore: now if we on the contrary go over to the other∣side, swimming upon our horses (since the Fer∣ry-man is stipt away) we shall disappoint his di∣ligence with a journey contrary to his expecta∣tion by turning towards Thebes. And since you be destitute of a horse, and Eursthus hath likewise abandoned his upon the opposite side; I will take him up behinde me; and for you and the La∣dy Argosthenia, her horse may serve both. Having so resolved, Arnaldo commanded Cadmus to at∣tempt to ford the River in the safest place. The couragious Youth spur'd his horse into the water, and having gone a little way with great ease, he began to feel no bottom; where∣upon leaving him to swim, yet guided by Bitt and Spur, that he might not make a stop in the water, he immediately began to set foot on land, and succesfully attained the other Bank. Arnal∣do did nor like that ford, fearing that either his beast, or mine, might yield in swimming to the labour of so great a weight: and on the other side
Argosthenia cried that we had better, to avoid a certain danger, expose our selves to an uncertain fortune. And I added: I know what I say, Ma∣dam; Diambres will over take us within this half hour. For me, I but meanly prise the endanger∣ing my life in your service, against such inequa∣lity of power and people. But you, what would you do? My horse hath forded other manner of Rivers then Asopos, and with other manner of weights, then now he is like to carry. I would freely offer him you; but I know that he will not well be rul'd (where I am) by the guidance of any other hand. Sir, said Euristhus take you Argosthenia behind you, and I will swim over, for my Cloaths are not yet dry. To that Argosthenia would by no means con∣sent, being unwilling so much to incommode the generous Youth, to whom his former services spoke her so much obliged; but Arnaldo desiring her to be advised by us, she obeyed. I presently entred the stream, and Euristhus cast himself in after me to swim, and after him entred Arnaldo, followed by his Squire My horse seemed to sport with the stream, with such volubility did he cut and trample that water under foot; insomuch that I was almost come to the other shore be∣fore Arnaldo had scarce waded the third part of the way. In the mean time the curiosity and love of Argosthenia, made her ever and anon to look back towards the Knight her spouse: thereupon hearing him once, angrily rating his horse, that peradventure was affrighted by the swelling of the Torrent, which imperuously assaulted him in
the midst of the stream; she turned her self with such haste, and carelesnesse towards him, that she slipt from her horse into the water, sinking to the bottom without any stay. Providence, which would not permit her to be the food of that E∣lement, had provided her of a help before the danger, by placing Euristhus to swim behind us; for he diving presently after her, drew her out of that dangerous current, as yet half-alive. I also at the same instant feeling bottom, leapt from my horse to help, and take her, as being far taller, and stronger than Euristhus, into my arms, and carried her a-shoar. But Arnaldo in seeing her fall, and knowing himself far from relieving her, was ready to throw himself for desperation into the middle of the Torrent to drown himself; but co∣ming to land, and seeing her in my arms, he was ready to die of jealousie, renewing his former suspition of our Amorous correspondence. Yet dissembling the same, he stood without giving us a word: nor spake I at all to him, though I per∣ceived his suspition. By this time Argosthenia coming to her self with reversing all the water her stomack was op∣pressed with, she began to say to me: Certainly heaven hath some wonderfull thing to do in our persons: Sir, My having received life so often from your hands, and the series of dangers, through which I passe every moment, makes me think, that either some very great good, or great ill, is portended to us by this encounter of fa∣tality. I onely calling Arnaldo to hearken to what I said, replied; Madam! Heaven is pleased sometimes to work its wonders, not onely un∣known
to, but despised by, the world. It hath designed you to a fortune above your hopes. Be pleased therefore to condescend to take Arnaldo for your Spouse and Husband. Here she in∣terupted me. Is this a time (said she) for such an affair? Will not my word suffice, which I have already past to you? No, Madam, said I: but it is requisite the businesse passe farther: Contract your selves to each other, and then we will talk with you. This they did, with the assistance of my self and of Euristhus; and I desiring to discharge my self wholly of the things I was intrusted with by the Lady, presently pre∣sented the Neck-chain, with her picture to Ar∣naldo; which she had commanded me to pre∣sent him with all. Arnaldo earnestly beholding it, said; Since that this Medall may be divided, you would oblige me, Madam, if you would please to keep my picture, which is inchased therein, and I take yours. And here he related to us, that he had formerly made that necklace to present Lucinda with: and lost it upon the very same day, the tilting was celebrated at Thebes. And I (added Argosthenia,) found it up∣on the Sea-shore, at my first Landing in the Boeotian dominions, and having made the picture of Lucinda to be changed for that of mine, I have alwayes worn it in my breast, for the Love of Arnaldo, till such time as it pleaseth Heaven, instead of his picture, to make me possesse his person. Arnaldo therefore took onely her pi∣cture, hanging it in another chain, restoring his own to her, to wear it for his sake. Then I, in∣terupting this their amorous contention, said;
Sirs: the night is already near at hand, and it's necessary we provide some lodging where to refresh you, being both in equall need of it. Whilst I thus spoke, I discovered a Bark, that scouring along those coasts, ran a swift course down the stream of the River. She had, at a place a little distant, discharged her marchandize, and was returning to the mouth of the River, for new fraight. There came at that instant into my mind, a new conceit, upon which I addrest my self to them, saying; Sirs, (said I) Our interests and your destiny calls us to Negropont. This Bark may waft us over for this little distance with security and commodiousnesse: and though yet there were no other benefit to be ac∣quired hence, this would be no little one, of avoyding the incommodity of a journey by Land, at this time of night, and in this neces∣sity which you have of repast, to your bodyes, and repose to your wounds. My counsell was approved by the contracted couple: And the Bark was made immediately to stay: which we hyred to the River's mouth, with great content to the Marriners, to whom, in regard they were discharged of their Lading, and bound to the same place, the money seemed easily got. Being entered therein, and the Lady having supt slight∣ly with such viands, as they gave her, and did provide at a Peasants cottage, as we past by; but yet merrily enough, save only that Arnaldo was exceedingly troubled at Argosthenia's relation of the passages under the Tyranny of Diambres: and I after supper imparted to Argosthenia, the
news of Negropont, putting her in expectation of things above her hope. The morning fol∣lowing, leaving Argosthenia with the Pages in the Bark: Arnaldo and my self, to enjoy the pleasure of the fields, would take Horse, ordering the Pilot so to steer the Vessell, that it might be near at hand for us to retire to at our pleasure. Thus we walked about a league, talking and discoursing upon the expected adventure, in the revolt of Calcidonia; till we came to a little Forrest of water-Poplers, which were casually sprung up on those shoars, by reason the River, inclining in it's course towards the contrary banks, wearing away the earth on that side, had left this side dry, out of which was grown up this little Wood of Willows and Poplers. Be∣ing entred into it, and having gone scarce fif∣ty paces, we were presently surrounded by about thirty Ruffians, some on foot, and some on horse-back, with their faces masked, one appearing before all the rest, shewing him∣self to be the leader of that rout, who directed a dart at Arnaldo to lay him dead on the grasse: yet the blow failed the Assassin's expectation; for it past between the side, and the arm, of the Knight, doing him no other harm, but gliding along his cloths gave a little race to his skin: But Arnaldo's blow, did not in that manner fail him; for presently laying hand on his sword, he threw himself with such an impetuosity upon the Assassin, that running him through and through, he fell dead to the ground. On the otherside, being unwilling to dye unrevenged, I did what I could; and if the hour of my death
had been by Heaven decreed to have been then, I certainly deserved it, by what I then did. But what could three persons alone do against thirty Villains? Arnaldo's Squire was slain, and he and I were so sorely wounded in many parts of our bodyes, that we fell half dead, and as they thought wholly life-lesse, upon the ground. Yet I, as being lesse hurt, presently re-assum'd my spirits that were fled, and opened my eyes, soon again grown sad by the sight of six dead bodies (for of that number as yet Arnaldo appeared:) but seeing my horse close by me, as if he had been condoling me; I gathered thence, that it was not to rob, but to murther us, that they had so rudely handled us. Raising up my self therefore the best I might, and searching my wounds, I found my self hurt in the thigh, and the left side; in the arm, and right shoulder; and in the middle of my belly; of all which wounds, only this last seemed mor∣tall. I bound it up therefore before the rest, and would go visite the dead body of Arnaldo, and finding him still breathing, I comforted my self; and, bringing him better to himself, he slowly and heavily opened his eyes, and scarse knowing me closed them up again, as if at that instant he had breathed out his Soul. Seeing him in so miserable a condition, I strived to get upon my Horse, to seek out some better means for his succour: but in vain. For the Marriners hearing the noise of the fight, and seeing per∣haps some of the Rogues along the shore, had (notwithstanding the cryes of Argosthenia) with sails and oars so hastned the voyage, that
they were gone above two leagues from that place in an hour. Being unwilling therefore to abandon the Knight in those miserable extremit yes, I return∣ed into the wood, and found by chance two Peasants passing that way, with intention to rob the dead bodyes, whom (though at my coming they began to run away) I so far engaged with my cariage and language, promising them a rich reward for that service, that they stayed: and understanding that they were sons to two la∣bouring men of those parts, I desired one of them, which I thought more discreet than the other, to goe and call them, to carry that Gentleman into some convenient place, where to cure or bury him. The young man ran, encouraged by the reward, and returned expe∣ditiously with his father, and a girl, who went for the good-mans daughter; which being sud∣denly come to us, she flung her self upon the face of the Cavalier, and muttered I know not what charms, so that he presently returned again to himself. Afterwards she told me, she would ask no more, but onely that she might be permitted to try her secrets, to cure that almost-dead bo∣dy, being opprest with six mortall wounds. I saw she spoke with discretion, and that the Knight grew worse every moment, therefore I told her, She should do her pleasure. So she searched his wounds, but would let none see how she would cure him; for she would not ac∣cept of any assistance; as in like manner she re∣fused all help in dressing me, though in a diffe∣rent manner, having suddenly secured our lives,
without giving us the least occasion to learn those secets. What shall I say? In four and twenty hours I beheld Arnaldo, whom I had bemoaned as dead, healed: and I, that was like∣ly to live kept my bedd a month, almost in de∣spair of recovery. But the Cavalier, though he was extreamly loath to leave me alone in that Village, yet in the end, constrained by his duty, and by my intreaties, he went towards the Mouth of the River in search of Argosthenia; and I remained, though so sorely diseased, to enjoy the pleasing conversation of the young Damsel, my Doctresse and Keeper. Arnaldo; or, The injur'd Lover. BOOK VI. THe Leader of the Assassins slain by the hand of Arnaldo, was the Tyrant Diambres; who in the passage which wee made along the little Island, where he had for that night took up his lodging, knew by my Horse, which with those others of our company, stood upon the fore-deck of the Ship, who was his master, and learnt something also of the arivall and suc∣cesses of Arnaldo; whilst we stayed to sup, and whilst the Marriners were at supper (which took up three hours time) he got before us with his attendants, to weave some new trechery: sup∣posing that Arnaldo would go attended splen∣didly, according to his quality. So he gave no∣tice
to some vile people of those parts, that we were exiled from Thebes, and were flying to Negropont: he moreover incouraged them to slay us, to gain a great sum, which as he affirm∣ed, was set upon our heads. But he being the first that was slain, in attempting of this exe∣crable enterprise, and after him three of his best Souldiers, it occasioned that the Villains, (ad∣vertised by the flight of the other retainers to Diambres, that that affair would succeed very contrary to what he had told them▪) for our good fortune left us all, some alive, some dead upon the ground, every one retireing to his own house, lest they should be accused of such a murder. Arnaldo being healed as I told you, and departed in quest of his Mistresse, I kept my bed still, under the amorous and dear charge of the fair Orsina. And because her garb, her looks, and her vertues, spake her to be more then the daughter of a Farmer, I desired one day to know from her supposed mother Serena, the truth of matters, concerning her; and she with a deportment, savoring not a jot of rurall, thus spoke to me. Sir, Since I see that this noble, and virtuous Girl, delighted by your courteous carriage, and by the grace of your countenance and expres∣sions, hath conceived an infinite affection for you, and desires exceedingly to cease this pa∣storall life, and to go to live in an other place and employment, more conformable to her birth, and inclinations; I will discover to you that concerning her, which none else knows, except my husband and I; and leave you to do as you shall please.
There went, now sixteen years agoe, to Corinth, upon occasions of his studyes, an English Gentleman, of great birth, but greater virtue: he put himself to lodge, according to the custom of Scholars, in the house of a young and come∣ly woman, a Citizen, which being left a Widow in the flower of her years, with some Fortune, in movable goods, had applyed her self to this Calling, very profitable in that City, of boarding Trans-mountanian and Trans-marine Scholars, which were wont to become the most modest, and most studious, of all those about our parts; whereas ours commonly abandoned themselves to all dissolutenesse. Now, as it should happen, these two, being both alike young, and fair, they were mutually enamoured of one another; their names were Rosmond and Camilla, and making use of their liberty and familiarity, there was both of them this goodly child Orsina. The love of the daughter, no lesse than that of the mother, detained Rosmond at Corinth some five or six years; whence at last being necessita∣to depart about urgent affaires, he left about three thousand Ducates, in assignment of Portion to Orsina, and pretious gifts moreover and above to her Mother. She notwithstanding, conti∣nued to lodge Gentlemen of such like quality: & Orsina came by that means to learn, not onely foraign Languages, but also the Principles of the Sciences, especially Physik & Chirurgery: in which professions, she is able to do strange things with onely two or three words, as what she hath experimented in Arnaldo, whom she hath raised from death to life, may easily perswade you.
It happened in this mean time, that certain con∣tests arose among the Scholars, her guests; which breaking into blows, some of them were slain at the table, mingling their blood with their victualls and wine. Whereat, Camilla being afrighted, and fearing to be cited before the Judges, she packt up all her richest movables, with what money she could presently get toge∣ther, and imbarkt her self for Athens: where not holding her self for all that secure enough, she would go into Negropont, as being a disjunct Jurisdiction from the Dominion of Attica, and stayed her voyage in this place, and in the end, dyed in this house; first leaving, and recom∣mending to my charge, this her daughter, now twelve years of age. I have not been wanting on my part, for the bringing of her up, for this three years, that she hath been here, with the best decorum my rusticity would permit; ha∣ving my self learnt some thing in my younger dayes, in the service of a Lady of Athens, which in the end marryed me to this Husbandman, with more regard to her convenience, than my satisfaction, though I confesse my self well enough pleased with this manner of life, which though rude and toylsom, is yet simple, and quiet. Now Orsina having often entreated me to carry her to Corinth, to procure for her the Dowry, left her by her Father, and to marry her; I could never prevail with my husband to content her; for having never gone out of the bounds of these Villages, he fears the world will fall on his head, if he hear but any strange Country named. If you shall please therefore,
gentle Sir, to favor this maid with your assistance, & protection, though my husband gainsay it, yet being informed by Arnaldo of your noble qual∣lities, I will consigne to you that little Coyn, and such Jewells as I have left in my hands by her Mother; assuring my self, that she cannot but arive safely to the end of her desires. She is already pleased with it; and tells me, She would account her self happy, in being able to serve you. Do you resolve therefore, for we are ready to execute what you shall command us. I was well pleased with the conversation and the Virtue of Orsina, but the taking such troubles upon my self, was a thing wholly con∣trary to my Genius and inclinations: And the businesse of Argosthenia, had made me to know by proof, what I might expect from travelling up and down the world with Women, especial∣ly young and handsom. Yet the intreaties of the child being added to the perswasions of the woman, and knowing my self obliged to her for my health, I promised, that so soon as I was dis-engaged from the company of Arnaldo, I would conduct her to Corinth, to her Parents house: and it fell out sooner than I thought for: For, Euristus coming to see me with Letters from Arnaldo; I knew not how to reward him for my liberty, which I obtained by his means, bet∣ter than by giving him Orsina in marriage, un∣der the notion of my Daughter, with all that deposited by her Father, as the Inheritance of her Mother, with a considerable rise to his for∣tune.
The advice brought me by Euristus, was, that Arnaldo, having found Argosthenia at the mouth of Asopos, expecting of him, they had de∣termined to return together to that Village, to assist me in my distemper, till I was recovered: But having deferred it, by reason of Cadmus be∣ing indisposed, and withall, to understand my pleasure; I, that already was aware, that Ar∣naldo, for all his generosity, languished with a jealousy of me, and that this resolution, of coming back, was a motion of Argosthenia; as it was on the other side an invention of Arnaldo, to remit it to my disposall: and being desirous withall to see my self at liberty, to travell the world according to my purposed intent, I imme∣diatly dispatcht back Euristhus, to intreat them both, that they would not incommode them∣selves for my sake, but pursue the course of their own fortune, and go to Calcides, to ce∣lebrate with solemnity their Nuptialls, by con∣sent of the Dutchesse, from whose pleasure did depend their felicity, and advancement: For that when I was ridd of my infirmity, I would wait upon them in person, at a time, when my urgent affairs would better permit. Yet I should, where-ever I came, and in all conditions, of estate, and fortune, ever bear in mind the obli∣gations received from them both, to preserve them fresh in my memory, to the last moment of my life. Euristhus returned with new Letters from Ar∣naldo and Argosthenia, who by all means desired me to be at Calcides, before the disclosing of themselves, being willing to have me present at
the opening of that Scene. But I resolved to travell to Corinth, to settle Euristhus and Orsina, and free my self from this new suggestion. And it was the goodnesse of destiny, so to dis∣pose of it; for if new accidents of adverse for∣tune should crosse their design, I should be also inevitably much concernd in it, without any other fruit, but onely that of a miserable con∣stancy of fidelity, and an infortunate amity. They therefore hired a Bark, to transport them to Calcides: and scarce had they put out of the Port, but they were taken by a Pinnace of Pirats, belonging to Rhodes, who presently fettered Arnaldo, and reserved Argosthenia, upon ac∣count of her extream beauty, for a mighty ran∣som; passing to unlade their wealthy booty at Scarpanto; where they sold Arnaldo (though he promised them great ransoms, and let them know his quality) to a very covetous and chur∣lish Merchant, who notwithstanding the come∣linesse of his person, and the offers made by him of vast sums, sent him to work in certain Vineyards of his, in a Village in the Country. Arnaldo being assaulted, but not vanquished by so strong gusts of fortune, inured himself to this course of life, in hope of speedy redem∣ption, having found out a way to dispatch Let∣ters to Thebes, letting his friends know his misery, that so he might be set at liberty, with force of gold, and the interposition of the re∣gall power. Yet he was in continuall apprehen∣sions of sorrow in behalf of the unfortunate Argosthenia his Spouse, which for her singular beauty, might be presumed subject to a thou∣sand
accidents of adverse fortune: verifying in his person, but too much, the title which he bore of the Injur'd Lover. But from the self-same consideration that trou∣bled him, did arise the cause of his security; those barbarous villains, having for their more profit till then preserved her incontaminated. She yet never ceased weeping in that her cap∣tivity, wherein she was deprived of all comforts: and were it not that she was loath to wish him so much unhappinesse, she could in that calamity have desired the conversation of Philiternus. Af∣ter a time, the Pyrats set sayl for Rhodes, and there exposed to sale that precious merchandize, the admirable Argosthenia, as a thing desired by many, though but few were found, who durst buy her at so excessive a price, as the Pyrates set up∣on her, which was no lesse then twenty thousand Ducats; there being none would venture so much money on a Jewel, which, though lovely in extremity, might in an hour, change and lose all its beauty. But that which one alone could not do, three young Gallants together, (to their own ruin) attempted: who being otherwise intimate friends, agreed to buy her joyntly, to possesse her also to∣gether by turns. Fools that they were, not to consider, That women were made to part, not to unite the Wills of men: and, That the Throne and Bed detest competition. The money being dis∣bursed, their agreement being for eighteen thou∣sand Ducats, they conducted the innocent prize to the house of Antiochus, the principal of the Purchasors, where the other two, Hermogenes
and Arbant fell into a contest with him, Who should enjoy her the first night: He treating them with very unworthy terms, said; that all reason required, that for nobility and fortune be∣ing their better, the precedency in that Love was his of right. Arbant, by this time grown all into a fury, told him, that having equally dispen∣ded his money as well as he, he knew not how to yield to him in this matter. Hermogenes, of a more tranquill mind, was content to remit the decision of it to Lot: but not being hearkned to by the other two, they broke out into such terms of rage, that Arbant challenged Antiochus out of his house, and after an obstinate Combat Antio∣chus was slain, and Arbant so ill handled, that he did not survive him many dayes. Hermogenes as the third buyer, challenged the possession of the fair Captive, but he was joyntly denied her by the Heirs of Antiochus and Arbant, till he had repayed them the sums contributed by the de∣funct parties to that mournfull purchase. But Argosthenia cut off this contention: for, engaging to her the women of Antiochus his house, with the discovery of her quality and misfortunes, they were moved with such a com∣passion of her calamities, that they helped her to escape, being disguised in boy's apparrel; ha∣ving first something shortned her hair, and disco∣loured her face. Argosthenia being gone, & the strife at an end, she, who found nothing about her but her Wed∣ding Necklace with Arnaldo's Picture, & two, or three pieces of Gold, preserved from the rapine of the Pirates, which had been so modest with her, as
not to search, and ransack her in her under Gar∣ments; knew not how to get out of that Isle, and return to her own Countrey, so lonely and forlorn as she was, but went wandring up and down the Villages adjacent, as if she begged Alms, fearing lest if she should shew her Gold to any to work her return, she should be either stopt, or robb'd. Till in the end lighting upon a poor old woman, but of a hearty constitution, which also went ranging up and down the Isle, she consorted her self with her, taking a resolu∣tion at last to disclose her self, promising any recompence she should ask, if she would assist her in getting from thence to the Isles of Scarpanto, or Negropont. The good old woman was content, and took her in place of her son, traveling together to the Western Coasts, and there finding a Fisher∣boat, of the largest sise that furrow the Seas on such imployments; She offered them ten Du∣cats upon her disimbarking on the Isle of Scar∣panto. The Fisher-men at first thought themselves mocked: but the Damsel assuring them that there was those in that Isle, who would presently pay them, and considering that they were to go to Sea to fish, they agreed, and with a prosperous voyage arrived there the same night. Here Argo∣sthenia landed in the morning, leaving the old woman in the Bark for security, and went to the house where Arnaldo was sold. But learning he was gone to his masters Countrey-house to work, she was exceeding glad. And because it was but three miles off, she went thither upon the wings of Love, and of desire, in a short space;
and seeking of him, she was brought to the place with much courtesie by a certain honest woman. She found him with his Fetters at his heels, and his Mattock and Spade going to work, and was so moved in mind at so deplorable a spectacle, that not able to keep upon her feet, she sunk down with sorrow and regret. Arnaldo and the woman ran to help her, a∣mazed with the strangenesse of the accident. But their words nothing availing, the woman ran to her house to fetch some Vinegar, Water, and Wine, and the like, to bring her again to her self; and in the mean time the confusion of Arnaldo much increased, thinking he knew the features of that beautiful visage; howbeit, that her short hair, and Olive-coloured face, and mans apparel, made Argosthenia unknowable. But she returning to her self, and taking an opportunity when the wo∣man was returned with her implements to her house, she said to the Knight. Arnaldo, a person of your acquaintance sent me to salute you from her. Here is a Bark of certain Fisher-men of Rhodes, in which I come to finde you, promising them ten Ducats upon my word; if you please to lend them me, I will leave you a pawn shall countervail them a hundred times. Arnaldo answered, that for money he had none, but yet he would procure some by that womans means to serve her upon a Chain, which he wore at his breast. And I also, said Argosthe∣nia, have Gold to make money of; and so saying, drew forth her Necklace: when Arnaldo saw that, growing pale, he ask't her, Who gave her it? Your self, said she. And is it possible that through this
disguise you should not perceive Argosthenia? Arnaldo trembled and sigh'd with fear and joy at those words, and if he had not perceived the wo∣man returning, he would have imbraced her in his arms. But, disguising the matter, he turned his speech to the woman, and desired to pro∣cure (not on the Necklace, but) upon a Brace∣let that Argosthenia gave him, twenty Ducats for that young man to imploy in his service. The woman mistrusting nothing, but thinking to receive some benefit to her self, went pre∣sently about it, in which mean time Argosthenia gave Arnaldo relation of her adventures, and of her intent to get him thence by one means or an∣other; for if he would but return with her in that Fisher-boat to Rhodes, he should be sure un∣der her conduct to find more easily some way to transport themselves for Negropont. Arnaldo wept extreamly to hear her strange fortunes, in being born for the death of so many persons; but in particular as to the getting out of that slave∣ry, he could not upon a sudden contrive a way to effect it; there being no other way to the Haven, but through the Citie: where in the day-time he would be stay'd, and in the night he could not get out, in regard he was loaded with Chains. Argosthenia signed, and pausing awhile, she said. When the Western Knight freed me from the thraldom of Diambres, we filed asunder in two hours the Iron-bars of a Window; and, Is there no way to break the Chains that are about your feet? But where shall we find (said Arnaldo) such a kind of file, in so forlorn a place? Think not of that, said Argosthenia, here's that will do
the work: And pulled forth a little flat Glasse Vial, about the bignesse of a Nut, saying. Before the Cavalier cut the bars, he put some of this wa∣ter on them, of which he gave me this Cruse. But in the using it, you must have a care you touch it not with your finger, lest its malevolent nature should hurt you. Hereupon Arnaldo pulled a little Cotton out of the quilting of his Doublet, and, just dipping it in the water, ba∣thed the Lock that fettered his feet, according to the direction of Argosthenia, and he presently saw the admirable effect; for, being made of pure Iron without the help of a file, it flew open; whereas in the grate of Diambres, the Iron being Steeled the help of files was also requisite. Arnaldo seeing himself at liberty, My dear Soul (said he) let's not stay any longer here, where we can expect no advantage: but let us leave the Bracelet to this woman, in reward of her civilities to me. I am certain she cannot re∣turn this hour: and by that time she doth come back, the Gates will be shut; so that we cannot enter without being seen. And this businesse likewise would be done presently, in regard all the people of these parts are gone into the Mountains to vintage, upon which occasion not so much as the little Children are left at home, it being, at this time of vintage, permitted to every one to eat as much as they please. And again, we shall come to the Citie in an hour, wherein we shall be unobserved, for it will be about nine of the Clock. And afterwards we will follow the counsel of Philiternus, who adviseth that, in all Enterprises, We must still give place to
Fortune, who is alwayes a friend of resolute Souls Let us go Madam. Argosthenia thought it an Age, till she saw her Spouse freed from that cap∣tivity, and therefore would not contradict him, but made use of Fortune's favour. What need more words? They came by hap∣py providence safe to the Port, the Citie being open, and without Guards in that hour of re∣tirement: But yet there they met with another accident to crosse them; for Argosthenia having, instead of the promised money, brought the Fisher-men a man, in Garb very suspitious, they would take neither of them into the Bark. Ar∣naldo a good while patiently endured their im∣pertinencies; but at last, seeing there was no other way to perswade them, he pluckt out an∣other Bracelet of Argosthenia's, and offered it them for satisfaction of that their service. Then the Fisher-men had so much the more suspition of his person: and were beginning to put off from the shoar, being unwilling to receive per∣sons that were to be suspected, either of Flight, or of Theft. Arnaldo by this time, being enraged by necessity with an extraordinary passion, and not usual in him, leapt into the Bark, and snatch∣ing up an Oare, menaced with an austere, and terrible look, presently to dispatch him that offered to oppose him; whereupon not having the courage to defend themselves, two (of five that they were) leapt, for fear, upon the shoar. Arnaldo being hereby the better secured, took into his custody two Spears, two Bows, and all the Arms and Swords he found; and helping Ar∣gosthenia aboard, commanded him that sate at
Stern to turn the Prow towards Candia, promi∣sing him the recompence due to his good ser∣vice, and also to chastise his villany, if he de∣ceived him. The Fisher-men seeing their crosse fortune, re-entred their Bark: for Argosthenia had also bent a Bow, and was ready to shoot any that should refuse; determining to obey that crosse necessity, which had yet succeeded more favourably than they hoped for: seeing that ha∣ving made Candia, where Arnaldo held corre∣spondence of consanguinity and friendship, he gave them fifty Ducats, and so sent them home pleased, who came out so unwillingly. Here, because the Cavalier would not make himself known in that condition, he bought with the Jewels of Argosthenia honourable habits for both: and took with him a Page, and the old woman that still followed them, sayling along the Coasts of the Isle, till he came to Sidonia, where report went, that some Vessels lay ready to set sayl for Athens. And finding it just as he desired, he embarqued in a Western Vessel, wherein sayling prosperously as far as the Coasts of Peloponnesus, the wind, which hitherto had fa∣voured them with benign gales, now became treacherous, amassing Clouds in the aire, and rowling the Sea upside down, with a Tempest the more sad and dangerous, by how much the lesse it was expected and feared. This storm conti∣nued three dayes and three nights in its fury, during which time, what they got of their voy∣age by advancing forward, they lost again by dri∣ving backward. On the fourth day, when as the weather began to calm, they could no longer
steer their Vessel, that was grown old already with many years continual scuffling with the waves: they split her upon a Rock right against the Pro∣vince of Argos; but with so good fortune to the Passengers and Marriners, that it endangered no mans life, and the damage of very little of the lading. Unfortunate Argosthenia did very ill re∣sent this adventure, and fell with impatience and anger into an extream distemper. And yet there was not wanting some, who leapt on shoar to free her from that danger, which they had run in the Tempestuousnesse of the Sea. The Captain of the ship had cast his eye on this miraculous Creature: but respect to Arnaldo, who seemed to be of a quality not to be toucht without danger; and the turbulence of the Sea had put a stop to the licentious thoughts of this man; who, although inured from his Cradle to that sordid kind of life, was too flexible of heart to withstand the Amorous Darts, sparkling in the lively eyes of incomparable Argosthenia. But be∣ing run upon the Rock through the necessity of the ship-wrack; while Arnaldo having accom∣modated his dear Spouse the best he could, at the foot of a Grot under the custody of her old ser∣vant; and taking his Page with him, was gone to seek if there were any Harbour in that desart, or any people to give them relief; There came the strangest capriccio into the head of the villainous Captain that could be imagined: and it was, to ravish away the young Lady, and clap her aboard the skiff, so to fly to the next shoar, before Ar∣naldo should return. The conception of so vitu∣perious an enterprize was instantly seconded
with the execution. Thus, in despight of the remonstrance made by the Master of the ship, which for his own interests would not consent upon any terms to his departure; drawing to him some Souldiers and Marriners, he mounted the Schiff with the ravished Lady, who was senselesse through excessive grief, and plying the Oars dis∣imbarqued in four hours space upon the Coasts of Epidaurus. But what a transport was Arnaldo in, when, returning from his fruitlesse quest to shelter, he found not the puple of his eye, which was so dear unto him; but so strange a Tyranny of fortune, ever constant in abusing him? I ve∣rily believe that if Methrodorus, the Master of the ship, and other people that stayed with him, had not prevented him by main strength, he would either have buried his sword in his own breast, or would have flung himself with a more inevi∣table wrack, than that he had escap't, into the Sea. But first restrained by violence, and after∣wards recomforted in part by the perswasion of Methrodorus, which promised him to put him on shoar, and to overtake that fugitive Traitour before the infirmity of Argosthenia would suffer him to arrive to the abominated end of his de∣signs; he desisted from his desperate determina∣tion. Thereupon, Methrodorus collecting all the goods, both his own and others, that having not taken wet might best be saved; he hid them in that cave, to return, and fetch them when for∣rune should be more favourable, and set to build with his company (Arnaldo himself putting his hand to the work) of the reliques of the ship another schiff, & in lesse then twenty four hours
equipped it out, with all necessary rigging, put∣ting themselves in chase of the Captain, dis-im∣barquing the same evening in Epidaurus. Three moneths were already spent before that, being impeded by the wounds I had received, and by the Nuptials of Orsina and Euristhus, I could begin my journey to Corinth. In the mean time seeing neither Messenger, nor Expresse from the Injur'd Lover, or his Mistresse, I toucht up∣on the Coasts of Attica towards Negropont, to know something of their voyage undertaken for Calcides; where, hearing a flying rumour of their Captivity, I was ready to die of grief. Yet not knowing whither to go, or what to do in their relief; I determined to passe by the way of A∣thens to Corinth. Whither being arived, and ha∣ving left the young couple among their friends, I had a desire before my return into my own Countrey, to see some of the most fam'd Ci∣ties of Peloponnesus. I made choice in this busi∣nesse (for Camrades) of Hercules and Alexander, two young Gentlemen of Messenia, which ha∣ving ended their studies, were returning home; we went first from Corinth to Argos, where spend∣ing but two dayes, we traveled towards Epidau∣rus. But being over-taken by night at a Village, six miles distant from the Citie, towards the Sea-Coasts, whil'st that we were seeking amongst those Countrey people for a Lodging, we en∣countred with a Souldier, who enquired for a Litter, to fetch from a place not above half a mile off, a sick young Lady, which he said was ship-wrack't in the late Tempest. Alexander my Camrade, was the most capricious man in
the world; and alwayes a desirer of rambling adventures: Having therefore heard so much, it was needlesse to perswade him to go see this Damsell. And because the Souldier said, that she was alone with one onely maid, and him∣self, pretending to be her servant; with a noble freedom, he offered (seeing there was not one of those clowns that would set foot out of doors at that time of night about such a businesse) himself to serve that Lady, with his own Horse to bring her to some place of accommoda∣tion. The proffer of our Comrade, obliged us to tender the like courtesy; but being rudely re∣pulsed by the Souldier, directly refusing our ci∣vility and generosity, Alexander persisted the the more in his humour of seeing that Lady: And turning to me, laughing; Sir, said he, ex∣cuse my indiscretion. Night is already shut in, and this clownish rout shew themselves unwil∣ling to entertain us. We have been heretofore ac∣customed to watching in our wild night-rounds at Corinth, and therefore it will do us no great hurt, to prolong our journy for two or three hours, till we come to some Town, where we may meet with lodgings fit for us, going first to see this Lady, to tender to her in person our ser∣vice; and, Who knows, but we may find her as courteous, as her servant is rude and uncivill? I, that was born still to make my friend's plea∣sure my Law, readily proffered my self to wait on him; but Hercules did exceedingly oppose it; were it that, wearyed by his journy, he desired to take his rest, or else, that fore-seeing in his
mind the approaching danger, he would give way to such an impulse. Yet Alexander prevailing, and taking along with us, for our guid, one of those Country-fel∣lows, we rid towards that place: where in∣stead of a sick Lady, we found six men of savage aspect, and in a deportment (excepting one of them) liker gally-slaves than Souldiers. Yet we perceived by their posture, that either they stood in doubt of themselves, or kept some se∣cret they desired not to have known. And we were confirmed in our opinion, in that at our appearing, they had either put out or hid two torches, which they carryed to illuminate the darknesse of the night, which, by this time, had wholy overspread the great face of Heaven; yet it's obscurity began to diminish, by reason of the exceeding clarity of the Moon, than ri∣sing. Hercules by this time half angry, said to Alex∣ander: See here the young Lady, which you expected to complement: Alexander laugh'd, and replyed; Even from the antient Sileni, arose matters of wonder, and who knows but these Cyplop's faces, may wait on some Venus? Yea, replyed I, but there being no fire in this Forge, we go in some danger, and instead of a Venus that we would conduct to a logding, we may find some Vulcan, that may throw a hammer at our heads. We had, at our first coming, dis∣mist our Guide, and, to give no suspition of our intent, we freely rode on in our way: Being at last come so neer as to discern them; and, dis∣coursing in a tone, onely understood by our
selves, one of them undertook to tell us, that we rode out of the way towards the Sea side, and not the direct way to Epidaurus. Alexander laughing, Thus (said he) they are served, that in a dark night follow a blind leader. We thought to have found a Lady, but we have mis∣sed our intentions, and in a fancy lost our way. It matters not much, said I: fot however this Lady have slighted us, the Moon shall serve as a guid to light us. Whilst we were thus talking, we heard the languishing voyce of a weak wo∣man crying; Ah, Sir Knight! And while we were hearkening from whence the sound came, she sighing, rehearsed the same words: Ah, Sir Knight, help the betray'd Argosthenia. These lamentable words pierced my heart as so many darts, and presently calling to mind the losse of that Lady, I concluded, that these must needs be Pirats, that had ravished her. Yet because I would not rashly conclude of things, before I knew the truth; I entreated him (and it was the Captain himself, her ravisher) that seemed to be the Commander of the rest, to tell me Who that Lady was, that implored my succour: and wherefore? His answer was, in putting his hand to his sword, and buckler, to defend his Rape. We were three, Six our Adversaries; and I thought, I heard some noyse from the Sea-ward, which were two Sea-men his Accomplices, who hearing of our coming, made towards us. I rid up full carier at the Captain assuring my self, that, the head being once supprest, the members would of themselves abandon the en∣terprise.
But I was deceived; for although he soon paid the penalty of his villany, falling mor∣tally wounded under my Horse's feet, who dis∣patcht him with the fury of his kicks; his Com∣panions so stoutly persisted in his revenge, that, after a long contest, there was slain besides himself, another of the enemies; and Hercules; Alexander dangerously wounded, and his horse distended upon the earth. For my part, I knew not what I did in that night-scuffle, but this I am certain, that I never escap't any perill with so little hurt in my person, as in this, though so hot and long, conflict. And happily it was the bountifull disposure of Heaven, which would not in such necessity, deprive the unfortunate Argosthenia of my assistance. Arnaldo; or, the Injur'd Lover. Book VII. BEing, as I told you, left with only Alexander, (who to say the truth, deported himself like an Alexander indeed, having laid for dead two of his enemies, and put the rest to flight) masters of the field, where there lay dead five Carcasses; I stept aside to the place where Ar∣gosthenia lay, more dead than living, through sicknesse, grief, and fear; with her old woman by her, little more sensible, I am sure more ter∣rified. The young Lady seeing me draw neer, and knowing me more by my deportment, than
visage, had a desire to get up to receive me, and to give me her hand, but could not: Whereat, beholding a Lady of that nobility, virtue, and gentlenesse, in so sad a condition; I stood a good space transported by the considerations of the rigours of Fortune, exercised over the lives of Mortalls, permitted by divine Providence, for our correction and instruction. But retur∣ning to my self, I did my best endeavour to com∣fort the Lady, and enquired of her, how her affairs stood, and of Arnaldo: she briefly rela∣ted all that had befaln her, from her departure from me, to that instant in which the Captain had stoln her away. Understanding by her rela∣tion, that the Skiff was left tyed to that shoare, I desired Alexander to ride and see if happily there were any of the Mariners left; for there being no other way to secure Argosthenia, than by conducting her that way to Epidaurus (more∣over, it was requisite, to take care for the body of our unfortunate Camrade, and for his own safty) thinking to win them with good treat∣ment, and by taking no notice of their default in that detestable enterprise. He went, but found onely the Bark: whereupon dispairing of help, any other way, I resumed my former familiarity with Argosthenia, and carryed her in my arms unto that place: where we found some small commodity of meat, and of a bed for the Lady. I made a fire and served her for Nurse, Physician, and keeper, whereat she was so af∣fected, that she continually wept for tender∣nesse. Next, I made use of a Secret, taught me by the fair Orfina, in order to the cure of Alex∣ander;
And making him also to take a little rest, I returned with the old woman to the fields, and laying the body of Hercules upon his horse, I got him also aboard the boat, and hid him in a private place of the same, to the end he should not with his sight trouble the mind of my pati∣ents; and last of all closed my eyes for a little while, to essay the dulcity of sleep, close by my horse, which that night, instead of hay and provender, fed on bisket and poudred bief, like a Mariner. Day appearing, and my company awaking, we discovered a new scene of wonder upon that shore; for Argosthenia, in the apprehensions of joy, for seeing her self delivered from the inju∣rious hands of the barbarous Captain, and being again in my protection; having taken a long sleep, she feigned her self so very much amen∣ded, that raising her self up in her bed, she dar∣red from her face a profusion of rayes of singu∣lar beauty, as if she had never had the least in∣disposition, or trouble. And Alexander on the other side, perceived himself reasonable well of his wounds; but I desired him before he stir∣red to expect the operation of the receipt, and with the woman's help prepared our repast, be∣tween merry and sad; merry, for the recovery of Argosthenia, and hope of restoring her present∣ly to Arnaldo: sad, for the death of Hercules, a Gentleman, for his worthy qualities, deserving a longer life. This done, and having procured from the places adjacent, with much trouble, and large promises, two Fisher-men, that un∣dertook to carry us in that Schiff to Epidaurus;
whilst we were making ready dinner, there came thither-ward a Judge in matters Criminall, with his Court, that were come from the City, up∣on the information of the Peasants there abouts, to take cognizance of the passages the night be∣fore, and to visit the dead bodyes, which still lay in the field. This pleased not me a jot; for al∣though right was on my side, yet having learnt, to my great cost, what I might expect (though secured by my innocence,) among such kind of people; I took a resolution not to imbroyl my self with them. Thereupon, making my horse to be brought into the Vessell, and turning loose that of Hercules; I bid the Fisher-men to put off from shore, and to steer towards the rock where Argosthenia hinted we should find her shipwrackt Arnaldo. The Fisher-men would by no means obey, saying, They were onely en∣gaged to land us at Epidaurus: besides, there was no security to passe with but two Oares, and such a burden, through the main Sea. When Alexander heard this, starting up from the place where he lay, and overcoming with his terrible∣nesse my complacency, which would have ap∣peased them with intreaties and rewards, he threatened to kill them presently, if they did not forthwith fall to their Oares. They seeing so troublesome a tempest to arise, turned their course the way, that against their wills he made them steer; but whether it were their villany or their ignorance, after that we had spent the re∣sidue of that day, in tossing to and fro in the Sea, about three hours within night, we arived at the rock, whence Arnaldo was departed six hours be∣fore, for Epidaurus.
Meeting therefore with nothing but the frag∣ments of the split Vessell, and the chips made about the new Schiff, I was thereat excessively vexed and confounded; not knowing which way to go to find Arnaldo, and deliver him his Spouse; for as yet she was not his Wife. But Alexander fell into so great a fury, that if Argo∣sthenia and I, had not put a stop to his frensy, he would have thrown the Fisher-men into the Sea, to whose crime he attributed our tarriance. Be∣ing unwilling therefore, to put to Sea in a new Voiage in the night, with so unfaithfull guides, and in so small a Boat, we acommodated our selves the best we could in that place. And lest that, whilst we were asleep, the Fishers should deceive us, we so bound the Bark with chains, and cables to the shore, that we were sure it could not stir thence, without our consent. But this prevention was to no purpose, for they expected when we should be asleep, having learnt already, that in those grotts there were hid some goods after the ship wrack; and softly getting a shore, they robb'd some chests, upon which they did swim back to their own shore. The first that waked upon break of day, was Ar∣gosthenia, and, without looking on any thing else, she also landed about her own affairs, and there found scattered on the ground, divers fardles of goods and writings, either faln by chance, or slung there on purpose by the Fisher-men, as being things that might impeach them. Where∣upon, being a Lady of a vivacious and nimble ingenuity, she gathered up the papers, and un∣tying the bundles, found a box of Orientall
Turchoises, worth about two thosand Ducats, and some five hundred Ducats in ready money. She laid them up in safety, for her own use a∣gainst any misfortune that might happen, and so returned into the Schiff. And by this time, the Day having assumed it's proper splendour, she was much troubled to misse the Fisher-men; & instantly awaking me, she shewed me what she had found, and advertised me of their flight. But by reason I was unwilling to humour Fortune so far, as to expresse any alteration at so great an act of her Tyranny; I put a smile upon the matter, and looking on the Stones, and restoring them to the Lady, to dispose of them at her pleasure; I had a curiosity to turn over those Papers. By the rusling whereof Alexander be∣ing awakned, I with a smiling action, told him, Camrade: If fortune hath for some dayas con∣fined us to this cliff, she hath also provided us matter of entertainment. We have here bis∣ket, and wine; flesh, and fish, for above a month: Wood we shall not want; either for fuell, or to defend us, if need require, from the incommodity of the season, which was in the latter end of Autumn, towards the beginning of Winter. Courage yet, that, let the worst come that can, we shall live even in this Desart. Alexander smiled, & said; You have a brave time on, Sir, & you have good reason so to esteem it; for in the company of so noble and virtuous a Lady, you might style your self Happy, though reduced to greater hardships. But I, what shall I do, in so desolate a place? Dear Alex∣ander, said I you make too bad a construction of
my heart, since the service I owe to this Lady, is the onely thing that troubleth me in this soli∣tude; not, but that I esteem it a glory to be able to serve her; but because I cannot see her in so much misery without a sensible affliction, nor call to mind the Knight her Spouse without ap∣prehensive disgusts. But these are onely words: the businesse is, that we must think upon our safety. Here we cannot hold our selves secure; for ships never sayl this way, except that of our unfortunate friends: and were it so, that some should by chance come, we should be still un∣certain of our lives. To think to get to land of our selves, having never in all our lives touched Oars, or Sayls, would be a piece of solemn folly. I have already computed that we have provision to serve us for five, or six weeks. This confi∣dered, let us dispose our selves to passe away the time, since it cannot be with much joy, yet with the least annoy that prudence will permit; and accustom our selves every day to manage these Maritime Pennes, that we may learn upon this great Book of the water to Write our selves an im∣mortal name. Sir, said Alexander command what you please, for I will make you free and absolute master of my will. Having thus concluded of things, my first thought was to make a Coffin, to bury there the body of Hercules; and there was no great diffi∣culty in it, for there was reliques of Wood, Iron, and Pitch, sufficient to have raised an ample stru∣cture. This done, and leaving the old woman to dresse Dinner, and look to my horse, we walked till Dinner time to view the Rock; and Argo∣sthenia
making a Bow of green wood, and some rustick Arrows of drie splinters, found her self an excellent divertisement, by shooting such Birds as flew thither, from the adjoyning conti∣nent. Having dined, we spent the rest of that day, part in merriment, and part in raising a Cab∣bin to lye in a-nights. The day following we spent also in those, and such like other new re∣creations, having learn't of the woman how to angle with the hook and line; who was therein most dextrous. On the sixth day of this our Hermetical course of life, about noon we dis∣covered a Fly-boat making towards us; where∣upon drawing our Bark ashore, we fortified our selves so, that we could have defended our selves with ease, from a greater number in that Moun∣tainous and impenetrable Fort; especially with the assistance of Argosthenia, who being perfect in Archery, could have sent death at a good di∣stance to our Enemies. They of the ship perceiving our design, put forth a white flag in token of peace and friend∣ship; Alexander, for all this, as being alwayes a Lover of blows and quarrels, would not agree that we should trust them to approach us; but Argosthenia having discovered amongst them the Master of the ship-wrack't Vessel, she took occa∣sion to treat him courteously to get some news of Arnaldo: We made therefore to understand at a good distance, that we intended to let none land but onely himself and one companion. He readily accorded to our pleasure, being the Com∣mander of all the rest; but coming on shoar, he stood like one half dead to see Argosthenia, with
a countenance more resembling a Goddesse then a Mortal; and, but that he saw her ravished, and carried away with his own eyes, he would have sworn she had never stirr'd thence. The first word we asked him was, What was become of Arnaldo, and he told us, that having learnt by the Processe formed by the Criminal Court, the death of the Captain her Ravisher, and that she was put to Sea for some other place with two young Cavaliers in her Company; whereas be∣fore he was comforted with the death of that Traitor, he now received a greater affliction in this new separation; having a conceit that one of those young Gentlemen was the same Knight who, said he, was destinated by heaven, perpetual∣ly to oblige him, so that he could never live in quiet within himself for him; having therefore now three dayes since departed towards Corinth, in hope to find him there together with his Spouse. But three dayes after his departure, he the said Methrodorus had heard some rumour, that we were upon that Rock; for two Fisher∣men of those Coasts being accused of having sold goods that were prohibited, and being ap∣prehended by Justice, and having confest against themselves, where they had done that robbery, they were likewise accused of their errour in a∣bandoning us in that manner. And that he was come thither to fetch away the residue of the goods hid in those caves, and to see withall if he might meet with the happinesse of being able in any measure to serve us. I knew what constru∣ction Arnaldo's turbulent nature would put up∣on my actions, but I reserved my thoughts to
my self, thanking Methrodorus for his courtesie, and saying, that we would onely trouble him once more so far as to borrow some of his Mar∣riners to go as far as Argos, or Corinth; for that we intended to go thither in search of Arnal∣do. Methrodorus presently made a voluntary offer to wait upon us himself to that Port with two of his Marriners, which attended him in that Fly∣boat. Then Argosthenia with a Soul truely ge∣nerous took him aside, and shewed him what she had found in Money and Jewels, asking him, If they were his. He answered, they were; but that he presented her with them: and because she should not think that he was so liberal of things that were lost, giving her that which was not in his power, he took his other riches out of the Cave, and made her an exceeding noble Present of Cloaths, both Silk and Gold, of Oriental work∣manship very beautifull and costly. Then la∣ding his Bark, he kept with himself onely some of the preciousest things, and he sent her under conduct of his Mate towards Athens, whither he before was bound, that he might stay himself with us to guide his Skiffe. Then I complemented Alexander, entreating him to acquaint me with his intention, for I thought it not civil longer to impede his return into his Countrey. But he being offended by my Courtesie, said, He knew not in honour how to desert us, till he saw us in a place of security. So we both mounted the Skiff, which was excel∣lent well provided for all occurrences, steering with a prosperous wind towards Corinth; and
coming to fall upon a discourse about the wri∣tings found by Argosthenia we came to know, that Methrodorus was not what he appeared to be, a Master of a Cretan ship, but a Knight of Calcides, father of Calisthenes, formerly spoken of as the Lover of Argosthenia, treacherously slain by her brother Aristheus in Athens. Whereupon the in∣surrections of Calcides ensuing, which had almost put the whole Isle into a revolt, he was forced to depart thence with the confiscation of his goods, and went to Candia, where he built the ship that was cast away, and had so good successe in the management of that imployment, that he was at that present worth little lesse then twenty thousand Ducats, which he had in A∣thens. Argosthenia wept exceedingly at the do∣lorous remembrance of her betrayed Calisthenes; nor was Methrodorus lesse moved when knowing her for the innocent cause of all his losses and misfortunes, he understood, moreover, that she was already contracted to Arnaldo, a Knight of the bloud Royal of Thebes; and might one day ascend the Throne of Negropont. He respected her therefore thence-forward as his Lady and Mistresse, and he entreated her, that at her return to her own Countrey, whither he offered to carry her, she would please to think upon his ruined family, and restore it by some act of bene∣ficence. Argosthenia promised that when it should be in her power she would remember him, not so much for being the father of Cali∣sthenes, and injuriously persecuted, as for the Courtesies shewn her in that her necessity. In such kind of recognitions, remonstrances, and
promises, it grew towards the evening, when Me∣throdorus advised us to land at a little Castle be∣tween the confines of Argos and Corinth, where he assured us we should find good accommoda∣tions. Here therefore we landed, and rested that night, when upon the next morning going out of my Chamber to visit Argosthenia, I met the Host, which attended to present me with a Letter. I knew it presently to be from Alexander, and ope∣ning it with exceeding great commotion of spi∣rit, I found that it said, Alexander to Philiternus. SIR, I Accompt it my happy fortune to have had an oc∣casion to serve you, together with the Princesse Argosthenia; for the adventures that accosted me within this few dayes have given me advice, what I may hope from the World, and of that which I ought to procure to my self in Heaven. Argosthenia be∣ing born to be the innocent occasion of ruin to many, I will make use of it as a just motive to provide for my own safety. I confesse, Sir, that her prodigious beauty hath made a deep impression in my heart; but were it so that she had not been espoused to Arnaldo, her being in your company would have taught me to behold her with a mortified eye, that so I might not offend, so much as in the least thought, either her reputation, or my own fidelity. Yet I would have esteemed it my great happinesse to have served her, though with this necessity of looking upon my self as dead; had not the relations of Methrodorus, and our late accidents opened my eyes, and let me see,
that by this way I took, together with the troop of a thousand other Wretches, I precipitated my self, for her sake, into the exteamest abysse of Calamity. I determined therefore to cease following her, not through cowardise, but discretion, it being a mani∣fest madnesse to dye in a complement. Amongst the Papers of Methrodorus, I read a relation, that in the coasts of Marmarica, there is a solitary Society of men, separated in customs from the confines of humanity, for to live according to the use of Hea∣ven. Thither I go to be buryed alive, with the bo∣dy of Hercules, which shall serve me for a profound Lecture of celestiall Philosophy. Pardon me, Sir, if I depart thus abruptly; since I did not conceive it good, to confront my debility to your most friendly conversation, which would have detained me in the shackles of a content, too sensible for me to have dis∣ingaged my self from, without an insupportable re∣sentment. I carry the Skiff of Methrodorus away with me, and one of his Mariners, which is wil∣ling to follow me in so generous a resolution till death; and I will make use of my own hands, in the voluntary labour of the Oar, learnt for the ne∣cessity of our bodily safety, to acquire to my self the precious reward of a celestiall life. I reverence the Lady Princesse, dearly embrace Methrodorus, and confirm my self, Sir Your Perpetual Vassall ALEXANDER. THe sense of friendship rendred this depriva∣tion of Alexander, inconceivably grievous; but Prudence lessened my affliction, thinking
that he had chosen the better part, and I began to desire, to visite my self one day, the Desarts of Marmarica. I imparted this passage to Argo∣sthenia, and Methrodorus; and they seemed ra∣ther to blame, than commend it. And Argo∣sthenia said, that, Cavaliers of Alexander's quality, born into the World for the profit of Mortalls, ought not to deprive themselves of the means to employ those Talents, to the common benefit, which Heaven had lent them, for this very end, to serve to mankind in ge∣nerall: I defended the resolution of my friend, alledging, that all those who had obtained from Heaven the rare qualities of Wit and Valour, were not obliged to employ them to the benefits of others, with a manifest perill to themselves. For, Heaven is also wont, to de∣prive men of the favours conceded them, as a punishment of their ingratitude and unwor∣thinesse, seeing Virtue is for the most part rather persecuted than acknowledged. Again, the re∣solution of Alexander well considered, his re∣tirednesse, may prove to the World a greater benefit than his commerce with men, whilst that, in conversation, by reason of his capric∣cio's and adolescentiall vanities, he was inju∣rious and prejudiciall to many, and in seque∣strative solitarinesse, he may be able with this integrity of his life and conversation, to come forth for an universall benefit into the World. Well, said Methrodorus, Who knows, but that even this resolution may arise from a fan∣tasticall humour, and not from the invitation
of Heaven? It concerns not us, replyed I, to penetrate into these secrets; in the mean time, we know, that Heaven sometimes makes use of such like means, to extract a generous Virtue out of a constrained necessity. We ought al∣wayes to censure well of those things, which ever appear good in themselves. For although the iniquity of man convert these into the worst, yet it doth not follow, that the good is not still good in it self; although the perversity of some, do sinisterly use it. Certainly Alexander hath done well, to prefer his own safety to others benefit, for so exercising his proper goodnesse, he shall live without injury, yea, rather with commodity to others: whereas in a Knightly life, although he might have pro∣fited some, that could hardly ever be without the prejudice of many. For although he me∣rited sometimes in defence of Innocence, and in chastisment of Villany; yet it more fre∣quently came to passe, that he undid himself and others, in a vanity, in a humour, or in a complement. Thus I argued: but I saw that this Philoso∣phy little liked Methrodorus, immerg'd in the thoughts of recovering his House from the dys∣asters, occasioned by the Loves of Calisthenes and Argosthenia; and it did as much displease Argosthenia, fearing that I also intended to de∣sert her, to follow the track of Alexander: and therefore I changed discourse, desiring Methro∣dorus to advise us, concerning the manner of our Voyage; for that being as yet uncerrain of find∣ing Arnaldo at Corinth, and being loth to di∣sturb
Argosthenia with a journey by Land, I judged she might transport her self commodi∣ously by Sea to Athens, and stay there in a house which I kept there till such time as I had over∣taken Arnaldo, which by making long journies over land I might soon do. Methrodorus was pleased with my design, but Argosthenia would not agree to it, fearing still that I contrived pretexts to abandon her. But having promised, (whether I found Arnaldo or no) to be at Athens, within the space of fifteen dayes, to wait upon her, she condescended, though in my judgment it was still very unwil∣lingly. This being resolved on, we proceeded to act it; Methrodorus hiring a Bark, and putting out instantly to Sea; and I began at the same instant, by Land, my journy towards Corinth. And just as I entred the house of Euristhus, I met full of sorrow and sadnesse the fair Orsina; and after many throbs and sighs, she related to me, that the Injur'd Lover had been at that City to en∣quire of me and Argosthenia, and Euristhus had entertained him at his house, where hearing how much I took to heart his dysasters, and what di∣ligence I had used to learn his captivity, to set him at liberty, it partly mitigated, if not who∣ly deposed the maligne suspitions of his Jelou∣sy, that held him in a continuall torment, to at∣tend a while among those, to whom I was conti∣nually writing some thing or other of news, concerning me. But seeing that, contrary to my custom, I had now let passe ten dayes, without writing to them, or sending any message, he
went thence that day, upon a certain rumour, that, sayling towards the Island of Aegina, I was cast away with a Knight and a Lady in my com∣pany; and fell into such a passion, that incon∣tinently leaving Corinth, he swore he would not survive the death of his unfortunate Spouse. Wherewith Euristhus being also extreamly affect∣ed, he went presently to the haven and hired a Feluca for Epidaurus, to inform himself of the truth of that Adventure. Understanding this, and being glutted and sated with so many ri∣gours and errours of Fortune and Love, I com∣forted Orsina the best I could, in such an inter∣venience of affairs; yet she would not let me depart (at least, till Euristhus his return;) but because I would not fail in my word to Argosthenia, nor omit any thing on my part, to satisfy my debt of Amity with Arnaldo, I pre∣sently left that City, and having gone about six miles, I was thinking to turn my course towards the Province of Megara, when, behold, I saw a Currier and his guide, coming full speed down a hill before me, to whom I advanced, and de∣manded, From whence he came posting with so much hast. He gave me no answer, but still put on in his way. But, I, know not by what spirit instigated, crossing the way before him with my Horse, worth twenty of his; I renew'd my re∣quest. He answered, that such Queryes and Af∣fronts ought not to be offered to publique Mi∣nisters; and I replyed that I had not in the least offended the publique liberty, with a request of meer complement; besides that, being the rode to Boeotia, I was so concern'd in those quarters,
that I was interested in the knowledge of such novelties as Fortune might there have plotted. He looked stedfastly on me, asking, If I were not a foraign Gentleman, dwelling in Attica, and accustomed to be sometimes at Thebes: And understanding that I was; he proceeded to beg my name: with which being satisfied, he ad∣ded; It is you Sir, that I am in search of; for by the King's Commission, Olympia, the Aunt of Arnaldo, hath sent me to you, with these Let∣ters, directed to Corinth, to the house of Euri∣sthus and Orsina. Now Heaven be praised, that I have shortned my journy by many miles. I took the pacquet, opened it, and there found Letters to Arnaldo and Argosthenia, both with∣out any seal, together with this, directed to my self. Olympia to Philiternus. SIR. HAving understood by yours, and Argosthenia's Letters, the accidents befaln you, with the Traytor Diambres; and, afterwards by that of Eu∣risthus to his friends, the contract of Argosthenia and Arnaldo; and lastly, by that of Arnaldo, the captivity of both: I have been so long suspended with these apprehensions, that I verily believed I should have dyed of grief. But I have had some respit of comfort, within this few dayes, by the news come hither from Peloponnesus, that Arnaldo was seen at liberty with Argosthenia in Candia, and that you was with Euristhus and Orsina at Corinth. So that imparting the news to the King,
his Majesty hath commanded me to write to them both, and consign the Letters to your care, knowing you to be a reall friend of Arnaldo, with whom it was to be supposed you held a continuall correspon∣dence. By the inclosed Letters you may see, Sir, what we have thought fit to write to my Nephew, and his Consort, and I intreat you, by the Love you bear them both, and by your native courtesy, to in∣terpose your interests with Arnaldo and Argosthe∣nia, that being now dis-ingaged from their mis∣adventures, which have so long oppressed them, they would apply their minds to those hopes, to which their births and divine Providence hath called them. If you gain no more hereby, yet you may rest assu∣red, that by your service and satisfaction herein, I shall for ever be ingaged to be more then all others, generous Sir, Your most particular Servant OLYMPIA. Arnaldo's Letter spoke thus. Olympia to Arnaldo. Worthy Nephew, and dear Son. YOur Letters from Scarpantum, came to our hands, later than we could have wished, with the unwelcome advice of your Captivity, and that of Argosthenia. Yet I imparted the affair to his Majesty, who instantly gave order, that all means should be used for your deliverance. Now we are
exceeding glad to hear, that before we could effect any thing, you had the Fortune to get free, together with your Spouse. Upon this advertisment, the King hath commanded me to write to you, that not∣withstanding Argosthenia's pretention to the Crown of Negropont, you should come hither with all speed: and that his Majesty would lend you all possi∣ble assistance to maintain her right, now that that Isle was in such combustions; for the Dutchesse Do∣ricinia, refusing to marry the Count of Litharre, the most potent Lord of that State, he had raised against her so hot a rebellion, that having chased the Dutchesse from Calcides, he proceeded to sub∣due to his obedience, the most considerable places of the Isle. So much shall suffice to have hinted, to make you resolv'd to come forthwith unto us; en∣treating you above all, to procure, if it be possible, the company of that Cavalier, from whom you ought entirely to acknowledge all your happinesse, Your most affectionate Aunt, rather Mother, OLYMPIA. BUt the Letter to Argosthenia, was onely full of feminine tendernesse, condoling, and congratulating, with referring her in the con∣clusion, to what she had writ to Arnaldo and Philiternus, as to the businesse of her return to that house, which was now doubly hers. This news, though it came not to me altogether un∣expected, yet I was thereat greatly perplexed, for it bereft me of my rest, and greatly troubled
me; in which I was constrained to Combat more with domestick than forrain Enemies; for it seeming impossible to me that the fraternal con∣fidence Argosthenia had in me, should not al∣wayes retain a continual apprehension of suspi∣tion the ever jealous, and ever amorous spirit of Arnaldo, threatning to break out one day into some great disorder; as also on the other side loving that gentle Cavalier with a most cordial affection, and being by him truely rebeloved: for I knew very well that to such suspicious spirits even the Atomes in the Aire are wont to occa∣sion trouble and inquietude. Yet I forbore this thought for that time, and dismist the guide that accompanied this messenger, taking him with me towards the Citie of Eulixis, where I held some interest and correspondence, gathering of him as I went, perfect information of the news of Boeotia and Negropont. Being come to Eleuxis, I was encountred with a strange accident of Euristhus being condemned to death, and Arnaldo's being a prisoner with that Governour. Furisthus having gone to Egina, and finding no intelligence of what he desired about my person, he was perswaded by an Eleuxin Lady, that had means lay in that Isle, to serve her with his Fe∣luca to Eleuxis; Euristhus knew nothing how that she was confined thither by the Governour, upon occasion of her husbands being slain by one of her Lovers. He came therefore with all security by midnight (the very time elected by Liviana, that she might not be known) to the Citie, where walking freely up and down, he casually met Arnaldo the next morning, as he
was just departing for Athens, in the same de∣sperate condition as we have said, for the pre∣sumed shipwrack of Argosthenia and Philiternus. He walked with such distraction and astonish∣ment, that although he met Euristhus, he so little regarded him that he did not know him. But Euristhus awaking him by his civility out of that profound trance, and imparting to him something of what Fame muttered in our pre∣judice, he invited him to stay awhile in the house of that Lady, with an intention of wait∣ing upon him with his Feluca to Athens, whi∣ther he designed to go the better to inform him∣self of my proceedings in my own house. The Lady made great entertainment for the Knight, and perceiving him to be notwithstanding his trouble and melancholly (that had so injur'd him) the goodliest person in the World, in a flou∣rishing age of twenty five years, and again ha∣ving dedicated her self to sensuality, she took a conceit to allay her dissolutenesse in this her fa∣miliarity. She invited him therefore to Dinner; an occasion, proper, by the intervention of Bacchus, to introduce the interests of Venus; and began with her procacious glances, and gestures, and licentious and lascivious words, to instil into the mind of the Cavalier the incentives of her lust. Arnaldo, who had alwayes loved more like a contemplative Philosopher then a carnal Amorist, not yet knowing what the malice of women was, smiled to himself at such pretentions, and pre∣serving in his external actions a modest affabili∣ty, he with a marvellous sweetnesse deluded her. The woman hereat not a jot discouraged, or de∣terr'd
from giving her designs a birth by the Mid∣wifry of some better machinations, prevailed so far, with the help of Euristhus, that she got the Knight to stay there a night longer. Which come, she deposed all feminine modesty, and went to find him in his own bed, to throw her self naked into his embraces. But not being en∣tertained, but rather disdain'd by the generous Arnaldo, which would conserve the faith of Ma∣trimony immaculate to his spouse; she was mov'd with such scorn, that, like a dissolute woman, she converted her lascivious desire into inveterate hatred, contriving for revenge of her repulse, the strangest villany that could possibly enter into the heart of woman. She made it be signified to the Governour, that when he had revok't her banishment, she would put into his power her husband's murtherer. The Governour accepted the offer, desiring to get that Traytor into his hands; and she de∣tained Arnaldo with sundry inventions, hiding his horse's furniture in her house: but yet at last being offended with such entertainment, & pre∣paring to be gone, the Provost of the Citie at the same instant broke into the house with the great∣est fury in the World with all his Officers, and beset the Knight to carry him to prison: Gene∣rous Euristhus seeing this, put himself upon a daring, but imprudent Enterprize; bearing away no prize of honour by contracting with such a rout of Catch-poles, from whom onely to fly was honourable; and ran his sword through the breast of the Provost with such a resolution that he fell senselesse at his feer. But all this audaci∣ty
could not prevent Arnaldo from going to prison: and he himself was also stay'd and car∣ried by force to the Magistrates: To whom the fact being attested, they condemned him, as guil∣ty of Treason in the person of a publick Officer, to lose his head upon a Scaffold. In this state of things I arrived in Eleuxis, and understanding the passages by a Gentleman my friend, at whose house I had lay'n; without ta∣king great thought for Arnaldo, knowing assured∣ly that the Injur'd Lover could not be guilty of such a Crime: I was extreamly surprized, and confused at the name of Euristhus; because my friend representing his case to me as of a very comely, and couragious young man, I imme∣diatly suspected him to be my dear Euristhus, husband to Orsina. I rid therefore straight to the Palace, where the young man was prepa∣ring himself to his last departure, and at my re∣quest, I was permitted to see him: but I was so transported, that I was nearer death then he, finding him in so wretched a condition, upon which the last minutes of his life depended. On the other side, Euristhus rejoyced to see me, and was beyond measure ashamed, that I should find him in that condition so unworthy of his gene∣rosity: Yet having not lost the brisk spirit which was so natural to him, I apprehended the qua∣lity of his Crime, and that of a certain the In∣jur'd Lover was the imprisoned Knight, with the presumptive stain of the murtherer of Liviana's husband. I ran in all haste with Euridamas, the Cavalier my friend, to the Governour, to whom having disclosed the quality of Arnaldo, I in∣treated
him also to suspend the execution of the sentence of Euristhus, for having done this in the company of a Knight of so high birth, and inno∣cence, his own reputation would suffer, both in the imprisonment, and death of his Cam∣rade. The Governour remained exceedingly sus∣pended at the discovery of Arnaldo, nor would he (at least as he fained) give credit to my te∣stimony; whereupon that I might not lose a minute of time to Euristhus's prejudice, I shewed the Letters just before received from Olympia, and produced the Currier himself that brought them me, plainly to prove the truth of my depositions. And here arose a new mountain of difficulty, for the Governour (having begun to fear, lest Arnaldo once got out of prison, and gone to Boeotia, might plot some revenge for that injury) would not set him at liberty till he had first acquainted the Senate of Athens with these proceedings. I perceiving this fear of the Go∣vernour, took upon me, (having something to lose in the Dominion of Attica) to assure him of the person of Arnaldo, for that all the pu∣nishment of his affronts falling upon his false accusers; he could not with any reason be a∣grieved with the publick justice. This difficul∣ty being overcome, I must of necessity presse yet a little farther, to defer also the sentence of Euristhus, for the getting him out of all danger was almost impossible without a miracle. But seeing my prayers and remonstrances profited little, I ran to the Governour's wife, a comely and discreet Lady, with the whom I had some
years before past some services in Athens; and so importunatly intreated her, that she inter∣posed her own authority with her husband, and obtained three dayes time of respit for his re∣prieve; for so much served for my design; which was to get an order (though there was no need) from the Supream Magistrates of Athens to in∣hibit all proceedings in that cause, and to ad∣journ the judging of it to the same Tribunal. Which done, and Euristhus being returned to prison, I went with the Judge Criminal to the prison of Arnaldo, where the Cavalier being ex∣amined upon my depositions, and sound inno∣cent; the Governour commanded that he should be entertained in the Palace, desiring at his wife's instigation to satisfie with courteous treatment, that over-sight of a constrained im∣prudence towards him. Arnaldo; or, The injur'd Lover. BOOK VIII. BUt, Who can recount the transports of Ar∣naldo, when knowing of his liberty, he knew also by the Judge, that it was I that had ob∣tained the Reprieve of Euristhus, and procured his freedom? And, Who can expresse his raptures when as he saw me, and heard that his Argosthe∣nia was gone to Athens some dayes before with M throdorus, to stay at my house, and was not a away nor dead, but merry and in health?
He had a desire to enterchange with me many endearments of condolings, congratulation, information, excuse, gratitude, and offers of ser∣vice; but could not, having abundantly sup∣plied all with tender Caresses of friendship. The Governour in the mean time gave order for the apprehension of Liviana, as a violater of his edicts, and as a calumniator of an inno∣cent person in so hainous a Crime; but she be∣ing pre-advised that a Gentleman was come to Town, that procured the liberty of Arnaldo, fled away with the Boat of Euristhus. This advice came to the Palace, whil'st we were complementing Isabella the Governour's wife; who himself also, the more to vindicate himself and to agrade us, was present at that Vi∣sit. She took occasion to request of Arnaldo, Wherein he had angred that woman, that she should plot so enormous a treachery? To which he having modestly given satisfaction with the honest blushes of Isabella, we past next to discourse of Argosthenia, and of the news of Negropont. Whereupon Isabella, who desired to be at Athens, for the celebration of some feasts, with pretence of seeing Argosthenia, of∣fered us with unspeakable courtesie the same Feluca which she had made to be prepared to do us the honour to permit us to wait on her in that voyage. Having returned the ac∣knowledgements due to so grand a favour, whil'st the Governour had withdrawn to give orders for the entertainment of Arnaldo: Ma∣dam, said I to her, the civilities we receive from you are truely worthy of an Isabella,
there is onely wanting the freedom of Euri∣sthus. You know Sir, said Isabella, and sigh'd, that I have a desire upon all occasions to repay you the Obligations I owe you: but this is a difficult case, the Crime being against the person of a publick Minister; therefore I fear that it lieth not in my power to get him out of prison. Alasse, Madam, said I, it is very easie for you to do. Two words of yours to the Keeper, to charge him not to hinder me from visiting him at my pleasure, shall suffice to carry him in your Feluca to Athens. You will do some of your miracles, said she, and laughed; but have a care, The Pitcher goeth so oft to the Fountain that at last it comes broken home. Madame, said I, my times are past: let others do what they can, for I can work no miracle. You are not to be trusted, said she, for your eyes be∣tray you; But rell me a little, What course of life have you led since you left Athens? For I have heard divers relations of it; and it's re∣ported that being inamoured of a handsom creature of Anaplistum, you have renounced the profession which you made of a Platonick Lover, out of complacency to her corporeal beauty. I confesse, I gave no credit to it, ha∣ving experimented your modesty to be greater; but yet length of time, and variety of occur∣rences often changeth opinions; and it is of∣ten seen that he that is not frolick in youth, raves in old age. I laughed, and replied. Fair and softly, Madam! though ther's a few false witnesses here on my head that accuse me, I am not so old yet. This very thing (said she)
testifieth against you; for if you count age an injury, you thereby let us know, that you are come from being a spirituall, to be a sensuall Lover: for we know very well, that Lovers of this nature, make themselves seem young, lest they should be rejected. For else, measuring my age with yours, from my first acquaintance with you to this hour, I know you cannot be old, not having haply seen thirty. But this is no∣thing. Tell me, I intreat you, How this news of the Gentlewoman of Anaplistum came up: for I have had no good successe in defending you against some Ladyes, who abused me when I ce∣lebrated the miracles of your modesty. Isabella was silent, and I rejoyn'd; Madam, It was only a novelty that fame spread abroad by an Ignorant Amourist, that breaking open the seals of some Lettes which he understood not, interpreted them according to his ignorance, and published them conformable to his mal∣lice. That Gentlewoman is marryed, and by this time a Mother; and I never knew her far∣ther than to have done her some slight services. Isabella smiled, with a grace peculiar to her self, and said: You tell me she is Married, and a Mo∣ther, (and so saying▪ she called for her woman:) See, said she, that Gentlewoman now in a wi∣dow's habit. I sigh'd, and she fell on weeping at that encounter: and I extreamly desired to know, what crosse wind of Fortune had disturb∣ed the tranquillity of her state: But because that was not a time for such matters, I sudden∣ly had a conceit, how I might save Euristhus, by her means. I therefore intreated Isabella to
grant her me for two hours, before her depar∣ture, and I obtained her without reply: Arnal∣do, and I, were invited to dinner by the Gover∣nour; Isabella exempting her self, that she might make ready all things for her departure, and to take care about what we had agreed upon, for the safety of Euristhus. Here it was, we under∣stood by publick information, that the Count of Lithar, uniting the Army of the Rebells, was gone to lay seige to Caristum, to beleaguer the Dutchesse therein, and that she had for that cause dispatch't one of her Gentlemen to Athens, to demand assistance of that Republick, where∣upon the Generall at Sea was commanded to set sail for that place forthwith: we took a re∣solution, not to lose that opportunity of ser∣ving Arnaldo, by transporting our selves in the same Armado to Negropont. And in the interim he had an opportunity of sending to Boeotia, Olym∣pia's messenger, with advice of his resolutions, and to petition the King, to let his succours on the other hand march to that Isle. This being dispatcht, we returned to the Governesse, to im∣part these things to her, entreating that she would so favour us, as to accept of our service. She made a civill return to our complement, saying, that if we would dis-imbroyl Euristhus, she would be presently ready in the Bark, to expect us. So I took with me Lisa the young widow, and retreated to the house of Euridimas, and made her to put, under her womans habit, man's aparrell, and provided my self of a long mour∣ning garment, and in this manner we came to the Prison of Eust; and leaving Arnaldo,
Euridamas, and other friends, to stand Centi∣nell at the Gates, I passed onely with Lisa, be∣ing assisted by his Keeper, who having been pre-advertised by Isabella of that visit, he atten∣ded me with great civility: Euristhus and Lisa were so alike in age, in looks, and in de∣portment, that when I saw her, thinking I beheld another Euristhus, the contrivance of this conceit came into my head. And because I might freely dispose of Lisa, as having brought her up, and given her in marriage, and again be∣ing a woman of a great soul, and of very resolute courage, she was easily induced to second this enterprise. Being come into the Prison, I dis∣mist the Keeper with a formall complement, and bid her to put off her woman's weeds; with which having drest Euristhus, and advised them both of my design; I held discourse with a Cam∣rade of his, to whom I promised (and did ob∣serve it,) to prevail in reward of that service, that Isabella should manumit him: Euristhus went out in womans apparell, with a counte∣nance, that in the darknesse of such obscure dwellings, would have deceived curiouser eyes than those of a rude and simple guard: and as∣sisted by his Companion to the Gate, I took Lisa up under my mantle, for she was so little, that we past almost un-discerned, and I went out in the obscurity of those walks very happily: But being got to the principall Gate, in the open light, and under other Sentinells, they saw that I walked slowly, and with some luggage under my long mantle, and began to suspect som fraud: but not daring to open their mouths, because
Arnaldo and the other Cavaliers, stood in a po∣sture able to terrifie more daring souls; they opened the Gate, out at which Euristhus sud∣denly leapt, sans complement, I followed her, se∣conded by Arnaldo, and our other friends, with so much alacrity, that Lisa putting back one of her feet, falsified the secrecy of the Mantle. Now the Keepers plainly perceived our design, and having neither courage to cry out, against persons of such quality, nor to stay an hazard of being questioned for that escape; they flung away the keys, and betook themselves to their heels; and ran faster than we into some other place: For we mounting upon the Carroche of Euridamas, past happily to the Feluca of the Go∣vernesse, which attended us ready to weigh Anchor. So Euristhus being delivered, and every one fal∣ling to some discourse or other, I would have had Lisa took her woman's cloths again; but she with a comely smile said, If that the Lady Isa∣bella so please, since my Fortune hath brought me whither my election formerly led me, be you content, Sir, that I continue as I am, to accompany you to see the war of Negropont. And you shall not need to fear I shall want the company of women, for I will wait upon the Princesse Argosthenia. Your company, said I, since the Lady Governesse is so content, shall be very welcome to us, provided it be in an ap∣pearance and garb, becoming your quality and my reputation. Do what you please, said Isabella, for that: I took her to be neer me for the Love of you, and to you I consign her, now that
she is at liberty. I thanked Isabella for her cour∣tesy, and added; But, How came Antonello to dye so soon, said I, being so sprightly, and lusty? She may better tell you, (answered Isabella, laughing) than I, as better acquainted with it. Yet for the pre∣sent, know that Antonello is dead, because he was not worthy of the company of so handsome a maid. He was become so infinitely Jealous of her, that she could not stir out of doors, to go to the Temple, nor so much as see the air at her window, without his grumbling, and bea∣ting her. You know what is wont to happen to such Animals; but the goodnesse of Lisa, hath never desired (though she might) to pay him in the Coyn he deserved: howbeit not be∣ing able to live in so miserable a slavery, she found out a way to free her self by placing her∣self in the Palace neer my person. Whereat Antonello took such distast, and fell into so fu∣rious a rage, that meeting me one day at a feast, he had the saucinesse, to vent his resentments publickly treating me with unworthy names. Whereby those Cavaliers, at whose house the feast was celebrated, were so moved, that un∣der pretence of communicating something to him, they drew him aside and slew him, having learnt, by his death, all such rash fellows, to ob∣serve the respect due to Ladies of my quality. In sum, Antonello is dead, and Lisa lives ever at your dispose; I having no longer any desire of this charge, to keep her for you. Dispose of her therefore at your pleasure, she being yours; but look well to it, that you provide her no
more Jealous husbands, for I know not whe∣ther she may be alwayes so good as not to deal with them according to their deserts. The rest of the company laughed, but Arnaldo sighed at these words of Isabella, though it was onely observed by my self, that sate next him, and knew the peccant humour of his profound me∣lancholly. He asked me, Who that fair young creature was? And I satisfied him, that being a Noble Lady of Anaplistum, which fell, by the death of her Parents, into a miserable conditi∣on, I had took her into my house, and marryed her to a young man, well descended, of Eleuxis, who perished in the mis-fortune re-counted by Isabella: whereupon, he exprest a desire to have her go along with Argosthenia, that so he might repay to her part of the obligations, which he acknowledged to my person. Perceiving where∣at he did drive, I complyed with him, seeing that together with freeing him, in a great measure, from the inquietude of his jealousie, I came also to ease my self of the burden of farther caring for her. Answering, that he was her Master, alwayes provided that she was satisfied; because I was alwayes far from offering Vio∣lence to the liberty of another's will. In this kind of entertainment we came with a feli∣citous voyage to Athens; where Fortune had prepared for us a new vexation. After we had waited upon Isabella to her house, we took our way towards my own; where instead of Argosthenia and Methrodorus, we came to en∣counter with the perfidious Liviana, who, without knowing who I was, had landed there
with the Feluca, and with a Page of Euristhus. Which Page, being brought up in my house, by reason of his new Masters mis-fortune, was fled thither. Argosthenia and Methrodorus, hearing by the boy of Arnaldo's imprisonment, and the condemnation of Euristhus, yet know∣ing nothing of the cause, but onely of the death of the Provost; they instantly went for Eleuxis, to provide the best they could, for that occurence. But, how amazed was Ar∣naldo and Euristhus, when they saw Liviana? and how confounded was Liviana, to behold Euristhus and Arnaldo; I leave for others to imagine. She having re-assum'd her banished spirits from her sudden fright, betook her∣self to my Closet, and hastily shutting her∣self in, fell a plotting her own death, to free herself from the feared ignominy of some scan∣dalous punishment. Whereupon I, not ex∣pecting any other from so furious a Female, knowing that Arnaldo and Euristhus, were too generous, to seek to revenge themselves upon a Woman, which, agitated by Love, or by hatred, knew not what she did; entred into the Clo∣set another way, and snatcht out of her hands the mortall instruments, which she had prepa∣red to take away her life, and left her at li∣berty, to go whither she would; assuring her upon my word, that she should not be preju∣diced in the least, by her adversaries. She be∣ing comforted a little by my words and de∣meanour, entreated me to let her remain for a few dayes in that Retreat, being in great dan∣ger if she should be seen. But being unwil∣ling
to incur such a scandall, I caused a Bark presently to be hired, and sent her (Arnaldo and Euristhus never knowing of it) the same night back to her confinement of Aegina; where, instructed by her mis-fortune, she reformed the lubricity of her Genius, living and dy∣ing (O strange alteration of Heaven!) with a fame very different from that of her former life. We being in the mean time in great in∣certitudes, whether to return to Eleuxis, in search of Argosthenia and Methodorus, or else lest we should once again lose our labours, to expect their return, or some advice (for they might easily learn there, that we were come with the Governesse to Athens) supped with much confusion, because also Euristhus was not secure whilst he was in Athens (howbeit he desired to accompany us to the War of Negro∣pont, we resolved that he also should return by Sea to Corinth, to comfort his wife with his presence, who was disconsolate peradventure in regard of the sad news, which might flye thither of his death. He was no sooner de∣parted, but there knockt at my Gates a servant of Isabella, which presenting me with a Note from that Lady, took his leave and went ano∣ther way. Being troubled at such a novelty, at that time of night, I presently opened the Paper, and found that it said
Isabella to Philiternus. SIR. IUst now my Husband is arrived hither from E∣leuxis, pretending to be angry with me for ha∣ving been assistant to the escape of Euristhus: and intended to complain to the Supream Magi∣strates against those Cavaliers which have aided him in that Enterprize: but in truth, it is for that he is transported with a jealousie conceived against you, for the past troubles and for my pre∣sent coming away with you in this manner. I be∣seech you therefore to provide according to your prudence some expedient to these disorders, lest there arise hence new occasions of vexation to you, and of inquietude to ISABELLA. I Valued not the design the Governour had to disquiet me, and my friends, upon such a quarrel; having power in my hands to make all his attempts that way to vanish into smoke. But that which did extreamly trouble me, was, that Isabella might hereby be a sufferer, to whom professing so many singular Obligations, it was my duty to remove from her any thing that might occasion her discontent. I made use therefore of this occasion to leave Athens once again, and participated my designs to Ar∣naldo, beseeching him to stay in my house with Lisa, to expect Argosthenia and Methrodorus, or some news from them before that he did
resolve on any thing. Arnaldo would by no means permit that I should go alone; but I be∣ing glad that I had encountred an opportu∣nity convenient for the pursuit of my intent of traversing the World, and compliance with my humour of travail, resolved to leave Athens before morning, being wafted over by a very swift little Bark to Eleuxis; where providing all things necessary for the interests of my friends, and informing my self of Argosthenia and Methrodorus, and having heard that being deceived by a false report, that Arnaldo and I had set sayl on our way for Thebes, they were gone thither; I took with me Euridamas being well practised in that course, and put my self in pursuit of them with such speed, that we over∣took them upon the Banks of the (to Argo∣sthenia) so fatal Asopos; with what resentments of the Lady, may be easlyer imagined than de∣scribed. She wept a great while for joy, and seeing her to trouble her content with condo∣ling the many malitious fortunes which sepa∣rated her from Arnaldo, I took occasion to di∣vert her thoughts unto more sublime appre∣hensions, perswading her to go presently for Calcides. Methrodorus feared such dangerous counsel, for that the Citie being in the Re∣bels hands, it would be to precipitate her in∣to the jaws of destruction. But revolving in my head a consideration of State, upon which the fortune of the Lady and of Arnaldo de∣pended, I persisted still in this resolution, al∣leadging, that there was no way so secure, not so facile as this to enstate Argosthenia in that
Grandure, to which her birth and destiny gave her just pretensions. Methrodorus and Euri∣damas desired me, that, to encourage them to accompany me in so hazardous a service, I would declare to them the secrets of my de∣figne. But I would not discover my self in a thing that depended more upon events than upon discourse; telling them, that if they thought the enterprise desperate and perillous, they might stay at Arclides to be spectators, and I would go with Argosthenia, her woman, and onely one Page, to Calcides. They would not consent to that, alledging that being my com∣panions, in the voyage, and in the service of Argosthenia, they would also partake with me in the hazzard, and in the glory of so strange an adventure. This being concluded on, and, giving the name of Erintha to Argosthe∣nia, I called my self Polydamas, a Knight of Corcira, and gave out, that, being banished for a matter of honour by the Prince of Epi∣rus, I was come into those parts to seek my fortune. Euridamas, and Methrodorus put them∣selves into the disguise, this of Usher to Argo∣sthenia, that of Gentleman of my Chamber; And I sent two servants belonging to those Knights (for that we would not have such mean persons about us in a businesse of that moment) to wait our pleasures at Arclides: and so we travailed by Land to Calcides: where, learning by the common vogue of the people, that the Count of Lythar, proceeded vigorous∣ly in the siege of Caristum to reduce it, before the Athenian Armado should relieve it; and
that the Metropolitan Citie Calcides was left to the Government of the Count of Olorita his brother, or indeed rather to his wife, who, be∣ing a Lady of a great Soul, had the greatest share in the management of all Affairs: I took the name of the Countesse as an auspicious Omen, and instantly dispatcht this Letter to her for the orderly disposal of my designs. Polidamas to the Countesse of Olorita. THe misfortune which persecuted me in my own Countrey, hath forced me to seek elsewhere for protection to my self and family. For that being desirous to defend my honour in the person of my wife, I was banished from Corsira by the Prince of Epirus my Lord: so that my family having in former times had correspondence, and relation to some in this Citie of Calcides, I have had thoughts to inhabit here with my wife. To which, I have been very much encouraged by understanding, that it is at present governed by the Lord Count of Olo∣rita, your Worthy Consort with the assistance of your counsel; confident, that both my wife under your Worthy Protection shall have occasion to live con∣tentedly even in exile, and that my Lord Count will accept in my person, the obsequy, and fidelity of one of his most devoted, and most obliged servants. I would have come immediately my self to have re∣ceived your most welcom commands; but because in the present conjuncture of Affairs it's not permitted to strangers to come to this Citie without a Pasport from the Lord Count, I humbly entreat this fa∣vour,
for my wife and self onely, and four servants of our attendants. And here I resign my self, Il∣lustrious Madam, Your ever most humble and most obliged Servant POLYDAMAS. A Cavalier of Corsira. HAving written this Letter, and informed Euridamas of my thoughts, I sent him to present it to the Countesse, together with a Necklace of Turchoises, wrought in Gold, com∣posed by Argosthenia in her idlenesse at Athens. The quality of the present, more than the style of my Letter, and the curiosity together of see∣ing my presumed wife, which Euridamas com∣mended for the most beautifull Creature in the World, easily perswaded the Countesse to grant me more than my request, making us an offer of her own Palace, till such time as we were provided with Lodgings. But being unwilling to engage my self, I took the first empty house, which I stumbled upon, and shut my self up in it, and that night went with Argosthenia to the Palace; not only to complement with the Count and Countesse, but to observe their proceedings, and the manner and quality of their Attendants. The Caresses which the Countesse gave us, (de∣siring perhaps to get some other present out of us), were indeed without measure, and yet with∣out
the least affectation, for that she was a Lady truely sprightly, vivacious, and magnanimous. This foundation being laid, and having for ever captivated the heart of the Countesse to favour us; I advertised Methrodorus that he should be∣gin by little and little to discover himself to his Kindred, Friends, and Allies, which he knew dis∣gusted the present Government; ye declaring he was arrived at Calcides, upon assurance of the fall of the Royal family which had so persecu∣ted them. With this diligence we collected in a few dayes twelve Cavaliers of the Prime of the Nobility of Negropont: some of which, though dissatisfied with the Dutchesse and the Princes past; yet would not admit to be governed by persons whom they had conversed with as equals in Fortune, and whom they had treated as in∣feriours in Nobility. We could easily have mustered a far greater number; but fearing by delay to give fortune an occasion of discovering something of these agitations; and doubting that in a greater number such a secret might be endangered; we summoned them every one to meet at an hour unobserved in my house; and having taken of them a solemne Oath towards the Dutchesse their legitimate Lady, for whose service I had gathered them together in that as∣sembly, I began in this manner resolutely to speak. My Lords, I suppose that you have alrea∣dy understood by Methrodorus your good Friend and Kinsman, to what end you were called hither, which is to consult of the way to eject the Rebels, and Tyrants from this Ci∣tie,
and to put it into the hands of the Dutchesse Doricinia, to whom by right of pri∣mogeniture, and by your election, you be ob∣liged in a perpetual obedience and fidelity. I know you think it strange, that I, being a young man, and a stranger, should upon my own motion venture my self, and incite you to an Enterprize of so much difficulty, and dan∣ger; But I shall not be the first among men, which although a weak instrument my self, have been able to give a motion to grand ma∣chinations. But, though others moved by co∣vetousnesse, have attempted enterprizes above their fortune; I may be thought to be come to this resolution by the onely impulse of Justice, Friendship, and Love. She, My Lords, which here you behold with the name of Erintha, and in the appearance of my wife, is Argosthenia, a noble branch of the Royal Stem of your Prin∣ces, to whom, after the Dutchesse your Mistress, discends the inheritance of this most flourishing Principality. Nor is she my wife, but my Lady by merit, and Sister by fortune: and is indeed lawfull Spouse of Arnaldo, a noble person of the Royal Line of Thebes, which is ready to come in a few hours with the Armado of the Republick of Athens in relief of the Dutch∣esse. There will not be wanting neither, on the other side, the succours of the Theban King, who stayes but for our notice, to haste over with his Forces to these parts. But if it be lawfull for me freely to declare my thoughts; I do not at all like these Auxiliaries, because I am afraid it is but the taking a Serpent into our bo∣some,
to our suppression, rather than relief. For, if that Commonwealth, and this King, make themselves Masters of the strongest pla∣ces of this Dukedom, to which they have so antient and so strong pretensions; I know not when they will be content to resign them willingly; (Princes never wanting pretexts, to usurp, and detain the possession of other States;) And, to compell them by force, we shall be al∣wayes too weak of our selves; and to call other Princes to our assistance, would be an opening the sluces to our totall inundati∣on, changing this Country into a seat of con∣tinuall War, for strangers, to consume our wealth, annihilate our families, violate our honours, and to impose reduplicated chains of vassallage, upon this, at yet, free Principali∣ty. I would advise therefore, that with Spi∣rits, and Resolutions, worthy of generous Knights, and Loyall Subjects, we do at∣tempt with our own hands, to re-establish the Crown of this Dominion, upon the heads of our legitimate Princes and Masters. Nor is this so difficult a matter to effect, if it be well managed. Resolve therefore to acknowledge for your Princesse (with a Salvo alwayes to the right of the Dutchesse our Mistresse) Ar∣gost henia, and to unite your selves for her, in this testimony of fidelity; and hereafter, we shall not want either time or occasion to con∣sult the manner also of turning the Rebells out of the City, to establish her in the pos∣session of her lawfull Dominions. Those Cavaliers for a good space stood asto∣nished,
by the unexpected coming of Argosthe∣nia, and by such an attempt of a young Knight, alone, and surrounded by a City of Enemies. But afterwards certified by Methrodorus, and by their own eyes (which discerned in the face of ArgOsthenia, the features of Doricinia, and her deceased brothers) of the truth of her per∣son; and encouraged also by the rehersall of the adventures she had happily gone through, un∣der my conduct, and of her Contract with Arnaldo, they ranne all to kisse her hand, pro∣nouncing her (after the Dutchesse) for their Lady; and disposed themselves in every parti∣cular, to follow my directions. Hereupon, I lost no time, but desiring some of them to stay in that house, till the contrived Design had taken effect, I thus continued to speak to them. My Lords: This is my design; And he that hath any better way, let him speak, and procure the publick and private benefit of his Country, of his Prince, and of himself. You shall, if you please, take a rude supper with me, to stay hid till my designs be ripe, to lead you elsewhere. In the interim, I will send Euri∣damas to intreat the Countesse to sup to night with my wife, desiring to impart some matters of concernment to her, out of the noise of the Palace. I am confident she will come presently, out of a desire to get some Present out of us, having an opinion, that we are exceeding rich in Jewells. When she comes, we will secure her attendants, and re∣turn with her and Argosthenia to the Palace;
of the which having made our selves Masters, with the imprisonment (if he will not freely surrender himself) of the Count Governour, we will proceed with his Orders and Signalls, to seise the Market-place, and the Port, without noise or blood. And this I assure you, my Lords, on the word of a Gentleman, (which is the onely recompence of merit, which myperills and counsells may acquire me) that there shall not be spilt the blood of any Sub∣ject, although a Rebell; nor of any Stran∣ger, although an Enemy; except it be in our necessary defence. I onely shall ask, that the Count and Countesse Governours, may be left to my protection, to whom beeing other∣wayes obliged, and drawing the Countesse to my house, I desire and entreat the Princesse Argosthenia to ingage, that she will never here∣after on any occasion, or under any pretence, punish them for this default of the Rebellion of the Count of Lythar their brother. Having thus said, and having received from the Princesse and Lords, their Word and Oath; and having left them in an unobserved place of the house, I immediately dispatcht Eurida∣mas to invite the Countesse to Supper; who failed not to come a while after, with a very slender retinue. We supt reasonable well; and forasmuch as being discomposed with the plots in my head, I was ever and anon silent and pensive, and sometimes beholding her with much attention, she entred into a suspition of me, as if I contemplated her out of a liking of her beauty; and began to observe my face, and
behaviour, and remained a little suspended and changed. But supper was hardly done, when I was informed by Methrodorus and Euri∣damas, that they had, in a pretence to entertain them, carryed the Attendants of the Countesse into a place whence they could not stir, and that the Confederated Lords were in a posture ready to march to the Palace. I started up, and, with a countenance between merry and seri∣ous; Gentle Madam (said I) It sensibly agrieves me, to stain the mirth of the Table of hospitality, with a necessitated incivility towards you; but because I am more obli∣ged to Argosthenia your Princesse, and my La∣dy, than to the courtesies received from your urbanity, I beseech you pardon the errour, that, with reason, I commit against Reason. Madam, you are my prisoner, and all that I can comply in to your Merits, and my Obli∣gations is, to assure you, in the name of this your Princesse, and my Mistresse, your life, honour, and estate. Be pleased therefore to change your title of Governesse of Calcides, into that of a Subject and Servant of Doricinia and Argosthenia, and to remain in my custo∣dy, not stirring a step from me; for if you stir, and receive some affront, I have dis∣charged my self, having already satisfied the debts of Friendship and Honour, not onely in advising you, but in preserving all that which you ought in justice to lose, as of course, with your Husband, guilty of a High treason, impardo∣nable upon any other account, unlesse that of the unparallel'd Clemency of this generous Princesse.
That the Countesse remain'd astonished with such a change of Scenes in the Theater of For∣tune, questionlesse is not to be doubted; She would at first have shewed her resent∣ments, and have cryed out to her servants; but seeing the confederate Lords to enter the room armed at all poynts, she now requested, what I had formerly voluntarily proffered, to pre∣serve her honour, estate; and life. Then I lead her, and Argosthenia, into her own Coach, and made some of the Lord's servants, to put on the Liveries of her Pages, and Lacquyes, who had already rallyed a great number of friends and Complices, going in this posture qui∣etly, till we came to the Palace; giving her in the mean time, particular information of Ar∣gosthenia, and of that affaire; that she might Cancell her former crimes, by her present good service, co-operating (herself) to the setle∣ment of the State, in reducing it to the obedi∣ence of it's legitimate Governours. The Coun∣tesse (as she said, being obliged with such modesty and courteous treatment,) offered her self to do miracles in this particular, seeing no sini∣ster adventure of Fortune obstructed her. Being brought with such like discourse to the Palace, and having deluded the guards, by first dividing them by her order, and then they being made to dis-arm by the Servants of the Lords, we ascended to the uper appartements (possessing our selves of all the posts as we went) and into her own Chamber, where her Husband was expecting her to go to bed. But, seeing me appear with her, and Argo∣sthenia,
Methrodorus, Euridamas, and the other Lords, in no peaceable posture, he would have cried out, and have called his Gentlemen and Guards to help him. Then the Countesse, stepping out before the rest, said, My Lord, you also must acknowledge Argosthenia for your Princesse and Lady, and put your self, as I have done, under the prote∣ction of this Knight, or resolve to die present∣ly without any remission. These usurped Gran∣dures, as unfit for us, are soon vanished: It re∣mains that we submit with patience and fide∣lity, thereby to deserve the favours we have already obtained of pardon for our Crimes; with the safety of our lives, riches, and ho∣nours. Surrender therefore to this Lady, who is your Princesse Argosthenia, your pretensions of Command, and the Signals for the possession of the Port and Fleet. She is Mistresse, and you are no longer Governour of Calcides. He being in part satisfied with these Remon∣strances of the Countesse, the absolute con∣trouler of his heart, and regulator of his affe∣ctions, did all that we desired: and we instant∣ly committed the charge to the Lords our Con∣federates, recommending to Euridamas the Guard of the Palace to Methrodorus that of the Piazza, or Market-place; to the Count of Armenum the investing of the Port, to the Count of Lagia of the Fleet, and to other Lords and Knights other Charges, according to their merits and capa∣cities. There were likewise called to the Palace the old servants of the Dutchesse, which had stay'd at Calcides; but I my self stirr'd not from
the Princesse's side, not to confound the orders, which depended on my direction, and to look to the persons of the Count and Countesse, and get out of them such things as were necessary to be known for the regulating my actions in the present conjunctures. The night being thus spent without sleep, the morning following, all that vast Citie beheld it self recovered out of the hands of the Rebels, without the losse of any man, except one onely Captain, and a few Souldiers of a Corps du guard: which would have refused obedience to the Count of Armenum. Day being come, all the Nobility and Citizens repaired to the Pa∣lace to do Homage to Argosthenia, and to de∣mand the death of the Governour and his fol∣lowers, for an expiation of that Rebellion. And seeing the old Counsellours of the Dutchesse, and the other Ministers of State advised that they should be delivered, notwithstanding the Prin∣cesse's Oath, that so the people might not be de∣nied that satisfaction, which might be a means to make them the more resolute in defending themselves against the Count of Lytharre, when he should march thither with his Army to re∣venge them; and being unwilling that my faith should be broken, I carried the Count and Countesse with the Princesse's permission secret∣ly to my house, and there disguising them in Lacquyes apparel, got them safe out of Calci∣des. Then afterwards leaving the Princesse's in∣structions in writing for the perfecting the de∣sign of the work begun, and bidding Adieu to the Cavaliers, my friends, I got incognitò a∣board
a very expeditious Bark, and hoisted sayl for Athens, to bring in person the first news of these Revolutions to Arnaldo. Who standing a long while astonished thereat, as at a thing he esteemed impossible; in the end threw himself about my neck with large acknowledgements of infinite Obligations, and would have carried me back to Calcides, with large promises of sharing his fortunes with me. Argosthenia con∣curred in the same instances with reduplicated Letters, and re-iterated Ambassages: but being content in having satisfied my Obligations of friendship to Arnaldo, and of brotherhood with Argosthenia, I would not again leave the doors of my own house, to hazard my self in the Tempests of the Court. And so having recom∣mended to them both, Euridamas, Methrodorus, and Lisa, who merited their esteem, I continued constant in the quietude and tranquillity of my mind and fortune: howbeit, I was very much troubled in the passions of my Soul, for the un∣timely, and much to be lamented deaths, which a little after hapned to Isabella, for whom I had already suffered so much in the Kingdom of Love and Fortune; and likewise of the Count of Olarita, now become my most Cordial friend; which left me heir of a great trouble, with re∣commending to me in the place of Sister, the fair, and sprightfull Countesse his Consort. How afterwards Arnaldo went to Calcides, how he was acknowledged for husband of Argo∣sthenia, how he rallied a potent Army of faith∣full subjects, and adventurous Souldiers; How he relieved the Dutchesse, overthrew in battle
the Count of Lytharre, who fled, and ended his dayes at Byzantium; And how the Dutchesse being returned to Calcides, confirmed Argosthe∣nia, after a solemn Marriage, in the Dignity of Hereditary Princesse, with the other Adven∣tures of these married Princes; Some more for∣tunate Pen than ours, will perhaps give no∣tice to the World; here being concluded th dysasters, and afflictions (the subject of Philter nus his relation) of the Injur'd Lover. FINIS.
