C3326 669.f.26[41] 99897900 171057
C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION, For Continuing Officers of the Excise, during His Majesties Pleasure. CHARLES R. WHereas by vertue of an Act Entituled, An Act for the continuing of the Excise untill the Five and Twentieth day of December 1660. the same Receipt was managed, and the whole Work thereof carried on by certain Commissioners therein named, called Com∣missioners for the Grand Excise, and by divers Sub-Commissioners, and other their infe∣rior Officers and Ministers not therein mentioned: And by certain other Commissi∣oners in the said Act also named, called Commissioners for Appeals and Regulating the Excise, and their inferior Officers and Ministers. And whereas part of the said Excise, consisting of certain Impositions upon Beér, Ale, Cider, Perry, and other Liquors, is by two several Acts of Parliament passed upon the Four and Twentieth day of this instant Deeember, granted unto Vs, That is to say, one Moyety thereof to Vs, Our Heirs and Successors, as a perpetual Recompence and satisfaction of and for Our Tenures and Purveyance; And the other Moyety thereof as an Augmentation of Our Revenue during Our Life. In both which Acts it is referred unto Vs to nominate such Persons as We shall think fit to be Commissioners and Officers for carrying on of that Service, which the shortness of time, and other Our Weighty Occasions will not yet give Vs Leasure to think of. To the intent therefore that Our Revenue may not suffer any loss or hindrance by this delay, We do hereby Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That all and every the Persons, who up∣on the Four and Twentieth day of this instant December, were Commissioners for the Grand Excise, Sub-Commissioners, or inferior Officers relating thereunto, or Commissioners for Appeals and Re∣gulating the Excise, shall be and are hereby Authorized and required to continue in his and their re∣spective Employments, And are hereby Declared to be Our Commissioners for the Excise of Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, and other Liquors, and our Sub-Commissioners and inferior Officers; and also Our Commissioners for Appeals and Regulating the Excise, during Our Pleasure. And We do hereby enjoyn them to Act in their several Places and Employments according to the Rules in the two Acts last mentioned and not otherwise, For which they shall receive from Vs during their respective Employ∣ments, like Wages and Salaries as hath been heretofore used and accustomed. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, this Four and Twentieth day of December, One thou∣sand six hundred and sixty, in the Twelfth Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING. LONDON Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY, 1660. At the KING'S Printing-House in Black-Friers.
