C7032A R231868 99897630 137265
Soveraign Omnipotency The SAINT's SECURITY IN Evil Days. Discoursed and Concluded From Rom. IV. xvii, xviii. By WILLIAM CROMPTON. Exod. 14.13. Stand still, and see the salvation of God. 2 Chron. 20.12. O our God, wilt Thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great Company that cometh against us, neither know we what to do, but our Eyes are upon thee. London: Printed for Benj. Alsop, at the Angel and Bible in the Poultrey; and are to be sold by James Cowsey, Bookseller in Exeter. 1682.
Dignissimo, Amicissimoque Affini nostro, GEORGIO YONG, Creditonensium, In Agro Devoniensi Armigero: Nec-non GEORGIO LAPTHORN, Plymidensium, Mercatori Celeberrimo: Nomine Virtutis non mihi solum noto: Ʋtrisque Sacrarum Literarum Patronis Candidissimis. Conciones sequentes, tum Potentiae Divinae summe efficacis, aeque ac Justitiae illius omnimodo incontaminabilis, Doctrinans Dilucidantes: D. D. D. Faustaque iisdem omnia, non mi∣nus calido voto, quam ipsimet, in hoc scripto  comprecatur; Guliel. Crompton.
Soveraign Omnipotency THE SAINTS SECURITY In Evil Days. ROM. iv. 17, 18. Even God who quickneth the dead, and calleth those things that are not, as though they were. THis part of the Chapter con∣tains an Illustrious Commen∣dation of Renowned Abra∣ham, and that Faith whereby he receiv∣ed the Promise to be the Father of ma∣ny Nations; and is described three ways, viz.
1. By the nature of it, which he discovers to be sincere; not only out∣wardly profest, (though that was ne∣cessary) but inwardly rooted. It was Faith before God, and found Access into the Divine Presence. 2. By the extent of the Relation between Abraham and the Faithful; and so, it is defined to be Ʋniversal, as God is Father of all, Jews and Gen∣tiles, without distinction of Nation, Sex and Condition. Spiritual, before him whom he believed; not Carnal, nor apprehended by men without a Revelation, 1 Cor. 2.14. The Natu∣ral Man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, neither can he know them, for they are Spiritually discern'd. 3. From the ground of both, which is the Soveraignty and Almighty pow∣er of God; set forth by two things, viz. Quickning the Dead, and callng things that are not as though they were. This supported Ahrahams Faith a∣gainst all seeming Impossibilities; and i the inended subject of this Dis∣course. In the Prosecution of which, I shll labour first to break the Shell, by explining the words, as they sh ll
fall under consideration, and then of∣fer you the Kernel contained in it; First I shall endeavour to unlock the Cabinet and then shew you the rich Jewels laid up in it; which you will find to be of great worth and use in these Cloudy days, wherein the Di∣vine Providence hath cast us. For the former Branch; 1. Gods quickning the Dead. A Short Sentence and diversly un∣derstood by divers Divines. I con∣ceive, the Resurrection is hereby meant, present in Soul, future of Body; with some special Limitation to Abraham. As, 1. A raising of such a Seed out of his dead Body. Rom. 4.19. And being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own Body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the dead∣ness of Sarahs Womb. i. e. Destitute of all natural power to conceive and quicken. Yet Abraham could set his Seal to it, by Faith, as being within the Limits of Gods power. 2. A recovering of that Seed alive from the dead, Heb. 11.19. Account∣ing that God was able to raise him up, even from the Dead, from whence also
he received him in a Figure; which to nature and humane apprehension was impossible. Yet this Abraham be∣lieved, because of the Lords All-suffi∣ciency. 3. A reviving of the Body out of the Dust, at the last Day: which A∣braham believed the Lord was able, and would certainly do it. The whole commends two things to our Learning. First, To quicken the Dead, is the Lords priviledge, an effect of his Al∣mighty Power. Secondly, That this Divine Privi∣ledge should be to us a Ground of Fai h. For the former. See it promised, Isa. chap. 26. ver. 19. Thy Dead Men shall Live, together with my Dead Body shall they Arise. To be understood either in a Physical or Moral Sense; with the Concurrent Consent of the Ancient and Learned Modern Exposi∣tors; who observe, that there is nothing more usual for the Church, and Holy Men therein, to Support their Hearts above all Incumbent Af∣flictions, and to Secure themselves of the Comfort of promised Deliverance, notwithstanding all the seeming Im∣probability
thereof, by the General Doctrine of the Resurrection. And so, John 5,21,28. The Father raiseth up the Dead and Quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom he will. On which Acount Christ is declared to be the Son of God, by the Resurrection from the Dead; R m. 1.4. First, Raising others; as he did the Rulers Daughter, to the Astonishment of all Beholders present at her Funeral; and the Widow's Son of Naim, who was carried without the City to his Grave; Christ stops the sad Train, and Resto∣reth Life to the Young Man, and some∣what more Dear than Life to his Mo∣ther. And the more Signally to Tri∣umph over Death, he Pursued it to its Fort, the Obscurity of the Grave. Lazarus was buried for four Daies, his Carkass was Corrupt, but Christ called him from the Bottom of his Tomb with that Powerful Voice that Created the World; The Dead An∣swers and comes forth to the Amaze∣ment of all that saw the Glory of God, so Clearly Manifested. In all, he Testified his Godhead, and the Truth of his Calling and Doctrine. Thus he raised Moses and Elias, and made
them known to his Disciples by ex∣traordinary Revelation, to Evince his Doctrine not to be new, but the same in Substance with that Record∣ed in the Law and the Prophets; both being represented by Moses and Elias; who though they were raised before him, yet it was not without him, but by the Fellowship of his Resurrection: As, though Light Riseth before the Sun, yet it Riseth not but by the Sun; and the Mace goeth before the Magistrate, but it doth so only to at∣tend upon him. Secondly, Raising himself. John 10,18. I have laid down my Life, that I might take it again, no Man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have Power to lay it down, and I have Power to Raise it up again. Here is a glorious Manifestation of his Pow∣er, that the Tomb could not Confine him, nor the Grave-Stone stay him; But throwing off those Clogs, as Sampson did his Withs, he shewed him∣self a while to his Beloved Ones, and so took his Joyous Ascent to the Right hand of the Father. As Love id Christ in the Grave, so Power Raised him from the Grave. Love
Rockt him a Sleep, and Power Awak∣ed him again. He broke through all Bars, Beat down all Opposition, and Sprang forth of his yeilding Dust, as a Triumphant Conqueror over Death and Devils. If it be objected, That Christ rose from the Dead by the Glory of the Fa∣ther, and that the Father raised him? It is easily answered; This was not by way of supplement, to make up a∣ny defect of power in Christ, but on∣ly by way of consent, to Christs own Power and Action; that so men might Honour the Son and the Father. John. 5.19,26. Or else, by the Glory of the Father, we may understand that Glorious Power which the Father gave unto the Son in the Flesh, to have life from himself; because that holy Spirit which immediatly quickned him, was both his and the Fathers, and so the Action was common to both. Thus like the Penix, he goeth out of the Spulcher in the day of his Tri∣umphs, al lighted and environ'd with Flames of Triumphant Glory. 3. Assuring others, by his lights and sen or, that they shall rise again. 1. Cor. 6.14. He is called the first
Fruits of them that Sleep. The Trium∣phant Resurrection of our Lord, is the Root and Hope of ours; with this he sweetens the acerbities of our present life, and replenisheth Hearts with the Antipast of their Immor∣tality; for, he arose not barely in a Personal, but Publick Capacity; and though it were a Damnable Heresy of Hymeneus, to say, That the Resurrecti∣on was past already; Yet it is a truth to say, that it is begun. He first, and we at his coming, 1 Cor. 15.25. By what is past in the head, we are assured of what is expected in his Members; for, his Resurrection is a Pledge and Earnest of theirs. He having paid our Debt, Death cannot detain us in Prison for it. Yea, it is a beginning of ours, as before is noted; he being raised who is the Head, the Body must also follow. If the Elder Bro∣ther be sprung out of the Dust, the Younger Brethren shall not stay there. The Vine-Plant being in Heaven, there the Branches must receive their Eter∣nal Flourish. Object. 1. Is it not said, 1. Cor. 15.2. By man came the Resurrection of the Dead?
A. It is , such a man as is God also; from whose Will this large Soul of Nature had its motion, and who therein commandeth so universally, as he seems to hold the Heaven and Elements under here, to be instru∣ments of his Wonders; it is he that lighted Stars at his Birth, and Eclip∣sed the Ancient Sun at his Death, and walked on the waters as on a Pavement of Marble. It is he, that causeth the Earth to cast out her Dead. Object. 2. Have not men done it? Answer. 1. Stories of Men Raised by Men, are either Lies and Illusions, as the Pythonist of Endor raised the Devil in Samuels Shape; and the Church of Rome maintain many Idle Stories of Dead men Raised, to Walk and Live after Death. Otherwayes, Dead Men neither walk nor appear in Body or Soul, after Death. Or, if there are any such, They are extraor∣dinary Permissions, for Secret Ends, only known to him that Permits them. 2. The Prophets and Apostles have done it, but in the Quality of Mini∣sters. So Elisha raised the Shunamites Son, 2. Kings 4.34. And Peter rais∣ed
Dorcas, Acts 9.40. But not by their own Power. It only belongs to Christ to do this work, with an Original Power, which hath its Foun∣tain in his Bosom; with an Absolute Command, which receives no Modifi∣cation in all Nature; with a Simple Will, which needs no other Instrument. It was by Divine Influence and Assist∣ance in those Prophets and Apostles, to confirm their Doctrine, and to draw the Church sooner to believe. 3. It is the Divine Nature that is the Fountain of Life; he gives, takes, restores, to whom, when, and how he pleaseth. As it is with the Sea for water and the Sun for light, in the former, all the waters are gathered together into an Ocean, where they grow into swelling heaps, and are the source of all the Streams that refresh the Earth; and in the latter, that great Luminarie is the Vessel, wherein the Lord hath gathered all light, which before was sattered in the Heavens, but is now united in that bright Lamp, which, running like a fiery Chariot, might rule the day, and illustrate the earth, making it fruitful. Thus it is with the Deity for life, John 6.63.
The Spirit quickneth, the Flesh profiteth nothing; The words that I speak unto you are Spirit and Life. And by this power he quickneth the Dead. So that it's clear, the work is his, who is Lord of nature, and holds the Keys of life and death in his own hands. His light only can dispel the darkness, and his voice only can break the silence of the Grave. The second Doctrine comes now to hand, viz. Doct. 2. That this Divine Privi∣ledge should be to us a ground of Faith. Gen. 17.1. I am God all-sufficient, walk before me, &c. Walk before me who am all-sufficient, self-sufficient, O∣riginal, Universal Good; the Pillar of Abrahams Faith. And the Apostle speaks by way of wonder that any should not believe it, Acts. 26.8. Why should it be thought a thing incredi∣ble with you, That God should raise the Dead? Therefore it is that the Sacred Scripture doth frequently mind us of his power, to help our incredulitie; Numb. 23.19. God is not as man, that he should lie, nor the Son of man, that he should repent; hath he said it, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and
shall he not make it good? And again, Is there any thing too hard for God? So, Math. 19.27. With God all things are possible. A main prop to an humble Suppliant, That seeing his own vile∣ness, and the Divine Excellencies, which are warming and enlightning, cryeth out, Lord if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean, as it is recorded, Math. 8. 2. This is the Rock, on which the weak Anchor of a Christians Faith may firmly fix. You know Sampsons Riddle; Out of the Eater cometh forth Sweet. The reason why Christians should consider the power of God; out of this strong comes forth sweet∣ness, In the application hereof may be found, Ʋse 1. Matter of Correction, and that of two sorts: First, of such that make it too hard; denying the Resurrection in opinion. As Pearls are dissolved in Vinegar, so is Truth in hearts made bitter with Corruption. Thus we find many wick∣ed and irregular Spirits, who having renounced the blessings of the other life, against the voice of nature in the order of the World, wherein we have
the New Birth of Stars, days, Sea∣sons, Plants and Birds, who make a perpetual Image of the Resurrection in the World; nay, against the touch of God, and impressions of verity on the very Gentiles, who have professed the happiness of the Soul in the other life and the Resurrection, even on their Tombs, to deny the Resurrection. So the Saduces of old, Acts 23.8. Hyme∣neus and Philetus, 2 Tim. 18. which you may easily perceive, is not only to crack the eye of a reasonable judgment, but also to pull out the eye of Faith, all pure and caelestial as it is. Or, in practice; Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die, 1 Cor. 15.32. Of those, I mean, who drown their Souls in their Bodies and would have no time to live longer, than they have to sin, and when there is an end of sin∣ning, wish there would be an end of living. And well it would be for them, if living like Beasts, they might be annihilated like Beasts. Thus men do err, not knowing the power of God. That God, who out of no∣thing Created all things, can certainly reduce many things into one. When the Body is gone into a thousand sub∣stances,
he can easily make an abstra∣ction, and bring that Body together a∣gain; as a Chymist, out of several Metals mingled together can abstract one from the other, the Silver from the Gold, and the Alchimy from the Silver, and reduce every Metal to its own kind. Thus should we much more believe of God, that he is able to extract and reinvest every Soul with its own Body, though they are ming∣led and confounded with many other Substances. The Persecutors of the Primitive Christians burnt their Bodies into Ashes and cast them into the River, and all, ad tollendam spem Resurrectio∣nis; but all in vain, for even they also shall arise to a better Resurrection; for, at the Shrill Voice of the last Trumpet, the greatest Jaylors shall surrrender up all their Prisoners; all the scatter'd Dust of Adams Seed shall ride upon Windy Wings, till it meet together in a collected Body. All the Creatures in the world, that have made their Meat of mans flesh, shall finde that they have eaten Mor∣sels too hard for the digestion of their weak Stomach, Isa. 26.19. The earth
shall cast forth her Dead, as a woman doth an untimely Birth; the Grave shall be in travel with the Dead, and shall be delivered of them. Secondly, Such as make this work too easie, saying they can quicken them∣selves; against all sense and common reason. It is to maintain a propo∣sition ridiculous to all humane under∣standing. Can any thing make it self? neither can any reasonable Creature raise it self to an higher rank of being than it is. A Stone cannot make it self a Tree, to have growth and life; nor can a Tree make it self a Beast, to have sense, nor a Beast make it self a man to have Reason, nor a Rational man make himself a Saint. Or else, ascribe it to the Ordi∣nary course of Nature, depriving the Lord of his Royal Prerogative. Ʋse 2. Here is matter offered of strong consolation and encouragement to the holy seed of Abraham; you believe in him who can quicken the dead. For your sakes, let me take leave, a little to open this Cabinet, that you may view the excellency of this powerful God in whom you believe; and be sure the prospect will be very pleasing.
Death, and so the Dead, may be considered three ways: 1. Politice; There is a Death of Kingdomes and States; as there is a rising and flourishing, so there is a de∣caying and dying, they spring, flourish and dye; the goodliest, and stateliest Politick Bodies that ever the earth bore, though animated with the search∣ing Spirit of the most profound Poli∣cie, strengthned with the resolution and valour of the most Unconquer'd, sight∣ed with Eagles eyes, of largest depths, and comprehensions of States and Crowns, adorned with never so many prosperities, and Triumphs; yet like the natural Body of a man, they have their revolutions and decays. Most apparent, in the ruines of the Roman Empire, once a glorious Body; and the once splendor of the Turkish Monarchie, and the Venetian Aristo∣cracy, which sprang from the most contemptible beginning; with the Spanish State, which once appear'd like a Comet, threatning destruction an giving Laws to all the Nations round about her. The Beams and Rasors of a State may be so link together, so tenton'd and set into one
another, as might embolden a bare Po∣litician to determine it an indissolu∣ble Constitution: But God under∣mines all with the Breath of his Mouth. And Politicians have observed, that the longest liv'd State on Earth, suf∣fers great alterations and Periods within the compass of four or five hundred years. This decay is, 1. In matters Ecclesi∣astical, concerning Religion. As the Church prays, Psalm. 80.18. Quicken us, we call upon thee. And the power of Christ Shines marvellously in the great Empire of his Church, which the Father hath put into his hands, to build, raise and cement with his Blood, illuminate with his Light, and nourish with his Body. To confirm which, the Historian hath observ'd, how the Doctrine of the Albigenss was pre∣served, notwithstanding all enemies; and he hids all the Privy Counsellours of Nature, who can tell where the Swallows lie all the Winter, and how at the Spring they have a Resurrecti∣on from their seeming deadness; Let them, sih he, also inform u, in what invisible Sanctuary, this Doctrine did lurk, in spice of ll opposition and Per∣secution;
and how it reviv'd out of its Ashes, at the coming of Luther. And withal he observes, that in those parts of France, where the Albigen∣ses were most cruelly handled, now the Protestants (the Heirs of most of their Tenents) most Flourish. 2. In matters Civil, touching the Law and matter of Government; as the Lord promised, Isa. 26.19. Thy Dead Body shall live, &c. Before, they complained of very hard labour, and that they brought forth nothing but Wind; now, thy Dead Body shall Live. Which some refer to the Ba∣bylonsh Captivity, wherein they were as Dead Bones in the Grave, without any Strength, Wisdom, or visible hope of being delivered; yet though they seemed so very much decayed, as if they were quite withered and Consumed with Calamity and Death, he promised to raise them again, and Cloh them with Beauty and Glory Thus the Lord quickens the Dead. If he burn his Phenix, out of the very Ashes he will raise another. 2. Physice; And that is the Death of the Body, of which we have spoken already. The Erth shll cast forth her
Dead. This is easie to God, to whom Miracles are as easie as natural ope∣rations. A Miracle being nothing else but a new Creation. 3. Ethice; Which is the Death of the Soul; Two fold, First, Tempo∣rary; either by the absence of Grace or Divine Discretion; when Man is indeed Dead, or as a dead thing, in his own apprehension, the Lord quick∣neth. You who were Dead he quickneth. Man is Impotent and weak, like a dead Member in the Body, he is in himself without Strength: And as the Organs can make no sound, unless Breath be caused to enter into them, so neither can a dead Soul make any Harmony, till God breathe into it, by his Blessed Spirit. Secondly, Eternal, when the person is actually cut off from all hope, and irrecoverably shut up in the eternal Abyss. So, the Lord doth not, he will not quicken, Luke 16.26. There is a great Gulf, a Dia∣mond Wall between Hell and Para∣dice, so that they who pass from earth to Hell cannot return, &c. Tali pri∣vatione non Datur Progressus; That Gulf being fixed by the immutable and immoveable Decree of God.
Q. How doth the Lord quicken the Dead? Answ. 1. By ordering all that falls out in the World, for the good of his People, Ezek. 37.12,13. Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, O my Peo∣ple, I will open your Graves, and cause you to come ou of your Graves, and bring you into the Land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your Graves, O my Peo∣pl, and brught you up out of your Graves. When things were brought to a dead Lf, hen he puts to his hand, his Strength is mde known; and when the danger is most felt, then his hel∣ping Arm is most welcome. When the Daughter of the Ruler of the Sy∣nagogue was dead, then Ch ist appea∣red most advantagiousl, Mark 5. That was the word he waitd for, and longed to hear. As Alxander the Great solaced himself with the great∣ness of his Peril in Indi, Tand m par Animo meo periculum video; So fa∣reth it with our absolute Monarch of the World, it is Joy to his heart to protract his time, till he see the height and maturity of danger, that so he may get the more honour. While things are but dying, there is
hope in nature, and in respect of us; but when they are quite dead, there is hope, if we look up to God, and believe him who quickneth the Dead. We need not meddle with the great Current of his Counsels; his Power in the object of our Faith. He can make light in the midst of duskie Nights, and Havens in the most for∣lorn Shipwrack; and if we were with him in the Shadow of Death, what should we fear in the Arms of Life? 2. By infusing Grace and working Life. The Method or order he ob∣serves is, First, to kill by the Law, and then to quicken by the Gospel. First, he Wounds, and then Heals; He useth Rod, but such as are dipt in Balm. And so the Lord quickens daily, and often woks a Miracle; and this in be∣stowing Powr upon his Son o quick∣en; and thos re by degrees drawn by Christ to himlf, and united to him b Life Commu d to them. As th S res in the heart, re∣tns  lf, and sends foth  into y united part, e won ih and the whole there i ontin i y, John 5.25. Verily I say unto you, The Hour is coming and
now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, they shall hear and Live. John 14. and 19. Because I live, ye shall live also. 3. By returning every Body his own Spirit. Ezek. 37.5. I will cause Breath to enter into you, and ye shall live. The same Body that dies shall rise again. According to the hope of blessed Souls, who after the Vision of God, do yet hope for the Resurrecti∣on of their Bodies, to which they most ardently wish to be reunited. As they, who are represented under the Altar, Revel. 6. and at the Tribunal of Justice, ask vengeance of their Blood, are instantly Cloathed with White Garments, in Token of that bright Flesh, which is to be joyned to their Immortal Spirits. However some have conceived, that the Soul shall be cloathed with a new Body; which if it should be granted, what would the Resurrection be, but a new Cre∣aton? This Doctrine of the Resurrection, is such, that it is too deep for Reason to wade, you must let Faith swim. It is infinitely above Reason to ima∣gine, and we have scarce Faith enough
to believe it. Have an Eye to Christ, rest on the Almighty Power. And so let me add in the next place. 3. An Use of Instruction, and that in two things. First, Never to dispair, 1. Not of the State, should that be as low as Israel, Ezek. 37.11,12. Son of Man, those Bones are the House of Israel, behold, they say our strength is dryed, and our hope is lost; we are cut off for our parts; Therefore Pro∣phecy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, O my people, I will open your Graves, and cause you to come up out of your Graves, and bring you into the Land of Israel. Though things seem to Humane Apprehensi∣on, helpless and hopeless, look up to the Supream Power, who can, beyond all our thoughts, make those who dwell in the Dust, to awake and Sing. This Doctrine speaks good news in that respect. There is Balm in Gile∣ad, and a Physician to heal, and this Physician yet dwelleth in our Hemis∣phere, with Healing under his Wings. Despair not, though it be brought so low as the Disciples, John 21.5. who had no Meat: This Lord can turn
Stones into Bread. Let us all pray, Lord increase our Faith! 2. Despair not of others, who are dead, and have a long time lain in the Grave of Sin. Only speak to and for them; as Ezek. 37.9. Come from the four Winds, O Breath, and breathe upon these Slain, that they may Live. You that have Sick, Dying, yea, Dead Relations, Children, Servants, Neigh∣bours, Let your Bowels yearn over them; Lift up a Prayer for them; the Prayer of Faith may Heal the Sick, and Save a Dead Soul. No better Physick to be given at a Dead Lift, in the most desperate Case, than Prayer. All you that have felt the Disease of Sin, and the Powerful Mercy of Christ, learn to pity others, and hope for their Healing and Quickning. He can turn noisom Dunghils into Mines of Gold, Brands of Hell into Light∣som Stars in his Firmament. 3. Despair not of your selves; though you have no Spiritual Life, but are all over like a Dead Carkass; yet wait at the gate of this great Phy∣sician; there may be a Time of Love come, Ezek. 16.6,8. He works at all hours. You may Reap if you
Faint not. Deus vester est Deus Vi∣vificus. Secondly, be Instructed, to prepare dayly for the generall Resurrection, for the coming of the great day of God, wherein he may give you new Bodies, Immortal, Agile, Incorupti∣ble, Priviledged with Favours, and Gilded with the Bright Splendours of the Body of Christ Jesus. You are hasting towards that Eternal Estate every day. Forsake, Forsake the Love of these sleight Cottages, those poor Ant-hills, which Enthral so many Spirits, devested of those Divine Seeds which bud under Generous and Hea∣venly Breasts. 1. Use the means, and look through them to Christ; still saying, I have a Dead Heart, O Lord, some quick∣ning Grace! Christ is not of more Power then Sympathy. You hath he quickned, who were Dead. 2. Be thankful for Spiritual Life, in Possession or Expectation. In this God hath done more for you, than if he had made you Princes of the Earth. In this, he hath done more for you, than if he had made you Angels. O be thankful! God in Quickning you,
hath done more for you, than if he had given you the World. Let your Hearts and Mouths be filled with Praises. It is a Mercy calls for your highest Praises in the Days of Eternity. THe Second Branch of the Text which Illustrates the Omnipotent Soveraignty of Christ, comes next to be Considered, viz. Calling things that are not, as though they were. An Effect or peculiar Property of the Deity, whereby God (with special Reference to Christ the Son, who ap∣peared to Abraham, and in whm he believing was justified) is described. The words are few, the Sentence short, and hard to be understood: not how it is a ground of Faith; that easily follows; but how , should be in the Divine Understand∣ing , how the God of Truth should Congruously and truely call things that are not, as though they were; this is difficult to conceive. For the Clearing and Opening of it, to the weak Capacity of man, some have and may, provided it be done with Reverence, Sobriety, and
Reference to the Scripture chiefly (for we cannot speak of God, but as he hath spoken of himself) take Oc∣casion to discourse, 1. Of the Infinite Essence, Compre∣hending and Representing all that ever should have being, to the Divine Understanding. 2. Of the Infinite Presence, and drawing together the whole Successi∣on of time, as if present, not Imagi∣narily but really, and Coexisting with all time. I am that I am; i. e. The Absolute Being, the Independent and first Original of all Essences; Jehovah, the Alpha and Omega. But while they have gone about in their own words to bring this Infinite Mystery under mans finite Capacity, they have left it more Obscure. I conceive it safer to be Contented with Scripture Phrases, not as Moulded this or that way by humane Reason, but as they lye in the Text, viz. in Ʋniversalibus, Large and General Ex∣pressions, and not descend to curious Particulars; rather falling under an awful Adoration and Beleif, than an exact Extrance on any such Subject, beyond what we may be assured is Re∣vealed.
This is to be wise to Sobriety: Especially, Considering, First, Our great Apostles Admi∣ration, Rom. 11.33. O the Depth of the Riches of the Wisdom of God! where observe a Difference between Wisdom and Knowledg. Knowledg is of things to come, though Inconvenient and Disallowed; Wisdom of things convenient and approved. As the excellent Dr. Twiss, (Contr. Jackson) hath noted. And also his Imposed Silence, 2 Cor. 12.4. His unspeak∣able words, not Lawful for any to ut∣ter. It is not for you to know — Acts 1. Secondly, The rash and presumptuous Adventure of some School-Divines, who, affecting Novelty and Obscurity, deliver things hard to be understood (if not Impossible to be so) about the Divine Attributes, those scorching and Peircing Beams, that others may fear to hear or read. Such curious Pries there have been into this Ark and Cabinet of Gods Secrets, not measu∣rable by the line of Humane Reason, or fashionable by the Plummet of any Created Understanding. And there∣fore we should still cry out, with that great Doctor of the Gentiles, !
Thirdly, Considering how difficult a Passage it is; Nature helps little, and God hath spoken little of himself. How dangerous is it to Err? Homo sum non Intelligo secreta Dei; Investi∣gare non Audeo; hoc ipsum Temerita∣tis genus est: saith Salvian, Lib. 3. de Guber. Dei. And it was a grave and serious Speech of Seneca, worthy the Consideration of the greatest Divines, Nunquam nos Verecundiores esse debe∣mus, quam de Deo Agitur. It should not seem strange, if strucken with those Rayes which dazle the Eyes of Seraphins, we yeild to his Greatness, and discourse in the Secret Mysteries of the Scripture, with great Modera∣tion, and take heed that neither our Thoughts nor Tongues proceed any further, than the Bounds of Gods word do extend. We should be wil∣ling to be Ignorant, where our great Master would not let us know. And, Nescire velle quae Magister maximus nos scire non vult, Erudita Inscitia est: as Scaliger hath expressed it. To all which I shall add that weighty Con∣sideration of Renowned Calvin, who, Lib. 1. Instit: cap. 13. Sect. 21. Speaks to this Effect, How may the
Mind define the Immeasurable Essence of God unseen? and therefore with Moulin, Haec Perobscura sunt, et iimide et Religiose Tranctanda. I shall therefore in handling this Text before us, do, as Men use to do in great Rivers or deep Waters, keep close to the shoar, and Labour to have firm ground to walk by, both in Ex∣plaining and after in concluding those plain Truths thence arising, most use∣ful for us. For Explication, we may take No∣tice of three things. 1. The Subject, implyed, He; the Messiah, the Mediator. Christ was he that appeared to Abraham; Christ it was in whom he believed. He gave being to things that had no beings in the Creation. He blew the Universe into an Existency by the Breath of his Mouth, and by his Fiat reared the Heaven and Earth with all therein; and he preserveth them in being, and Restoreth them in and by the Resurrection. An Invincible Ar∣gument of Christs Divinity against the Arrians and Servetians, with o∣ther Enemies, who will not that Christ should Reign over them, and will not
Honour him with any personal Exi∣stence, till he was born into the world of the Virgin-Mary; they not being able to bear so Resplendent a Light, have endeavour'd to obscure it by the Fumes of their Brains. 2. The Work, Call. Taken e∣specially three wayes in the Holy Scriptures: And so 1. For the Knowledge of God, Isa. 42.6. I the Lord have called them in Righteousness. Chap. 43.1. Fear not O Jacob, I have Redeemed thee, I have called thee by my Name, , Vo∣cavit, is used in both Texts. And so in the 147 Psal. 4. He telleth the Number of the Stars, he calleth them all by Name. And this, either of things in Act, that have been or shall be; called Scientiam Purae Visionis; or of things Possible; Called Scientiam pro Sim∣licis Intelligentiae, so far as they are knowable. 2. It is taken for the Power of God alling: i. e. Causing not only things hat have no actual Existence, to ap∣ear as being; but giving them be∣ng in time. So, in the Creation he alled for Light, Fiat, and there was
Light; and so of other things; he calleth them into being, by his No∣ble and Divine manner of working, which the Scripture calleth Creation, bringing them from not being to a be∣ing, producing the matter of which they consist, preparing and sitting it, as now it is, Investing it with all those Forms and Admirable Qualities, or which all the Motions of their Nature do depend. And else-where, it i said, he called for Famine and the Sword i. e. he Commanded and Effectuall Caused them, Psal. 105.16. Jer 25.29. 3. It is taken for the Manifestatio of both, in dispensing Means and di¦posing his Creature, according to th Right and Dominion he hath ove them as Creatures. Rom. 8.30. & 9. I will call them my People which were  my People &c. 3. Here is the Effect of this Wor , &c. Things that are  as though they were. Not beings aft a manner, are caused to be. While some understand it of t first, others of the Second, I cannot  see Reason, why we may not unde¦stand it of all. And so they offer to o Consideration,
1. The Omnisciency of Christ Jesus, our Mediatour. 2. The Omnipotency of our God, in whom we believe. First, The Omnisciency of Christ Jesus our Mediatour. He calleth, i. e. by his Knowledge foreseeing all things presented, as if actually existing be∣fore him; not as existing or being in the Divine Nature (as Aquinas held their real existence in Eternity, confuted by Scotus,) except by way of Eminency: but as to exist in time, according to the Will and Wisdom of the Creator, Psal. 139.2. Thou knowest my down-sitting and my up-ri∣sing, thou understandest my Thoughts a far off: and Verse 6. Such Knowledge is too wonderful for me, it is high, I cannot attain t: i. e. his Omnisciency. Unto which add, (lest any should conceive this to be verified of God the Father only) John 21.17. Lord, thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I lov hee, Spoken of Christ. Objected here may be that of the Evanglist, Mrk 13.32. Of that Day and Hour knoweth no man, no not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.
Answ. To which I Answer; This Text hath puzled many, Ancient and Modern; For resolution know, 1. That Christ did not know that day as he was a Creature; neither was it fit for a Creature to know. Though to Christ is granted a Transcendent Knowledge: He had a Created Know∣ledge, answering his sinless Capacity, in his Humane Nature: Concreated, by a Participation of the Divine Vi∣sion; Infused, necessarily following the Hypostatical Union. Yea, the Schoolman hath observed, that Christ had an acquired and experimental Knowledge, daily gotten by the ope∣ration of the active intellect, making species actually intelligible, abstract∣ing them from the Phantasms; Yet as man, he knew not that day. There are two things to be considered in Christ; viz. His Person; and so he is Omnisciet: his Humane Nature, and so he was subject to a Negative ignorance of such things, whereof the Humane Nature was not capable. Totus Christus, was Omniscient; but not Totum Christi; he knew as he was God; he did not know as he was man. Neither is it any dishonour to
Christ, to have such an ignorance imputed to him, since it doth peculi∣arly belong to his Humane Nature. But, 2. We may resolve the Text thus; that it did not appertain to his Office to teach them of that time; So Nosce is put for Docere; 1 Cor. 2.2. I De∣termined to know nothing among you but Christ Jesus and him Crucified. i. e. to Preach any other thing, but Christ; his Name and Grace, his Spirit and Love shall Triumph in my Discourses to you. For without doubt, then Christ knew that day. Now to add more force to our Pen, we will here propound some Enqui∣ries, the resolution of which, will yeild great illustration to this Do∣ctrine. Q. How did Christ know? Answ. Not by discourse, as men and Angels do. We know one thing after another, and one thing by ano∣ther. But the Infinite Understanding of Christ, grasps all things, Simel et Semel, at an Instant, without any Di∣latory Viw or long Debate; by see∣ing the Determination of his own Will; all being present before him,
who is present every where. And that for divers Reasons: 1. Because he had the Idea of all, and the Reason and Ground of all present before him. Though the Knowledge here spoken of, is not so much direct, Intending on the things themselves; as Reflex, by an Act of Intuition on himself, the most clear glass he seeth all things in. 2. Because his Eye was carried from all Eternity, upon and over all; and that by Vertue of the Eter∣nity and Immensity of his being. God is in all things, and therefore knows all things. He is a Sphere of Infinite Greatness and Efficacy, and whatever is besides this Sphere, must necessarily be within it, Encircled and Folded up in it. And hence David proves Gods Omnisciency by his Omnipresence, Psal. 134.2. 3. The Effect doth ever vertually pre-exist in the Efficient cause; either Formally, as in Univocal Causes, or by way of Eminence, as here. All things known by God, are God, in a more Noble Manner than in themselves. Q. 2. How can God know things that are not; for non entis, null est Scientia?
Answ. Of no being simply, neither in Act nor Power, the Rule is true; but those , not Beings, were then in esse Cognito, and should certainly be in esse Formali; He first seeth them in his own Essence, and then blows them into being, by the Breath of his Mouth, by his comman∣ding word. Quest. 3. Whether this do not make something for Equivocation? Answ. Not at all. For, 1. To call things that are not, as though they were, is a Divine Priviledge, men may not do so. 2. It is an Essential Representation, not a Mental Reser∣vation. One thing is not conceived and another called; but things that are not, are called, as if they were, which shall be in time, as they were known and called before time. Objected than it may be, That the Lord foresaw Sin, as if it had been in Act. Answ. Undoubtedly he did; pur∣posing to produce and sustain the Act, and permit the obliquity. Which can∣not reflect on God, as if he were the Author of Sin, in not preventing it; For though Sin be the worst thing in
the World, yet the existence of Sin is not Evil, for then God would not Per∣mit it to be. Prosper and Hilary both, with Renowned Austin, say, The Cause hereof may be unknown to to us, but unjust it cannot it be as God. Which Doctrine offers to us, 1. Matter of Information, in the fol∣lowing particulars. First, of the Independency of the Creator, in producing and disposing of the Creature. Nothing out of God did move him to do any thing to them. True it is, that he knew them in him∣self, in their Causes, and in themselves; not by Species resulting from them, but by Reflection on his own Nature. Extra se non quaerit Lumen ut videat, ipse enim est qui videt & unde videt. He needs not Light from without him∣self to see by, for he it is that seeth, and from himself it is that he seeth; as Bernard expresseth it. Jer. 5. Before I Formed thee in the Womb, I know thee. 2 Tim. 2.19. The Lord knoweth who are his; , No Love, no Election, no foreseen Faith or Work: for then they should have been fore∣seen in God and not in Man. Secondly, of the Necessity of the
Creature, both in respect of Existence and Operation. He calleth those things which are not, as though they were, because of the Necessity and Certainty of their being. Under∣stand this with Reference to the first cause. For if we look to second causes, there are three sorts, viz. Necessary, which cannot but do this and that; as the Fire necessarily burneth, and the Sun shineth. Free, to this or that Act; as the reasonable Creature is. Con∣tingent; beyond Expectation pro∣ducing Effects accordingly: but all known to the first Cause, before they were, as if they were. So that there is no Room nor need for any Scientia Media. Thirdly, we are Informed how this Divine Omniscience is a ground of Faith: viz. On a Three-fold account. 1. As it is known to be infallible; his Priviledge that cannot deceive, nor be deceived. 2. As it is known to be Immutable, subject to no Alteration or Variati∣on, Jam. 1.17. he is described to be withut variableness or Shadow of Change: As the Sun, he Shines always with the same Rayes of Brightness
(Eclipses only excepted;) an At∣tribute that runs through all the rest; his Mercy, Council, Love, are all im∣mutable, his Heart is the same to day and for ever. We may be Changed in our opinions and Estate, but the Di∣vine Nature never Changeth. 3. As it is Incommunicable. Eve∣ry Creature is Finite, and this is In∣finite. The Gods of the Gentiles were often herein challenged and found wanting: The first Angels would have had it; but sunk under the weight of that desire; and Adams Candle aspiring to be a Sun, hath burnt the dimmer ever since. All these laid together, will prove a strong Motive to believe. In the Second Ʋse of this point, is discovered the folly of men, in two things, viz. First, In endeavouring to prevent Gods Omnisciency, by sinning secure∣ly because secretly, and digging deep to hide their Plots. Hear the Lan∣guage of the Prophet, Isa. 24.15,16. We to them that digg deep, to hide their Counsels from the Lord. They think no eye seeth them, not his, who can do nothing but see: How vain!
The Eyes of God are like two Fla∣ming Torches, more resplendent than the Sun it self; none can steal from his Lightning Flashes. Screetch-Owls may find Holes and Nights to keep them from the day, which they can∣not abide, but he that flies from the Face of God, where can he find dark∣ness enough to hide himself? O blind and insensible Fugative from the So∣vereign Essence, in the Region of Nothing, whither wilt thou go, not to find the reproaches of thy Crimes! Be Confident, he that can save from the deadliest extremities, can also see in the darkest obscurities. Secondly, In endeavouring to usurp it; and that, 1. By manifest falshood not only of the Pope and his adherents, defining and concluding things that are not as though they were; but others al∣so, who daringly call their Sins, Gods Temptations; The Woman thou ga∣vest me, &c. And many have laid the Bastards of Heresie to the door of the Sanctuary, and called Diabolical Seductions, Evangelical Revelations; as if the Father of Lights could bring forth the Issues of Death. This
is to usurp the Royal Prerogative of Heaven, and to invade the Lords In∣communicable Property. 2. By Flattery; and that either of our selves or others. Of our selves; calling Carnal Contents, Pleasure, Dissolute Passions, true Mirth; Cove∣tousness, Providence; Vain-Glory, Curiosity; Presumption, Hope; Fa∣ding Creatures, true Riches; against our Knowledge. Solomon calls them , things that are not, in compari∣son of true Riches, Contentment and Duration; for they make to them∣selves Wings and flie away as the Ea∣gle towards Heaven. Of others; es∣pecially the Great and the Rich; for sooner will an hot May want flies, than such want Flatterers, calling them to be what they are not. Such was that Parasite who endeavoured to puff up King Canutus, by telling him that all his Dominions, nay the Seas themselves, were at his Command. And Onuphirus the Popes Biographer, praised Hildebrand, or Gregory the Seventh, for notable Acts and great Vertues, whom Cardinal Pembo true∣ly described to have been a Murthe∣rer, an Adulterer, a Conjurer, every
way as bad as might be. Mark Antho∣ny was a Prince extreamly dissolute, yet was by his Flatterers called, God Bacchus, and he soon came to that shameful impudence, as to have that title engraved on his Statute. Such servile Souls there are, who bind themselves like Fishers Angling Lines, seeing their advantages to depend on impertinent Discourse, and that the false Altars of Worldly Greatness will be served with such Smoke, spare it no more than a man would water in a River. No Age, but has been pestered with such Cattle. Nero's Courtiers would sooth him up for his singing, though it were exceeding ill, with a Quam pulcher Caesar Apollo Augustus! Like the Flatterer in the Fa∣ble, who accomodating himself to the time, gave the Ape many speci∣ous praises, saying, He was a Vermi∣lian Rose, and that those that environ'd him, his Young Ones, were the Leaves; that he was the Sun, and those about him were the Raies; that he was as Valiant as a Lyon, all his off-spring were a Race of Young Lyons. With a multitude among our selves, who call the niggard, Bountiful; the Vo∣luptuous,
Chaste; the Proud, Hum∣ble; the Civil Man, Religious; above their Knowledge; they are not so we see it, neither can we make them so, and therefore should not call them so, Ʋse 3. In the third place, this Do∣ctrine yeilds singular comfort to all the Faithful. Your Saviour, 1. Knows all your enemies to pre∣vent them. He that sits in Heaven, Laughs them to scorn, the Lord will have them in Derision; be they never so cunning and politick; the Di∣vine Providence shut up in a Cloud, Roareth over their heads, and in a moment will overthrow the Moun∣tains of Wind, which the Tyrants of the World raise one upon the o∣ther, and make their silly wisdom appear like an Owl, unfeathered and asham'd at the Raies of Noon-day; though their alitudes may be so ma∣ny Ravishments to dark the Earth. As it was once said of Anthony con∣cerning Augustus, so it may be of Christ and the Enemies of his people, His Geinus goes beyond theirs. 2. He knows all our wants to sup∣ply them; inward, outward, of Soul, Body, for Present, for Future
Cheer up your drooping Spirits, in the Consideration of your Saviour. In him dwelleth all fulness, as he is Mediatour, established and destinated for your Salvation; so that all Perfection, Riches, Grace and Excel∣lencies meet there together, Divinity and Humanity fill'd with all the Qua∣lities and Properties that pertain to them, there concur; which Christ hath not for himself, but for his Peo∣ple; as the Sea hath Water, to Con∣vey unto the Earth, and the great Luminary hath Brightness to Enligh∣ten the Heavens and the Earth, that from it, as from a Common source, might Stream forth into all things all the Flame and Warmth they want. 3. Christ knows all your Sins, to Pardon and Subdue them. He cal∣leth you now, what you are not; Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my Love, and there is no Spot in thee. You shall be, because he will make you so. Your Light shall be without any Shadow, your Beauty without the least Spot to disgrace it. Those Roses that are now in their Blossom, shall be fully blown, and those Stars which are
now Imprisoned in a Cloud, shall be set in a Clear Skie. The Bright Dia∣mond of your Souls, now soiled with Corruption, shall be cleansed; all the Black Spots now fixt there, shall be changed into radiant Lights of Heaven. Comfort one another with these words! Ʋse 4. Lastly, We are hence in∣structed in some few Duties, viz. 1. To shun inward Sins; Hypocrisie, Pride, Vain-Glory, Infidelity, as carefully as outward and more visi∣ble Sins. God is Omniscient, and views the sins of the heart, as well as the sins of the Life; the under Roots as well as the upper Boughs. He sees Faults where men see none. Nay, that which shines to mans eye like a Dia∣mond, is in Gods Ballance a Con∣temptible Worm. It was a wise pra∣ctice, therefore, of that Arabian we read of, who to prevent sin, repre∣sented to himself over his head, an Eye which perpetually enlightned him, an Ear which heard him, and an Hand which measured out all his Deportments and Demeanours. Veri∣ly, the due consideration of Gods Eye, will blunt a thousand and a
thousand Arrows shot against the heart of a resolute Christian. If the exercise thereof, were as familiar to us, as it is effectual; how power∣ful a motive would it be, to cleanse all the impurities of our Intentions and affections, and give us leave to arrive to the top of Perfection! 2. To seek to him for Knowledg. Ignorance is no Branch of his Image who is Omniscient. Let it be the Mother of Popish Devotion, suf∣fer it not so much to be with the Profession of Christs Religion. He giveth wisdom liberally. He descend∣ed into the Country of Darkness, to scatter Knowledg by his brightness, and ceaseth not to give light, and kindle in our hearts many Inspirati∣ons, which are like so many Stars, to conduct us to the Fountain of our Happiness. Hear him promising, All thy Children shall be taught of God. It is his Prerogative to teach Hearts. The Sun enlightens the World, and Christ enlightens Souls. Make it your Prayer, Lord, breathe upon us; breathe thy Spirit into thy Word! You may read the Bible and hear Ser∣mons over and over, but to no pur∣pose,
till the Spirit of Christ Shine in your Hearts; and the more Com∣merce you have with the Divine Es∣sence, the more splendour you shall enjoy. And having obtained, use all to his Glory from whom you receive all. Be faithful Stewards. Like as small Rivers, which pay their Tribute and acknowledgments to the great Ocean whence they came. 3. Prize the Lord Jesus Christ; set an high esteem upon him: why do we Reverence Learned men among our selves, as those eminent Doctors, Reynolds, both former and latter; Perkins, Bolton, Luther, Melancthon, Musculus, Beza, Calvin, Zanchis, Chamier, Camero and others? Among our Adversaries, Lumbard, Aquinas, Durand, Hales, &c. Among the Gen∣tiles, Aristotle, Plutarch, Homer, &c. With other brave Fellows, separated from us, by many Lands and Seas, yea, by Death; and all for their Knowledg; because we have seen a Ray of their wits upon Paper, Beams of their Knowledg, which was but a drop of his Ocean, and a Spark of his Light, who Enlightneth every one that cometh into the World; this
made them admired. If Alexander could say, That he was more Bound to Aristotle his Schoolmaster, than to his Natural Parent; how much more are we Bound unto and should we Prize and Praise our Omniscient Jesus? Secondly, we have here offer'd to our Consideration, The Omnipo∣tency of our God, in whom we Be∣lieve. He calleth; i. e. he Causeth things not only to appear, but also to be in time, as they were willed and seen be∣fore time; This Power is either Absolute; whereof sacred writings say but little, and about which, we are not to en∣quire; or Actual, as Limited by his Will, and Ordered by his Wisdom, to give being, and dispose his Crea∣tures by means, to their several ends. Of which we are now to discourse; giving us two Observations; viz. 1. That our God, in whom Abraham believed, and we should belilve, is Omni∣potent. 2. That the Omnipotency of our God, in whom we should believe, is a firm ground of Faith.
For the former; Our God is Omni∣potent. He can do all things that im∣ply not Imperfection; as to Sin, and deny himself: to Sin, is against his Supremacy; he hath no Superiour a∣gainst whom he might offend; It is against his Natural Sanctity and Om∣nipotency. Or, that imply not a Contradiction; as to be and not to be at the same time, in the same Re∣spect, because that is Repugnant to Entity▪ Thi is true of all the Persons; 1. Of the Father; none ever Acknow∣ledging a God, denying it. So we have it in the Apostles Creed, I believe in God, the Father Almighty. Where, Almighty, is applyed to the Father, Inclusively; as, Lord, or Dominion is appropriated to the Son, not exclu∣ding the Father or the Holy Spirit. Hence it is, that Hereticks have ap∣propriated all the Attributes of Eter∣nity, Omnisciency, Omnipotency, to the Father alone. 2. It is true of the Son. John 1.3. All things were made by him, and with∣out him was nothing made. Which latter Clause, is added for e more Certainty; it being usual with the
Hebrews, thus by Negation to Confirm, what before they have af∣firmed, where they would assure that the thing is so indeed. He is there∣fore stiled, The first and the last, Revel. 1.17. It is a verity that is written with the Rays of a vast number of Divine Witnesses. 3. It is true of the Holy Spirit. Gen. 1.2. The Spirit moved on the Face of the Waters; i. e. he sustained them by the Power of his Sublimity. How∣ever Interpreters have varied here∣about, yet all conclude it to be the Spirit of God, nothing distinct from the Deity, or Infinite Active Power of God. So the Psalmist, 95 Psalm, which our Apostle takes notice of, as spoken not by, but of the Holy Spirit; Hebr. 3.7. The Grounds whereof are two∣fold, 1. The Unity of Nature doth im∣ply, equality of Power; we say, we be∣lieve there are three Subsistences in the Divine Essence, and that each of those Persons, is truely and properly God: and we find such Attributes and works ascribed to the whole Nature of the Deity, to the seve∣ral
Persons Subsisting in that Divine Nature, as do evince their Power to be the same. 2. This Manifestation of power, is opus ad extra, and therefore com∣mon: According to that constant Rule of Credit among all Divines, Opera Trinitatis ad extr sunt indivisa: But especially Attributed to the Second Person here and in most pla∣ces; because that is most benefici∣al to the Church, and is most op∣Posed by Enemies. Gen. 17.1. I am God Almighty, [Elshaddai,] signifying, either Sufficiency, because he is sufficient of himself, as Psalm 16.2. My Goodness extendeth not to thee, &c. He is Infinitely above Crea∣tures; Infinite in Essence and Good∣ness, comprehending within himself all good, and anticipating it to all Eter∣nity with an incomparable Eminen∣cy. Or else, it signifieth, Omnipoten∣cy (for the word will bear both) all things yielding to him, both for their being, order and continuance. Gen. 18.14. Is there any thing too hard for th Lrd? Numb. 23.19. God is not as mn that he should lie, neither the Son of Man, that he should Repent;
hath he said, and shall he not do it? Mat. 19.26. With God all things are pos∣sible. But what need of proof? It is a truth written as with Rayes of the Sun; confirm'd at least 70 times in the Scriptures of God, as some have taken pains to reckon them. Add we may, 1. The Confession and practice of the Saints of God in all Ages; 2 Chron. 20.12. O our God wilt thou not judge them? 2 Chron. 25.9. God hath power to help and to cast down. Flying from their Enemies both inward and out∣ward, to rest upon his Rock of Pow∣er. Rom. 7.25. I thank God through Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 15.57. O Death where is thy Sting! Thanks be to God through Christ. 2. The works of Christ; Curing the Diseased; Mark 5.26,27. Clean∣sing the Temple, Math. 21.12,13. Which Jerom Attributes to his Om∣nipotency; that he so mean, should at∣tempt a matter so considerable, a∣gainst so many proud, insolent per∣sons, arm'd with Authority, and at such a time; and extolls it above rai∣sing of Lazarus from the Dead, Re∣storing
the Blind to sight, and the Lame to their Limbs. This was his Divine Work. Not to omit the mentioning of his Changing Water into Wine; John 27. Thus as the greatness of the Sun is measured by a small Shadow on the Earth, so many times there needs but few words to illustrate a great Vertue. The Reasons are many, I shall chuse out and insist upon two only: 1. The Unitie of Nature common to all the Persons, John 17.22. As we are one. Ʋnum per Ʋnitatem; i. e. by the absolute simplicitie of Nature. Phil. 2.6. Who — Reckoned himself e∣qual with God, in that incomprehen∣sible abundance of Perfection, where∣of the supream Adorable Nature is full; as Life, Goodness, Immensity, Eternity, Holiness, and all other Properties, which it hath in an infal∣lible manner. Now from the purity and Perfection of that Infinite Being, we may thus argue for Omnipotency, viz. That which hath Being and is most distant from Passive Power, being Ens Simplissimum, & Actus purissimus, a
most Simple Being, and a most pure Act, must partake Infinitely of Active Pow∣er; which is Omnipotency, Again; In whom is found the Per∣fection of all things, in him is also found the Perfection of Power: But in Christ is found the Perfection of all things, Emi∣nently, as is already proved, therefore in him, is the Perfection of Power; which is Omnipotency, to which no∣thing can be added. 2. The Equality of Attributes; as is his Knowledge, so is his Will and Power, Psal. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and Earth. Now Knowledg and Power, are according to the Condi∣tion of Nature; Men know and can do something; Angels know and can do more; but God most of all, his Knowledg is Infinite, and so must his Power needs be. The Second Doctrine from hence, now comes to hand, viz. That this is a Principal Ground of Faith. See Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is Impossible to please God; for he that cometh to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
Gen. 17. When God would encou∣rage Abraham, he maketh himself known by the glorious Attribute of his Almighty Power; I am God Al∣sufficient. Math. 8.2. Lord if thou wilt, thou canst make me Clean. There is no such proper Pillar to uphold a falling Spirit, as this of the power of God; No Shade like to this, to¦ward off the strokes of Evil. One Shine of this Attribute in its full Lustre of Glory, is able to dispell in a moment, all the nights of Fear, Doubts, Temptations, which may at any time overspread the Heaven of the Soul, it causeth them utter∣ly to vanish. Here's the Adaman∣tine Bulwark against all Adversary Power. The Devil is Mighty, but not Almighty, as my God and Savi∣our is; was that comforted Luther, that Incarnate Seraphin, and Cham∣pion of Christ. How it is so, will further appear, if we consider, 1. The Difficulty of things offer'd, both for matter and manner. As that all things should be ours again, after they were lost; that the Di∣vine and Humane Nature should be
united; that a Virgin should Con∣ceive and Bear a Son; what great and admirable things are these? Here are matters which the cleerest Understandings of Men and Angels entertain with Amazement, things in a Sphere above Nature, beyond all Humane Disquisition; The deep things of God; the Divine Om∣nipotency can only maintain Faith in the sense of their possibility. 2. His Propriety in and over all. He made all, gave them a Being according to the Idea and Platform presented to the Divine Understan∣ding; and he hath absolute Right to dispose of all, Rom. 9.18. To do with his own as he will. His Power is independent, and Prerogative il∣limited, Psal. 8.6. to be understood of Christ; Thou madest him to have Dominion over the works of thine Hands. Which Absolute Power flow∣eth not from the nature of Commu∣nicative Bounty, in bestowing Gifts, to some more, to others less, and so hath more or less Right over them; for then his Power should be finite and limited, as (Arminians hold, only to cut off the Absolute
Decree, which the Lord past by ver∣tue of his Right) no Creature be∣ing capable of an Infinite measure of goodness: But from the Excellency of his Nature, being Omniscient, Omnipotent, Infinite, Eternal, &c. 3. From the Irresistability of his pow∣er: All things do obey him. There is nothing from Heaven to Hell which boweth not under his Laws. Rom. 9.19. Who hath resisted his Will? Luke 7.7,8. Say the words, and thy Servant shall he Healed. And this is true of Christ, as appears Math 8.27. Even the Winds and the Seas obey him. Xerxes the Persian Monarch, threw Fetters into the Sea, as if he would have Chained the unruly Waves; but to little purpose; but when Christ speaks, The Winds and the Seas shall obey him. By a word he unpins the Wheels and breaks the Axle-Tree of the whole Creation. In short, what∣ever the Divine Unerstanding can Comprehend, so much the Divine Power can Execute. 4. From the Incommunicableness of this Attribute. No Creature is Ca∣pable of being Omnipotent: & quic∣quid recipitur, ad modum Recipientis,
Recipitur. Besides every Creature is Resistable in the Exercise of Natural Qualities. In him we Live and move and have our Being: he Supports, Re∣strains, and orders all. But here we meet with Objections from some, who, Imitating the Sor∣cerers, cast mists upon the Brightest Morning. 1 Object. May not this Omnipotency be Imputed to the Humane Nature of Christ? Answ. By Reason of the Union Hy∣postatical, the Properties of both Na∣tures may be Communicated to the Person, and yet not mutually between the Natures. The Natures were not Changed, nor their Properties Con∣founded, each Retaining after, what was peculiar before Christ suffered and Dyed, but according to his Humani∣ty; Christ was Omniscient and Om∣nipotent, but according to his Deity. 2 Object. Is raised from that Pas∣sage of Christ himself, Math. 28.18. All Power is given me in Heaven and in Earth; which say some, cannot be understood of his Deity, for so he was not Capable of any Addition. Answ. It is spoken of Christ as
Mediator. Omnipotency was given to him for Intercession, and Aplication of his Merits, for the Governing and gathering of his Saints; That all things shall work together for good: so, John 5.22. The Father judgeth no man, but hath Committed all Judgment to the Son; and for other Places of that Nature, they are to be understood, not Simply of Power, but of Authority; accord∣ing to that, 1 Cor. 15.24,25. Then the End shall come, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father, when he shall have put down all Rule and all Authority and Power; for he must Reign till he hath Subdued all his Enemies under his Feet. Which establisheth the former answer. 3. Object. Is it not Communicated to Believers? Answ. Christ hath given very great Power to Believers, in so much as 1. Believers can do all things; but then see whence their bow hath such a back of Steel, viz, in and from Christ, by a derived Power. Christ leaves on such as have received him, some foot∣steps and Impressions of his Omnipo∣tency: for, whereas Divine Power Consists especially in two things viz.
In Gods being able to do all things that are Regularly possible, and his not being able to do any thing Sin∣ful; so, we find some Prints of both upon Christians; I can do all things, saith Saint Paul; And whosoever is born of God cannot Sin, saith Saint John: this I say, is by a derived Power, Communicated to them according to their Capacity. 2. All things are possible to them; i. e. all things as Christ was to do for them, or they receive from him as Mediator; all things are possible to them, not Simply, but Respectively to that Power, unto which all things are Referr'd and Subjected. Well then; to apply the whole. Ʋse 1. First, Diverse Corolaries may be deduced from the whole, by way of Information, viz. 1. That he in whom we believe, Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever, was before all things that now have being, and gave being to all. John 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am. John 1.2. The same was in the Beginning; in the Instant of Creation, therefore also, before the Creation, and there∣fore from Eternity. Indeed Arrius
Corrupts the Greek Text, reading it thus, The Lord Created me in the Be∣ginning; and thence Blasphemously Inferr'd, that Christ was no more than a Creature. But the Scripture saith, He was set up from Everlasting; Prov. 8.23. and he is called, The An∣tient of Days, Dan. 7.9. And as he was before all things, so he gave being to all things; 1 John 3. He was not Idle with the Father (as some Blas∣phemously speak) but by him as a Principal Efficient, co-Agent, the Father and Holy Ghost, all things were made. 2. That all things (Creatures) which we see and know, once were not, and are in the Power of God to be Reduced into nothing; or to be Disposed by him, as he shall please, according to his Absolute Soveraign∣ty. God hath Power over every Created being, and over every part of being; He being Jehovah, that gave being to all and received being from none. He Confirms Scepters and Crowns; he Raiseth Cities, Pro∣vinces and Monarchies; he erects States, preserves Laws, and Travels through-out all Nature without take∣ing
pains; and can as easily Reduce them all to nothing. 3. That there is an exact Confor∣mity between the Decree and the Ex∣ecution. Things that had no being, were called as i they had been, and in time they were, as they were before called. There is no depending Freedom in any Creature: God sustains the Agent, and determins the Action; his Power reacheth over all. 4. That God cannot Sin, for he is Omniscient and cannot err; he is Omnipotent and hath no passive Pow∣er to receive from without, that might change his will. Ever is to be abhor∣red the Blasphemous Doctrine of the Marcionites, Manichees, and Libertines, who would make this Dreadful and Sacred Majesty the Cause of most detestable Errours; yet with as much absurdity as they, who make the Sun Guilty of Darkness, by whom the Heaven is enlightned; and the Sea of Driness, by whom the whole Earth is Moistned. And therefore Conclude against Bellarmin, who Wickedly Imputed to Protestant Di∣vines, that which they Detest with greatest Loathing.
5. That we have the same ground for our Faith as Abraham had, viz. the Omnipotency of Christ, seen in the Creation of the World, and Susten∣tation of all, in bearing with all; in the great Empire and Defence of the Church and Gospel, in the midst of Enemies; in Converting, Pardoning Sin, and Preserving all his House from Apostacy; In all which you have a Marvellous Discovery of his Divine Power, who maketh Light to break out of Darkness, and Traces the Rays of his Glory upon an heap of Dirt, using base and Inferiour Persons and things, for the good of his People. 6. Therefore we should not Finally doubt nor despair of our selves or others, Math. 19.26. With God all things are possible. Rom. 11.32. God is able to Graft them in again. Saint Augustine in his third Epistle to Vo∣lusian, and else-where, give Rules a∣gainst distrustful Reasonings; Tota ratio facti, Potentia Facientis; Conse∣cra Authorem, tolle Dubitationem. We must grant God to be able to do some things, the Reason of which we are not able to Comprehend; the whole Reason of doing, being the
Power of the Doer: it is God that doth them; Consider the Author, and all doubts will cease. Let us Remem∣ber Paul ▪ Mary Magdalen, Masses, and other Monuments of Gods Pow∣er, which hath Crowned Plants with Flowers and Fruits, that were Barren and Accursed; fill'd Desarts and the most Desolate Heaths, with Exquisite and Delicate Trees; which Examples had never come to our Hearing, had it not been for our Encourage∣ment. With these should every Sound Penitent be Revived and Com∣forted. God can turn Noisom Dung∣hills into a Mine of Gold, Brands of Hell into Lightsome Stars, in the highest Firmament; Slaves of Daemons into Angels. Doubt not, Despair not of the Church and State. Ezek. 37.11,12. O my People, I will open your Graves, and cause you to come out of your Graves. What cannot God do, who can Cre∣ate? Nothing can stand before a Cre∣ating Power. He needeth no exist∣ing Matter to work upon, nor Instru∣ments to Work with. O, what a great thing is nothing in the Hand of God!
Ʋse 2. Seondly, this Doctrine sounds sharp reproof against those, 1. Who abuse this Atribute either in opinion or practise. In, Opinion, as they who argue a Posse ad esse, because of the power of God; and Attribute that to it, which im∣plies a Contradiction; as to be a Fi∣nite Body in Substance, and yet Infi∣nite in Presence, to be every where. It is Christs Divine Property to be a many places at once, neither inclu∣sively nor exclusively. If it be said, That the Omnipotency of God may extend the Dimensions of Christs Bo∣dy, that it may at the same time fill Heaven and Earth; it may be easily replied, This is to make Christ a Monster, and to contradict the very Nature of a Created Body. Yet Pa∣pists most confidently obtrude this Principle upon the Word, and by this their Catholick Power, make a Body to be at two places at once; as the Body of Christ in Heaven, and upon a popish Altar at once: Which is a contradiction, and therefore a lye. Let God be true and every man a Lyar. Heaven is said to to receive Christs Body, Acts 3.21. In
Practice; As they, First, who live as if they were Omnipotent. Such there be in the World, who endea∣vour to make their Will a Law, and cause all to fall down before them. Like Jezebel and Sennacharib; confoun∣ding Elements, and raising Stars with the Dust of the Earth, whereby to come to the end of their exhorbitant pretensions; Threatning to hew down Mountains, and Thunder-strike Mor∣tals; supposing all the ample house of Nature to be Created for them. Swal∣lowing the World by Avarice, and wasting it by Riot. And not only so, but according to the improve∣ment of their Cruel Pride, cry not, with the Old Tyrant, for another World to plunder, but attempt the Invasion of the Intelligible World, and commit Rapine upon Souls, ma∣king havock of the Church of God, to which Angels refer but as Mini∣string Spirits; and Lording it over Gods Heritage, which the Apostles besought to be Reconciled to God, and never Commanded them any thing, in their own name, and only such things, for which, they could shew unquestionable Commission. Such as
these set themselves down in the Throne of God, as Maximilian that good Emperour used to say; this being one of those three things, the Divine Power hath reserved to him∣self as his Prerogative, viz. To Create, to Foretel things to come, and to Rule over Consciences. Se∣condly, Living as if they cared not for him that is Omnipotent, indeed despising his Threatnings, slighting his Promises, as if he were able to perform neither. Whence they dare to lift an Arm against the Omnipo∣tent! When as all power in Heaven and in Earth, yea, all Judgment is committed to Christ. He hath Au∣thority to relieve his Saints, to Sen∣tence all his Enemies unto Eternal Flames and Torments; and will make some as bright as Stars, and others like Burning Coals in Hell. O Hear, Consider, Tremble! 2. This Doctrine casteth a sharp Dart of reproof against all such that deny or doubt of it: as those Isra∣elites who said, Can the Lord provide Flesh also? And that Court-Favou∣rite, 2 Kings 7.2. Who, when the Prophet Elisha, by the Command of
God, foretold the great Plenty of Samaria, dared to say, If the Lord open the Windows of Heaven, can these things be? Such unbelieving hearts are among us to this day. Can the Lord do this or that? Is he able to accom∣plish what he hath promised, can he Heal my Backslidings, pardon my Sins, and save my Soul? As if the Lord Jehovah, lived after the rate of Creatures. This is to reproach the Holy One of Israel. 3. Against such as rely altogether on the Power of God, without the use of Means. As the former sort Reproach God, so these Tempt God. The Lord could indeed Enlighten us without the Sun, and afford us Fruit without the Earth; but he will have the Creature Operate. The very Heathen could say, Admota manu, In∣vocanda est Minerva; and the Sage Greek, Rebuked the foolish Carter, who, when his Waggon stuck in the Mud, Cryed to God, but never put his hand to help himself: Meanes must be used. Though men live not by Bread alone, but by the word of Gods Blessing proceeding out of his Mouth, yet that word is Annexed to Bread,
and not to Stones: and that man should not Trust but Tempt God, who would have Stones turned into Bread, because God hath Power so to do. And if God have provided stairs it is not Faith but Fury, not Confidence but Madness to go down a Precipice. Second Means must be used in Obedi∣ence to Gods order, though not in Confidence of their help; the Creature must be the Object of our Dilligence, but God only the Object of our Trust. Ʋse 3. Thirdly, This Doctrine, as it is sufficient to terrify the Wicked, so it is to give occasion of Confidence to the Faithful; since it hath an Eter∣nal alliance with him that governs the World. Read your matchless Con∣solation, in the following particulars. 1. Against Sin, Satan and all E∣nemies of the Church, that Christ is Omnipotent, 2 Chron. 20.15. In the Words of King Jehosophat to the Peo∣ple of Judah, Thus saith the Lord to you, Be not afraid or dismayed because of this great Multitude, for the Battel is not yours but Gods. 2 Chron. 32.7,8. Hezekiah said to the People, Be strong and Couragious, be not Afraid or Dis∣mayed, for the Kings of Assyria, nor for
the Multitude that is with them, for they are more with us than with them. What∣ever Power or Counsel shall be set up against Heaven, shall not succeed a∣gainst the design of Heaven. The vast Numbers of men, trouble him no more, than those Millions of Waves in the Sea, are a trouble to that great Ocean. All Nations before him, are but as one drop of the Dew. He Causeth whole Countries to tremble under the Force of his Word, as under Lightning Arrows; and is attired with the Conquest and Trophies of Souls. O the Wonders of God! He Causeth the Arrows of those that In∣vade his Kingdom, to Return against them that shot them; as in Julian's Case was apparent; which we only mention. Though he thought by the help of his false Gods, to Command the Waves of the Sea, and to walk upon the Stars, yet was he buried in Execration and Horrours. And as it is in Temporals, so it is in Spirituals. He can subdue the strongest Corruptions, Break the hardest Heart, relieve the most Faint∣ing Graces. Let all Christs People learn to look up, and then you will,
1. Patiently suffer and wait. He is Omniscient and Omnipotent; He knows all and can relieve all. 2. You will learn to rest upon him, Psalm 37.3. Trust in the Lord and do good, so shalt thou dwell in the Land. You will not trust in men and frame to your selves an arm of Straw; but confide in him, who with the Fingers of his Power sustains the whole Globe of the Earth. You will not Adore the Favours of men, which are like the Rainbow in Heaven, which ha∣ving made shew of many Splendours and varied Paintings, leaves nothing but Water and Morter. You will then no more build Fortunes on Foun∣dations of Silver, upon a Frail man, who beareth all the Fingers of Vani∣ty. God is a Wall of Brass about his people. Lo I am with you to the end of the World! In all Conditions. If Daniel be in the Lyons Den, he shall be visited by God, and the Lyons change their Nature, for re∣gard to him. If the three worthiest be cast into the Fiery Furnace, Ne∣buchadnezzars Hell, they shall walk entire, assisted by the Angel of God, as in a Meadow Enameld over with
Flowers: And now, when, one would have thought, that whole Religion had been dead, the Divine Power Writes her Praises in Characters of Fire. Whoever forsakes the Lords People, he will not forsake them. He is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. 2. This Doctrine speaks singular Comfort against losses, of Country, Friends, Estate, Liberty, and all out∣ward Comforts; if you be in Cove∣nant with him that is Omnipotent. This was Abrahams Case, Gen. 17 1. Fear not Abraham, I am thy Shield; I am God Almighty, or All-sufficient; before whom nothing can stand when he will accomplish his Word. This was a bottom of great Confidence to Abraham, as we are in∣formed, Rom. 4.29. Being fully perswa∣ded, &c. Where ever God is engaged by his Word, his Power is especially to be eyed. Persons are apt to ask, How can these things be? It is im∣possible it should be so and so to us; but he is able, Omnipotent. It is he that made Josephs Abasements to be his Advancements; and that turn'd Ba∣laams Curse into a Blessing. He can
bring Meat out of the Eater, and Sweet out of the Strong, and cause Grapes to be gathered of Thorns, and Figs from Thistles, make Friends of Enemies, your Wound your Cure, your Affli∣ction, your Consolation. Nay, your Weakness, your Strength. So that as the same Water is sowre in the juice of a Figtree, is sweet in the fruit; so the Troubles which in their bark are but sowre and unpleasing, shall not∣withstanding in the fruit of them be exceeding sweet. Ʋse 4. Lastly, Be ye Instructed to be followers of Abraham, in this Win∣terly Age of the World: to build on this Foundation, in your Obedience both Active and Passive. 1. Be perswaded of this Truth, Measure not God by the Ell of man, Cloath him not in your Fashion. Hold not that Impossible to the Di∣vinity, what your weak Understand∣ing cannot Apprehend. Be perswaded, First, That he is able to cast down the Strongest and Proudest Enemies of his Kingdom: Isa. 37.29. Because thy Rage against me and thy Tumult is come up into mine Ears, therefore will I put mine Hook into thy Nose, and my
Bridle in thy Lips, &c. When the Rage and Tumult of Christs Adversaries is highest, then will he get himself most Glory, by putting a Hook in their Nostrils, and turning them as he pleaseth. Can any thing be too hard for God? this God of Power, who Darkneth the Air with Tempests, makes Clouds to pour down in Deluges, and Swallows up the Fleets of petty Pharo's? He who flyeth upon wings of the Wind, over the Curling Waters of the Sea, Inflaming Light∣nings, and makes Blood and Scorpi∣ons to Rain on the Rebels of the Earth? Secondly, That he is able to Raise out of the lowest Condition. Wit∣ness Job on the Dunghill, Israel in Egypt, the Christians of the Primi∣tive Church, and all along, whence they were ready to cry out, There is no Hope. His Power and Essence walk Hand in Hand; in so much, as Pow∣er in God is nothing else but the Ef∣fective Essence of God. Object. We all believe Gods Power, but doubt of his Will. Answ. All do not believe his Pow∣er. The unregenerate man believes
not at all. All unbelief doth se∣cretly question the Power of God. And Renewed men believe not Fully. Things past and present, all can be∣lieve, because they are seen, but things promised, because they Transcend the Course of natural Causes, and the Contrivances and Projects which they forecast, they often Flag and Falter a∣bout them. For, 1. They limit him in their thoughts, they will have such and such Graces, so much in the use of Means, and such Means, those of their own Choice, rather than others; whereas God is an Independing Agent, and works where, when, and as he will. As God is Omnipotent to Command Supplies for any help, so he is Absolute to Chuse what Means he please∣eth, and his Wisdom shall pitch upon. 2. They Determine and often Con∣clude against themselves, and rashly too, and against their present Con∣dition; being brought to some extre∣mity, they drew up desperate Con∣clusions against Mercy it self, saying, The Lord will be gracious no more; I shall surely fall by the strength of this
Corruption and that Temptation. Mrs. Honywoods Case is famous; who confidently affirm'd, she should be Damn'd, as sure as that Glass would break, that she threw against the wall. And David in his haste said, I am cut off from before thine Eyes. If they are advanced, then they shall never be cast down; David also in such a Case could say, My Mountain shall never be moved: good News lifts them up, and ill News casts them down. It argueth a great Defect, in the un∣certainty of the heart with God, who is both powerful and willing. 2. Make use of this Doctrine and Truth delivered about Christs Omni∣potency, these three ways, viz. First, in your Faith to believe his Word. Prophecies shall be accom∣plished, Promises be fulfilled. Anti-Christ shall fall. Psalm 2.7. Thou shalt break, them with a Rod of Iron, &c. Ezek. 24.14. I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass. Accordingly when the Seven Angels appeared with the seven last Plagues, they that stood on the Sea of Glass, said in their Song, Great and Marvellous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty, &c. And when
the third of them poured out his Vi∣ol upon the Rivers of Water, an Angel of the Altar said, Even so Lord God Almighty, &c. So that all who wish well to Sion, make full account, that in due time the Mountain of the Lord shall be set upon the top of all Mountains, because it hath been pro∣mised of old, and be confident, as it is expressed in 2 Thess. 2.8. That the wicked one shall be consumed by the Breath of his Mouth, &c. Because this Commination standeth upon the file in Holy Scripture, and is not yet verified. Though God do not allways fulfill his Threatnings, but on Re∣pentance revoke them; yet he al∣wayes fulfills his Promises to them that fear him and hope in his Mer∣cy. Secondly, in your Prayers, to Crave his Aid and Assistance. Whatever ye ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Let men be never so prone, the Carnal Appetite uniting with a probable Object, being able of it self no more to Resist, than a Stone can from Descending, or the Adamant from Drawing, yet the Lord can Re∣strain, Renew, do away all old things,
and make all to become New. To whome shall we go? Thou hast the words of Eternal Life. From his eyes alone, are darted Rayes of most Powerful Compassions. Thirdly, In your Patience under any of his Rods, and Diseases Natu∣ral, Spiritual, Political. Ephes. 3.20. He is able to do abundantly above all, what we are able to ask or think. It is a tried Case, Psal. 3.6. I will not be afraid of ten Thousands of People that have set themselves against me round about. O say, Fie upon Despair and minds Affliction! Learn in all things that appertain to you, speedily and Effectually to fix your selves on the Will of the Omnipotent. Continu∣ally say, God seeth this Affair, since nothing escapeth the Quickness of his Eye. Expect but a while, the Trouble is but a Flying Cloud, and God will do all for the best. Thus did Abraham in the Text; Above Hope he believed in Hope, because God quick∣neth the Dead, and calleth things that are not, as though they were.
Vers. 18. Who against Hope, Believed in Hope. — THese words Contain a lively De∣scription of Abrahams Faith, drawn from the Internal Form, it was , A Phrase Dif∣ficult to be understood, but most aptly serves to shew the Difficulty of believing. Some turn the word  by Praeter, besides hope; others, by Supra, above Hope; a third sort, by Absque, without. All may be true, but not reach so fully Home, neither to the Word nor Scope of the A∣postle. Our last Translation there∣fore, following many, both Antient and Modern Divines, Reads it, Against; and so I find some Refer∣ing it, 1. To the time of Abrahams Faith; in the beginning of his Age he had hope, but this was against that. In the middle of his Age he complain'd, as if there were no hope; Gen. 15.2. Lord what wilt thou give me, since I go childless? But this was after that. 2. Others refer it to the kinds of
hope, or degrees of one and the same hope; whom I rather choose to follow. First, understand it was spoken of two Kinds of Hope; one na∣tural, when Reason apprehends Grounds why such a thing may be; and this is proportionably common to men with Beasts. Another Di∣vine; when a man waits for that he can see no ground in himself, nor reason for. Abraham was against the first, and in the second. Secondly, Others take it for one and the sme hope, but in different degrees, It was weak and doubtful in the beginning but strong and firm in the end. Faith and Hope (two individual companions; Hope springing from Faith, as the Stream from the Fountain, or the Daughter from the Mother) meet with many oppositions, but prove victorious in the end. Yeilding us three things Right Worthy of Observation, viz. 1. The Connexion of these two Theo∣logical Graces, Believing in Hope. Rom. 5.2. By whom also we have Ac∣cess by Faith into this race wherein we stand, and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of
God. 1 Pet. 1.21. By whom we do believe in God that raised him from the Dead and gave him Glory, that your [Faith and Hope] might be in God. The Sun and the Beams go together, and so do Faith and Hpe. The Reasons are, 1. They are in∣fused at once, when the Spirit is given to the Elect, as they are capa∣ble of it, before, in, or after Bap∣tism. What they say of the Cardi∣nal Vertues, Sut inter se connxae, they are chain'd together, may be also sid of the Graces of Gods Spi∣rit, who plnts an habit of all the Graces in the Heart. The New Crea∣ture hath ll the Parts and Lineaments, a mixture of all the Humours. 2. From the order and maner of Working; o begette h stirreth up and manifest  it self by anoher. Rom. 5 3,4. And not only so, but we Glory in Tribulations also, knowing that Tribulion workth Patience; and Patience, Experience; and Exeperi∣ence, Hp; &c. Faith there is a Mother cended with her Daughters. Rom. 15 13. The God of Hope fill you w th ll Joy and Peace in believ∣ing, that you may abound in Hope. 1 Cor.
13.7. Charity believeth all things, Hopeth all things, &c. Heb. 12.1. Faith is the Substance of things not seen. Faith lights the Lamp to hope, as the Fire of the Altar lighted the Lamps of the Sanctuary. 2. We are hence to observe, the Difficulty of believing; it is against Hope. Math. 19.13. a Rich man can hardly Enter into the Kingdom of God. This appears divers wayes; viz. 1. From the Efficient necessarily required to work Faith in the Heart. Ephes. 1.19. It is called the exceed∣ing greatness of his Power to us-ward who believe. A Difficult Work re∣quires a great Power to accomplish it. Man, as Clem. Alexandrinus ob∣serves, is Gods Harp; the Harp cannot sound unless it be touch∣ed with the finger, neither can the Heart of man sound forth any Graci∣ous Harmony, till it be touched by the Finger of Gods Spirit; Sin having disorder'd the Strings of that Harmo∣nious Instrument, put it out of Tune, and mar'd its Musick, and there is nothing but Jarring; and so it con∣tinues, till that great Musician, who
tunes the whole World and makes all things keep time and measure, set this Instrument in Tune again. 2. From the Paucity of Believers. Isa 58.1. Who hath believed our Re∣port? &c. Luke 18.8. When the Son of man cometh, shall he find Faith on the Earth? Among the Millions at Rome, there were but few Senators; and among the swarms of People in the World, there are but few Beleiv∣ers. In themselves, indeed Conside∣red, they are many, as the Stars which adorn the Azure Firmament, as the Sands on the Sea shore for Multitude; but Comparatively, they are very few. As in the Field there are more Weeds than sweet Flowers, and in the Earth more Dross than Gold; Thus it is here. The Trees of Righteousness are thinly Planted in the Worlds Orchard. There are but few Birds of Paradise, to the Birds of Prey: Notwithstanding all the Means of Grace, Preaching, Exhorting, Reading, &c. few Believers. 3. From the many Enemies of Faith, and other Impediments; There is Satan, Luke 22.31. Satan hath de∣sired to winow you as Wheat, but I have
prayed, that thy Faith fail not. This is the main thing he aims at, This he Assaults, endeavouring to blind-fold the Eye of Judgment; to allure the Will and Affections after Toys, Plea∣sure, Profits and worldly Honours: perswading sometime to presume, other-while driving to Despair. Thus he sifts and Winnows poor Souls, to keep them in Unbelief, or Misbeleif. There is the World of Ʋnregenerate men, as the Scribes and Pharisees, watching to catch our Sa∣viour that they might accuse him; Concluding, if any man did Confess Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue, John 9.22. Yea, for a time, Paul, a Chosen Vessel, was u∣sed as an Instrument that way; Acts 28.23. Concerning this Sect, it is spo∣ken against every where. A great Dis∣couragement. Yea, our own Natural Abilities, which are Antipodes to Grace; Rom. 1.22. Professing them∣selves wise, they became Fools. 1 Cor. 1.22. The Jews Require a Sign, the Greeks seek after Wisdom; not that which cometh from above; by Wisdom they could not come to the Knowledg of God, but proved most Vain and
Corrupt, when they endeavoured to be most Exact. So that we may Conclude with the Apostle, Ephes. 6.10,11. &c. Finally my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might; put on the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against all the Wiles of the Devil; For we wrestle not with Flesh and Blood, &c. 2. We observe hence, The growth, increase, and Final Victory of True Grace. Against Hope he believed in Hope. Math. 13.32. The Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a Grain, and to Leaven that leaveneth the whole Lump. Grace is of a spreading nature, it swells it self into the whole man, and makes the Soul rise as high as Heaven. Grace lies not in the Heart, as a Stone in the Earth, but puts it self forth in vigorous Actings. To this refers that exhortation, 2 Pet. 3.17. Fall not from your Stedfastness, but grow in Grace, &c. The first appearance of it on the Soul, may be but as the Wings of the Morning, spreading themselves upon the Mountains, yet it is still ri∣sing higher and higher upon it, Cha∣sing
away all filthy Mists and Vapours of Sin, till it arrive to its Meridian height; such is the strength and force of Divinity in it. Though at first, when it enters on the Soul, it may seem to be sowen in weakness, yet it still raiseh it self in Power: As Christ was in his Bodily appearance, still increasing in Widom and Knowledg, and Favour with God and Man, till he was perfected with Glory; so is he also in his Gracious Appearance in his Saints, who shall go from strength to strength, till they appear before God in Sion. The Reasons hereof are taken, 1. From the Principle or Fountain whence Grace Floweth; And that is, Christ and his Spirit; of Infinite Va∣lue and irresistable Efficacy; so that unless Christ be overcome, Grace cannot be overcome. Grace being a Creature, is in its own nature pe∣rishing (for ours is no better Coin than Adams) but in Christs Keep∣ing it can never perish. The Saints Graces of themselves, like Glass, may break, but being held in the Hand of Christ, they can never be broken; 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept by
the Power of God through Faish unto Salvation. The small Mustard-Seed shall not be killed, the little Spark of Fire shall not be quenched; there is an overflowing Power to draw them forth and perfect them. Where-ever the frame of Grace is begun, it shall be brought forth to a compleatness, and Christs Kingdom in that Soul shall be victorious over all opposi∣tion of Corruption. 2. From the Nature of the Oppo∣sers of Grace: They are finite, and mortally Wounded. Our Lord led Captivity Captive, Heb. 2.14. And through Death hath Destroyed him who hath the Power of Death. So that up∣on serious Consideration, I may say to all the Faithful, as Elisha sometime spake, 2 Kings 6.16. Fear not, for they that are with you are more than they with them. Though inward Cor∣ruption and outward Enemies be Nu∣merous and strong, yet they shall not Finally prosper. Where Christ pro∣motes his Kingdom, it is so establish∣ed, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Assaulted it may be, but Conquered it can never be. As it is said of the old Romans, they
lost some Battels, but never lost a war. Christians may have some Foils, but they shall be finally Victorious. Ʋse 1. In the Application here∣of, I shall endeavour a little further to Discover the Nature of this Grace of Hope, &c. 1. By way of Information; the En∣quiry will be, First, What it is? Answ. It is a Divine Vertue, In∣fused by the Spirit into the Understan∣dings and Wills of Actual Members of the Militant Church, whereby they certainly and patiently wait for those good things God hath promised, Rom. 8.24,25. We are saved by Hope; but Hope that is seen is no Hope; for what a man sees, why doth he yet hope for? but if we hope for that we see not, then we do with Patience wait for it. In which Description we have ex∣prest or Implyed, four things: 1. The Principal Author, The Spi∣rit of God; 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his Abundant mercy hath Begotten us again unto a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead.
2. The Subject inclusive; partly the Understanding, partly the Will; the one Informed, the other perswa∣ded to expect. 3. The Object about which it is Imployed; either Formal; which is God alone; his Power, Truth and Help to obtain the promised Good: or Material; and that is Glory, con∣sidered three wayes, viz. First, of the Soul, which is Grace, and is the Object of Hope, either in the Pre∣paratives, whilst the Lord is Dis∣posing the Subject for Grace; Or, in Regard of a Fuller Measure of De∣grees thereof; it not being with the Trees of Righteousness, as it was with the Trees of Paradise, made perfect at once. Secondly of the Bo∣dy; and so all the good things that a member of the Church Militant is capable of, are a Secondary Object of Hope. Thirdly, the Glory of both, which is perfect Beatitude in the Heavenly Kingdom; as the end whereunto all other means lead the Elect. 4. The Conditions of this Materi∣al Object, which Aquinas describes to be,
Good; Hope looks at some good; so it differs from Fear, whichlooks at Evil. Future Good; so that the Saints in Heaven, have no need nor use of it: their Expectation is drowned in Fruition. Difficult, Hope looks on, and con∣siders upon one side Pearls, which yet are in the shell; and on the other side Roses; which yet it may enjoy with some Labour. Such was Abrahams Hope, that he should be the Father of such a Poste∣rity, being as it were Dead; that he should enjoy a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; yet he was to suffer Fa∣mine, and wait for it forty years. And Lastly, Possible; So there is no Hope in the Damned. It is in those on this side the Grave, quickned by the Living Spirit of God. Though the things they hope for are hard to come by, yet they are possible, and this is like Cork to the Net, keeps the heart from sinking into Dispair; it being the Balm of all Grief, the Coffin of Fear, and Cradle of Patience. Secondly, What are opposites of this Grace?
Answ. Two, 1. Presumption; the Unbeliever hopes without ground, and will be invincibly followed by an ill success of his pretensions. The Rayes of Abrahams Hope were groun∣ded on a good Title; but men of a∣nother Stamp act otherwise; their Hope is an Imposture, a Golden Dream. Like a dying mans Will, that hath neither Seal nor Witness to it: Therein he bequeaths such and such Lands and Legacies to one and to a∣nother: but the Will being thus left naked, it signifies little: Such is the hope of a wicked man; it promi∣seth him great matters, that all in the Covenant of Grace is his, Christ and Heaven; but alas, all is a meer Delusion, a Presumption of his own Heart. 2. Despair; not Legal, which was in Abraham, and others; But Evan∣gelical, notwithstanding all ground of Hope. So Abraham did not: Dis∣pair looks on things through black Spectacles, and gives all for lost; Hope doth the contrary. Q How is it possible to hope against Hope? Answ. 1. Because of the Power of
Christ, upon which the Soul doth in great Straits, rowl it self. Whatever Lets and Impediments do arise, be∣tween the Promise and the fulfilling of it; though they be as high as Mountains, and as the Gates of Hell, yet the Believer can by Faith look upon them all but as Difficulties which cannot check the Power of Christ, but only Magnifie it. For, as jealous Thoughts of the Divine Arm, or fear that it may be encoun∣tred with some insuperable oppositi∣on, makes the Hope of Promised Good, to be weak and uncertain, so the faithful and serious consideration of Gods Power, a resting upon it, produceth Hope against Hope, it turns every Valley of Achor into a door of Hope, administers Manna in the Wil∣derness, and draws water out of the Rock, brings light out of darkness, comfort out of every Tryal. Thus Miconius wrote to Calvin upon view of the Churches Enemies, reflecting upon the Power of Christ; Gaudeo quod Christus Dominus est, alioquin totus Desperassem. I am Glad that Christ Reigns, otherwise I should ut∣terly despair. So the Believer in the
midst of Straits, rejoyceth in the Power of Christ, who lives and Reigns for ever and ever! 2. The Spirit of Christ inwardly works and nourisheth some Sparks of Hope always in the Hearts of his people. Thus it was with Job, Da∣vid, Paul, and a vast number of o∣ther faithful Souls, who sparkling with the lightning Rays of Hope, have lift up their Palms in the midst of Hazzards, and Gain'd Heaven by Violence, still laying the degrees of their Honour in the depth of suf∣fering. This, like an Anchor, holds the Ship of the Soul in her greatest Storms, and like an Helmet keeps off the Blows of the Sword or Ar∣rows from entring, 1 Thessal. 5.8. Let us who are of the day, be sober, putting on the Breast-Plate of Faith and Love, and for an Helmet the Hope of Salvation. In time of publick Ca∣lamities, the Righteous have Hope. Joel 3.16. The Lord will roar out of Zion, the Heaven and Earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the Hope of his People. So that if all outward hope be taken away, their hope in God is not taken away. Upon
this account it was, that the Jews being Prisoners in Babylon, are called Prisoners of Hope, Zech. 9.10. If Hea∣ven and Earth be ready to come to∣gether, yet through the strength of the Divine Spirit working in their Hearts, Believers have Hope; which as a Bow in the Heavens all furnished with Emeralds, never loseth it force. 3. Their former Experiences are a Foundation of Hope against Hope. Rom. 5.4. — And Experience, Hope. Hos. 2.5. I will give the Val∣ley of Achor for a door of Hope. This Valley of Achor (so called from A∣chans Sacriledge, to deter men from Sin,) some think to be the same with Engeddi, mentioned so often in the Canticles; however, both are neer to Jericho, and in it, they tast∣ed the first Fruits of Canaan, as an earnest of the rest: in it they saw abundance of Plenty, and were De∣lighted and Refreshed therewith: all that the Lord did then for his People, and now saith, he will give it to the Church, for a door of Hope. A Be∣liever brings in a Catalogue of Ex∣periences; Psal. 119.65. Thou hast dealt well with thy Servant! In how
many Cases hath he had Experience of God? when Sin and Temptation have been strong, he hath come in with Auxiliary Forces, and his Grace hath proved sufficient. When the poor Soul hath been even sinking un∣der Fear, God hath recovered him out of the Quick-Sands, and lifted his head above the deep Water. Psal. 33. O Lord thou art my Glory and the lifter up of my Head: When David was in the Mouth of Danger, the Lord delivered him. I was pluckt out of the Mouth of the Lyon; so Saint Paul. The Believer hath many Ex∣periences and these beget Hope. Thou hast and wilt Deliver, saith Experi∣mental David. 4. By looking on things, not as they are at present, or in their own pow∣er, but as they shall be by the Lords promise. Surely saith the poor Be∣liever, He is faithful that hath promi∣sed: As he is able to fulfil the least Iota, of whatever he hath spoken, so he is infallible in what he promi∣seth. As no impediment can arise to hinder his Power, so no contingency can fall out to alter his Will; all his Promises being in Christ Jesus yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.
These and such like Meditations serve to uphold and keep Believers from being injurious to God, or them∣selves, and to believe in Hope against Hope. Ʋse 2. This Doctrine administers incomparable Comfort; whosoever is Christs, is enabled to believe in Hope against Hope. When Comfort can neither be seen, felt nor appre∣hended, when Fears and Distresses are on every side, and all hope of safe∣ty is taken away, when nature affords no ground of Hope, or en∣couragement to expect the fulfilling of a Promise, but suggesting many posing arguments to impede and gainsay the Truths of it, and to make Faith as feeble as their Bodies, when old and Crazy; then to hope against Hope. 1. That the Church shall be raised and preserved from so many Enemies, is against Hope. 2 Chron. 20.12. O our God, wilt thou not judg us? for we have no Might against this great Com∣pany that cometh against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. 2. That a Wound shall be Healed;
It is against Hope. Prov. 18.14. A Wounded Spirit who can bear? 3. That many and strong Lusts shall be vanquished and subdued; Rom. 7.24. O Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me, from this Body of Sin and Death! 4. That an impure Soul shall be prepared for and received into Hea∣ven; it is against hope; yet see Isa. 1.18. Come let us reason together, saith the Lord, though your Sins be as Red as Crimson, I will make them white as Snow. — To day shalt thou be with me in Paradice. Oh, strive for this Heavenly Hope. Q. How may it be Attained? A. As other Graces are wrought, so is this. It is the work of God; wherefore he is called, The God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. He is the first Planter, the Promoter and Finisher of Grace. God is called the Father of Lights, and he must light up this Candle in your Souls. More particularly, it is obtained, 1. By Experience, Rom. 5.4. as David argued, 1 Sam. 17.37. And Holy Paul, 2 Cor. 1.20. Experience breeds Confidence. Thou hast, thou shalt,
is the ordinary argument used by the Psalmist. And so the Church com∣forted her self, and Nourisheth her Hope, Lament. 3.21,24. This I Recalled to mind, therefore I hope in thee. And, The Lord is my Portion, saith my Soul, therefore will I Hope in him. The observation of Gods Merciful Acts of Providence to his Church in general, as to any of his People in particular, is the way to kindle Hope. 2. By Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures. Rom. 15.4. As the Blood and Spirits are con∣veyed by the Veins and Arteries, so is the Spirit of God by the Word and Promise, helping the Soul to lay hold on Christ by Faith, which is a Grace, as of Union, so of Establish∣ment. Q. How may it be known where it is? Answ. 1. By the Object thereof, God in Christ, things Above; not Means, not Creatures, principally or Terminatively. A man of such hope, dares not pluck off the Crown from the head of Free Grace, or snatch it out of the hand of Divine Power, to set it on the head of any Creature; But he makes God his hope. Thus is Abrahams Faith described.
2. By the manner of working. First, it begets a Care and Love to Purity. 1 John 3.3. He that hath this Hope, Purifieth himself even as he is Pure. As Lightning is to the Air, such is Hope to the Soul; It purifieth the Soul, after an high Strain, even as God is pure; Secundum speciem, though not ad gradum; i. e. In kind and Quality; though not in Act, yet in desire and affection. Hope purgeth the Conscience from dead works, to serve the Living and True God. By it the Soul draws nigh to God, and comes to have a sight and view of him, and is thereby assimulated to him. Pro∣portionable to our Faith, so is our Holiness, and according to our ex∣pectations will be our Conversations. Secondly, It quickens to Duty, is a Whetstone to Industry. It is Hope that carries the Ship to Sea, and ploughs the Curled Ocean: It is Hope that weilds the Souldiers Weapon, and steels his Helmet: It is Hope that feeds the Sower, even when he seems to cast away his Seed; very Tears are dropt in hope; and so Mournful Souls are led along the milky way, to the Eternal Father. Hope teacheth
men to cast Bread upon the waters, where it may be fed and afterward restored. Thus Divine Hope is active in its influence, is as Wind to the Sails, Wheels to the Chariot, and wings to the Bird; It makes active in Religion, To Run the way of Gods Commandments, and never ceaseth, till its object be obtained. The Furnace shall not terri∣fie a mans hope in Christ: As fire, it is sparkling and Flaming: Though the Winds blow, the Rain fall and Rage, yet Hope seated in the Heart of a Believer, as on a Rock, grows up a∣gainst Hope, and so perseveres in ex∣pectation, till Charity, that circling endless thing, hath perfected its wings to make its Flight to the Eternal Ci∣ty of Repose, passing the Vail into the Tabernacle of the Sanctuary, where JESƲS the Forerunner hath made his Entry, for the Salvation of his Faithful Ones. Glory be to God in the Highest!
The Justice of GOD ASSERTED, IN Seeming Contrariant Providences: And Vindicated from the Cavils of Corrupt Men under them. Psal. 145.17. The Lord is holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his works. Rev. 153. Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. London: Printed for Benj. Alsop, at the Angel and Bible in the Poultrey; and are to be sold by James Cowsey, Bookseller in Exeter. 1682.
THE JUSTICE of GOD ASSERTED, In Seeming Contrariant PROVIDENCES. Job 34.17. — Wilt thou Condemn him that is most just? JOB's Great Afflictions make a great noise in the world; they Sounded so far, as his Friends at a great Distance from him, hear of them; whether by the Ministry of good or bad Angels, or of neither, it Skills not. Ill News is swift of Foot, saith the Greek Proverb , and like ill weather, which comes ere it be sent for. The Sins and
Mscries of Good People are much talk∣ed of, and soon bruited abroad. This brings Jobs Friends out of a Desire and Design to Condole with and Com∣fort him, (the Character of true Friendship, which is suited to a day of Adversity,) though it fell out other∣wise; for they tormented him, well nigh as much as Satan himself, though it were of Ignorance and Unwitting∣ly, rather than of ill will or fore-thought Malice. Eliphaz the Tema∣nite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; all likely Idume∣ans, and men much esteemed for wis∣dom, and Godliness; as is manifest in their several Disputations and Dis∣courses: in which they admonish him to Repent; assuring him, that he could be no less than a gross Sinner, and Hypocrite, because so grievously Afflicted, (a great Mistake in them; and usully the Reproach of the world upon the Generion of the Just.) To Answer this, ob now Addresseth himself, though Tormented in Body, Perplxed in Mind, stoutly defending his own Innoe y, and seeming to Tax the Lord; as Dogs in a Chain Bark at their own Masters. To this
his Friends make a sharp Reply, from the 15th Chap. to the 22. and he an∣swereth them again with greater Cou∣rage and Boldness than before. Whereupon they begin a second Re∣ply, and the Discourse Continues, till the Parties grew weary of Job; who shewed himself a Valiant and Re∣solute Champion: only as every Pomegranate hath some rotten Ker∣nels in it, so Job had his Frailties and out-bursts, Caused by Extremity of Pain and Excess of Passion; and who amongst the best Spirits, in Strange and Heavy Accidents, do not pay some Tribute to the Natural Passions of Men? These Ending, Elihu, a stander by, a good Man, steps in, as being all in a Flame, undertakes to carry on the work against and Re∣citeth Jobs Speeches, Chap. 32. but not so candidly, and refelleth them, but not so mildly, as was meet. True it was, Job in his Heat, had let fall many Lavish Speeches, but yet it was far from him to say, either that him∣self was without Sin, or that God was unjust, as Elihu would bear him down; very unfitly taking some sayings of his, that way Sound∣ing.
Whence may be Noted by the way, That Words prove not alway what they Intend, but as they are Interpre∣ted. The words of the best men are not free from straining: they would yield Milk, when they are forced to yield Blood: Inferences may be made upon what we say or do, such as we never thought of. Arbitror nonnullus in quibusdam Locis Librorum meorum Opinaturos me Sensisse quod non Sensi; aut non Sensisse quod Sensi; saith Au∣stin. Lib. 1. de Trinitat. ad Finem; and it fell out accordingly; for as Baronius Witnesseth, after Austins Death, arose up divers, qui ex ejus Scriptis male Perceptis, Complures In∣vexerunt Errores; who out of his Writings wrested and misconstructed, brought in many Errors, which they endeavoured to maintain, by the name and Authority of Saint Augustin. And the like may be said of Luther. Which may teach us to set a Watch over the Door of our Lips; to Weigh our Words in Ballance, to Utter few and Seasonable Words. Elihu, we see heated, a Fire is
kindled on the Hearth of his Heart, by the Spirit of Judgment and burn∣ing, and such as many Waters cannot Quench; Wherein, though Elihu was somewhat Faulty, yet because he was right in the main, all was taken well. Noting, How apt even good men are to min∣gle Sin with their best Actions; To Plow with an Ox and an Ass; but the Lord is pleased to Consider whereof we are made, and Graciously to lay the Fin∣ger of Mercy on the Scars of our Sins; as that Limner in the Story. He looks over what is his, and over∣looks what is ours. Where there are no Sins of Allowance in us, there shall be Grains of Allowance to us: he will not cast away his Pearls for every Speck of Dirt. The Ground of Elihu's Anger and Heightned Zeal is mentioned Chap. 32. vers. 2. because Job justified himself rather than God. This he did not directly and in so many words, but by a seeming Consequence, and Elihu was kindled at it. It is a Blessed thing to have a Stomach for God, to be blown up in his Cause; as were Moses Elijah, Phineas, David, Christ, and
the Angel of Ephesus; to be all on a Light Fire with Love to God, and In∣dignation against all that doth him any Dishonour. All true Zeal is of a Masculine Spirit. Job had utter'd some Discontented Speeches against God, which Reflected on his Honour and Justice; he had despaired of a Restauration, and most earnestly wish∣ed for Death, and thereby seemed to Justify himself rather than God, and this Elihu could not brook; and therefore Continues his sharp Rebuke, in this Chapter, to the humbling of Job, and Vindicating of God. Job was not so Righteous, but that he de∣served this Affliction; as there may be Cause in the very best, as well by Reason of their Actual Prevarications as of their Birth-Sin. God cannot do Wrong. It is Inconsistent, 1. With his Nature, Vers. 10. Far be it from God to do Wickedness. He cannot Sin. In which Sense only it is said, he can∣not do this or that; not through Want, but through Height and A∣bundance of Power. He cannot do Wickedly, because he is Omnipotent. It is for poor Creatures to be Lyable to such Imperfections; the Divine
Ʋnderstanding cannot be a Principle of Dirction, and the Divine Will cannot be a Principle of Injunction, and therefore the Divine Powe cannot therein shew it self to be a Principle of Execution. 2. It appears from his Actions, Ver. 11. He is so far from doing Wrong to any, that every man shll find according to his way. And although this is not done forth∣with, yet we may write upon it, and Reckon, that, Non dum Omnium di∣erum soles Occiderunt; as sure as the Night follows the Day, Account will come, and God will Reward unto each man according to his Works. His Providence, like a well-drawn Picture that Eyeth every one in the Room, observeth all things. Al∣though one Man may not know ano∣ther, nor any man know himself, yet God, following as it were all men hard at the Heels, doth with his eyes narrowly observe and mark what way every man Wolks in, he seeth all his oings. And let none please themselves in their Sinful Practices, as if God did not see them, because for a time they escape unpunished: for Sin and Punishment are tied to∣gether
with Chains of Adamant, and cannot be long asunder. 3. His Will doth evince it; Vers. 12. God will not do wickedly. He can do whatever he will do: but he cannot do Wickedly because, for want of good in Sin, it cannot become the Object of his Will. Job had said as much before, but then he seemingly dasht all again, with his Inconsiderate Complaints and Mur∣murings; and this Elisha could not bear, but again and again Celebrates the Righteousness of God. This whole Chapter is a Golden Flood of Grave Discourse; an E∣legant Oration; if we Consider the matter or the manner; It is a Dia∣mond set in Gold. Each line in its place, is adorn'd with the Enamel of Divine Affection, which breathes through the Discourse. Here, as in a Mirrour, is the Lords Righteousness presented; his Justice is displayed in most orient Colours. And when Elihu hath done all he can, he seems to say, as Cicero once did of Crassus and Antonius, Roman O∣rators, If any man thought he had spo∣ken too much in Commendation of them, he must needs be such a one,
as either knew them not, or was not able to judge of their worth. The Text is one single demonstra∣tion of Gods Justice, carried on in an excellent Metaphor: taken from binding up the Wounded, after the manner of Chirurgeons: And then the words are translated by some thus; An qui odit justitiam, Chirur∣gos imitaretur? Would he that ha∣teth Righteousness, do as Chirurge∣ons use to do? Would God, if He were Unrighteous, bind up the Bro∣ken-Hearted, or receive into favour, as he doth, a Sinner that Repenteth, doing him good again, as if there had never been any breach between them? It is noted, that a King hath his name in the Greek Tongue from healing,  ab , Medela; and that Isa. 3.7. A Governour is called Hea∣ler, or Binder up; its the same word here in the Text. But how unfit for such an Office, must he needs be, who doth not only, not do Right, but hates it? As did Nero, Caligula, Com∣modus and others, enemies of Hea∣ven and Earth. — And wilt thou Condemn him that is most Just?
None in his right Wits will do so. This were for man to exalt himself a∣bove the Divine Majesty, and for the dribling River to vye with the Drowning Ocean. And yet what do they less then this, who grudg at Gods proceedings, and are ready to think, if they had the ordering of things in their own hands, they could dispose of them a fair deal better? As Alphonse King of Castile, the Oint∣ment of whose name is marr'd with the dead flie of his Atheistical Speech, That if he had been in Gods stead, he would have disposed the World better than it is. Christians beholding the Lords severer Dispensations against them, their budding Flowers opened in a warm day, shut again in a Cold one, and their flowing Tides to become ebbing Waters; God cloathed as it were with darkness, and they not able to cleave the Clouds to behold him walking on the Vault of his Palace, nor trace him in his beamy walk through the midst of the Sanctuary, among these Golden Candlestcks which hve long suffered a dimness; are apt to conceive that the Lord deals not well with them, and they
deserve better from him, God might have been a wiser and a better God. Blasphemy is the fruit of Discontent∣ment. Let none charge God foolish∣ly. The Text will teach us to be better Commentators upon Provi∣dence, viz. Even to justifie God in all his sayings, and to give him glory in all his doings, by our silence or Ad∣miration. The Summa totalis, or sense of all, falls into this entire proposition, viz. Whatever mens apprehensions are, God in all the ways of bis Providence towards the whole World, is a most just God. God is most just. A universal Pro∣position. So he was, thus he is, and so ever shall be: The Crea∣tures shall be dissolved into nothing, and men as they are, into Falsities; But God will be found just for ever. I shall first endeavour to explain this truth, and afterwards confirm it. For Explication, know, that one may be said to be just three ways, 1. Obedinia Activa, by Active Obedience, and that Voluntary and Perfect; both extensively, in Regard
of the Object; and Intensively, in Re∣gard of the Suhject; So, Christ alone is said to be just here; his Heart and the Law were Unisons; answering each other as Face answereth Face in a Glass. And the Saints shall be hereafter; when the Imperfect Linea∣ments of Grace in the Soul, shall by the Pensil of the Holy Ghost, be drawn forth in their orient Beauty, and the Vermilion of Glory be laid upon them. If it be Objected, That the Saints are said to be just here? I answer, true. Joseph is called a just man, Math. 1.19. so were Ze∣chariah and Elizabeth, Luke 1.16. said to be Righteous before God, &c. But to be understood, 1. Not Legall, for Righteousness of Creation, whereby God made man after his own Image, in Holiness and Righteousness, to walk exactly ac∣cording to the Rule of Justice. Per∣fect man was then, though mutable, because hi Holiness depended upon and flowed from a Principl in him∣slf, Original Justice; now lost; and so, none is Righteous, no not one. But, 2. Evangellically, viz (1) In De∣siderio
& Conatu. The Saints do Level at the mark of Perfection. They hunger after compleat Righte∣ousness: whence it is said, they Sin not, John 3.9. because though they be not without Sin, yet their Wills is against Sin; they have voted it down. When they fail, they mourn; and this is called Gospel-Righteousness. (2) Comparative & Respectu Impiorum; in Respect of the Wicked; and so Noah was said to be perfect in his Generation; he be∣ing Compared with the Prophane World, was a Perfect, just man. Gold in the Oar, Compared with Lead or Brass, is perfect; a field of Wheat may have some Thistles growing in it, yet Compared with that of Tares, is perfect Wheat. (3) Divina Accep∣tatione. God doth accept of them in and through Christ, Colos. 2.10. Ye are compleat in him: Through the Red-glass every thing appears red; so through the Red glass of Christs Blood, the gracious Soul ap∣pears lovely and Beautifull in Gods eye. They are accepted in the Belov∣ed, Ephes. 1. 2. One may be said to be just,
Gratia, by Grace; as the Elect and Called are just: Justitia unionis Im∣putata; by the Righteousness of Christ Imputed, Jer. 33.6. This is as truely theirs to justify, as it is Christs to bestow; and this is a Christians Triumph, when he is de∣filed in himself, he is undefiled in his Head; in his Righteousness the Saints shall shine brighter than the Angels. Or, Justitia communionis Inherente; viz. the Graces of Christs Spirit, Holiness of Heart and Life; which Cajetan calleth Ʋniversal Righteousness. 3. Natura, by Nature, and so two wayes, 1. Dono, by Gift; as Adam was by Creation. His will (which is the Universal Appetite of the whole man) was Wonderfully good, Furnished with several Habits of Goodness, as the Firmament with Glittering Stars. There was in him a propension to all good; as an In∣strument in Tune, he was full of Har∣mony; like a Bright Air and a pure Beauty without the least Cloud to stain it; his Heart was without the least Tincture of Impurity; as Wine that hath no Sophistication. Such was Adams Holiness. But this is not
now to be found on Earth, we must go to Heaven for it. 2. Essentia, by Essence; and so God only is just. Righteousness in God is as Beams in the Sun, Water in the Fountain, and Lines in the Centre, it is Original: he is the Pattern and Prototype of all Righteousness; just ad intra, as he is; just ad extra, as he works; every way just. Some may understand the first only, as Osiander would every where; o∣thers the latter only: I conceive both may and must be here understood: God is just in himself, and in all his Ministrations to the Sons of men. Again, He is said to be just, 1. Qui justa facit & imperat juste; So doth God, who never Acted or Commanded any thing, but what was in it self equal and reasonable; although perhaps to our shallow and corrupt Understanding it may ap∣pear otherwise; as to our eyes, Turrets and Steeples, how upright, soever, if their height be exceeding great, do oftentimes seem crooked, and look as if they stood awry: But all Gracious Hearts discover that Beauty and Equity in all Gods Com∣mands,
as draws forth their Assent and and Consent to them; they can say, Blessed be God for his Precepts; His Commands are not Grievous. 2. Qui opera quadrat adjuris Prae∣cepta; So doth God, whose Will is the supream Reason; Nec Recta so∣lum, sed & ipsa Regula; not only right, but the very Rule of Right; And im∣possible it is for him to do wrong by erring from the Rule of Righteous∣ness. Men may overslip themselves, and miscarry or deny Justice, in which case, Appeals have been made to God; as in the time of Hen. 3. The bold Countess of Arundel, Appeal'd from the King and his bad Counsellors, to the Court of Heaven. And in the History of the Holy-War, Relation is given of a Templar, who being to be burnt at Burdeaux, at the place of Execution, he saw the Pope and King Philip looking out of a Window, and cryed to them, Clement thou Cruel Tyrant, seeing there is no higher a∣mong Mortals to whom I should Ap∣peal for my unjust death, I cite thee together with King Philip, before the Tribunal of Christ Jesus, the Just Judg, who Redeemed me; there,
both to appear within one year and a day, where I will lay open my Cause, and Justice shall be done with∣out any respect: And it fell out ac∣cordingly. 3. Qui promissa servat; So doth God: He is faithful that promised. One letter of his name, whereby he hath made himself known, is, Abun∣dant in Truth; And Christ is called the faithful and true Witness; And the Counsels of God are said to be Faithful and True. He so much a∣bounds in it, as he hath no mixture of the contrary; though the best of men have some; as for example; A precious Stone, hath some speckling or cloud, but light it self admits of none. God is light, and with him is no darkness at all; so God is true, and in him is no Falshood at all. God that cannot lie hath promised, saith the Apostle, Titus 2. God may de∣lay his Promise, but he cannot deny his Promise. 4. Qui suum cuique tribuit, justi∣tia distributiva; So doth God; He gives to every man his own. It is In∣justice and Tyranny to invade ano∣ther mans Right: An Evil, which
cannot be imputed to God without Horrid Blasphemy. But to come nearer; we may con∣sider God under a fourfold notion, and in each shall find him Just. 1. Ʋt Dominus, as Lord; in re∣spect of his purpose, touching man to be Created, of glorifying his Mer∣cy and Justice, Wisdom and Power; in Saving, Damning, calling effectu∣ally, denying others; chusing, refu∣sing, reprobating; Where it is not safe to search too far; Quod nesci∣atur sine Crimine, ne discutietur cum discrimine; nor strive to know with danger, what we may be ignorant of with safety; in such things, ad∣miration is better Piety, than appre∣hension; (Curiosity is the first spawn of Sin) nor to judg that unjust, which Reason apprehends not. Of all his Decrees, we may conclude, There is no Ʋnrighteousness with God. Rom. 9.13. Jacob have I loved, &c. Let not Carnal Reason dare to reprehend what it doth not apprehend. Let none forbid Faith to swim, where Reason cannot wade. Banish Soci∣nian Blasphemy, which will needs have a Reason of Divine Mysteries.
Except they see, they will not be∣lieve; whereby Faith is become, as some of that sort of men have made bold to call it, Theologorum Ludi∣brium, Scripturarum Tyrannidem. 2. Ʋt Creator, with respect to the Means of Execution. Giving being, permitting the fall, Ordaining and Governing by his Providence, pre∣serving and disposing both the good and bad. All these are just, 2 Tim. 4.14. The Lord reward him accord∣ing to his Works. Math. 5.45. He maketh the Sun to shine on the Evil and Good. In which, he is at an Infinite Distance from Unrighteousness: for in these he moves according to the Council of his own Will, and this is ever Rational; though our shallow Reason in this State of Degeneracy and Mortallity, be not able to Fa∣thom the Depths of its Contrive∣ments, and is thereupon ready to Cavil and Call in Question their E∣quity. 3. Ʋt Pator Electorum; by speci∣all Righteousness, viz. Goodness in his Decrees, and Faithfulness in his Pro∣mises, two principal Emanations of the Divine Being, Respecting his In∣tellectual
Creatures, whom he hath taken into so neer a Relation to him∣self; all which he justifies, for and by the Obedience of his Son, who is Constituted by the Father to be the Head of all his Elect, to be his Mem∣bers, and to be by him brought to e∣ternal Blessedness. See 1 John 1.9. If we Confess our Sins, he is Faithfull to forgive. The word [Faithful] refers to Gods Promises, as [Just] doth to the Blood of Christ, the Ran∣some received, whereby the Saints are Cleansed; And it stands not with the Divine Justice to demand the Debt twice, viz. of the Sure∣ty and the Debtor; but upon Con∣fession he is Faithful and Just to For∣give. 4. Ʋt Judex, as a Judg, to distri∣bute Rewards according to Works; 2 Cor. 5.10. This is the exactness of that Divine Justice which Tri∣umphs in God. The World is a great Book consisting of many Leaves and Pages; This Judg will peruse every Leaf, Page, Line, and Tittle of it; and make the great Index expurgatorius, blot out the names of thousands, take a funder
this whole Volumn, cast much into the Fire, bind up the rest as a perfect Volumn of elect ones for Eternity. Revel. 1.7. all the World shall see their Judg, their Crimes, their Ac∣cusers, Conscience, and Satan, if out of Christ, or if believing in him, then Pardon sealed with the Blood of the Judge, their Heaven smiling in his Smiles; Revel. 20.12. In three things he agrees with up∣right Judges, viz. 1. In Loving Justice and hating Iniquity. Job is said, to have accounted Justice his Robe and Diadem. Chap. 29.14. and of Tra∣jan that excellent Prince, that when he gave the Sword of Power, to any whom he made Governour of any Province, he used to say, Accipe hunc Gladium, si benefecero, utere pro me sin aliter, contra me. It was from this Love of Justice. Of Fabricius a Senatour of Rome, it is recorded as his Encomium and left as his mark of Honour, that a man might as soon turn the Sun from its Course, as turn him out of the Course of Justice. From this very Principle it was, that Aristides obtained the Report of the Just from all in his time. Now if
this be so true of men, how much more must it be true of God. The Rightous Lord lveth Righteousness. Psal. 33.5. He Loveth Righteousness and Judgment! 2. In Impartiality and Equality, hearing all sides. Plutarch reports of Alexander, that when he sate in Judgment, he was wont alteram aurem prebere Actori, alteram vero integram servare reo, alway to stop one ear to the Plantiff, saying he kept that for the Defendant; one mans tale being good, till another be told. Aequum me utrique parti in Discptan∣dis Controversis quam Iutuenda Di∣sciplina praebebo; said Justinian; I will hear both Causes &c. And this is a Rule observed by God; Gen. 18.21. I will go down and see, &c. Spo∣ken according to our Dialect, after the manner of a Judge, who first exa∣mines the Cause exactly, before he will give the Sentence. God doth not make the Sword the Judge; he Weighs things in the Ballance; he ever lyeth Judgment to the Line; When God is on a work of Justice he is not on a Riot, as if he cared, not whom he did hit, but goeth in the
Way of a Circuit, with the Offendor, I will go down and see! 3. In passing Sentence without re∣spect of Persons. The Just Judge fears no mans Condition in Judge¦ment, he beholds not the faces of any persons, but the Cause; Like Melchizedeck he is without Pedigree, This Son of Righteousness shines on Beggars as well as on the Nobles. Job 34.19. God accepts of no mans Person; No not the Persons of Princes; Prov. 24.23. Kings and Nobles must come to his Bar, and receive Sentence, as well as poor, Inferiour Persons. He will do Ju∣stice upon men, be they what they will be. Jer. 22.24. But in three things, he surpasseth all, viz. 1. In Authority, which is derived to him from none. He is Lord Pa∣ramount and hath Potestatem  and extends to all. Gen. 18.25. He hath Jus Imperii, and Jus Dominii; which none can have, but subordinate∣ly & derivatively from him: His King¦dom ruleth over all. His Name writ∣ten on his Thigh, is King of Kings. As among men, it is one of the Jura
Regalia, the Flowers of the Crown to enact Laws and Statutes; it is much more true of God. 2. In Liberty: He is not tied to Law, in respect of time manner or measure. The greatest and best Judges on Earth, do or should go∣vern by Law, to the making of which others concur as well as they; But God is a Law to himself. He and none but he can write on his Impe∣rial Edicts, Stat per ratione voluntas, My Will is my Law, (which is Li∣berty in God, but Tyranny in man) his Will because of the Holiness of his Nature, is always just. He can better say than ever Constantine that Arrian Emperour could, Quod ego volo, pro Canone sit; Let my Will be your Soveraign Rule; sith things are Right because I will them, I will not because they are Right. 3. In Ifallibility. He cannot err in deciding Controversies and Cau∣ses; being Omniscient, nothing is hid from him, but all things are un∣vailed to his eye. He is never at a stand. No ignorance dwells in his Understanding. Fair Shews can ne∣ver delude him; Colourable and False
Reports cannot mislead him, as Earth∣ly Judges may be. He can never ac∣quit any, who is in truth faulty or inwardly unsound, nor upon any false suggestions pass Censure upon any. He proceeds only upon certainty. Let the Papists conclude the Pope or his general Council infallible and so fit to decide Controversies in mat∣ters of Religion; but we must be∣lieve that all Mortals are more or less subject to Error and Uncertainty. If Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, were among the best Magistrates, Priests or Prophets that ever were; they could not satisfie in all things, ei∣ther some Unrighteousness would be in them, or they, though innocent, will be justly accounted suspitious. Thus much only for Explication of the Doctrine; For Confirmation thereof I am now to address my self: Which I do not intend to make as the Cords of a Tent stretched out to their utmost length, or unnecessarily to enlarge, as the Pharisees did with Affectation their Phylacteries; yet for the more full establishing thereof, it will he perti∣nent to speak unto three things, viz.
to prove it by Authority, and Argu∣ment, and to clear it from Ob∣jections. First, for Authority; which though some do impiously Question, yet to us it is sufficiently and Invincibly bind∣ing. And this the Scripture doth di∣versly, viz. 1. Affirmatively; when it de∣scribeth God to be Just, Holy, Righ∣teous (Exod. 9.27. Psal. 27.17. Jer. 12.1.) all sparkling Jewels of the Crown of Heaven, with which it flourisheth; and which, however diversified in our Conceptions, are notwithstanding Identified with Gods essence, which is but one, though to us they appear to be diffe∣rent from each other, and all from it; as the vast Ocean, though but one, receives divers names from the seve∣ral shoars it washeth on; so how∣ever, Justice, Holiness, Righteous∣ness, be several Names Suited to diffe∣rent Operations, yet all are but one Simple Act in God, under those va∣rious Denominations. 2. Negatively; when it removes all Injustice and Iniquity from him; (Deutr. 32.4.10.17. Dan. 9.14.
Rom. 9.14.) Righteousness is the Embroidered Robe wherewith God is Cloathed. It is the Glory of the Godhead. Exod. 15. Glorious in Holiness, is his Name. Darkness can∣not be Imputed to the Sun; no more can Sin to God. You may as soon Sepa∣rate weight from Lead, or heat from Fire, as Righteousness from the Divine Nature. 3. Affectively, When it Attributes to God, the Affection of Zeal, Anger, Fury, &c. as Exod. 20.5.32.10. Numb. 11.20. which are not in God such Passions as they be in men; but an act of immutable Justice, and are not to be understood secundum Per∣turbationis affectum, but secundum Ʋltiois Effectum. Anger and Wrath in God, is nothing but Tranquilla Constitutio justi Supplicii; a Calm and quiet Appointment of just Punishment, revenging Justice. And the same Justice of God, as it simply burns a∣gainst Sin, is in Scripture called his Anger; when it doth more fiercely ex candescere or sparkle out, it is called his Wrath. The same Justice when it pronounceth Sentence, is called his Judgment; when it is
brought to Execution, it is called his Vengeance: all directed against Evil. Thus we see the Truth to have an Innate Proof, shining with its own Beams: and by this, it should prevail over mens Minds, vanquish unbelief and chase away the Clouds of Error. But, Secondly, For Argument. Though the Scripture like the Sun-beams, are their own Discovery, yet one may contract them into three Glasses, wherein we may take a clearer View of them, and perceive a warmer Influ∣ence from them falling on our Minds and Hearts. The Arguments grounded on the former Authority are these following, viz. 1. God is Agens liberrimum, a Debtor to none, bound to no Law, because none was ever given to him, therefore he cannot offend in distri∣butive Justice. Matth. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do with my own as I will. Rom. 9.21. Hath not the Potter power over the Clay, to make one Vessel to Honour and another to Dishonour; i. e. He may lawfully, he hath full Authority so to do:
That's the meaning, and so runs that expression in the Hebrew Text. Jer. 18.16. Cannot I do as this Potter; And Gen. 34.14. We cannot do this thing, i. e. We may not do it; It is unmeet, unlawful for us to do. Now this God can do, it is lawful, by Right he may. However by this awarding Paribus imparia, unlike proportions to men of like Condi∣tions, considered in the same Lump and doing this arrbitrarily, accor∣ding to the good Pleasure and Coun∣sel of his own Will, sets men a crying out of Iniquity in Gods pro∣ceedings; yet it is without reason and with great Injustice, for God is free; and besides, his Will is the supream Rule of Righteousness. 2. He is Fons Justitia, Justice it self, the original of Righteousness, and it is impossible for him to do, or be the Author of Sin. Out of this Fountain cannot proceed sweet Wa∣ter and bitter; no more than white∣ness can black the Wall, or heat make one cold. Every thing is just, because God doth it. He cannot do that which is contrary to his Nature. He cannot Lie, because he is Truth it self. God
canot Sin, because he is perfect Righ∣teousness. 3. He is Judex Mundi, as Abra∣ham said, Gen. 18.25. And shall not the Judge of the World do Rght? It is Abrahams acknowledgment of God in Covenant. He adem the World and shall judge the World. These are atributed to him interchange∣ably, to make and judge the World, And he certainly will do Righ. We may as easily suppose God o cease from being Judge of the World, as cease to do Right. He i the Maker and Monarch of all men: who is his Superiour? To whom shall he give account? Who shall expostulate with him for Injustice? Or for fear of whom should he warp? He can cease to be, as soon as leave to be just. The Apostle improves his very reason, to demonstrate the Righ∣teousness of God; Rom. 3.5,6. Is God unrighteous who taketh vengeance; God forbid; How shall God judge the World? It being an Office exclusively belonging to him, by reason of his indepndnt hbiual Justic. He shall judge the World; that's a reciev∣ed Principle; from whence he ers
that therefore God cannot do unrigh∣teously. See Jer. 11.20. 2 Thessal. 1.6. Thirdly, we come to clear this Doctrine from Objections; for this Bright and Shining Truth is very Of∣fensive to sore Eyes; as the most Evangelical Discoveries are not without Fierce Oppositions. It is the Devils work to Imprison all Truth, but the nobler and more pretious Truths, must expect to be put in the lowest and darkest Dungeon; as here now the Justice of God; the Flower and Crown of Heaven; how would he eclipse this Fair Sun! And, 1. It is Objected, That God did Ordain some of his Creatures to Punishment and Damnation, without Fault and Desert. Answ. Divine Purposes are very unsearcheable, they lye wrapt up in everlasting Darkness and are covered in a deep Abyss, none can Fathome the Bottom. Yet to this Objector, I say, it is most false: and a Calumny usually cast upon the Doctrine of Pre∣dest nation; and which the Rhetorick of our Adversaries, is wont to blow
up to the highest pitch of Aggrava∣tion even to the Impeaching of Gods Justice which is most Blasphemous. But to the Answer, 1. God Created man for his own Glory, Ʋltimately; and if any Mis∣carry through their own Default, (as it will be found they do,) God will be glorified in them as well as in others. The Howlings of them which perish, shall render forth his Praise, as well as the Hallelujahs of them that are Saved. They both sing unto the Glorious Attributes of the Blessed Trinity an everlasting Canticle. On∣ly in this great Consort of the Intelli∣gent Creation, the designedly Con∣spiring Voices are as differing as the Condition of the respective Singers. Hell's Darkness shall as well contri∣bute to Gods Glory, as Heavens e∣ternal Splendours. As shadows Ju∣diciously placed, do no less praise the Painter, than do the livelier and bet∣ter Colours. 2. In Ordaining, he is to be Con∣sidered as a Lord, not as a Judge. E∣lection and Reprobation being Acts of Power and Prerogative: so that in these the matter of Right and
Wrong are not concerned. Gods Volitions and Decrees are not de∣pending on any temporal Objects, as Motives thereunto; but determine without any Respect to any Dispositi∣on in the Creature; and what Injust∣ice can be therein? The clay should not dispute with the Potter. None should argue against Divine Prero∣gative. Ratio quosdam elegit & quos∣dam reprobat, non habet rationem nisi Divinam Voluntatem. Aqu. 1 part 4. 23. Art 5. 3. He doth punish none without fault, nor condemn any without De∣sert. God who is pure Justice, in∣ferreth no prejudice upon the Crea∣ture, but as provoked by some Cri∣minal miscarriage; though it be cer∣tain, that the Reprobate shall dye, yet Sin, not the Decree is the cause of Death. Rom. 5.12. By Sin Death entred into the World. To crown or to damn is an Act of judiciary Pow∣er, and proceeds according to the Tenour of the Revealed Gospel. The Eternal Decree of the Damnation of the very Devils, was never de∣termined to be Executed otherways than for their own Misdeeds.
2. It is objected, The Author of Sin cannot be just. Ergo. Answ. Innocency it self cannot be protected from Imputations; though the Reproach will stick no faster, than a Bur that is cast against a Cri∣stal; fot it will easily appear, that God is neither Autho or Actor Pec¦cati: He makes Sin no more than the Sun makes the Night. Though Bellarmin labour to impose this Blas∣phemy on Calvin, Beza, and Zuin∣glius, as their opinions; Yet the Dominicans and some of his own So∣ciety, clear him, as saying, 1. That he willeth Sin permissively, other∣wise it could not be, Miro & inffa∣bili modo non fit praeter ejus volunta∣tem, quod etiam fit contra ejus volunta∣tem; Quia non fieret nisi sinerit, nec utique nolens sinit, sed volens: As Aug. Enchirid. And again, Non si∣nerit bonus fieri male, nisi Omnipotens etiam de malo posset facere bonum. Ibid. The Lord thought it better to do good with evil, than not to permit it: And it is acknowledged, that Sin the worst thing that is, but the Ex∣istence of Sin is not Evil; other∣wise saith Aug. God would not per∣mit it.
2. God concurs ad Actum & De∣terminationem voluntatis in particulari, non ad obliquitatem Actus. God doth concur to the Action and sustains the Agent; For 'tis sain, by him all things consist. Coloss. 1.17. and Acts 17.28. In him we live and move, &c. , we are acted by him So that the bare Action is good and the fault wholly remains with the Creature. Obj. But he that doth not hinder Sin when he may, is guilty. So a wicked Mrcian asketh, why the Lod who foresaw the event, did suf∣fer Eve and the Devil to confer, and if e were able, why did he not hinder Sin to be. Answ. Thus men presuming upon certain Aioms of Crooked and Dis∣torted Reason, will undrtake to pass Sentence upon God. The Rule will hold true in Respect of men, qui non vetat peccare, cum possit, jubet; but not in Respect of God, who is bound to no Law; neither did he suffer Sin unreproved or unpunished. Prosper and Hilarius both, with Austin, make answer to this Question, why God did
not hinder Sin? the cause may be un∣known, it cannot be unjust. 3. It is Objected; God doth Distribute unequally, evil things to good men and good things to evil men. Answ. This is a bad and common Charge. The seeming Disregard and Inequality of Providence, hath caused some to charge God foolishly. Among Heathens of old, we find Bru∣tus, an able Assertor of Divine Pro∣vidence, such as he knew; when finally vanquished by Antonius and saw such bad Success in so good a Cause, as he thought his to be, dis∣claimed all Vertue and derided all Endeavours of living well, as vain and bootless. And Pompey when dis∣comfited by Caesar, blamed Provi∣dence, as if there were a Mist over it. But both blamed the Sun, because of their own sore eyes. And these well-tempered Heathens were not alone, but men of other make have stumbled at the same Stone. It was Davids Case, Psal. 73.2.3. As for me, my Step were almost gone, my Feet had well nigh slipt, for I was envious at the Foolish &c. and the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap.
12.1. Why doth the way of the Wicked prosper &c. Which is as though he had said, Why shall such Weeds as Cumber the Ground be watered so plentifully and grow so exceedingly, when good Con is so thin and Lean? Why shall the Lyon and Raven, those unclean Creatures, be spared, when the innocent Lamb and Dove are Sacrificed? The wiked flourish, like a Bay-tree, and enjoy a Constant Spring and Summer, though without Fruit, when the Saints, like good Apple-trees, have their Autumn and Winter? This hath touched good men to the quick; sore eyes could not behold the gloious Sun-shine of wicked mens Prosperity, without much pain. But however God is just. Therefore to answer the Ob∣jection, I say, he that doth so finally, is unjust. Differt nunc Dus, non De∣terminat; God will have men to be known. Some serve him only for a Livery; dayes of Adversity are Gods fans or Furnace; non Approbat facta Impiorum; he approves not the un∣godly in their wayes; though at Gods Connivance and present Immu∣nity of their Hellish Practices, they
make damnable Inferences of his ap∣proving them. Because they have no Changes, they fear not God. Object. 4. Suppose two persons for natural Disposition Equal, the one is taken and effectually called, the o∣ther left; is not here Respect of Per∣sons? Answ. Here is more bubling up of Carnal Reason against Divine Dispensation: the same Answer occurs here for Substance, as to the former. 1. Certain it is that these two Terms, Righteous Judgement, and Accepting of Persons, are differently Opposite. But here is no respect of Persons: the Working of God, on which the Object is founded, is actus Potetiae Liberae, potius quam Justitiae, an act of free Power, rather than of Justice. And Divines have received it for a Principle, That Accepting of Persons, is not found in Gratuitis, in Acts of Bounty, wherein the Do∣nor is at Liberty to dispose of his free Gift, as pleaseth himself; but in De∣bitis, in Acts of Justice and Righte∣ousness, wherein lieth an Obligati∣on on him that Distributeth, to give
every man his due. Hereon they Conclude, that in Divine Choice, God is no Debtor to any of his Creatures, but Acteth therein, not as a Judge, but as a Soveraign Lord and Liberal Benefactor, choosing some, and passing by others; as without Injustice or Wrong to any, so without shew of accepting of Persons, Augustin dis∣puting this Question largly against the Plagians, brings in the Instance of a man that hath two Debtors, of whom he forgives one, and requires full Payment of the other; if any demand the Reason, he answereth, It is my Will: and so God giveth Effectual Grace to one and not to another, this is his Free Power. 2. It is just, because according to his Will and Wisdom. Rom. 9.18. Therefore hath he Mercy on whom he will, &c. And therefore not injust, because hidden to us. If this do not satisfie, I shall refer such to consider what one of our Antient Writers did to their Forefathers; Heron in Epst. ad Cesiphontem, viz. The Apostle, saith he, having discoursed of this Myste∣ry, acknowledgeth their depths, and adoreth the Wisdom of God in them,
Dignare & tu ista nescire; concede Deo potentiam sui; nequaquam te indiget Defensore: Be thou also willing to be ignorant of such things. Leave God to himself in modlling of his De∣crees and Dispensations; he will be sure to do it so, as not to stand in need of any Apology or Defence from thee! 4. Objected it is, What Justice is it in God, to command a man by his Word, the perfrce of which cannot be done by him, without the inward help of hs Sprit, and yet in the mean whil, deny that help f the Spirit to him? Answ. Fair words; but a trick whereby men of towring Thoughts labour to bring the Royal Preroga∣tive of Converting Grace, into the hands of sinful Clay, and so derogate fom the honour of him who is the Former of all things. But must it needs be a blemish to Gods Honour and a stain to his Justice, to com∣mand man to perform his Duty, though he have no strength to per∣form it? Once he hd strength, nd hath lost it; but Gd hath not lost his Right to command, though man
hath lost his Ability to obey. A Drunken Servant is not disobliged to serve; nor a broken Merchant to pay his Creditors. It is a Right Rule to be observed in unknitting this Knot; Mandata Dei, non sunt Men∣sura nostrerum virium, sed Regula Officii & materia praecum; as Molinus Contr. Amyrald. Precepts and Exhor∣tations, ordinarily signifie the ap∣proving Will of the Commander, and his Duty to whom they are pro∣pounded; although sometime the Duty of the Hearer, rather than the Will of the Speaker, be declared by them: They shew us what we ought to do, not what we can; they assure us what God will do when he pleaseth, not what he is bound to do, Grace is free. Nither can any Creature challg fctl Grace at Gods hands, as a de Debt, eiher to his Nature or his Labour; however some sawcil w and spk of God, as if he we boud to do this or that, to giv his or the other Grace, e∣ven▪ wh  produe no Pro∣mise, by  mde himself a Debto  is the zeal of Petr L rd. Lib. . Sentn. D∣stinct.
43. against such men; Ʋt mi∣hi videtur, hoc verbum [Debet] venenum habet, — nec Deo proprium competit, quia non est debitor nobis, nisi forte expromisso. To me, saith he, this word [he ought] or, he is bound, seems to have much poison in it, and cannot properly belong to God, who is no Debtor to us, save only in those cases, wherein he hath passed some free Promise. And I am sure, our Saviour tells his Disciples plainly, It is given to you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, to others it is not given, Math. 13.11. And the Housholder in the Parable, stops the Mouths of those Murmurers that re∣pined, as expecting more from him than it was his pleasure to give, with the sole consideration of its being his Will so to have it, Friend I do thee no wrong, &c. Math. 20.10,13. Dei judicia nemo plene comprehendit, nemo juste reprehendit. 5. It is Objected, God commanded Abraham to kill his Son. Answ. 1. He may do that, which he hath forbid us to do; as appears out of Deut. 24.16. Compared with 2 Kings 14.6. For although by an ex∣press
Law, Magistrates be forbidden to put Children to Death for their Parents Sins; yet God, who is the Author of Life and Death, hath re∣served to himself a Liberty of so do∣ing, whensoever it shall so please him, by Reason of his supream Do∣minion over all; and therefore for him to Inflict inferiour temporal Pun∣ishments in that case, cannot but be accounted just; and the rather, if we Consider, that Children may be accounted part of their Parents; for as a mans Wife is himself divi∣ded, so his Children are himself Mul∣tiplyed. 2. Gods command to Abraham was but Mandaum Explorationis, not Seductionis, a Command of Tryal, not of Seduction. God is said to Tempt, when he puts us upon the Trial of our Faith and Obedience, that he may do us good in the latter end, Deut. 8.26. but to Seduce he cannot be said to do. The Author of  Good, cannot be the Author of Sin: as before is Noted. Object. Did he not bid Shimei to curse David! Answ. True; as a Punishment on
David; but it was a Sin in Shimei: his ca was to drive David to De∣spair, but God directed it to Humble him. 6. It is Objected; How it could stand with Justice in God to set forth his Innocent Son to suffer? From this the Scinian party cry out against us, as if God were charged with Tyranny, in laying the Punishment of Offendors on our Innocent Savi∣our; which also drew from Brentius a Lteran, thi Blsphemy, Dus Pater in cruce Tyrannus egit erga Filium, &c. Answ. To which I answer, 1. It was with his Will, which is the Rule of Justice▪ wih  to his In∣finite Wisom.  st jus si quia Volitum, qumvis non tum qua Vlitum, sd qu nus Slntia dictatum. Dei Vtats est semper licet non Cus. This was concluded on as the most Congnous and conve∣nient mean to manfest Mercy and Justice; an excllent Temperament so that one doth no oppos the o her. God will not let Sin , therefore he prov  m to be Sacrificd for Isaac; a Mediatour to
come between us and Wrath. How∣ever Reason do most gainsay this Mystery, we must say, Taceat ista Mulier in Ecclesia; Let this woman hold her Peace in the Church. Hear what the word saith, and believe; Christ suffered that God might be just; Rom. 3.26. If this will not Satisfie, I answer farther. 2. Christ may be considered two wayes, viz. as he is in himself a Na∣tural Body, without any Relation to us; and so no action of his concerned us, nor any of ours concerned him; or as he i part of a Body Mystical; in which Consideration, his Actions and ours concern us jointly: for if the hand be Wounded, the ad will say, you ur me. Thus we read, 1 Cor. 12.26. If one M mber suffr, all the Mebrs sffer with it. For in this Rl Cs stands to his People by Ver of  graciou Covenant mde ween God the Father and Ch e Son, and secretly trans∣ beween them, bere the Cre∣aion of the World. From which Union between Ch and his Mem∣bers is produ word wih Divines call , a mutual Com∣munication
of Properties; which work extends it self so far, as that the Perfections and Excellencies which are Originally peculiar to the Person of Christ, are Communicated unto, and truely affirmed of holy men; 1 Cor. 1.30. and so the Infirmities, yea the Sins of his Members, are Commu∣nicated unto and Affirmed of, and Imputed to Christ. He was made Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. though in the same Breath, the Apostle saith, He knew no Sin; both which are most true; because our Sins are his Sins, by Reason of this Union: as the Debt of the Principal is also the Debt of the Surety. In which Sense, Christ is said to be slain from before the Foundation of the World, Revel. 13.8. even before he was Incarnat; be∣cause of Abel, who was his Member and Type. Christ suffered for the Sins of his People, which are his Sins in that himself and Members are one; and no Injustice doth appear as to this Ministration. 7. It is objected; Good men are swept away in common judgments, as the wicked are. Answ. Outward things come alike
to all. So Solomon; to Saints as well as Sinners. What they say of Tem∣pers, that Non datur purum elemen∣tum, there is no pure, unmixt Tem∣per, that is strained and sublimated and as it were framed into such an Harmony, that it hath always an healthful Predominancy, but mixt, and whereby Diseases break in; the like may be said of Divine Dispen∣sations towards the best of people; there is a mixture in them; the Saints are not ever singled out as Objects of sensible Mercies. Their Sun oftentimes sets in a Cloud; their Ship in common Tempests is over∣whelmed; But, 1. It is not so always. Noah and Lot shall be standing Witnesses there∣of, so long as the World shall stand. They were standing Monuments of Gods Preservation, in the then Ru∣ins of the Worlds Desolation. Though an Housholder spend and sell the greatest part of the Harvest Crop, yet he will be sure to preserve a little Seed-Corn, to sow his ground for a new Crop. Though Sodom be utterly destroyed by Fire, yet Jeru∣salem is as a Brand pluckt out of the
Fire. God maketh a light account of a whole City full of Sinners; he takes away the ungodly of the earth like dross, Psalm 119.119. which is put into the Fire to be consumed. His own people shall be preserved. Though he make a full end of all Nations, yet he will not make a full end of his people, but correct them in measure. He will have some to be Monuments of his Mercy, for in the midst of Judgments he will beloved, as well as feared in his smiles. 2. Never as the wicked are; though in Afflictions, and National Calamities especially, God oftentimes seems to make no distinction between the Ob∣jects of his Compassion and Fury, in∣discriminately involving them in the same destiny; yet his Intention makes a vast difference, where his infliction seems to make none: As when on the same test, and with the self-same Fire, Chymists do urge the Gold as well as the blanded Lead; but withal foreknowing and designing such a disparity in the Events, as to consume the ignoble Minerals, or blow them off into Dross and Fumes, and make the Gold more pure and
full of Lustre. Even so doth God in his severe Dispensations towards his people in common with the wicked; to the one they are destructive, to the other Purgative, Isa. 27.9. By this shall the Iniquity if Jacob be purged, &c. When the evil of Affliction over∣takes a wicked man, it is to take a∣way their Soul; when it comes to a godly man, it comes only to take away his Sin. A rotten cloath if it be scour'd and rub'd, it breaks and tears; but a piece of Brass well scou∣red, will shine the brighter; Judg∣ments on wicked mens false hearts, break them, but the same on good men, amend and better them. Thus you see the Objections are but as opposing the shadow to the light, and a lye to truth; and how they who go about to put out the truth of God, by snssing, make it burn the brighter. Neither indeed was it ever possible for the enemies of Gods Righteousness by all their En∣gins to compass their Design; all the vapours of mens Brains, are not able to cloud so bright a Sun. The use of all follows. And, 1. This Doctrine, like a
direful Comet which carries with it Blood and destruction, speaks dread and terrour, and it hath a double a∣spect; 1. On the whole Land in general, and so it sadly threatens, Considering, First, What is done by us. Sinful we are to astonishment: that of the Prophet may be applied to us, Hear O Heaven, and Hearken O Earth, I have brought up Children, and they have Rebelled against me! Secure we are, fearing no evil, setting light by the means, vapouring out the good Spi∣rits of a pleasant Land, in a vain Conversation. Our Calm and peace∣able Gospel dayes have brought forth in us Spiders and Caterpillars, and the like Vermine, even Pride, Lux∣ury, Prophaneness, Atheism, Spirits averse to the power of Godliness, and a sound Reformation; Witness that general Apostacy to Formality, Will-worship, and strange Inclinati∣ons to Popery, and such-like innova∣tions: and which is a great aggrava∣tion to shew our inexcusableness, God hath been correcting us, to amend us, but we have been the more vile and sinful. Hos. 7.1. When I would
have Healed Israel, then the Iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, &c. Zeal is exceedingly decayed, the word sup∣pressed, and Religion meets with much snarling and opposition every where. How impudent is Sin grown? God looked for purging of the Land, and behold it is more defiled. When the Pot boyleth the Scum is discover'd. Baths bring forth Corruption (if it be in the Body) into the Skin: God hath been reforming the Land; and our Wickedness appears the more. Time was when Sin began to be asha∣med, to creep into Corners, to be out of Fashion, but now it is grown brazen faced, walks in the open Streets, seems to be in request more than ever. Thus our Sins testify a∣gainst us, are grown up to Heaven, and darken the Sun, put out the Moon, seal up the Constellations, to intercept the passage of Prayer thi∣ther, and to stop the influences of the light of Heaven from descending hi∣ther; or to knock at the Gate, to sollicite for vengeance upon us. Secondly, what the Lord hath done to others so offending; even took away his Glory, and gave them up in∣to
the Enemies hands; bringing them into a Spiritual Egypt: Witness the famous Asian Churches now un∣der the Mahometan Tyranny. There was a time when the Vineyard, Isa. 5.4. should have afforded red Wine, and then it might have expected Water∣ing every moment, and Continued Preservation, but this Vineyard De∣generating, instead of Red Wine, it brought forth Wild Grapes; and then instead of keeping, the Lord threat∣ned to take away the Hedge, and pull down the Walls thereof: instead of Preserving it from hurt, to let it be eaten up, broken down, instead of Watering, to command the Clouds to yield it no Rain. Thirdly, Considering, what he hath done amongst us; how he goeth on by Degrees. God is just, and when the Number is up, the rod will cer∣tainly fall; when the Corn is ripe, the Sickle is prepared. Though he break not the Candlestick, he may, for ought we know, remove it, and not leave so much as any quality, title or Property of a Church; he may deal with us, as he did with Ephesus; and who knows but that the Lord
hath said of us in this Nation, as he did of the old Church of the Jews, Deut. 32.32,33. Their Vine is the Vine of Sodom, &c. Sure I am, he hath already begun to cut the Vine, till it bleed; and if Repentance steps not in to turn away Wrath, he may be provoked to say to England as he once did to Palestina, Jer. 2.21. I Planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right seed; how then art thou turned a degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto me? And not only loan us out, but set us to whole-sale; and make the Kingdom an Holocaust to his just Indignation. 2. On the prophane and ungodly in special. This Doctrine is to them an Arrow sent from Heaven, Fea∣thered with Wrath and headed with Ruine. It is a hand from Heaven, an Alarm from thence. Conside∣ring, First, what the Lord hath threat∣ned, Deut. 29.19,20. The Lord will not spare that man, he shall not es∣cape. Do not think the Lord to be a God of Clou ts, one, that however he speak heavy words, yet will not do as he saith; say not with them in
Isa 5.13. Words are but Wind; and with them in the Gospel, God forbid! Do not fancy to your selves a God made up wholly of Mercy, and so act arbitrarily, living as you please: for verily you will find, he hath blows as well as words, and that the cry of Sin, will most cer∣tainly be followed with the eccho of Wrath. Clouds contains the showers of Rain that fall on the earth, and so do Threatnings contain the Judg∣ments that pursue Sinners. As in the Revelations, you never read that the Heavens opened, but some great matter followed; so it is here. Hath the Lord spoken, and shall he not do it? Verily, his word shall not pass a∣way unfulfilled! Secondly, what he hath done, to the Old World, Sodom, Achan, A∣hab, Saul, Herod, and such like Sin∣ners against their own Souls. He hath made Arrows of all Wood, and vengeance of all Creatures to punish their Demerit, he hath fallen upon them more swift than Tem∣pests, Eagles, or impetuous Storms. They are so many visible Sermons, and speak the determinations of God,
real Stories to be read by you, that you may not become Stories for o∣thers to read. Then shall he speak to them in his Wrath, &c. Behold these examples in a way of particular ap∣plication, as bringing Tidings of Ruine, and saying, Ʋnless you Repent, you shall all likewise perish. As Judges use to hang up notorious Offendor in Chains, to be a terrour to all Spectators, so hath the Lord done with many obstinate Sinners; he hath Thundred and Lightned over their rebellious heads, none of them were able to resist his Justice. Thirdly, Considering what you have deserved; even to be delivered up to a reprobate sense, Rom. 1.28. to Be∣lieve a lye, 2 Thes. 2.11. to be turned into Hell, where your Horrour and Lamentations should be the Musick of Gods Justice, and the Heraulds of his Righteous Severity to all Eter∣nity. Object. But shall we be so dealt with? Answ. Yes, without Repentance and speedy turning to God. It is but as he is just, he will find you out. The Rocks and Mountains shall not be
able to shelter you from the Wrath of him that sits on the Throne. May the terrours of God prevail with you! O be importunate with the most High to cut the thred of your Wickedness, that you may not spin it out to a full Length. Put to your own strength to break off the Match between you and Sin, and Sue out a Divorce; Break off thy Sins by Righteousness, saith Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar. Cut this Gordian Knot. If you have any Ge∣nerosity of Spirit, any sparks of So∣briety, consider your latter end; now begin to found a retreat, fold up your Ensigns; It is not too late, the door of Grace is yet open. Protest not to persevere in Mischief, like De∣vils. There are none but enraged Spirits, that will be healed by the Ex∣perience of their own ill, and bury themselves in their ruin. Wise men alwayes make a Medicine for them∣selves of others Folly. Ʋse 2. This Doctrine sounds most incomparable Comfort to all the be∣loved of God, and called unto Holi∣ness; Considering, First, what he hath promised; Pro. 28.13. Isa. 1.18. Ezek. 18.22,
25,26. 1 John 1.9. &c. These are a Nosegay of sweet Flowers taken out of the Scripture-garden; make use of them; Let your Meditation, like the Bee, suck the sweetness of them. They'le prove as Bezar-stone to keep you from fainting under your Sins and Sorrows. Get more acquain∣tance with them, O Ye Sons of A∣doption. Be not like unskilfull La∣pidaries, little valuing the worth of such Orient Pearls, which are the Riches and the only Treasure of the Heirs of Glory, on this fide Heaven. Suck at these Breasts; take Cou∣rage from those Heavenly Influ∣ences. Secondly, Considering what he hath done. He hath been Mindfull of his Covenant, neither will he forget. Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of Love, which you have shwed towards his Name, in that ye have ministred to the Saints, and do minister. 2 Thess. 1.6,7,8. You have three sure Foundations to build upon. 1. You have his Attributes of Ju∣sti and Truth. Whatever he hath prmised, shll be performed. His
promise may lye a long time, as Seed, under ground, but it is all the while a Ripening. Shall not God be true? If not, who shall? He will be so far from coming short of his word, that he will better it. He often shoots be∣yond the Mark of his Promise, ne∣ver short of it. 2. His immutable purpose; 2 Tim. 2.19. The Foundation of God standeth sure, &c. and, The Gifts and calling of God are without Repentance. It cannot be said of God, as it is of man, that though his Goodness be sweet, yet it is short, though he can do enough for us, yet his mind may change or his Promise be broken; No, as he is li∣beral in all his expressions, so he is unchangeable in his intentions of your good. Where he loves, he loves ever. 3. You have his Seal and Earnest, Ephes. 4.30. 2 Cor. 5.5. called the first Fruits of the Spirit, Rom. 8.23. as Israels Grapes in the Wilderness, were the first Fruits of Canaan; what pledge can be more certain than the Earnest of the Spirit: Ephes. 1.14. If this Foundation fail, you may well say with the Prophet David,
What shall the Righteous do? But soon∣er shall the huge Rock be broken in∣to bits, and thrown as Pebbles and Cockle-shells upon the Shoar, by the violence of Waves; sooner shall the Mountains that God hath set fast by his strength, be overturned by the breath of Tempestuous Winds, than the Promises which are founded upon the immutable Power of God and his never failing Goodness, be in the least Iota made void and of none effect. Now as some kind of Artificers, after long poring on a piece of black work, finding a dimness in their eyes, are wont to take an Emerald, or some other green thing, by the ver∣dure whereof they may be refreshed, and their Spirits cheered; thus Be∣lievers when dulled and puzzled with the consideration of sad, strange and contrariant Events in the World, may for their spiritual Relief, make use of this Cordial, these considera∣tions laid before them, their lustre will be exceeding cheering to the eye of Faith. Ʋse 3. Hence is offered somthing of instruction; and that diversly:
First, In matters of Contentation and submission to all his Dispensa∣tions. Providence is the best He∣rauld to Marshal us, and we ought to fit down content, without murmuring at Gods disposing Justice. Thus Job practised; The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh, &c. Mauritius the Emperour, when his Wife and Chil∣dren were Murthered before him, and his own eyes afterward bored out, uttered this Speech, Justus es Domine & Recta judicia tua: Thou art Righteous O Lord in all thy ways. That we are spared it is his Mercy; that we are punished, cannot be un∣just. However things go in the World, could we have hard thoughts of Sin, all our thoughts of Gods dealings with us, would be most honourable. Secondly, in matter of Imitation; and so, 1. For Magistrates, in executing Justice. Here's a Copy for them to write after. See the Rule, Deut. 1.16. Judge Rghteous Judgment, be∣tween every man and his Brother. Ju∣stice is the Soul of Judgment. An un∣just Judge, is a Solecism, a contra∣diction. God will do Justice upon men,
be they what they will be; so must Magistrates execute Justice imparti∣ally. They must be the Law enliven∣ed; they must be , as Plutarch speaks, Living Images of God; who when he is in the greatness of his Power, is most just. Though he could check all the world that speak against him, yet he will do righteous things, Psalm 48.10. Thy Right Hand is full of Righteousness. Gods Right Hand is an embelm of of his strength, and it is full of Righteousness. Thus should men be exalted to highest place of Judg∣ment, they should be full of Righ∣teousness. It is not enough that Justice be in the Laws, but it must be in the Judges too, else no honour, no scurity of a King∣dom: Justice in the Law, is like Gold in the Mine, which while it is there only, doth no man good; but when in the Magi∣strate, it is like Gold coined, for Use and Honour. 2. For Ministers, to declare his Righteousness, and not to fear for any Amazement; Concealing it before great men, covering those Sins with
Silence which they know them guilty of. Greatness must not be a Buff-coat to any mans Wickedness. We know Physitians and Chyrurgeons (and so Ministers) are sometimes allowed to be Cruel. The Lapping up of the Pills of Reproof, in much Pap and Sugar, by allaying the bitterness, fre∣quently the Operation is frustrated. Ministers must not Complement Souls into Hell. They must not feast mens ears, but Wound their Hearts; not lick the sores of great ones, and Bite the Sores of poor ones. This is not just. Nathan did not so; nor John the Baptist before Herod, nor Paul before Felix; nor Chrysostom before Eudoxia, nor Ambrose under Theodo∣sius; nor Bernard it seems by his Dis∣course to Eugenius. Let no Sinister End divert you from the Publication of Gods Justice. It is a work of your Place and Office. It was the work of Christ, of his Apostles and Mini∣sters in all ages. O, manifest some Sparklings of this Diviner Spirit, be∣cause so like that which appeared in those Transcendants among Preach∣ers. Lo I am with you! 3. For People in all their earthly
Transactions. As one wrote to Egi∣dius Abbot of Norinburg, concerning the 119. Psal. Haec non sunt Verba solum Legenda sed Vivenda; so may I speak here to you; these things are not spoken and Written to be heard or read only, but to be lived. This, the Grace of God which hath appeared to all men, teacheth you. A Duty as necessary to Salvation, as that which immediately refers to God himself. Moses came out of the Mount with both Tables in his Hands; the Se∣cond as well as the first. They must go both together; one stone in a Mill will do but little good. A Bird cannot Fly with one Wing. Many please themselves with a Single Con∣science towards God in the first Ta∣ble of the Law, having little Regard of the second towards man; this Argues little Sincerity. You must give God and men their due: Pra∣ctice Righteousness. Ʋse 4 And lastly, The Use is for Reformation and Preparation to meet the Lord, Amos 4.12. The Lord is just and the Judgment day is at Hand. Currat ergo Paenitentia, ne praecurrat Sententia, saith one. Mit∣tamus
Preces et Lachrymas Cordis Le∣gatos, saith another. Haste, haste to meet the Lord with Entreaties of Peace. By hearkning to his Word, believing and doing it; by Humbling your selves under his Rods, or at the Report of his Judgments. And to this end, 1. Cast away your Sins, every man his Idols. Come out of the crooked Paths of Pride, Hypocrisy, Oppressi∣on, Barrenness and whatever is con∣trary to Godliness. 2. Give your selves to Fasting and Prayer, and Mourning, Joel 2.12,13,17. Perhaps you may find Compassi∣on. Who knoweth but that the Lord may Return and leave a Blessing behind him. 3. Put on Christ, and take him in your Arms. Zeph. 2.1,2,3. Gather your selves together, yea, gather together, O na∣tion not desired: Before the decree come forth, before the day of the Lords Anger come upon you. Rom. 13.12,13. The day is far spent, the night is at hand: Let us therefore cast off the Works of Dark∣ness, and put on the Armour of Light. Let us walk honestly as in the day; not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in
Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. — This is the Garment with which you may come boldly before the Lord. FINIS.
