C7619 R171661 45789265 172576
A CURB FOR PEGASUS OR OBSERVATIONS ON THE OBSERVATOR, Number 10. Dated Munday July 6th. 1696. In Relation to the People called QUAKERS. HAD the Authors of this Observator wanted Work, as it should seem they do, or else would hardly have vented such a piece of Im∣pertinency: They might have been better employed in answering some Papers, intitled, The New Athenians, no Noble Bereans, formerly Published in reply to some A∣thenian Mercuries reflecting upon the Quakers and their Principles; and which, though the Authors of the said Mercuries have promised to answer, they have never yet thought fit to perform. And this might be the more justly expected from these Men, since they are reputed to be the same who formerly wrote those, or at least Assistants therein; but whether so or no, yet these promote the same Work still, tho' now under a different disguise. However, be they who they will that scribled this Pamphlet, I find the Quakers Lot no worse, than the Apostles and Primitive Christians Lot was from the Men of their Generation, as it is exprest, 2 Cor. 6.8. By honour and dishonour, by evil report and good report, as Deceivers and yet True: But be it known unto all, that, This we confess unto them, that after the way which they (and such as they are) call Heresie, so worship we the God of our Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets, and have hope to∣wards God, which they themselves also allow (however we be belyed) that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and the Ʋnjust. And herein do we exercise our selves, to have always a Conscience void of offence towards God, and towards Men, Acts 24.14. And thus standing here, we can (as to what con∣cerns our selves) slight all envious Blasts, let them come from what Quarter they will; for having God our Justifier, Who are they who condemn? Rom. 8.33, 34. Yet lest from a profound silence, some inconsi∣derate Persons might conclude a Guilt on our Part, to stop the Mouths of these and such like Gainsayers, whose endeavour is to reproach the Truth we pro∣fess, thereby to discourage others from entertaining any good Opinion either of it or us, it is sometimes requisite to wipe off the Dirt we are bespattered with, which is the design of these Observations, to which I now proceed. Obs. 1. These Men are besides their Province, for Religion and Religious Societies was not the propo∣sed end of their Observators, as the Reader may see in Pegasus, Numb. 1. Wherein they propose their Design, To furnish Inteligence of News, and their Ob∣servator, to enable those who are liable to be imposed up∣on, to make a truer Judgment of the State of Affairs, &c. Consequently ther Flying Horse has nothing to do with Disputes about Religion: But they have al∣tered their Topicks, and have medled with what (I may in some Sence say as in relation to such Pam∣phlets) are things too high for them; no wonder then, they have over-shot themselves. Obs. 2. They repreent the Case, as Disputes be∣tween G. K. and the Quakers, whereas it is well known the Persons sunmoned by G. K. refused to Answer his Summons: demurring to his Authority of appointing such a Meeting for a Dispute without their Consents, and hose Quakers who spake any thing there, pretended to nothing of a Dispute. Therefore, if that Meeting could in any Sence be called by such a Name, it might more properly be termed a Dispute between George and Keith, then be∣tween G. K. and the Quakers. Obs. 3. They have quoted an uncertain Author (as I may justly call him) Rich. Baxter; who tho' he hath much wronged us, being dead is unable either to prove upon us what he hath alledged against us, or retract what he could not prove. For which Reason, as one that dislikes Trampling upon the
Graves of the Dead; I shall drop this Deceased Per∣son, and direct my Speech to these Observatorians, who by thus quoting him of espouse the Cause, and are in some Measure accountable therefore. Obs. 4. They mix with the Quakers, The Vanists, Seckers, Ranters, and Bhmenists, which is unfair, and seems to be designed to amuse People, as if they were all of a stamp; whereas many, nay (I believe) most of the Quakers know not what Tenets those others held, consequently unaccountable there∣fore: But upon this here are Miracles instanced, to manifest that Divine Vengeance fell upon the aforesaid, and is a stroke directly levelled at them; that by join∣ing the Quakers to those, they may sideways smite these; as much as to say, they deserve the like, but Caveant Authores. Obs. 5. They link the Quakers with the Socinians, as Denyers of the Godhead of Christ. After this Rate our Adversaries will leave us no Christ at all in a while; for they use to accuse us as Denyers of the Humanity, and now we must lose the Divinity too. What do they think we make of Christ, if we will have him neither God nor Man, but both Accusati∣ons are equally false, for we do acknowledge him to be both God and Man▪ But however, by thus overdoing it, they do their own Business, their Charge being too high to be believed by any rational Men. Obs. 6. What farther they quote out of Rich. Baxter, hath in all the Branches of it; met with so frequent replies, that it would be but Actum Agere to add any thing here. Only thus much I shall ob∣serve, That their Stock is but low, or else they would not Rake up such old Stuff. Obs. 7. They Rank us with the Beau's, Wits and Debauchees, &c. call us Contemplative Debauchees, and Precise Enemies to Jesus Christ under the Name of Chri∣stians, &c. How the Quakers can be Precise and Con∣templative, and yet compared with Beau's and Debau∣chees is such a Riddle, as is past their skill to unrid∣dle, and truly by the same Method of Speech a Man might call them wise Fools. Then as to Christianity, their Works demonstrate they have no real Title to it, if the Apostle John be worthy of Credit, who saith. In this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil: Whoever doth not Righteous∣ness, is not of God, neither he that loveth not his Brother, 1 John 3.10. Obs. 8. Their great Partiality is observable, in quoting G. K's Narrative as authentick Proof, be∣fore they know what answer will be given to it, which Evidences they are resolved to hear of but one Ear, and upon his Asserting they will pawn their Credit for the Truth of wht he says, because 'tis against the Quakers that his Calumnies are levelled. Well! be the Quakers Faith what it will, I am sure their Faith is wrong, or else their Works would be better. Are these your Arguments you use to Con∣vert those deluded Souls, as you call them? If these be the best you can produce, you will not have much occasion to boast of them. Obs. 9. They flatter G. K. for Opposing the Qua∣kers: But if they should have occasion to know him as much as the Quakers do, they would be as weary of him as ever the Quakers were before they cast him out from amongst them. For let them say what they will, it is not G. K's mistaken Opinion of Persons as G. W. W. P, &c. (as they would Insinuate) that oc∣casions this Difference, but his now opposing what Do∣ctrines he formerly held and defended while amongst the Quakers, and that those are wicked Principles is Gratis dictum, and they that affirm must prove, First That the Doctrines formerly held by G. K. and still by the Quakers in themselves are wicked, and secondly, That the Quakers hold those wicked Principles they charge upon them, in this Observator, all which is still to do as in relation to these Authors, and as to the Controversie between G. K. and them, Subjudice lis est, therefore not yet prov'd as they say. Besides if those are but little Cavils (as they are pleased to call them) which were offered in the Paper Printed by T. Swle, they may the more easily be answered by so Famous a Champion. But by the way let them take notice G. K. hath a great deal more to answer then that half sheet: So that if these his Advocates think he hath too much work upon his hands, they may be pleased to assist him if they think fit. Obs. 10. Their Insinuating as if Popish Emissaries nou∣rished those by them cited wicked Principles (which they Father upon the Quakers) amongst us, is Idle. Our Principles and Method of Worship being well known by Judicious Men who are not of our Communion, to be more opposite to Popish Principles, and the Fop∣pish Ceremonial Worship of that Superstitious Church, then those of any Protestant Society besides. Now upon the whole, the Reader may be pleased to take notice, That these Authors offering no proof for what they assert against us, but what Sufficient exceptions lie against, as above, I have likewise of∣fered no quotations out of our Books in vindication of our Principles, which if occasion were I could produce in great number, sufficient to wipe off the grossest Calumnies that they are able to devise: But I love to be short, especially since brevity marrs not the cause I now undertake. I shall further add, a name∣less Pamphlet deserves a nameless Reply, and since they have taken a course thus to vent their Spleen in such a Paper as is not usual to be Published with any Authors name to it, they must excuse me if I put not mine to this; In the mean time promising, that when they think fit to own theirs, I will not be ashamed to own mine. Farewell, London, Printed, and Sold by T. Sowle in White Hart Court in Gracious-Street, 1696.
