C893A R226430 99895663 153085
THE CASE OF Colonel Adam Murray, Humbly Represented to the COMMONS, in Par∣liament Assembled. HE was among the first who declar'd, and took up Arms for Their Majesties, King William and Queen Mary, and the Protestant Religion. When the Earl of Antrim's Popish Regiment was sent to Garrison, the Town of Derry, he was one of those who rose in the Country, forced them away, and thereby encourag'd the People of the Town to shut their Gates against them, and consequently to hold out, as they afterwards did against the Irish Army. Presently after he raised a Troop, with which he gave all the opposition he could to the Irish Forces at Claudyford. After the Protestants retreated from thence, 400 Horse stuck by him, with which he continued nigh the Irish Army some days after the Protestants fled into Derry. After this when the Irish Army surrounded all that part of Derry, which lay open from the Sea, the Protestants within the Town, sent a Letter to him, to come speedily in, otherwise that the Town would be lost; for that Colonel Lundy was treating with Hamilton, the Irish General about a Surrender. Upon this Message he forc'd his way through the Enemies Dragoons, and got into the Town, but not without the loss of several of his Men. When he came into the Town, he immediately went to Colonel Lundy, chief Commander, with a strong body of Men: Lundy told him they had sign'd to Sur∣render upon Honourable terms, and shewed him the Instrument they had sign'd, upon which he protested against any Treaty with the Irish Army; which hinder'd the delivering up the Town at that time. Afterwards he march'd to the Main-Guard, and secur'd the Keys of all the Gates and Stores, which he kept for two Days, till it was agreed that Colonel Baker, a very ingenious Man and good Souldier, should be Governour of the City, Mr. Walker should manage the Stores, and Colonel Murry should Command the Horse. 'Tis well known what Service those Horse did, 'till, in extream necessity, they were by Order of Council, forc'd to Eat them. He was afterwards in all the frequent Sallies that were made, and was always successful, till about Eight days before the Irish Army fled from before Derry, he was Shot thro' the Body, as they pursued the Enemy to their Trenches. After he recover'd of his Wounds, and the Irish Army were forc'd to quit the Siege, he continu'd a Reform'd Officer, according to the King's Letter to D. Schomberg, that the Derry Officers shou'd be continu'd in full Pay, till provided for in equal or better Posts. In 1691, General Ginkel sent him from the Camp to the Lords Justices in Dubln, where he was intrusted with a very ample Commission, to Command all the Mi∣litia of the Province of Ʋlster. This Commission he can shew, together with Let∣ters of Thanks, from General Ginkel, for the Service he did with the Militia; and particularly those who were sent to James Town and Sligo. He was three Years and some Months Lieutenant Colonel to the Lord Charle∣mont, till that Regiment was broke: The Pay then receiv'd, with a small Sum, call'd Bounty-Money, and 20 l. from my Lord Conningsby, is all the Reward he has had for his Sufferings and Services; in mentioning which he thinks it not very decent, or modest to be too particular he refers to common Fame, and in one particular, to what the Irish Army generally said, that he kill'd the French General Mammoo. 'Tis very well known, what great Proposals King James made him, first by the Earl of Abercorn, afterwards by his own Father (sent unto him by the King) if he wou'd come over to him. He having no Estate has contracted considerable Debts, and his Family must be reduc'd to extream Misery and Ruine, unless relieved by the Justice and Mercy of this Honourable House.
Colonel Murray's CASE.
