d1661 e124_30 99872893 125340
A Discoverie of Treason AGAINST THE KING, AND PARLIAMENT: Together with the whole KINGDOME: BEING The true Copie of a Letter found about a Priest lately apprehended at Clarkenwell in the County of Middlesex. WHEREIN Many of their trecherous and hellish Plots against the Kings Majesty and this whole State are fully discovered, with their practises against the Parliament, and the Protestant Religion. LONDON, Octob. 29. Printed by R.A. and A.C. for G. Smith. 1642.
The Copie of a Letter found about a Priest lately apprehended at Clarkenwell in the County of MIDDLESEX. FAther Rector, Let not the damp of a∣stonishment seize on your most deare and zealous soule concerning the pro∣ceedings of this Parliament, for you must know the Counsell is ingaged to assist the King by way of Prerogative in case the Par∣liament will resemble the Pelican, which takes pleasure to dig out with her owne beak her own bowels. You may remember how the late famous and mortall Statesman, the Conde Gunda∣more, said, King JAMES rockt him asleepe with a fancy and sweet sound of peace to keep np the Spanish treaty. Likewise we were bound to some eminent Statesment of our own countrey, to gaine time in procu∣ring the advantagious cessation of armes in the Palatinate, and in the North of the Spa∣nish
Nation in vilifyihg the Hollanders, demonstrating to the King, that the States were most ungratefull to his Predecessors, that the States were more obnoxious then the Turks, and perpetually hindred his loy∣all Subjects, and had usurped the regality of the narrow seas, in fishing upon the Eng∣lish coasts. This great man had but one principall meanes to further his great de∣signes, which was, that none but the Puri∣tan faction, which plotted nothing but an anarchy, and his confusion, were averse to the most happy union. We steere on the same course, and make great use of an anar∣chicall election, and have prejudicated the Great One, that none but the Kings ene∣mies and his are chosen of the Parliament: and that the Parliament avowes, that they will begin with the least, and will not give over till they have extirpated him and his posterity. On the other side, the sincere parties that are to be admired for their in∣defatigable industry, incessantly forment re∣venge and jealousie in most of the Parliament-men, especially they work upon the
pride and vain-glory of such as have beene imprisoned, possessing them, that they are the only martyrs & Worthies of the coun∣treys. London is a much distempered as Florence; for the Companies are at odds, and the Common Councell have opposed their Magistrates against the old custome, which hath bred a great deal of heart-bur∣ning in the city, so that twice a day we can divulge what we list in Pauls, and upon the Exchange, you shall see the same sword that hath wounded us, being drawne upon the same wound with an oyl that we have, shal make us whole. And this shalbe done in Parliament, in charming the wisest and temperatest: with the violent sort we take a strange course, by working upon their passions, and inebriating their fancies with probabilities and presidents, that favourites may wrestle with Parliaments for a time, but at last a Parliament will overthrow their backs: we incourage them with all the wits we have, to fall upon some great persons heere Ais Majesty, and perswade them that now is the time or never, the
King being in such necessity, insomuch that we assure our selves, God hath forsaken and infatuated them, that they shall not on∣ly strike against the same rock but sink and rake in the bottome of the sea of destru∣ction. We have now many strings to our bow, and have strongly fortified our faction, and we have added two bulwarks more. For when K. JAMES was very violent against Arminianisme, and interrupted with his pestilent wit and deep learning our strong designes in Holland, and was a great friend o that old rebellious heretick the Prince of Orange; now we have planted the so∣veraigne drug of Arminianisme, which we hope will purge the Protestants from their heresie, and will flourish and bear fruit in due season. The foundation to build up the bulwark must be mutation; our mutation will cause reluctation, which will serve for as many violent diseases as the Stone, the Gowt, Tooth-ache, speedy destruction, or perpe∣tall insufferable anguish of the body,
which is worse then death it self. There are other matters in hand of con∣sequence which we take to consideration & tender care, which is the state of the Pu∣ritans, for they are impudent subtill people. I cannot but laugh to see how some of our coat have counterfeited themselves, you would scarce know them if you saw them. It is admirable, how is speech, apparell and gesture they act the Puritans. They abused our sacred Patron Ignatius in jest, but we will make them smart for it in earnest. I hope you will excuse my merry digres∣sion: for I confesse to you, I am at this time transported with joy to fee how happily all instruments and meanes, aswell great as small, do co-operate to our purposes. But to return again to our main fabrick: In the first place we take into consideration the King honour & present necessity, and we shew how the King may free himselfe from his wardship as Lewis the 11. did, and for his great splendor and lustre, he may raise vast summes, and not be beholden to his subjects, which is by way of imposition
and Excise: we instance the Low-Coun∣treyes, and shew what a masse of money they raise to pay their armies both by sea and land meerly out of Excise. Then our Church Catholikes proceed to shew the means how to settle this Excise which must be by an Army of horse and foot; for we have made it sure: they shall be Forraigners, and Germans, vvho vvill eat up the Kings revenues, and spoile the countreys vvheresoever they come, though they be vvell paid; vvhat havock vvill they make then vvhen they have no pay. If the countrey be too hard for the souldiers, they must consequently outrage, vvhich is e∣qually advantagious to us. FINIS.
