D1972A 99897293 170839
THE APPEARANCE or PRESENCE OF THE Son of Man. PSAL. 48. Thy right hand is full of righteous∣ness, Let Mount Sion rejoyce, and the daughters of Iuda be glad, because of thy Judgements. Printed in the Year, 1650.
Even as I received of my Father, &c. He that hath an ear let him hear. ANd proceeding herewith in another place what he saith, who had not concealed it were it otherwise; That in his Fathers House were many mansions: reserv'd My∣steries, all revealed not at once, as much to say, M therefore left without excuse: of the iron rod the A bid beware, reiterated so: even He that hath an ear (to wit) on pain or peril of his head, &c. Proclaiming no other then the Supreme Order or Authority, their unlimitted Commission: The Spi∣rit after absent so long, how (as it were) stands knocking at the door:
whereof these the sum or substance of no inferior consequence: A great∣er then the Conquerer, Parliaments Prerogative not exempted: say∣ing, To him that overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, I will give power over the Nations, shall rule them with a rod of iron: His insult∣ing Enemies necks made his foot∣stool. Who speaks the word of the Lord, and done it is: Those Heathen Po∣tentates, but like to Potters brittle Vessels broken in pieces, scattered, suddenly a Printers Press like. As the aforesaid herewith consenting shews expresly (Psalm) The Lord said, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine Enemy, &c. shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion, Be
thou ruler, &c. And so much for this the prophetical everlasting Order. Whose Prison-commons put into the reckoning, In the days of thy trouble (saying) shall the people offer thee free-will-offerings, &c. Bread (to say) for the Lords sake, and run∣ing-water: Therefore shall he lift up thy head: The Lord thy keeper, hell gates shall not prevail against her: and clear truths as Noon day, not un∣known come to pass: Notwith∣standing by you, As for this Moses we wot not what is become of him: with one consent afraid all to come nigh him, terrified with them, be∣cause of that lusture on his vissage, &c. The two renewed Tables coming down with in his hand:
Shadowed out directly in those re∣vived VVitnesses two (Revel. 11.) when supposed to have heard no more news of them: Those lights deem'd had utterly been extinguish∣ed, like to the day of Iudgement, when those rebels at the same time swept away in that cities earthquake: And sacrificing all to your own in∣ventions, how requisite some real Demonstration then extraordinary, such unruly winds, where broken loose Trees whose fruit withers: Not for ought good without ap∣plyed means supernatural, not to be tamed or ordered: Even appointed this anointing faithful and true say∣ing: These from her overshadow∣ed with the same hand, as he Aarons
god that was ordained, like Beams of Divinity participating, and Oyls odirefferous, an Elixer not of man or flesh and blood: She whose Throne heaven, earth her footstool from the un∣created, saying, I am A. and O. first and last, both beginning and ending, by whom all things were done: Not without her any thing done or made; Trinity in Unity, of Manhood the head: Who of Death have the Keys and Hell: Then the Queen of the South a greater, born a greater not of Wo∣men: Melea, by Interpretation, Queen of Peace, or She-councellor. And so much for this without con∣tradiction, she his Executor, Made like unto the Son of God, the ancient of days likeness: owner of that Ti∣tle of Tythes, to whom the Patri∣arch
offered a Tenth, from the slaughter being returned of those Kings; preceding that Cities day of Iudgement prefiguring the final; for which interceding none might avail: Even the Lord upon her right hand, wounding even Kings in the day of his wrath; judging among the Hea∣then: Heads of divers Countreys smiting assunder: such headships of the Church, of such no more. And weak sights moreover lest offended overcome with light, for quallifying the said Deity, or to mo∣derate the same. Imprimis, first and formost saying I am A. and O. alias, Da: and Do: by her first and last marriage so subscribes, that begin∣ning and ending Dowger, &c. in the next thus. Item, Daughter of
Audleigh, or Oldfield, in the Saxon Tongue,  no created Peership: a Saxon Baron afore the Conquest, As unto this day, preferring the act of time Antiquity, before Ti∣tles subject to be reversd; and so far for that beginning and ending, of Kings and House of Lords. Also Baron Touchet of France, Castlehaven in Ireland, Douglas of Scotland: Honors three, consisting in a fourth, Audeley: Of those Na∣tions no obscure Denominations, which late ruined old house of this Kingdoms fall a forerunner, Je Le Tien its Motto, Hold fast till I come (Rev. &c.) a derivative therefrom: like unto the Tabernacles work to a loop, and holy Garments or Coats adorned with several pre∣cious
Stones, following that patern in their true fiery colours display'd, consuming dross a Refiners fire, like of whose discent, Genealo∣gy of his noble Prophets no novel∣ty to be kept, suffices so much in refference to the Morning-Star, usher of the day: That honor re∣ceived from him, giving the seven Stars or Plannets: The Creations coat, arms born: By vertue here∣of, (ver.) He that keeps my works unto the end, as I received of my Fa∣ther, &c. whom invincible Pro∣phets, his followers with whom no shrinking or back-drawing, till they have made it good: so much for their Charge. Where lastly, by consequence, Heaven how comes to be her
Ioynture, place, being no unneces∣sary circumstance thus going on: Thou Bethlehem or Berkshire, not the least, first of Counties: Even shewing the word of the most high God, at Englefield Mannor-House: That Morning-Salutation for ever blest, where that voyce came unto her, speaking down as through a Trumpet, these words. Saying, There is Nineteen years and half to the Judgement day, And you as the meek Virgin. Where farther, by way of Priority thus walking about Si∣on, counting her Towers, those Right-hand years, in the first of his Reign, Ao 1625. first of his name of these Dominions, moneth
July, 28. so after the first Roman Emperor called: He slain, &c. shewing not to vulgar apprehensi∣ons difficult, in this Cosmographical Table of New Heaven and Earth: How under the Gallery of the a∣foresaid Englefield-House, where a∣wakened with that unexpected Alarm in English: The Western Road lies a Thorowfare under a high Arch for Travellers: Also a place called Hell of old, a Mile or two distant therefrom, full of pits within the royalties: The Harbor of such decrepid with age, and their Associates blinde and halt, craving relief nigh the Highway-side, no Critick observation in the County of HARTFORD: whose Ioynture the Manor of
Pyreton (fire in Greek) consisting of a Tythe or Impropriation, shews Ao 48. the same year of that Kings slaughter or execution: she restored Trinity Term put into Possession of the said Tythe: By the Sheriff a Writ Moveas Manus, by ver∣tue of it, to that Patriarch, some∣time appertaining Abbot of St. Al∣bons: sold away Ao 33. in the days of her durance, not difficult a little to regain it; the oftner Argued, the more Ambiguous, until by the Ba∣rons of Exchequer, in writing the same appointed to be put down; so Intricate, &c. Of which ho∣ly Appurtenances Consecrated; things too exactly which cannot be observed, Ao 1625. Since when, not any thing acted or come to pass:
From Germanies Desolations, Ro∣chels Siege, until Irelands Blow, and what since followed; like one waves pursuing another, forerunners of the moments great change and general Iudgement, when persons or Sex, without such respects: even which Passages not unforeshewed by her hand, together with the afore∣said Golden Number of Nineteen years and a half to Ao 1644. extending the  B▪ his January Account not onely, but the late Charls when became a prisoner, Nazeby, &c. That day of Iudgement, Ao 45. current; afterward tasting of the said fatal Moneths cold Cup: as Buckingbams August Moneth, him foreshewed, whereupon (boad∣ing to that Nation a lash) she wan
that wager to his smart: The typi∣fying Breeches of the Sotch man her Husband, against such wimzes of hers who laid them, as he then term∣ed it, passing not scotfree, &c. And these with other like, a world not able to contain them: also this for another, 1647. by the same to∣ken that Night a bold Star facing the Moon (April. 2.) passed through her Body, at which time served that Writ, bearing dare the second of April: I send thee to a rebellious house, &c. Ezek. 2. and cap. 12. she prefixing Penticost ensuing, as when such a mighty rushing wind, to beware them like as when they all assembled, &c. witness South∣wark: That Mornings ghests un∣expected accompanied with such
a Thunder-clap from above, and darkness: To the upper House a warning piece their discharge. And lastly, a second like unto it, witness, 1650 July Jubile, that judge∣ment by fire in Holborn, and other parts of the City: Instantly in the same week she cast out of her law∣ful possession of Englefield, by that Counties Sheriff, being by due course of Law put into the same: But in the VVhitson-week, the like unheard without being impleaded: for the same Sheriff with pistols and VVeapons to break up doors, done as he said by a mighty power: All he had to say for himself, authorized by Committees Order, for swallowing a VVidows Estate up after that maner: And fasting, under pre∣tences,
