E1394 E55_20 99872028 155264
A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, Concerning the present lamentable, and miserable Condition of Ireland, the poore Protestants in some places being forced to kill their Horses to satisfie their Hunger, and very many others having perished by Famine. With some sad and serious Motives propounded by both Houses, to all pious and well affected Englishmen for their speedy Reliefe, a thing earnestly to be intended considering what courses are now set on foot at Oxford, for bringing those barbarous Rebels into this Kingdom. Whereunto are added, The severall Propositions made by the Commit∣tees of the House of Commons, and the Committee of Adventurers chosen in London out of the body of the Adventurers, and ratified by the House, for the more perfect incouragement of all that wish well to the generall cause of Religion, the relieving of the Protestant brethren in Ireland, and the safety of this State and Kingdome. Die Lunae. 19 June. 1643. ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this Declaration, with the Propositions and Votes shall be forthwith printed and published. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed by George Miller, Iune 24. 1643.
Die Veneris 16. Iune 1643. WE the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, being by severall Letters ful∣ly informed both from the Lords Iustices, and Councell of Dublin, and also from other parts of the Kingdom of Ireland, of the extreamly necessitous condition of the whole Army and the test of the distresed Protestants of that Kingdom, out of a compassionate sense of the miseries of their Brethren there, and their tender care to prevent the extirpation of the Protestant Religion so generally aimed at: have though fit to publish to the view of all piously affected persons, the lamentable estate of that distresed King∣dome, which is now by the unhappy influence of our distractions here, reduced to that extremity that in most parts of the Army, our Souldiers want Bread for their bellies, Clothes for their backs, and Shooes for their feet, to give them a necessary sub∣sistence; and in some parts thy have beene forced to kill their Horses to satisfie their hunger, very many of the poor English in severall places having perished by famine.
Neverthelesse it hath pleased Almighty God, to imprint such speciall markes of his unlimitted favours, upon the endea∣vours of our severall Armies there, tht we have more then probable cause to hope, that if we shall cheerefully addresse our selves to send them seasonable supplies, hée will not yet permit the ruine of our Religion and Countreymen in that king∣dom. Which we are the more inducd to believe, since we are credibly informed, that the wants of our Adversaries doe in most parts equalize, in many far excéed ours, where they have beene forced to eate, not the flesh only but the very hides of their Horses to kéepe them from starving, which have brought ve∣ry many of them to such a condition of weakenesse, that they appeare rather like walking Anatomies then fighting me, so that we have no reason to suspect, but that our Armies there (if not suffered first to starve) may by Gods blessing yet soon reduce that Kingdome. Nor can it be unknowne to any understanding and judicious observer, that whatever bee pretended by the Rebells, yet the true causes heightning them to such a degree of barbarous∣nesse, are, the inveterate hatred they beare to the true Religion, and their ambitious desires as is most evident by the severall Commissions from the Rebels, stiling themselves the supream Counsell of the confederate Catholiques of Ireland, issued to men of War whom they maintained at Sea to spoyle the trade of this Kingdome, making themselves absolute and indepen∣dent on this Kingdome, and which is not a little fomented by all the Popish party throughout Christendome, as appeares by the large contributions sent from all parts thither of Mo∣ney, Armes, Ammunition and experienced Commanders: And can it be that Gods enemies should be more violent, and inde∣fatigable for restoring Idolatry in a Kingdome forraine to theirs, then we zealous in propugning Gods truth in our owne against both barbarous Traytors and monstrous Idolaters?
shall the common incendiaries of both Kingdomes strip them∣selves of all they have to accomplish our destruction, by devour∣ing that rich and fruitfull Island; And shall the good people of this Nation, of the same bloud and Religion with them, think any thing too deare for redeeming them, whom wee ought to our powers to preserve; seeing hereby, we also secure our own both Religion and Liberties, preventing the accesse of the Rebells from thence by inabling our Army to continue there, which will consequently containe them within that Kingdome, A thing earnestly to be intended, considering what coures are set on foote at Oxford, for bringing them into this King∣dome: Not to insist how much it imports all the Adventurers, Lenders and Contributers, all Merchants and indeede the whole Nation to advance a considerable summe to what they have applyed unto that worke for the now compleating there∣of, Nor to be more particular in laying before the World, how the King (seduced by evill Councels) doth deny his con∣currence to the Bill lately sent him as a most necessary expedient for that worke. Wee have therefore thought fit to appoint a speciall Com∣mittee for that purpose, and have resolved in the midst of our distractions here, (as a thing wherein the wellfare of our Re∣ligion, the honour our English Nation, and the safety of this Kingdome is so neerely concerned) to contribute by all possible meanes to the preservation of that Kingdom. And although the great burdens which lie upon the subjects for maintenance of the Armies, raised for the necessary de∣fence of this kingdome, will not suffer us to lay any present charge upon them, yet our tender care of Ireland is such, that in pursuance of a vote of the House of Commons, an Ordinance is now ready to passe, whereby a charge shall he set of two hundred thousand pounds upon this Kingdome, to be assessed
upon the severall Counties, according to the Proportion of the Bill of four hundred thousand pounds, and to be paid in two yeers, by which time we hope the distractions of this Kingdome by Gods mercy may be so setled, that the Subjects shall with ease and cheerfulnesse beare this necessary burden, and by this meanes wee conceive this future charge will give present credit for the reliefe of the starving condition of Ireland, which is intended to be laid upon this Kingdom, as an adven∣ture for land in Ireland, for the benefit of the severall Coun∣ties proportionable to the summes that shall bee raised in the particular Counties to bee imployed to the ease of their pub∣lie charge. And doe likewise earnestly recommend the care of that worke to all such as are really affected to our Religion, and the Cause we have in hand, to advance Moneys for that use, either by way of adventure, loane, or weekly Contribu∣tion in such manner as shall be agreed on by the Committee, and approved by the Parliament, wherein both Houses of Par∣liament intend to shew that good example which they hope all others will follow. For what may bee advanced by way of adventure, it is al∣ready provided in a late Ordinance of Parliament, that all new Advnturers shall receive the same Advantages grant∣ed to the formr in the Act of Parliament for the Advenurers of Ireland, and in the same Ordinance provision is made for the security of all such as shall voluntarily lend to so pious a Worke; All which Monies now proposed to bee advanced, shall onely have their aspect forwards (without consideration of former areas) and bee disposed of with all possible cre to the best advantage of this present Summers service: And for what hath beene formerly raised to that purpose, it shall most evidently apeae to all the World, that it hath beene with a great overplus disposed of for the use of Ireland, And that all aspersions of that nature cast upon the Parliament have beene
but the malitious pretences of disaffected persons, to excuse their own backwardnesse, and dishearten such as desire to prevent the ruine of our Religion, which we hope by our cordiall and season∣able indeavours may spéedily be prevented, and this Warre soone brought to a happy conclusion, And herein the concurrence of most of the Officers of that Kingdome administers great en∣couragement, who are desirous (so well they affect that worke) to underwrite the one halfe of their Arreares due by way of Adventure for Land, and also take the one halfe of what shall grow due and is to come, likewise on the Condition of the Sub∣scribers at the reducing of that Kingdome, desiring onely to sub∣sist untill the worke be finished. We have so just reason upon these many and convincing grounds to be sensible of the extraordinary Care and pious In∣tentions of the well affected Party in this Kingdome, as we must not or cannot doubt of their ready Zeale in the setting for∣ward of so Pious, so Charitable a worke, wherein the Religion we professe, lies at the stake: and the lives of so many thousand of our poore Protestant brethren are in apparent danger, unlesse by present reliefe their approaching ruine be timely prevented, nor can we well expect that God will long blesse us, if we be wanting to our brethren, whose preservation is so immediately linked to our owne safety, that we have much cause to suspect this Kingdome is much indangered, when we have once abso∣lutely lost that of Ireland. For such is the malice of the Rebels to our Nation, that if they once root us out of that Kingdome, thy will not despaire by themselves and their Confederates wholly to extirpate both us and our Religion out of the Christian World. For remedy whereof in so much as the generall waies ob∣served on the last Act of Contribution hath not procured such meanes of reliefe as are necessaty, (though divers both Persons and Parishes have been very bountifull) severall of that
Kingdome with others are therefore directed to solicite the businesse by such particular applications as may be hoped (in a wore so earnestly crying for reliefe) will beget competent supplies for giving that Kingdome a being, and in all likelihood preserving this from finall undoing, which as it must be ac∣knowledged to the already Contributers, so is and shall be estéemed by those who hereafter put hand to the worke as a most acceptable seruice to this and that Kingdome. These things considered, we desire that all well affected peo∣ple would heartily apply themselves to prevent such mischiefe by chearefull contributing to so Pious a worke, which will be an Act in the esteeme of all the world very commendable and ex∣treamely acceptable to God and all good men.
Die Lunae, 19o. Junij, 1643. THe Committee appointed by the House, the 29th of May, 1643. for the better expediting the Affaires of Ireland, together with the Committee of the Ad∣venturers in London newly elected, or any eight of them, shall have power to call to their Assistance such other persons as they shall thinke fit, And the said Com∣mittee of Adventurers, shall have equall power to Vote with the Committee of the House of Commons in all matters con∣cerning the managing of the Moneyes now to be raised for Ire∣land by way of Adventure or otherwise; And this Committee shall have likewise power to appoint Treasurers to peruse the Accompts of such as have beene formerly imployed, to be rea∣dy for the view of the House, to reward such as they must ne∣cessarily imploy in this service, and to issue out any of these Moneyes now to be raised for the affaires of Ireland by Order from this Committee, and to manage all matters for the good of the future service according as they shall find most expe∣dient, being still to give an accompt to the House of their Pro∣ceedings as oft as shall be required.
Die Lunae, 19o. Iunij, 1643. Resolved upon the Question, THat this House doth declare, that they will in a short time send over a Commander in Chiefe into Ireland, such as this Kingdome shall have good cause to confide in. Resolved upon the Question, THat this House doth thinke it fit to send over Committees into the severall Provinces of Ireland, whereof one in each to be of the House of Commons, and one chosen by the Adventurers, from whom they may expect such continuall Intelligence of the conditions of each Province, that they may make their Provisions accordingly. Die Lunae, 19o. Iunij, 1643. Propounded from the Committee▪ THat an Ordinance may be brought in for the Adventurers, who shall now deposite a fourth part of what formerly is subscribed and paid, that they shall have so many Acres of Land added to what is allot∣ted by the former Act of Parliament, as shall make their former propor∣tian of Acres double to what is graunted by the Act, as also for what they shall now pay upon the Ordinance, with all Priviledges as former∣ly. And whosoever shall subscribe De novo, shall have the like double proportion of Land for his new subscription. THe Adventures to be set in such Province as they shall clouse.
THat such as desire to Plant together, may be permitted so to doe, they declaring the same at their new subscriptions, or within Moneth. THat the House declares an Act or Acts of Parliament shall be pre∣pared in due time, to passe both in England and Ireland for con∣firming whatsoever now passeth by Ordinance. Resolved, &c. THat this House doth agree, that an Ordinance be prepared and drawne in pursuance of these Propositions. H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com. Die Lunae 19o. Iunij, 1643. FOr as much as many both Adventurers for Land in Ire∣land and others, are willing to apply themselves by all good meanes for bringing that great good worke to some perfection, well knowing, what consequence the losse of that Kingdome will be to this, both in relation to the security and firme peace of the State, and also in respect of the Cause of Religion, which must be deepely wounded in case that King∣dome should become wholy Popish. And for as much as the Subscriptions upon the severall Acts of Parliament doe not ingage a third part of the Land designed to be applied to that
work by those Acts, and that the time limited for underwri∣ting by those Acts is elapsed; We being desirous to make up what was wanting in the former Subscriptious, in some proportion to our Abilities, doe humbly offer, That both Hou∣ses of Parliament will give such incouragement as may in∣duce those who are Merchants, and live on Trades, to ad∣venture Considerable Summes, by passing an Ordinance in these following or the like particulars. That so much of the City and Suburbs of Limbricke as is Escheated with the Island of Enishcattery, and the fishings of the River, with other immunities belonging to the City, and Twenty foure Thousand Acres of Confiscated Profitable Land next contiguous to that City may be secured to the Ad∣venturers who shall now underwrite, the said City and Land being made over to them & their heirs, &c. in free and common soccage as of his Majesties Castle of Dublin, with such Immunities as are graunted to the City of Bristoll, and such other Priviledges as be contained in the Acts of Parliament for Subscriptions on Lands in Ireland; Provided the se∣verall Summes to be underwritten doe amount in the To∣tall unto Sitty Thousand Pounds, there being reserved to his Majesty for the same, the Yearely rent of one Thousand two Hundred and Fifty Pounds per Annum. That the Towne of Galloway in Connaught▪ with Twen∣ty Thousand Acres of Land and Immunities as abovesaid shall be secured unto such as adventure for that City and Land, provided, That the totall of the subscriptions amount unto Fifty Thousand Pounds, his Majesties Rent one Thousand and Forty pounds. That the City of Waterford in Munster, with thirty Thou∣sand▪ Acres of Land and Immunities as aforesaid, shall be
secured to such as adventure for that City and Land, Pro∣vided the totall of their Subscriptions amounts unto Sixtie Thousand Pounds, the Rent to his Majesty per Annum, one Thousand two Hundred and Fifty Pounds. That the Towne of Wexford with twelve Thousand Acres of Land and Immunities as aforesaid, shall be secured to such as adventure for that Towne and Land▪ Provided the totall of their Subscriptions, amount unto Fifteene Thou∣sand Pounds, the Rent to his Majesty per Annum, three Hundred and twelve Pounds eight Shillings eight Pence. And seeing the course of passing Bills is so much obstruc∣ted, that the Kingdome of Ireland will be lost if some effe∣ctuall and speedy course be not taken, The Adventurers de∣sire to be secured, that such Conditions as shall be now past by Ordinance, shall be turned into an Act or Acts of Parliament for their more fit and unquestionable security▪ which they hum∣bly conceive will much further the worke. That those who have or shall underwrite any considerable Summe upon the said Propositions for Cities, and have for∣merly adventured, or shall underwrite for Lands in the King∣dome at large, shall be accomodated to have his Lands set out as neere unto those Cities (for which he shall subscribe) as may be. And in case the respective Summes whereat the said Cities Townes and said Lands adjacent are valued be not wholy underwritten▪ yet the underwriters shall have so much in proportion out of those Cities, Townes and Lands adja∣cent as their adventure shall amount unto, to be set forth by in∣different Commissioners to be Named by both Houses.
THe House doth allow of these Propositions, And it is Or∣dered that the House will apply their Authority for making good of the same. H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com. THe Propositions afore-mentioned being now agreed unto, These are further to signifie, that the following Title is prefixed to severall Books for the severall Com∣panies, whereunto all that are so disposed, are desired this day to repaire, and such as are at present in this Assembly this 24th. of June, 1643. are desired to resort to their severall Companies, where the same Books are now remaining▪ Such others as be not of any Companies of London, and whose hearts God inclines to Contribute in this Pious worke, are intreated to resort unto Grocers-Hall, where Books are also remaining, and Treasurers appointed, as in the foregoing Declaration appeares.
June 14. 164. VVHereas the Honourable House of Commons have fully condiscended to the Propositions made by the joynt Committee of Adventurers, as by an Order of the 19th. of Iune 1643. doth appeare, That so good a worke may not suffer through the want of necessary supply, which is now ho∣ped may be soone brought to a very good condition; We whose Names are under written, doe hereby oblige our selves to the pai∣ment of the summes to our Names affixed at Grocers-Hall unto M. Iames Bunce, M. Thomas Foot, M. Iohn Kenderick Alder-men, and M. Sam: Avery Esquire Treasurers, appointed for that service, whose acquittance, or any two of them shall be sufficient to entitle the said Subscribers to such Adventure unto which they shall sub∣scribe, and be a discharge for such other paiments as shall be brought in upon the other Propositions; the severall paiments to be made as followeth. viz. One third within Ten Dayes, another third within one Moneth after, and the last third within two Moneths after that; So as all our Adventure is to be fully paid in within three Moneths after our said Subscription; And we whose Names are underwritten, will make our Election to which of the Propositions we will apply our Adventure, at the time of our said first paiment. FINIS.
