E1897A R175190 45789292 172603
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS assmbled in PARLIAMENT FOR Mitigation of the Excise upon Strong-water. Die Jovis, 26 Septemb. 1644. woodcut of three flowers HEB DDIEV HEB DDIM Printed at London, by R. Cotes, and J. Raworth. 1644.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMEMT FOR Mitigation of the Excise upon Strong-water. Die Jovis, 26 Septemb. 1644. WHereas by Ordinance of Parlia∣ment, dated the eleventh of Sep∣tember, Anno643. there is eight pence upon every Gallon laid by way of Excise upon all Strong-waters,
and Aqua vitae, imported, or to be imported, or made or distilled within the Realme of England, Dominion of Wales, or Towne of Berwicke, to be paid by the first buyer, or maker, or distiller respectively, which summe of eight pence upon the Gllon, being rai∣sed upon the Strong waters, and Aqua vitae, made within the Kingdome, is found to have something intermitted Trade in that Commodity within the Kingdome. And forasmuch as by the said Ordinance of the eleventh of September, 1643▪ there was no provision made for the levying of Excise upon all Spirits imported, whereby the true intent of the said Ordinance might be avoi∣ded. Be it ordained by the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament, and by Au∣thority of the same, for the incouragement of the maker and Distiller of Strong waters▪ and for the better receipt of the Excise up∣on this commodity, that all Aqua vitae, or strong waters made in the Kingdom of Eng∣land, Dominion of Wales, or Towne or Port
of Berwicke, do pay two pence upon every Gallon by way o Excise, and so after that rate, for a greater or lesser quantity, to be paid by the first maker thereof. That all Spirits made of French or Spanish Wines, commonly called Brand-VVine, Im∣ported, do pay two pence upon every Gallon Excise, and so after that rate for a greater or lesser quantity to bee paid by the first buyer, from the said Importer. That all strong wa∣ters perfectly made whatsoever, imported from beyond the Seas, shall pay eight pence upon every Gallon Excise, to bee paid by the first buyer, from the said importer. That for such forain Spirits as aforesaid, as any distiller shall use and make into perfect Strong waters, that such maker or distiller shall pay onely one penny upon every Gallon more, it first appearing unto the Commissi∣oners of Excise, or their deputies, in the seve∣all offices respectively by sufficient testimony, that the two pence aforesaid was duly paid at▪ the first sale thereof as Spirits.
That for all Aqua vitae, or Strong waters, made in the Kingdome, which shall be a∣gain exported for any parts beyond the Seas, or out of the Realm of England, &c whether into plantations or other whatsoever, having first paid the severall Excises before menti∣oned. The Commissioners of Excise for the time being, or their deputies unto whom the severall Excises have been paid as aforesaid, being sufficiently satisfyed therein, as aforsaid, shall and may allow and repay the severall Excises aforesaid, except onely the one penny laid upon forain Spirits, made here into per∣fect strong waters. Provided alwayes that all Spirits both forain and domestick, that shal fraudulently be sold by any person or per∣sons to Chapmen or others to retaile in kinde, instead of Aqua vitae or Strong wa∣ters before the same bee re-distilled and made into perfect Aqua vitae, or Strong waters, shal pay for every Gallon, so sold after the rate of eight pence per Gallon Excise. And provided alwayes that no distillers, or
other dealers in Spirits, Aqua vitae, or Strong waters as aforesaid, shall have any benefit of the rates or abatements aforesaid, but onely such as shall cleere the Excise according to the said severall rates, for all Spirits, Aqua vi∣tae, and Strong waters, made, bought, or sold respectively since the eleventh of Septem∣ber, 1643. by such testimony as shall satisfie the Commissioners, or their deputies by an accompt under their hands to be brought in within one moneth after the date hereof; But to pay Excise and to bee proceeded against without favour, according as is expressed in the said Ordinance of the eleventh of Sep∣tember, in this behalfe. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
