E2066 E469_2 R205407 99864803 117035
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT. For the true payment of TYTHES And other Duties, and for continu∣ance of an Ordinance of the ninth of August, 1647. Die Veneris, 27 Octob. 1648. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That this Ordinance for the true payment of Tythes, and other duties, be forthwith printed and pub∣lished. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. London printed for Iohn Wright, at the King-Head in the Old-Bayley. 1648.
Die Veneris, 27. Octob. 1648. An Ordinance of the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament, For the true payment of Tithes and other Duties, and for continuance of an Ordinance of the ninth of August, 1647. THe Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament, Doe Or∣der Ordaine and De∣clare, That the Ordinace of Par∣liament of the ninth of August,
Anno Dom. 1647. Intituled, An Addition Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For the true payment of Tythes, and other Duties, shall continue, re∣maine and be, and hereby is con∣tinued, to remaine and be in full force and strength, from the last day of October, Anno Dom. 1648. untill the first day of November, An. Dom. 1650. any proviso of limi∣tation, or restraint for ceasing, or determination thereof therein con∣tained, or to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided alwaies that upon all appeales to be brought into the Chancery, the partie appealing shall lay down in Money, either with to Justices of Peace, by whom any Order shall
be made, according to the purport of the said Ordinance, or in the court of Chancery, the full value of the Tythes adjudged before the said Justices, together with the tre∣ble Damages and Costs, the which Costs so to be deposited shall not exceed ten pounds, or in default thereof no appeales shall be recei∣ved or admitted; And it is like∣wise Ordained, That the penaltie of forty shillings upon Constables, petty-Constables, and other Of∣ficers limited and appoined in and by the the said Ordinance for neg∣lecting to doe their Duties, shall be leavyed by way of distresse and sale of the Goods of such Persons so neglecting or refusing, by war∣rant from the said Justices of
Peace, and by such Persons as shall by them be thereunto Au∣thorized, the same to be imployed to the use of the poor of that Parish where such Constable, petty-Con∣stable or other Officer doth inha∣bite. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. FINIS.
