E2282A 47682938 172890
THE RULES AND DIRECTIONS of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: Concerning the Examination of all such as shall be admitted to the Sacrament of the LORDS SUPPER, Within the Kingdome of England, and Dominion of Wales: Contained In an Ordinance of the twentieth of October, 1645. with Questions and Answers concerning the same. Printed at London for M. Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 1659.
Rules and Directions concerning suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in case of Ignorance. 1. ALl such persons who shall bee admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, ought to know that there is a God, that there is but one ever living and true God, maker of Heaven and Earth, and Governour of all things; That this onely true God, is the God whom we wor∣ship; that this God is but one, yet three distinct Persons, the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, all equall God. 2. That God created man ofter his owne Image, in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness; That by one man ūn entied into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned; That there∣by they are all dead in trespasses and sins, and are by nature the Children of wrath, and so lyable to eternall death, the wages of every sin. 3. That there is but one Me∣diator betweene God and man, the man Christ Iesus, who is also overall, God blessed for ever, nei∣ther is there salvation in any o∣ther; That he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary; that he dyed upon the crosse to save his people from their sins; That he role againe the third day from the dead, as∣cended
into Heaven, sits at the right hand of God, and makes continuall intercession for us, of whose fulness we receive all grace necessary to salvation. 4. That Christ and his benefits are applied onely by faith; That faith is the gift of God, and that we have it not of our selves, but it is wrought in us by the Word and Spirit of God. That faith is that grace, where∣by we believe and trust in Christ for remission of sins, and life ever∣lasting according to the promise of the Gospell, that whosoever believes not on the Son of God shall not see life, but shall perish eternally. That they who truly repent of their sins, do see them, forrow for them, and turn from them to the Lord, and that except men repent they shall surely perish. That a godly life is conscionably
ordered according to the Word of God, in Holinesse and Righte∣ousnesse, without which no man shall see God. That the Sacraments are Seals of the Covenant of Grace in the Blood of Christ: That the Sacraments of the new Testa∣ment, are Baptisme and the Lords Supper; that the out∣ward Elements in the Lords Supper are Bread & Wine, and doe signifie the Body and Blood of Christ Crucified, which the worthy Receiver by faith doth partake of in this Sacrament, which Christ hath like wise ordai∣ned for the remembrance of this death; that whosoever eats and drinkes unworthily, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; and therefore that every one is to examine himselfe, left he eat and drink iudgement to himselfe, not discerning the Lords Body.
That the soules of the faith∣full after death, do immediately live with Christ in blessednesse; and that the souls of the wicked, doe immediately goe into Hell torments. That there shall be a Resur∣rection of the Bodies, both of the just and unjust at the last Day, at which time all shall ap∣peare before the Iudgement Seat of Christ, to receive accor∣ding to what they have done in the body, whether it be good or evill: And that the righteous shall goe into life eternall, and the wicked into everlasting pu∣nishment. And it is further ordained by the Lords and Commons, that those who have a competent measure of understanding con∣cerning the matters contained in these Articles shall not bee kept backe from the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper for Igno∣rance. And that the Examinati∣on and iudgment of such persons as shall for their ignorance of the aforesaid points of Religion not be admited to the Sacrament of the Lods Supper, is to be in the power of the Eldership of eve∣ry congregation.
SHORT Questions and Answers. Q WHat is God? A. A most holy Spirit, Infinite in all perfections, Ioh. 4.24. 1 Tim. 6.16. Q. How many Gods are there? A. One onely, 1 Cor. 8. Q. Into how many Persons is this one God distinguished? A. Into three, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. 1 Joh. 5.7. Q. In what estate was man made by God at first? A. In a very happy estate, being made after the Image of God, Gen. 1.27. Q. In what respect is man said to be made after the Image of God? A. In that he was indued with perfect knowledge, and with true holinesse and righteousnesse, Col. 3.10. Eph. 4.24.
Q. Did man alwaies continue in that happy estate wherein he was at first made? A. No, he became miserable by sinne, Gen. 3.17. Q. What was the sin which Adam did commit? A. Disobedience against God, in eating the forbidden fruit, Gen. 3.3, 6. Q. Did all Man-kind sin in Adam? A. Yes: Adam was a publick person, and we were all in his loines, Rom. 5.19. Q. What is sin in generall? A. A transgression of Gods Command∣ments, 1 John 3.4. Q. What be the kinds of sin: A. 1. Originall, which is the corrupti∣on of nature, wherein we are conceived and born, Gal. 5.19. 2. Actuall, which is the fruit of that corruption in evill thoughts, words and deeds, Psal. 51.5. Q. What is the punishment due to sin? A. All curses and plagues in this life, at the end death, and after that eternall tor∣ment in Hell, Deut. 28.16, 17. Rom. 9.23 2 Thes. 1.8, 9.
Q. Seeing we are all sinners, by what means may we escape those miseries which we have deserved, and recover happinesse? A. Onely by Jesus Christ, Acts 41.2. Q. What is Jesus Christ? A. Jesus Christ is the onely begotten Son of God, who also became man for our salvation, Luke 1.35. John 1.14. Q What hath Christ done and suffered for our redemption? A. He fulfilled the Law for us, Mat. 3.15. 2. He hath endured the curse of the Law due to our sinnes, Esay 53.5. Q. How are men made partakers of the benefits of those things which Christ did and suffered? A. By Faith, John 1.12. Q. What is Faith? A. A grace whereby we receive Christ as our perfect Saviour, and rest upon him alone for salvation, Joh. 1.12. Acts 16.31. Q. How is Faith wrought in us? A. 1. Inwardly by the Spirit of God, Acts 16.14.
2. Outwardly, by the preaching of the Word, Rom. 10.14. Q. What meanes hath God appointed to strengthen our faith? A. All his holy Ordinances, especially his Sacraments, Act. 2.38. Q. What is chiefly to be considered in a Sacrament? A. 1. The outward signes and rites. 2. The inward things signified thereby Q. How many Sacraments are there? A. Two, Baptisine and the Lords Sup∣per, Mat. 28.19. Mat. 26.26. &c. Q. What is the speciall use of Baptisme? To ingraft us into Christ, Mat. 28.19. Gal. 4.27. Q. What is the outward sign in Baptism? A. Water, Act. 10 47. Q. What doth that set forth? A. Christs Blood, Rev. 1.5. Q. What doth the sprinkling of it upon the party baptized set out. A. Our spirituall cleansing from sin by the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2. Q. What is the speciall use of the Lords Supper?
A. 1 To make us remember Christs death, 1 Cor. 11.25. 2 To make us grow in grace. Q. What are the outward signes thereof? A. Bread and Wine, Mat. 26.26, 27. Q. What doth the Bread set forth? A. The Body of Christ, Mat. 26.26. Q. What doth the Wine set forth? A. The Blood of Christ, Mat. 26.27. Q. In whose roome stands the Minister? A. In the roome of God himselfe, 2 Cor. 5.20. Q. What is set forth by the Ministers blessing Bread and Wine? A. Gods setting of his Son apart for our Redemption, Ioh. 10.36. Q. What is signified by breaking the bread? A. The sufferings which Christ endured in his body, 1 Cor. 11.24. What is signified by powring out of wine? A. Shedding Christs blood, Luk. 22.20. Q. What is signified by the Ministers gi∣ving Bread and Wine to the Communicants? A. Gods giving of his Son unto them, Mat. 26.26.
Q. What doth peoples taking Bread and Wine set out? A. Their applying Christs body and blood unto themselves by faith, Ioh. 6.35. Q. What is required of every one before he comes to the Lords Table? A. He must examine himselfe, 1 Cor. 11.28. Q. Of what must he examine himselfe? A. 1. Of his sins. 2. Of his graces. Q. Of what graces must a man, before his coming to the Lords Table, examine himself? Ans. 1. Of his Knowledge. 2. Of his Faith. 3. Of his Repentance. 4. Of his Love. Q. How ought every one to behave him∣self at the Lords Table? A. With all holy reverence, thankfully remembring Christs death, and seriously considering the things that are signified by the outward signes and rites, Eccles. 5.11. Cor. 11.25. Q. What is the danger of unworthy recei∣ving?
A. Unworthy receivers are guilty or the body and blood of Christ, and so doe eat and drink their own damnation, 1 Cor. 11.27.29. Quest. What is to be done after our recei∣ving? A. We must give hearty thankes unto God, as for all his benefits, so especially for giving unto us Christ, to perfect the work of our salvation. 2. We must examine how we have pro∣fited by our receiving. 3. Wee must carefully performe our vowes and promises made unto God, of leading a new life, & bringing forth fruits meet for repentance. Q. What is repentance? A. It is a sighing and sorrowing for sins, and turning from them to God, Acts 3.9. Q. Is this repentance necessary to salva∣tion? A. Yes, for except men repent, they shall surely perish, Luk. 13.3. Q. What is a godly life? A. A life conscionably ordered accor∣ding
to the Word of God, in holinesse and righteousnesse, Psal. 119.19. Luk. 1.75. Q. Is a godly life also necessary to salvation? A. Yes, for without holiness and righteous∣ness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Q. Seeing the soule of man is immortall and can∣not dye, what shall become there f when it shall be se∣parated from the body? A. The soules of the faithfull shall imme∣diately live with Christ in blessednesse, and the souls of the wicked shall immediately go into hell torments, Luk. 16.22, 23. and Chap. 23. ver. 43. Phil. 1.23. Q. But shall not the body also be quickned and raised againe? A. Yes, there shall be a Resurrection of the bodies both of the just and unjust at the last day, at which time the soule and body shall be united, and shall all appear before the Judgement Seat of Christ, to receive ac∣cording to what they have done in their life times, whether good or evill; then shall the righteous inherite life eternall, but the wic∣ked shall goe into everlasting torment, John. 5.28, 29. Matth. 25.32. 2 Cor. 5.10. Matth. 25.46. FINIS.
