E3065 99896970 133130
Englands Triumph: Or The Subjects joy. All you that troubled are with Melancholly, The Spaniards have a Juyce will make you jolly: Good Wine, good Wine, I say's the only thing, That can for such distemper comfort bring: It comforts the heart, and quickens each vein, If a man behalf dead, it will fetch him again, To a pleasant new Tune, Or, come let us drink all day and night. THe Kings most faithful Subjects we, indeed we are not dull, We drink to shew our Loyalty, and to fill his Cossers full: If all his Subjects drank like us, he would be richer far, More powerful and more prosperous then all the Eastern Monarchs are, then all the Eastern Monarchs are, Then let us drink all day and night, ive each a lusty bowl, This is the ravishing Delight of every generous Soul: Whilst others lye and soak in bed, and Live but half their time, This Wine that lies within our head, ;hal still preserve us in our prime, &c. Instead of sleep we'l spend the Night, in singing of the praise, Of Wine that makes the Souldier fight, and gives the Port bays, That fills the veins with noble blood though we be ne'r so mean, Inspires what's either great or good, and turns rank Clowns to Gentlemen, &c. Let Soulders fight, and Parsons preach, and schollars break their brains, Fanaticks sweat and ball to teach, sedition for their gains. Whilst others they do wast and pine, we still are sound at heart, And if we have but spritely Wine, we'l drink and roar, and never part, we'l drink and roar, and never part. LEt Merchants still for treasures run, and cross the burning Line, We have our Engins here at home, in every glass of Wine. Each Carbuncle upon my Nose, better then Iems doth shine, My cheeks are fresh like to a Rose, my heart is merry with brisk Wine, my heart is merry with brisk Wine. Let Doctors cure themselves of grief, and each Apothecary, We are sure to give our selves relief, by drinking of Canary, If melancholly disturbs the mind, and makes our hearts full sad, We know where we good Sack can find and that will make us brisk and glad, and that will make us brisk and glad. Our Wives the benefit will find when we come home at night, Good Wine does always make us kind, and give them their delight. Whilst that the sober sot is dull, in counting of his coyn, And filling of his Coffers full, our brains shall swim in Spanish Wine, our brains shall swim in Spanish Wine. If that a forraign Foe should strive, our Country to invade, Due bowl of Sack would conquer five, drunk by an English blade, It makes e'm fight couragiously, their country to defend, They never shrink nor fear to dye, but hold out stoutly to the end, but hold out stoutly to the end. If that Consumption should us waste, and make our bodies poor, Then every morning Sack we taste, which both our health restore, Around, around, let's drink about, the first Glass shall be mine, Fill it up to th brim i'le drink it out, and sit and sing the praise of Wine, and sit and sing the praise of Wine. Here's a health, here's a health to Englands King, whom God grant long to Raign, Our drinking shall him tribute bring, let sectaries complain. Wealth, honour, and renown attend his Royal Name always, His Ioys I wish may ne'r have end, but gain his subjects love and praise, but gain his Subjects love and praise Printed for J. Hose, over, against Staples Inn in Houlbourn, neer Grays-Inn-Lane.
