E3663 E448_18 99862424 161838
An exact Narrative OF Every dayes Proceedings Since the Insurrection in ESSEX. Together with a more perfect List of what persons are slain and taken by both parties, till the 18 of June present, 1648. Also the Resolution of the Councell of War concerning the manner of punishing the Prisoners they have taken in that County. Printed for Robert Bostock at the Kings Head in Pauls Church-yard, June 20 1648.
An exact Narrative of every dayes Proceedings since the Insurrection in Essex. Together with a more perfect list of what Persons are slain and taken by both Parties. DIvers Gentlemen of the Committee for the County of Essex, whereof some were Parliament men, being met toge∣ther at Chelmsford, to provide for the peace of the County, and to prevent the apparent dangers likely to arise, were surprised in the Committee-Chamber by a rabble of Mu∣tineers commanded by Lieutenant Colonell Farre, and his Major Smith; which being done, they sent to the Lord Goring, then about Bow-bridge, who came speedily to them. The Committee being thus surprized, the Malignants were so imboldened, that the Mutineers grew very numerous, and joyned with Goring, and Sir Charles Lucas, Lord Capell, and others: They staid together at Chelmsford four or five dayes, and much encreased by the resort of the trained souldiers from divers parts of the County: But the good providence of God so ordered it, That Sir Thomas Honywood, Colonel Harlukendon, Colo∣nell
Cook, Colonell Sparrow, and some others were absent from Chelmsford when the Committee did meet; these perceiving in what danger the County was in, did presently raise their Regiments, one of Horse, and two Regiments of Foot, and those were drawn to Cogshall: from whence they sent Colonel Sparrow with some Horse to fetch the Magazeen from Braintre to Cogshall, who disappointed the E∣nemy of that Store. On Saturday last the Enemy marched from Chelmsford to the Earl of VVarwick's house at Lees, where they seised his Arms, and one great brasse Saker: from thence on Sunday they marched to Braintre, and on Munday to Colchester. The Generall with four Regiments of Horse, and five regiments of Foot came to Chelmsford on Sun∣day, and on Munday he marched to Cogshall, where the Essex Forces did attend him; and being thus u∣nited, wee marched towards Colchester; and drawing neer unto the Town, the Enemy sallied forth both Horse and Foot, and possessed themselves of the hedges, to hinder our approach; but they were re∣solutely charged by the Lord Generals Van, com∣manded by Colonel Backsted, Colonel Needum, and others, who suddenly beat the Enemie from their ground and pursued them into the Town, and seven Colours of ours entred with them; but our Horse, by reason the passages were so strait, could not come in soon enough to their assistance; so our men were forced to give back, and the Town gates were clo∣sed upon them: Yet wee continued the assault four or five hours; but finding the Wall where the prin∣cipall assault was, to be much stronger then was ex∣pected,
they made a very fair and orderly retreat. We lost Colonel Needum, Captain Laurence, and Captain Cox, who were much lamented, for they were of eminent desert, and about 100 private Souldiers. Of the Enemy were slain Sir William Campion once Governour of Borstall house, and Colonell Cook of Kent, and divers others of note, and about foure hundred private Souldiers were taken prisoners by our men; whereof divers Kentish men, and some French and Walloons that could speak no English. The Enemy came into Colchester with about 1000 Horse and 4000 Foot. On Wed∣nesday the Generall began to provide, that the E∣nemy might not escape out of the Town, and for that end sent for the Suffolk Forces then at Sudbury being about 1500 horse and foot, and with them the passes are secured about Nayland, Bures, and o∣ther places, and the Suffolk Forces about Ipswich do keep the passe at Cattaway Bridge, whereby the Enemy is wholly prevented from getting over into Suffolk; and now we are beginning our iutrench∣ments, and drawing our severall quarters neer unto the Town, and the Enemy within is fortifying, and pulling down the houses on the wall, but we doubt not but we shal shortly either starve or storm them. The Generall much desires to keep the Heads of this great party from making an escape with their Horses; for their intents was to get into Suffolk, and Norfolk, and other Countries, and to have raised the malignant Party as they went, who were ready prepared and the designe ripe: the Enemy also were raising Forces about Walden and Lynton,
where they had gotten together about 500 Horse and Foot, to supppresse those the Generall had dispatched away two troops of his own Horse and three troops of Collonell Harlukendons Regiment, under Colonel Sparrow, those troops found the E∣nemy at Lynton with about 500 Horse and Foot un∣der Major Reinolds, they routed the Enemy, ook the Major, and a Colonel with a wooden leg, Major Mu∣stamp, and others they killed. Thus much unto this of 18 June 1648. The report is even now that Goring is gone to Cattaway Bridge, to seek his passe into Suffolk, but they are followed with a party. Sir Thomas Barnadon desired to send 500 men to secure Harwich. Our men scoured the streets, but the main guard of at least one hundred Foot com∣manded by an old Souldier remained still not to be attempted by our men, it being in the Church and Churchyard, who were guarded by such narrow passages that it could not be forced without the ap∣parnt hazard of the losse of many men. Upon Summons those in the Church entred into a treaty and agreed that the Countrey men should go to their own homes leaving their arms behind them, and ingaging not to bear arms against the Parlia∣ment. Many horses are taken, but few prisoners we being not able to surround the Town, and ef∣fect the surprise too. There were taken for the publick store 100 foot-arms, and neer as many more which our men have amongst them, 2 colours of foot, 4 drums, and 2 Barrells of powder. This was the seventeenth day.
The prisoners taken at the entrance of the Sub∣urbs of Colchester were drawn out. Every thirteenth man of the Essex Batchellours are to die, every tenth man of the married men and every fifth of Londoners and Kentish men that were ingaged in this new designe, the others that are left of Batche∣lours to be sent beyond the seas, and the remainder of the married men to their families. A List of the Prisoners remaining in custody with the Marshal Generall at Lexdon, the 17 of June, 1648. Sir John Dorrill of Cokehall in Kent. Col. Sir William Leighton. Col. Francis Clark. Col. Sir Bernard Skidmore late Governour of Hereford for the King. Col. George Rawlins. Lieut. Col. Thomas Roberts. Esquires. Henry Sanders Col. Sam. Thornton Thomas Steward Capt. Gregory Baker.
Cap. Christmas. Robert Ruthen son to the Lord Ruthen. Esquires. Thomas Roberts Carew Rawlins Ralfe Britton Peter Anderkin John Dethicke Edward Dinely Lieutenant Thomas Outing Lieutenant Francis Bland. Servants to Sir Bernard Skidmore. Maximil. Edwards Henry Bridgeman William Woodley,Servant to Lieut. Col. Tho∣mas Roberts. 324 Common Souldiers FINIS.
