E3752 E129_30 99860070 156290
Exceeding Joyfull NEWES FROM Plymouth and Devonshire. Sent in a Letter from the Deputy Lieute∣nants to the House of Commons. Decemb. 8. Where∣in is declared the full proceedings of the Cava∣leirs against the Parliament Forces in the said County, from the 4. of Decemb. to the 9. 1642. Also a full Relation of the besieging of Plymouth, by the Lord Grandison, the L. Digby, and Commissarie Wilmot, with 9000. men, and how they were beaten off by the parliament for∣ces that were within the Town, killing about 850. the Lord DIGBIE being shot through the shoul∣der, with a musquet bullet. Decemb. 10. Printed for H. Blundoll. 1642.
THE RELATION OF The great Overthrow given to the Lord Mhune, the Lord Grandison, the Lord Rivers, the Lord Digby, and Com∣missary Wilmot. December the 8, 1642. By the Renowned and Heroick Champions, the Volunteers of Plymouth, being in number 2000 ageinst the aforenamed Per∣secuors with 9000. UPon the 7. of this month, the Lord Grandison advanced from the Kings Army with 3000. horse and foot, with an
intent to march against the town of Marl∣borow in Wilt-shire, but having received a Letter from the L. Mohune, concerning the present estate of Plymouth, he changed his Resolution, and marched towards the said Town, to joyn his Forces with the Lord Mohune, the Lord Digby, Commissary Wilmot, &c. But by reason of his long and tedious ll Wednesday night, he lay short of the o∣ther Forces about 8. miles, on Thursday morning. But towards 12. of the clock the same day he got to the Lord Mohune, where he joyned his Forces with him, and the rest of his Confederates, and about three of the clock in the Afternoon they began to move forward toward Plimouth, and about five of the clock they came within one mile of the said Town. But the Forces that were there billeted having information of their comming, pre∣pared a Supper for them, and mounted their Ordnance, setting their men in battle array, and in a very good posture for their
own defence, and so soon as the Cavalers made their approach neerer the Town, the Plymouth Forces began to welcome them, sending them a great Charger full of black plums, which plums were as bad as poyson to those that tasted of them; for they made such a slanghter amongst the Kings Army, that many hundreds of them lay dead before the Town Walls. The Lord Digby and Commissary Wil∣mot seeing this, with much futy and vio∣lence they adventured up with their For∣ces, and gave a desperate charge against the Parliament-Forces, but did very little exe∣cution, and although they were fix to one, yet our men gave them the foyl, obtaining a happy Victory, and putting neer upon 9. hundred and fifty to the sword, with the losse of one hundred and twenty men, be∣sides the Lord Digby is dangerously woun∣ded, being shot through the shoulder with a bullet. The Lord Mohune and the rest of the Cavaleers are retreated 20. miles from Ply∣mouth, and it is very probable hee will have
but little stomack to come thither againe, by reason they tasted of such hard fare; yet if they do come to make another attempt, the plymouth forces are resolved to pre∣lent unto them the like plums which they tasted of before. The like proceedings hath bin in Che∣shire, between the Lord Rivers and his Ad∣herents, against the well-affected party of that County, as it was declared in a Letter to Sir William Brewerton, a member of the House of Commons, intimating that the L. Rivers having raised an Army of Papists and disaffected protestants is very active in that County to put in execution the Com∣mission of Array, and plunders and pillages all those that refuse to yeeld obedience to his illegall Commands. And therfore the County desires, that the Parliament will speedily take order for sending some Commanders unto them, for a great part of that County stands very well affected to the Parliament, and are re∣solved to spend their lives and fortunes in this cause.
Whereupon the Parliament have ordai∣ned that some speedy aid shall be sent un∣to them, and that they shall associate them∣selues together, to defend themselves from tyranny and oppression, and to maintain the peace of that County against all that did oppose them. And it is credibly informed, that upon Tuesday last there was a generall meeting of the well-affected Protestants, who stood in opposition against the Lord Rivers and his Cavaleers, and at the last gave them a Charge, killing about 40. of his men. Whereupon the L. Rivers mustred his Forces together, placing them in battle ar∣ray, and drawing them up to a head, and at the last wheeling about, and obtaining the wind, they charged against the Parliament Forces, but after one hours fight they were forced to retreat, by reason that two of our Troops of horse broke in upon the L. Ri∣vers left wing, breaking their Rankes and files, and bringing them to a most confused Order, killing 2. or 300, and putting the rest to flight.
Upon Friday last, there was Letters came to the House of Commons, directed to Mr. Speaker, out of Devonshire, informing the house of the true estate of things in that County, and that the Cavaleers do excee∣dingly plunder and spoyl that County, and that they are marching from Tavestack to∣ward Plymouth, and do threaten that Town but the Committee for the Militia being there, they have gotten some new forces in∣to the Town, and are in a good posture of defence. Also the Deputy Lieutenants at Excester have raised three Regiments of the Tray∣ned Bands of the adjacent Counties, and are resolved to aid and assist Plymouth, The Parliament hath also made the E. of Stam∣ford Generall of South-Wales, and his Son the young Lord Grey, Generall of Liecester shire, Darby-shire, and Lincoln-shire. The Lords and Commons assembled in Parl. do declare, that all souldiers that do commit any offence contrary to their Orders shall be brought to condigne punishment, and that they may be se∣verely proceeded against according to Law. FJNIS
