F1401A R42495 36282119 150050
THE FOLLOWING COLLECTIONS OR PIOUS LITTLE TREATISES, TOGETHER WITH THE RVLE OF S. CLARE AND DECLARATIONS VPON IT, Are printed for the use of the ENGLISH POOR CLARES IN AYRE. An Index whereof begin's in the sequent page. This shall be unto you a direct Way. Is. 35. v. 8. You shall not decline, neyther to the right hand, nor to the left. Deut. 5. v. 32 ❧ † ❧ Printed at Doüay by MICHAELL MAIRESSE. PERMISSV SVPERIORVM: 1684.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS IN THE ENSUING BOOK. I. A Pious Collection of severall pro∣fitable directions and devotions, fit∣ted for the ENGLISH POOR CLARES, in order to the better observance of their holy Institute: very usefull and necessary for all Religious Per∣sons, both men and woemen. A Morning exercise for every day in the week. p. 1 From the rising untill the work house. p. 5 In dressing your self, severall praiers. p. 5 A morning purpose. p. 9 From the workhouse till dinner. p. 13 From dinner till the examin at night. p. 15 Before sleeping, prayers. p. 19
A direction how to say the way to Ieru∣salem. p. 19 How to apply the seaven words, Christ spoake upon the Cross. p. 21 The 7. Ave's which are to be read for the 7. sorrows of our B. Lady: how they are to be said. p. 22 Considerations on the 3. Pater's and Ave's which are said at the shewing of the B. Sacrament. p. 23 After your examin at night, how to sa∣lute our Lady with 3. Ave's. p. 24 How to say your Pater's and Ave's in thanks giving to Allmighty God for his benefits, for night or any other time. p. 24 An exercise for Mass. p. 25 Certain Intentions or Meditations which we ought to have when we communicate: out of S. Bonaventure. p. 37 Considerations before Communion: taken out of the same Saint. p. 37 Four considerations of S. Mathildis before Communion. p. 38
A Praier before, and another after receav∣ing the B. Sacrament. p. 39 What we ought to do, the day we commu∣nicate. p. 41 A Prayer before and after confession. p. 42 Directions how to say the divine Office with due devotion and attention. p. 43 Certain holy Meditations of the 7. effu∣sions of blood: distributed for the canoni∣call hours. p. 47 A direction for mentall Praier. p. 51 An Instruction for mentall Praier. p. 54 Colloquies or speeches, part in meditation, and part in Praier: praising Allmighty God's excellency, goodness, holyness, wor∣thyness, &c. p. 67 Causes of distractions. p. 68 The means to resist distractions of heart and tediousness of spirit. p. 69 The chiefest effects of praier. p. 70 Things to be considered in meditating the Passion of our Saviour. p. 72 Severall Affections to be drawn from the
consideration of the same Passion. p. 72 Considerations of the knowledge of ones self. p. 73 Considerations of sin. p. 73 How to consider death. p. 73 Of the pains of the damned. p. 74 How to contemplate Heaven. p. 74 How to consider vertue. p. 75 How to consider the feasts of Saints. p. 75 How to meditate on the perfections of All∣mighty God. p. 76 Considerations of all Gods creatures in ge∣nerall. p. 76 Considerations of Gods creatures in parti∣cular. p. 77 The benefits in brief of Allmighty God. p. 77 What you ought to do in the time to come with God's benefits in particular. p. 77 The benefit of our Redemption. p. 78 The benefit of our Vocation. p. 78 The benefit of our Iustification. p. 79 The benefit of donation. p. 80 The benefit of Preservation. p. 81
The benefit of glorification. p. 81 The eight Beatitudes. p. 82 A Religious person ought often to consi∣der the benefit of his vocation, by these cir∣cumstances: Vnde es? Quo? Quomodo? Quando? Quo fine vocatus? p. 84 The Priviledges and benefits of a Religious Person. p. 86 Iesus, Maria. Certain aspirations, for every day in the week. p. 86 Aspirations for every day in the week, upon the Passion of our B. Saviour. p. 92 An Oblation unto our B. Lady, to say on any of her feasts 70 Ave Maria's, and then during every day 5. Ave's and the praiers there following. p. 99 A Prayer to Iesus Christ. p. 99 When you pass by the B. Sacrament a prayer. p. 100 When you take holy water. p. 101 How to honour the B. Virgins Name. p. 101 Litanies of our holy Father S. Francis. p. 104 Litanies of our B. Mother S. Clare. p. 106
Litanies for the conversion of England. p. 108 A dayly exercise of prayers, with weekly meditations upon the Passion. p. 113 Meditations upon the Passion for every day in the week. p. 117 A method for meditation. p. 123 A prayer before meditation. p. 124 A prayer after meditation. p. 125 A Table of daily Patrons, Meditations, Vertues, Vices, and Intentions. p. 126 II. A Short treatise concerning the per∣fection of à Religious life, writ∣ten by S. BONAVENTURE to his devout Sisters. The Preface. p. 3 CHAP. 1. By what means a man may attain to the true knowledge of himself. p. 8 CHAP. 2. Of humility, and the stepps
or degrees by which it is at∣tain'd. p. 14 CHAP. 3. Of Religious poverty. p. 22 CHAP. 4. Of silence, and how necessary it is to all Religious. p. 30 CHAP. 5. Of the study of Prayer. p. 35 CHAP. 6. A remembrance of Christ's Passion. p. 44 CHAP. 7. Of the perfect love of God. p. 54 CHAP. 8. Of finall perseverance. p. 57 III. The Rule of the holy Virgin S. CLARE, faithfully translated into English. The Apostolicall Confirmation of the Rule. p. 3 CHAP. 1. Of the rule and forme of life of the order of the poor sisters, given by S. Francis. CHAP. 2. Of those who desire to enter in∣to this Religion: and how they shall be received. p. 6
CHAP. 3. Of the divine office, of Fasting, of Confessing and Communica∣ting. p. 10 CHAP. 4. Of the election of the Abbess. p. 11 CHAP 5. Of silence, and of the manner of speaking at the speak-house, and Grate. p. 14 CHAP. 6. How the sisters may not receive any possessions, by themselves or by any person interposed. p. 16 CHAP. 7. The manner that the sisters shall observe in their manuall works. p. 18 CHAP. 8. How the sisters shall not ap∣propriate any thing to them∣selves: and of the sick sisters. p. 19 CHAP. 9. Of penance to be enjoined the sisters that offend: and of the manner of conversing without the Monastery. p. 21 CHAP. 10. Of the Admonishment and vi∣sitation of the sisters. p. 23
CHAP. 11. Of the duty of the Portress. p. 24 CHAP. 12. Of the visitour and Chaplin. p. 26 The rest of the Bull for the Confirmation of the Rule. p. 27 The Testament of our holy Mother S. Clare. p. 28 Our holy Mother S. Clar's Benediction unto her sisters pre∣sent and to come. p. 36 The Bull of Pope Innocent the fourth: that the Religious may not be constrain'd to receive Rents or Possessions. p. 38 IV. The Declarations and Ordinances made upon the Rule of our holy Mother S. Clare. A letter of the Approbation and Confirmation of the de∣clarations, sent by the Reve∣rend
Father William Cassall, to his devout daughter S. Col∣let. p. 4 Another by the same Reve∣rend Father, to Sister Collet, and all the other Sisters of the said Religion. p. 5 CHAP. 1. Of the entry into this holy Re∣ligion. p. 10 THE FORME OF PROFESSION. p. 15 CHAP. 2. Of the quality of their habits and of their garments. p. 16 CHAP. 3. Of the Divine Office. p. 20 CHAP. 4. Of Abstinence. p. 24 CHAP. 5. Of Confession and of Commu∣nion: of the Confessour and his companions. p. 26 CHAP. 6. Of the observance of Cloyster. p. 29 Chap. 7. Of the election of the Abbess, discreetes and other officers. p. 34
Chap. 8. The manner of keeping Chapter. p. 38 Chap. 9. Of silence and the manner of speaking at the speak-house and at the grate. p. 41 Chap. 10. Of the observance of poverty, and that the Sisters may not admit of any possessions, nor have any thing proper. p. 45 Chap. 11. Of the sick Sisters. p. 49 Chap. 12. Of the manuall works of the Sisters. p. 52 Chap. 13. Of the correction of the faulty. p. 55 Chap. 14. Of the portress and entring into the Monastery. p. 57 Chap. 15. Of the Visitour. p. 64 An exhortation for the better observance of these present con∣stitutions. p. 72 What the Religious are oblig'd to, under mortall sin, by their vowes. p. 78
The perfections of the Rule. p. 78 The praise of the Rule. p. 81 Three Priviledges, which our holy Father p. 8. Francis obtained of Allmighty God. p. 81 Three other Priviledges. p. 82 Seaven other Previledges, for those that obser∣ve the Rule & dye in the Order. p. 82 Certain Indulgences granted to all the Reli∣gious of the Order of S. Francis. p. 83 An examin of conscience, for à Religious Per∣son. p. 86 Twelve great evills, which come by veniall sins. p. 88 Nine wayes by which we participate of the sins of others. p. 88 The Twelve fruits of the B. Sacrament. p. 89 The Twelve Evangelicall counsayles. p. 90 The Benediction of our Holy Father S. Fran∣cis. p. 91 The malediction of our Holy Father S. Fran∣cis. p. 91 A PLENARIE ABSOLUTION FROM GUILT AND PAINE. Otherwise call'd. p. 92 THE ABSOLUTION OF THE CORDE.
TO THE READER. BELOVED and DEVOUT READER, tho' this BOOKE, as to the whole, and every part thereof, might reasonably be judg'd very cōvenient and usefull, at lea'st for all Poore Clarisses; yet (as appear's by the TITLE) it is desig'nd, fitted out, and printed, particulerly by the CARE, and for the VSE, of the ENGLISH POORE CLARES OF AYRE; in the Diocess of S. Omers Who signally observe theyr INSTITUT, and ORDINANCES upon it, in their NATIVE PURITIE, living accordin∣gly, in the TRUE SPIRIT of S. CLARE, un∣der the GOVERNMENT, and DIRECTION of theyr HOLY ORDER, as both RULE and DECLARATIONS prescribe, Teache and er∣nestly recommen'd unto them. Fiat, Fiat.
Imprimatur actum in Vicariatu Andomarensi, die tertiâ Novem∣bris 1684. De Mandato B. DE LARRE Secret.
A PIOUS COLLECTION Of severall profitable directions and de∣votions fitted for the English POOR CLARES In order to the better observance of their holy INSTITVTE. Very usefull and necessary for all Religious Persons both men and woemen. A Morning Exercice, on Sunday. CALL to mind this sentence: Haec dies quam fecit Dominus, exultemus & laetemur in eâ. This is the day that our lord hath made let us rejoyce and be glad in it. Remember your duty and obligation unto Almighty God, being carefull to spend the day wholly in his service and prayse, and particularly this day honour the most Blessed Trinity, thanking those three divi∣ne Persons for the benefit of our Creation, and for all others bestowed either upon your self, or any other in the behalfe of man.
On Munday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence. Surge, eur jaces pronus in terram. Arise, why lyest thou gro∣veling on the ground. Remember your banish∣ment and punishment or suffering of being de∣prived of the presence of Almighty God, and the company of the Angels, and pray that after your death you may be united unto them offe∣ring this day to honour them, but especially your good Angel, beseeching him and all the others to pray for the state of the Holy Church and that we may so use this our warfare that af∣ter death we may reign with them in all eter∣nity. Tuesday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence. Surge qui dormis, & exurge à mortuis, & illuminabit te Christus. Arise thou that sleepest with the sleep of death and Christ will illuminate thee. Remember that Christ and his holy Ghospell are the lights of the Church, and endeavour you to follow the same better then you have hitherto done: offe∣ring this day to honour the holy Apostles, Pa∣triarks and Prophets, beseeching them to pray for the conversion of all Heathens, Infidells, and for all those that are out of the Catholick faith, particulerly in England.
Wensday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence: Surge & comede, grandis tibi restat via. Arise and eate, thou hast yet a great way to go. Think how farr you are from vertue and the perfection of your holy Foundress and Saints of your Order and pray them that they will obtain you strength and force to follow their examples with greater fervour then you have hitherto done, offering this day wholy to their honour, beseeching them to pray for the good and reformation of the whole Order, and for all Holy Orders. Thursday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence. Surgite quid dormi∣tis, surgite & orate ne intretis in tentationem. Arise why do you sleep. Arise and pray least you enter into temptation. Consider what oc∣casion you give your self to enter into tempta∣tion in negligently employing your time, and being slothfull and dull in holy prayer and spi∣rituall Exercises, offering this day in honour of the Confessours, beseeching them to obtain for you new fervour of spirit and constancy in the service of Almighty God, and to pray for the comfort and releasement of the souls in Purga∣tory.
Friday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence. Surge, propera a∣mica mea & veni. Arise, make hast my beloved and come. Think that our sweet saviour calleth you to shew you what he hath suffered for you, out of the great love he beareth you. Desire gra∣titude for the same. Resolve that you will with patience suffer all such temptations and contempts as it shall please him to send you: And offer this day wholy in honour and memory of his bitter Death and Passion, the sorrowes of his holy Mo∣ther, and beg the suffrages of all the holy Mar∣tyrs beseeching them to pray for all those who are in any affliction, or desolation be it corpo∣rall or spirituall. Saturday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence. Surge, redde quod debes. Arise & render what thou owest. Think what you owe unto Almighty God by the vowes of Poverty, Chastity, and obedience, and what you do not pay in this world you must satisfy in the next. Wherfore offer your self this day wholy to honour the most glorious Virgin Mary with all the other Virgins besee∣ching them to obtaine grace that you may be more diligent in the observance of your vocation, and also to pray for the comfort and constancy
of all the Catholicks in England, and the con∣version of the same. Frō your rising till you go to the work-house. HAving said one of the foresaid sentences that befitteth the day; you must rise with all speed offering your intention according to the same and immediatly being risen, kneel down, and Kiss the ground with an Elevation of heart unto Almighty God, giving him thanks for ha∣ving preserved you that night, and brought you unto the beginning of the day beseeching him you may employ it in his service. In dressing your self say these sentences follo∣wing as they are set donn. In putting on the Habit, say. INduat me Dominus novum hominem qui secundùm Deum creatus est in justitia & sanctitate veritatis. O Lord cloathe me with the new man, who according to God is created in justice, and san∣ctity of truth. In putting on the cord. CIngat me Dominus Iesus cingulo fortitudinis, ut vi∣riliter perseverem in Dei servitio. O Lord gird me with the girdle of fortitude & strength, that I may persever couragiously and with alacrity in thy holy service.
In putting on the Scapular. POnat Dominus in corde meo jugum in memoriam Passionis & Sanguinis ejus. Our Lord lay his yoke on my heart as a me∣moriall of his Passion and blood. In washing your hands or face. AMplius lava me Domine ab iniquitate mea, & à peccato meo munda me, meritis Domini nostri IESV CHRISTI filii tui qui dilexit nos, & lavit nos à peccatis nostris in sanguine suo. Wash me O Lord yet more from my iniqui∣ties, and from my sin make me cleane through the merits of JESUS CHRIST thy only son, who hath loved us and washed us with his pre∣cious blood. In putting on the Cloake. COoperiat me Dominus IESVS clamyde munditiae & castitatis, ut nullum praeter Iesum amatorem admittam. Cover me, O Lord, with the mantle of clean∣lines and chastity that I may admit of no other lover then my saviour JESUS. In putting on the Kercher. TEgat me Dominus tegumento paenitentiae contra in∣fidias Diaboli, ut non praevaleat inimicus contrà me.
Cover me, O Lord, in the shrowd of Pennan∣ce against the snares of the Divell, that my enemy may not prevaile against me. In putting on the veyle. ACcipiam velamen sacrum quod seram usque ad. Tribunal aeterni Iudicis ui omnia flectun∣tur genua: recordabor meipsam, mundum, & spre∣visse & penitus reliquisse, ac in veritate me Domino Iesu subjecisse, eique tamquàm sponso me conjunxisse. Ille contrà adversa omnia me defendat, & secum in vi∣tam aeternam recipiat. Amen. I will put on the sacred veyle, which I shall appeare in before the Tribunall of the Eternall Judge, to whom all knees do bow. I will call to mind, that I have despised, & forsaken both the world and my self, to be subject in reall truth to my Lord JESUS-CHRIST, and to joyne my self unto him as to my spouse. May he de∣fend me in all adversities, and receive me to him∣self into life everlasting. AMEN. After: or, in saying each one of these senten∣ces reflect either on your intention in directing your works that day. Or, consider how great a benefit Almighty God hath bestowed on you in giving you that day to spend in his service, wherby you may glorify his divine Majesty, in∣crease your own merit, and satisfy for your ne∣gligences past. Call to mind what the souls in Purgatory and thousands in the world would do
if they had the same means: and also think that it may be the last day that shall be granted you In this life. Being drest, make hast unto the Quire, with out forrein cogitations, recollecting your self, and keeping diligently your sight, and at the en∣tring into the Church, after the saying. Asperges me &c. Thou shalt sprinkle me &c. In the taking of holy water. Say, Domine in multitudine misericordiae tuae introibo in domum tuam, adorabo ad templum san∣ctum tuum in timore tuo. Lord in the multitude of thy mercy I will enter into thy house: in thy feare will I adore thee in thy holy Temple: and kneeling downe at the Perentory say. Adoramus te sanctissime Domine Iesu Christe, hic & ad omnes Ecele∣sias tuas & benedicimus tibi, quia per sanctam Crucem tuam redemisti mundum. We adore thee o most holy Lord JESUS CHRIST, here, and in all thy Churches, and we bless thee, because by thy holy Cross thou hast redeemed the world. After, being in your place, or before the B. Sacrament, imagin Almighty God present, as in∣deed he is, and adore him with the greatest re∣verence and humility you can, representing unto your self his Majesty, Power, and Goodness. Accustome your self to this in all your Examins, especially that of the morning, noon, and night: and as much as you can in whatsoever exercise you undertake.
A Morning purpose. FIrst: give thanks unto Almighty God for having preserved you that night, and delivered you from so many misfortunes both spirituall and corporall which since your going to bed thousands have fallen into. 2.ly Examin your conscience, and see wherein you have offended that night, and if you find any thing, humbly crave pardon, begin by Gods grace to amend, and to spend the day wholy in his service. 3.ly Offer your self in all that you are, or may be able to perform by your corporall forces or spirituall powers unto Almighty God, especially that which you shall do that day with the inten∣tion for which you offer your actions, in union of the life, death, and Passion of our blessed saviour Christ Jesus, the merits of his most glo∣rious Mother, beseeching his divine goodnes to dispose wholy and entirely of you, as may be most to his honour, and the good of your soule in confidence of which resolve and endeavour to receive all things that day from his holy hands with equall indifference, beholding them as co∣ming from his fatherly hands and providence, and the love with which he sendeth them. 4ly. Make a renunciation of your proper will passions, and wicked inclinations, or what soever may hinder you in the way of perfection and true conformity to the divine will.
5ly. Call to mind what your Obediences ar like to be, and with whom you are to converse and how you ought to carry your self for the gaining of vertue and overcoming of imperfectiō: but particularly bend your spirituall forces against that vice which you find most to hinder you, and that you are most apt to fall into, purposing and resolving on such means as when the occa∣sion presenteth it self, you may by the grace of God overcome it, calling to mind at that present your good purpose. Offer these your good desires unto Almighty God acknowledging that without his grace you could not have made them, confessing your own weakness, and force of your externall and inter∣nall enemies. Wherfore earnestly and humbly beg his assistance by the intercession of his holy and blessed Mother, whose help instantly crave, as also the aide of your good Angell, with the Saints you are most devoted unto, and if you have leisure say the prayers following. O Domi∣na mea &c. O my lady, &c. as in the Primer. The oblation of the 7. Aves. with this Prayer unto your Angel Custos. O most loving Angel, my Gardian, Tutour, Maister, Guide, Governour, and defender, wise Counselour, and my most faithfull friend, to whom J am commended by the goodnes of God our sweet Saviour from the instant of my birth unto the last period of my life: What reverence do J ow you, knowing that you are present
with me? And with what devotion ought J to serve you in respect of the great care you have of me? And what confidence ougt J to have, ha∣ving you at my side in all occasions to defend me. Teach me then, O holy Angel: chastise me, conserve, and conduct me the right and assu∣red way unto the heavenly Jerusalem without per∣mitting me to do any thing in your presence which may be offensive in your sight, and which J da∣re not undertake before another without shame. J beseech you present unto our Lord my mise∣ries and wants, & obtain me a remedy of his infinit goodnes. Watch when J sleep, and be not wearied when J am tired: stay me when J am ready to fall: raise me up when J am fallen, direct me when J am gon astray: fortify me when J am weak: illuminate me when J am assaul∣ted: check the rage of my suttle enemie, and at the houre of my death defend me from the infernal dragon, that being guided and assisted by thee J may arrive unto the glorious dwelling place, and thou rejoyce in my good, and J in thy glory, & our Lord King of all glory be honored in us world without end. Amen. These Prayers being ended prepare your self to Prime according as it is set down in the di∣rection for the Divine Office, being carefull to carry your self with all fervour and devotion, ob∣serving well your thoughts: considering that you are not only in the presence of Almighty God, but also exercising the office of Angels in sin∣ging
his holy prayses. Having done this; exerci∣se your self as you have been taught untill it ring to Mass, and be carefull to observe this manner in all other houres. When the Litanies are read do not sit fiddling with your fingers, turning the leafes of your book, or looking a∣bout you, but imagin you are a poor beggar full of miseries, afflictions and necessities, and that for your greate unworthines to present your self before the divine Majesty of God, you beg an almes through the intercession of his Angels and Saints, considering that one of them alone is able to strike down infinit men. Likewise you are not only to pray for your self, but also our Benefa∣ctours, and our poor Country: wherfore endeavour to read them with great devotion, and when they are finished make a short examin as you did after Mass: and prepare your self to go to Sext: In the reading of which, exercise your self in the way to Jerusalem, observing the same directions: which where set down for Prime. When Offi∣ce is ended make your Examin again, and when the signe is given read the Pater noster with great devotion and attention for the Benefactours, which being done the sign will be given to go forth of the Church: then observe that modesty and re∣verence which you have been taught. At the first entrance being in your cell kneel down, and Kiss the ground, offering your little work of O∣bedience of making your bed unto Almighty God, and exercise your self in the way to Jerusalem
untill it ring to the Work-house, and rhen take a point therein which is ordained for that time. From the work-house till dinner. BEing come unto the Work-house and Veni Creator, being said, Prepare your self to read the dirge with all devotion and attention. Con∣sider in what great necessity the soules in Pur∣gatory are, what paines they suffer, and that if you be diligent in praying for them, you may be a means to release tnem: Almighty God having perhaps ordained you for that end: but if you be unmindfull and negligent in the performance thereof, they may be detained from his divine presence through your fault, and also he will permit others when you are in the like case to forget you, and neglect to assist you: wherfore endeavour to be very attentive, and devoutly recollected in reading. After the Dir∣ge, the beads are read, unto which give great attention, and read them with devotion: the rest of your time in the Work-house exer∣cise your self in the way to Jerusalem, carryng your self with all modesty & still∣ness. When, it ringeth to the second Mass. (Sig∣num magni Regis est) (Tis a signe that a great King is at hand) being come into the Churh of∣fer your self unto Almighty God, & make some reflexion on your Exercise & carriage in the workhouse. In time of the 2. Mass Exercise
your own devotions. When you go to None observe the directions which were set down for Prime exercising your self in the way to Jerusalem. None being read make your Examin how you have spent your whole forenoon: for better doing of which crave the assistance of our sweet saviour, begging pardon where you have failed, and make new resolutions for the performance of what you purposed in the morning, and the exercising vertue in all oc∣casions. After which consider that it is a punis∣hment due to sin that you must now leave the bread of Angels which is holy meditation and Prayer to feed vpon corporall meats: which pu∣nishment is due unto the children of Adam: wherfore humbly submit your self unto it, con∣sidering the great hunger, which the poore sou∣les in Purgatory do sustain in being deprived of the presence of Almightly God, and with hearty compassion and great devotion read the De profundis for them. Going down, with Grace use what is ap∣pointed in the way to Jerusalem. When you sit down at the table you may behold our B. Saviour according to that foresaid exercise, who lived in this world 33. years, and humbly submit∣ted him self unto all pennances due unto men for their sins: wherfore beg grace to use this Corporall food, because it tis his blessed will and give your body its necessities, not using the∣rein superfluitie to please nature or sensualit: but season your meat in the wounds of our
B. Saviour: and drink from the delicious foun∣tain of his sacred side, mingled with the gall and vinegar which he drank for your sake, Being at dinner give your attention wholy to that which is read at the table. At twelve of the clock exercise that which is appointed in the way to Jerusalem, saying. Christus factus est pro nobis obedi∣ens: after which you may return to that which is read at the table. When you have dined, make some little reflexion how you have behaved your self: if you find to have fallen, humbly crave pardon, purposing to amend. At the going up, with Grace exercise your self in the way to Jerusalem. From Dinner untill the Examen at night. When Grace is finished read your Pater nosters for your benefactours; When you come to your Cell you may stay there untill it ring to the work-house, employing your self in reading wri∣ting, or keeping your devotion, or doing some other thing which you desir. When the Bell calleth you to work, exercise your self there according to the same directions, which are set down for the forenoon, using the Way to Jerusalem, After your beads are read untill it ring to Evensong. And then leave your work saying. Hoc signum &c. And making what hast you can into the Church, being kneeled down either in your place, or els∣where, make your short Examin; which being don read the little office, if you have not read it before, Keeping your Devotion untill it ring up to Evensong: in the reading of which
observe well your thoughts, and the manner which was set down from Prime. The Office being ended prepare your self to Meditation, and afterwads the signe being given, make your short Examen, as it is set down in the directions for mentall prayer. When you go forth of the Church, employ your self in the way to Jerusalem untill you go to Collation, where when you have ti∣me in considering the Mystery of the Washing of the feet give your attention to that which is read at the Table▪ when you have ended Col∣lation, you may read that which you meane to make your Meditation of, if you have not read it before, or do not take that which is read at the table: being-sure never to omit the matter before Meditation. The best time to read it is the quarter before five▪ when the signe is given after Meditation, going up from Collation use the way to Jerusalem, and continue the same untill Recollection: then kneeling in your pla∣ce, make your Examen: First, present Your self before Almighty God and give him thanks for all the benefits you have received that day: in particular esteeming your self as unworthy of them as any creature on earth, or the soules in Hell: as also the miseries both spirituall and temporall, from which he hath delivered you, to be as many and as great as are, or might have fallen upon any in the world. Secondly, beg grace to see the offences com∣mitted that day acknowledging your unableness
to do the same without his speciall assistance. Thirdly: how you have spent that day with obedience, and exercises you have had, weighing wherein you have failed by omission or commis∣sion, in thought, word, or work, towards Al∣mighty God, your sisters and your self: how you have exercised your interiour powers, your sen∣ces, particularly your sight, and especially how you have observed the services and exercises of your Religion, whether you have governed your exte∣riour with that modesty, mortification, submis∣sion and mildnes, that you are taught. Fourthly: if you see your self to have overco∣me any imperfection, give thanks unto Almighty God, and where you find to have failed and of∣fended, humbly crave pardon. Fiftly: purpose with his holy grace to be more carefull and watchfull over your self the day fol∣lowing, making such resolutions as may help you most for the overcoming of that vice wherein you find your self that day to have sinned in. Then say the Prayer following. I Confess unto you, O Lord God omnipotent Creatour of heaven and earth, all my sins which ever I have committed even from my in∣fancy untill this present-houre wittingly or ig∣norantly, and particularly this day in thought word, or work. To you, O Lord only I con∣fess my offences and beg pardon for them
as being innumerable: therfore I humbly beseech thee to forgive and forget all, whereof thou kno∣west me guilty in all my life past, and enkindle in me a fervent amendment with faith, hope, and charity, O mercifull, O pittifull o sweet JESUS sonne of the B. Virgin Mary. Going to your cell make use of that which is ordained in the way to Jerusalem, and during that time you are undressing your self, call to mind the strict account, which you are to render unto Almighty God when the day of this life is ended: also of the uncertaintie to live untill the next morning, much less any longer, reflecting how many miseries may and will fall upon thousands before your uprising: and alwaies before you go to bed kneeling commend your self to our sweet saviour, and his blessed Mother with your good Angell, Kissing the ground and the Cru∣cifix. Being laid in bed, think you lay your mouth to the sacred side or feet of or sweet Saviour, saying the prayer following. O most sweet Lord JESUS CHRIST in union of the love which caused thee to create for us this corporall rest, and disdainedst not thy self to take the same whilst thou livedst here on earth: I do make use of the same to fulfill the necessity of my body, that it may be more prompt and ready to serve thee. Amen.
Before sleeping say thus. O Most sweet JESUS let me now rest upon thy sacred breast, and grant me to fetch my breath out of thy most sacred heart, that thy sweet spirit may flow into my soul, vivificate my mind and vnseparably unite me unto thee sweet JESUS; so often as this night I do fetch my breath, so many millions of praises I beseech thee receive from me. Vnto your good Angel say. O Angell of God who art my keeper, illumi∣nate, preserve, rule, and govern me com∣mitted to thy charge by the supernall power this night and evermore, Amen. A direction how to say the way to Jerusalem. 1. AT five a clock when Meditation is ended, going to put off your cloake, take the Mystery wherein our saviour took leave of his B. Mother. 2. When it ringeth to Collation, that which is then present, his going unto the place where he made his supper. 3. When you are at Collation, the washing of the feet.
4. That of the Institution of the most B. Sa∣crament, the which continue till the end of Com∣pline. 5. Then take our saviour's going into the gar∣den with his disciples. 6. When the B. Sacrament is seen, the three prayers which he made in the garden. 7. Going forth of the Church, his betraying. 8. In your cell his being at Annas's, and leave him there untill Matins; at which time go with him to Caiphas, and find him there at Prime. 9. Under which go with him to Pilate, and from thence to Herod. 10. At Terce take the Mystery of the white garment. 11. At Sext the whipping and crowning with thorns, Going forth of the Church, our saviour's being lead and shewed to the people. 12. Making your bed, remember the three sentences of death which were given against him. 13. Going to the Workhouse his going with his Cross to be crucified, and passing through the golden gate. 14. In the workhouse the three falls: the mee∣ting of our sweet saviour with his holy Mother, Simon Cyrenean, & Veronica. 15. Going forth from the Workhouse, the carrying the Cross up Mount Calvary. 16. Between the two peales to None, his sitting naked upon the stone. 17. At None, the nailing to the Cross.
18. Going down to Grace, how the Cross was reared up and set in the place where it was to stand. 19. At twelve a clock behold our saviour hanging on high upon the Cross, saying these first words, Father forgive them for they know not what they do. 20. From evensong, exercise your self in the 7. words: the piercing of our Saviours side: his taking down from the Cross, and lyng in the lap of his Mother, his buriall, and descending into Limbo. How to apply the seaven Words. 1. FAther forgive them for they know not what they do. Here pray for all those that are in mortall sin: for all Heathens, and Here∣ticks, and beseech Almighty God to illuminate their hearts, and pardon their offences. 2. This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. Pray for the happy departure of all faithfull Christians, and releasement of the soules in Purgatorie. 3. Son behold thy Mother: and again, Wo∣man behold thy son. Recommend to our B. Lady your self, your Parents, kinred and Bene∣factours and the state of the whole church: be∣seeching our sweet Saviour to give her unto us for Patroness, Mother, and Advocate, and grant us grace to serve, honour, and obey her.
4. I thirst. Pray that wee, and all creatures may continually thirst after justice and the per∣fect love of God. 5. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. Here pray for the comfort and assistance of all in temptation or affliction, either spiri∣tuall or corporall. 6. It is consummated. Beseech Almighty God that his holy will may be accomplished in you, and all creatures to the perfect praise of his most holy name. 7. Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. Pray rhat as he recommended his to his heavenly Father, our soules may be protected by him in this life by the fruition of his holy grace, and in the next received to that beatitu∣de which by his death and Passion he ha's purcha∣sed, for us. The 7. Ave's which are to be read for the 7. sorrowes of or B. Lady; you may take according to your devotion, or these following. 1. THe departure of our sweet Saviour when he went to make his last supper. 2. When S. John brought her word of our Saviours being apprehended, and his cruell usage. 3. When shee mett him bearing his Cross. 4. When shee beheld him crucified upon the Cross.
5. The cruell piercing of his sacred side. 6. When shee had him dead in her lap. 7. When shee parted from the body of her deare son at his buriall. Considerations on the 3. Pater nosters, and Aves which are said at the shewing of the B. Sacrament: in honour of the Prayer in the Garden, offering your intention to gain the Pardon. 1. SAy the first Pater and Ave, in honour of the unspeakable love with which our sweet Sa∣viour made oblation of his dolorous agony, cra∣ving by the merits of the same, that our sins may be forgiven us, and that we be reconciled to his heavenly Father, and obtain strength and comfort in our temptations and afflictions. 2. The 2. Pater and Ave, in honour of the en∣tire resignation with which our B. Saviour offe∣red his Prayer: crave therby grace to conform our selves unto the divine will, and attain per∣fect union with Almighty God. 3. The 3. Pater and Ave, say in honour of our sweet Saviours perseverance in his most painfull prayer, beseeching him that by the merits of the same wee may not leave of the good once begun for the repugnance wee feel, or want of consola∣tion therein, but with love and confidence per∣sever to the end.
After your Examin at night, you may sa∣lute our B. Lady with these 3 Ave's. 1. BY the first beseech her that she will obtain for you pardon of all your sins, and espe∣cially those you have committed that day. 2. That shee will please to present all your works unto her blessed son, rendring them agrea∣ble by her merits in whatsoever is wanting on their part. 3. Recommend your self unto her, and beseech her that shee will preserve you from all sin de∣ceits and illusious of the divell, and particularly from all evills. How to say your Pater noster's and Ave's in thanksgiving unto Almighty God for his benefits either for night or any other time. 1. THe first Pater and Ave address to the right hand of our sweet Redeemer offering to his Eternall Father, the precious blood which issued out of his most sacred wound in thanks∣giving for the benefit of your Creation and the Creation of all others, as also of all things crea∣ted for mans use. 2. The 2. address unto the sacred wound of his left hand in thanks giving for the benefit of
consetving you from evils, and the like for o∣thers. 3. The 3. address unto the wound of his right foot in thanksgiving for the benefit of your Redemption, and the like for others. 4. The 4. address unto the sacred wound of his left foot in thanksgiving for the benefit of your vocation, and all others on whom he hath bestowed the like. 5. The 5. address unto the sacred wound of his blessed heart, for all generall and particular benefits, either spirituall or corporall, which with so great love he hath bestowed on you, and all creatures. An Exercise for Mass. FIrst know that Mass is a sacrifice, wherein is offered the very same body and blood of our Saviour, that was before offered upon the Cross, and was infinitely able to redeem infinit worlds: and sith the world is sufficiently redee∣med with one redemption, he gives unto every one such and so great grace, as he hath prepared himself to receive: therfore, like as a man that fetcheth water forth of the sea cannot want for any scarcity that is there, yet he may want by reason of the littleness of his vessell: even so no man need want grace coming unto this holy sa∣crifice if the vessell of his heart be of sufficient bigness. Wherfore prepare your self worthily,
and beg such grace, devotion, reverence and at∣tention, as the worthines of the sacrifice following requires. The Exercise. THe Priest signifieth God, the Altar the church: and as the Altar is of many stones, so is the church of God, of many people. Wherfore you must not heare Mass for your self alone, but for the whole church: for since he is a com∣mon Lord, he is not delighted with particular service. A Prayer before Mass. O Good JESUS vouchsafe me the vertue of your holy grace, and grant J beseech you that J may purely assist at this divine sacrifice of the holy Mass to the eternall praise of your holy name in memory of all that you have been plea∣sed to suffer for my sake, and for all mankind. When the Priest saith the Confiteor. COnsider the offences of our first parents with those of the whole world, and in particular those which you have your self committed, and at the Kyrie elerson, aske most humbly pardon for them, and beg grace for amendment.
At Gloria in excelsis. COnsider how the Angels in heaven rejoyce at the conversion of a sinner, wherfore be∣seech them through the great desire they have of mans salvation to aid and assist us, and all crea∣tures to obtain the same. At the Epistle. COnsider that this World is a place of Pen∣nance, and be sorry that so few do embra∣ce the same, but follow vain pleasures and delights: and beseech Almighty God to enlighten their hearts, and offer your self to suffer whatsoever it shall please him to lay upon you, begging grace for the same. At the Ghospell. COnsider what pains our Saviour took in this world going from one place to another, prea∣ching and inviting all men to follow his most perfect example and doctrin, begging by the merits of his pains and labours, that you may be a true follower thereof. At the Creed. THink what a multitude of people were con∣verted by the holy Ghospell; and nevertheless
how many there are which remain in blindnes, and wil not be lightned, for which be heartily sorry, and beseech God to convert them, but principally pray for the conversion of England. At the Offertory. COnsider the promptitude with which our sweet Saviour offered himself into the hands of his heavenly Fathet to suffer his bitter death and Passion for your Redemption, and all man∣kind. Wherfore offer your self wholly to his divine goodness with your vowes of obedience, Poverty, and Chastity, purposing from thence forward to be crucified by these three nailes to the Cross of all mortification. At the Preface. COnsider how our sweet Saviour raised La∣zarus after he had been dead four daies: and thence you may draw comfort and confidence, that although you find many evil customes in your self, all hindering you from the true service of God: yet acknowledge that he is able to rai∣se and deliver you from them all. Wherfore you must purpose strongly to resist them accor∣ding to the grace and strength, which it shall please him to give you.
At Sanctus. COnsider how the Angels in heaven do con∣tinually praise Almighty God, and how pleasing their service is unto him: wherfore pray unto them to obtain for you such fervour of spirit in this life that at your death you may be worthy to be assisted by them in heaven. At the Canon. COnsider the unspeakable love of our Saviour in offering himself for you in this most ho∣ly Sactifice: weighing his Majesties greatnes and Omnipotency, which is therein contained: and here you may pray for the intention of the whole church, and for all those you are to pray for that day. A prayer at the Elevation of the most B. Host. ADoro te Domine Iesu Christe & benedico tibi, qui pro nobis in cruce moriens redemisti mundum. Ave caro Christi immaculata Crucis hostia, morte tuâ nos a∣marâ fac redemptos luce clarâ tecum frui gloriâ. Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori. Aufer à me quicquid tibi displicet. Infunde in me quicquid tibi placet. Converte me totum tuum dulcis Iesu, Deus meus. Amen. J adore thee o Lord JESUS CHRIST, and
J bless thee who dying on the Cross for us, hast redeemed the world. Haile holy flesh of CHRIST, immaculate host of the Cross, Make us, redee∣med by thy bitter death, to enjoy with thee in glory, eternall light. God be mercifull to me a sinner. Take away from me all that is displea∣sing to thee; infuse into me all that is pleasing to thee. Convert me wholy to thee sweet JE∣SUS my God. Amen. A Prayer at the Elevation of the Chalice. SAnguis tuus Domine Iesu Christe pro nobis effusus, sit nobis in remissionem omnium peccatorum nostrorum, negligentiarum, & ignorantiarum nostrarum: in robur & augmentum fidei, spei, charitatis, gratiarum, & vir∣tutum: in cautelam vitae, in adoptionem gloriae aeternae in absolutionem omnium fidelium defunctorum & om∣nium pro quibus orare tenemur. Amen. Let thy blood, O Lord JESUS CHRIST, which was shed for us, be a remission of all our sins, negligences and ignorances, a strength∣ning and encrease of faith, hope, charity, gra∣ces, and virtues, a caution to my life, an adop∣tion to eternall glory, an absolution of all the faithfull departed, and of all for whom we are bound to pray. Amen. Whilst the Pater noster is said. COnsider who made this Prayer, and joyne your intention with the Priest's, who re∣peateth
it for the necessities of the whole church. An Excrcise for the 5. Pater nosters after the Elevation. 1. FIrst you make a particular intention to get pardon, and to dispose your self to receive the Blessed Sacrament, either corporally or spi∣ritually for the which observe this exercise. The first Pater and Ave, address to the right hand of our B. Saviour beseeching him that the pre∣tious blood which issued out of this his sacred wound may serve you for a bath to wash and purify you from all staines and spots of your sins, and particularly those which you have com∣mitted since your last confession. The 2. address to the left hand, beseeching him that the sacred blood which issued from the same may serve for a spirituall balsome to cure all your infirmities, and spirituall sicknesses. The 3. address unto the wound of his right foot, beseeching him by his sacred blood which issued forth thereof, that it will please him to adorn you with the garment of charity, and purity of heart and mind. The 4. address to his left foot, beseeching him that his sacred blood which issued forth of this wound may lighten the eyes of the soule to know his greatnes, feare his justice, and love his goodnes. The 5. address unto the sacred blood which is∣sued from thence that he will pardon and extin∣guish
all your inordinate desires and affections and unite your heart to his through perpetuall love and continuall memorie of him. A Prayer before spirituall Communion. O Pie Domine Iesu Christe, qui huc propter me ve∣nisti, & te mihi in panem quotidiaenum, imo in omnem desiderabilem usum tribuisti; vellem te libenter etiaem in Sacramento suscipere, sed heu non audeo, nec possum accedere, quia timeo te offendere propter indisposi∣tionem meam inimicam & tamen scio quod sine te vero cibo non possum vivere: quare humiliter te rogo ut licèt non sumam te sacramentaliter, me tamen reficias & ad me descendas spiritualiter & velis mihi gratiam imper∣tiri, quam te devotè sumentes debent sentire. O bone Iesu noli me despicere, noli me indignam famulam tuam tran∣sire; sed digneris ad me venire, mecum manere, & effectus tuos in me operari. Amen. O most pious Lord JESUS CHRIST, who camest hither for me, and hast given thy self to me for my' daily bread, yea to every desirable use. J would willingly receive thee even in the Sa∣crament: but alas J dare not, nor can J approach, because J am afraid to offend thee by reason of my indisposition offensive to thy eye: and yet J know that J cannot live without thee the true food: Wherfore J most humbly beseech thee, that altho J do not receive thee Sacramentally, yet that thou wouldst refresh me, and come down to me spiritually, and impart unto me that grace,
which those that receive thee devoutly must feel. O Good JESU despise me not, and pass not by me thy unworthy servant, but vouchsafe to come to me, and to remain with me, and work thy effects in me. Amen. An Exercise to be said by word or heart when you Communicate spiritually or corporally. 1. WHen the Priest saith Domine non sum di∣gnus, say interiourly at the 1. time. O my God J am not worthy for the multitude of my sins that the earth should beare me. 2. At the 2. O my God J merit not to lift up my eyes to behold the heavens. 3. At the 3. O my God, J am she who for my iniquities merit no other then hell; but not∣withstanding, O infinit goodnes, leave not to visit me. A devout Prayer to be said in time of Communion. O Bone JESU, dilecte mi, charissime mi, amor meus, dulcedo cordis mei, vita animae meae. O ae∣ternum bonum meum, melliflue JESU miserere mei, uni me tibi intimè ad gloriam nominis tui. Amen. O good JESU, my beloved my dearest, my love, the sweetness of my heart, the life of my soule. O my Eternall good, mellifluous JESU
have pitty on me, unite me to thy self most intimately, to the glory of thy name. Amen. Another. O Light increated, illuminate my darkness, il∣luminate my understanding with pure know∣ledge, replenish my memory with holy remem∣brance and chast thoughts, set my will on fi∣re with a holy and enflamed love, quicken my soule and make that J may tast the vertue of your holy presence, and by the same ever re∣main in me, and let me remain in you. Amen. A Thanksgiving after you Commu∣nicated spiritually or Corporally. GRatias tibi ago Domine JESU CHRISTE, qui me tantis Sacramentis spiritualibus refecisti; in∣dulge Domine obsecro reverentiam, mane mecum per gratiam, & fac me hodie & semper tuis obedire man∣datis, ut effectus & virtutes hujus Sacramenti sentiam. Amen. J give thee thanks. O Lord JESU CHRIST, who hast refresht me with such great spirituall Sa∣craments: grant me, J beseech you, reverence; stay with me by your grace, and make me this day, & alwayes obedient to your commands, that J may feel the effects and vertues of this Sacrament. Amen.
When the Priest sayes Agnus Dei. COnsider how your sweet saviour is rhe lamb of God who hath offered himself for all the sins of the world, and is now at the right hand of his Father to be the Advocate and Judge of sinners. Pray him humbly to pardon you your offences, and make you worthy spiritually to receive him, which indeavour to do with the Priest in the devoutest manner you can, and with the greatest affection you are able. When the Priest saith the last Collect or Prayer. GIve thanks unto the holy Trinity for having granted you so great a benefit as to be pre∣sent and prataker of so worthy a Mystery. At the last Dominus Vobiscum. IMagin as if you heard the sound of the Angels trumpet, wherwith our Lord at the end of the world will call to Judgment, and beseech him to give you grace to be ready and prepared against that day. When the Priest saith Ite Missa est. COnsider that at the last day of Judgment the wicked shall be condemned to everlasting
pain and torment, and perpetually deprived of the presence of Almighty God. At the last Benediction. COnsider the Benediction which Almighty God will give to all the Elect, and will lead them unto everlasting rest: wherfore beseech him so to bless you and all creatures both in this life and in the next as you and all other may perpetually bless his holy Name. Amen. At the End of Mass, say the Prayer following. SWeet JESUS I offer unto thee the sacrifice of this holy Mass, and of all the Masses which shall be said throughout the whole world, by means whereof I beseech you to give me know∣ledge of my sins and miseries, as also to restore the ruins and defects of my poor soule, and to supply my wants and unworthiness: mortify in me whatsoever is displeasing unto your divine Majesty and make me one according to your own heart: conform my spirit, soul, and body to that of your sacred humanity, and alwayes il∣luminate and direct me by the sight of your in∣comprehensible Divinitie. Amen. Having said this Prayer under the Ghospell Examin how you have behaved your self in this holy Mystery, and if you find your self to have
failed humbly crave pardon of Almighty God, purposing by his holy grace to amend, & be more diligent the next day. DEO GRATIAS. Certain intentions or Meditations which we ought to have when we Com∣municate: out of S. Bonav. 1. FIrst to unite our selves more & more to Almighty God. 2. To gain therby some vertue or grace. 3. To acknowledge his benefits which we cannot do in any thing which is more pleasing and agreable to him then by worthily frequen∣ting this holy Sacrament. 4. The desire of the praise of Almighty God, and his goodness, the same being a Sacrifice of praise. 5. To receive the spirit of Christ Jesus, & to live in humility, charity, Obedience, Po∣verty of spirit, mortification of body, and con∣tempt of the world, that thy Redeemer may live in thee, who is thy finall end. 6. To renew the memory of the Passion of Christ Jesus. Considerations before Communion taken out of the same Saint. 1. WE are to meditate vhat we are about to do; which is to receive Christ Jesus,
true God and true man, who died upon the Cross for us. 2. That we are to receive the Holy of Ho∣lies: for which cause, it behoveth that we ap∣proach thereunto, without sin; purging our selves by true Contrition. 3. Consider the divine Excellency and our own misery: how great this Lord is, and how meane the servant. Ponder that his goodness is much more then our offences, or vertues. 4. Stirr up in your self a most fervent desire to harbour in your heart such a loving Lord: The holy Doctour saith it is a very strange thing that man receiving into his soule Almighty God in the most B. Sacrament, his heart does not even faint, yea even burst through vehemency of love. Fooure considerations of S. Mathildis before Communion. 1. THe great love of God who had remem∣brance of her from all Eternity. 2. That he created her Knowing how ungra∣tefull shee would be unto his divine Majesty. 3. That he would dy for her, upon the Cross, and with his sacred blood satisfy his Eternall Fa∣ther for her demerits. 4. That for her love he would remain in the holy Sacrament to feed her with his own blessed body and Cleanse her with his owne sacred blood.
A Prayer before receiving the B. Sacrament. O Sweet JESUS J most ardently desire to re∣ceive you Sacramentally and spiritually: al∣though J know my self to be most unworthy you should enter into the house of my soule; be fa∣vorable unto me wretched sinner, and take from me whatsoever is displeasing unto you: prepare in me, and in all hearts a habitation agreable unto your divine Majesty. Would to God, O my sweet Saviour JESU, would to God J were wholy enflamed with an ardent desire and love of you. Behold J here renounce, and give up to you all things, O sweet JESU, O JESU, my love for ever. A Prayer after receiving the B. Sacrament.
O Most sweet Lord JESUS CHRIST, J hum∣bly beseech thy unspeakable mercy, that this holy Sacrament of thy pretious body and blood which J unworthy have received, may be to me and to all sinners a full purgation of all our offences, a strength against frailties, a for∣tress to defend us against all perills both of soul and body, an entire pardon and establishment in all grace, an amendment of life, a continuall memoriall of thy sacred Passion, a nourishment against all spirituall weakness and a staff of our  Pilgrimage: let it, my sweet Saviour JESUS, guide us going, reduce us straying, receive us returning again, hold us up stumbling, lift us up falling and persevering bring us to glory. O highest God let the reception of this most wor∣thy Sacrament so alter the tast of our hearts, that at no time we feel any sweetness, love, or desire, and consolation, admit any delight, es∣teem any honour, feare any adversity, or even-live but for thee, and to accomplish thy blessed will, which may ever be perfected in us. A∣men. Another Prayer. O Most glorious and ever blessed Virgin Ma∣ry, O holy Father S. Francis, O holy Mo∣ther S. Clare, S. Michaël, Angels, Archangells, Vertues, Powers, Principalities, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubins, Seraphins, and all cele∣stiall Spirits, J beseech you to prostrate before the face of my God, and beseech him in favour of his most deare son, my Saviour and Redee∣mer CHRIST JESUS, that it will please him to pardon the unworthines and indevotion whe∣rewith J have received the most blessed and dread∣fall Sacrament, and do not permit the same to cause that the spirit thereof be not communica∣ted unto me also, that by the vertue and effi∣cacy of this holy Communion J may feel the effect of his divinë mercy: that I may receive
this day a full remission of all my sins, true light and knowledge of his grace, which is in me: that be reduce and put me in such an estate as shall be most pleasing unto his divine Maje∣sty: augment in me faith, hope, charity, obe∣dience, chastity and patience, with all other ver∣tues and gifts of the holy Ghost, necessary to procure the glory of his divine Majesty, and the salvation of my soule to the honour and praise of his holy name. Amen. What we ought to do the day we communicate. 1. BE very careful to govern our sences, es∣pecially our tongue; and if it happen we fall by frailty, we ought presently to crave par∣don and beseech our sweet Saviour not therfore to absent himself from us. 2. To render to this blessed guest all the best services we are able, he being infinitely worthy to be served, loved, and adored of all creatures. Wishing above all things his holy honour and pleasure. 3. Seek still to entertain this blessed spouse with holy thoughts and desires, beseeching him to give you and all others, whatsoever he know∣eth to be needfull for his love and service, be∣leeving that he is inestimably rich, and a most liberal giver. 4. Do nothing that day without considering
first whether the thing you do will be pleasing and agreable unto him, and demand his permis∣sion and leave. 5. Make fervent aspirations, cast forth ar∣rowes of divine love towards that most amiable and sweet Lord with a vehement desire of lo∣ving him infinitely, and be wholy transformed into him by conformity of will. Deo gratias. A Prayer before Confession. O Soverain Creatour of heaven and earth, and of all things which in them are: J worm and miserable wretch have offended your divi∣ne Majesty, I wonder at my folly, detest my ingratitude, and lament my offences, craving through the merits of the bitter Passion and death of your onely begotten son, and the infinite love, with which he did both offer and suffer them for my sake, and for the whole world: grant unto me and all sinners true knowledge and perfect contrition of our sins and offences with entire remission of them all, loose us from the chaines of our imperfections, and heale the wounds of our soules: grant us ever to be pur∣ged and refreshed in the fountain of his holy wounds. Amen. A Prayer after Confession. O Good IESU let this my Confession be gra∣tefull and acceptable unto you by the me∣rits
of your admirable life and painfull death, with all the labours, anguishes, and sorrowes, which you suffered for mankind, together with those of your B. Mother, and all your holy Saints supplying whatsoever is wanting in me, either now or any other time, through want of true contrition, entire confession, or full satisfaction: beseeching they may also be unto me light, di∣rection and strength in all my wayes unto the per∣fect possession of you my sweet IESU in eter∣nall glory. Amen. Directions how to say the Divine Office with due devotion and attention. WHat care we ought to have in saying the divine Office according to the examples of the holy men, is witten in the 27. Chapter of Pa∣ralipomenon, Despise not your self, our Lord hath chosen you to stand before him and adore him. Wherfore since God hath chosen man to so high a prefer∣ment, it is very requisit we should know how, and in what manner humble service doth consist. The holy man Gerson affirmeth that in saying your Mattins and other houres, carefully and studiously, leasurely and distinctly, consisteth the greatest exercise of a Religious man, and is so fit for him as nothing more. S. Benedict doth call this the worke of our Lord, especially be∣cause it it is the chiefest office that any man can perform gratefull to the divine Majesty. S.
Jerome doth affirm that to offer up Hymns, Psalmes, and spirituall prayers, and to shed teares for our own offences, and those of our neighbour, is to reconcile the people to God, and to paci∣fy our Lord with his flock: all which things are to be accomplished in the divine office. Wher∣fore we ought very diligently to apply our whole study, and inward powers to the due execution thereof: least perhaps that dreadfull sentence pronounced by the Prophet Jeremy c. 48. v. 10. fall upon us, maledictus qui facit opus Domini fraudu∣lenter. Artursd be be who do's our lords worke negligently. Three sorts of preparation for saying the Divine Offices. THe first of living well, which is to be exer∣cised in doing all pious works, to restrain our selves from all vanities, and daily to keep our hearts free and pure from all things that may in the least sort soyle them, alwaies directing our thoughts and works whatsoever unto Almighty God and his honour. The 2. is, that before we begin the Divine Office, we be carefull to recollect our spirits, ex∣cluding all forrain thoughts, or whatsoever may give us distraction in our Divine Office, consi∣dering seriously what wee are going bou It behoveth us also diligently to weigh these, things following.
That we come To worship God. To thank God. To intreate God. First we come to worship God in three per∣sons and one essence with the worship of Patria which is due to God alone, for the benefit of justification, that is the Incarnation of his only son, our B. Saviour his life, death, Resurrection, and Ascension; which Mysteries we ought ca∣refully to consider, and ponder with great de∣votion and reverence. 2. We come to thank God in praysing him for the great benefits which we have received and do momentarily receive, and hope to re∣ceive herafter. Therfore it is requisit that we behold and renew the same every houre and moment of our life: but especially when we are so particularly employed in a worke that hath so great relation and adherence thereunto. 3. We go to intreat God, in beseeching his most immeasurable clemency for our own ne∣cessities and those of the whole Church: but to bring all these particulars with more facility to our mind it will assist us much, attentively to think that nothing is more necessary or pro∣fitable for us then God. The 3. Preparation is a zealous prayer, which we must make to the end we may wor∣thily finish the task of our devotions, and in imitation of the three Kings offer to his divine
goodnes the gold of devotion, the frankincense of attention, and the Myrrhe of constant per∣severance. Being to begin the Office you may say. I adore thee O Christ, and bless thee O Lord, for by thy Cross and Passion thou hast redee∣med the world. Thou art my God, and I will exalt thee; To thee be praise. To thee be glo∣ry. To thee be thanks giving for ever. All creatures worthily worship thee; praise, glori∣fy, and adore the most high and undivided Trinity, and the humanity of my blessed Lord Jesu, who in time past was conversant with men upon earth, and now sits at the right hand of his Eternall Father: J beseech the Holy Vir∣gin with the holy Angels and Saints, and tho∣se whose feasts are celebrated this day throug∣hout the whole Church, that they will all help me with their aid and furtherance, to the end I may finish this my office worthily to the true praise of Almighty God, and the profit of my soule Amen. For the Prayer before the lesser Houres take either REX CHRISTE &c. or the Prayer following. O Good Jesu I desire for the love and ho∣nour which I owe unto you, humbly to obey you, faithfully to serve you, and purely
to love you, in union of that most perfect at∣tention, which you being here on Earth prayed and praised your heavenly Father. Help me O Lord Jesu with your holy grace, for being left by you, I shall be able to do nothing. Amen. Devout Meditations at Gloria Patri. GLory be to the Father, who when I was not, hath created me. Glory be to the son, who when I was lost hath redeemed me. Glory be to the Holy Ghost, who hath sanctified me, and the elect of God. Here ensue certain holy Meditations of the 7. Effusions, distributed for the Canonical Houres. At Matins. COnsider with devotion, and yield manifold thanks to our B. Saviour for the effusion of his pretious blood, and suffererings in his Circumcision, offering the dolours and pains of the said effusion to God the Father for all those that are in state of mortall sin, that it would please his divine goodnes to give them a perfect knowledge of their offences with con∣trition, confession, satisfaction and amendment.
At Laudes. POnder and give thanks for the dolorousness, pain and effusion of blood, which our Sa∣viour CHRIST JESUS endured in the garden a little before he was apprehended and taken, where with great pain and agony he sweat blood and water: offering this spiritually unto God the Father for those that are in the state of gra∣ce, favour and love of God, and his holy name, that it would please him to conserve them in that state and purity. At Prime. YIeld many thanks for the pain and effusion of blood, which our B. saviour CHRIST JESUS suffered in his flagellation, offering it up unto God the Father, for all those that are in any affliction or tribulation, be it spirituall or corporall, beseeching his divine Majesty to con∣serve each one of them, as he knoweth to be most to his honour, and the health of their sou∣les. At Tierce. IN devout contemplation give Many thanks unto God our sweet Saviour CHRIST IESUS for the effusion of his most precious blood which
he endured in his crowning with thorns: offe∣ring it to God the Father for our parents, kin∣red and benefactours, and all for whom wee are any wayes obliged to pray: beseeching him to give them his holy grace to live in his true love and feare, and at their death to possess everlasting life. At Sext. YIeld manyfold thanks unto our B. Saviour IESUS for the paines and effusion of his pretious blood, which issued forth of his hands and feet, being nailed on the Cross; offering it to God the Father for the state of our holy Mother the church, that the Popes holines, and all Ecclesiasticall Powers may be exalted, to the increase of his honour, and have grace strength and ability, well to discharge what is committed to them therein. At None. GIve manifold thanks unto our B. Saviour for the effusion and shedding of his sacred blood when nayled to the Cross his most holy side was pierced with a lance; offering it to God the Father for the Conversion of all Hereticks: particularly for England, that it would please him to enlighten them with his holy grace to know and embrace the truth, that they with all
others may in union and perfect charity, love, praise and magnify him everlastingly. At Evensong. CAll to mind the dolorous Mystery of our B. Saviours taking from the Cross and lying in the lapp of his Mother, offering it to God the Father for all religious persons who are espe∣cially dedicated unto his holy service, beseeching his divine goodnes to give each one of them grace perfectly to perforn his holy will even unto death, & to live vertuously in the obser∣vance of their institutes, and persever therein untill the end. At Compline. COnsider how our B. Saviour being dead and his holy body taken down from the Cross, it was by our B. Lady, S. Mary Magdalen and other holy persons laid in the sepulcher whilest his glorious soul descended into Limbo, where he delivered the just: all which with devotion wee may present unto God the Father for the com¦fort and releasement of the soules detained for the purging of their sins in Purgatory, beseeching him mercifully to receive them unto his happy rest, that they may eternally praise him. AMEN.
A Prayer after the Divine Office. O Good JESUS be propitious unto me a mi∣serable sinner: unto thy goodnes do J com∣mend this my office most coldly and distractedly accomplished, beseeching that through your me∣rits it may be amended and perfected. Unto you good JESU do I offer it for the good of the whole church, and the salvation of my sou∣le, in union of that most perfect attention, with which here on earth you did pray unto your hea∣venly Father; Answer I beseech you, Satisfy, and pray for me. AMEN. A Direction for Mentall Prayer. THose who desire to increase and go forward in a spirituall life, let them go that certain way, which is the interiour and mutuall com∣munication with Almighty God, performed in this holy Exercise. Because in Prayer vertues are ceived, obtained, and augmented. Prayer as the holy Apostle S. James saith, availeth much, ascen∣deth to heaven before the tribunall seat of Almigh∣ty God, and bringeth unto men every good and perfect gift; causeth such a league and union be∣twixt God and them, as it maketh their soules apt to receive infinite grace from his divine Ma∣jesty. Daniel by Prayer converted the fierce∣ness of Lions into the meekness of Lambs. Prayer
made the fire loose its force, being not able to burn the three children in the midst of the fla∣ming furnace. Prayer likewise stayed the course and altered the uniform motions of the heavens, giving power to the voyce of man to stop and detain the sun for as many howers as was ne∣cessary for the obtaining the victory against his enemies. Jacob through the vertue and effica∣cy of Prayer prevailed against the Angell. Yea Prayer tyed the hands and infinit power, (if we may so say) of the Lord of Angels: for by the Prayer of Moyses Almighty God seemed to be as it were disabled to chastize the people, when he said unto this faithfull servant of his. Suffer me that my fury m y be angry against them: as if he should have said: Detain me not with thy Prayers. Prayer finally obtaineth pardon for whatsoever offences: the Publican getteth remission of his sins, and the Prodigall child pardon, and returns again into favour by Prayer. Therfore it being so profitable and necessary for a spirituall life, obtaining by the vertue thereof whatsoever it will in heaven or Earrh; it is requisit that all Religious persons, spend as much time as their state and leisure will permit them in this kind of Prayer: which rather consisteth in the actions of the will then the long discourse or speculation of the understanding, sensible gifts, or consola∣tions: for that is not in our own hands. The fruit of Prayer is, that we raise from the same, humility, patience, obedience, Indifference &c.
This is alwaies in our power, (the grace of God presupposed.) To the end that Prayer be per∣formed with Recollection and attention, it is necessary that we do not take it in hand as a thing of small moment, not rashly, but advisedly; not with a slow and dull heart, but with a lively attention, and undaunted courage: for other∣wise we might incurr the curse of the Prophet Jeremy, who saith, Cursed is he that doth the worke of the Lord negligently. Neither is so great atten∣tion and force to be used as therby to weary and break our heads, and hinder our health: for so, insteed of pleasant and sweet milk we should wring forth blood, (as the wisdom of God sig∣nifieth in Proverbs) cause a feare and horrour to undertake this holy Exercise. Wherfore to avoid these extreams, Moderation is to be used in such sort, as by over much striving therein we hurt not our selves, as was aforesaid, nor through too much carelesness let our mind be carried away with unprofitable matters Let not wandring thoughts trouble you, but put them away sweetly: for you merit more by patient resistance then in having great comfort and con∣solation. Humble and accuse your self in the fight of Almighty God, that you cannot be so long in his presence without so many earthly cogitations: beseeching our B. Lady, your ho∣ly Angel, and all others with the Saints to pray for you and supply your wants in due praise and love of his divine Majesty. For scruples and
temptations, which happen in Prayer, the first remedy, is not to hearken, or give eare unto them. An Instruction for mentall Prayer to which are required 5. Conditions. To wit. 1. Preparation. 2. Meditation. 3. Pream∣bles. 4. Colloquie. 5. Recollection. 1. PReparation hath 4. conditions. The 1. which is universall to all piety, Purity of heart and calmness of passions, and affections, and Recollection both of senses and fancies: but above all things, that the intention be pure, and that you undertake this vertuous Exercise sincerely for the love of God to please him, and reform your life and manners accor∣ding to his most blessed will and not for ho∣pes of consolations or divine lights; which we∣re an intention proper to hirelings, and not fit for his children, nor gratefull to our heavenly Father, who desires above all things a pure in∣tention. 2. The 2. is Reading, which you may ac∣custome in this manner: read those points you intend to make your Meditation on after even song, before or about dinner: and that which you purpose to meditate on after Mattins the night before. Ruminate the matter divers
times before you meditate, moving your self to tast and feel those good motions and affections, which you think the matter will yield you to draw forth. For if in an affaire of importance which we handle with earthly creatures, we se∣riously think and consider thereof before: how much more ought we to do it in this so spiri∣tuall an Exercise and the greatest which can pos∣sibly be undertaken, being we are therein to treat with Almighty God about the good and salvation of our soule. The 3. condition, is the Presence of God. Coming to the place where you purpose to me∣ditate consider the presence of Almighty God comparing his greatness and goodness, with your own basenes and vileness and imagining our sweet Saviour calleth you to shew you what he hath don, said and suffered for you. Or con∣sider your self a beggar, sick, and guilty, to crave of your benefactour an almes, of your Physitian health, and of your Judge pardon; beseeching your good Angel, and some of your Patrons to accompany and assist you therein. 4. The 4. and last condition of preparation▪ is the Prayer preparatory, wherein you crave grace affectuously in generall to perform your Meditation to Gods honour and glory, and the good of your own soule, remembring that sen∣tence. Omnis nostra sufficientia à Deo est. All our sufficiency is from God: beseeching your hea∣venly Father who is a sea of mercies to rain down
by his power plenty of pious thoughts to possess your memory; God the son the true light and wisdom to illuminate and instruct your Under∣standing with heavenly knowledge; God the Holy Ghost, who is an infinit burning fire of chari∣ty, to enflame your will with pious affections. The 2. Condition of Mentall Prayer is Preambles, which are for the most part three. 1. THe fitst whereof is a tepetition to your self as you would to another, of the matter, sentence, or verse, of which you are to medi∣tate. 2. The 2. if the matter be Historicall, is to represent unto your self the place and persons present. As for example: Meditating some My∣stery of Christ, put before your eyes some moun∣tain, citty, or desert, fitting the place to the Mistery or sentence, which you are to consider. If what you purpose to meditate be spirituall matter, void of such similitude, abstain from the 2. Preamble accordingly. If of Hell: think of the length, breadth, and depth of that horrid place, with all things that may give horrour unto If of Heaven: represent the spacious plea∣santness of that Celestiall Country. If on death: your self lying on your death bed, or laid in your grave. If on Judgement: our sweet Sa∣viour
sitting on his Judgment seat. If on sin: your soule to be held prisoner in your body, fettered with chaines of disordered passions, and clogged with the burden of the flesh. But if the sentence of your Meditation be such, as cannot make these nor the former similitudes: call to mind who spoke or did it, in what man∣ner, sort, or with what intention: reciting that sentence two or three times unto your self: which manner you must also accustome in all sorts of Meditations, expecting what it shall please God to teach you: therfore saying: Speak Lord thy servant heareth. 3. The 3. Preamble, or petition is briefly to crave light and knowledge of the Mystery you meditate on, and grace to stirr up in your self such particular good affections of this or that vertue as you shall see the matter is most apt to minister occasion, for your spirituall profit. The 3. Condition of mentall Prayer, is Meditation, which consisteth in the three powers of the soule. 1. FIrst: let the memory remember to call to mind the presence of Almighty God, be∣fore whom you are to chuse the matter whereon you are to meditate, in what manner you are to do it, and the end wherfore. 2. Secondly: the Understanding must discour∣se
of the matter, whether it be of some person, as of our Saviour: some words of holy scriptu∣re, some actions, as of the Passion of CHRIST JESUS, or the suffering of his Saints: the ve∣rity, cause, properties, effects, conveniences, and circumstances, as, WHO, WHAT, WHY, WHERE, WHEN, BY WHAT MEANS: And this is not to be don slightly, but very seriously, so as they may move the will, pon∣dering and as it were shewing them again. 3. Thirdly: the will must stirr up in it self these affections, and make such good purposes as the subject doth require, and the understan∣ding hath before approved for good: seeking to perform towards God: 1. The affections of praise of his holy name. 2. Love of his good∣ness. 3. Confidence in his mercy. 4. Faith in his verity. 5. Feare of his justice. 6. Gratitude for his benefits. Towards your self, affections of love or hatred, desire or disdain, joy or sorrow, conversion, or aversion, feare or hope, dislike or pursuit of the matter which you have disco∣vered: and in these of the will you must incite and stay your self in every point of your medi∣tation. How to proceed with fruit in every point of your Meditation. FIrst the memory is to present the matter unto the understanding, as is above said, and that
is to consider the persons, actions, and circum∣stances as is set down: and when by discourse and particular view of the matter, you shal suf∣ficiently understand any speciall point to move affections: as to discover Gods goodness, love, or any benefit, don towards us by him, exam∣ple of vertue, or difformity of vice, then stay that discourse, and seek to stirr up such good affections, as the matter will most aptly afford. As for example; when by discourse you have found the goodness of God, or some great be∣nefit of him to us; then stay, love, view, and admire him for the greatnes thereof: inciting your self to have a perpetuall memory and ack∣nowledgment of them, drawing somthing for your instruction and encouragement to his most perfect service and your own progress in vertue. This is a great part of the fruit, which you are to reap of Meditation, the which you must per∣fect by colloquy and Prayer. Helps, if the will do's not yield unto those affections which you desire. REflect with your self what affections such cōsiderations ought to move in you towards God, whose love, goodnes, and benefits you see to be so great, and you have deserved so little: the which consideration ought to produ∣ce in you exceeding great love, praise, gratitu∣de, obedience, confidence &c. Then come to
your will again, and see whether it will yield to those affections. If it do not, then labour to move it either by such persuasions as you would give to another, whom you desire to in∣cite to the same affections: Or else, reprove your dulness; or ask your self the question why you should not yield thereunto: seeing that you can remember your self and others to be exceedingly moved unto such affections towards creatures for less motives. And again say. Why should not I feel the like to my Creatour, or at least yield with my will to desire it, and purpose the same? Then have recourse to Prayer and say. O my God, J will purpose &c. J desire you to assist me with your grace: confessing your misery and unworthines, beseeching him to be your help. And somtimes say these words of Jacob: I will not leave thee O Lord untill thou givestme thy blessing: or those of the Cananean woman. Yes Lord I am a dog, yet doggs eate, the crums which fall from their Maisters table: or other such like. And thus, having at least by some meanes or other stirred up the foresaid affections, though not so fervently as we desire, persever in exercising the will, drawing forth somthing for your profit. This example, in due proportion may serve to teach you how to proceed upon any other matter: as when you have by discourse discovered any vertue or vice in some word, deed or thought, of some person who is presented in the Meditation: first by staying or pondering, or sometimes admiring
how worthy a thing that vertue is, in that per∣son, and how foule the vice: the fruit and pro∣fit which ariseth of the one, and the loss and shame of the other. Then proceed as you will to move and stirr up the affection you seek; never contenting your self with generall affe∣ctions, be they never so fervent, nor spend to much time in them, but make some particular resolutions, of which you stand in most need for the advancement and correction of your life, which having stirred up, confirmed, and resol∣ved to practice, conclude alwaies the part, and much of the whole Meditation with devout col∣loquies or speaches of heart unto Almighty God. The 4. Condition of Prayer, or Colloquy to be said at the end of Meditation or part of them during the same. 1. THe first is to give God thanks for the holy affections, resolutions, and purpo∣ses, which he hath inspired into you, as also for his goodnes and mercy which you have dis∣covered in the discourse of your Meditation. 2. Secondly, by way of oblation, wherein you present unto God the self same goodnes and mercy of his, which you have tasted in Medi∣tation together with the death Passion, vertues and merits of his holy son our Redeemer, and consequently with all the affections and resolu∣tions
which by his holy grace you made in your Meditation. 3. Thirdly by Petition or Obsecration, which you demand of God, and earnestly conjure him, as it were through the death and Passion of our fweet Saviour, the merits of the glorious Vir∣gin Mary, the intercession of your good Angel, and all the holy Saints to bless your affections and resolutions, which to his honour and glory you have made, to the end you may faithfully put them in execution, and for making your self more capable of his grace; crave pardon for your sins and offences committed against his di∣vine Majesty, with remedy of some vice and augmentation of some vertue, offering your self wholy unto his holy service with a firm purpo∣se to avoid whatsoever may offend him. 4. Fourthly; besides these particular petitions which appertain unto your self, it is very good to make a generall sute for all both living and dead, but especially for those who have most need, and to whom you are most obliged, and particularly for the soules in Purgatory. The 5. Condition of Mentall Prayer is Recollection. FIrst, your Meditation being ended, it is very profitable to ponder well and consider how it succeeded; whether you followed the method that was taught you, in the preparation, Pre∣amble,
Meditation and all the rest, and what point moved you most, and how you have ex∣ercised your self therein, craving pardon for your defects, and giving Almighty God thanks for what was well, resolving to follow what you see to be profitable unto you, and avoid the contrary. 2. You must have a particular care to con∣form your felf unto those good motions, which Almighty God shall give you in Prayer: for, so to do, is a most speciall means to obtain the increase of grace: for the contrary would be an ingratitude and contempt of Gods graces, which deserveth not to have the like hereafter: a prin∣cipall help for the same is to have care to re∣member them: and for that end it is good at Mass, and the Divine Office to renew and offer them to Almighty God, and divers times in the day to do the like. 3. Thirdly and lastly, if at any time it hap∣pen that through ill disposition, want of due Preparation, or yielding to temptation, your Meditation doth not succed; be not dismayed or discouraged, but humbling your self in Gods sight, acknowledge your imperfections and ne∣gligences; crave pardon of his divine Majesty, purposing by his holy grace to be more carefull and diligent the next time: for the obtaining of which, have confidence in his divine goodnes, and thank him that he hath vouchsafed to per∣mitt you the favour to be so long in his pre∣sence.
And if it were to have the least good af∣fection in all the time of your meditation, or but a remembrance of Almighty God, think not the time lost, and labour fruitless, but ra∣ther if you wil make use of that little you have by often remembring it, doubt not but that lit∣tle spark by laying wood to it, and often blo∣wing the coales will turn to a great fire of the love of God. An advice how to overcome some diffi∣culties that fall out in Meditation. THe first is when you find your self without gust of devotion, and so dry that Medita∣tion will not only seem to be cumbersom unto you, but also time lost. To overcome this dif∣ficulty: you must understand, that aridity and driness may come somtimes out of your own fault; as when you used not that diligence you ought either in meditation, or in preparing your self, by foreseeing what you are to meditate on, accor∣ding as hath been said, whereof it cometh, that you do it with negligence, & dryly: and Almy∣ghty God in punishment thereof doth worthily deprive you of the consolation and tast of Me∣ditation. The remedy to rid your self of this pu∣nishment, is to take away the cause. At other times this aridity cometh without fault; and we must not therfore leave Meditation: for as a time of consolation doth please you, when our
Lord like the sun in the spring cometh neare to you, and mak's you have gust in meditation: so you must not be displeased or leave your Exer∣cise, when the self same saviour as the sun in winter doth go from you, which he also doth for your good, that you may plant roots of humility, exercise patience and resignation, kno∣wing that when he goeth from you, you remain dry without devotion, having confidence that God will accept of your Meditation and endea∣vours, and send you consolation when he thin∣keth most fitting; and persevering with courage and hope, remember the words of Tobias. Qui post tempestatem, tranquillum facit. Who after a storme mak's a calme. As also that of Job. If we have received good things, why should not we beare with the basd. It may be also that Almighty God suffereth you to be dry in Prayer, to try with what intention you come to so holy an Exercise: proving whether you be his souldier for payment, expecting he should reward you with gust and de∣votion: or else to make you know that your tast and comfort in meditation is his gift, which he be∣stoweth on whō, ād when he will, that by this means you dispose your self to ask humbly of him, and with confidence expect what you aske▪ whēsoever you prav to please God therby as you ought to do; you may say: I did not begin my medita∣tion to feel gust or devotion, but for the love of God, my sweet saviour JESUS, & for his love I will continue it.
Another difficulty is, that the divell will repre∣sent Meditation unto you, as very hard and dif∣ficult, so to make you differr it, and afterwards wholy forsake it. But if you have a true desire to do a thing acceptable to your Creatour, ei∣ther Meditation will not seem so tedious or you will hold all well employed for his love. How many courtiers do you see going a hundred times a yeare unto the Princes chamber without hopes of once speaking unto him, onely to be seen-by him, that he may take notice how they en∣deavour to shew their duty unto him: so must you come to the Exercises of Prayer, which is as it were Gods Chamber of Presence purely and meerly to do your duty and testify your fi∣delity. And if it please him not to speak to you, no otherwise then if he saw you not, or if you were not in his presence, you must not for all that go away discontented, or discomforted, but continue still with patience and a devout beha∣viour in the presence of his soverain goodnes: and without doubt your service will be acceptable to him, and at last he will take notice of your constancy and diligence.
Colloquies or speeches, part in Meditation and part in Prayer; Praising Al∣mighty Gods Excellency, good∣ness, holiness, worthiness &c. TO THE SOULE. EXhorting it to some vertuous action: som∣times reprehending her vices and faults, little zeal, imperfections &c. PURPOSES. Purposing to Gods honour, Obedience, Hu∣mility, Resignation, Mortification &c. AFFECTIONS. More affections towards God, increase of his honour, augmentation of the Church, &c. SUPPLICATION. Make supplication unto God, as a son does to his father, a beggar to his benefactour, a sick man to his Physitian, a schollar to his Master, and a spouse to her bridegroome. TO OUR B. LADY. Alleadging that shee is our mother, Mistris, Queen and Advocate, and therfore ought and doth love us, defend, protect, and pray for us.
TO OUR GOOD ANGEL. Alleadging his office, charge, and power to help us: his honour to defend us. TO THE SAINTS. Especially those to whom you are most devoted, alleadging their affinity to our nature, their tryalls of our necessities, their security in glory, and their ability and willingnes to help us. CAUSES OF DISTRACTIONS. 1. First from the Divell who doth still en∣deavour to hinder from the fruit of Prayer. 2. It proceedeth from our own imagination which is free, untamed, and ill governed. 3. From some affections unmortified, which draw our thoughts after them, for where the trea∣sure is, there is the heart. 4. From cares which sting, and divide the heart into a thousand parts. 5. From coldnes in enforcing our selves to this so noble an Exercise. 6. From ignorance, not knowing how to discourse or meditate, or searche into hidden ve∣rities, and ponder them in such sort as may move the will and stirr up affections of devotion. This ignorance by the grace of God will be remedied by this form, and method following.
The meanes to resist distractions of heart and tediousnes of spirit, are prin∣cipally foure. 1. FIrst, profound humility, acknowledging our weakness and misery; being ashamed to stand before God with such distractions, ac∣cusing our selves of our offences both past and present. 2. The second, fortitude of mind, resolving not to admit any distraction, although it admi∣nister matter of content, of seem of much im∣portance; for nothing behoveth us so much as to tend to Prayer and to God, before whom we are. Wherfore if a thousand times we should be diverted, we must turn again as many times more, without loosing courage. 3. The thrid remedy, Prayer it self: beseeching our saviour to recollect our thoughts and wan∣dring affections, that wee may use attention and devotion: craving the help and intercession of his glorious Mother with the holy Angels and Saints, who are willing to assist all those that pray: saying somtimes with David. My heart hath forsaken me, may it please you Lord to deliver me from the violence which I suffer, and have respect to help. Other times with the Prophet: My soule is as earth without water. Again: with the blind
man in the Ghospell. O son of David have mercy on me. Or with the Psalmist. Depart from me o yee malignants, and I will search the Commandements of my God. 4. The fourth is Confidence in Almighty God: persuading our selves, that being he comman∣deth us to pray, he will give us grace wherby we may resist the divell, bridle our imaginations, restrain our passions, moderate our cares, cast from us our coldness: But with this confidence wee must adjoyn diligence, as Cassian saith, re∣moving before Prayer whatsoever you think may distract you therein: imitating in this the subtil∣ty of our adversary; who as S. Nilus Abbot saith, ordaineth all his temptations, wherwith he tempteth sp rituall persons, to hinder them from Prayer & the fruit thereof: tempting them with impatience to dis∣quiet them, curiosity to distract them, multitude of busines to disturb them, pride and ingratitude to make them barren and dry &c. By this we may learn to be no less provident and carefull of our good then the divell is of our harm, ever governing our selves in such sort as may most forward our Prayer, remembring the words of our sweet sa∣viour in S. Luke. It behoveth us alwaies to pray, and never to be weary. The chiefest effects of prayer. ARe particular lights, affections, and reso∣lutions. And whatsoever else is needfull for
a large Examin after Meditation, is set down in the end of the book of the practice of Medita∣tion. 1. Consolation is an inward motion unto the more perfect love of God, and withdraweth our affections from all earthly creatures. 2. Teares, springing of love or sorrow, ri∣ghtly ordained to the honour of God. 3. Increase of hope and Charity. 4. Joy and devotion, which incites the soul unto greater perfection. 5. Illuminations of the understanding, wherby it understandeth some things anew or better, and more perfectly then before. 1. Desolation is that which vaileth the eyes of the soul, that it may not behold that which apper∣taineth to the glory of God, and the perfection of the soule. 2. That which troubleth, and moveth us to earthly and outward things. 3. That which draweth us to the distrust of obtaining perfection, or what may help us. 4. That which driveth away Hope and cha∣rity. 5. That which bringeth the soule to a certain tepidity, heavines, and tediousnes of mind. S. Bernard speaking of the devout Meditation upō the Passion of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, saith thus. If thou desirest perfectly to be purified from all thy sins and vices, if thou wouldst be nobly enriched with vertues, illuminated in holy Scripture: if thou would'st gloriously
triumph over thy enemies: if abundantly be conforted in adversities; if often, to have compunction and shed teares of devotion: if to obtain the burning fervour os spirit in Meditation: if to be replenished with spirituall joy, if to persever in well doing, if in the end well and blessed∣ly to dy, and to reign in heaven eternally: and finally to be beloved and crowned by our Saviour Iesus, ever∣lastingly, exercise thy self in the holy Meditation of the blessed life and Passion of Iesus, and often reduce the same unto thy heart and memory. Things to be considered in Meditating the Passion of our Saviour. 1. Who it is that suffereth. 2, What it is he suffereth. 3. How he suffereth. 4. For whom 5. To what end he suffered. Severall Affections to be draw'n from the consideration of the same Passion. 1. To have compassion on the greatnes of his pains. 2. Contrition for the sins, which were the cause of his sufferance. 3. Imitation in folowing his examples. 4. Gratitude for the largeness of our Re∣demption. 5. Hope he dyed to save us. 6. Love in seeing the greatness of his love. 7. Admiration in beholding his unspeakable
bounty and goodnes. It is written of him, dixit multa, fecit mira, pertulit dura. Considerations of the knowledge of ones self. 1. Consider what you have been, what you are, and what you shall be. 2. Ponder what you are by nature: by fault, what you have deserved; and what you may do by grace. 3. The effectuall cause of your Being, is God. 4. The matter of which you are made is Earth, agreeing with the nature of beasts. 5. Our soules to the image of God. 6. Our end to serve him, and live eternally with him. Considerations of sin. 1. How much it displeaseth Almighty God, and hurteth man. 2. How contrary to his justice, displeasing, and disedifying to our neighbour. 3. God's severe punishment of it, and what we loose therby. 4. The disgust that followeth sin, and dis∣honour that accompanieth it. 5. The grief of God, his Angels, and Saints, with the joy of the Divell. 6. The difformity of sin, and the disagree∣ment between men and it, according to the no∣bleness of the soul.
How to consider Death. 1. That all must necessarily dy, and then be deprived of all things. 2. Onely accompanied with grief and sicknes of the body, with temptations and feares of the soule. 3. And nothing will confort you at that hou∣re but only good works. 4. Death ought not to be feared, contemned, or desired. Of the Pains of the damned. There are many waies to meditate of this, as in that which followeth of glory, only chan∣ging the good for the evill. To contemplate Heaven. 1. Consider the dowries of the soule, which are the vision, possession and enjoying of God. 2. The dowries and perfections of the body: Impassibility, Brightnes, Agility, Subtility. 3. The place: most excellent, most large, most beautifull and most rich. 4. The company of the Angels and Saints with the Blessed Mother of God, which shall en∣dure for all Eternity.
How to consider vertue. 1. In what vertue consisteth. 2. What examples and doctrine my sweet Sa∣viour hath given you thereof. 3. How beautifull, excellent, necessary, and profitable it is: how pleasing unto God, and ma∣keth man agreable to him. 4. How much it edifieth and profiteth your neighbour. 5. The spirituall joy it bringeth with many benefits. 6. The victory we gain therby over our selves. 7. How farr we are from the perfection the∣reof and what you ought to do hereafter. 8. The power we gain therby, in presenting our Prayers to God. How to consider the Feasts of Saints. 1. In what place they are now and with what glory they are crowned. 2. How much they may help us by their Prayers and merits. 3. By what works, Prayers, and vertues they have attained such glory. 4. If you will come where they are, do as they have don.
To meditate on the Perfections of Almighty God. 1. His infinit Essence. 2. His Power. 3. His Wisdome. 4. His Bounty. 5. His Goodnes 6. His Love. 7. His Mercy. 8. His Justice. 9. His Providence. 10. His Omnipotency: con∣cerning which weigh this sentence of holy scripture, or what himself hath don in testi∣mony thereof. Caelum & terram ego impleo. In ip∣so vivimus, movemur & sumus. I fill heaven and Earth. In him we live, move, and are. For his po∣wer. Dixit, & facta sunt. He said, and they we∣re made. Considerations of the creatures of Almi∣ghty God, & first in generall. 1. BY the largeness of the world, consider the greatnes of Almighty God. 2. The multitude and variety of things with the infinit perfections of God. 3. His bounty in the profit they bring unto us. 4. His beauty by the beauty of the creatu∣res. 5. His wisdom in the well ordering of all things. 6. His Eternity, in the roundness, which hath neither beginning nor end.
7. The unity of the world, shewing that God is only one. The creatures in particular, their begin∣nings and continuance which is of God. 1. The end thereof, to wit his honour, and the service of creatures. 2. Of what and how they were made by his only word and power. 3. The qualities and effects of these creatu∣res, the reverence they use unto God and his perfections. The benefits in brief of Almighty God. 1. Who hath don you the benefit. 2. Who hath moved him to do it. 3. Wherfore he hath don it unto you. 4. How great the benefit is. 5. How much you are obliged therby, 6. How ungratefull you have been. What you ought to do in the time to come with the benefits of Almighty God in particular. 1. First how God hath predestinated us in per∣petuall love before the world was. 2. How he hath made man like to himself.
3. Given you a body of most seemly features void of all defformity. 4. Made your soul immortall, and adorned it with three powers. 5. Appointed an Angell to keep and defend you. 6. Made you to be born of Christian parents, and members of the Church, The benefit of our Redemption. 1. First sent us his well beloved son to be our Redeemer and example. 2. By Baptisme purged you from orignal sin and restored you the vesture of originall justice. 3. Fortified you with the Sacrament of Con∣firmation, wherby he hath armed you against your enemies. 4. Made you a Christian, and therby the child of God and coheire of his Kingdome. 5. Hath given the holy Ghost in token of adoption of love, communicating unto you his benefits inspirations and fruits. 6. Lastly the Sacraments of Confession and Communion, as a refuge in all Spirituall relap∣ses and necessities. The benefit of vocation. 1. First the patience of Almighty God with you: you falling so often after so many great
benefits received, long expecting your return, and not letting you dy in an evill state. 2. Sought to recall you by inward inspirations admonitions, and exhortations. 3. Mollified your heart, giving you a good will to vertue, and removed such impediments as might withdraw you from him. 4. Lovingly received you at your return, as the Father did his prodigall child, putting on you the stole of innocency, which you had lost by sin. 5. Hath called you from the vanities and mi∣series of the world, as he did Lot from Sodom. 6. What great plenty of means he hath given you in Religion, wherby you may satisfy for your sins, increase your crown and merit. The benefit of justification. 1. First how God hath changed your will, and moved you to do pennance, made bitter things sweet, and that which was unsupportable to be easy unto you. 2. Secondly, he hath given unto you perse∣verance in his feare and love: many begin∣ning well have failed in the end to their con∣demnation. 3. Thirdly he hath given to you the Evange∣licall vertues of hope and grace, to persever in your good purposes to avoid vice and labour for vertue.
4. Fourthly hath left the holy scriptures and devout books, wherein as in a glass you may behold your defects and imperfections. 5. Fiftly, the examples of Martyrs, Confes∣sours, Virgins, and the daily edification of those with whom you live. The benefit of donation. 1. FIrst the gift of nature, fortune, and gra∣ce: as the five sences with the three in∣teriour powers of your soul, health, strength, &c. 2. God brought you back when you were astray, instructed you when you were ignorant, and lifted you up when you were fallen. 3. Thirdly enlightned your understanding when it was in darkness of sin, and stirred up in you many good motions and desires. 4. Moved your will and affections to spiri∣tuall works and exercises. 5. Preserved you from many enormous sins, taking from you the occasions, and giving you grace to persever and resist them. 6. Delivered you from divers sorts of temp∣tations, drawing you forth when you were over∣whelm'd in them, and given you greater force to resist them.
The benefit of Preservation, 1. PReserved you both spiritually and corpo∣rally in a good state, with increase of good desires, to execute good purposes. 2. From the cradle to this moment preserved you from many enemies, diseases, dangers, &c. 3. Hath hitherto furnished you with all neces∣saries both spiritual and corporall. 4. Ordained for you succession of times, as day and night, winter and summer &c. 5. Directed you in prosperity and adversity, in sicknes and healthe, and in the whole course of your life. The benefit of Glorification. 1. THe fruition of the divinity with the vision of God, and his B. Mother. 2. The company of your good Angel with the Martyrs, Confessors Virgins, &c. 3. The dowry of the soule: the glorification of the body more bright and cleare then the sun it self. 4. the place of the blessed, the delights of the senses, the riches and abounding pleasures of the inhabitants, which are innumerable, in∣estimable, and immeasurable. 5. By the grace of God you shall scape the torments of Hell: the miseries of this life:
hurts and cruelties of your mortall enemies. These Meditations are as it were a cord to draw you unto Almighty God. Gratitude is a great part of justice, and amongst all Christian exercises none is more easy, if you be willing: none more needfull, if you regard your duty: none more profitable, if you desire reward, then often to look over the great and manifold bene∣fits, which we have received of Almighty God. The eight Beatitudes. 1. BEati pauperes spiritu, quoniam ipsorum est re|'gnum coelorum. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the King∣dom of heaven. Poverty of spirit Acknowledgeth her sins. Con∣temneth her self. Despiseth none. Honoureth all. 2. Beati mites quoniam ipsi possidebunt terram. Bles∣sed are the meek, for they shall possess the land. Meeknesse Answereth sweetly. Admonisheth benignly. Is mild being reprehen∣ded. Behaveth her self piously. 3. Beati qui lugent quoniam ipsi consolabuntur. Bles∣sed are those that mourn for they shall be comforted. Sorrow Excludeth all glory. Abideth in mise∣sery, For the love of her neighour. For her own sins. 4. Beati qui esuriunt & sitiunt justitiam quoniam ipsi saturabuntur. Blessed are they that humger and
thirst justice for they shall be satiated. Hunger and thirst Hath horrour of vice: A fervour of spirit: Tedious∣nes of temporall things: de∣sire of Eternall. 5. Beati mundo corde, quoniam ipsi Deum videbunt. Blessed are the Cleane of heart, for they shall see God. Purity of heart Is sincere in intention: Right in works: Excludeth per∣verse cogitations: Assiduous in contemplation. 6. Beati misericordes, quoniam ipsi misericodiam con∣sequentur. Blessed are the mercifull, becaus they shall find mercy. Mercy Hath compassion in tribulation. Succoureth in necessities. Delighteth in liberality. Is benigne with affability. 7. Beati Pacifici, quoniam filii Dei vocabuntur. Bles∣sed are the Peace makers for they shall he cal'd the children of God. Things which work Peace Silence and solitariness. Frequent and devout Prayer. Fervent contemplation. To admit no interiour trouble. 8. Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur prvpter justitiam, quoniam ipsorum est regnum coelorum. Blessed are they that suffer persecution, for theyr's is the kingdome of Heau'n.
Things which produce Pa∣tience. Feare of eternall sufferance. Fervent love of God. Memory of the Passion of our Saviour. Hope of Eternall joy. A Religious person ought often to consi∣der the benefit of his vocation by these circumstances following. VNDE ES? Quo? Quomodo? Quando? Quo fine vocatus? 1. FROM WHENCE, God, to wit, hath called you? From the world, the gulfe of sin and evils. 2. WHITHER? TO holy Religion, the house of God, the school of vertue, the gate of consolation, and the pourtrait of the celestiall Ierusalem. 3. HOW? With what love, wisdom, and power he called? without your own merit. 4. WHEN? In your youthfull, or old age, when you least desired or sought after such a course. 5. Lastly for what END? 1. To serve God perfe∣ctly, and forsake all things to accomplish it. 2. To do pennance, beare your Cross, and follow the steps of Christ Iesus. 3. To work your salvation and to gain perfection. 4. To help your neighbour as much as is possible according to your vocation and institution by good example and prayer. S. Bernard had this sentence alwaies in his heart. Bernarde ad quid venisti? Bernard, to what end didst thou come hither?
The Priviledges and benefits of a Reli∣gious person. Homo vivit puriùs, cadit rariùs, surgit velociùs, incedit cautiùs, quiescit securiùs, irroratur frequentiùs, mori∣tur confidentiùs, purgatur citiùs, remuneratur copiosiùs. A Religious person. 1. LIveth more purely: by the observance of Po∣verty, Chastity and Obedience. 2. Falleth more rarely: by flying the occasions of sin and perverse conversation. 3. Riseth more quickly: by consideration of ho∣ly scriptures; the lives of Saints, and example of those with whom we live. Walketh more warily: by meditating their sins past, imperfections present, and the joy which cometh of vertue. 5. Resteth more securely: by attaining the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and interiour consolation. 6. Receiveth more grace: by bettering their dis∣position, and becoming more familiar with God. 7. Dyes more confidently: by the the efficacy of Priviledges in Religion, meritorious works and help of Communaulty, with the imitation of their spouse CHRIST JESUS. 8. Is sooner purged: by the many remedies to make satisfaction, by the multitude of holy in∣spirations, and frequent exhortations.
9. Is rewarded more abundantly: because a Re∣ligious life is victorious over her enemies the FLESH, the WORLD, and the DIVELL. JESUS MARIA. Certain Aspirations for every day in the weeke. Munday, Humility. 1. WHen shall it be my God, that J shall be so odious, execrable, and insuppor∣table to my self, as J desire to be afflicted and punished of all creatures. 2. O sweet Saviour, when shall it be, that J shall have such a true contempt of my self, as with all my heart J wish to be contemned and reputed of every one, most vile. 3, When shall J, deare JESUS, for the love of, you desire in such sort to be humbled, as J be ever reduced to nothing. 4. O most meek Lord, J confess before thee, and will acknowledge to all the world, that J am the most vile and unprofitable of all crea∣tures. 5. O my God there is not on earth to be found a creature so disloyall and ungratefull as J am unto thee. 6. J am not worthy to look up to heaven, and much less to possesse the same.
7. If the greatest sinner in the world had tho∣se inspirations, and daily means of vertue, which J, o Lord, confess to have: J verily think he would not be so wretched as J am. Tuesday, Confidence. 1. ALthough every moment, deare JESUS, J commit many imperfections, yet J ho∣pe by thy help to attain to Christian perfection. 2. My sweet Saviour, if J committed all the sins and crimes, which have been from the be∣ginning of the world, yet would J be confident of pardon. 3. J hope most firmely, O son of God, my Redeemer, by thy holy merits and Sacraments to enjoy eternall life. 4. O infinit clemency! was there ever any sinner that truly asked pardon, to whom you denied it? 5. My sweet Saviour: if all creatures both in heaven and earth should tell me that thou hadst forsaken me, and didst refuse to help me, yet J would not beleeve them. 6. O sweet JESU; albeit the furies in Hell, together with all the afflictions of this life should torment me, yet would J trust in thee. 7. O good JESUS: thou that said'st. Aske and it shall be given: beleeve, and you shall receive: J humbly beg, and unfainedly confide in thy goodnes, whatsoever is necessary for me, either spirituall or corporall thou wilt give me.
Wednsday, Poverty. 1. O My Lord, J desire no riches, ease, or sensuall delights, but only the love of thee. 2. O that J had a thousand worlds, with all the fained pleasures thereof, not to possesse, but willingly to leave for the love of thee. 3. Most deare Lord, J will possess nothing but thee, and what J have, only for thy sake. 4. O dearest spouse all riches without thee are unto me unsupportable poverty: joy, sorrow, ease, paine, consolation, a consuming grief. 5. O my sweet Saviour that was't both in li∣fe and death so poor and naked of all things: for thee I most willingly embrace the want of what is necessary for corporall life and health. 6. My sweetest Jesu, which was't so poor and free from the posession of your will even in the repugnance of death: for thee, I entirely forsake my own will and sence to the consum∣mation of my life. 7. O my dearest Saviour that Wouldst not admit in all thy torments the least comfort, I beseech thee make me so perfectly poore as for thy love I entertain no unnecessary consolation. Thursday, Gratitude. 1. O my good God I render thee eternall thanks for all thy gifts both of grace
and nature bestowed on me and on all creatures. 2. O most liberall God thou hast don to me above all I can ask or desire. 3. O my Saviour what shall J render for all those numberlesse benefits, which I have and continually do receive from thee? 4. O deare Saviour in gratitude for all thy mercies towards me, I offer and beseech thee to accept of my heart and soule, with what else thou hast bestowed on me. 5. O my Creatour and deare Redeemer, that I could be gratfull unto thee. 6. Teach me, my God, to render thee such thanks as may be most acceptable unto thee. 7. O would to God I had the gratitude of creatures both in heaven and earth to offer up unto thee my onely good: but all being too lit∣tle, I beg thou wilt thy self supply these wants. Friday, Obedience and Resignation. 1. O Most benigne Lord, let me but know what you would have me to do. 2. Sweete Jesus I offer my self both in time and Eternity, most entirely to accomplish thy will. 3. Although J should be lost, yet if it be thy will: for love of thee I most willingly yield to live in continuall affliction and torment. 4. I offer my self with all my heart, my sweete Saviour, in what I may possibly,
in body, life and soule to be disposed of, by thy blessed will and pleasure. 5. Behold, sweet Lord for love of thee, I abandon and deny my senses, renounce my un∣derstanding, and wholy forsake my self to pro∣ve, and accomplish thy holy will. 6. Most deare God, for thy sake I firmly purpose, rather to dy a thousand deaths then once to be disobedient to thee. 7. O good Jesus, when shall I see that hap∣py houre, wherein by perfect obedience and entire Resignation I shall wholy live in thee, and thou in me. Saturday, Love of neighbour. 1. MOst mercifull Lord, I beseech thy in∣finit goodnes, so to illuminate the hearts of all sinners, that they may be truly penitent for their sins, to seek thee with all care who art the onely God. 2. I beseech thee my sweet Lord by the bo∣wels of thy infinit mercies, that all such as seek after ambition and earthly delights, may turn all their affections to love thee. 3. Grant sweet Jesus through the merits of thy bitter Passion, that all those for whom thou hast suffered, may reape the benefit thereof. 4. Most mercifull Lord, I humbly beseech thee to comfort all afflicted soules. 5, Most sweet Saviour; give such grace and
vertue unto all creatures, as they may be truly conformable unto thy holy will. 9. Most mercifull God, release for thy own sake, and thy B. Mother's, all those who ei∣ther in Earth or Purgatory, thou dost by ju∣stice punish. Sunday, Love of Almighty God. 1. TAke form me. O sweet Saviour, that which separateth me so farr from thee. 2. Purge my soule, O Lord, from all sin, and imperfection, by which it is defiled, and made unworthy of thy Image. 3. Behold, O my God, I hate and detest with all my heart, even the least offence that ever I have committed against thy divine Majesty. 4. Forgive, sweet Saviour, all that which justly thou mightest lay to my charge: for that now I desire to be perfectly united unto thee. 5. My sweetest Lord, as a channell of all uncleannesse desirous to be purified, I present my self unto thee. 6. O Eternall God, I beseech thee, that I who am the least of all creatures, may by perfect love of thee, be elevated above all crea∣ted things, and my spirit only satisfied in thee. 7. What shall I render thee my beloved Lord for all thou hast bestowed on me, that am but dust and ashes and yet thou hast made all things for me.
Aspirations for every day in the Weeke upon the Passion of our blessed Saviour. Munday, Contrition. 1. O Vile and most detestable sin, by which I have so oft betrayed and sold thee my Eternall Father: yea even for a momentary pleasure. 2. O that I had never by ingratitude bound thy liberall hands, and therby deprived my self of thee, and of thy will, and mercifull plea∣sure in me. 3. O my soule unto what streights have thy sins and offences brought thy Saviour: would to God I had some seas of teares to shed for having thus often cruelly tormented thee. 4, O, if it had been thy will, my sweetest Jesu, I wish I might have endured, not on∣ly temporall but endless pains, rather then ha∣ve caused the least part of thy affliction. 5. O Sacred wounds of my dearest Saviour in revenge of my cruelty, wound my heart with ten thousand darts of true remorse. 6. O sin how deformed and unjust art thou, that thus has't defiled the beauty of heaven and crucifyed my Immaculate Jesus. 7. O that I might with a thousand millions of lives, and infinit seas of blood, blot out
of my soule the guilt of thy death and Passion. 8. Sweet Jesus ingulfe and drown me in thy sacred wounds, that there I may learn to love. Tuesday, Compassion. 1. O That I could shed for thee my Lord so many teares as the sea contains drops of water, in true compassion of thy torments. 2. O who will give water to my head, and a fountain of teares to my eyes, to weep upon thee, the love of my soule. 3. O love, and only comfort of my heart, what consolation hadst thou in all thy torments? 4. Alas, my well beloved; why am not J alwaies present to suffer with thee, at least by compassion on thy pains. 5. My sweet JESUS, O that I might be crucified with thee. 6. O love of my soule, that I might have had the priviledge of the launce to have rested in thy heart. 7. My dearest Saviour permit me the favour to remain at the foot of thy Cross, to the end that I may weep continually, sigh, bleed, cry, and consume in compassion of thee. 8. Give me an endless spring of teares, to wash away the sacred blood of my sweetest love, which still issueth as flowing rivers from thee.
Wensday, Imitation. 1. O Most sweet JESUS: give me grace in imitation of thy sacred Passion, most willingly to undergoe the burthen of this tran∣sitory life. 2. For that thou hast suffered so many and cruell torments for my sake; let me never, O mer∣cifull God, fly any tribulation, which thou shalt vouchsafe to send me by thy self or o∣thers. 3. My Jesus, to accompany thee in thy ma∣nifold afflictions, I would be glad, not onely to endure the wants which thou sendest me, but seek others, and never be satisfied in suf∣fering with thee. 4. In imitation of thy nakedness, reproaches and whippings at the pillar; I will endeavour to strip my self of all inordinate desires and af∣fections. 5. I will continually follow thee my dea∣rest Saviour with the Crosse of perfect obedien∣ce, and never for any difficulty leave the same till I come to dy with thee. 6. O my Eternall God, that wouldst for my sake be nailed to the Cross: let me by true mortification be alwaies crucified with thee. 7. My loving spouse, I beseech thee, that with a full renunciation of my self, and per∣petuall death of all earthly things I may irre∣vocably dy with thee.
Thursday, Thanksgiving. 1. WHat thanks shall I yield unto thee my Eternall life, who wouldst endure uns∣peakeable torments to free me from the snare and fetters of death. 2. All you seraphins, and celestiall Spirits, with whatsoever hath been created praise my Redeemer for the unspeakeable price of my Re∣demption. 3. O my soule: how can'st thou devise to render the least part of due gratitude unto thy Jesus, who hath by his own humility so much exalted thee. 4. O let me ever acknowledge, my deare Saviour, that endless bond of gratitude, which thy Passion alone exacteth of me. 5. Sweet JESUS, that I could incessantly lo∣ve thee, for these inestimable treasures, which thou by thy torments hast purchased unto me. 6. Good IESUS; since I have nothing but my self to offer in requitall of thy infinit love: I beseech thee to accept in love and gratitude what by-right is thy own. 7. O eternall God, that I had a thousand hearts and lives to offer unto thee, who by thy death hast given and bequeathed thy self to me. 8. Grant, sweet IESUS, that thy dolorous death and Passion be ever imprinted in my heart my true thankfulness and imitation thereof.
Friday, Admiration. O My God, who art thou, who hast en∣dured so many and cruell torments? sweet and dearest love hast thou forgotten thy Maje∣sty and glory? 2. O light of heaven, and splendour of thy Fathers glory, unto what art thou now redu∣ced? 3. Alas, my Saviour, what art thou who art so despightfully treated? 4. O love of loves, that through the excess of thy love, thou wouldst for me endure so bitter a death. 5. O love how strong art thou, which with thy force surmounted'st him, that by no other means may be overcome. 6. O incomprehensible God, for whom dost thou suffer, but for miserable sinners, ungra∣tefull creatures, thy enemies, children of the divell, and those who contemn thee. 7. O dearest love; that my heart is not pier∣ced with thy dolours. 8. What were it o Lord, if I had all the loves of the world to unite and offer unto thee? 9. My sweet IESUS, if I could reduce all thy drops of blood into teares of love, what were it compared unto thy love?
Saturday, Ioy. 1. My heart and soule rejoyce and praise the mercies of my God who out of his infinit love hath died to give thee life. 2. O my delight, what joy will it give to my heart to receave that life, that infinit good, through the merits of thy most bitter and dolorous passion. 3. Sweet JESUS, I praise thee with eternall joy for having in thy most cruell death so per∣fectly accomplished the work of our Redemp∣tion. 4. It was by thee, O beloved Cross, that peace hath been established between God and man. 5. O triumphant glory, and most puissant King who by thy most sacred death, hast over∣come the Prince of Hell, and delivered our sou∣les out of his bondage. 6. O Heaven, Earth, sea, and all things therein; yield praises in our behalf unto the sa∣viour of our soules; and let us rejoyce in the me∣rits of his sacred passion. 7. If all my members were tongues, O how willingly would I employ them in the praise of thee my sweet saviour, and thy health-brin∣ging wounds. 8. O all yee celestiall spirits assist me to love and praise my God, by the vertue of whose Passion your ruins are repaired.
9. Sweet JESUS, what glory and comfort is it unto human nature to be exalted in thee, unto the right hand of thy Eternall father. Sunday, Love. 1. When shall it be, my crucified JESUS, that both the senses of my body, and powers of my soule shall be wholy employed in thy praise. 2. O my JESUS, when by perfect love and imitation shall I be daily crucified, and conti∣nually dy with thee. 3. O my beloved JESUS, when shall I love thee in such sort, as that thy sacred wounds be by burning love imprinted in my heart. 4. O my beloved JESUS, when wilt thou bring me into the wine cellar of thy blessed side and make me wholy drunke with the most sacred wine, which floweth from thy loving heart. 5. O when shall it be, my dearest JESU, that the flame of thy love shall pierce and wound my heart, that I may be wholy conformable unto thee. 6. Sweet JESUS let me love thee so unfai∣nedly as that by force of thy love, I neither feel, see, nor take comfort in any thing, but accompanyng thee my afflicted Lord. 7. My sweetest Saviour, when shall I have my full and wisht repose within thy crucified armes.
8. O sacred wounds of my JESUS, especially of his tender side, and most amou∣rous heart, why do you not burn and con∣sume my soule in the delightfull flames of his love. An Oblation unto our B. Lady to say on any one of her Feasts 70. Ave Maries, and then during every day 5. Ave's and these Prayers following. 1. O B. Virgin Mary, and Eternall Queen of Angels, I offer my self unto you in all that I am, or ever shall be, beseeching you to receive me as your own. 2. O B. Virgin Mary, preserve me living and dyng from all evill, for I am your own. 3. O B. Virgin Mary, receive me for your own, ever govern, and protect me as your own and have mercy on my soule, when it shall part out of my body. 4. O mercifull Mother, through your holy departure, make joyfull my departure, and in the houre of my death, receive my soule. A Prayer to Iesus Christ. ANima Christi sanctifica me, Corpus Christi salva me, Sanguis Christi inebria me, Aqua lateris Christi lava me.
Passio Christi conforta me, O bone IESV exaudi me, Intrà tua vulnera absconde me, Ne permittas me separari à te, Ab hoste maligno defende me, In hora mortis meae voca me, Et jube me venire ad te, Vt cum Sanctis tuis laudem Te In saecula saeculorum Amen. In English thus. SOule of Christ sanctify me, Body of Christ save me, Blood of Christ inebriate me, Water of Christ's side wash me, Passion of Christ comfort me, O good JESU heare me, Within thy wounds hide me, Suffer me not to be separated from thee, From the malignant enemy defend me, In the houre of my death call me, And bid me come to thee, That with thy Saints I may praise thee For ever and ever, Amen. When you passe by the B. Sacrament. DVlcissimum nomen Domini nostri Iesu Christi, & gloriosae Virginis Mariae Matris ejus sit in ae∣ternum benedictum.
In English. Let the B. Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST and the glorious VIRGIN MARY, his MOTHER be blessed for ever and ever. And then offer your intention herein to get the pardon which is gained. When you take Holy water. Aqua benedicta, sit nobis salus, protectio & vita. Asperges me Domine hissopo, &c. In English. May this holy water be to us health, prote∣ction and life. Thou shalt sprinkle me o Lord with hissope, &c. How we may honour the most holy and B. Name of the most glorious Virgin Ma∣ry, by sayng these 5. Verses with 5. Psalmes. 1. MAter amabilis Maria nomine, Multò nobilior quocunque lumine. Muni me miserum in tuo nomine, Malignis obvians tuo juvamine. Magnificat.
2. Aurora rutilans lunâque pulchrior, Astris fulgentior, & luce clarior, Afflictum respice qui nimis crucior, Averte jaculum hostis quo ferior. Ad Dominum cum tribularer. 3. Regina nobilis, filia filii, Rosae consimilis & flori lilii, Refove flebiles lacte consilii, Ruentes per dies huius exilii. Retribue servo tuo. 4. Iesse tu congruè vocata virgula Immarcessibilis & sine macula, IESV jam florid o qui regit saecula, Ipsa tu suggere ut solvat vincula. In Convertendo. 5. Ancilla Domini sumens tam nobilis Ave, quod Gabriel dedit mirabilis, Accipe canticum servi inutilis, Adsis in omnibus mihi placabilis. Ad te levavi. ℣. Dignare me laudare te Virgo sacrata. ℟. Da mihi virtutem contra hostes tuos. OREMUS. COncede nos famulos tuos, quaesumus Domine Deus, perpetuá mentis & corporis sanitate gaudere, & glorio â B. Mariae Virginis intercessione, à praesenti libe∣rari tristitia, & aeternâ perfrui laetitiâ. Per Christum Domenum nostrum. Amen.
The 5. Verses Englished. 1. O Amiable Mother ô Mary hail by name, More noble then the light of natur's frame, Defend me, by your meanes, which way so'ere J goe, And by your shelt'ring help, preserve me from my foe. 2. Bright shining dawn, fairer then the moon, More sparkling then the starres, and brighter then the sun, Look on me, wretch afflicted, and tormented, so, As to put by those darts, my foes do at me thr'o. 3. O noble queen, and daughter to thy son, Like to the Rose and Flower-de-Luce at noone, 'Tis milk of your good counsel, must cherish us that weep, 'Tis you that from all banish't ruin's, must us keep. 4. You are the rod of Jesse fittly nam'd, You neyther wither, nor with spot are sham'd, Pray to our Jesus, who the world doe's rule That J from bonds of sin, may save my soule. 5. O handmaid of our Lord, who took the noble haile From wond'rous Gabriel's mouth, the world's great baile, Receive the sacred Cantick, your worthless ser∣vant sing's, And gratious be to me, sweet Mary in all things.
LITANIAE B. P. N. FRANCISCI. KYRIE eleïson. Christe eleïson. Kyrie eleïson. Christe audi nos. Christe exaudi nos. Pater de caelis Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, Miserere nobis. Spiritus sancte Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas unus Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancte Francisce, Pater amabilis, ora pro nobis. Pater admirabilis, Pater benigne, Pater venerabilis, Vexillifer Jesu Christi, ORA PRO NOBIS. Eques Crucifixi, Imitator filii Dei, Seraphim ardens, Fornax Charitatis, Arca Sanctitatis, Cultor pacis, Vas Puritatis, Norma Justitiae, Speculum Pudicitiae, Regula Poenitentiae, Magister Obedientiae,
Exemplar Virtutum, Patriarcha Pauperum, Profligator Criminum, Lumen tuae Patriae, Decus Morum, Vivificator Mortuorum, Saturator Famelicorum, Obsequium Leprosorum, ORA PRO NOBIS. Praeco magni Regis, Forma Humilitatis, Consors Sublimitatis, Victor Vitiorum, Dux Minorum, Praedicator Silvestrium, Portans dona Gloriae, Auriga militiae nostrae, Novis utens Prodigiis, Caelum caecis aperiens, Gratum gerens obsequium, Templum Christo consecrans, Hostes malignos proterens, Tenens vitae bravium, Spargens virtutum munera, Amplians iter ad Gloriam, Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Parce nobis Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Exaudi nos Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere nobis. ℣. Ora pro nobis beate Pater Francisce. ℟. Ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.
OREMUS. DEus qui Ecclesiā tuā B. Fraucisci meritis foe∣tu novae prolis amplificas: tribue nobis ex ejus imitatione terrena despicere, & caelestium dono∣rum semper participatione gaudere. Per Domi∣num nostrum, &c. Amen. LITANIAE B. M. N. CLARAE, VIRGINIS. KYrie eleïson, Christe eleïson. Kyrie eleïson. Christe audi nos. Christe exaudi nos. Pater de caelis Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, Miserere nobis. Spiritus Sancte Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas unus Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancta Maria, Ora pro nobis. Sancta Dei Genitrix, Sancta Virgo Virginum, Sancta Clara Virgo Mater nostra. Virgo Christi Sponsa, ORA PRO NOBIS. Virgo Francisci plantula, Virgo electa prae millibus, Virgo Seraphica, Virgo Matris Jesu discipula, Virgo primogenita pauperum, Virgo gemma Virginum, Virgo norma Perfectionis, Virgo humillima, Virgo mundo abscondita, Virgo speculum Paupertatis, Virgo Lilium castitatis, Virgo rosa paenitentiae,
Virgo Crucifixi amore saucia, Virgo crucis ardentissima amati Virgo stella clarissima, Virgo sequens Agnum quocunque Mater nostra honorificata, Mater admirabilis, Mater amabilis, Mater sicut balsamum aromatizans, ORA PRO NOBIS. Mater paranympha Christi, Mater pulchrae dilectionis, Mater puritatis nutrix, Mater Obedientiae magistra, Mater scala Paradisi, Mater gloria Filiarum, Mater socia Angelorum, Mater clipeus in te sperantium, Mater protectrix Pauperum, Mater consolatrix flentium, Mater terror Infidelium, Mater triumphatrix daemonum, Agnus Dei qui tollis &c. Parce &c. Agnus Dei qui tollis &c. Exaudi nos &c. Agnus Dei qui tollis &c. Miserere nobis. ℣. Ora pro nobis Beata mater Clara. ℟. Ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi. OREMUS. FAmulos tuos quaesumus Domine, beatae Vir∣ginis tuae Clarae votivam commemorationem recensentes, caelestium gaudiorum suâ facias in∣terventione participes, & tui Unigeniti cohaere∣des. Per eundem Dominum nostrum &c. Amen.
IESVS MARIA. Litaniae dicendae pro conversione Anglia ad Religionem Catholicam. KYRIE eleïson. Christe eleïson. Kyrie eleïson. Christe audi nos. Christe exaudi nos. Pater de coelis Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, miserere nobis. Spiritus sancte Deus, miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas unus Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancta Maria, Ora pro nobis Sancta Dei genitrix, ora &c. Sancta Virgo Virginum, ora. Sancte Michaël, ora. Sancte Gabriël, ora. Sancte Raphaël, ora. Omnes sancti Angeli & Archangeli, orate. Omnes sacti beatorum spirituum ordines, orate &c. Sancte Joannes Baptista, ora. Sancte Joseph, ora. Omnes sancti Patriarchae & Prophetae, orate. S. Petre. ora. S. Paule, ora. S. Andrea, ora. S. Jacobe, ora. S. Joannes, ora. S. Thoma, ora. S. Jacobe, ora. S. Philippe, ora. S. Bartholomaee, ora. S. Mathaee, ora. S. Simon, ora. S. Thadaee, ora.
S. Mathia, ora. S. Barnaba, ora. S. Luca, ora. S. Marce, ora. Omnes sancti Apostoli & Evangelistae. orate. Sancte Joseph ab Aremathia, ora. Omnes sancti Discipuli Domini, orate. S. Eleutheri, ora. S. Victor, ora. S. Albane, ora. S. Georgi, ora. S. Thoma, ora. S. Juli & Aron, orate. S. Socrates & Stephane, orate pro nobis. S. Euvalde, ora. S. Kiliane, ora. S. Osualde, ora. S. Rumolde, ora. S. Bonifaci, ora. S. Colmanne, ora. S. Augule, ora. S. Alphege, ora. Sancte Livine, ora. Sancte Edmunde, ora. Sancte Eduarde, ora. Sancte Kenelme, ora. Sancte Arnulphe, ora. Sancte Clare, ora. Omnes Sancti Marty∣res, orate. Sancte Gregori, ora. S. Augustine, ora. S. Celestine, ora. Sancte Palladi, ora. Sancte Patrici, ora. Sancte Carole, ora. Sancte David, ora. Sancte Melite, ora. Sancte Julte, ora. Sancte Germane, ora. Sancte Lupe, ora. S. Quintigerne, ora. Sancte Niniane, ora. S. Erconvalde, ora. Sancte Felix, ora. S. Corentine, ora. Sancte Cedda, ora. Sancte Aidane, ora. Sancte Eadberte, ora. S. Willibrorde, ora. Sancte Asaphe, ora. Sancte Beane, ora. Sancte Mackure, ora. S. Ethelnolde, ora. Sancte Donstane, ora. Sancte Honori, ora. S. Cuthberre, ora. Sancte Sampson, ora.
Sancte Maglori, ora. Sancte Mansuete, ora. Sancte Mallone, ora. Sancte Laurenti, ora. Sancte Suiberte, ora. Sancte Pauline, ora. Sancte Suithune, ora. S. Wolstane, ora. Sancte Osualde, ora. Sancte Vito, ora. Sancte Walfride, ora. Sancte Richarde, ora. Sancte Theodore, ora. Sancte Joannes, ora. Sancte Hedde, ora. S. Wolfranne, ora. Sancte Gilberte, ora. Sancte Malachia, ora. Sancte Thoma, ora. Sancte Berine, ora. Sancte Aldelme, ora. Sancte Osmunde, ora. Sancte Laurenti, ora. Sancte Edmunde, ora. Sancte Anselme, ora. Sancte Hugo, ora. Omnes sancti Pontifices & Confessores, orate. Sancte Eduarde, ora. Sancte Edilberte, ora. Sancte Sebbe, ora. Sancte Richarde, ora. Sancte Brandane, ora. S. Columbane, ora. Sancte Galle, ora. Sancte Dei-Cola, ora. Sancte Columba, ora Sancte Querare, ora. Sancte Joannes, ora. Sancte Winoce, ora. Sancte Canise, ora. Sancte Egberte, ora. S. Willebalde, ora. Sancte Fintane, ora. Sancte Benedicte, ora. Sancte Beda, ora. Sancte Fiacri, ora. Sancte Fursee, ora. Sancte Guthlaci, ora. Sancte Roberte, ora. Omnes sancti Sacerdo∣tes, Monachi & Ere∣mitae, orate. Sancta Maria Mag. ora Sancta Vrsula & So∣ciae, orate. Sancta Wenefrida, ora. Sancta Dympna, ora Sancta Brigida, ora. Sancta Theresia, ora. Sancta Editha, ora. Sancta Ediltrudes, ora
Sancta Hilda, ora. Sancta Edilburga, ora Sancta Ebba, ora. Sacta Osita, ora. Sancta Milburges, ora. Sancta Vereburga, ora Sancta Fredesuida, ora. Sancta Thecla, ora, Sancta Batildes, ora. Sancta Lioba, ora. Sancta Cuthburga, ora. Sancta Syra, ora. Sancta Walburga, ora. Sancta Margarita, ora. S. Helena, ora pro nobis. Omnes sanctae Virgines & Viduae, orate pro nobis. Propitius esto, parce nobis Domine. Propitius esto, Exaudi nos Domine. Ab insidiis diaboli, Libera nos Domine. A neglectu inspirationum tuarum, Libera nos Domine. A mala & pertinaci voluntate, Libera. A caecitate cordis, libera. A morte perpetua, libera. Per mysterium sanctae Incarnationis tuae, libe¦ra nos Domine. Per Nativitatem tuam, libera. Per infantiam tuam, libera. Per divinissimam vitā tuam, libera, Per Passionem & mortem tuam. libera. In die judicii, libera. Peccatores, Te rogamns audi nos. Vt nobis parcas, Te rogamus. Vt Ecclesiam tuam sanctam regere, & tueri dig∣neris, Te rogamus. Vt Sacerdotes in Britannia, pro Religione Ca∣tholica laborantes, custodire & adjuvare di∣gneris, Te rogamus audi nos.
Vt Britanniam ad Catholicam Fidem & unita∣tem Ecclesiae revocare digneris, Te rogamus &c. Vt nos exaudire digneris, Te rogamus audi nos. Fili Dei, Te rogamus audi nos. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Parce nobis Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Exandi nos Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere nobis. Oremus. MEntes nostras, quaesumus Domine, Pa∣racletus, qui à te procedit, illuminet & inducat in omnem, sicut tuus promisit Filius, veritatem. COncede, misericors Deus, fragilitati nostrae praesidium, ut qui sanctae Dei genitricis memoriam agimus, intercessionis ejus auxilio à nostris iniquitatibus resurgamus. OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui saluas omnes, & neminem vis perire; respice ad animas Britannorum diabolicâ fraude deceptas, ut omni haereticâ pravitate depositâ, errantium corda resipiscant, & ad veritatis tue redeant unitatem. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. DEO GRATIAS.
A DAYLY EXERCISE OF PRAYERS With weekly Meditations upon the Passion. IN THE MORNING. IN nomine Patris † &c. Pater: Ave: Cre∣do: Confiteor: &c. I adore thee most Blessed Trinity, & give thee thankes for all benefits bestowed upon me, es∣pecially, for my Vocation to this State, the use of Sacraments, & other Divine helpes; & particularly, that thou hast preserved me this night, wherein perhaps many have been sum∣moned before thee, to give an account of their lives; The living O God shall bless & glorify thee, as I will this day. O Eternall Father, to thee I offer up my self, with whatsoever I am able to doe; admit O Gra∣cious Father, these first fruites of my love, uni∣ted with the merits of thy beloved Son.
O B. JESUS, I purpose through thy Grace, to walk the paths of thy H. Comman∣dements, performing the duty of a good Chri∣stian by the practise of all Vertues, especially of N. Grant O Lord, that I may doe & suffer all things, according to thy Holy will. Come O Holy Ghost, direct, assist & com∣fort my distressed Soul, with thy Grace, that I may shun all Sin, especially N. I have hitherto greivously offended thee, but I will be more watchfull over my wayes; Help me I beseech thee in this my spirituall warfar, for thou hast promised, that I shall walk amongst Serpents & Basilisks, & trample over Lyons & Dragons. Help me also O Holy Angels & glorious Saints, thou especially O Sacred Virgin Mother, with thy chast Espous S. JOSEPH. Protect me O Angell Guardian, & Yee O Holy NN. my Patrons for this day; that I fall not into the snares of Satan. But thou O my God & my All, art my cheife hope; let the flames of thy Divine Love consume all evill affections in me, that I may for ever love & obey thee. AN OBLATION. O B. JESUS, in union of thy N. I offerr up all my thoughts, words & deeds, purposing to practise the Vertue of N. & shun the Vice
of N. beseeching thee, that all I doe or suffer, may be acceptable to thee, for NN. through the Mediation of my glorious Patrons NN. Amen. BLess me O JESU, with thy Sacred Virgin Mother † Bless me all yee Holy Saints & Angels, specially my Angell Guardian, & Ho∣ly Patrons NN. †. O Eternall God, Father, Son, & H. Ghost, bless † & keep me, now & for ever. Amen. IN THE EVENING. IN nomine Patris &c. O Most Blessed Trinity, I glorify thee with all the Saints & Angels, for all favours, at all times bestowed upon me, especially this day. (make a survey of Gods favours to thee.) Alas what thankes can I return to thee, for these, & all thy gracious benefits? O God who hast observed all the motions of my heart, & all my words & actions, Enlighten me, that I may know wherein I have offended thee, & what is wanting to me, that I may be∣wayl my sins, & through thy Grace amend my life. (Examine thy conscience through all houres & duties of that day, towards God, thy Neighbour, & thy selfe; considering wherein thou hast offended by thought, word or deed.) Lord be mercifull to me
a sinner! Behold here my God, what sins I have rendred thee for thy gracious gifts; It greives me, that, I have offended thee; Pardon me O my God, through the Cross & Passion of thy dearest Son, the merits of the Sacred Virgin, & all Angels & Saints, especially N N. I pur∣pose hereafter never more to offend thee, & to undergoe all Crosses for the satisfying my transgressions against thee, & purchasing Gra∣ce, for the amendement of my life. AN OBLATION. O B. JESUS, I offer up to thee, thy N. as a propitiation for all my sins, especially of this day; Uniting therewith the merits of thy Sacred Mother, & all Angels & Saints, especially my Patrons NN. to whose protection I now & for ever commend my self. Bless me O JESUS &c.
MEDITATIONS VPON THE PASSION. For every day of the week. SUNDAY. Washing of the Feet. CONS. 1. Who washeth? God, thy Crea∣tour, Redeemer & giver of all good things. 2. Whose feet he washeth? of ignoble per∣sons, great sinners, & his own betrayer. 3. Why he washeth? to give example of meekness, & teach us to cleanse our Soules, ere we approach his Altar. Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could love thee & all creatures, as I ought, & thou de∣sirest! Resolve, To practise the Vertue of Charitie, & shun the vice of Envie, in occasions best known to thy self.
MUNDAY. Prayer in the garden. CONS: 1. How CHRIST prayeth, knee∣ling, prostrate, & with instancy: & thou how tepid. 2. What's his prayer? That his Chalice may passe, yet with resignation to obey his Fathers will: doe thou pray thus. 3. How he sweats, bloud, in great drops, in great sorrows; wilt thou rely on thy own strength? Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could humble my self to Thee, & all creatures for thee. Rosolve, To practise Humilitie & shun Pride, &c. TUESDAY. Mocking before Herod. CONS: 1. How JESUS betrayed, appre∣hended, & manicled, is led to Annas, Caiphas, Pilate & Herod: Follow him in this sorrowfull Pilgrimage.
2. How He is every where falsly accused, & yet is silent; be silent too, when injur'd. 3. How before Herod, he is cloathed & mocked as a Foole; if thou beest a Christian, imitate CHRIST'S self-denyall. Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could contemn my own will for thy sake. Resolve, To practise Self-denyall, & shun self-love, &c. WEDNESDAY. Whipping at the Pillar. CONS: How JESUS led back to Pilate, is there accused as a Blasphemer, Seducer & Traitor; Barabbas though a Murderer, is pre∣ferr'd before him; can'st thou repine, when vilified? 2. How that Innocent Body uncloathed, & bound to the Pilar, is whipt for thy sins: thou sin'st, & he suffers. 3. How barbarously those Soldiers treat thy JESUS; Oh cruelty! this he suffers for thee: Bath thy heart in his saving bloud. Affect. Oh my JESU, that I could bear all
Crosses, from all persons, for the love of Thee Resolve, To practise Patience, & shun Anger, &c. THURSDAY. Crowning with Thorns. CONS: 1. How JESUS thus bleeding, is crownd with sharp Thorns; this Crown is instead of a Crown of Glory. 2. How they cloath him in scarlet, put a reed in his hand for a Scepter, & then kneeling deride Him. O my JESU thou art a King indeed; reign for ever in my heart. 3. How JESUS, thus adorned is led forth by Pilate, & shown to the Jewes, with, Behold à Man: O sad Spectacle! Yet still, they cry, Crucify Him: Oh! the heavy weight of my sins. Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could obey Thee, even to loss of life. Resolve, To practise Obedience & shun Sloath, &c.
FRYDAY. Carrying the Cross. CONS: 1. How JESUS thus derided, whip∣ped & crowned, goes forth carrying the Cross, whereon he is to be sacrifized for thy Sins. 2. What shouts of joy the Jewes make after Him, through the streets of Jerusalem: thus is Innocency despised. 3. How the devout woemen meet & bewaile Him: thy hard heart sheds not one Teare amidst these his sorows, or for thy own sins. Affect. Oh my JESU, that I could abandon all sensuall satisfactions for the Love of Thee! Resolve, To practise Temperance, & shun Gluttony, &c. SATURDAY. Crucifying of Iesus. CONS: 1. How JESUS with much pain & shame, arrived to Mount Calvary, is a∣gain uncloath'd, & thus all his soares are rene∣wed: My Sins not blotted out by Repentance, shall one day be disclosed to the whole World.
2. How they streatch thy JESUS upon the Cross, fastning him with nayles therunto, & then raise him up, where he hangs between two theeves: Oh what ignominy! 3. How He there hangs for the space of three houres, reviled by Jews & Gentiles, forsaken by his Disciples, drenched with gall & vineger, peirced to the heart with a speare, yet He prays for his Enemies: Enter, & make thy aboade in that love-wounded-Heart. Affect: Oh my JESU that I could imitate Thee in the purity of thy Life & Doctrine. Resolve, To practise Modesty & shun All con∣trary Therunto, &c. Woodcut illustration of the crrucified Christ, with two male figures standing to either side.
A Method for Meditation. 1. PReparation hath 3. parts. Presence of God, Choyce of matter, and Invocation. 2. Meditation it self hath 3. parts. Consideration, Affection, and resolution. 3. Conclusion hath 3. parts. Thanks-Giving, Oblation and Prayer.
A Prayer before Meditation. O my God, my Sovereign, my Creatour and my All; I here most humbly prostrate my self with the profoundest adoration J am possi∣bly capable of, before your devine Majesty, ear∣nestly imploring à continuance of your blessings vpon me, your poor needy Creature, and that you would be pleased out of your infinite boun∣ty, by meanes of your holy spirite so to illumi∣nate my vnderstanding, inflame my will, recol∣lect from distractions and strengthen in good re∣solutions all the powers of my soule, as that J may worthily, attentively and devoutly per∣forme this sublime exercise of mentall prayer J am now vndertaking, to your honour and glory, the comfort of my own distressed soule, the joy of the Saints in heaven, and the edifi∣cation of men on earth, thro' your mercyes the meritts of my Blessed Saviour and the inspira∣tions of your Coelestiall Paraclet Amen.
A Prayer after Meditation. BEhold O my God, Behold, o my most patient and merciful Lord, how J have passed over this time of Meditation, and treating with thee; with how much negligence, sloth, coldnes, and distraction, and with how litle feeling of thy good motions within me: but thou O Lord knowest all my infirmities and Miseries and therfore J crave of thee pardon for them. J thank thee also most heartily and humbly, for all the good thoughts and suggestions, which have presented themselves to my mind, in time of this my me∣ditation, as most holy Embassadours sent from thy heavenly Throne, to deale with me for the gaining of thy kingdome; whos blessed voices and most profitable speeches, J beseech thy divi∣ne goodnes, to give me grace to imprint in my heart, and seeke to put in execution, in the cours of my life to come: to the end that my judg∣ment and Damnation, be not the more grievous in respect of thes thy Benefits, but rather that my life being mended therby, and my soul stirr'd up to more zeale of thy service, J may be finally made partaker with thy true Children, of that eternall blïss which thou hast prepared, for such os love, feare and serve thee and yeeld obedience to those holy inspirations which thou sendest them for their eternal happines, Amen.
A Table of dayly Patrons, Meditations Vertues, vices, and Intentions. Day. Patron. Meditation. Vertue. Vice. Intentions. Sund. H. Angels. washing feet Charity. Envie. For the H. church. Mund. Apostles. Prayer in the Garden. Humility. Pride. For Vnion of Chri∣stian Princes. Tuesd. Martyrs. Mocking. Self denyall Self love. For benefactors. Wednesd. Bishops. Whipping. Patience. Anger. For Religious or∣ders. Thursd. Doctors. Crowning. Obedience. Sloath. For conversion of Infidells. Frid. Confessors. Carrying the Cross. Temperāce. Gluttony For soules departed. Saturd. Virgins. Crucifying. Modestie. Impurity For distressed persōs
Woodcut illustration of the crucified Christ, with Mary and John standing either side of the cross (a skull resting at its base).
