F1567 E114_22 99873062 125514
A FORME OF ECCLESIASTICALL GOVERNMENT: Fitted to the present State of the Church of ENGLAND as now it stan∣deth, not presumptuously prescribing what must bee done; onely propoun∣ded to the sincere consideration, of the more Iuditious. In a way tending to introduce the Primitive Government. Humbly presented to the High Court of Parliament. 1 Tim. 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, bee counted worthy of double honour, especial∣ly they who labour in the Word and Doctrine. Hier. in 1 Tit. & in Epistola ad Evagrium: By the custome of the Church, rather then by the truth of the Lords disposi∣tion, Bishops are greater then Presbyters, with whom they should rule the Church in Common. After severall peruseals published, Anno Sal. 1642. London, Printed for John Hancock.
To any honest hearted Reader. HOnest hearted Reader, although the first intention was to present a briefe view, in halfe a sheete of paper to the High and Honourable Court of Par∣liament, of the State of the Countrey; (especially in these Staffordian parts, upon request,) touching such particulars, as are herein mentioned; yet having then onely drawne an over briefe and compendious comprehension of these things; Dum brevis esse laboravi, obscunus sum factus, and was mi∣staken by some that perused the same upon the bre∣viaries first ascention. Thereupon I have enlarged, the same for further explication, condescending to the apprehension of the weakest and meanest Reader (presuming upon the patience of the Noble Pa∣triots, to whom it is chiefely intended,) that so all sorts might have the perusall hereof for further satisfaction of those doubts and objections, that very many make against the Presbyterian Government, as not to bee introduced into the Church of England, especially not standing with a Monarchicall Go∣vernment.
Here, therefore is the Presbyterian way sitted to the State of the English Church, as now it stands, (in a way as neere as may bee, it being not ne∣cessary in every circumstance to cohere with any other Church though never so sound) by the ad∣mission and setling whereof, might arise a most hap∣py sweet harmony, betweene our selves and other reformed Churches, especially the Church of Scot∣land, betwixt whom it is most to bee wished there may bee a concordance, being within the same Do∣minions. Great presumption were it in any one man, especially in so weake and meane a man, as my selfe, to prescribe any thing in this kind; I have one∣ly cast in my Symbolum, yet not rashly neither, for after I had set downe such thoughts, as God was pleased to suggest unto mee at vacant houres, I first exposed the Notes to the peruseall of sundry intel∣ligent Readers, both of the Layty and Clergy, be∣cause it concerneth both, and having so generall ap∣probation, and so many encouragements by words and letters. I have beene bold to expose them to publike view, and that under this title, because so many assent herein. I humbly wish, this generall answere may bee given to any, that may except a∣gainst it, that as every one had liberty to bring something towards the building of the materiall Temple, and they that brought but Goats haire were accepted: So is it not a time now for every one to doe something to helpe forward the great worke in hand; some one way, some another? one that is in∣feriour, may put the more able and better gifted in mind of what may bee usefull. Time was, when
the very keeking of the Geese was of singular use. That God that tieth not himselfe to any meanes or instruments, but workes sometimes without, a∣gainst, or contrary to meanes: oftentimes by unlike∣ly meanes and instruments, that so the glory may bee his owne, bringing mighty things to passe, not by might, not by power, but by his Spirit, that is, by the way and meanes which his Spirit revealeth and appointeth, before which, great Mountaines shall become a plaine; this God (I say) give his bles∣sing to these endeavours, so farre as they are agreea∣ble to his owne will, revealed in his owne word, and so to him alone shall bee ascribed all the praise.
The generall Heads, briefely touch∣ing the whole, being as a tast to such, as have leasure to read no more, the dis∣course enlarging it selfe beyond the first intentions. 1. A Remonstrance of the State of the Countrey in respect of Preaching, where it is shewed, most places have either no Preachers, or such as are negligent, or such as are scan∣dalous. Hereupon aboundeth monstrous dissolutenesse of living. Pag. 1. 2. The causes and occasions of such scarcity of sound Preaching, are conceived to bee five. Pag. 2. 3. The remedy propounded with all humility to consideration, consists in three words. First, That such places as have suffi∣cient Preaching, and maintenance so continue. Secondly, That such as want maintenance, may have a competency from the peo∣ple for the service they doe them; proved by the law and the equi∣ty of the Gospell. Yet to bee content with poverty where the people can afford no better. Three reasons against Impropria∣tions, and that they are the fittest maintenance. Yet no Impro∣priator to bee looser by parting with them to the Church againe. Thirdly, That unfitting Preachers bee displaced, and have al∣lowance. And sufficient ones set in their stead, as they can bee procured. Till which time, places that want, are to bee supplied by weeekely exercises. The manner of the same, with an Apolo∣gy for the tender. Pag. 3. 4. The setling of this course in a way tending to introduce the Primitive Government. The present Parliament to ap∣point
Preachers for the said weekely exercise in each hundred, which should engage themselves to uphold it their time. And to have power to renew their owne number upon the death of any, or any other occasion, and to increase their number as faith∣full Labourers increase. It hath beene Gods manner to joyne Ministers together for their mutuall helpe. These must be such, as deserve well A notable discovery how to find such. Pag. 12. 5. For an happy progresse in reformation, the Parliament to appoint Assistants to the Ministers, called Lay-elders. Some limited power to bee committed to these Pastours and Elders consisting in foure things, First, To oversee, that every place within their hundred, have sufficient preaching as soone as can bee procured, and weekely exercises in the meane while. The Congregation, are to chuse their Preacher, or consent freely if it may bee. If they want judgement, then to have assistance. No buying, nor seeking living for the prefersments sake. The un∣worthy to bee refused or removed. Secondly, To oversee, that every place have sufficient maintenance, according to the order the present Parliament shall appoint or prescribe in their owne wisedome. Thirdly, That they oversee the execution of Disci∣pline. The office of Ministers in this respect. The occasion hereof from the evils of our Spirituall Courts. The great ne∣cessity of Discipline. Power of the keyes what? why so called. Reasons five against Pastours, having temporall jurisdiction. Objections touching this answered. Divinity Lectures, moneth∣ly in each hundred by the Doctours (or Teachers,) seated in great benefices, able to maintaine both a Pastour, and a Teacher. No Diocesan-Lord-Bishops. The beginning of the Romane Primacy. Fourthly, That the Pastours and Elders oversee such Deacons in such a way for the Poore as the Parliament shall ap∣point. Pag. 15. 6. The modest confirmation of this course, severall wayes: First, From the nature of Church Government. Secondly, From 10. Scriptures opened and examined. Herein is shewed what Prophecy is, Teaching, and Exhorting, belong thereto. Also what Ministry is, Its offices are: First, To distribute. Se∣condly, To governe. Thirdly, To shew mercy. Some offices tem∣porary
as Apostles, some perpetuall as Teachers. Maintenance due to Church-officers. Ever looke to CHRISTS institu∣tion. Thirdly, From reasons taken. First, From the objects of Church Government. Secondly, From the parts and faculties, or powers of man. Thirdly, From the State of the Church. The fourth Testimony, is from Authours generally received as Ortho∣dox, touching Pasturs, Teachers, Discipline, Deacons, the power of Church-meetings, elections, and deciding controversies, and touching order. All which, shew that the variation from this government, here pointed out in these things, did grow rather by custome of the Church then by any ordination of CHRIST and his Apostles. A fift confirmation is from the remove all of 10. objections. The Civill Government of the Church briefely re∣lated in the last answere. 28. Lastly, the Conclusion of the whole, wherein we are desired not to cleave to those that weave the web of their owne inventions, but Vsque ad necem, to stick fast to CHRISTS owne insti∣tution, the want whereof, is a maine cause, why the word of God in the Ministry thereof, taketh so little effect in these corrupted times. The end of this worke is, that wee may not onely bee deli∣vered from Tyranny, but also preserved from confusion. To which end, the Almighty ever guard, and guide all your Ho∣nours. Pag. 57.
THE COUNTREY MINISTERS Submissive an∣swer to the Honourable Parliament, most happily assembled this present yeare of Christ, 1641. Desiring of them (as they are certified by particular letters) their certificate of the State of their Countrey, and their o∣pinion for the remedy, doe make a Remonstrance of the State of their Countrey; and doe propound to consideration the ensuing course, for the instruction and reformati∣on of such places of the Kingdome as are igno∣rant and vaine, through want of faithfull Preaching and Discipline. The Remonstrance. THe want of Preaching in the Countrey, is such, 1 Remon∣strance. that in sundry Parishes and Chappelries, there hath beene no Preaching ministry setled since the Reformation. And a great part of those who sometimes preach, are very negligent in Want of Preaching. their places, or scandalous in their conversations; So that there is not a fourth part of the Churches and Chappels supplied by able men, and diligent in their functions;
whereupon as there is such scarcity of meanes of Reforma∣tion, so there is abundant dissolutnesse in the Countrey. Much disso∣lutnesse. One of our Countrey Townes consisting of fifty Families, there can but few bee found amongst them all but they have within these late yeares beene scandalously blemished with that fowle vice of effeminate uncleannesse, drunkenesse, and other vices abounding therewith. And many other Neigh∣bouring Townes in as ill report: Every one doth almost what hee will, as Israel did when there was no Govern∣ment amongst them, yet little care is taken by any to redresse any thing. The causes and occasions thereof. THe causes and occasions of this so great and lamenta∣ble 2. Causes are 5. scarcity of Preaching, wee conceive to bee: 1. Want of maintenance, not one place of foure having Want of maintenance. a competent provision for an able Minister. The which is occasioned; First, By the alienation of Church maintenance to the Occasioned 3. wayes. Bishops and Cathedrall Churches; one Cathedrall Church reaping the profits of fourty Churches and Chappels, or there about, conceived to bee a full fourth part. Secondly, By the multitude of other impropriations that are withheld from the Church, and no competency in liew thereof. Thirdly, By discouraging of men piously affected, from distributions to necessitated places, especially Londo∣ners, who had begunne to give a worthy precedent, and then had their meetings forbidden, yet are not wholly fallen. 2. Another cause of such scarcity of Preaching is negli∣gence Patrons. of many Patrons in the promotion of Incumbents to Ecclesiasticall preferments; oftentimes little respecting mens deservings, but sinister respects. 3. The carelesse admission by Ordinaries of those who Ordinaries. are thus presented: Little inquiring into their parts, lesse into
their conversation, least of all into their zeale to promote the knowledge of God and godlinesse, except it bee to quench it some way or other. 4. The frequent permission of Pluralities in sundry parts Pluralities. of the Countrey, amounting to a great number. 5. The rigid pressure of Ceremonies, together with in∣novations Ceremonies. of that nature multiplied without stint, to the disheartening of many from entring upon the worke of the Ministry, and others from the execution. The Remedy. IN tender consideration of the premises, wee crave leave 3. Remedies in three words. for three words; with all humility suing to your Honours, that they may bee taken into your grave consideration, as the cause of Christ and his Church. The first word. 1. SVch Churches and Chappels as are already furnished Sufficient to continue. with sufficient Preaching, and sufficient maintenance, wee onely wish may prosperously continue constant. The second word. 2. SVch Churches and Chappels as are furnished with suf∣ficient Maintenance supplied, and how. Preaching, and yet the painefull Preachers there, want sufficient maintenance, wee humbly wish, that a compe∣tency may bee made for such out of the revenues belonging to that pl, as out of the Parsonage, Vicarage or Impropriation thereun appertaining, if from thence it may bee had. That the people should maintaine the Minister sufficient∣ly Figured by the law. was figured, Numb. 5. 9. The Priests and Levits had maintenance sufficient provided for them, Numb. 18. 9. 10. Num. 5. 9. and 18. 9. 10. and Verse 19. The Lord set out the Priests portion of the peoples offrings, and hallowed things after hee had prescribed their office. This maintenance and livelyhood they should have from
the people for their service. This maintenance that God bestowed on the Priests for their serving of him, was a bountifull maintenance, Numb. 18 19. To the end, hee might encourage them in his service, as it is said in 2. Chron. 31. 4. And there was not any of them that did so much as shut the doores of Gods sanctuary, or kindle a fire on his Altar for nought; Mal. 1. 10. And to the Sonnes of Levi, the Lord gave all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance for their service which they served; for as the Levits were joyned to the Priests in service, so in provision for mainte∣nance, Numb. 18. 21. Though the Levits had no inheri∣tance in the promised land. Numb. 26. 62. Yet were they to have 48. Cities and the Suburbs to them for their habi∣tation, Num. 35. which fell to them by lot, Jos. 21. 4. And when the people neglected their duty in not giving such things as were appointed, then was the house of God for∣saken. And the godly Governours looked to the redresse thereof; Neh. 13. 10. 11. 12. The nation of the Iewes were accursed with a curse for this cause, in that they kept back their tithes and offerings which they should have brought into the store-house, that there might have beene meate for the house of God for his Ministers, Mal. 3. 8. 9. 10. Now the equity of these things remaine perpetually, as Equity in the Gospell. the Apostle observeth, saying: Doe yee not know that they that minister about holy things, eate of the things of the Tem∣ple, and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even so hath the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospell, should live on the Gospell; 1 Cor. 9. 13. 14. And as the ministry now is more excellent then the ministry of the law. So should the Reward for the more excellent ser∣vice not bee inferiour, to that which God gave for the lesse excellent worke and service. By Numb. 18. 31. what they had in the law, appeareth to bee their due for the ser∣vice they performed for the people: So the Apostle, spea∣king of the honour, due to the Ministers of CHRIST, saith, The Labourer is worthy of his reward, 1 Tim. 5. 17. 18.
And CHRIST himselfe tels his Disciples, The Labourer is worthy of his reward, Luke 10. 7. But this matter wee are loath to presse, least wee should seeme to preach our selves, though indeed this is a part of Scripture, which wee must not neglect when occasion requireth us to speake of it. But what if the Revenues of the place bee so small, and Yet to be con∣tent with po∣verty, when the place can afford no bet∣ter. the poverty of the people such, that the Pastour cannot have a competency, what must bee done then? Surely that Minister whom God hath set over such a people must bee content with his portion, taking in good part what suffi∣ceth for necessity, seeing hee is by Gods all-ordering pro∣vidence seated amongst a people that are not able better to provide for him. Remembring those words of our Sa∣viour, Rev. 2. 9. I know thine affliction and thy poverty but thou art rich. The Angell of that Church of Smyrna was a right excellent Shepheard, and tooke great paines in feeding and guiding the flock of CHRIST, yet his reward in this World was but smale, hee lived in poverty. But what, did not the flock care for him? yea doubtlesse, if they had beene rich, hee should not have beene poore. Hee did not repine at it. Hee was not an hireling that dealt for filthy lucre, but dealt even of love, and as Saint Peter re∣quireth, of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5. Hee saw what labours the Holy Apostles endured, what dangers they passed through, and how poore they were touching worldly wealth. Saint Paul saith of himselfe, wee are poore and yet make many rich; 2 Cor. 6. 10. This is a worthy exam∣ple for us to follow. Indeed to many amongst us, if they have gifts of lear∣ning for the ministry, and bee employed therein, and take paines, they thinke it so unworthy a thing to bee in pover∣ty, as that they are ready to bee impationt at it; and thinke that the excellency of the worke of the ministry may war∣rant them to heape up Worldly treasure, even to the de∣triment of the Church; whereas certainely if the charge bee committed to us to feed the flock of CHRIST, and the
flock bee in that state, that wee cannot have the wealth of the World to abound in any plentifull measure, wee must bee content with that which may suffice even for necessi∣ty. Wee are not better then the Apostles were; wee are not better then the Angell of the Church of Smyrna. If wee should stand on getting wealth, and preferment here, it might bee said to us, you laboured indeed, but you had your wages. A fowle corruption also it is in some Ministers that suf∣fer themselves to bee annoyed with popular feare, so as that they are most affraid of displeasing private persons, espe∣cially in Parishes where their maintenance doth arise from the voluntary contribution of the people, who too much seeke to tie the tongues of their Preachers to their purse strings, (as it were,) which must open and shut according to their quarterly santasies. So that the people are bounti∣full in many places, onely to such, as preach as they would have them, such Preachers fare daintily, when others must take up with herbs. Thus then for conclusion of this matter touching Reasons a∣gainst Impro∣priations 3. Church maintenance, wee wish that impropriations may bee all laid to the Church againe, and doe humbly sue and petition for it, considering: First, They were once lawfully laid to the Church, and never yet lawfully taken away againe. Secondly, There is no other certaine provision made for the ministry of the Gospell in this setled state but this. Thirdly, The Gospell herein should not bee inferiour to the law. Yet wee doe not otherwise move this, but that as neere Yet Impro∣priatours not to bee loosers. as may bee, such as are the present Impropriatours should not bee loosers, but if they hitherto have not made them∣selves Savers by the holding of them, our motion is, that they shall still continue holding them, or most part thereof till they bee; else suffer themselves to bee bought out by the well affected. Our trust is, ingenuous Gentlemen will
be content in this case to be no Gainers by the Churches re∣venues, and wee doe not move for them to become loosers. If any other more likely course can be found out for Church maintenance then the tythes, &c. Wee should rejoyce to bee cased of an Earthly incumbrance, and occasion of diffe∣rence betweene Pastour and People. The third word. 3. THat such Parishes and Chappelries as are not suffi∣ciently Preaching supplied, and how. provided of honest painefull Preachers, but they are either unable, unwilling or scandalous, &c. Our opinion and humble wish is, that those and all other such defective Mini∣sters that are indeed unworthy of their places, that they bee displaced; and that sufficient Incumbents bee set in their stead, which should allow the displaced ones some competency, as the places can afford; as for example, 30. l. out of 80. and so propor∣tionably in all other places whatsoever the value is. For the which yearely summe the displaced ones should bee as assislants to the new incumbents to performe some easie service, if they bee not so scandalous as to bee utterly unworthy of any such holy employment at all: which if they bee, then to have but 20. l. &c. Instead of the said 30. l. and betake themselves to some other employment for their owne good. Great cause there is in the Countrey that the Honoura∣ble Vnworthy Preachers to bee displaced and have al∣lowance. Neh. 13. 10. &c. Matth. 15. 14. Parliament should labour to redresse these things, as Neh. 13. 10. &c. For there is an woefull crue, a raked re∣giment of unlittered or scandalous blemished ones covered with Priests garments, which cover the Land like the frogs of Egypt, Exod. 8. 6. Leading many thousands with them∣selves, (as may bee feared) into the ditch, as Matth. 15. 14. And yet the same still graced and countenanced by such as should have kept them out at first, or rooted them forth af∣terwards, but alas, they are there Creatures. Many are or∣dained by men, and sent abroad by them into the Countrey, that are even as fit for the Church, as an Asse for the Lute; (Asinus ad Liram,) or as a Blind man is to bee made a
Painter. They move us to use language too light, for your Honours gravity. Indeed it is true, wee read that the Priests were some∣times simple, sometimes wicked men, as the Sonnes of Ely were the Sonnes of Beliall, 1 Sam 2. 12. and that none were to despise the ordinances of God for the unworthi∣nesse of such Priests, for God promised that hee would blesse the people, Num. 26. 27. And in the Hebrew Canon they have this rule, Doe not marvell, and say, what availeth the blessing of this simple Priest? for the receiving the blessing depends not on the Priest, but on the holy blessed God, as it is written in the quoted place; They shall put my name upon the Sonnes of Israel, and I will blesse them. Yet please to remem∣ber the end, not onely of Ely his Sonnes, but even of Ely himselfe too. And God forbid, the Fathers and Mothers of the Church of England, should suffer such things in their Sonnes that are got into the ministry, and not restraine them, contenting themselues with a sleighty rebuke, &c. Wee deny not, but there are many amongst us preach earnestly, but it is their owne Doctrine, and great punish∣ments doe they threaten to the neglecters thereof: But that which God hath expressely and earnestly commanded, they preach very slackly. Yea they would discharge men from the punishment which God threatens to the Transgres∣sours of them, like those in Jer. 14. 23. 27. chapters, and those in Ez. 13. These are the most pernicious, being often listened unto by many that are apt to receive pleasing things, and the Doctrines of men suteable to their owne humours. All these unable, unwilling, scandalous and dangerous Preachers, whence came they? how got they in? surely they are climbed in at the window. For the dumbe and unlear∣ned God sent not; such as cannot, and such as will not preach God sent not: for whom hee sent, he sent to preach, and enabled them thereunto. But these steale and murther; they are Theeves and Robbers, Foxes and Wolves. They are Theeves (doth not CHRIST himselfe call them so?
let not the termes bee offensive) for they take the tythes as Gods part, and doe not the office God hath appointed for such livings, that is, they feed not the flock with his word. If any take on him to bee a Physition, and is not, but takes A Similie. 10. l. to cure such an one, and either runneth away or doth no good, were not this apish Physition a Thiefe? If to A Similie. mend the high wayes, the Parish gather money, and trust one supervisor to repaire them with it, and hee either run∣neth his way with the money, or doth them no good, is not hee a thiefe? Thus doe the foresaid Ministers, are they not then Theeves and Robbers? They take away Gods goods, and their Neighbours against their will, and therefore they are Robbers; yea they are very Murtherers, Wolves, and false Prophets. A woman taking a child to nurse, and A Similie. either wanting milke herselfe, or an heart to give it any, suffers the child to perish, is shee not a Murtheresse? such are these, E. 33. Such Watchmen as warne not, are guilty of bloud, and so become Murtherers, Ez. 24. Wee hope the phrases will not offend, seeing CHRIST and the Holy GHOST use them, and apply them to such as wee speake off. Wee grutch not any that are godly, though never so And sufficient ones set in their stead, as they can bee procured. much promoted above us by inward or outward endow∣ments; But our complaint is of false Prophets, which occu∣py the roomes of true Pastours, and either are not sent, else if they be sent, do not exercise their office as God hath com∣manded, but quite otherwise. A lazie person is unfit for the Clergy, none but labourers were sent into CHRISTS Vineyard. An Angell appeared to Zacharias exercising his Priesthood. Yet of any of the foresaid sorts the idle seemeth best, silence being better then bad speech. Then on the other side, these unworthies are not onely to bee displaced, but sufficient Incumbents are to bee set in their stead, &c. as was said. There should bee such as would purely deliver the word of God, as was signified by the silver trumpets, Num. 10. 2. The materials being purest and fittest for sound, the Ministery of the word of God, and
the graces of his Spirit, were signified thereby, Esa. 58. 1. and 27. 13. Ezek. 33. 3. Rev. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 14 8. The He∣brewes say, If the Trumpets were made of any other matter, they were unlawfull: So amongst us, The tongues of the just must bee as choyce silver, Prov. 10. 20. For the words of the Lord are pure, as silver purified, &c. Psalm. 12. 7. Also these Trumpets were of beaten worke wrought with the hammer, beaten into a plate: signifying the labours of the Ministers of God, giving themselves continually to prayer, and to the Ministry of the word, Act. 6. 4. That so these Trumpets may give a cleere and certain: sound, for, and unto the people, to call them home to God by happy con∣version. But this so cleere a case, especially by the new Testament, chiefely in Pauls Epistles to Timothy. whom hee would have to bee instant in Preaching the word, even to stand upon points, beat much upon them, presse them home, and that both in season and out of season, and reprove, rebuke, exhort, withall long suffering to watch unto all things, to endure affliction to doe the worke of an Evangelist, to make full proofe of his. Ministry, to shew himselfe a worke man that needeth not bee ashamed; 2 Tim. 4. 2. 5. By the which (wee say) and other the like, this case is so cleare, wee need not enlarge it. An Addition to the third word. VNto the foresaid third word, wee adde thus much Till which time places that want, to bee supplied by weekely exerci∣ses, and how. more: That if sufficient Preachers cannot bee procured for all such places as want faithfull preaching, our charitable opinion is, the faithfull Ministers in each hundred will under∣take a weekely exercise in such places, one weeke in one Towne, another in another and soround, till setled painefull Pastours can be procured: This they will doblesse freely performe, expe∣cting no rewad from men where the Churches revenues are so slender that nothing can bee allowed. Provided that in other places they may have moderate allowance for their paines where the meanes are sufficient.
Though wee offer this in their name, and nothing doubt An Apology for the tender. of the performance in this case of so great necessity; yet wee are not of the mind some young Divines are in, that thinke themselves like the Palme-tree and Camomile, to grow the better for being burthened and pressed downe, undertaking an heavy burthen in their youth, thinking to profit and grow better by it. Such too often sow the wind and reape the whirlewind, Ier. 48. 10. Their greene wood Similie. rather smothers away in smoke, then burneth and casteth out heate, as an Ardens lucerna should. Rather with Chrysostome, wee call the Ministers charge, Onus Angelicis humeris formidandum. Moses was fearefull herein, and thrice refused, excusing himselfe till God was angry. Ezechiel was unwilling, though God laboured to confirme him. Ionah directly turned his back and fled ano∣ther way. Ammonius, a Monke, being called to bee a Bi∣shop, fled away from taking the office; and cut of his right eare, that being maimed hee might bee uncapable of the place. Evagrius likewise fled away when they would have made him Bishop, but did not mutilate himselfe. These examples and instances wee forgot not, while wee make this tender; yet while wee remember, Nihil esse diffi∣cilius; wee also consider, Apud Deum nihil batius; and the one so ballanceth the other, that the laboriousnesse thereof dateth us not a whit, (waighing from whom and to what end t is,) but rather in that respct to embrace the paines if it bee imposed. What though this charge challenge to it selfe all our strength, wee are lessoned by Augustine; Ingenium, prudentia, eloquentia, sunt dona Dei, & cui melus serviant quam  quo donantur, ut ita custodiantur, ungeantur perficiant ▪ Wee acknowledge many more worthy to bee taken in∣to this imployment then our selves, in the City, and Vni∣versities, that might doe the Countrey good service. And our inability makes us not grutch others ability, but rather wish with Moses that all the Lords people might like∣wise prophesie, wee should rejoyce with that worthy Lace∣demonian
when hee was not chosen one of the 30. Sena∣tours, the Common-wealth having so many better thn himselfe. Yet our resolution is this, that if any part of such imployment bee imposed on us, where the Instrument is dull and blunt, wee would put to the more strength, and adde the more prayers and paines to our studies and endea∣vours. If herein wee bee presumptuous, if bould, if undiscret, if foolish; for the sake of poore Countrey soules wee are so. It is for forlorne ones amongst us, 1000. times to be pittied, that wee are thus presumptuous, bould, undiscret, and foo∣lish, even for them and their good, and wee trust our paines would find grace in their sight, seeing for them they are undertaken, and the benefit thereof (if it bee any) must bee theirs. The setling of the foresaid course in a way tending to introduce the Primitive Government. FOr the setling of this course our humble opinion is, A cer∣taine 4. The set∣ling of this course. number of conscionable, honest, painefull Preachers in every hundred, should now at the entrance on the course bee no∣minated and appointed by the honourable Parliament, and they Parliament to appoint faithfull Preachers. should engage themselves to uphold the same weekely exercise while life and ability lasteth, if occasion so require; and to renew the first number when there is any defect by death, removeall, disability, or any other way: and so to continue till each place bee sufficiently provided for. Ingaging whom they receive as strong∣ly, as themselves were at the first entrance of the course of the honourable Parliament. For it is the property of good Mi∣nisters to labour and take care for good successours, as Moses doth in Num 27. 15. 16. though for the peoples sake, God was angry with him, and would not let him goe into the good land, Deut. 4. 21. Yet such was Moses his love and care for them and their welfare, that hee procureth what in him lieth their good after his decease, and a faith∣full Governour to bee set over them of God, which is a
great blessing unto a land or people, Eccles 10. 17. Touching the mentioned number, It hath beene Gods manner to joyne tribes together; and disciples together for their mutuall help of each other, as Iudah, Isachar, and Za∣bulon in one Campe. Reuben, Simeon, and Gad, in another. Ephraim Manasses, and Benjamin, in another. Dan, Aser, and Naphtali, in another Campe by themselves, Num. 2. And afterwards when the number of Priests were increa∣sed, they were divided into courses. So our Saviour also ordained amongst his Disciples a kind of combination and fraternity, as is to bee seene by the rehersall of their names; Matth. 10. 2. 3. 4. First Simon Peter, and Andrew his bro∣ther: Secondly, Iames (or Iacob) the Sonne of Zebedee, and Iohn his brother: Thirdly, Philip, and Bartolomew▪ Fourth∣ly, Thomas, and Matthew the Publicane: Fifthly, Iames the Sonne of Alpheus and Lebbeus, or Judas his brother, (Luk. 6. 16. Iud. vers. 1.) Sixthly, Simon the Canaanite (or the Zealous) and Iudas Iscariot. And these did CHRIST send forth thus by two and two, Mark. 6. 7. To warre the war∣fare of the Gospell, as it is called in 1 Tim. 1. 18. And when Iscariot lost his office, Matthias was chosen in his place, Act. 1. 26. Afterwards there were added Paul and Barna∣bas, Act. 13. 2. These Ministers wee speake off, must bee such as deserve well, even of ingratefull times they live in, though men bee as unthankefull as they will, they must not looke to them, but to the honour of God, the credit of Religion, the main∣tenance of the truth. For let men bee as they will, base and wicked, enemies to grace and goodnesse, what wee doe, wee doe it not to men but to God. And when men thus minded, are joyned thus together, they are more likely to prevaile. Forces united are the stronger. But who must bee these honest, painefull, conscionable  Preachers, that would doe thus, and might bee trusted thus? But who must they be? where shall wee find them? such are rare to bee had, and if there bee such. Yet how shall wee come to the know∣ledge of them, that wee may nominate and employ
them in such a worke of this so waighty a nature? A necessary question indeed, there being much dissimu∣lation  in the World. Gold may bee counterfeited. Any A notable way to find such. mans writing or seale, even the Broad-seale of England may bee counterfeited, yea grace it selfe may, and is most commonly counterfeited of any thing else. For the prevention whereof, a most memorable and re∣markeable A memora∣ble discovery. fact of Constantius Chlorus, Father to Constan∣tine is related in Euseb. l. 1. of the life of Constantine and Euseb. lib. 1 d vita Con∣stant. cap. 11. Chapt. 11. Hee being about to make triall of the constancy of his Courtiers and attendants about him, whether they were sound and constant in the Christian faith, hee makes a shew that hee would give them leave and full liberty to sacrifice unto Idols, and that they should not bee punished for it. Nay, except they did so, hee would banish them out of his Court. But when many amongst them for feare of loosing their honour and dignity, did rather forsake God, then that they should bee taken offending the Emperour, then did Constantius Chlorus discover his plot which be∣fore hee had concealed, and falleth upon them with grie∣vous chidings for forsaking of God, accounting them un∣worthy of his service, commands them to depart out of his Court, with great vehemency uttereth these words, Quo∣modo fidem Imperatori praestabunt inviolatam, qui Deo sunt perfidi? How will they bee true to the Emperour, that are false to God? But as for those, whom hee found constant in the Christian faith, hee kept with him, obliged them to him by bestowing on them great honours and preferre∣ments, saying, Hee more esteemed of them to bee with him in his house, then to have his house stuffed full with the ra∣rest treasure. Such a course as this (though excellent then) needs not now bee taken. Such English Preachers as lately have dis∣covered themselves upon a lesse triall, hastily ushering in Altars, Genuflections, and other like superstitious vanities, the lazy Loyterers, corrupt Worshippers, false in Doctrine, loose in practise, grosse temporizers expose themselves to
some censure. Such on the other side as have continued constant, beene painefull in Preaching Gods owne word twice weekely, have lived accordingly, and hazarded them∣selves in standing out against all such vaine superstitious innovations, need no further triall by the charitable. So that though Ministers should bee looked out and pre∣sented by the people, as Moses saith, Deut. 1. 13. Take for you wise men, and understanding, and knowne among your tribes, and I will appoint them to bee your head. And though also in the primitive times Ministers were looked out and pre∣sented by the people, Act. 1. 15. 23. and 6. 3. 5. 6. &c. And all the Congregation assembled at the consecration of Levits, as a mattr concerning them to know and approve off, Num 8. 9. 10. For the Levits were taken instead of their first borne, Verse 18. 19. And all the Congregation also assembled at the consecration of the Priests, Lev. 8. 3. 4. And the Sonnes of Israel, that is, some of the chiefe of them, (as the first borne) in the name of the rest, did lay or impose hands on the Levits, which rite was kept at the or∣dination of Officers, as in the old Testament, so in the New, Act. 6. 6▪ and 13. 3. and it fitted the present businesse. For the Levits being taken to serve the service of the Sons of Israel instead of their first borne, and to make attonement for them, Num. 8. 19. by offering for them; Verse 11. By this signe, they put this charge and service of the Church upon them, and so consecrated them to God in their name. Hereby they figured the Church of CHRIST, called the generall assembly, and Church of the first borne, which are written in Heaven, Hebr. 12▪ 23. Yet in this case, no fur∣ther looking, nor any new ordination, is necessary, but one∣ly to looke to their former constant conscionable lives and labours. The proceedings of the course. THat Reformation may make an happy progression, 5. The Pro∣gresse in Re∣formation. (desiring not to bee mistaken,) our further submissive
opinion is; For the present Parliament to nominate, ap∣point and set out certaine Lay-elders, which are to bee Lay-elders to bee appointed. three or foure of the gravest, godliest, honestest men, and of the best judgement in every Parish and Chappelry, to as∣sist the said Ministers, and by the authority of the Parlia∣ment, these Pastours and their Assistants (being teaching and Lay-elders) to have some limited power for the orde∣ring, guiding and managing the Ecclesiasticall businesse in their owne severall Parishes and Chappelries. And also Differences to bee composed, how? that the whole company of these Pastours and Elders have power within their owne hundred to decide, compose, and order whatsoever cannot bee decided, composed, and ordered in any particular Parish or Chappelry by the Pastour and Lay-elders there. And this to bee done at their Power of teaching▪ and Lay-elders. meetings for their weekely exercises mentioned before. And the happy trienniall Parliament to decide such grander differences as cannot bee decided in particular Parishes, nor by the whole hundred. The power to bee committed to these consisteth in these particulars. TO oversee, that every Church and Chappell within 1. To see, every place have sufficient preaching as soone as may bee. their hundred bee (as neere as may bee) furnished with a sufficient Ministry, and that the same goe fairely on in an orderly way for edification. But for as much as wee feare each place cannot on the sudden bee furnished with sufficient preaching, therefore till that can bee effected, (for which wee pray) the said ap∣proved Ministers, or the major part of them should have power to chuse the places within their owne hundred for the said weekely exercises, and appoint Preachers out of themselves for the same. Yet as soone as God pleaseth to send forth any sufficient Weekely exer∣cises in the in∣terim. labourers into his Vineyard, the same shall joyfully bee ad∣mitted to some particular Church or Chappell whch is in want. And though the Patron doe present or commend a Clarke to a Congregation, yet as neere as may bee there
ought to bee an ingenuous and free consent of that Con∣gregation, to which hee is to preach before hee bee instal∣led. Not bought and sould, Nec prece, nec pretio; much lesse should their consent bee forced or extorted. Our arguments for the Congregation to chuse their Mi∣nister People to chuse their Minister. are: First, Because in the Apostles times, the Congregation did chuse their Minister, the Apostles themselves not pre∣ferring any by their authority, but alwayes with the con∣sent and approvement of the Church, Act, 6. 2. and 14. 23. 2. Secondly, Hereby the Church shall preserve her liberty which Christ gave her: for no Pastour nor Minister of God, was to bee thrust by Christs order on the Church against their will. Thirdly, By this meanes, the Minister may with a good conscience, exercise his talent towards the Lords flock that have chosen him, and bee encouraged thereto; and on the other side, the people may more easily submit themselves to him and his instructions. But now in case, the people doe not know who are fit Assisters therein. Ministers for them, and cannot judge thereof, then the foresaid approved Ministers should seeke out Preachers for them, or at least judge (when they are brought to them) of their fitnesse for the Ministry in generall, and for that Congregation in particular. This businesse, the Civill Magistrate hath committed to the Ministers of the Church. As did that godly Emperour Valentinianus, of whom Theodoretus maketh mention in his Valentinians example. fourth Booke of Ecclesiasticall history, the fist and sixt Chapters. Though the Ministers put it to him freely to make his choyce, yet hee would not accept of that liberty and power, but left it to those, to whom it is due by Di∣vine institution, Tit. 1. 5. For this cause, Paul left Titus in Creete to set in order things that were wanting, and to ordaine Elders in every City, as hee had appointed him▪ That is, to assist others in the election of their Ministers, and moderate the
businesse if need bee, as Calvin expounds it. And a strict observation hereof continued in the Primitive Church under Christian Kings and Emperours. In so much, that hee was not acknowledged for a lawfull Pastour of the Church, which was intruded on the Church by the com∣mand of a great man, as most Orthodox Authours shew. Neither are any to buy this preferrement with money, Not buy, nor make any forceable entrance, Act. 8. 18. 19. 20. 21. No, nor any other way to seeke this for the preferment sake, for that is not Pauls meaning in 1 Tim. 3. 1. If any desire the office of a Bishop, hee desireth a good worke. Hee nei∣ther commands, nor exhorts any to desire this office, but Nov seeke preferment. sheweth, it is an hard businesse: a worke, not a play: a care, not riotousnesse not free from censure: a Fatherly office, not a tyrannicall liberty. And this hee saith to reprove such as gap after the office; and yet consider it not, neither are any way fitted for it. Here might bee shewed what ones are to bee chosent what the manner of chusing them is: and how the ordina∣tion is to bee performed, but then wee should bee tedious. And us the said approved Ministers (that have carried them∣selves as aforesaid, though they little thought to have seene these dayes,) together with their choyce assistants, are thus Refuse the unworthy. to chuse; so also, according to their Commission from the Honourable Parliament, to refuse and remove such as are crept in by craft, or broken in by force; for that they entred not into the sheepfold by the doore, but climbed in, some other way, and in are Theeves and Robbers, not to bee suffered no more in Church then in Common-wealth, Ioh. 10. 1. As the said Ministers with their assistants, should over∣see 2. sufficient maintenance seene unto. the Churches and Chappels, that they bee thus furnished with a sufficient Ministry, having removed such, as hindred out of the way by the authority aforesaid: So also should they oversee, that every Church and Chappell have suffi∣cient and sitting maintenance. And that according to the rder the present Parliament shall please to establish, that
so they may not bee defrauded by the subtilty of any, nor oppressed by the greatnesse of others. That these teaching and Lay-elders (being both set out 3. To oversee Discipline. by the present Parliament as was said for the businesse) have also the oversight of the execution of Discipline, for the suppression of insufferable evils, &c. The maine occasion wherefore wee move this, is the Occasion. many most notorious abuses of our present Spirituall Courts, (falsely so called;) Some whereof have bin grosse, even since the Parliament beganne to sit, as if on purpose they would improve their present oportunity while it lasted. The lawfull Pastours of the Church, or rather the whole Churches power. Church, (the which these teaching and Lay-elders repre∣sent) have power to promulgate the word of God, and to constitute somewhat in externall matters, or about in diffe∣rent rites: As also to restraine manifest offenders by Eccle∣siasticall Discipline, either by excommunicating them, or by suspending them from the Lords supper. And this power CHRIST hath given to the Church, though no power to bind the consciences of men with any now law necessari∣ly belonging to faith and manners, neither have they any power to compell any but as is said. The office of a Minister consists as in the dispensation of Ministers of∣fice. the misteryes of God, as was said; so also in the administra∣tion of Discipline, which is a certaine power given and granted of God to his Church, to direct, lead, and bring men to piety that are entred into CHRISTS flock, least they should either in Doctrine, or in conversation, commit any thing unbeseeming their Christian profession, to the scandall of it. Hereby offenders are reproved, rebuked, chidden and corrected, that they may returne into the right way, and every one performe his office according as God hath pre∣scribed him. There is a marvelous great necessity of Discipline a∣mongst Necessity of Discipline. us. It being no little dishonour to God, that the wicked, impenitent, blasphemous wretches, should runne
on without just punishment, as if betweene them and the freeborne dutifull Sonnes of God, there were no difference, and that his Kingdome with the Kingdome of Sathan should bee so sowly mixed and confused. The Church by conniving at the wicked and impenitent, and not correcting them publikely and privately, not punishing them with the sword of the Spirit, doth make herselfe quilty before God of their damnation and destruction. By the liberty that hi∣therto hath beene to goe on in wickednesse, the Kingdome of CHRIST is filled full of scandals, and the weake (whose number in the Church is great) being corrupted with the examples of the wicked, will bee seduced; much rather, therefore should such as are without the pale of CHRIST bee drawne into Gods sheepefold, that they which speake against us as evill doers, may see our good workes and god∣ly conversation amongst them, and glorifie God, 1 Pet. 2. 12. These should rather thus bee brought in, then that the sheepe of CHRIST which are already in his flock should bee offended and perverted by such fowle scandals raigning so rise, and yet suffered and winked at. A little leaven lea∣vens the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5. 6. Gal. 5. 9. Evill words cor∣rupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33. And one infected sheepe infects the whole flock. This Discipline, or rather the administration of it, is cal∣led Power of the keyes. the power of the keyes by CHRIST himselfe, in Matth. 16. 19. and 18. 18. Joh. 20. 23. And as the keyes of Ci∣ties and Houses are necessary to bee delivered to the Rulers of the City and Masters of the Family: So CHRIST him∣selfe hath committed the administration and government of his Kingdome to his Church, (which is the house, of the living GOD, 1 Tim. 3. 15.) Giving his Ministers certaine lawes, hee trusts them with the mannaging of his matters according thereunto. Hence it is that Paul saith, in 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the. Ministers of CHRIST, and Stewards (or Dispencers) of the Mysteries of CHRIST. As with a little helpe of the Key of the gates and doores Why so cal∣led?
of Cities and Houses, are opened and shut, and men are ei∣ther shut forth or received in: So CHRIST by the right administration of this Discipline will have declared to im∣penitent persons, their shuting out of his heavenly King∣dome, and to the penitent, that they shall bee received in. This shall bee effectuall, for both the parts of this admini∣stration, God himselfe confirmeth in Heaven. As no City, nor House can stand and florish without the strength and stay of Discipline, of order, law and punish∣ment: So if Christs Kingdome here on earth, if his Church, doo want this speciall Government, it will runne into erro∣neous Doctrine and impious wickednesse, and so undoe it selfe, and yet never bee admonished, reproved, blamed, that it might bee regained; whereas, if such as shew them∣selves stubburne, and will bee reclaimed and brought into the right path by no gentler way; bee feverely punished for their offences and grievous scandals, this will make much for the glory of God, and good of the Church. The cor∣ruption of our nature is great, the infirmity of Saints not smale, this Discipline is a wholesome remedy, whereby the whole body of the Church, and every member thereof is so restrained and kept in, that we shall not be indulgent to our selves in that wch is evill, but kept close to our duty in our right paths by this bridle, when the bond of love and liberty will not doe it. So that to the preservation of the Church Discipline, is the same, that the sinewes are to the joynts of a mans body. These things being so, God even from the beginning, would that great respect bee had to this ordi∣nance in his Kingdome. And it much beloveth such to whom it is committed to bee most diligent observers and executioners of it. Also how wise, how circumspect, how moderate, all such should be, which execute this Discipline; the holy Apostle shewes, in 1 Tim. 5. 1. 2. Rebuke not an Elder, but intreat him  a Father, and the younger men as Bre∣thren, the elder women as Mothers, the younger as Sisters with∣all purity. Though it cannot bee denied, but Ministers have some
some secular dignity, as to administer the temporall goods Against Pa∣stous having temporall ju∣risdiction. anciently given to the Church, and sometimes to bee made use of for their counsell in waighty matters, as in electing Officers, making lawes, &c. Yet by no meanes to have both temporall and spirituall jurisdiction ordinarily and imme∣diatly, they must lay aside all the temporall jurisdiction, and mainely take up their employment in their office of teach∣ing and governing the Church. The Reasons are these. 1. CHRIST himselfe neither had, neither would have any temporall jurisdiction, or secular Go∣vernment; Luk. 12. Ioh▪ 6. and 18. His Messengers there∣fore, ought neither to have, nor affect any. 2. This CHRIST forbids his Apostles, and so all other Ministers absolutely, that they should not affect bearing rule in this World, nor exercise Lordship as the Princes of this World doe, Matth. 20. Luk. 22. ergo, 3. The Apostles would not take care of tables, being a matter nothing agreeing to their Apostolicall function, but committed this care to the Deacons, Act. 6. 1 Tim. 3. and 5. Therefore much lesse the waighty businesse of this World. 4. Such is the dignity and gravity of the Pastours office, that they may, and ought, bee content with it alone. This requireth the whole man to performe it aright, and fulfill all the parts of it, as appeareth both by the thing it selfe, and also by the word o God; 2 Cor. 2. and 5. Farre bee it there∣fore from them on their owne accord to bring upon them∣selves other employments, to entangle themselves in the businesse of this life, contrary to that of the Apostle, 2 Tim. 2. No man goeth to warre and Intangleth himselfe with the busi∣nesse of this life, &c. Of necessity therefore, they must cast off, either the temporall, or else the spirituall jurisdi∣ction. 5. The ancient Fathers of the Church, have neither
usurped both temporall and spirituall jurisdiction them∣selvs, nor ever did approve of those that laboured for it; nay, they have openly condemned this usurpation. This is to bee seene in many; in Augustine by name, in many of his Epistles. Also in Greg. M. l. 4. Ep. 44. And Bernard l. 2. De consid. ad Eugenium. Therefore Pastours now are not to thinke of having temporall and spirituall authority, or∣dinarily, and immediately, but labour to discharge the one. In the old Testament, the very same men were both  Priests and Kings, Judges and Princes, as Melchisedch, Gen. 14. also Noah, Gen 6. and Abraham, Gen 14 and Moses, Exod. 18▪ and 40. Likewise Eli and Samuel, 1 Sam. 2. and 4. Therefore the like may now profitably be? This was proper to the old Testament, and extraordina∣ry,  and is fulfilled in CHRIST alone, who is both King, and Priest, and Prophet for us; and so is not to bee drawne to ordinary Ministers of the new Testament. Temporall and Spirituall jurisdictions are not contrary,  but subordinate onely, or subalternate, and therefore may bee exercised by the same men: nothing hinders, but the same man at one time may bee qualified for diverse offices, as a Councellour and a Magitrate? Here is a double fallacy, partly ac identis, partly secundum  quid For though these two powers doe not simply, and in respect of some men crosse each other: yet if you consider the ordinary law of God, and the proper state of the new Testament, and the waightinesse of either of these offices, and lastly, the manifold infirmities of men; Certainely you may see they are not onely different, but in some measure crosse and contrary one to the other, so that they cannot bee undertaken and executed by one and the same man, but with many cautions used. Thus for the power to bee committed to these Elders, and the limitation thereof. But if this representative Church must have the power  of these particulars, what shall become of the Lord Bi∣shops that hitherto have raigned and ruled in the Church of England?
These might have beene forgotten, being not in our  bookes. The question wee can scarce answer unto, no such being found in the Scriptures, as doth and will presently appeare. Yet Rebus sic stantibus; our humble motion is, that such of them as bee found faithfull, together with some other ancient learned Divines that have studied long, bee employed onely in the exercise of their Doctorshippe, or gift of teaching, as Divinity Lecturers. Of these, there should bee in every hundred one, and hee to bee seated in Divinity Le∣ctures mo∣nethly in each hundred, and how. such a Parish, where is the largest maintenance, which may bee competent both for the Pastour that preacheth to that Congregation there, and also for the Teacher. This Teacher should bee employed onely in teaching the Pastours of that hundred at monethly exercises for that purpose; unto which the foresaid weekely exercise, should give place, and cease for that weeke monethly. This wee adde, least wee should leave out any order of Ministers appointed by CHRIST at the first, to remaine for ever. For such as these, were set out in the primitive times, whose office then was to teach the Pastours by interpreting to them the Scriptures, laying out the sense and Doctrine soundly, and confuting er∣rours, &c. The which is most necessary amongst us, Iesuites, and Popish Champions, in livery Habit as serving men, sometimes almost gravelling us with some studied dis∣course, wherein they to our reproach find us shallow, through want of this helpe. This order of Ministers, were at the first called Doctours, or Teachers, as after is to bee seene. And a particular hun∣dred, seemeth somewhat neerely to resemble the primitive Congregations, called Ecclesiae. Of these Teachers, wee have indeed a commendable practise already in our Vniver∣sity Vniversity practise. Professours, which read Divinity Lectures in the Schooles. The like whereto wee desire, may bee as is said in each hundred in the Countrey. Both which should bee Seminaria Pastorum; As Calvin speakes, Nurceries, especial∣ly to young Divines after they have set upon the study of Divinity, and entred into the Ministry; the necessity of the
Countrey often calling them to leave the Vniversity, before they ever come to attend much to the Divinity Lectures, read by the Professours in Schooles there. See Wilson on Rom 12. Dial. 5. pag. 537. These being exempted both from teaching and ruling, only exercised monethly as is said in teaching, might also be fit to advise and give counsell to the younger sort, being now in their old age, and having now seene these dayes which they did not wot off; it adds something to their experience. Thus the Levits in their old age, even after they came to bee fifty yeares old, left off the harder service, but still had charge, Num. 4. 3. As Ministers at the first ordination, should not enter till they bee furnished with qualifications for so great a worke, so should they continue no longer charged with the full waight of the burthen of their function, then they are fit and able to undergoe it, but rather bee exempted therefrom unto more easie service, Num. 8. 25 26. As for Lord Diocesan Bishops, wee know no such di∣stinction, No Dices Bishops. nor the primitive Churches. There is mention indeed of Bishops, but not differencing them from Pastours; For Bishops signifie Pastours, Teachers, Elders, even, who∣soever had in the primitive Church any Ecclesiasticall power, either for Doctrine, or Regiment of the Church, Phil. 1. 1. To the Bishops and Deacons at Philipp, whereby wee see, that this name Bishop is Common to all the Mi∣nisters, (or Officers) of the Church, seeing Paul attributeth many Bishops to one Church. A Bishop and Pastour are Synonima. The Scripture con∣founds Synonima. these termes promiscuously, Bishops, Prsbiters, Pa∣stours, and Ministers. Whosoever had the office of a Mi∣nister, had the name of a Bishop. Paul requireth Titus to make Presbiters in every City, Tit. 1. 5. and presently hee addes Verse 7. That a Bishop must bee without reproofe. And in Act. 20. 17. Hee calleth those Presbiters of Ephesus, which afterward hee calleth Bishops, Calv. Instit. lib. 4. 3. 8.
But now there is a wide difference betweene our Bi∣shops and Pastours of particular Congregations, for they have a different calling with us in England. The booke of ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons shew, they have a different ordination, therefore must needs differ in them∣selves, according as the Apostle argueth, Hebr. 7. 16. 17. 21. That the Priesthood of CHRIST was diverse from the Leviticall Priesthood, because the manner of ordaining each was diverse, the one being without an oath and for a time, the other being with an oath and for ever. The Bishops or Pastours of the Church, and the diverse orders of them, are frequently set downe in the word of God, yet no signe of any such Lord Bishops. See 1 Cor. 12. throughout the whole Chapter, where all the orders are largely laid downe. Yea of the ordinary Ministers its plaine∣ly affirmed, that in respect of their office, they are all equall; neither ought they to exercise any absolute power in the Church, but onely that which is meerely ministeriall. See 1 Cor. 3. and 4. also 2 Cor. 1. and 3. and 4. Ephes. 4. 11. and often else where. In the Apostles times, there was no signe of such, but ra∣ther, the contrary; for as much as the grand controversies of Religion, and other Ecclesiasticall matters were deter∣mined by the Common vote of the Apostles together with the consent of the people, Act. 1. 6. and 11. 14. But espe∣cially the 15. Chapter wholy. Therefore much lesse, now the Apostles are dead, and the whole affaires fall to ordinary men. Such a Lordly authority is not onely unprofitable, but dangerous and hurtfull in as much, as it is so apt to degene∣rate into tyranny, especially in such infirme men, through pride, ambition and other wickednesse, as evident expe∣rience hath hitherto shewed amongst the Papists, and too much amongst our selves. By sundry histories and an∣cient The begin∣ning of the Romane pri∣macy. writings it doth appeare that in the beginning of Constantine the great, there was much stirre about prehe∣minence, and in the Nicen Counsell, certaine Patriarkes
were appointed, and amongst them, the Romane Patriarkes was preferred in some sort above the rest, because of the dignity of the City of Rome whence hee came. It fell out in processe, of time that the Roman Bishop increasing dayly in ambition and wealth, first under the Em∣perour Phoca, about the yeare of CHRIST, 600. then under Conr. Vost. anti. Bellar. Tom. 1. Thes. 4. de Rom. Pont. Pipin and Charles the great, about the yeare 800. And so afterwards likewise, they did more and more lift up them∣selves, that at the length, they usurped an absolute Mo∣narchy in the Church. See by name, the Sixt Canon of the Nicen counsell. And have not some of our Lord Bishops made faire offers to follow the Romane Bishop in a like way? That these foresaid Teaching (or rather Preaching) and Lay-elders 4. To oversee Deacons. have the oversight of such Deacons or Deaconesses, as the present Parliament shall please also to set forth and appoint, for the releeving of the poore in such sort as your Honours shall pre∣scribe. This is so marvelously neglected as that our Church is Neglected much. blemished by it. Wee cannot expect God should pitty us in our misery, wee so little pittying the poore in their ne∣cessity. It reflects upon the wholebody, thus to neglect the poore members. Our humble suite therefore, in behalfe of these is, That there may bee some Persons in each Parish charged with the collecting for, ad distributing to the poore members of Christ amongst us. And that the said Ministers and Lay-elders see, that these Deacons discharge their office with simplicity, wil∣lingly doing service to the poorest and meanest. Fit Persons may bee looked out for this purpose by the Elders, not further troubling your Honours with every tri∣fle, Act. 6 3. Rom. 12. 8. For the choyce of these, the Apostle giveth direction, in 1 Tim. 3. 8. 9. 10. when hee saith, Deacons must bee grave, not double tongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucr, holding the mistery of faith in a pure conscience. These must first bee proved, and then use the office of a Den∣con,
if they bee found blamelesse by this representative Church. In the primitive times, there were also Deaconesses, Deaconesses. which were godly ancient widdowes, which attended on the poore, and sick, and afflicted members of CHRIST, Act. 6 1. Rom. 16. 1. 1 Tim. 5. 9. where also are directions for such. But thus much for the power to bee committed to these approved Presbyters in these foure particulars. The confirmation, and modest justification of the foresaid 5. The modest confirmation of the course. course, and the setling thereof, in manner aforesaid by aguments (besides what is intermixed already in the descriptn f it) ta∣ken from the nature of the Government of CHRISTS Church, from examined Scriptures, from the primitive practise, from reason and testimonies of the ancient and most Orthodox Wri∣ters that are extant. Such is the nature of the Government of the militant 1. From the na∣ture of the Government Monarchicall. Church, that First, In respect of CHRIST it is a Monarchy, though in no other regard whatsoever, neither of Pope nor any other. And so this course declareth it, giving no au∣thority at all to the Church over the conscience to ordaine any new law for faith or manners; but onely see to the exe∣cution of what CHRIST himselfe hath given forth al∣ready as head, this representative Church being onely the Overseers under him; Act. 20. 28. Secondly, In respect of the chiefe Magistrate, the trien∣niall Parliament, and the foresaid teaching, and Lay-elders, it is (as commonly it hath beene) partly Aristocraticall, Aristocrti∣call. Democrati∣call. partly Democraticall. Cour. Vorst. anti-Bellar. Tom. 1. Thes. 1. de Rom. Pon. pag. 57. So that herein our submis∣sive opinion agreeth with the nature of the Government of CHRISTS Church here on earth. The Scriptures wherein this subject is discoursed off, 2. From Scrip∣tures. which shew the primitive practise, and are now to bee examined, whether they bee for our purpose or no, bee mainely these that follow briefely, being many. 1. Act. 6. Some widdowes were neglected in the dayly ministring; then the 12. Apostles called the multitude of
Disciples together, and told them, it was not fit they should leave the word of God and serve Tables, that is, to make provision for the maintenanne of the poore, for as much, as they were not able to satisfie both offices; therefore they looked out certaine men of honest report, which they ap∣pointed over the businesse, that they might give themselves continually to prayer, and the ministration of the word. This pleased the whole multitude well, and they did so. 2. Act. 13. 1. There were in the Church at Antioch, certaine Prophets and Teachers. How Prophets and Teachers differ, shall bee shewed after from other places. In this place, they are Synonima. Prophets here are not such, as had the rare gift of foretelling, but they were famous In∣preters of the Scriptures of the Prophets. And they were exercised in teaching and exhorting, as Paul sheweth, in 1 Cor. 14. Calvins Com. on this place. 3. Act. 14. 23. Paul and Barnabas appoint Ministers, but how? why, they ordained them Elders by election in every Church. The word , signifieth, to . elect by putting up the hands; which declareth, that Mini∣sters were not made without consent of the people. As before in Chap. 13. 1. 3. 4. where though there is no men∣tion made of the Churches election, yet that was, because the vocation was wholy of God, and so the Church was to receive Paul and Barnabas, that were offered by Gods owne hand. In this 14. Chap. though Paul and Barnabas bee said to ordaine the Elders, yet they doe it not onely of themselves, but by the election of all, for in creating Pastours the people had a free choyce, yet least any thing should bee done tumultuously, Paul and Barnabas were over the rest as Moderatours, Cal. 4. Rom. 12. 6. 7. 8. Seeing then that we have gifts that are diverse, &c. Paul teaches, that no brotherly helpe bee withheld from one another, for such assisting each other is the bond of mutuall communion. Herein consists the society of the godly, that one impart his gifts to another, and suf∣fer himselfe to bee helped by the ability of others. Yet
every one must keepe his owne order, wherein God hath set him, and not hinder others, for such as pervert Gods order withstand God himselfe who is the God of order. This hee sheweth by the comparison of a naturall body where every member keepeth its owne office, and not in∣vades the roome and office of others. The gifts hee here sheweth are two in generall, Pro∣phecy Two gifts. and Ministry. First, Prophesie: Hereby hee meaneth the right under∣standing 1 Prophesie what? of the Scripture, and the faculty of explaining the Prophets and the Misteries of CHRIST in the Gospell. For in this sense Paul speakes, when hee saith in 1 Cor. 14. 5. I would that yee all speake with tongues, but rather that yee Prophesie. And in 1 Cor. 13. 9. Wee know in part and Prophesie in part. Hereby meaning, chiefely the ordi∣nary teaching which was to continue. For this must bee according to the proportion of faith, that is, according to the first rules of Religion gathered, (as it is thought) by the Apostles out of the Scriptures, Cal. 2. Vnto this Prophesying, here bee two offices belonging: Whereto be∣longeth, 1. Teaching. 2. Exhorta∣tion. First, Teaching, which is the office of the Doctour. Se∣condly, xhortation, which is the office of Pastours. For these two offices wee confesse, are divided (though some∣times their gifts may and doe meet in one, Ephes. 4. 11.) and have their severall gifts. One hath the gift of know∣ledge, the other of wisedome, 1 Cor. 12. 8. And severall operations or workes, for the one doth teach and inter∣pret the Scripture, lay out the sense and doctrine soundly, confuting errour, which is the Doctours part. The practise whereof, as was said, is commendable in our Vniversity. Professours which read Divinity Lectures in the Schooles; and wee wish the like were in our severall hundreds in manner aforesaid, and for the reasons aforesaid, this order being in the best and first Churches. If wee should wish every Parish had such, wee had no hopes to prevaile, though indeed, every Parish hath need of more Ministers then one. Then to exhort the Hearers unto godlinesse in practicall
points, and to comfort and strengthen the infirmity of faith in the Saints, as also to administer Sacraments, this is the part of the Pastours or Exhorters. Origen, and Peter Mar∣tyr take Prophesying thus generally for Doctrine and Ex∣hortation, so doth Paraeus. 2. Ministry: This is the other generall head, and it is not 2 Ministry what? here to bee taken in a particular sense, but in a generall mea∣ning as comprehending other kinds under it, which were wont to bee conversant about the body and temporall things. This pertaineth to Discipline and manners. It hath Its offices. three gifts, or is here subdivided into three offices. First, To distribute the treasury or Church goods to the 1. To distri∣bute. poore, as every one had need, Act. 6 3. 5. Their gift was simplicity, that is, that they without fraud, vaine-glory, cove∣tousnesse, or frowardnesse, should give out the almes. Secondly, Those that were joyned to the Pastours, as 2. To Go∣verne. assistants and helpers for Government of the flock to pre∣vent scandals and offences, 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Tim. 5. 17. Thus Martyr, Clevian and Paraus doe judge, Piscator also. These Master Calvin calleth Seniours, Osiander Censours of manners, Tertullian Presidents, which attended and ob∣served outward behaviours onely. Their gift was dili∣gence, which stood in a firme purpose and strong endea∣vour to doe the businesse and charge committed to them. Thirdly, The last sort of Ministers, here mentioned are 3. Mercy-shew∣ers who? mercy-shewers in these words, Hee that sheweth mercy with cheerefulnesse. Thus Fajus, and Gualter, and Paraeus expound it. These mercy-shewers were not such, as were spoken off, in Matth. 25. 35. 36 For that worke is common to all Christians, but here hee meaneth such mercifull workes as bee mentioned, in 1 Tim. 5. 10. They which were to bee employed in this service of shewing mercy, were such as were appointed to looke to the poore, sick, aged, impo∣tent, strangers, exiles, orphans, &c. Their gift was cheere∣fulnesse, which containeth; First, Alacrity of heart. Second∣ly, Gentlenesse in words. Thirdly, Pleasantnesse in coun∣tenance.
For as their worke was such as might breed loathsomnesse to attend sick and feeble persons, so they were to bee old widdowes and aged men, who naturally are soure and testy; therefore needed this precept of cheere∣fulnesse. Thus wee see, one had one function, another had another; one was a Doctour, another a Pastour; one an El∣der, another a Deacon; one a Superiour and ruled, others obey as Inferiours, and every one of these, had their severall gifts for the performance of their worke. As man con∣sists of Soule (which hath understanding and will) and a Body; God willing to have the whole man saved, appoin∣ted for the understanding part, Doctrine to teach it, and for the will, Exhortations to quicken it: And for the Body, cer∣taine other Officers to looke to the welfare and carriage of it before men. 5. 1 Cor. 12. Where the Apostle reckons up the diver∣sity of gifts given for the edification of the Church, and re∣lateth them in this manner, yet not all, but those which ten∣ded to his present purpose, as viz. First, To one is given the word of wisedome. Secondly, To another, the word of knowledge, Verse 8. Knowledge and wisedome are taken diversely in Scripture, but in this place, Calvin taketh them as Minus and Majus, as in Col. 2. 3. where also they are joyned together as here. For Paul shewes, that all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge, are hid in CHRIST. By knowledge therefore, hee meaneth the understanding of holy things; by wisedome, hee meaneth the perfecting of them; and skill to apply, that which is understood, to use. Thirdly, To another Faith, Verse 9. And by Faith, hee here meaneth a particular Faith, as appeareth by the context, which worketh miracles, such as Judas had, and by it wrought miracles. Fourthly, The gift of healing, the which what it is, no man is ignorant. Fifthly. To another, the working of miracles, Verse 10. as to worke by miracles against Sathan and Hypocrites, as was done against Ana∣nias, Elimas, &c. These were great workes to restraine the Devils, to drive them out. Sixthly, To another Pro∣phecy,
phecy, Verse 10. that is, To declare Gods mysteries, and that in a singular manner, as Gods Messengers or Interpre∣ters to men. Seventhly, To another discerning of Spirits, that is, to try both the Doctrines and Persons. Hereby, they discerned the true Ministers of CHRIST from the false. Eightly, To another, diverse kinds of tongues, to ano∣ther, the interpretation of tongues. Interpretation diffe∣red from the knowledge of the tongues, for they that were endued with the knowledge of tongues, did not onely keepe themselves to that language where they were: Inter∣pretours translated the strange language into another tongue. These gifts they then got not by labour nor study, but had them by a wonderfull Revelation of the Spirit, and so they were extraordinary and temporary onely for that time, and so now are ceased, and not to bee insisted up∣on. Having thus in the beginning of the Chapter spoken of Offices. their gifts, hee towards the end speakes of their offices wherein they were employed, after that they were sitted with such gifts. He doth not here reckon up all the offices, but some for instance. In Ephes. 4. is a fuller enumeration of them, as wee shall see by and by, to which wee will ha∣sten, because those are required to the perpetuall Govern∣ment of the Church. Those that hee mentioneth here are Some were perpetuall, as Teachers which were limited. some perpetuall, some temporary. The perpetuall are those, which are necessary for the Government of the Church. The temporary are those, which were necessary for the laying the fundation of the Church at first. Of the former sort, was the office of Teachers. Of the other, was the office Others tem∣porall, as A∣postles. of Apostles. For God created Apostles to preach the Go∣spell through the World, and did not limit them to any certaine places and Parishes. But they were to Preach the Gospell to all Nations, the which they did by Preaching in the chiefest Cities and places of each Countrey, not having time for particulars, and from those chiefe Cities, the newes of the new Doctrine, spread into all the severall parts of the Countrey. Whereas Pastours were tied to particular
congregations, and not commanded to preach to all the World, but to have a care of that Church, which was com∣mitted to their trust. Secondly, From Apostles hee cometh to Prophets in Prophers. this 28. Verse, though in the Ephesians, hee joynes Evange∣lists to Apostles. By Prophets here hee meaneth not such as had the gift of foretelling matters, but such as had a sin∣gular gift of interpreting (as before) and also of wisedome to apply the Scripture to present use. That this is so doth appeare, because hee here preferreth Prophecy before all other gifts, for that it makes more for edification, which commendation agreeth not to the prediction of future things; also when hee hath laid downe the Prophets office, hee adds this, that hee speakes to men to edification, to exhor∣tation, and to comfort in Chap. 14. 3. The which are all di∣stinct from predictions. Prophets therefore in this place, may bee chiefe Interpretours of the Scripture; such also as are endewed with a more then ordinary wisedome and dexterity to see into the present necessity of the Church, that they may speake properly to it. Thirdly, Teachers betweene them and Prophets, this Teachers. difference may bee noted, that the office of a Teacher stands in this, that hee maintaine and uphold sound Doctrine, that purity of Religion may continue in the Church. And Pro∣phets, hee makes those, which reveale the will of God, and apply the prophecies, threatnings, promises, and the whole Scripture fitly for the present use of the Church, as is often occasioned to bee said. Cal. As for those that hee speakes of that doe miracles, and Miracles hea∣ling. have the gift of healing, hee spake of them before; in Rom. 12. yet there hee speakes not so much of the gifts them∣selves, as the administration thereof. And as for the hel∣pers here mentioned, they were Deacons, which had care for Helpers. the poore. And the Governours they were Elders, which were the Overseers of Discipline. For the Primitive Church had a Senate, which was to Governours. keepe the Common-people in honesty of manners, which
Paul sheweth, else where when hee maketh a twofold order of Presbyters, 1 Tim. 5. 17. And the Government consisted of Elders, which were men more excellent, then others for gravity, experience, and authority. Calv. Lastly, Vnder diversity of tongues hee comprehends, both the knowledge of tongues and the gift of interpre∣ting. These were distinct gifts, for sometimes, one spake with many tongues, and yet did not understand the lan∣guage of that Church where hee was; this defect Interpre∣tours supplied. Now seeing, all were not Apostles, nor all Prophets, they were not all Teachers, &c. Therefore, they should be helpers one to another, and not jarre, not proudly insult, but covet every one after edification to profit the Church with the gifts God hath given him. 6. Ephes. 4. 11. Here the Apostle reckons up foure severall sorts of offices: First, CHRIST gave some to bee Apostles, which is to bee taken in a proper signification for CHRISTS twelve chosen Apostles, in whose order, Paul afterwards was. Their office was to publish the Gospell through the World as was said, to plant Churches, to erect the Kingdome of CHRIST, all abroad, and so had not proper congrega∣tions. Secondly, The next to these Apostles were Evangelists, and their office was like the other Apostles, onely they differed in respect of dignity. Of this sort were Timothy and such like. For though Pal joyne him to himselfe in his salutations, yet hee doth not make him his companion in the Apostleship, but claimeth this as peculiar to himselfe. Next unto the Apostles, yet the Lord made use of the la∣bours of these. Thirdly, Betweene these two, Paul interposeth Pro∣phets, which are as those in 1 Cor. 14. Famous Interpre∣tours of the Scripture, which also made application for pre∣sent use. Fourthly, Pastours and Teachers; By Teachers or Do∣ctours,
hee here meaneth Interpretours of Scripture, to keepe up soundnesse of Doctrine, and he may bee a Teacher, which is not appointed for Preaching. Pastours are such, as had the charge of certaine congregations. Not, but that sometimes one man may bee both, but the gifts are diverse. Onely these two latter, are perpetuall, without whom there can bee no Government of the Church, Calv. Com. ibid. 7. 1 Tim. 3. In the first verse, the Apostle sheweth, what a speciall care must bee had in chusing Ministers to so excellent a worke, as to personate the Sonne of God, to build up the Kingdome of CHRIST, to take care for mans salvation, which CHRIST hath bought with his pretious bloud, and to governe the Church which is GODS owne inheritance. And though they are here called Bishops, yet the name is but the same with Ministers, or Pastours, or Presbyters. These must bee such as are apt to teach, Verse 2. not onely to have learning in them, but also the gift of teaching. They must have volubility of tongue, and it must bee such as is fit for edification, and they must have skill to apply matters for the use of the people. Againe, hee must take care for the Church of GOD, Verse 5. for the gover∣ning of it, and carry himselfe, as that hee may not bee con∣temptible in the family, much lesse in the Church. These must bee such for their conversation, as that they which are without, even the very Infidels may bee forced to acknow∣ledge them honest men. Then in Verse 8. &c. Hee speaketh of other Church Ministers, which are the Deacons, which exercise a publike office in the Church, though not to teach, and sheweth what ones they must bee. These were such Deacons as Luke mentioneth, in Act. 6. 3. which had the care of the poore, and what their office was, Calvin shew∣eth fully in his Institutions. 8. 1 Tim. 5. 17. to 23. Let the Elders that rule well, bee counted worthy of double honour, especially, they which labour in the word and doctrine. This place is most cleere, that there Elders of two sorts. were two sorts of Elders, scil. Teaching, (or rather Exhor∣ting)
and Lay-elders. This is the ground of our foresaid course in the greatest part of it. For here, hee sheweth the Church Governours to bee some ruling, and some both ru∣ing and labouring in the word and doctrine; the latter be∣ing assisted by the former, and the former directed by the latter. Both were much to bee honoured with double ho∣nour, which is maintenance and reverence according to Chrysostome: Paul preferreth those, that labour in the word and Doctrine above the other. And those two words, word and doctrine, signifie one thing, to wit, the preaching of the word. But they were not so to be accounted off, except they ruled well; wherefore wee hope the refusing of them that hitherto have demeaned themselves unworthily, or not laboured in the word and doctrine, is but according hereto by the rule of contraries. They are not to bee better accounted off, nor provided for, then is aforesaid in their allowance. Though, Paul calleth the Church Governours Pres∣byters or Elders, yet it is not so much, because of their age, as in regard had to their office. Those that onely ruled, and had not the office of teaching, were cerraine grave, honest, approved men, chosen out of the people, which were to execute Discipline with the Pastours by a common consent and authority, and they were as Censours for correction of manners, as Calvin commenteth. Ambrose also complai∣neth that this custome did begin to grow out of use through  the slothfulnesse of the Teachers, or rather through their pride, who would bee alone in ruling without the Lay∣elders assistance. Then the Apostle sheweth the maintenance of these, Mainte∣nance. especially of the Teaching Elders. For it is an ungratefull World that maintaineth not the bodies of such as feed their Soules with Manna from Heaven. Sathan labours to de∣prive the Church of the word and doctrine by affrighting men from undertaking the waight of this office for feare of poverty and want. But the Oxe must not bee mouselled that treadeth out the corne; For the Labourer is worthy of his
reward. It were an inhumane part not to have care of them, that have the care of the whole Church. 9. Tit. 1. Wholy especially, Verse 5. where Paul saith, Hee left Titus in Creet, that hee should continue to redresse things that remaine, and ordaine Elders in every City as hee had appointed him Paul himselfe had begun to lay the foun∣tion in Creete, and afterwards left Titus to finish it. For some would have overthrowne the Government of the Church, which Paul beganne to lay, and would have cor∣rupted the Doctrine also. Some through ambition would have thrust in themselves to bee Pastours. Others under colour of Mses Law, brought in many trifles. But against these, Paul armeth Titus, shewing what man∣ner of Ministers hee ought to chuse; cheifely requiring, that they bee men of sound Doctrine; that they may resist the Adversary. Also they must bee unreproveable, that is, with∣out all infamy, whereby their authority might bee dimi∣nished. Hee calleth them GODS Stewards. For that they have the dispensation of his gifts. They must bee righteous towards men, and holy towards GOD▪ They must bee such as hold fast the faithfull Doctrine even in times of tri∣all. 10 Lastly, Rev. 2. 2. CHRIST saith to the Minister of the Church of Ephesus, I know thy workes, and thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not beare them, that are evill, &c. That is, grossely evill, though hee did beare much with mens humane frailties. Thus having given some insight into such Scriptures, as treat of this subject, they all seeme, and truly doe tend this way that wee point at. Whosoever possesseth himselfe  well with the course in the reading of it, and then considers of the same in reading these Scriptures, may see they close in together one with another. In perusing these Scriptures, consider what was extraordinary and temporary, and so ended with those extraordinary times, the which are easie to discerne: and those that were ordinary and perpetually to remaine, being thought of a part by themselves; the fore∣said
course may easily appeare to bee consonant to them. How this will seeme to every Reader (into whose hands it may fall) wee know not; any thing may be carped at, the mind of the Reader is all. But whosoever hee is, wee beg of him to looke to CHRIST his owne institution of Ec∣clesiasticall Ever looke to Christs Institution. Government. Hee being Master of the house, would not leave it without order. Some Doctrines are hu∣mane Doctrines as Paul calleth them, because they suite to mans disposition. So there are humane orders and govern∣ments devised by men, which may seeme lesse liable to ex∣ception; farre more plausible, but our eye must bee on the primitive Institution. Some plead for the Episcopacy still, some for the paring of the abuses, and let the substance stand; would wee but looke well to the Institution, and study the point throughly, wee should all looke one way. Papists may tell us of many faigned Sacraments, and shew much re∣semblance, betweene what they call the thing signifying, and the thing signified, and a fairer face, happily they may put on the faigned ones then on the true, but it is the very point of Institution that discriminateth all. So it is in Ec∣clesiasticall Government. All must bee brought to this Touch-stone, and that let us account for adulterate, and he∣torogeny, that is not consentaneous to primary Institu∣tion. Besides those extraordinary Embassadours of God, the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, which were but tem∣porary, 3. From Rea∣son. there are but these three other orders (already men∣tioned) in the Church of the new Testament, which are to continue for ever, viz. First, Bishops or Pastours, and Tea∣chers of Gods word. Secondly, Presbyters or Elders par∣ticularly so called. Thirdly, Deacons, or the Church Trea∣surers and Bestowers of almes, and such gifts as were given to the Church. For as there are three chiefe objects of Church Go∣vernment First, From the objects. which ever continue, scilic. First, The word and Sacraments. Secondly, The administration of Disci∣pline, for the Reformation of life and manners. Thirdly,
The care of the poore, sickly and afflicted ones. So likewise ought there to bee three ordinary degrees of men to bee oc∣cupied about the Government of the Church thus. Touch∣ing which you have seene, Act. 6. and 13. and 14. 1 Tim. 3. and 5. Tit. 1. wholy. Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 12. Ephes. 4. &c. Conr. Vorst. anti. Bellar. pag. 197. Other reasons were pointed at before, as, man con∣sisteth 2. From the parts of man. of soule, (which hath mind and will) and body, which must bee ordered and provided for, &c. So God hath set out Teachers for the mind, Pastours for the will, and one to doe both; where both Teachers and Pastours can∣not distinctly bee had. And Lay-elders and Deacons for the body. All which is in the proposed course. It was also pointed at before, that one Government was 3 From the State of the Church. for the foundation of the Church at first, another for the continuance of the Church; wee must not thinke of the Apostles having Successours, these wee enlarge not, they are plaine of themselves. From the Testimonies of most Orthodox Authours that 4. From Au∣thours the best. have written fully of this subject, and doe accord generally with this course in one consent. Polan. Sintag. pg 537. No other Ministers are to bee constituted, or if they bee, none are to bee received, but such as CHRIST himselfe ordained by his Apostles. For (saith hee,) there can bee no better Government of the Christian Church now, then that which CHRIST him∣selfe ordained by his Apostles, therefore, in such wee must rest as the Apostles (according to CHRISTS will) set over the Church. Of these (saith hee,) some had the charge of Spirituals, Spirituall. some of Corporals, quoting Rom. 12. 6. 7 8. Those which had the charge of Spirituals, were some over Doctrine,  some over Discipline. The office of such as were over Do∣ctrine, was to teach and interprete Scripture. These Sy∣nechdochically were called Prophets, because they did open and expound the sense of the Scriptures of the Prophets for common edification, exhortation, and consolation of all, 1 Cor. 14. 1. 3.
These which were over the Doctrine were some Pa∣stours, Pastors. some Teachers, Ephs. 4. 11. Act. 13. 1. The Pastours were such as were over a particular and certaine congre∣gation, as part of the Church of CHRIST, Act. 20. 17. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. Ier. 23. 4. These are called Bishops. Bishop is the name of office, and the office is to attend the lck committed to him. According to Cajetan, upon Act. 20. 28. Pastours then are particular Bishops of a par∣ticular congregation, whereas the Episcopacy of the Apo∣stles, (that were extraordinary men for the first setling of the Church) was universall and generall. These Bishops are also called Presbyters or Elders, Act. 20. 17. 28. whom Paul calleth Elders, in Verse 17. hee calleth Bishops in Verse 28. The like is in, Tit. 1. 5. 7. Ideo jure Divino iidem sunt Presbyteri, qui Episcopi: quod ip∣sum Cajetan. etiam jus Canonicum docet, Dist. 93. cap. legimus. Where∣fore Presbyters and Bishops by Gods law are equall, that is, they administer the same office, in the same manner, and with the same authority: So that (saith hee,) the Church of God which in respect of its head, scil. The Lord IESUS CHRIST, is a Monarchy, ought to bee governed Aristo∣cratically by Bishops and Pastours, which are equall in pow∣er, though they may differ in distinct functions, and degrees, for order and government of the Church; whence it was, that the Presbyters had the power of imposition of hands in ordaining Pastours, 1 Tim. 4. 14. Can. Presbyt. Dist. 23. Indeed, after the Apostles times to prevent Schismes, one of the Presbyters was some what preferred above the rest, which afterward was. , called Episcopatus, or Antistes. But primarily it was not so; For as all the Apo∣stles of CHRIST were equall in dignity, authority, juris∣diction, and power. Ambros. Com. upon the third Chapter to Cor: Peter himselfe had no Primacy, or Monarchy a∣mongst them: Neither was hee the universall Apostle, but the Government of CHRISTS Church was given to e∣very one of CHRISTS Apostles, by equall power and
jurisdiction, Matth. 28. 19. Io. 20. 21. 2 Cor. 11. 28. So all Bishops are the Apostles Successours in the office of feeding the Church, as Aacletus writeth, Dist. 21. C. In novo. The Apostles being deceased, the Bishops succeeded in their place. And Hier. as is cited, Dist. 35. C. Ecclesiae. If wee bee in the Apostles stead, let us not onely imitate their words, but also follow their conversation. And Ʋr∣banus secundus, ex Augustino Dist. 68. C. Quorum vices, speaketh in this manner, Pro Apostolis filii nati sunt tibi: Constituti sunt Episcopi. Yet this distinction must diligent∣ly bee noted in this place, how the Apostles had Successours, how not. Peter, Andrew, Iohn, and the rest of them in the Apostleship are considered, either as Pastours, or as Apo∣stles. As Pastours, they have Successours; as Apostles, they have none. And so the quoted Authours are to bee under∣stood. Every Bishop then, (that is, every Minister,) is a Successour of Peter, who preach the same Doctrine which Peter did. Non habent enim Petre haereditatem, qui Petri fi∣dem non habent, quam impia divisione discerpunt, saith Ambros. de paenit. lib. 1. cap. 6. which is cited in the Canon Law de paenit dist. 1. cap. potest. Whosoever therefore doth not teach and follow the same Doctrine which Peter preached, is no Successour of Peter. All Bishops are equall therefore amongst themselves, in respect of their office of feeding, that is, of teaching and ad∣ministring the Sacraments, and of binding and loosing. This the same Canon Law teacheth, Dist. 93. cap. legimus. Yet for the preservation of order and Ecclesiasticall Go∣vernment, when divisions did arise, the Church at length, long after the Apostles, somewhat preferred one before o∣thers to keepe them within limits, Et coercere, . And as the same Authour saith, It is true indeed, all Pastours are Bishops, and were commonly so called; Act. 20. 28. Phil. 1. 1. Yet in succession of time, hee that was before his other fellow Collegues for order sake, was called a Bishop, the rest Presbyters. But how this came at length, let us learne out of Hier. in cap. 1. Epist. ad Tit. &
in Epist. ad Evagrium, where hee affirmeth, Before there were factions in Religion, a Presbyter and a Bishop were both one; and the care of the Church was equally divided amongst many, it was governed by the common advise of Presbyters e∣qually. But when Schismes and divisions did arise, it was de∣creed, that one of the Presbyters should bee elected, and in every Church bee set over the rest, and was called a Bishop or overseer. But (saith hee,) This subjection of Presbyters under Bishops, and majority of Bishops above Presbyters did grow rather by  the custome of th Church, then by the truth of the Lords dispo∣sition, for they ought to rule the Church in Common, for thus to exalt one was not the Lords ordinance: but the contrary, according to which David consulted with the Laity as well, as with the Priests and Levis, to bring up the Arke of God, 1 Chron. 13. 1. 2. 3. Hezechiah concerning the keeping the Passeover tooke counsell, not with the Priests onely, but with the Princes and all the congregation in Jerusalem; 2 Chr. 30. 1. 12. And afterwards, the brethren in the great counsell at Ierusalem were not shut out, while the Apostles and Elders came together to consider of a great controversie in Divinity, and to make decrees; but when they were sent forth they passed under their owne name, and the name of the brethren also; Act. 15. 6. 22. 23. Thus then wee should looke still to the first institution, and rather follow that, then that which at first a little digressing, runne head long on into one mischiefe after another insuffe∣rably. Thus they write of Pastours. Touching Teachers, the best Authours call them Doctors Teachers. of Divinity, and write of them in this manner, to wit, Do∣ctores Theologiae sunt, qui in id tantum incumbunt, ut sincera Doctrina inter fideles retineatur. Ergo non ampliús quám docent: nec tamen alia docent quàm Pastores, sed tantum aliter quia non student movendis affectibus. Pastores circa scientiam & conscientias hominum occupantur: Doctores praecipuè circa scientiam. These were chiefely in the Vniversities. Neither Pastour nor Teacher ought to have civill and worldly Dignity: Ambrose on 2 Tim. 2. 4. No man that
warreth (as a good souldier of CHRIST,) intangleth him∣selfe with the affaires of this life, but that hee may please him, who hath chosen him to bee a souldier. Manifestum est quod dicit, quia nemo potest duobus Dominis servire. Negotia enim secularia avaritiae erviant necesse est. And the same Ambrose saith a little after, Ecclesiasticus autem idcirco Deo se probat, x. ut huic devotus officium impleat, quod perpendit, in Dei rebu solicitus, à seculari negotio alienus. Non enim convenit unum duplicem professionm habere. Also Hieron. Comparatione mi∣litantium utitur, ut ostendat multò magis nos à secularibus negotiis liberos esse debere, ut Chisto placeamus: quum etiam seculi milites a reliquis actibu vacent, ut possint Imperatori suo placere perfecté. The reformed Churches goe so farre this way in this Discipline, that they have a constitution, that no Minister of the word shall practise physick professedly, least in any degree it with-draw him from his care of the Ministry. No approved example out of the new Testament, nor out of Ecclesiasticall History or Counsell, of any Minister of the word of God, that exercised any Dignity meerely ci∣vill. The examples of Popish Bishops, and Clerkes, are not to bee approved off, for they are not of Gods order, Pol. Synt. 539. Yea, these Pastours and Teachers being the Lords wit∣nesses, are not so much as to possesse superfluous terrene riches, according to Pol. pag. 537. First, Least they should bee with-drawne from the ser∣vice of God. Secondly, Least they intangle themselves with secular businesse. Thirdly, Least leaving their office and care of soules committed to them, they doe things unbeseeming the Mi∣nistry. Fourthly, They ought to meditate on Heavenly things, rather then on Earthly. Let us proceed and see next what they say of Discipline, Discipline. namely, That there are two sorts of Elders: Some over
both word and Discipline, others onely over Discipline, 1 Tim. 5. 17. Of the latter they write thus; Moderatores Disciplinae sunt viri pii & graves ex plebe delecti, & Episcopis seu Pastoribus tanquam Adjutores adjuncti, ut communio Ec∣clesiae tanto melius conservetur. Ac de is agitur, Rom. 12. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Presbyterorum Collegium vocatur Presby∣terium, & vacatur etiam Ecclesia representativa particularis. Officium est, Disciplinam Ecclesiae regere, omnibus in officio o tentis, aut si semel abducti fuerint, ad illud revocatis. Idque in omnibus Disciplinae capitibus tum essentialibus, tum acci∣dentariis. Essentiala sunt, quae omnino in Ecclesiae recta ad∣ministratione sunt necessaria & velut fundamentalia. Cujus∣modi  sunt ordo quidam in Ecclesia quae est Domus Dei, legi∣timae vcationes Personarum, velut Pastorum, Doctorum, Presbiterorum, Diaconorum, & carundem; Si munere suo non recte sungantur abdicationes; censurae item Ecclesiasticae. Ac∣cidentaria sunt accessoria quaedam, quae pro▪ temporum, perso∣narum & locorum ratione statuuntur, & necessitate vel uti∣litate postulante mutari possunt; Pol. Syn. 539. 540. What hee writeth of Deacons, &c. is likewise sutable Deacons. to our foresaid course, as is to bee seene in ibid. pag 540. though wee stand not to relate it, for wee should but Actum agere. Moreover, the power of Church-meetings, is described Power of Church mee∣tings, what? thus; Potestas Conventuum Ecclesiasticorum est jus quod Deus Ecclesiae dedit, ut fidls in nomine Christi convenirent ad com∣munem suam aedificationem. Of this CHRIST speakes, Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. An example of this, is in Luk. 24. 53 Pol. Syn. 541. These Church meetings, they divide into three sorts, 3. Sorts. (besides their ordinary weekely meetings every Lords day for publike worship. First, Consistorium Ecclesiasticum, & est caetus in quo Presbyteri Ecclesiae unius conveniunt ob negotia Eccle∣siastica. Secondly, Colloquium Ecclesiasticum, & est caetum in quo
vicinarum Ecclesiarum deputati conveniunt, ut negotiis Ec∣clesiam spectantibus colloquantur & deliberent. Thirdly, Concilium Ecclesiasticum, est Synodus Eccle∣siastica, &c. Reverend Calvin also touching these things, saith: It is necessary for the preservation of peace, that every one bee appointed what hee shall doe, least all runne on heapes and make tumults up and down; uncertainely without a calling, all flocking to one place, and leave other Churches void. Every Pastour should bee content with his owne limits, and not breake out into another mans charge. Neither (saith hee) is this an humane invention, but of Gods appointment. For wee read, that Paul and Barnabas made Presbyters in all the Churches of Lystra, Iconium and Antioch, Act. 14. 21. 23. And Paul commands Titus, that hee ordaine Elders in every Towne, Tit. 1. 5. Else where hee mentioneth, the Bishops which were at Philippi, Phil. 1. 1. And Archippus the Bishop of Colosse, Col. 4. 17. A famous Sermon is related, which Paul made to the Presbyters or Elders of the Church, Act. 20. 17. 18. &c. Every one therefore undertooke the cure and government of his owne con∣gregation, and knew himselfe bound to it by the Law of God calling him thereunto. From thence hee was not to remove for his owne commodity, nor of his owne mind, but there to abide except publike Authority for a publike god remove him. Calv. Inst. l. 4. 3. 7. Againe saith hee, Though every Pastour have a severall congregation assigned to him, yet it is not denied, but one which is tied to one, may helpe other neighbour Churches, if any divi∣sion  arise which rquireth his presence, or if his counsell bee re∣quested in some matter of difficulty, ibid. And touching assistants, hee presently addes; There were also ruling Elders chosen out of the people who together with the Bishops had the censuring of manners, and the execution of Discipline. And that of the Apostle in Rom. 12. 8. cannot bee interpreted otherwise. Let him that ruleth doe it with dili∣gence. Every congregation therefore, even from the beginning, had a Senate of their owne, consisting of godly, grave, holy men;
and the jurisdiction for the correction of vice was in their power. Experience it selfe sheweth, that this was not the order of one  age onely, but is a Government necessary for all ages, Calv. Inst. l. 4. 3. 8. Furthermore, touching Elections: Potestas electionum Elections. vocationumque, est jus quod tota Ecclesia habet in eligendis sibi vocandisque Ministris probatis atque idoneis, & in ordinem sacrum cooptandis. Pol. Syn. 542. The Church ought to have an exact and accurate care of this liberty not to loose it, but to contend, as for the faith, so for this: as Chrysost. Hom. 11. on Ephes. saith, For no man ought to take on him any Ecclesiasticall function, without a lawfull election and vocation. Hebr. 5. 4. 5. 6. No man taketh this honour to himselfe, but hee that is called of God, &c. It is further added, De ritu praesentandi: Qui ab Ecclesià liberis suffragiis electus fuerit, demum à Pastoribus Ecclesiae accipit ordinationem Ecclesiasticam. Et ordinatio Ecclesiasti∣ca est per sonae examinatae & liberis suffragiis electae, approba∣taeque ad functionem obeundam introductio & confirmatio. Haec ordinatio fiere debet à solis Pastoribus, praesente toto Ec∣clesiae caetu, cui is qui confirmatur, ministrare debet: jus autem, consensus: votum, nomen, approbatio, & authoritas ordinationis illius est totius Ecclesiae. Graviter itaque peccant, qui plebem Ecclesiaflicam ab electionibus Ministrorum plane arcent, Pol. Synt. pag. 544. Touching deciding controversies: Potestas judicandi Controver∣sies. controversias religionis est, jus ac donum quod Deus Ecclesiae dedit in controversiis religionis dijudicandis, explicandis, & decidendis, 1 Cor. 14. 29. 30. 31. 32. Cum causa aliqua difficilior requirit, plures conjunctim judicare possunt, legitimam vocationem habentes; non tantum Episcopi sed etiam alii periti Christiani, qui doctrinâ & experientiâ valent, & sensus exer∣citatos habent cujuscùnque ordinis erunt, &c. Idautem facere possunt vel in Presbyterio, vel in Colloquio, vel in Synodo. Pol. Synt. 544. Norma autem judicandi, est sacra Scriptu∣ra, ibid.
Touching Order thus: Potestas ordinis Ecclesiastici, est ju Order. à Deo Ecclesiae datum constituendi ordinem & politiam Eccle∣siae, facientem ad communem fidelium aedisicationem. Hac po∣testate Ecclesia constituit tum ceremonias externas ad cultum Dei deventer peragendum utiles: tum externam morum formam homini Christiano convenientem. Decreta ita{que} super politia Ecclesiae, appellari consueverunt Canones Ecclesiastici; Histor. Tripart. l. 2. c. 14. Tuching the authority of the Church, thus: Potestas ju∣risdictionis Authoriy. Ecclesiasticae, est jus à Deo Ecclesi datum tuendi Ecclesiasticam Disciplinam in offendiculis judicandis & tol∣lendis. Estque vel communis vel propria. Communis, cui sub∣esse omnia membra Ecclesiae debent nullo excepto. Haec appel∣ltur potestas clavium vel ministerium Ambres. l. 3. de Spiri∣tu sancto, . 19. 2 Cor. 13. 10. Etsi potestas dicitur, verum non alia nisi ministerialis. Claves sunt duae, Doctrina & Disci∣plina. Partes potestatis sunt Ligatio & solutio. Ligatio est Privata vel Publica. Privata, quae fit privatim à Presbyteris. Estque vel Admonitio vel Abstentio. Admonitio est repre∣hensio seu objurgatio severa cum lenitate Spiritus temperata. Estque vel Domestica, quum quis ab uno aliquo vel altero Pres∣bytero privatim admonetur, Act. 20. 20. 26. Istas privatas  admonitiones exercebunt alii Presbyteri, qui non laborant in sermone & doctrinâ; vel Presbyterialis, quum is qui peccavit ad Capitulum, seu Presbyterorum Collegium vocaetur, & ibi coram toto Collegiode peccato suo à Pastore admonetur & ar∣guitur, quò acrius pungatur. Nominatur ab aliis, Admonitio consistorialis, quia conventus Presbyterorum ab iisdem con∣sistorium appellatur. Abstentio est, quum Pastor Ecclesiae in Capitulo seu consistorio Presbyterorum interdicit delinquenti usum sacrae coenae, donec rescipiscentiam testetur. Publica ligatio est, quae publicè in universae Ecclesiae caetu usurpatur à Pastore adversus cum, qui publico aliquo flagitio enormi offendiculum dedit. Et sic de caeteris. Censurae Ecclesiae omnes Christiani subjecti sunt cujuscunque ordinis. Pol. Synt. 544. 545. Pro∣pria jurisdictio est, cui Episcopi Ecclesiae, & caeteri Ecclesiastici subjecti sunt peculiari ratione, &c. ibid. 546.
Lastly, to conclude this third testimony, wee referre you to profound Zanchius (as one of our learnedest Prelates calleth him,) on Ephes. 4. 11. who gathers this Doctrine thence, That CHRIST hath ordained many degrees of Mi∣nisters, but none to excell the rest in authority and power, &c. For if CHRIST had done so, seeing it is a matter of such moment, Paul certainely would have mentioned it here, seeing on purpose, hee here discourseth of the chiefe orders of Ministers, which CHRIST ordained in his Church. But neither here nor else where, doth hee make any men∣tion of any such, though hee often speake of the Ministry, and Ministers of the Church; as Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Tim. 3. and 5. &c. Yea, see Con. Vorst. pag. 197. who though hee was suspected for his owne judgement, yet that one worke of his, is received of all Orthodox judgements, for hee shewes not his owne opinions, but collecteth the judgement of our Orthodox Writers, and for his faithfulnesse therein, hath beene approved of the best Divines, England lately had, and of some, or all in the present convocation▪ And that, which hee hath collected is, Evangelici, generatim omnes, de ordini∣bus Ministrorum Ecclesiae, ita statuunt: ut praeter extraordi∣narios illos Dei legatos puta Apostolos, Prophetas, & Evange∣listas, qui temporarii fuerunt tres alios in Ecclesia N. T. per∣petuos ordines agnoscant: nempe, Primó, Episcopos sive Pastores, ac verbi Ministros. Secundó, Presbyteros sive Seniores, in spe∣cie dictos. Tertió Diaconos, sive Ecclesiastici aerarii, & eleëmo∣synarum oeconomos, &c. Haec est brevis & expedita sententia nostrorum, de ordinibus Ministrorum Ecclesiae: tot videlicet, esse ordines seu gradus S. Ministerii perpetuos, quot olim à Christo, & Apostolis instituts fuerunt, quot que ipsum Ecclesiae regimen necessario postulat: nempe, tres illos supra exposites: quippe quorum usus in Ecclesia perpetuus est, & de quibus ex∣pressa Scripturae testimonia habemus: caeteros autem vel non verè sacros. vel omnino superfluos & otiosos, vel denique noxios ac pernitiosos esse, ibid. 198. This the Doctrine of the Government of CHRISTS
Church, which is written in our Bookes, professed and maintained by the best, and openly preached in our Pul∣pits, as much, as may bee suffered; an horrible restraint hath hitherto lien upon us, too much pusilanimity hath possessed the best: But now we hope, these long silenced truths will lispe no longer, but cry aloud and spare not. Lastly, wee shall confirme the premises by answering 5. From ∣veall of . such Objections, as may bee made against it. They which are but weake, and so for the most part shall have briefe an∣swers. Why have you not spoken, and preached more of this all  this while, if it bee a constitution of CHRIST, or written of it, as now you doe? It hath beene a truth long committed to writing, and is . extant in our bookes as you see. As for the pressing of it in the times wee have had, wee could not conceive to doe good by it, as now. CHRIST in Matt. 16. 20. char∣geth his Disciples, that they should tell no man that hee was CHRIST, on which place Musculus sheweth, all truths are not to bee spoken at all times, for the knowledge of the truth hath its degrees, and its times, out of which nothing must bee brought to bee unfruitfull. Hereupon the Wise∣man saith There is a time to bee silent, and a time to speake. This seemeth, but a ridiculous course in many parts and  passages of it? So doth preaching, it is the folishnesse of the World, &c. Sl. yet it's the ordinance of CHRIST for salvation, Mark. 16. 16. So is this CHRISTS owne institution, as is shewed, therefore beware of such objections. Would you then have an equality in all Ministers? There may bee much difference in regard of Dignity, not  of Empire; Calv. on Matt. 16. 19. It is strange, the Church hath erred herein so long, and so  many reverend Bishops and Fathers so much mistaken? They knew it to bee an humane institution, and not of  CHRIST disposition, as Bishop Bilson confesseth out of Hierome, in his 12. Chap. of his perpetuall Government
of CHRISTS Church, yet permitted it. Bigamy and Po∣ligamy were suffered long. You seeke to promote your selves? Wee are sorry, if the premises argue so much; Ministers  are servants, it's not for them to contend for Lordship and Empire. None that ever knew, CHRIST will take us for his followers then, wee rather consider the Church con∣sisteth not of one sort of men onely; it is not, wee of the Clergy alone that make the Church, wee would therefore have the rest to have an hand herein as well, as our selves. Wee are ashamed any of us hitherto have usurped more then Ministry, that is service. It is dangerous to alter so setled a Government of so  long continuance? Looke upon other reformed Churches, who have shaked  off such Government without perill. Let us rather thinke it dangerous to retaine any Antichristianity, but out it, lest it extirpate us. Where is any president for this, shall wee bee singu∣lar? Wee are rather singular as wee are, and different from,  and more backward herein then, other reformed Churches. What a president did the King of Denmarke give in his Kingdome? Nay in our owne Kingdome, did not King Henry beginne well in setting upon the Abbots and Priours in his dayes? And did not Queene Elizabeth follow well in her time? and shall wee make no progression? rather strike a third blow to pay for all, the which doubtlesse will bee for eternall memory to our renowned King and States assembled. Is it not well to reduce the Government to the purest  times of Queene Elizabeth, shall wee not content our selves therewith? Though much then was done, yet shall wee in 80. yeares  after shew no proceedings? this not the growth that is expected. See what CHRIST saith to the seven Churches of Asia, Rev. 2. and thinke what occasion hee hath to
speake to us off. When hee cometh against us with an ar∣my, wee are not able to meet him, it is our wisedome to send treaties of peace, and give him quiet possession of his owne inheritance. Oh would not any Master of a Family take it ill to bee locked out of doores by the servants hee trusted his keyes with? and to beate their fellow servants? hiding their talents, and bring nothing forward? Many other formes seeme more likely then this. By this  course, wee feare every Parish, or at least, every hundred would vary, so as that wee should have great diversity of Government, which is most dangerous and scandalous? Many seem, and are not. Errour seemes more plausible  then truth; witnesse, Popery in many points. Our maine businesse is to looke to the originall and primary institution, and let that decide all, if that bee against us wee yeeld; if for us, wee humbly sue for audience; this is the very Apex of the controversie. As for varieties and diversities of Govern∣ment, &c. as is said already, the present Parliament is to prescribe one forme for all, which is to bee observed in eve∣ry hundred and Parish. But is this the onely regiment of the Church, thus to bee  ruled by an Ecclesiasticall Government alone, is this your drift? Nothing lesse, though this objection had not beene raised,  our purpose was to shew the Civill Government of the Church, also as well, as wee have the Ecclesiasticall. And this wee crave leave now to doe that wee may not bee mistaken. The Civill Government of the Church is, the corporall Civill Go∣vernment of the Church. Government thereof under the Civill Magistrate, to whom God will have his Church in subjection in this World, for the preservation of outward peace and quietnesse. Rom. 13. 1. Let every soule bee subject to the higher powers, &c. Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to bee subject to Principalities and powers, to obey Magistrates. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it bee to the King as Supreme, or unto Governours sent by him, &c.
From this subjection no man is exempted, though hee bee an Apostle, though hee bee an Evangelist, though hee bee a Prophet. 1. All Churchmen ought to bee subject to the secular All in subje∣ction, and why? Magistrate, in respect of the outward and Civill rule, and that for these reasons. First, God hath required it of them. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, &c. Rom. 13. 1. Wherefore the Civill power of the Magistrate over the Church is of Divine right, not humane, nor customary. Secondly, In the time of the old Testament, the Priests were in subjection to the Kings. Thirdly, CHRIST himself & his Apostles, and their god∣ly followers were subject in temporall things to the secular Magistrate▪ CHRIST paid tribute to Caesar, was judged before Pilate. So was Paul the Apostle before Festus, Fe∣lix, and Nero the Emperour. And Paul doth not appeale from Festus the chiefe Ruler to Peter the chiefe of the A∣postles, but to the Emperour Nero. Augustine confesseth himselfe subject in his Exposition on the Romans, Num. 72. So doth Policarpus of Smyrna, Euseb. Histor. Eccl. l. 4. c. 15. 2. They ought to bee subject in all things, which Kings And how▪ shall appoint in Ecclesiasticall order according to the will of God, as outward decency and matters indifferent. Thus the Priests and Levits were subject to the order which Da∣vid appointed, and which Solomon after established, and Hezechia and Iosiah brought into use againe afterwards. Such authority, God hath given to godly Kings Princes, and Magistrates in the Church, therefore they have the chiefe authority in their Dominions, both in respect of cor∣porall Government, and also in regard of their care for Re∣ligion, and the worship of God, as the example of Moses, Iosua, and David teach. Wherefore the Pope of Rome, with his Cardinals, false Priests, and Clergy, doe resist the will of God, while they deny subjection to be due to the Civill Ma∣gistrate.
It is necessary, the Church should have a Magistrate over her. Magistrate necessary for the Church. For first, Hee is ordained of God to defend the Church. Iudg. 2. 16. The Lord raised them up Iudges to deliver them out of the hands of them that spoild them. Secondly, Without the Magistrate, true Religion cannot long subsist. Iudg 17. 6. and 19. 1. In those dayes there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his owne eyes. A good Magistrate, that is faithfull and wise, is a good token of Gods love towards a people, as the Queene of Sheba saith, 1 King 10. 9. The Church is in the Common-wealth, as Optatus Mile∣vitanus saith. Yet this must rightly bee understood. For Church is in the Com∣mon-wealth. the Church and the Common-wealth, sometimes differ both really and respectively, sometimes onely respectively. After the ascention of CHRIST into Heaven the Church differed from the Common-wealth, both really and re∣spectively, and the manner of it was wholly separated from the manner of the Common-wealth, before the saving Doctrine of the Gospell had broken the obstinate minds and wickednesse of Infidels. But after that the darkenesse of the errour of the Gentiles was driven away, and the pro∣fession Reall die∣rence. of Christianity was received by most men, the Church was after a sort the same with the Common-wealth. For at that time, the people which made the Com∣mon-wealth, the same also were the Church, though in a dif∣ferent manner and end. Especially, then the Church & Com∣mon-wealth were all one, when the beleeving Emperours Both one. published liberty for Christian Religion, and made that a Christian Common-wealth, which before was Heathen, wherefore the beleeving Emperour, is the temporall head of the Christian people, and the Rector and temporall head of the faithfull. Though the same people bee the Church and Common-wealth, Yet differ. yet there is a difference betweene Church and Common-wealth: for the end of the institution of the Com∣mon-wealth is for the obtaining of an humane good; but the end of gathering the Church, is for the worship of In end▪
God, and for a preparation of future happinesse. Neither are the Church and Common-wealth distinguished onely by a different end, but also by their condition, institutions, and Condition. government. The Common-wealth is conversant here in this World, as in it's owne lawfull Countrey, and gets worldly wealth and the meanes of this life, obtaineth power and enlargeth it's coasts as much as it can; and be∣cause there is an outward good in it; therefore the men of the Common-wealth commonly esteeme it highly. But now the Church striveth for the price of the high calling of God in CHRIST, Philip. 3. 14. and bendeth her hopes and thoughts without ceasing to the fruition of a better life: the Church doth not possesse the outward goods of the World, but onely maketh use of them. Neither doth shee esteeme the World as her owne Countrey, &c. 1 Cor. 7. 29. 30. 31. Therefore the Church is called by another name, scil. the City of God, Psal. 87. 3. Rev. 21. 2. and shee hath her conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. shee saith with CHRIST, Ioh. 8. 30. My Kingdome is not of this World. This difference then betweene Church and Common-wealth, requireth diverse Governours: they that governe the Church are by a common name called Ministers, they that governe the Common-wealth, are called Magistrates. Both the Magistrates and the Ministers, receive their power from CHRIST, who was both King and Priest. The Magistrate receiveth the Civill power, the Ministers re∣ceive Ecclesiasticall power, CHRIST being God and Man, is the Authour of both powers. Ministers in Divine things depend not on the Magistrates, nor the Magistrates in hu∣mane things on Ministers. Both Ministers and Magistrates have the same beginning, All power from Christ. viz. from CHRIST, who saith to all Ministers in Peter, eede my sheepe, Ioh 21. 16. and to all people hee saith, Give to Caesar that which is Caesars, Matt. 22. 21. By this that hath beene said, it appeareth, that the Civill They crosse not, yet dif∣fer. and Ecclesiasticall Government resist not one another, but the one is fit for and suteable to the other. Neither yet are
they confused as Romane Bishops say, who would usurpe both Ecclesiasticall and Civill government to themselves; where∣as in the new Testament, no man ought to bee both a Mini∣ster and a secular Magistrate. Yet the Civill and Ecclesiasticall Government differ some wayes, as namely: First, The Civill Government hath authority and power Power. to compell men: the Church Government is but a service or simple ministry. CHRIST being head reserveth autho∣rity in himselfe; Luk. 22. 25. 26. Yee shall not exercise Lord∣ship, but hee that is chiefe, shall bee as him that serveth. 1 Cor. 3. 5. 21. and 2 Cor. 1. 24. and 4. 5. We preach not our selves, but CHRIST IESUS, and our selves your servants for CHRISTS sake. 1 Pet. 5. 3. The Elders must not bee Lords over Gods heritage, but examples to the flock. Secondly, The proper subject of the Civill Government, Subject. is the matters of this World, as the life, body, state, credit of the subject, &c. whereas the proper subject of the Church Government are matters holy and divine, as those which God hath necessarily required to the sanctification of our soules and consciences; and also such as the honesty and or∣der of the Church require to bee ordained and observed. A King is not properly the Rectour of the Church, but of the Common-wealth, yet hee is the Defender of the Church. The Civill power hath not onely direct authority in temporall matters, but also indirect authority for the right ordering Ecclesiasticall matters, especially over Mi∣nisters that doe not rightly performe their duty to the Church; 2 Chron. 24. 6. 8. 11. 12. Ioash gave order for the repaire of the Temple, and gave order especially to the Priests and Levits about it, that too much neglected it. 2 King. 12. 4. Iehoash likewise gave order to the Priests for the repaire of the Temple, and after required an account, and reason why it was not done. But the Ministers of the word of God are so exercised about Divine matters, that they are prohibited to meddle with secular businesse. In∣deed they may touch upon such things out of a charitable
office, but not out of any Sacerdotall power. Against this, is objected the example of the Priests of  the old Testament, and of the Prophets, who not onely touched upon the Common-weale matters, but mannaged the greatest imployments thereof? But this, they did either by expresse command from God, as  when Elisha annointed King Iehu, 2 King. 9. or by some ex∣traordinary leave, the publike safety of the State requiring it. Thirdly, The proper end of the Civill Government, is End: the preservation of Civill society amongst men: whereas the proper end of Church Government, is the preservation of the communion of Saints, Act. 2. 42. and 4 32. Fourthly, God would have his Church in this World Place. subject to the Civill Magistrate, that it might looke for its owne Kingdome in the Heavens, where at length it shall raigne, but not to rule here, till it come to its head there. The Common-wealth hath a Kingdome, which begin∣neth and endeth here in this World. Thus CHRIST would have his Church Ministry a service, not rule; thus for the difference. The good God of power so rule us all here, that wee may rule with him hereafter. For conclusion, though wee conceive, this is the truth Conclusion. according to CHRIST IESUS for the maine and sub∣stance of it, containing all the orders and particulars in it, which CHRIST instituted as essentiall and perpetuall, yet wee shall rejoyce to see it rectified in any particular circumstance by the quicker sighted. And hope this our offering towards the Lord his building, will bee accepted: Goats haire was welcome of old. Exod. 25. 4. and 35. 6. This is indeed a point, that should bee studied by such, as would and should bring in CHRISTS Government a∣mongst us, for that which any study themselves, taketh most impression in their mind. Yet herein, such should bee sure to read the soundest Orthodox Authours, for that many there are fowly corrupted, though they beare a faire shew.
Many pamphlets are thrust out, some to little purpose; some too too presumptuous, and wee feare offensive to your Honours. Wee hope this worke will no more offend, then CHRISTS owne institution of old. Wee Ministers conse∣crate the bread and wine, but by declaring the first institu∣tion of it: And how shall we declare by writing or preach∣ing the holinesse of our Church Government, but by shew∣ing the Lords own institution of it? Let us not listen to those that weave the web of their owne inventions, but cleave to CHRIST and his Gospell, having our eye mainely on CHRISTS owne institution, as in the Word and Sacra∣ments, so also in Discipline. Mightily did the word of God prevaile in the primitive Why the word workes not now. times: And some blessing, the Lord pleased to bestow on his ordinances amongst us till of late; but now since cor∣rupt Government waxed more ridged, changing the Lords ordinances and constitutions for humane inventions, the Lord hath almost wholly left his house and forsaken his heritage, because of this plague raigning and ruling in it, so that few, few now a dayes are wrought upon by the word. Which of us would or could have any joy to stay in his owne house, if we might not rule and beare sway there; but strumpets must order all, and that quite crosse to our owne minds, entertaining strange Lovers as Israell did. Which moved the Lord to leave them to themselves, and so to bee a prey to their Neighbour Nations. The maine occasion was, because they set up Kings and not by him; they erected an other Government then ever hee appoin∣ted. Alas! they which goe after humane divises, come to∣gether in their owne name, not in the name of CHRIST: Calv. on Matt. 18. 20. Wherefore now our last Pe∣tition is, that the Church may bee so ordered, that CHRIST may come into his house againe. Let Buyers and Sellers bee whiped out, if lesser adoe will not serve. Let not Bryers and Brambles any longer beare rule, but the tale Cedar and fertile Olive. So shall all the god∣ly,
that have lately hid themselves, creepe forth as Bees out of the Hive in this faire Sunny-day, and comforta∣bly labour for that, which is sweeter then the hony and the hony combe; heartily praying as to bee delivered from Tyranny so to bee kept from con∣fusion. FINIS.
