F2091 45097788 171376
The Frantick LOVER: Or, The Wandring Young-Man. With Grief and Care he is opprest, no Comfort can he find; In Nights he is disturb'd of Rest, Caus'd by his Love unkind. To an Excellent New Play-House Tune. This may be Printed, R. P. YOu are so fair and cruel too. I am amaz'd what I shall do to purchase my desire; Sometimes your eyes doth me invite. But when I enter you kill me quite, and the more encrease my fire. Long I have lov'd▪ and am abus'd, And when I offer, I am refus'd, can any suffer more? Be coy be cruel, do your worst Though for your sake I am accurst, I must and will adore. Was you as kind, as sweet and fair, No creature could with thee compare, to love I am inclin'd; But yet I understand and see. That your'e resol'd to torture me, O are you not unkind? Can you forget the vow you made, When as in solemn sort you said, I was your only joy: Yet now you will no favour show, But prove my final overthrow, and would my life destroy. Sometimes in dreams I do behold Your tresses like fair threads of gold, likewise your beauty bright; But when I waken from my rest, And find that I am dispossest, it proves my ruine quite. When first I did thy beauty see, O then thou didst appear to be an Angel in my 'eye: Like lambs together we did play, But now thine heart is drawn away tell me the reason why? Was I not only just and true, Pray let me here be try'd by you, then what may be the ▪cause That you unworthily forsake Your love and like a tyrant break, the bonds of Cupids laws. What grief of heart do I endure? 'Tis the alone can kill or cure, send me one gentle smile; Or else I through the world will range, For why my Love can never change, O do not me revile. For sure I am▪ my Love is true, Where e're I range i'll honnour you▪ in sounding forth thy praise; If I may not enjoy the Bliss, Bestow on me a pating kiss, I'll wander on  my days. He ANSWER. AM I so fair and cruel too, As has reported been by you? 'tis faulse, pray don't revile: In one you seem to flatter me, Then charge me with much cruelty, where is your love the while. You tell me that you loved long. And through me have received wrong pray is this false or true? When did the darts of my disdain, Give any reason to complain? I will be judg'd by you. When first to me you did make Suit, If then I held you in dispute, was this disloyalty? I must confess it would be brave, If young men could but ask and have, maids soon would slighted be. 'Tis not the mode for maids to wooe, Yet when we find Men iust and true, then, then we often yield: This is no more then modesty, But he that would hade more of me, shall never win the field. But if thy Heart so Loyal be, As not to fancy none but me, in all the world beside: Then I will willingly comply, In loyal Love to live and dye whatever may betide. I'le make it all my study still, To be obedient to thy will, true blessings to restore: Here in my armes I'll the infold, And prize the more then all the Gold, on the rich Indian Shore. The moan you made my heart did move, Thou shalt not wander from thy Love, whom you so much adore: And therefore now no more repine, Take Hand and Heart, I will be thine, what canst thou wish for more? FINIS. Printed for I. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street, without Newgate.
