F202 E394_15 99862129 160331
A MANIFESTO From His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, AND The ARMY under his command; concer∣ning the XI Members impeached, in the name of themselves, and the Kingdome of England. WITH Seven Propositions for the present peace, and settlement of the Kingdome; which being granted, they assure the Parliament to draw backe. PRESENTED, To the COMMISSIONERS at UXBRIDGE June 27. to be by them humbly presented to the PARLIAMENT. JUNE, 27. 1647. BY the appointment of His Excellencie Sir T. FAIRFAX and the Councel of Warre. Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secr. CAMBRIDGE, Printed for Benjamin Ridley, for the use of the Army, under his Excellencie Sir Thomas Fairfax, Anno Dom. 1647.
A MANIFESTO From his Excellency Sir Thomas, Fairfax and the Army under his Command, &c. VVHereas the Right Honourable Commis∣sioners of Parliament have desired to know from us, what things we do desire to be granted, before our drawing back the Quarters of the Army to a further distance from Lon∣don, upon the granting whereof we will ingage to draw back. We do in answered thereunto humbly propose these particulars following, as what are of present necessity to us, and we do desire at present to be granted, in order to the Armies, and Kingdomes present safety, in the further debate, transaction, and settlement of those other things contained in our former representations, and Papers, which will require, and may admit more time; Vpon the granting of which things we shall willingly draw back (as is desired) to have those other matters debated and transacted at a further distance, with deliberation an∣swerable to the nature and weight of them.
I. That the Parliament would be pleased to recall the Declaration inviting men to desert the Army, and pro∣mising their Arriers in case they do so, and to declare for future, that whoever shall desert their Cullors or charges in the Army, without the Generalls particular licence, and disearge, shall not have any of their Arriers payd them. II. That the Army may be payd up, equally to those that have deserted it: This we desire may be immedi∣ately granted, or resolved before we draw back, and to be performed (at least) to the private Souldiers fully, and sin part, to the Officers withall speede convenient. III. That those that have deserted the Army may be in∣stantly discharged, and dispersed, and receive no more of their Arriers, till the Army be first satisfied. IV. That both Parliament and City, may be speedily and effectually freed, from the multitude of reformades, and other Souldiers before mentioned, that flock together in, or about London, by a speedy dispatch and discharging of them from the City. V. That all such listings and raisings of new forces or drawing together of any (as in our Remonstrance & all our papers are exprest) and all preparations towards a new warre, may be effectually declared against, and supprest; as also all invitations & endeavours to draw in forraigne forces, either from Scotland or other forraigne parts. VI. That the continuation of the Army in the pay of the State for some competent time, (while the matter in de∣bate relating both to the Army and Kingdome, may be concluded and setled) be at present ordered and declared for, (before our drawing back) and the same with all speed to be effectually put into one established way, that the Ar∣my
may be enabled to pay Quatters for the ease of the countrey where it must lie, and the Souldiery the better kept from abuse to the Countrey, and reduced to that good order and discipline, which hath formerly been happily kept in this Army, though of late, (through want of pay, and other justdisconents which the late provocations put upon them,) unhapilie interrupted: VII. That during the same space the Parliament would resolve not to propose any place for His Majesties resi∣dence nearer to London then they will allow the quarters of the Army to be. NOw for our former desire of pre∣sent suspending the impeached Members from sitting in the House. I. Whereas we understand the House hath voted, that it doth not appeare that any thing hath been sayd or done by them within the House touching any Matter contained in the Papers from the Army, for which the House can in Justice suspend them, though (if way were given, and opened without breach of priviledge for us to charge them with, and for others to be examined freely to testifie unto such things,) we should not doubt to make such proceedings and practices of theirs in the House to appear, for which according to former Presidents, they justly might and ought to be suspended; yet wee are so tender of priviledges of Parliament, as that we shall at present forbeare, to reply or presse further upon that point for the houses proceedings therein, upon their own cognizance. 2. Whereas the house of Commons hath voted, that by the Lawes of the Land, no Judgment can bee given to suspend those Members from siing in the house upon the papers presented by the Army, before particulars pro∣duced,
and proofes made; though we thinke good reasons may be given, and presidents found to the contrary, even in the proceedings of this Parliament, as in the case of the Earl of Strafford the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, the L. Keeper Finch, and others: Yet we do declare, that wee have both particulars and proofes against them ready to produce; but considering that the procedings thereupon, wil probably take up much time: And the present unset∣led affaires of the Kingdome, in relation to these greater matters proposed by us, do require a speedy considerati∣on. We shall be willing, that those greater and more ge∣nerall matters of the Kingdome be first considered of, & setled, before the Censure of those Members be determi∣ned; And therefore because they may apprehend it some prejudice to them to have their particular Charges gi∣ven in, and lye upon the  long undetermided, we shal be willing to forbea the giving in of the particulars a∣gainst them, till they may without interruption to the ge∣nerall affaires, be immediatly proceeded upon; But if the house doe thinke fit the particulars against them bee first delivered in, we shall be ready to do it. 3. Whereas we understand, that the Members charged have desired leave from the houses to withdraw them∣selves: We cannot but take notice of the modesty thereof, so farre, as that we are contented therewith for the pre∣sent more quiet proceeding to settle the perplexed affairs of the Kingdome (which without any private animosi∣ties against persons) is our greatest end in what we doe; only wee declare, that (as wee suppose the Gentlemen themselves from the same grounds that induced them to offer this, will still forbear to offer the contra, till the matters concerning them be heard and determined, or to make any new interruption or disturbance to the pro∣ceeding upon, or setlement of the generall  of the Kingdom. So we hope and shall confidently expect that the wisdome and justice of the house, will not  any
thing to the contrary, or leave, it to an hazard thereof ut will use sufficient care and caution, against such things, & for the bringing of those Members to tryall, when the House shall judge it more seasonable and safe, as before exprest. By the appointment of His Excellency, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and His COUNCEL OF WARRE. Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secr. Vxbridge Iune 27. 1647. Vxbridge Junii 27. WHereas without Order from the Gene∣nerall, or the Councel of War, Nicho∣las Cowley Commissary Generall of provi∣sions, hath issued out Warrants to some Hundreds within lesse then a mile of Lon∣don, to bring provisions from thence into
the Army, which hee pretended to be Ran∣devouzed between London and Uxbridge; Whereas there was no such thing ordered either by the General, or his Councel of war. It is therefore this day ordered by the Ge∣nerall and his Councel of warre, that the said Commissary Cowly shal stand committed, and he is hereby committed to the Marshal, from whence he is not to be discharged, un∣till he hath given satisfaction to the Com∣missioners for the city of London residing at Uxbridge. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Councel of Warre. Signed John Rushworth, Secr. FINIS.
