F268 669.f.13[3] 99862457 162898
A Faithfull and Impartiall Relation of what passed betweene His MAjESTY, And the Com∣missioners from the two Houses, both at the delivery of their Votes for a Personall Treaty, and at their receiving His MAjESTIES most Gracious Answer. By an Eye and Eare-witnesse, who not trusting to his Memory, made use of his Pen: And for the truth of this Relation, the Relator appeales to the Commissioners themselves, or to any there present, who had the happinesse with him, to heare the most pious, most Christian Expressions, of a most Religious KING. ON Munday, Aug. 7. 1648. The Commissioners having admittance into the KING's presence, the Votes were first read, and then presented to the KING by the Earle of Middlesex, who desired His MAJESTIES speedy Answer: Telling Him, that their Returne was limited to ten dayes: The KING then askt, Whether the ten dayes were not to be counted from that of the delivery of the Message? My Lord of Middlesex answered, No, Sir, they are to be counted from the day of our setting forth. The KING replyed, I have not then five dayes allowed me to consider of my Answer, which I presume you expect in writing; And I have none to help me, no not so much as a Clarke to transcribe; however I will really contribute my best endeavours to a happy Peace.—After a short pauze, the KING said, I would have sent to the Parliament, but I desire them to take notice, that my long silence proceeded not from a dull, stupid lazinesse, or my being insensible of my owne or the Kingdomes condition; but from the Incapacity that lay on me by reason of former Votes: but now a way is opened to a Treaty, which I ever apprehended, as the onely meanes to a durable Peace: I shall cheerfully embrace it, and none shall more speedily run to it, then my selfe: And for my part, as being more concerned then any one in this Kingdome, nay should I say more then all, I speake it without vanity, I hope it will be thought no Hyperbolicall Expression, for I am assured, whoso∣ever gaines, I shall be a loser.—His MAJESTY then read the Votes to Himselfe, and having read them, said, I like them well, my desires being included in these Votes: for what can I desire more, then to Treat with Honour, Freedome, and Safety, upon the Propositions, and such other things as either I or the Houses shall offer?—His MAjESTY then askt, Whether the Commissioners to Treat were yet nominated? My Lord of Middlesex Answered, No, Sir. Then the KING said, In a Treaty, two sorts of things are considerable; some Necessary, others Convenient.—Then the KING said to them, I will goe and apply my selfe to my Answer, that I may not delay a minute to promote so good a worke: And then withdrew, and for that time dismissed the Commissioners. On Thursday, Aug. 10. the Commissioners waited on His MAjESTY to receive His Answer; and upon their entrance into the Presence, the KING said, He was sorry that He was limited to so short a time, and had so little helps for dispatch, yet notwithstanding he had prepared his Answer: And immediately before the reading thereof, used these words, That the last Message he sent to the Houses, was delivered to the Commissioners Sealed: And had it been so presented, it would have been better for him, but now he thought it fit to send this open, because he could not be in a worse Condition; being under so close a Restraint, none being suffered to speak a word to him, without suspition.—He then produced his Answer, and read it aloud in the Presence Chamber, being full of company: And after he had read it, His MAjESTY said, That he hoped he had therein indeavoured to give satis∣faction to his Parliament: There being nothing in it but what he conceived implyed in their Votes. And farther added, That there might be some that would oppose this Treaty, as being gainers by these Wars, and therefore desired the continuance of it. Others might think him revengefull, but he said he was so far from seeking revenge, That if a Straw lay in the way to hurt them, He would stoope and take it up to prevent it: And said, God forgive them, for I do: Then the Commissioners comming to take their leaves of him, He called them to him, and asked them, how they liked his Answer? They told him, They thought and hoped, it would produce a sudden and happy well-grounded Peace. August ye 22th 1648 FINIS.
