L3247B 99897835 170972
THE Dukes Desk NEWLY BROKEN VP Wherein is discovered Divers Rare Receipts of PHYSICK and SVRGERY, good for men, women and children. Together with several Medicines, to Prevent, and cure the most Pesti∣lent Diseases in any CATTEL. By W. Lovell, Gent. and Traveller. London, Printed for John Garway, and are to be sold by J. Andrews at the White-lyon neer Py-Corner.
THE Dukes Desk Newly broken up, &c. A remedy against the plague, sent to the Lord Mayor of London, by King Henry the Eight. TAke a handful of Sage, a handful of Herb-grace, a handful of Elder leaves, a handful of red Bramble leaves, stamp them all, and strain them through a fine cloth with a quart of White-Wine, and then take a quantity of Ginger, and
mingle them together, and take a spoonfull of the same, and you shall be safe for twenty four days; nine times taking of it is sufficient for a whole year, by the grace of God. And if it be so that the party be strucken with the Plague before he hath drunk this Medicine, then take the water of Scabios a spoonful, of water of Bettony a spoonful, and a quantity of fine Triacle: And put them all toge∣ther and cause him to drink it, and it will expel all the venom. If the Botch ap∣pear, then take the leaves of Brambles Elder leaves, mustardseed, and stamp them together and make a Plaister thereof, and lay it to the sore, and that shall draw out the venom, and the party shall be whole by the grace of God. A Medicine that was taught King Henry the Seventh by his Physitian, against the Pestilence. Take of Rue, Mandragories, Featherfew, Sorrer, Burnet, of each half a handful, of crops and roots of Dragons a like quan∣tity: Wash them them clean, and seeth them with a soft fire in running water, from a pottle to a quart, and then strain them
together through a clean cloath, and if it be bit¦ter, put thereto a quantity of Sugarcandy, or Sugar; and if this Medicine be used be∣fore the Purples do arise, ye shall be whole by Gods grace. For the plague in the guts in man. Take the skul of a man or woman, wash it clean, then dry it in the Oven after your bread is drawn, beat it to powder, and boil it in posset-drink, then let the party drink thereof morning and Evening, or as oft as need requireth; it is an approved Re∣medy. Mr. Bakers Medicine for the Cough of the Lungs. Take three pints of running water, half a pound of Portual Sugar, with nine figs, and half a spoonful of Annise-seeds bruised, a handful of Raisons of the Sun clean washed and stoned, a penny worth of Maiden hair; let all those boil toge∣ther, until the one half and more be boyled away, then strain them thorow a fine cloth, and every morning drink two spoonfuls of it luke-warm, and you
shall find present remedy. Probatum. For a Tetter. Take the Gum of Cherry tree and lay it in Vinigar ten days, then anoynt the Tetter there∣with. To clense the Stomack and make sweet the breath. Take Rosemary and boil it in Witewine, and drink thereof three mornings fasting, it helpeth forgetfulness, and profiteth the Wit. A Medicine to dry a Sore Take mutton Suet, and melt it, and strain it, and make thereof a Salve. To skin a sore. Take new milk and Allum, dip a cloath therein and lay it upon the sore. For all manner of Paulsies in the Hands Take small Spike both the flower and
the stemme, distil it and wash the place grieved, and the hinder part of the Neck. For Worms, Boyls, and Botches. Takes Rosemary, and eat it fasting with Bread and honey, and you shall have no Worms, Boils, nor Botches. For the Tooth-ach. Take Rosemary stalks and burn them to Coals, and put them into a new linen cloath, and rub the Teeth therewith, and if there be any Worms in them, they shall dy, and it shall keep the Teeth from all pain. For a sore Throat. Take Callenbines, and Sinkfoyle, and stamp them and boyl them together, and strain them with Milk, and drink it very warm. For a Canker in the Mouth Take a flower-Deluce root, wash it and slice it, and a few leaves of Penny∣royall lay them in steep in Conduit water, wash the mouth with the water and you
shall find present remedy. Probatum. Another for the Cough, or stopping of the breath. Take Sirrup of Horehound, of Hysop, of Li∣quorish, of each an ounce, and take thereof every morning a spoonful or two. For the hardness of the Spleen. Anoint the Spleen with the Oyl of Mastick, made of Mastick it self. For a Stitch. Take Cammomile, and make it dry between two dishes, on a chafingdish of coals, and so bind it to the place. Another for the same. Take Bread, and make a toast thereof, then crumble it and fry it with honey and Salt, and lay it hot to the place. For windiness, and weakness of the stomack. Take new bread, tost it a little, then soak it all night in Hypocrist, and eat it in the morning fasting.
For the Yellow Jaundice. Take the inner bark of a Barberry tree, and seeth it in milk, and drink it. Another for the same. Take Turmerick, and English Saffron, and drink them in Ale. To stop bleeding at the Nose. Take Comfrey, and put it into the nostrils, or receive the smoke thereof. For burning. Take the dropping of Bacon, and lay thereon. For the Piles. Take black wooll and black Sope, and bind it thereto. To remove a Disease from the stomack. Drink a quantity of Dragon water, or water Imperial, mingled with Triacle or Mithridatum. For one that is poysoned. Take green Rue, wash it and temper it with White-Wine, and give it to him to drink.
A present remedy for an Ague. Take two ounces of Baysalt, two oun∣ces of white Franckinsence and a handfull of Smallage, beaten altogether, and lay it to the wrist of the hands two hours before the fit do come. For Spitting of blood. Take Smallage and Mint, Rue and Bet∣tony and seeth them in good Milk, and sup it warm. For the pain in the back. Take Sage, Rosemary, Camomile, of each of them a handfull, then stamp them together and fry them in May Butter, and anoint the back therewith warm. For a Canker in the mouth. Take the Juice of Plantaine, Vinegar, and water of Roses, and wash the mouth there∣with. For a Sore Breast. Take Groundsel and chop it small, the grounds of small beer, and wheaten bran, and Sheps Suet beaten in a Morter, and boil them altogether and lay it to the Breast.
For a weak Stomack. Seeth Centory in fair clean water, and let the sick drink thereof luke warme nine spoon∣fuls at a time, it purifieth the Breast and Sto∣mack. For the Worms. Take a spoonful of the Syrupe of Worm∣wood, with a scruplè of Aloes. For the Stone Colick. Take a head of Garlick, roast it in the Embers, clean it, and beat it in a dish with a rouling pin, put thereto a good quantity of Pepper, then take of unsalted butter clean washed, as much as both Garlick and Pep∣per, mix them well together and make pils thereof, as big as may conveniently be swal∣lowed, roul them in nutmeg and Sugar, then take one, if that ease not, take a second at most but a third fasting, half an hour after, then take a toast, and butter it well on both sides with fresh butter put it into a pint of the strongest Ale you can get, being soak∣ed, eat the toast first, then drink the Ale, and by the help of God it shall cure young and old. For the Dropsie. Take Pills made with Aloes, Jallump,
and Honey; every day take Broth made with Veal, and Scurvey-Grass boyled in it; let your meat you eat be rosted dry, and all the other dyet as dry as you may; refrain drink as much as you may, but what you drink let it be the best. To make one sleep. Take Lettice and pound them, and wring out the Juice, and drink it. To stop a loosness. Make pap of Bean flower, and put thereto powder of Cinnamon. For a Felon. Take May butter and temper it with a little Barley flower, and Bean flower, and new yellow Wax, with a little Rosin, and make it in form of a plaister. To stay the flux. Take Ising-glass, and boil it in broth, and give the Patient to drink.
Medicines for the Cattel. For the plague in the guts of horses. TAke a piece of a horses skul dried to a powder, half an ounce, a handful of Bay-salt, a handful of Rue dryed to powder and brew them together in three pints of Ale, make it blood warm and then drench the horse therewith, but first let him blood in the Mouth. To prevent the plague in the guts. So oft as you give them Provinder, throw into it salt and rue shred small. For the Staggers and Yellows. Give him a handful of bruised Hempseed in a pint of White-Wine, but first let him blood, then ride him till he be warm, and mersh him after. For the Scratches. Beat green Coperas, and mix it with black Sope, or take Butter and Barrows grease, with Brimstone, mix them and apply it as hot as you can without scalding. For the Bots. Chop wild Mints and give it in Milk.
For the bots and worms. Give him a quart of cold Wort, and let him stand meatless all that night. For the Farcy or by some called the Farcion in a horse. The farcy commeth of the great abundance of blood, therefore you must let him blood on both sides of the neck, a hand breadth from the head, then take a gallon of fair water and put thereto a handful of salt, three handfuls of Mallows, two handfuls of Rew, one pound of hempseed, bruse all in a Morter, then seeth them till the husks be wasted, and give it him to drink, then to the out∣ward fore apply one ounce of the oyl of Ter∣pentine, one ounce of the oyl of Petre, chaffe it well in, and it cureth. For a strain in the pastorn joynt. Take a quart of Brine and boyl it till the scum arise, then strain it, and put thereto a handful of Tansey, a handful of Mallows, and three spoonful of honey, four ounces of sheeps suet, boyl them till the herbs be well-sodden, then apply it very hot to the place greived, and low a cloth over it, and it shall be sound in three days.
For the Gravelling af a horse in the foot. Cut the hoof till you can find the sore, then take one ounce of Virgins Wax, one quarter of an ounce of Rozen, as much Dear Suet half an ounce of Boares Grease, one head of Semgreen, bruse all these in a Morter, and set it over the fire till it be melted then ap∣ply it to the horse foot, spare not to travel him, for it shall cure him. For to make a horse follow his keeper, or Master. Take a pound of Oatmel, four ounces of hony, half a pound of Lurary, and make a bag there∣of, wear it next your skin, walk therewith till you sweat, then wipe the sweat with the bag, keep the horse from meat a day and night by force, then give him the things in the bag to eat, let him loose and he will follow the keeper wheresoever he go eth. For the Murrain in Cows, Oxen or such like Cattel. Thoseh that are infected, first cut off the tip of te Ear, then take the leaves of Bares-foot dried and beaten to, pouder, as much as will lye on a shilling and a
quart of Milk, brew it together and so drench therewith blood-warm. To prevent the Murrain. Run a Bodkin through the double skin that hangeth at the breast of the Beast, put therein a root of Bares-foot, and let it abide. For the Murrain in Pigs. If they are infected, drench them with Rue dryed to a power and given in Milk, then let them blood in the ear or tail. To prevent the Murrain. Run a Bodkin into the biggest vein of the Ear, inward towards the head, then put in the root of Bares-foot, and let it remain. For a sheep that hath a rising in the flanck. Run a Bodkin into it an Inch, and no more, it is a present remedy. These Receipts have been perused and approved of by divers Practitioners in Physick, especially by Mr. John Ponteus: and are Printed for the good of the Kingdom. FINIS.
