M80 E114_24 99873284 125749
CERTAIN INFORMATION FROM DEVON AND DORSET: CONCERNING THE COMMISSION OF ARRAY. August, 27. printed for H. Blunden. 1642..
LOving Brother, I desire to relate unto you something from hence. The last weeke Master Ashford came to Town with Master Culme the Sheriffe, and by all probability to reade the Commission of Array, for they brought it with them, and produced it, and made War∣rants to send abroad, for the stopping of our Mustering this weeke, and sent for our Constable to publish them, and they had some clause of the Array in them, very strange ones they were, as ever were knowne▪ But our Constable, Walter Challis, would not reade them: yet after many jeares, and proud and peremptory words of theirs, especially from Master Ashford, hee tooke one of them, and by advise, sealed it up, and sent it to Lieutenant Bamfield. Wee expected an hot day, for here was present also Master Ickland of Culme-John, of the same party, and Master Wil∣loughby of Pey-Hemby, but Master Willoughby would not set his hand to the Warrants by no meanes, but went away before them. And Master Saint-Hill sent hither his Sonne in Law, Master Hankcock, a young man that lives in house with him, we suppose to carry backe newes of what was done, for he did the like at Exon Assises the weeke before, he sent this Gentleman out to meet the Lord of Bathe when he came to Exon with his Commission. Besides, wee the more suspect Master Saint-Hill, for that he would have had in all the Armes of his Parish into his owne custody, being their Captaine: And hath in his house at
this present, three Ladies come to his house the last weeke, with some two or foure Cart loades of Provision, some say Munition too, besides much Cattle, they came out by Sherborne, and wee suppose Master Coventry is at this house, for hee sent privately to Master Sanders to be there, but he would not entertaine him because of his Chil∣dren, and we suppose him therefore either at Brad∣much, or at Master Chanons. Wee fearefully ex∣pected the Lord of Bathe here, with the Cavaliers, to second this project of Master Ashfords, and the Sheriffe: wherefore we had extraordinary Ward∣ing, and our Townes men shewed a great deale of undaunted courage, and opposed them very much, both in word and deed: and Master Prowse shw∣ed excellent valour and wisdome herein, and is made Captaine, and incites the whole Parish mightily, and taketh care for the fencing of the Towne with Walls, and Chaines, and Ordnance: Thomas Sumpter also is a very great instrument of good. Hunnington men, and Arotry are exercised to day, and so are to passe away for Sherborne▪ Taunton men are gone already, and our men are to be mustered on Thursday next, Baronet Pri∣deaux is our Colonell, wee are likely to have ma∣ny Volunteeres out of this Parish. We are very sorrowfull Marquesse Hartford is so great an ene∣my to us, my Brother can informe you of that at Sherborne better then my selfe, and of Sommer∣set I believe you have heard, and I feare we may have too much to informe you of here, for this Towne is envyed very much, both by Master
Ashford now, the Sheriffe, and the confederate Pa∣pists thereabout them, we believe, but especially by a strangers lodging here at Henry Skinners this quarter of this yeare for shelter, he answered the Justices, that hee is a Darby Shire man, and Thornecombe he named himselfe▪ but (now I thinke on it) you know him▪ by all probabilities hee should be a Jesuit, a Rebell of Ireland, or a discon∣tented Cavaliere, for he hath shewed himselfe so, and the whole Towne and Parish doe thinke so of him now▪ for the best affected at length question∣ing him, he began to bee very ffe, and told some at his going away, (which was at the beginning of the rising in the North) that he would remember them, when they did thinke he was dead and gone, and his own brother was in the head of the Rebels there, and indeed we doubt him to be chiefe of the Troopes hereabouts. Hemb-fort hath been watch∣ed day and night, fearing they should take that place, the whole Country by turne have done it: And Sir Tho: Drew is very much against this Ar∣ray, grounding on that wise mans speech in Parlia∣ment against it, and sayes it is altogether illegall, and will die upon it, and when occasion serves, we believe he will shew it, as about the Hill he hath declared his minde already, and he hath much Ar∣mour in his house, enough for 30. men at least. Master Saint-Hill sayes these Ladies are come for shelter, because of the troubles at Sherborne, but we doubt him, because of the Armes which the Parish boldly oppugne him in, and resolved to set a Watch about his house when these came. Your very loving Brother, T. M. Collomptonii, Aug. 22. 1642.
Dorset, August 22. 1642. THE Marquesse would faine remove to the King, but feares his intercepting, therefore offers the Countrey to remove if they will afford him a Guard for his safe convoy, but it will not be granted by the Counties; they have beene much prest unto it by the Justices and Gentry, for the most part of our Gentry are for the King: Wherefore the Marquesse hath given out his War∣rants this day to the Justices to bring in the Traine bands to him, or to have them in readinesse to keep the peace, he standing upon his Guard in the Ca∣stle, where he makes great provision, being in feare that he may be soone set upon by the Earle of Bed∣ford, and he hath but two pieces of Ordnance in the Castle, and about 400. very good Horse, and not aboue 100. Foot as yet come to him: I wish the Marquesse go not from thence, for that there is very great and hasty provision made and intended against him. We have 6. pieces of Ordnance in our Towne, besides 2. Morter pieces, and three small brasse pieces, and to morrow is expected 2.
great pieces more from Lyme, many Horse sent in hither, and a thousand men expected from Devon∣shire; and its thought that the Earle of Bedford will shortly be at Sherborne with neare 20000. the Marquesse is said to expect the King very spee∣dily for his assistance. Lime, Waine, and Poole doe fortifie themselves against the Cavalieres. Your very loving Brother. H. L. FINIS.
