N665A 43078097 151609
The new Married Couple OR, A Friendly Debate between the Countrey FARMER and his Buxome WIFE. Being a second Song to the Tune of, The Countrey Farmer. DEar Gill I ne'r thought until last night, that Cupid had yielded such sweet delight But when thy soft arms with mine were twin'd the Ivy the Oak, did not closer bind: Thou gav'st me sweet Kisses that might invite, in old Shepheards a new delight: Young Colin did ne'r with Mirtilla so bright enjoy such a sweet, such a pleasing night. My Nedde (quoth she) since I have thee here, I will be a Port for to please my Dear: And in the soft Circuit of thy Pale feed either upon he high Hill or Dale; Graze on my soft Lypis, if those Hills be dry stray down where Fountains lye: Thy Doe thy fair breeder, will always be nigh, to please her young Wanton with Art & Eye. Thou shalt be a Banquet to my Taste, on which, I will always delight to feast; As sweet as young Colley the Farmer Cow, as sweet as the Hay in his Barn I vow: As sweet as young Roses that all admire as may Blossoms upon the Briar: As sweet as blind midnight, with Maidens desire as sweet as Sack-Posset by Sea-Coal fire.
U bors (quoth stout Nedde) I'le forsake my dumps and brskly bestir my ol-hob-nail stumps The Iasses shall foot it, he Lads shall sing and Ecchoes all round with our Ioys shall ring: Doll sall leave Dairy and ames Brown-Cow and brisk Roger his Cart nd Plough, To met us young Nancy and William come now we shall have rare Daunces nd Iigs enow. Thouh Batchellors may live merry lives ye e will no change that have Bxom wives; Vpo the soft Pillow of their Breast e Love-sick lie warm in Cupids Nt. What though there be Cuckolds we nee not fear ur VVives always will take such car Aough the Brows, bud the Horns shant ear To make us look noble and like the Dear. I Gill should within the Curtains chide my Antlers, & head in the sheets il'e hide A when my Good Housewifes-Pot boyls ore o cool her hot Broth I'le attempt no more. It is I confess the depth of skill to lead Women by their own VVill But while her tongue gallops my Tongue shall lye still & thus I'le endeavour to please Gill, Gill. Dear Neddy (quoth Gill) name not things so soon with us 'tis but yet our Honey-Moon Come let us to please each other strive and gather like Bees within our Hive. Thou must not be like a dull Idle drone nor mind Horns for thou shalt have none: But follow, thy Plough hy Dobbin and Roan and I to my milking will go with Joan. Dear Gill there are many old Complaints all Wives that look fair dont prove all Saints For many Mens wives are like the Moon that alters each morning, each night and noon Yet for my own part, I will never fear. but try always to please my Dear If I can▪ my VVife will hold almost a year this Riddle me Riddle nine months will treat Printed for P. Brooksby at thGolden Ball in Pye Corner
