N876 38875543 152308
BEing commanded by his EXCELLENCY the Ld MARQUIS of NEW-CASTLE to publish the follow∣ing Articles for his new Course, I am first to informe you, that the worke was begun so late, and is so great, viz: the plowing of five miles in length, and a considerable bredth, with the harrowing of it twice over, and sowing it with Hay-seed to sord it, that there will be no firme riding on it before the last of July, when my Lord intends to give a Cup of 5l and the same he will do on the last of August and September, then ending the Course for this year: But the next year (if God grant his EXCELLENCY life and health) he means to begin it on the last of Aprill, continuing it on the last of each moneth till the last of September inclusively, Six moneths in all, giving each moneth a Cup of 5l. The ARTICLES. 1. The Horses are all to meet at Sparton-hill-top between eleven and twelve, where the Riders are to be justly weigh'd, the weight ten stone down-weight, by the weights (as they call them) of Aver-du-poyse: the Horses are to be bridled, sadled and shod. After the Riders are justly weighed by such a Gentleman as shall be desired to be a just Judge, not onely of the Riders weight, but also to judge impartially who comes first to the stoup; another Gentleman must be appointed at the Twelve-score-stoup, to judge what Horse is rid out of distance, which is a main businesse: and a third must be desired to see them start faire. 2. The Horses must be led downe from Sparton-hill, to the starting-place; and there must be three heats, the first heat to Sparton-hill, there to rub halfe an hour, and then the Judge is to give them warning to get up and start: but if in that halfe-houre they relieve their horses with any thing but faire water, or if they ride out of distance, or the riders want weight, they must lose the Cup; only there is allow'd two pound for wasting. The second heat is to end where they begun last, and two Gentlemen must be desired to see, not onely who comes first to the stoup, but at the twelve-score-stoup, who rides out of distance, and who not: and 'twere well to have a flag at the ending stoup of each heat to be let down as soone as the first horse is past the stoup for the Judges easyer discerning who rides within distance and who not: the riders must be weigh'd every heat, the reliefe is to be onely water, the Rub but halfe an houre, and then the Judge is to bid them mount. 3. There being three heats, he that wins the most heats wins the Cup, so he rides within distance, not otherwise, but that horse which is formost the last heat; this will make them ride for it. The stakes are ten shillings an horse, and to be put into the hands of the Judges who are to deliver them to the second horse. 4. He that wins the Cup saves his own stake, the second horse shall have all the rest. 5. It is to be consider'd that if any Rider whip another Rider, or his horse on the face, or pull back anothers bridle; he shall lose the Cup. 6. No by-stander must ride in with the Horses, to face, stop, or turne them over, or any other way to hinder them, but must ride aloofe from them. If any such fault be committed, I must implore the Gentry to help me in the Legall punishing of the offenders. His EXCELLENCY saith, that, seeing he makes this Course onely for the pleasure of the Gentry, he hopes they will take it in good part, he having no other end in it, except his Lordship's owne contentment. But his Excellency addes, that he never yet knew any publike thing which was not found fault with, and that every where there be many teachers, for if people did not find fault with every thing, they would not be thought wise in any thing: but his Lordship is very confident he shall find nothing of this humour amongst those Noble Persons whom herein he desires to serve. And he commands me to tell you, that, though this be not the Law of the Medes and Persians, yet he will alter nothing in it. Every man may put in his horse, mare or gelding at his pleasure, 'tis the Liberty of the Sub∣ject, and so his that sets up the Course. When any man doth the like, he may make the Law what he pleases. In the mean time his Lordship hopes this Course will please you all, since he has no other end in it. His EXCELLENCY further commands me to let you know, that his course or heats continues no longer then his Lordships good liking. Thus I have obey'd his EXCELLENCIE's commands IO: ROLLESTON.
