O802 E879_1 99865708 117957
A REVIEW OF THE ANNOTATIONS OF HƲGO GROTIƲS, In Reference unto the Doctrine of the Deity, and Satisfaction of CHRIST. WITH A Defence of the Charge formerly laid against them. By IOHN OVVEN D. D. OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL, Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for THOM. ROBINSON. 1656.
A second Consideration of the Annotations of Hugo Grotius. HAving in my late defence of the doctrine of the Gospell, from the corruptions of the Socinians, been occasioned to vindicate the Testimonys given in the Scripture to the Deity of Christ, from their exceptions, and finding that Hugo Grotius in his Annotatios had (for the most part) done the same things with them, as to that particular, and some other important Articles of the Christian faith, that booke of his being more frequent in the hands of Students, then those of the Socinians, I thought it incumbent on me, to doe the same worke in reference to those Annotations, which it was my designe to performe towards the writings of Socinus, Smalcius, and their compa∣nions and followers. What I have been enabled to accomplish by that endeavour, with what service to the Gospell hath been performed there∣by, is left to the judgment of them who desire . Of my dealing with Grotius I gave a briefe account in my Epistle to the Go∣vernours of the Ʋniversity, and that with reference to an Apology made for him, not long before. This hath obtained a new Apology under the name of a second defence of Hugo Grotius; with what litle advantage ei∣ther to the repute of Grotius, as to the thing in Question, or of the Apolo∣gist himselfe, it is judged necessary to give the ensueing account: for which I took the first leasure houre I could obtaine, having things of grea∣ter weight, dayly incumbent on me. The only thing of importance by me charged on those Annotations of Grotius, was this; that the Texts of Scripture both in the Old Testament and New, bearing witnesse to the Diety, and Satisfaction of Christ, are in them wrested to other senses and significations, and the Testimonies given to those grand truths, thereby eluded. Of those of the first kind I excepted one, yet with some doubt, least his expressions therein, ought to be interpreted according to the Analogy of what he had elsewhere delivered: of which afterwards. Because that which concernes the Satisfaction of Christ will admit of the easyest dispatch, though taking up most roome, I shall in the first place insist thereon. The words of my charge on the Annotations, as to
this head of the doctrine of the Scripture are these. The condition of these famous Annotations as to the satisfaction of Christ is the same. Not one Text in the whole Scripture, wherein Testimony is given to that sacred truth, which is not wrested to another sense, or at least the Doctrine in it, conceald and obscured by them. This being a matter of fact, and the words containing a crime char∣ged on the Annotations, he that will make a defence of them, must ei∣ther disprove the Assertion by instances to the contrary, or else gran∣ting the matter of fact, evince it to be no crime. That which is objected in matter of fact, aut negandum est aut defendendum, sayes Quintilian: lib. 5. cap. de refut: and extra haec in judiciis fere nihil est. In other ca∣ses, Patronus, neget, defendat, transferat, excuset, deprecetur, molliat, minu∣at, avertat, despiciat, derideat; but in matters of fact, the two first only have place. Aristotle allows more particulars for an Apologist to divert unto, if the matter require it: he may say of what is objected, . (Rhet. lib. 3. cap. 15.) all which in a plaine matter of fact may be reduced to the former heads. That any other A∣pology can or ought to take place in this, or any matter of the same im∣portance will not easily be proved. The present Apologist takes ano∣ther course. Such ordinary paths are not for him to walke in. He tells us of the excellent booke that Grotius wrote de satisfactione Christi, and the exposition of sundry places of Scripture, especially of divers verses of Isa. 53: given therein; and then adds sundry inducements to perswade us, that he was of the same mind in his Annotations. And this is called a defence of Grotius. The Apologist I suppose knowes full well, what Texts of Scripture they are, that are constantly pleaded for the Satisfa∣ction of Christ, by them who doe beleive that doctrine. I shall also for once take it for granted, that he might without much difficulty, have obtained a sight of Grotius Annotations; to which I shall only add, that probably if he could from them have disproved the Assertion before mentioned, by any considerable instances, he is not so tender of the Prefacers credit, as to have concealed it on any such account. But the Severalls of his plea for the Annotations in this particular, I am perswa∣ded are accounted by some, worthy consideration; a breife view of them will suffice. The signall place of Is. 53. he tells us, he hath heard taken notice of by some; (I thought it had been probable the Apologist might have ta∣ken notice of it himselfe,) as that wherein his Annotations are most suspe∣cted; therefore on that he will fasten a while▪ Who would not now ex∣pect
that the Apologist should have entred upon the consideration of those Annotations, and vindicated them from the imputations insinuated: but he knew a better way of procedure, and who shall prescribe to him, what suits his purpose and proposall. This I say is the instance chosen to be insisted on; and the vindication of the Annotations therein, by the interpretation given in their Author his booke de Satisfactione Christi is proposed to consideration. That o∣thers, if not the Apologist himselfe, may take notice of the emptinesse of such precipitate Apologyes, as are ready to be tumbled out, without due digestion, or consideration, I shall not only compare the Annotations and that booke as to the particular place proposed, and manifest the incon∣sistency of the one with the other; but also to discover the extreame ne∣gligence and confidence, which lye at the bottome of his following at∣tempt, to induce a perswasion, that the judgment of the man of whom we speake, was not alter'd (that is, as to the interpretation of the Scrip∣tures relating to the Satisfaction of Christ) nor is others in his Anno∣tations, then in that booke; I shall compare the one with the other, by sundry other instances, and let the world see how in the most impor∣tant places contested about, he hath utterly deserted the interpretations given of them by himselfe in his booke de Satisfactione, and directly ta∣ken up that which he did oppose. The Apologist binds me in the first place to that of Is. 53. which is ushered in by the 1 Pet. 2. 24. From 1 Pet. 2. 24. (saies the Apologist) Grotius informes us that Christ so bare our sins, that he freed us from them, so that we are healed by his stripes. This thus crudely proposed, Socinus himselfe would graunt it, is little more then barely repeating the words; Grotius goes farther, and con∣tends that  the word there used by the Apostle, is to be interpre∣ted, tulit sursum eundo, portavit, and tells us that Socinus would render this word abstulit, and so take away the force of the Argument from this place. To disprove that insinuation, he urges sundry other places in the new Testament, where some words of the same importance are used, and are no way capable of such a signification. And whereas So∣cinus urges to the contrary Heb. 9. 28. where he saies  signifies nothing but auferre peccata, Grotius disproves that instance, and manifests that in that place also it is to be rendred by tulit, and so relates to the death of Christ. That we may put this instance given us by the Apologist, to vindicate the Annotations from the crime charged on them to an issue, I shall give
the Reader the words of his Annotations on that place: it is as followes: &c:]  hic est, abstulit, quod sequentia ostendunt, quomodo idem verbum sumi not avimus, Heb. 9. 28. eo∣dem sensu  Ioh. 1. 29. &  &  Isa. 53. 4. ubi Graeci : vitia nostra it a interfecit, sicut qui cruci affiguntur interfici so∣lent. Simile loquendi genus Col. 2. 14. vide Rom. 6. 6. Gal. 2. 20. 24. est autem hic ; non enim proprie Christus cum crucifigeretur, vitia nostra abstulit. Sed causas dedit per quas auferrerentur. Nam crux Christi fundamentum est predicationis; praedicatio verò poenitentiae, paenitentia verô aufert vitia. How well the Annotator abides here by his former interpretation of this place, the Apologist may easily discover: 1 There he contends that  is as much as tulio, or sursum tulit: and objects out of Socinu, that it must be abstulit, which quite alters the sense of the Testimony. Here he contends with him, that it must be abstulit. 2 There Heb. 9. 28. is of the same importance with this 1 Pet. 2. 24. as there interpreted: here, as here; that is in a quite contrary sense, altogether inconsi∣stent with the other. 3. For company  used Is. 53. is called in to the same signification, which in the booke de satisfactione he contends is never used in that sense, and that most truly. 4. Upon this exposition of the words, he gives the very sense contended for by the Socinians; non enim proprie Christus cum crucifigeretur vitia nostra abstulit, sed cau∣sas dedit per quas auferreretur: what are these causes; he adds them imme∣diatly, Nam crux Christi fundamentum est praedicationis, praedicatio verò poenitentiae, poenitentia verò aufert vitia. He that sees not the whole So∣cinian poyson wrapped up and proposed in this interpretation, is igno∣rant of the state of the difference, as to that Head, between them, and Christians. (5) To make it a little more evident, how constant the Annotator was to his first principles, which he insisted on in the manage∣ment of his disputes with Socinus about the sense of this place, I shall adde the words of Socinus himselfe, which then he did oppose. Verum animadvertere oportet primùm in Graeco, verbum, quod interpretes verterunt pertulit, est , quod non pertulit sed abstulit vertendum erat, non secus ac factum fuerit in epistola ad Hebraeos cap. 9. 28. ubi idem legendi modus habetur, unde constat  non perferre peccata, sed peccata tollere, sive auferre, significart. Socin. de Jes. Christ. sat. lib. 2. cap. 6. What difference there is between the designe of the Annotator, and that of Socinus, what complyance in the quotation of the paralell place of
the Hebrewes, what direct opposition and head is made in the Annota∣tions against that booke de Satisfactione, and how clearly the cause con∣tended for in the one, is given away in the other; needs no farther to be demonstrated. But if this instance makes not good the Apologists asser∣tion, it may be supposed, that that which follows, which is ushered in by this, will doe it to the purpose; let then that come into considera∣tion. This is that of Isa. 53. Somewhat of the sense which Grotius in his booke de Satisfactione contends for, in this place, is given us by the Apologist. The 11th verse of the chapter which he firsts considers (in my booke) page 14: he thus proposes and expounds: justificabit servus mens justus multos & iniquitates ipsorum bajulabit. in Heb. est:  vox autem  iniquitatem significat, at{que} etiam iniquitatis poenam. 2. Reg. 7. 9. vox autem  est sustinere, bajulare, quoties autem baju∣lare ponitur cum nomine peccati aut iniquitatis, id in omni lingua & maxi∣mè in Hebraismo significat poen as ferre, with much more to this purpose. The whole designe of the maine dispute in that place, is, from that dis∣course of the Prophet to prove, that Iesus Christ properly underwent the punishment due to our sinnes, and thereby made satisfaction to God for them. To manifest his constancy to this doctrine, in his Annotations he gives such an Exposition of that whole chapter of Isaiah 53. as is manifestly, and universally inconsistent with any such designe in the words, as that which he intends to prove from them in his booke de Satisfactione. In particular (to give one instance of this assertion) he contends here that , is as much as bajulare, portare, and that joyned with iniquity (in all languages, especially in the Hebrew) that phrase of bearing iniquity, signifies to undergoe the punishment due to it; in his Annotations on the place, as also in those on 1 Pet. 2. 24. he tells you the word signifies auferre, which with all his strength he had contended against. Not to draw out this particular instance into any greater length, I make bold to tell the Apologist (what I suppose he knowes not) that there is no one verse of the whole chapter, so interpreted in his Annotations, as that the sense given by him, is consistent with, nay is not repugnant to, that which from the same verses he pleads for in his booke de Satisfactione Christi. If notwithstanding this information, the Apologist be not satis∣fied, let him if he please consider what I have already animadverted on those Annotations, and undertake their vindication. These loose discour∣ses are not at all to the purpose in hand, nor the Question between us,
which is solely; whether Grotius in his Annotations have not perverted the sense of those texts of Scripture, which are commonly, and most righ∣teously pleaded as Testimonies given to the Satisfaction of Christ. But as to this particular place of Isaiah, the Apologist hath a farther plea, the summe whereof (not to trouble the Reader with the repetition of a discourse so little to the purpose) comes to this head; that Grotius in his booke de Satisfactione Christi gives the mysticall sense of the chapter, under which consideration, it belongs to Christ and his sufferings; In his Annotations the literall, which had its immediate completion in Iere∣my, which was not soe easily discoverable or vulgarly taken notice of. This is the summe of his first observation on this place to acquit the An∣notator of the Crime charged upon him. Whether he approve the application of the prophesie to Jeremiah or no, I know not. He saies, Grotius so conceived. The designe of the discourse seems to give appro∣bation to that conception. How the literall sense of a place should come to be lesse easily discovered then the mysticall, well I know not. Nor shall I speake of the thing it selfe concerning the literall and mysti∣call sense supposed to be in the same place and words of Scripture, with the application of the distinction to those Prophesies which have a dou∣ble accomplishment in the Type and thing or person typified, (which yet hath no soundnesse in it) but to keep to the matter now in hand, I shall make bold for the removall of this engine applyed by the Apolo∣gist for the preventing all possible mistake, or controversie about the An∣notators after-charge in this matter, to tell him, that the perverting of the first literall sense of the chapter, or giving it a completion in any person whatsoever, in a first, second, or third sense, but the Son of God himselfe, is no lesse then Blasphemy; which the Annotator is no otherwise freed from, but by his conceiving a sense to be in the words, contrary to their literall importance, and utterly exclusive of the concerment of Jesus Christ in them. If the Apologist be otherwise minded, I shall not invite him againe to the consideration of what I have already written in the vindication of the whole prophesie from the wretched corrupt interpreta∣tion of the Annotator, (not hoping that he will be able to breake through that discouragment he hath from looking into that treatise, by the pros∣pect he hath taken of the whole by the Epistle) but doe expresse my earnest desire, that by an exposition of the severalls of that chapter, and their application to any other (not by loose discourses forraigne to the Question in hand) he would endeavour to evince the contrary; if on second thoughts he find either his judgment, or ability, not ready or com∣petent for such an attempt, I heartily wish he would be carefull hereafter
of ingenerating apprehensions of that nature, in the minds of others, by any such discourses as this. I cannot but suppose that I am already absolved from a necessity of any farther procedure, as to the justifying my charge against the Annota∣tions, having sufficiently foyled the instance produced by the Apologist for the weakning of it. But yet least any should thinke, that the present issue of this debate, is built upon some unhappinesse of the Apologist in the choice of the particulars insisted on; which might have been pre∣vented, or may yet be removed, by the production of other instances: I shall for their further satisfaction, present them with sundry other, the most important Testimonies given to the Satisfaction of Christ, where∣in the Annotator hath openly prevaricated, and doth imbrace and pro∣pose those very interpretations, and that very sense, which in his book, de Satisfactione Christi, he had strenuously opposed. Page 8. of his booke de Satisfactione, he pleads the satisfaction of Christ, from Gal. 2. 21. laying weight on this, that the word, , signifies the want of an antecedent cause, on the supposition there made. In his Annotations he deserts this assertion, and takes up the sense of the place given by Socinus de servator. lib. 2: cap. 24. His departure into the tents of Socinus on Gal. 3. 13. is much more pernitious. page 25, 26, 27. urging that place and vindicating it from the exceptions of Socinus, he concludes, that the Apostle said Christ was made a Curse, quasi dixe∣rit Christum factumesse : hoc est poenae à Deo irrogatae, & quidem ignominiosissimae obnoxium. To make good this, in his Annota∣tions, he thus expounds the words: duplex hîc figura; nam &  pro , quomodo circumcisio pro circumcisis: & subauditur : nam Christus it a cruciatus est, quasi esset Deo , quo nihil homini pessimo in hâc vitâ pejus evenire poterat: which is the very interpretation of the words given by Socinus which he opposed; and the same that Crellius insists upon in his vindication of Socinus against him. So uniforme was the judgment of the Annotator, with that of the Author of the book de Satisfactione Christi. Pages 32, 33, &c: are spent in the exposition and vindication of Rom. 3. 25, 26. that expression , manifesting the end of the suffering of Christ, is by him chiefely insisted on. That by  is there intended that justice of God, whereby he punisheth sin, he contends and proves from the nature of the thing it selfe, and comparing the expression with other paralell texts of Scripture: Socinus had interpreted this of the Righteousnesse of Christs fidelity and veracity: Lib. 2. de Servator. cap. 2. (ut ostenderet se veracem & fidelem esse.) but
Crellius in his vindication of him places it rather on the goodnesse & libe∣rality of God, which is, saith he, the Righteousnesse there intended. To make good his Ground, the Annotator, thus expounds the meaning of the words▪ vocem  malim hic de bonitate interpretari, quam de fide in promissis praestandis, quia quae sequuntur non ad Judaeos solos per∣tinent, sed etiam ad Gentes, quibus promissio nulla facta erat. He rather (he tells you) embraces the interpretation of Crellius then of Socinus; but for that which himself had contended for, it is quite shut out of doors: as I have elswhere manifested at large. The same course he takes with Rom. 5. 10. which he insists on pag. 26. and 2. Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21. concerning which he openly deserts his owne former interpretation, and closes expressely with that which he had opposed, as he doth in reference to all other places, where any mention is made of Reconciliation: The substance of his Annotations on those places, seeming to be taken out of Socinus, Crellius, and some others of that party. That signall place of Heb. 2. 17. in this kind, deserves particularly to be taken notice of; Cap. 7 pag. 141. of his booke de Satisfactione, he pleads the sense of that expression, , to be, : and addes, significat ergoibi expiatio∣nem quae fit placando: But Crellius defence of Socinus had so possessed the mans mind before he came to write his Annotations, that on that place he gives us directly his sense, and almost his words in a full oppo∣sition to what he had before asserted: , hoc quidem loco, ut ex sequentibus apparet, est auferre peccata, sive purgare à peccato, id est, efficere ne peccetur, vires suppeditando pro modo tentationum: So the An∣notator on that place; indeavoring farther to prove his Interpretation. From Rom. 4 last, Cap. 1. pag. 47, of his booke de Satisfactione, he clear∣ly proves the Satisfaction of Christ: and evinces that to be the sense of that expression, traditus propter peccata nostra: which he thus Comments on in his Annotations: poterat dioere qui & mortuus est, & resurrexit ut nos à peccatis justificaret, id est, liberaret. Sed amans  morti con∣junxit peccata, quae sunt mors animi, resurrectioni autem adeptionem Iustiti∣a, quae est animi resuscitatio: mirè nos & à peccatis retrahit & ad Iustitiam ducit: quod videmus Christum mortem non formidâsse pro doctrinâ suâ pec∣catis contrariâ, & ad Iustitiam nos vocanti Testimonio; & à Deo suscita∣tum, ut eidem doctrinae summa conciliaretur Authoritas. He that sees not, not only that he directly closes in, with what before he had opposed, But also, that he hath here couhed the whole Doctrine of the Socinians, about the Mediation of Christ, and our Iustification thereby, is utterly
ignorant of the state of the Controversie between them, and Christians. I suppose it will not be thought necessary for me to proceed with the comparison instituted. The severall bookes are in the hands of most Students, and that the case is generally the same in the other places pleaded for the Satisfaction of Christ, they may easily satisfy themselves. Only because the Apologist seemes to put some difference between his Annotations on the Revelations, (as having receaved their linedments and colours from his owne pencill,) and those on the Epistles which he had not so compleated; as I have already manifested, that in his Annotations on that booke, he hath treacherously tampred with, and corrupted the Testimonies given to the Deity of our blessed Saviour, so shall I give one instance from them also, of his dealing no lesse unworthily with those that concerne his Satisfaction. Socinus in his second booke against Covet, second part, & chap. 17. gives us this account of those words of the holy Ghost, Rev. 1. 5. who hath loved us, and washed us in his owne blood: Johannes in Apocalyp. cap. 1. v. 5. alia Metaphorâ seu Translatione, (quae nihil aliud est quam com∣pendiosa quaedam comparatio) utens, dixit de Christo & ejus morte, qui di∣lexit nos & lavit nos à peccatis in sanguine suo, nam quemadmodum aquâ abluuntur sordes corporis, sic sanguine Christi, peccata, quae sordes animi sunt absterguntur. Absterguntur, inquam, quia animus onster ab ipsis mundatur, &c. This interpretation is opposed and exploded by Grotius lib. de Satisf. c. 10. p. 208, 209. the substance of it being, that Christ washed us from our sins by his death, in that he confirmed his doctrine of Repentance & new∣nesse of life thereby, by which we are turned from our sins; as he manifests in the close of his Discourse, hoc saepius urgendū est, (saith Socinus) Iesum Christum eâ ratione peccata nostra abstulisse, quod effecerit, ut à peccando desistamus. This Interpretation of Socinus, being reinforced by Crellius, the place falls againe under the Consideration of Grotius in those An∣notations on the Revelations; which as the Apologist tells us, received their very lineaments and colours from his owne Pencill. There then he gives us this Account thereof, : Sanguine suo, id est, morte toleratâ, certos nos reddidit veritatis eorum quae docuerat, quae talia sunt, ut nihil sit aptius ad purgandos à vitiis animos. Humidae naturae, sub quâ est sanguis, proprium est lavare. Id vero per egregiam  ad animum transfertur. Dicitur autem Christus suo sanguine nos lavisse, quia & ipse omnia praestitit quae ad id requirebantur & apparet secutum in plurimis effectum. I desire the Apologist to tell me what he thinks of this peice thus perfected, with all its lineaments and colours by the pencill of that skilfull man; and what beautifull aspect
he supposeth it to have. Let the Reader, to prevent further Trouble in perusing transcriptions of this kind, consider Rev. 13. 8, pag. 114. Heb. 9. 25. to the end; which he calls an illustrious place in the same page and forward: I Iohn 2. 2. pag. 140, Rom. 5. 10, 11. page 142, 143. Eph. 2. 16. page 148, 149, Col. 1. 20, 21, 22. Tit. 2. 14. page 156. Heb. 9. 14, 15. pag. 157, 158. Act. 20. 28. and many others; And compare them with the Annotations on those places, and he will be farther ena∣bled to judge of the defence made of the one, by the instance of the other. I shall only desire that he who undertakes to give his judgment of this whole matter, be somewhat acquainted with the state of the difference, about this poynt of the doctrine of the Gospell, between the Socinians and us: that he doe not take auferre peccata, to be ferre peccata: nostri causa, to be nostrâ vice, and nostro loco: causa , to be : liberatio à jugo peccati, to be redemptio à reatu peccati: Subire poenas sim∣pliciter, to be subire paenas nobis debitas: to be , and  in res∣pect of the event, to be so as to the proper nature of the thing; offerre seipsum in coelo, to be as much as offerre seipsum in cruce, as to the worke it selfe: that so he be not mistaken to thinke that, when the first are granted, that the latter are so also. For a close of the discourse relating to this head, a breife account may be added, why I said not positively, that he had wrested all the places of Scripture giving Testimony to the Sa∣tisfaction of Christ, to another sense: but that he had either done so, or else concealed or obscured that sense in them. Though I might give instances from one or two places in his Anno∣tions on the Gospells, giving occasion to this assertion, yet I shall insist only on some taken from the Epistle to the Hebrews, where is the great and eminent seat of the doctrine of Christs satisfaction. Although in his Annotations on that Epistle, he doth openly corrupt the most cleare Te∣stimonies given to this Truth, yet there are some passages in them, where∣in he seems to dissent from the Socinians. In his Annotations on chap. 5. vers. 5. he hath these words, Iesus quidem Sacerdotale munus suum aliquo modo erat auspicatus; cum semet patri victimam offerret. That Christ was a Preist when he was on the earth, was wholly denyed by Socinus both in his booke de Servatore, and in his Epistle to Niemoieuius, as I have shewed elsewhere. Smalcius seems to be of the same judgment in the Racovian Catechisme. Grotius saies, Sacerdotale munus erat aliquo modo auspicatus: yet herein he goes not beyond Crellius, who tells us: mortem Christus subiit duplici ratione, partim quidem ut foederis mediator seu spon∣sor, partim quidem ut Sacerdos, Deo ipsum oblaturus: de causis mortis Chri∣sti pag. 6. And so Volkelius fully to the same purpose. Partes (saith he)
muneris Sacerdotis, haec sunt potissimum; mactatio victimae, in tabernaculum ad oblationem peragendam, ingressio, & ex eodem egressio: Ac mactatio qui∣dem mortem Christi, violentam sanguinis profnsionem continet: de Relig. lib. 3. cap. 47. pag. 145. and againe: Hinc colligitur solam Christi mor∣tem nequaquam illam perfectam absolutám{que} ipsius oblationem (de qua in epistola ad Hebraeos agitur) fuisse, sed principium & praeparationem quandam ipsius Sacerdotii in caelo demum administrandi extitisse, ibid. So that no∣thing is obtained by Grotius his munus Sacerdotale aliquo modo erat au∣spicatus, but what is granted by Crellius and Volkelius. But in the next words, cum semet offerret patri victimam, he seems to leave them: but he seems only so to doe. For Volkelius acknoledgeth that he did slay the Sa∣crifice in his death, though that was not his compleate and perfect obla∣tion, which is also afterwards affirmed by Grotius: and Crellius expresly affirmes the same. Nor doth he seeme to intend a proper expiatory and satisfactory Sacrifice in that expression; for if he had, he would not have been guilty of such an , as to say, semet obtulit patri. Be∣sides, though he do acknoledge elsewhere, that this victima was , & , yet he sayes in another place (on ver: 3.) Sequitur Christum quo{que} obtulisse prose ; giving thereby such a sense to that ex∣pression, as is utterly inconsistent with a proper expiatory Sacrifice for sin. And which is yet worse, on chap. 9. 14. he gives us such an account why expiation is ascribed to the blood of Christ, as is a key to his whole interpretation of that epistle: Sanguini (saith he) purgatio ista tribuitur: quia per sanguinem, idest, mortem Christi, secuta ejus excitatione & evectio∣ne, gignitur in nobis fides, quae deinde purgat corda. And therefore where Christ is said to offer himselfe by the eternall Spirit, he tells us, Oblatio Christi hic intelligitur illa, quae oblationi legali in adyto factae respondet, ea autem est, non oblatio in altari Crucis facta, sed in adyto caelesti: So that the purgation of sin is an effect of Christs presenting himselfe in heaven only: which how well it agrees with what the Apostle sayes chap. 1. v. 3. the Reader will easily judge. And to manifest that this was his constant sense, on those words v. 26. , he thus comments; , Ʋt peccatum in nobis extinguatur: fit au∣tem hoc per passionem Christi, quae fidem nobis ingenerat, quae cordae purifi∣cat. Christ confirming his doctrine by his death, begets faith in us, which doth the worke. Of the 28th verse of the same chapter I have spoken before. The same he affirmes againe, more expressely, on chap. 10. vers. 3. and on ver. 9. and verse 12. he interprets the oblation of Christ, whereby he tooke away sinne, to be the oblation or offering himselfe in heaven, whereby sin is taken away by Sanctification, as also in sundry
other places, where the expiatory Sacrifice of Christ on earth, and the taking away of the guilt of sinne, by Satisfaction, is evidently intended. So that notwithstanding the concession mentioned, I cannot see the least reason to alter my thoughts of the Annotations, as to this businesse in hand. Not further to abound in causá facili; in all the differences we have with the Socinians, about Christs dying for us, concerning the nature of Redemption, Reconciliation, Mediation, Sacrifice, the meaning of all the phrases and expressions, which in those things are delivered to us, the An∣notator is generally on the apostate side throughout his Annotations: and the truth is, I know no reason why our Students should with so much diligence and charge, labour to get into their hands the books of Soci∣nus, Crellius, Smalcius, and the rest of that Crew, seing these An∣notations, as to the most important heads of Christian Religion, about the Deity, Sacrifice, Preisthood, and Satisfaction of Christ, originall sin, free will, Iustification &c, afford them the Substance and Marrow of what is spoken by them; so that as to these heads, upon the matter, there is nothing peculiar to the Annotator, but the Secular learning which in his Interpretations he hath curiously and gallantly interweaved. Plau∣tus makes sport in his Amphitruo with severall Persons, some reall, some assumed, of such likenesse one to another, that they could not dis∣cerne themselves by any outward appearance; which caused various con∣tests and mistakes between them. The Poets fancy raysed not a greater similitude between Mercury and Sosia, being supposed to be different persons, then there is a dissimilitude between the Author of the booke de Satisfactione Christi, and of the Annotations, concerning which we have been discoursing, being one and the same. Nor was the contest of those different persons so like on another, so irreconcilable, as are these of this single person, so unlike himselfe in the severall treatises mentio∣ned. And I cannot but thinke it strange that the Apologist could ima∣gine no surer measure to be taken of Grotius's meaning in his Annotations then his treatise of the Satisfaction of Christ doth afford, there being no two treatises that I know, of any different persons whatever, about one and the same Subject, that are more at variance. Whither now any will be perswaded by the Apologist to believe that Grotius was constant in his Annotations to the Doctrine delivered in that other treatise, I am not sollicitous. For the reinforced plea of the Apologist, that these Annotations were not finished by him, but only collections that he might after dispose of; I am not concerned in it; having to deale with that booke of Annotati∣ons
that goes under his name; if they are none of his, it is neither on the one hand or other, of any concernment unto me. I say not this, as though the Apologist, had in the least made good his former plea, by his new Exceptions to my evidence against it, from the Printers preface to the Volume of Annotations on the Epistles. He saies! what was the opus integrum that was cōmended to the care of ? and answers himselfe, not that last part or volume of Annotations, but opus integrum, the whole volume or volumes that contained his  adversaria on the new Testa∣ment. For how ill this agrees with the intention and words of the Prefa∣cer, a slight inspection will suffice to manifest. He tells us, that Grotius had himselfe publisht his Annotations on the Gospells, five yeares before: that at his departure from Paris, he left a great part of this volume (that is this on the Acts and Epistles) with a friend; that the reason why he left not opus integrum, that is, the whole volume with him, was because the residue of it was not so written, as that an Amanuensis could well un∣derstand it. That therefore in his going towards Sweden, he wrote that part againe with his owne hand, and sent it backe to the same person (that had the former part of the Volume committed to him) from Hamburge. If the Apologist read this Preface, he ought, as I suppose to have desisted from the plea insisted on: If he did not, he thought assuredly he had much reason to despise them, with whom he had to do: But as I said, herein am I not concerned. The Consideration of the charge on the Annotations relating to their tampering with the Testimonies given in the Scripture to the Deity of Christ, being an other head of the whole, may now have place. The Summe of what is to this purpose by me affirmed, is, that in the An∣notations on the old and new Testament, Grotius hath left but one place gi∣ving Testimony clearly to the Deity of Christ. To this assertion I added both a limitation, and also an enlargment in severall respects. A limita∣tion that I could not perceive he had spoken of himselfe, clearly on that one place. On supposition that he did so, I granted that perhaps one or two places more, might accordingly be interpreted. That this one place is Ioh. 1. 1. I expressely affirmed: that is the one place wherein, as I say, he spake not home to the businesse. The defence of the Apologist in the be∣halfe of Grotius consists of sundry discourses. First to disprove that he hath left more then that one of John free from the corruption charged; he instances in that one of Iohn 1. 1. wherein as he saith, he expressely asserts the Deity of Christ: but yet wisely forseeing, that this instance would not evade the charge, having been expressely excepted, (as to the present enquiry) and reserved to further debate; he adds the places quoted by Gro∣tius
in the exposition of that place as Prov. 8. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Isa. 45. 12. & 48. 13. 2 Pet. 3. 5. Col. 1. 16. from all which he concludes, that the Annotations have left more Testimonies to the Deity of Christ untampered withall and unperverted, then my assertion will allow; reckoning them all up againe Section the 10th. and concluding himselfe a successfull Advocate in this case, or at least under a despaire of ever being so in any, if he acquit not himselfe clearly in this. If his failure herein be evinced, by the course of his late writings himselfe will appeare to be most concerned. I suppose then that on the view of this defence, men must needs suppose that in the Annotations on the places repeated, and mustered a second time by the Apologist, Grotius does give their sense as bearing witnesse to the Deity of Christ. Others may be pleased to take it for granted without farther consideration: for my part being a little concerned to inquire, I shall take the paines to turne to the places, and give the Reader a briefe account of them. For Prov. 8. his first note on the wisdome there spoken of is: Haec de easapientia quae in Lege apparet exponunt Haebraei, & sane ei, si non sol; at praecipuè haec atributa conveniunt: Now if the attributes here mentioned, agree either solely or principally to the wisdome that shines in the Law, how they can be the attributes of the person of the eternall Son of God, I see not. He addes no more to that purpose, untill he comes to the 22 ver. the verse of old contested about with the Arrians. His words on that are Graecum Aquilae, est, , ut & Symmachi & Theodosionis, respondet{que} benè Haebraeo , & Caldaeus habet , & 70 , sensu non malo, si creare sumas pro facére ut appareat: viae Dei sunt operationes ipsius: sensum hujus loci & sequentium non male exprimas cum Philone de Colo∣niis: . On verse 27, he addes aderam, id est, , ut infra Iohn E∣vang. 1. 1. What clear and evident Testimony, by this exposition is left in this place to the Deity of Christ I professe my selfe as ignorant, as I was, before I received this Direction by the Apologist: He tells us that  is rendred not amisse by the Chaldee  and the 70 , though he knew that sense was pleaded by the Arrians, and exploded by the antient Doctors of the Church. To relieve this Concession, he tells us that creare, may be taken for facere ut appareat, though there be no evidence of such a use of the word in the Scripture, nor can he give any instance thereof. The whole interpretation runs on that wisdome that is a property of God, which he manifested in the workes of Creatiō:
of the Son of God, the essentiall wisdome of God, subsisting with the father, we have not one words nor doth that Quotation out of Philo releive us in this businesse at all. We know in what sense he used the word : how farr he and the Platonicks, with whom in this expression he con∣sented, were from understanding the only begotten Son of God, is known. If this of Philo has any aspect towards the opinion of any professing themselves Christians, it is towards that of the Arians, which seems to be expressed therein. And this is the place chosen by the Apologist to disprove the assertion of none being left, under the sense given them by the Annotations, bearing cleare Testimony to the Deity of Christ; his comparing  ibi ego, which the vulgar renders aderam, with  seems rather to cast a Suspicion on his intention in the expression of that place of the Evangelist, then in the least to give Te∣stimony to the Deity of Christ in this. If any one be further desirous to be satisfyed, how many cleare unquestionable evidences of the Deity of Christ, are slighted by these Annotations on this Chapter, let him con∣sult my vindication of the place in my late Vindiciae Evangelicae, where he will find something tendred to him to that purpose. What the A∣pologist intended by adding these two places of Isaiah, Chap. 45. 12. and the 48. 13. (when in his Annotations on those places, Grotius not once mentions the Deity of Christ, nor any thing of him, nor hath oc∣casion so to do, nor doth produce them in this place to any such end or purpose; but only to shew that the Chaldee paraphrase, doth sundry times, when things are said to be done by God, render it, that they were done by the word of God) as instances to the prejudice of my Assertion, I cannot imagine. On that of Peter, 2 Epistle, 3. 5. : he addes indeed, vide quae diximus ad initium Evangelii Iohannis: but neither doth that place intend the naturall Son of God, nor is it so interpreted by Grotius. To these he addes in the close, Col. 1. 16. in the exposition whereof in his Annotations, he expressely prevaricates, and goes of to the inter∣pretation insisted on by Socinus and his companions, which the Apolo∣gist well knew. Without farther search upon what hath been spoken, the Apologist gives in his Verdict concerning the falsnesse of my assertion before mentioned, of the Annotators speaking cleare and home to the Deity of Christ but in one, if in one place of his Annotations: But 1. What one other place hath he produced, whereby the contrary, to what I assert, is evinced? Any man may make Apologies at this rate as fast as he pleases.
2. As to his not speaking clearely in that one, notwithstanding the im∣provement made of his Expressions by the Apologist, I am still of the same mind as formerly: For although he ascribes an Eternity , and affirmes all things to be made thereby; yet considering how care∣full he is, of ascribing an , how many Platonicke inter∣pretations of that expression he interweaves in his expositions, how he hath darkned the whole councell of God in that place about the subsistence of the word, its omnipotency and incarnation, so clearely asserted by the holy Ghost therein, I see no reason to retract the assertion opposed. But yet as to the thing it selfe, about this place I will not contend: only it may not be amisse to observe, that not only the Arians, but even Photinus himselfe acknoledged that the world was made , that how little is obtained toward the confirmation of the Deity of Christ by that concession, may be discerned. I shall offer also only at present, that , is threefold,  and . The  or  is Christ, mentioned Iohn 1. 1. his personall or eternall subsistence, with his omnipotency, being there asserted. Whether Christ be so called any where else in the New Testament may be disputed, Luk. 1. v. 2. (compared with the 1 of Iob. 1. 1.) 2 Pet. 1. 16. and Act. 20. 32. Heb. 4. 12. are the most likely to give us that use of the word. Why Christ is so termed, I have shewed elsewhere. That he is called  Psal. 33. 6. is to me also evident.  is better rendred , or , then . Where that word is used, it denotes not Christ: Though 2 Sam. 23. 2. where that word is, is urged by some to that purpose. He is also cal∣led  Hag. 2. 5. so perhaps in other places. Our present Quakers would have that expression of, the word of God, used no where in any other sense: so that destroying that, as they do, in the issue they may freely despise the Scripture, as that which they say is not the word of God, nor any where so called.  amongst men is that which Aristotle calls  saies Hesichi∣us.  is that which we speake in our hearts, saies Dama∣scen. de Orthod. fid. Lib. 1. cap. 18. So Psalm 14. . This as spoken in respect of God, is that egresse of his power, whereby accor∣ding to the eternall conception of his mind, he worketh any thing. So Gen. 1. 2. God said let there be light, and there was light. Of this word of God the Psalmist treats, 147. v. 18. he sedeth out  & melteth the Ice, and Psal. 148. 8. the same word is used. In both which places the Sep∣tuagint renders it by . This is that which is called , Heb. 1. 2. and Heb. 11. 3. where the Apostle saies the heavens were
made : which is directly paralell to that place of 2 Pet. 3. 5. where it is expressed : for though  more properly de∣notes , yet in these places, it signifies plainly that egresse of Gods power for the production and preservation of things, being a persuite of the eternall conception of his mind, which is . Now this infinite wise and eternall conception of the mind of God, exer∣ting its selfe in power, wherein God is said to speake, (he said let there be light) is that which the Platonicks, and Philo with them harped on, ne∣ner once dreaming of a coessentiall and hypostaticall word of God, though the word  occurre amongst them. This they thought was unto God, as in us,  or . and particularly it is ter∣med by Philo▪ : de Agric. That this was his  is most evident: Hence he tells us : de Mund. opific. and a little after, . The whole tendency of his discourse is, that the word of God, in his mind, in the creation of the world, was the image of himselfe; and that the idea or image of the things to be made, but especially of light. And whereas (if I remember aright, for I cannot now find the place) I have said somewhere, that Christ was , though therein I have the consent of very many learned Divines, and used it meerly in opposition ; yet I desire to recall it: nor doe I thinke there is any propriety in that expression of  used of Christ, but only in those of  and , which the Scripture (though not in the very termes) will make good. In this second acceptation, , Photinus himselfe granted that the world was made by the word of God. Now if it be thought necessary, that I should give an account of my feare that no∣thing but  in this sense decked with many Platonicall encomiums was intended in the Annotations on Ioh. 1. (though I confesse much from some quotations there used, may be said against it) I shall readi∣ly undertake the Taske; but at present in this running Course, I shall adde no more. But now, as if all the matter in hand, were fully dispatched, we have this triumphant close attending the former discourse, and obser∣vations. If one Text acknowledged to assert Christs eternall Divinity (which one was granted to doe it, though not clearly,) will not suffice to conclude
him no Socinian) which I said not he was, yea expressely waved the ma∣nagement of any such charge) If six verses in the Proverbs, two in Isaiah; one in St. Peter, one in St. Paul added to many in the beginning of St. Iohn, (In his Annotations on all which, he speaks not one word to the pur∣pose) will not yet amount to above one Text; or lastly if that one may be doubted of also, which is by him interpreted to affirme Christs eternall sub∣sistence with God before the Creation of the world (which he doth not so interpret, as to a personall subsistence) and that the whole world was crea∣ted by him; I shall despaire of ever being a successfull Advocate for any man; from which Condition I hope some little time will recover the Apologist. This is the Summe of what is pleaded in cheife, for the defence of the Annotations: wherein what small cause he hath to acquiesce, who hath been put to the labour and trouble of vindicating nere 40 Texts of Scrip∣ture in the old Testament, and new, giving expresse Testimony to the Deity of Christ from the Annotators perverse interpretations, let the Reader judge. In the 13th Section of the Apologist's discourse, he addes some other Considerations to confirme his former vindication of the Annotations. 1 He tells us, that he professeth not to Divine, what places of the old Testa∣ment, wherein the Deity of Christ is evidently testified unto, are corrupted by the learned man, nor will he upon the discouragement already received make any inquiry into my Treatise. But what need of Divination? The Apologist cannot but remember at all times, some of the Texts of the old Testament that are pleaded to that purpose; and he hath at least as many incouragements to looke into the Annotations, as discouragements from casting an eye upon that Volume (as he calls it,) wherein they are called to an account. And if he suppose, he can make a just defence for the severall places so wre∣sted, and perverted, without once consulting of them, I know not how by me he might possibly be ingaged into such an inquiry. And therefore I shall not name them again, having done somewhat more then name them already. But he hath two suppletory considerations, that will render any such inquiry or inspection needlesse. Of these the first is That the word of God being all and every part of it of equall truth, that doctrine which is founded on five places of Divine writ; must by all Christi∣ans be acknoledged to be as irrefragably confirmed, as an 100 expresse places would be conceived to confirme it. Ans. It is confessed, that not only five, but any one expresse Text of
Scripture, is sufficient for the confirmation of any divine truth. But that five places have been produced out of the Annotations by the Apolo∣gist for the confirmation of the great truth pleaded about, is but pre∣tended, indeed there is no such thing. The Charge on Grotius was, that he had depraved all but one; if that be no crime, the defence was at hand; if it be, though that one should be acknowledged to be clear to that pur∣pose, here is no defence against that which was charged, but a strife a∣bout that which was not. Let the places be consulted, if the assertion prove true, by an induction of instances, the Crime is to be confessed, or else the charge denied to contain a crime: but Secondly he saies, That this charge upon inquiry will be found in some degree, if not equally, chargeable on the learnedst and most valued of the first Reformers, particularly upon Mr. Calvin himselfe, who hath been as bit∣terly and injustly accused and reviled upon this account (witnesse the booke intituled Calvino Turcismus) as ever Erasmus was by Bellarmine and Be∣za, or as probably Grotius may be. Though this at the best be but a diversion of the Charge, and no de∣fence, yet not containing that truth which is needfull to countenance it, for the end for which it is proposed; I could not passe it by. It is denied (which in this case untill further proofe must suffice) that any of the learnedst of the first Reformers, (and particularly Mr. Calvin) are equally chargeable, or in any degree of proportion with Grotius, as to the Crime insisted on. Calvin being the man instanced in, I desire the A∣pologist to prove that he hath in all his Commentaries on the Scripture corrupted the sense, of any Texts of the old Testament or new, giving expresse Testimony to the Deity of Christ, & commonly pleaded to that end & purpose. Although I deny not, but that he differs from the cōmon judgment of most, in the interpretation of some few propheticall passa∣ges, judged by them to relate to Christ. I know what Genebrard and some others of that faction, raved against him; but it was cheifly from some ex∣pressiōs in his institutions about the Trinity (wherin yet he is acquitted by the most learned of themselves) & not from his expositions of Scripture, for which they raised their Clamours. For the booke called Calvino Turcismus, written by Reynolds and Giffard, the Apologist has forgotten the designe of it. Calvin is no more concerned in it, then others of the first Reformers; nor is it from any doctrine about the Deity of Christ in particular, but from the whole of the reformed Religion, with the Apostasyes of some of that profession, that they compare it with Tur∣cisme. Something indeed, in a chapter or two, they speake about the Tri∣nity, from some expressions of Luther, Melancton, Calvin and others:
but as to Calvin's expositions of Scripture, they insist not on them. Possibly the Apologist may have seen Pareus his Calvinus Orthodoxus, in an answer to Hunnius his Calvinus Judaizans; if not, he may at any time have there an account of this calumny. Having passed through the Consideration of the two considerable heads of this discourse, in the method called for by the Apologist (ha∣ving only taken liberty to transpose them, as to first and last) I must pro∣fesse my selfe as yet unsatisfyed as to the necessity, or suitablenesse, of this kind of defence. The summe of that which I affirmed (which alone gives occasion to the defensative now under consideration) is: that to my ob∣servation Grotius in his Annotations had not left above one text of Scripture, if one, giving cleare evidence to the Deity of Christ; of his Satisfaction I said in summe the same thing. Had the Apologist been pleased to have pro∣duced instances of any evidence for the disproovement of my assertion, I should very gladly and readily have acknoledged my mistake and over∣sight. I am still also in the same resolution, as to the latitude of the expre∣ssion, though I have already by an induction of particulars, manifested his corrupting and perverting of so many, both in respect of the one head, and of the other, with his expresse complyance with the Socinians in his so doing, as that I cannot have the least thought of letting fall my Charge, which with the limitation expressed (of my owne observation) containes the truth in this matter, and nothing but that which is so. It was indeed in my thoughts to have done somewhat more in reference to those Annotations, then thus occasionally to have animadverted on their corruption in generall; namely to have proceeded in the vindica∣tion of the truths of the Gospell from their Captivity under the false glosses put upon them, by the interpretations of places of Scripture wherein they are delivered. But this worke being fallen on an abler hand viz. that of our learned professor of Divinity, my desire is satisfied, and the necessity of my indeavour for that end removed. There are sundry other particulars insisted on by the Apologist, and a great deale of Rhetoricke is layd out about them; which certainly de∣serves not the Readers trouble in the perusall of any other debate about them. If they did, it were an easie matter to discover his mistakes in them all along. The foundation of most of them, lies in that, which he affirmes Sect. 4. where he saies, that I thus state the Jealousies about H. G. as farr as it is owned by me, viz. that being in doctrine a Socinian, he yet closed in many things with the Romane interest. To which he replies, that this does not so much as pretend that he was a Papist. As though I undertake to prove Grotius to be a Papist, or did not ex∣pressely disowne the management of the Iealousy, stated as above; or that
I did at all owne it, all which are otherwise: yet I shall now say, whi∣ther Grotius ad nocentissi∣mae haerese∣os atque f∣renis licen∣tiae scyllam, iterum{que} ad tyrannidis charybdin declinavit fluctuans: Essen. he was in Doctrine a Socinian or no, let his Annotations before in∣sisted on, determine: And whether he closed with the Romane interest or no, besides what hath been observed by others, I desire the Apologist to consider his observation on Rev. 12. v. 5. that booke, (himselfe be∣ing judge,) having received his last hand. But my businesse is not to ac∣cuse Grotius, or to charge his memory with any thing but his prevari∣cation in his Annotations on the Scripture. And as I shall not cease to presse the generall Aphorisme (as it is cal∣led) that no drunkard &c. nor any person whatever not borne of God or u∣nited to Christ the head, by the same Spirit that is in him, and in the sense thereof, perfecting Holinesse in the feare of God, shall ever see his face in glory, so I feare not what conclusion can regularly in reference to any person living or dead, be thence deduced. It is of the Annotations whereof I have spoken: which I have my liberty to do: and I presume shall still continue, whilest I live in the same thoughts of them: though I should see — a third defence of the lear∣ned Hugo Grotius. The Epistles of Grotius to Crellius mentioned by the Apologist in his first defence of him, giving some light to what hath been insisted on, I thought it not unfit to communicate them to the Reader, as they came to my hand, having not as yet been printed that I know of. This booke of Crellius lay unan∣swered by Grotius a∣bove 20 yeares. For so long he lived after the publish∣ing of it. It is since ful∣ly answered by Essenius. Reverendo summaeque eruditionis ac pietatis viro Domi∣no Johanni Crellio pastori Racov. H. G. S. LIbro tuo quo ad eum quem ego quondam scripseram (Eruditissimè Crellî) respondisti, adeo offensus non fui, ut etiam gratias tunc in∣tra animum meum egerim, nunc & hisce agam literis. Primò, quod non tantùm humanè, sed & valdè officiosè mecum egeris, ita ut quaeri nihil possim, nisi quod in me praedicando, modum interdum excedis, deinde verò, quod multa me docueris, partim utilia, partim jucunda scitu, me∣que exemplo tuo incitaveris ad penitiùs expendendum sensus sacrorum librorum. Benè autem in Epistolâ tuâ, quae mihi longè gratissima ad∣venit, de me judicas, non esse me eorum in numero qui ob sententias salvâ pietate dissidentes alieno à quoquam sim animo, aut boni alicu jus amicitiam repudiem. Equidem in libro That is the body of So∣cinian Di∣vinity writ¦ten by Crel∣lius and Volkelius. de verâ Religione, quem jam per∣curri, relecturus & posthac, multa invenio summo cum judicio obser∣vata.
Illud vero saeculo gratulor, repertos homines qui nentiquam in controversiis subtilibus tantum ponunt, quantum in verâ vitae emendati∣one, & quotidiano ad Sanctitatem profectu. Utinam & mea scripta ali∣quid ad hoc studium in animis hominum excitandum inflammandúm{que} conferre possint: tunc enim non frustra me vixisse hactenus existimem. Liber de veritate Religionis Christianae magis ut nobis esset solatio, quam ut aliis documento scriptus, non video quid post tot aliorum labores u∣tilitatis afferre possit, nisi ipsâ fortè brevitate. Siquid tamen in eo est, quod tibi tuique similibus placeat, mihi supra spemeuenit. Libris de jure belli & pacis mihi praecipuè propositum habui, ut feritatem illam, non Christianis tantùm, sed & hominibus indignam, ad bella pro libitu suscipienda, pro libitu gerenda, quam gliscere tot populorum malo quo∣tidie video, quantum in me est, sedarem. Gaudeo ad principum quo∣rundam manus eo libros venisse, qui utinam partem eorum meliorem in suum animum admitterent. Nullus enim mihi ex eo labore suavior fructus contingere possit. Te verò quod attinet, credas, rogo, si quid unquam facere possim tui, aut eorum quos singulariter amas, causâ, ex∣perturum te, quantum te tuo merito faciam. Nunc quum aliud possim nihil, Dominum Jesum supplice animo veneror, ut tibi aliis{que} pietatem promoventibus propitius adsit. x. Maii. M. DC. XXVI. Tui nominis studiosissimus H. G. TAm pro Epistolâ (vir Clarissime) quam pro transmisso libro, grati∣as ago maximas. Constitui & legere & relegere diligenter quae∣cunque à te prosiciscuntur, expertus quo cum fructu id antehàc fecerim. Eo ipso tempore quo literas tuas accepi, versabar in lectione tuae inter∣pretationis Let the Reader judge what Annotatiōs on that Epi∣stle we are to exspect from this man. in Epistolam ad Galatas. Quantum judicare possum & scripti occasionem & propositum, & totam seriem dictionis, ut magnâ cum curâ indagâsti, ita feliciter admodùm es assequutus. Quare De∣um precor, ut & tibi & tui similibus, vitam det, & quae alia ad istiusmo∣di labores necessaria. Mihi ad juvandam communem Christianismi causam, utinam tam adessent vires, quàm promptus est animus: quippe me, à primâ aetate, per varia disciplinarum genera jactatum, nulla res ma∣gis delectavit, quam rerum sacrarum meditatio. Id in rebus prosperis moderamen, id in adversis solamen sensi. Pacis consilia & amavi semper, & amo nunc quo{que}: eoque doleo, quum video tam pertinacibus iris com∣mitti inter se eos, qui Christi se esse dicunt. Si rectè rem putamus, quan∣tillis de causis— Januarii. M. DC. XXXII. Amstelodam. FINIS.
