P108 669.f.6[121] 99871230 160981
official seal of Bristol, England EBEN EZER, As a Thankefull Remembrance of Gods great good∣nesse unto the City of BRISTOLL, in preserving them from the Forces of Prince Rupert without, and a Treacherous plot within, to betray the City to them the seventh day of March 1642. T. P. dedicates this. Exod. 12. 14. And this day shall be unto you for a memoriall., ver. 42. It is a night to be much observed unto the Lord. Iudg. 5. 11. They that are delivered from the noise of Archers in the places of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his Villages in Israel. O Thou who dost excell the highest praise, Thou wonder-worker, life and length of dayes, Thou never-failer in the mount to thine, Onely wise, present, in each place and time, What Brazen Colume, or what Marble stone, Shall we ingrave thy noble Acts upon? This act, thy strange act, counterplotting those Blood-thirsting (Foraine and Domesticke) foes? O native City how canst thou be still? What would'st have more thy mouth with praise to fill? Is health, or wealth, or plenty worth the having? Or seed immortall, sent thee for soule-saving? Or Life, that blessings make the rest to thee Matters of praise? then sing a part with me. Septembers seventh was thankfull for the Scots, And we not for our selves, whose lives by lots Like Hamans bloody prodigy was cast This present March? it might have beene our last, The rising Sunne might warme our frozen brest, More then a falling. Scots then, now we had rest. Startle the Muses, rattle up the Quires, Of sweetest Musicke, Citizens Bonfires, Let Bels, and Cannons roare, your joyes expressing; Young Men and Virgins, in your comely dressing, A way to Church in flockes, the touling Bell Toules now for Heaven, is not for death or Hell: Each streete is echoing praise, the sword is staid, The horned Rammes in Isaaks place are laid: So let them perish and indure disgrace, That Traytors prove unto their native place. The King of heaven our gracious King preserv, But those that doe his Grace pretend to serve, I wish they may prove upright, faithfull, good, But for to plot to shed their Neighbours blood, As some have done, and in this plot would doe, They prove no lesse then King and Kingdomes foe. O Prince of Peace, let it not seeme too great, That Prince and Peeres, and Peoples hearts may meet, And all in unity and peace as one, Build Zions walls, and downe with Babylon, Till when, for mercies let us thankfull be, And untill then, never unbend our knee. So praise, and pray, and Fast and pray agen, Vntill the God of Peace shall say Amen. Printed at London for Michael Sparke senior, 1643.
