P1695 E1034_10 99863220 168921
THE CASE OF Mr. Hugh Peters, Impartially Communicated to the Vievv and Censure Of the Whole World: Written by his own hand. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Speed, and are to be sold at his shop, at the signe of the Printing-Press in St. Pauls Church-yard.
THE CASE OF Mr. Hugh Peters, &c. THey which think to Vindicate them∣selves to the World by writing Apo∣logies, rarely reach their ends, because their Game is an After-game: preju∣dice is strong, and the Plaister can hardly be made broad enough, nor Apologies put in∣to all hands who have pre-judged and received the first tincture. And therefore our blessed Saviour is slow in that work; onely clears the great question of that age, by proving himself the Messiah, (Joh. 5.) by
four witnesses, but not forward to answer expectati∣ons of the World otherwise. And yet so much of his example there is; yea, so much of St. Pauls, and others, that there seems to be a necessity of saying something, though hard to wipe off so much dirt as is thrown on my self. Yet at this distance and leasure, hearing by printed papers what my Lot is in England, my native Country; There∣fore I do in the Name and fear of God, and before his holy Majesty, Angels and Men, profess that I ne∣ver had head nor hand in contriving or managing the late Kings death, as is basely and scandalously suggested by black mouths: was all that day (he dy∣ed) sick and sad in my Chamber; which I prove by two substantial witnesses. And for what is in that Pamphlet June 19. about my confessing in my sick∣ness, landing at Plymouth from Ireland, it is most un∣true and mistaken: for I never was sick at Plymouth, nor landed there from Ireland: nor any of that infor∣mation colourable; & this I avouch in the truth of my soul; and would in presence justifie, if weakness, and lameness, and this distance did not hinder; yea, ma∣ny years being upon me, and an utter inability to do my self right in these things, if the Lord do not make my way in the hearts of men. I shall briefly give an account of my coming into England, my behaviour since I came, and my present condition in this Juncture. A Colony going to settle in New England, by his late Majesties Patent, I went thither; who by my birth in Cornwel, was not a meer stranger to that
place, and fishing-trade: and thither, invited often, I say, went, and was with another sent into England by the Magistrates there, for ease in Excise and Custom, and some supplies for Learning, &c. because I had been witness to the Indians receiving the Gospel there in Faith and Practise; they having the Bible transla∣ted by us into their Language, and part thereof prin∣ted, and hundreds of them professing the Gospel, and teaching each other the knowledge of the true God; and the rather, from the example of the English there: when in seven years among thousands there dwelling, I never saw any drunk, nor heard an Oath, nor any begging, nor Sabbath broken: all which invited me over to England: but coming, found the Nation im∣broyled in troubles and War; the Preaching was, Curse ye Meroz, from Scotland to England; the best Mi∣nisters going into the field: in which (not without ur∣ging) I was imbarqued in time; and by force upon me here, failed of my promise of returning home: which was and is my sad affliction. My first work was, with the first to go for Ireland; which I did with many hazards; then was at Sea with my old Patron the Earl of Warwick, to whom I ow'd my life; then was imploy'd by the City; then by the Earl of Essex, my Lord Say, and others; and my return stopt by the Power that was; and so was in the last Army in several places, but never in the North: In all which affairs I did labour to perswade the Army to their duty. My Principles in Religion guided me to those Or∣thodox truths exprest in the Confessions of Faith in England; and am known to joyn with the Protestants
who are sound in the Faith, in Germany upper and ower, France, &c. I have and do hereby witness a∣gainst all Errours of all kinds. For the War, I thought the Undertakers knew their Work; I was in∣considerable, yea, heartily sorry for mistakes about me. For my Carriage, I challenge all the Kings party to speak if I were uncivil; nay, many of them had my Purse, Hand, Help every way, and are ready to witness it; yea, his present Majesties servants pre∣served by me through hazards. I was never privy to the Armies transactions about the late King at Holm∣by or elsewhere, or of any Juncto, Council or Cabal. But when his Majesty sent for me, I went to him, with whom I dealt about my New England business, & was three or four times with him, and had his special ac∣ceptance, and served him to my utmost, and used all my little skill for his and the Nations good more then twice: for which I have witness; though it be hard to cut my way through so many Rocks. But God is good. It is true, I was of a Party, when I acted zealously, but not with malice or mischief: it hath been ac∣counted honourable, Et Caesare in hoste probat, to keep to principles of honour and honesty. I never quar∣relled others for their judgement in Conscience. It is received, that Religio docenda est, non coercenda. I saw Reformation growing, Laws made, and some against debauchery and evil (which I was glad to read in his Majesties late Proclamation.) I saw a ve∣ry learned, godly, able Ministry as any the world, well provided for: I saw the Universities reformed, and flourishing; and such things much encouraged
me in my Endeavours. I studyed the 13 of the Rom. and was tender; but found the best of Scotland and England of the Ministry engaged, and so satisfied me, that I understand the first undertaking is still main∣tained good. By the War, I never enriched my self: I have often offer'd my personal Estate for 200 l. and for Lands, I never had any but that part of a Noble mans, which I never laid up peny of; nor never ur∣ged the Lord Grey, or others, to buy, nor knew not of the sale, till done; nor justifie any unworthy thing in it. I never plundred nor cheated, never made peny over the Sea, nor hoarded or hid any in Eng∣land. I never was guilty of secluding the Members in 48. nor knew it, till done, and sent by my Lord Fairfax to fetch off two of them, and to know who they were that were secluded. I never had Jewels, nor any thing of Court or State, more then before, directly nor indirectly. Ne∣ver had any Ecclesiastical Promotion in my life in the Nation to enrich me; but lived on my own when I had any thing: nor have been a lover of money. The many scandals upon me for uncleanness, &c. I abhor as vile and false, being kept from that and those aspersions cast; and such I make my protest against as before. I know how low my name runs, how Titleless, how contemned. David knew▪ why Shemei curst him For the Laws of England, I know no place hath better: onely having lived where things are more ex∣pedite and cheap, I have shewed my folly so to say: and having no evil intention, a very worthy Lawyer
took exception at something of mine or my friends, which was never intended in his sense by either, and crave his excuse; I can charge my self with evil e∣nough, as any excentrick motion of mine from my own Calling, want of a solemn spirit in slight times, with unbelief, if I have gone about to reach Religi∣ous ends by trampling upon civil duties, breaking of any Covenants, or slighting them; and do fear Gospel, and the Spirit also may be undervalued by mine, and others unworthy dealing with them. Much to these I might add, who have seen many va∣nities under the Sun; and the World hung with Nets and Snares: Alas, there is nothing to Christ. And lastly, I understand what exception is upon me for Life and Estate in the House of Commons. I have taken hold of the Kings Majesties gracious Pardon, as others did; and know not truly where this exception lies grounded. I wish I had been with their Honours to have clear'd it. I hope a Va∣grant report or Airy noise takes no place with them: for I challenge all the World for my innocence for these suggestions; and appeal to their Honours, and the Noble Lords, for a review of the Charge or Information; and crave no favour if any sober man can charge me; otherwise I most heartily beg just favour, unless my evil be only for acting with such a party, I must have it: For I know before whom my Cause is, and may not despair. I must again profess, were I not a Christian, I am
a Gentleman by birth, and from that extract do scorn to engage in the vile things suggested, and that by one creditless witness, that only supposeth, but as∣serts nothing. I wish from my heart that our pre∣sent Prince may be, and the Nation by him more happy then any; and that the true ends of GOVERN∣MENT may be had and commu∣nicated fully; that every honest heart may have cause to rejoyce in God, the King, and their Laws. And for my self (through Grace) I resolve to be quiet in a corner (if I may) to let God alone with ruling the World, to whose Wisdom and Power we ought to submit yea, to mind ine tow hough never so small; to  under Authority, rather
then impatient; to procure the quiet and peace of the Nation to my ut∣most; to mind things invisible, and of a better consistence then these below; and to pray, when I can do no more. Hugh Peters. FINIS.
