p1796 e545_30 99863210 115399
THE PETITION OF THE General Councel OF OFFICERS Under the Command of His Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, To the Right Honorable the COMMONS of ENGLAND assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the total and universal taking away of Free-Quarter, and other burthens of the Common-wealth, nd for the Relief of Ireland. Together with the ANSWER and several VOTES of the Parliament to the same. Also a List of all the Officers at the General Councel when the Petition was read and approved of. SIgned by the Appointment of the General Councel of Offi∣cers of the Army, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Sect' London, Printed for John. Playford, and are to be sold at his shop in the Inner-Temple, March 3. 1649.
Mr Speaker, THe Petition herewith sent, being unanimously agreed unto by the Councel of Officers of the Army un∣der my Command, and finding the things therein to be just and necessary, in order to publike good, J thought fit (with my concurrence in it) to present it to you, desiring you would take the particulars into a speedy and effectual Considerati∣on; J remain, Your most humble Servant, Tho. Fairfax. Queen-street,2. Mar. 1648. For the honorable William Lenthall Esq Speaker of the Right Honora∣ble the Commons of England assem∣bled in Parliament.
To the right honora∣ble the Commons of England as∣sembled in Parliament; The humble Petition of the General Councel of Officers of the Army under the Command of his Excellen∣cy Thomas Lord Fairfax. HAving observed (with much satis∣faction) how God hath desposed your hearts to accomplish divers things (of greatest consequence in reference to his glory and the publike good of this Na∣tion) for which we have long waited; and that himself hath also owned you therein, which we do with all humility and thank∣fulness acknowledg: And having had a due and serious regard to the greatness of those
works you are now about, and a care also, lest we might seem unthankful, or impatient, upon endeavors so constant and eminent; And being (indeed) most desirous, that those things which relate unto our selves (although very neerly) should yet bring up the rear of our desires to you: We have hitherto been very tender in re-minding you of any further par∣ticulars in order to the Peace and Settlement of the Common-wealth, or Army, lest by that means we should either hinder or di∣stract your Proceedings. But whilest mat∣ters of publike Justice and neer concernment to the Nation, have been put in execution by you, we conceived that we should be much indebted to the duty we owe unto God, and our native Country, if we should neglect the consideration of some things (comparatively) more remote, yet of much concernment also: Now, as we humbly conceive those things that are most necessary for the easing and removing the present bur∣thens of the Common-wealth, and for the satisfaction of those that have served you
faithfully, are most properly, safely, and sa∣tisfactorily to be provided for by you, who are the supream Authority of the Nation; so we could not finde any way to avoyd the imputation which might justly be cast upon us, if (by our neglect, and omission of any things necessary for us to represent) any ill consequence should have followed; We therefore humbly offer these following par∣ticulars to your serious consideration. 1. That Free-Quarter may forthwith be totally and universally taken away. 2. That a speedy and effectual provision may be made of constant pay for the Army (whilest they are kept up,) whereby the Soldiery may be enabled to live upon their pay, and avoyd that pest of Free-Quarter, which (without any other Enemy) must un∣avoydably ruine the Common-wealth. 3. That all persons, of what degree or quality soever, who have been employed in
publike Receipts of Mony, Plate, or Goods, and are any way chargeable and accomptable to the Common-wealth, may be brought to a speedy and exact Accompt; and that per∣sons of known integrity and ability may be appointed for that purpose, which (we humble conceive) may be one expedient for the ends aforesaid. 4. That the many great abuses which the whole Nation, & we in particular daily suffer by clipt mony, may be speedily redressed, and that all those who make it the practise to buy up such mony underhand, and then put it off at the full value, may be brought to ex∣emplary punishment. 5. That the Accompts of all the Officers and Soldiers, who faithfully served, and con∣stantly adhered to the Common-wealth in this or any other Army, County and Garri∣son, since the beginning of this War, may be speedily stated, and Debenters given out, which Debenters we desire may be as fully
allowed of as the mony which hath been lent upon the Publike Eaith of the Nation. 6. That these Accompts so stated, visi∣ble security may be given out of Deans and Chapters Lands, or otherways, wherein we refer the way, time and place of payment to be limited and ascertained by you, and that the Officer or Soldier may not be prejudiced by destructive delays and attendance, so that the mony due may not satisfie the expences and loss he may be at in procuring the same. 7. That whereas divers Soldiers have (through extraordinary Duty and Service) lost and spoiled their horses, some course may be taken for the satisfaction of all such whose horses were slain in the field, or taken in fight in the last Summers War upon due proof thereof, and that satisfaction hath not been already made, and that future provisi∣on be made for such horses as shall be so lost in the Service of the Common-wealth.
8. That some effectual course may be taken for a just & sutable supply to maimed souldi∣ers, & the widdowes of such as have been slaine in the service of the Parliament. To which end we humbly propose, that the Rents and Revenues of SUTTONS Hospitall, and other donations for the like good and charitable uses may be examined and regu∣lated, and the full improved value may be disposed of to the ends aforesaid; which we the rather urge, because those Rents have been constantly freed from Taxes and As∣sessements, and yet have (by the corruption of the Officers) been abused, and not dis∣posed of according to the will and intent of the Donors. 9. That the sad and distressed condition of our Brethren in Ireland, may be imme∣diately considered, and (ere it be too late) such seasonable supplies sent thither as may regain the English honor and interest, for which work we humbly offer, and earnest∣ly desire, that such Forces as are already rai∣sed
and can be spared, which we conceive will be, with some little addition, a consi∣derable strength, may be forthwith appoin∣ted for that service, with such equall provision for maintenance, as the For∣ces here shall have provided, and under such Conduct and conditions as may in∣courage faithfull men for that imploy∣ment, by which meanes you will pro∣bably in a great measure secure this Na∣tion, in part ease the people of their pressures, and, by the blessing of God, recover that Kingdome out of the hands of the Rebells. 10. That divers Gentlemen, Officers, who for their constant fidelity to the pub∣like interest suffered long imprisonment, losse of great estates, and places, and were ejected out of their commands in Ireland by the perfidious INCHIQUIN, and are thereby now reduced to miserable ex∣tremities, may have their pinching neces∣sities
immediately relieved, least they pe∣rish for want of bread, which if so, would tend to the great dishonour of the Par∣liament: The faithfulnesse and worth of these Gentlemen deserves a speciall eye of regard, and recommends them as most fit persons for further imployment in the service of that Kingdome, be∣cause of their experience in that War. All which particulars being of so immediate concernment to the publike, we humbly lay before you, with assurance of a timely and effectuall accomplish∣ment of them, and whatsoever else you in your wisdomes shall find necessary for the safety and settlement of the Commonwealth. March 1. 1648. Signed by the appointment of the said Coun∣cell of Officers, Joh. Rushworth Secr.
Present at the generall Councell of Of∣ficers held at White-Hall, when this Petition was read and approved of, March 1. 1648. The Lord Generall Fairfax. Sir Hardresse Waller. Col. Whalley. Col. Hewson. Col. Barkstead. Col. Twistleton. Col. Okey. Col. Desborough. Col. Horton. Col. Reynolds. Col. Goffe. Col. George Twistleton. Lievt. Col. Venables. Lievt. Col. Bowen. Lievt. Col. Cobbet. Major Blackmore. Major Swallow. Major Barton. Major Browne. Major Coleman. Major White. Major Haynes. Major Berry. Major Audley. Major Creed. Major Disney. Capt. Browne. Capt. Pretty. Capt. Wolfe. Capt. Drury. Capt. White. Capt. Penyfather. Capt. Disher. Capt. Winthorpe. Capt. Messervey. Capt. Smith. Capt. Barrow. Capt. Goddard. Capt. Affirm. Capt. Clark.
Capt. Scotten. Capt Billers. Capt. Lawrence. Capt. Banes. Capt. Percivall. Lievtenant Chillenden. Lievt. Newman. Lievt. Lloyd. Lievt. Frank. Lievt. Southwell. Lievt. Deane. Lievt. Byfield. Lievt. Comes. Lievt. Owen. Cornet Wallis. Cornet Tracy. Cornet Lewis. Cornet Lockyer. Cornet Thompson. Cornet Melling. Ensigne Gravey. Quartermaster Emerson. Quartermaster Cooke. Quartermaster Antrobus. Quartermaster Salter. Quartermaster Whiting.
Die Veneris 2. Martii 2648. THe House being informed, that there were di∣vers Officers of the Army at the doore, they were called in, and Colonell Whalley told Mr. Spea∣ker, that the Generall Councell of the Officers of the Army had sent these Gentlemen and himselfe to present the House with this Petition, which the Generall had likewise recommended by his Letter; & that it is their desire, that the House would take it into their serious, effectual and speedy consideration. The Petitioners being withdrawn, the Letter from the Generall dated 2. Martii 1648. and the said Pe∣tition were read. Resolved upon the Question by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that the matters contained in the said Petition presented from the Generall Councell of the Officers of the Army, be taken into immediate consideration. Resolved, &c. That Mr. Speaker do returne thanks to the Petitioners. The Petitioners being againe called in, Mr. Spea∣ker gave them this Answer. Gentlemen, The House hath read the Letter of the Generall, and your Petition, and looked over every part of it: I must needs say (and you would wonder at it I should tell you so) This day will be a day of much discontent, I mean to all the common
Enemies of you and us: But as to all good men that have engaged to carry on the good of the Kingdome with us, it will be a great rejoycing and satisfaction by this your modest and discreet Petition; and as in your selves it shewes your moderation, so all those whose mouths are open to malice and detraction, will see that both the Army and Parliament are so unanimous in promoting the publique good. The things themselves they consider as matters of great concernment, and intend, and have resolved to take them into immediate consideration. And as you have shewed your selves in former services (for all that you and we do is but service) forward and faithfull, so for these your discreet and and serious Representations, they have commanded me to returne you the heartiest thanks I can; and accordingly I do give you the hearty thanks of this House, and desire you likewise to returne the like hearty thanks from this House to the Generall, and to the whole Generall Councell of the Army. Hen. Scobell Cler. Parliament. FINIS.
