p2120 e270_20 99870968 123366
MOCK-MAJESTY: OR, The siege of Munster. BEING A TRUE STORY OF THOSE fine things, wherewith King IOHN BECOCK, At first a Botcher of Leiden by profession, and his companions the ANABAPTISTS, pleased themselves after they were become Masters of that City. You shall here likewise have the issue of the whole MOCK-SHOW. C. TACITUS. Quidam, ut imperium subvertant, libertatem proferunt; si subverterint, ipsam aggredientur. Idem, Histor. lib. 1. Malignitati falsa species libertatis inest. ELEUTHEROPOLI, ANNO 'ΑΝΑΒΑΠΤΙΣΤΟΜΑΝΙ'ΑΣ, C.XIIX. Imprimatur, James Cranford. London, Printed for J. S. and L. C. 1644.
TO THE WORSHIPFULL, Mr. RICHARD LITHGOLD, Mr. JOHN CHILD, Bailiffs of the ancient Corporation of Kingston upon Thames: For their endeavour for the publique good; For their vigilancy in their Place, and Office: Especially, For the assistance, and encouragement, of their Minister, in preaching the Word, and suppressing novell Fancies: THIS IS DEDICATED, Willingly, Deservedly.
TO THE INTELLIGENT READER, Baptis'd, or Rantis'd. THou must excuse me for this pretty new stampt word. It is pitty but it should signifie something in English. Whether it do or no, it is not a weeke since I first met with it, and that in a way of scorn, and contempt, of the Baptisme of our Church.Ch. Blackwood in his booke entituled, The storming of An∣tichrist in his two strongest holds, &c. very lately publi∣shed.He that goes about to naturalize it, and make it a Denizen, is one that kes upon him also to question the truth of that Relation, which we have inJoan. Sleid. Commentarie X. Sleidans commenta∣ries, concerningBlackwood praef. pag. 12. the tumultuous carriage of the Ana∣baptists in Germany, as himselfe speakes; making the Author thereof, for differing opinions sake in matter of Religion, to make no conscience of violating that sacred rule, which directs and binds every Noble Historian,Ne quid falsi audeat; nequid veri non audeat. That he dare speake no∣thing false; nor yet conceale any thing that is true. Not a little troubled to see so injurious, and false an imputation, laid upon the truest History; that ever was written since the Acts of the Apostles; I was the more incited, to communicate a∣gaine to the publique view, and that in a language which we all can understand, that part thereof, which concerns those tumults more especially: and I do looke for better grounds, for the con∣futing thereof, then such weake surmises, and exceptions, that
he wasBlackwood, b. p. 12. a contrary minded Historian; or, that (d) it is not lawfull to believe an History, from the mouth, or pen, of an enemy. More Christian, and rationall charity,Gal. 4.16.I am sure, hath been observed to direct the soules and actions, even of Heathen men themselves. And I forbeare not to make use of St. Pauls question herein: Is he therefore become your enemy, because he speaks the truth? As for our Author, he hath as faithfully, as ever did any, observ'd what theFl. Joseph. con∣tra Appion. lib 1. . Herodian. l 1. , &c.lear∣nedst of the Jewes requires in a good Historian, To relate nothing, which he could not maintaine from his particu∣lar, and certaine knowledge thereof, by Tot rerum, qu gesserat, aut à fide dignis acce∣perat, notitiâ fretus, Comment. scribere aggressus est. Thuan. lib. 17, de Sleidano. Vid. Meich. Adamum. in Philosoph. German. in Sleidano. personall im∣ployment in the action; or else had not received it from the hands of such, whose truth ought not to be call'd into question. What, in this respect, is objected against him by MatthaeusOrat. de Ord∣at usu Histor. Dresserus, upon the bare word, and assertion, of his friend Christop. Carlevilius, hath as much weight in it, as Mr. Blackwoods surmises. And of what spirit Dresserus was, learned men, who have perused his books, certainly cannot be ignorant. Onely I am sorry, to see any Reformer joyne, or at least, agree with so great a stickler for the Sea of Rome; and that in a censure against a Protestant, of such known piety and integrity. It is hard to gain-say what the noon-day looks upon and witnesses: And now to deny, what our fore-fathers, and all Christendome well-neere tooke notice of, with no lesse wonder then shame, were to endevour to swagger truth out of the world. The great respect and entertainment, which Sleidan had here, when he wasJo. Sleidanus in Anglia communi Protestantium nomine legationem obiit, Theod. Beza in Ie.Embasadour to the Court of England in the generall name of all the Protestants of Germany, shal be both a testimony of his prudence, faithfulnesse, and other abilities in pablique affaires; and also an assurance, that this , or fragment, of that his most excellent History, shall find welcome
with us in an English, though somewhat a courser dresse. How sacred and venerable he esteemedDiligentis∣simè fimul & verissimè histo∣ria perscripta. Beza, ibid. Historiam huc illuc usque ex∣acta fide, & dili∣gentrâ pertex∣uit. Thanus An. M.D.LVI. v. Gesner. in Biblioth. Henr. Pantaleon. Pro∣sopograph. lib. 3. & alios sexcen∣tos.truth to be, and how re∣ligious a thing he accounted it to swerve in the least matter from the nice observing of it, if any man be not Christian e∣nough to have charity to believe the man himselfe herein, others then in this case shall more then aboundantly witnesse it. Thuanus, (k) Beza, &c. Papists, Calvinists, Lutherans, and men of what Religion soever, that are not yet more blinded by faction, then led by reason, will give satisfaction in this be∣halfe, even to such as are extreamly scrupulous. And if all these will not worke in Mr. Blackwood a beliefe of Sleidans truth, in respect of this Relation, then let his owne name-sake, and Countreyman, and perhaps kinsman,Lib. 2. De Vinculo Relig. & Imp. Adam Black∣wood, Omnia nudè, simpliciter, & bonâ fiderprout quaeque res acta fuit, reito: nec enim de meo quicquam addo nec in ullius hominis invi∣diam, aut gra∣tlam aliquid scribo. Ego sanè, quod sine ostentation dictum esse velim, ita sum affectus, ut si∣quid in hoc opere minus verè perscrip∣tum esse scirem dispecturus illud sim, & lectorem iple moniturus ultrò, ne fidem habeat. Sèd plane confido, futurum, ut nulla mihi vaniras objici possit, &c. Sleidan. praefat. ad Elector. Saxoniae.a very learned writer tell the story; and what both his credit and judgement was concerning the same. Now you must pardon him, if he do perchance. Pers. sat. 1. Auriculas teneras mordaci radere vero: And here you have his owne words, rendred as neerely as con∣veniently would permit. (n) Lindenius quidam (falsly printed for Leydensis) Sarcinator, &c. A certaine Botcher, saies he, of Leyden in Holland, having by his Sermons gotten to be King of the Anabaptists, stir'd up a rebellion of the com∣mon sort of people, He meanes. Thomas Muncer, and his complices, whom Luther termes Importunos concionato∣res, and Sanguinarios doctores, Sleid. lib. 5. as formerly others had done, who for ten yeeres space destroyed and laid waste Germany, and occasioned the death of many thousands. But here I cannot sufficiently admire the sottishnesse of those men, who placed over themselves such a King as preached no∣thing else to the people, but the destruction of King∣domes, the abrogation of Magistrates, and that all men were created by that great and powerfull God to a like
condition. Who either from those wild conceits he had gathered out of the Talmud, or other Judaicall forgeries; or else, from absurdities taken out of the Alcoran, did teach them, that the enemies of their religion, or rather indeed of their rebellion and treason, were to be dealt withall by banishment, and imprisonment; by bonds, and stripes, and by death it selfe. Fidem huic sermoni res ipsa facit: Ʋtinam mendacio ista confingeremus, & rerum ab iis gestarum veritas nostram oratto∣nem refataret. The truth of the matter procures it selfe beliefe. And I could wish, that all were but lies, and meerely feigned; and that the truth, of the carriage of the whole businesse otherwise, might confute what I say. At first, when this doctrine, newly rais'd from hell, was scattered and spread among the people, nothing could seeme more meeke and simple then these kind of men. They desired nothing, forsooth, but Reformation of the old discipline, and liberty of conscience. But, I pray you, what liberty of conscience call you that, which breaking downe all pales and boundaries, endeavours what it can to ruine Kingdome, and Common-wealths, and to sup∣presse all manners and Laws? This conscience is a wolfe in a sheepes cloathing. And as the Sea-horse, according to ib. .Plutarch, kils the sire, that he may more easily couple with the dam; so these mad men, that they may with more freedome abuse the Commonwealth, which is the mother of us all, to their owne lusts, they strive to dis∣enthrone, and put downe all Kings and Magistrates, who are the common fathers of the people. And as the Viper is not borne, but by eating out a way to life: so neither is this new profession, but by the destruction of the Com∣monwealth, our mother. For, as Macrobius saies of the E∣picures sect, this whole faction, carried away from the truth with a full swinge, cannot by any meanes subsist, but by the corruption of manners and Lawes, and the utter ruine of States. For where good Laws are in force,
how possibly can any scoundrell fellow Abjectissimus quisque de faece vulgi cedo, impudentissi∣mus quisque sycophanta, perditiss. apo∣stata, &c., any dunghill cobler, any talkative, ignorant, impudent coxcombe as∣pire, and aime at Principality, and a Kingdome, and Ty∣ranny it selfe? They, that were first indeed misled by this way, might be somewhat excused, as being, through their folly and simplicity, enveagled under a faire pre∣tence, and shew of Evangelicall truth. But now, if any one at this day, and in so great a light of the Gospell, suffer himselfe at noon-tide to be blinded, and seduced; he shall not be conceived to offend out of folly, and sim∣plicity; but out of stubbornnesse, and incurable mad∣nesse; and therefore must by no meanes thinke to depre∣cate that judgement, which he hath voluntarily, and with his owne hands pluckt upon his owne head. Thus far out of that learned man, the contrary minded Mr. Blackwood, if I may borrow the expression, in his booke dedicated to the Ex∣cellent Prince HENRY, and inscribed,Of the bond of Religion, and govern∣ment. De Vinculo Reli∣gionis & Imperii. A writer, to say no more, (for it is testi∣mony sufficient) very highly esteemed of, for hisIn his Speech of the Post-nati. singular learning, by that great and eminent Lawyer, Chancellour Egerton L. Ellesmere. Farewell. JUDG. 9.15. And the bramble said unto the Trees, If in truth ye anoint me King over you, then come, and put your trust in my sha∣dow; and if not, let fire come out of the Bramble, and devour the Cedars of Lebanon.
Mock-Majestie: OR, The Siege of MƲNSTER. Anno M.D.XXX.III. NOT farre from Munster, one of the chiefe Cities of Westphaly, is a Church dedicated to Saint Maurice, wherein one Bernard Rotman in the yeare M.D.XXXII. Preached the Gospell to a very numerous auditory. And when as the Citizens thought of some course to bring him in among them, they were hinde∣red by the Papists, who gave him some small piece of money, to goe some where else, and exercise his Talent. He hereupon goes his waies▪ and having toucht at severall places, casting about for his best profit and advantage, after some moneths absence, returns back to Munster. They that were not well pleased there with, did what they could to keepe him out of the Pulpit: but to no purpose, the people were already so much taken with him. Therefore presenly some of the abler and wealthier sort got him in among them into the Citie: and finding the Church doors shut up against him, they set him up a Pulpit with∣out doors in the porch. And being now become confident of their strength, and presuming on their numbers, they make bold to demannd the keyes of the Church from the Priests, threatning otherwise them∣selves to breake open the doors. Not long after, Rotman, by the coun∣sell and consent of some, who were chiefe of his party, sends setters into the Land-grave of Hessens Countrey, being not far distant thence,
requesting that some able, and learned men might be sent to assist him in the plantation of the Gospell. They of Marpurg sent him two; who with himselfe and three others, straightway enter into consultati∣on, how with best speed they might rid all the Papists out of the City, that by this meanes the Gospell might be preached with more freedom and liberty. The best way they could think upon was to summe up all the Popish errors: and so digesting them into thirty heads, they deli∣vered them to the Magistrates, assuring them all to be repugnant to the Word of God, offering to make it good out of holy Scriptures, even with the hazard of their own lives. Hereupon the Magistrates cite the Fryers, and Priests to appeare before them in publique, exhibiting the same Articles of their errors alledged against them. Now whereas they had ever borne the people in hand, that their Doctrine was according to purity, and grounded on the Word of God, which notwithstanding those Preachers denyed, undertaking to maintain it with their utmost perill; the Magistrates demanded of them, whether they could con∣fute by Scripture what was objected against them. This being in such manner proposed unto them, as that they might well perceive thereby how the Magistrates stood affected, they answered in briefe, that they had nothing to urge for their owne defence; but that whereas hither∣to they had made the people beleeve their Doctrine to be sound and warrantable, all proceeded either from opinion or ignorance. Where∣fore the Magistrates, upon conviction of their falshood, and errours in Doctrine, having nothing to answer for themselves, but the bare con∣fession of their owne lewdnesse, commanded that for the time to come, they should cease preaching to the people, and yeeld up their roomes every where to these new Teachers, who had detected and laid open their ignorance and impostures. Afterward, by a joynt agreement of the Magistrates and people, they had each of them particular Churches appointed to teach in, which the Fryers in generall tooke very scurvi∣ly, but they especially of the Cathedrall, being most of them descended of good Families. They, when they saw no other remedie, departed in an anger, making their addresse to the Bishop; the result of their consultations with whom was, to beset all the wayes and passages, whereby provision might be brought into the Citie. Which being done, the Bishop with the rest, went to Telget, a small towne some three miles distant from the Citie, to take further Counsell there. At length they dispatcht a Messenger with letters to the Magistrates, warning them to cease from their intended courses, and to restore all things to
their former state and condition; otherwise, that they should be decla∣red as enemies. The Bishop then was Count Francis Waldecke, and before him Fredericke, brother to the Archbishop of Collen: But hee, either for his healths sake, or fore-seeing the storme that was like to fal, had not long before voluntarily quitted both office and place; contented to lead a private life rather in his own Country, then to hazard his qui∣etnesse among a factious and seditious people. They of Munster, upon deliberation, detayned the messenger, and is∣suing out upon Christmas Eve, some nine hundred of them came unex∣pectedly upon the Town, which instantly they tooke, besetting every way, that none might make escape: but the Bishop had departed thence the day before. Thus they brought the prisoners into the Citie, among whom were the chiefe of the Clergie, and others of very noble descent. The Magistrates demanded of them, what they intended to do, and whether they purposed any more to hinder the preaching of the Gospell for the time to come? They freely answered, they would do what in them lay to further it. By this means they fell to an agree∣ment, a Copie whereof the Magistrates sent to the Landgrave of Hes∣sen, withall intreating him, that for the Gospels & Common-wealths sake, he would not be wanting to help on a busines of so great moment. Here upon he disparcheth some to them, by whose intercession a re∣concilement was made; But all wrongs and injuries being forgotten, a firm peace was concluded of; that in sixe Churches the Gospel should be taught; that whatsoever was unbeseming or superstitious in mat∣ters of Religion, should be abolished; that in the Cathedrall nothing should be altered, that the Citizens should not thinke that it any way belonged to them. These Articles of agreement were subscribed and signed with the seales of the Landgrave, the Bishop and his Officers, the Nobility, Gentry, and people in generall, February the XIV.M.D.XXXIII. Things being setled in this manner, there came to Munster one Iohn of Leyden, an Hollander, and a Botcher by profession, a stiffe Anabap∣tist. He having cunningly insinuated himselfe into the acquaintance of the Preachers there, began at first, in private discourse, to aske them, whether they thought it fit to baptize Infants? which they affirming, he wholly carryed with the contrary opinion, fell to scoffing and con∣temning of them. Whereupon Bernard Rotman, of whom there is for∣mer mention, in a publike assembly of the people, exhorted them all to pray unto God, that they might enjoy the Doctrine of Christ in pu∣rity,
not polluted with the corruptions of fanaticall and hot-braind men, especially the Anabaptists, who secretly crept in among them, and frequented their Assemblies: whose opinion, if it should once but get the upper hand, was like to prove destructive both to Church & Com∣mon wealth. About the same time came thither also one Herman Sta∣preda, who being appointed collegue, or partner in the Ministery with Rotman, began publiquely to inveigh against the Baptisme of little ones. This fellow had been sometime a heater of one Henry Roll, whom they of Vtricht had not long before this, put to death for his preaching of Anabaptisme. And this was another degree and step, whereby to advance this new doctrine; the matter being already brought to such a passe, that all the talke of the Town was now concerning the Anabap∣tists. Yet what they did was all in private; none being admitted into their assemblies, but such as were of their owne Sect; their Teachers likewise forbearing to maintain any thing in publike, venting their do∣ctrines in the night time when others were asleepe, then only perfor∣ming their misterious works of darknesse. But matters could not be car∣ried so close, but that the people must needs take notice thereof, who tooke great exceptions at it, and cryed out shame that new doctrines should be sowed and scattered abroad by night, as if they feared the re∣proofe and confutation of the day light. Hereupon the Magistrates made an Ordinance, that the chief authors thereof should quit the Ci∣ty: which indeed they did; but were no sooner gone forth, but they returned back by another way, being now so bold as to give it out, that God had commanded them to continue there still, and to play their parts with a deale of bravery and confidence. This somewhat moved the Magistrates, and indeed struck them with no small wonder: Ther∣fore to avoid greater uproares and commotions in the Citie, as wel the Ministers of the Anabaptists as of the Gospell, are cited to appeare in their Towne Hall, and a set number of learned men appointed besides. Here Rotman bewrais of what spirit & temper he was, & having for so long together kept himselfe close, he now in a generall concourse publi∣shes his opinion, and with a great deal of bitternesse, he declares the bap∣tisme of Infants to be a thing both ungodly and execrable: but Herman Busch, a very learned man, so ably maintained the contrary in presence of the Magistrates, that they by a publique decree were strait way com∣manded to forsake the Citie. They finding no remedie, pretended how unsafe it was for them to passe the Bishops Countrey; whereupon the Magistrates gave them safe conduct and provision for their journy.
But having formerly resolved never to change their abode for any o∣ther, but to nestle here still, after a while returned privately to their proselytes here, lurking closely in their houses for a time. The Magi∣strates in the meane while, before such time as they began to peepe out of their holes, shut up the doores of all their Churches save one. For their feare was, lest the Anabaptists, whose numbers daily encreased, having once more got the company of their Teachers there, might wholly shut out the Ministers of the Gospell. Vpon this in November, the Landgrave at the request of the Magi∣strates, sent two Ministers more to preach among them, Theodoricke Fabricius and John Melsinger. But Melsinger, apprehending the com∣motions in the Citie, and the danger which might ensue thereon, retur∣ned home againe presently. The other zealously exhorted the Citizens that they would heedfully beware of the doctrine of the Anabaptists; in which course like wise he held on couragiously, and continued in it, till such time as the Anabaptists getting the upper hand, made all flye before them out of the Citie, as you shall heare anon. And to make all sure, as he thought, the Landgrave prescribed a set forme of doctrine and administration of Discipline, & that by consent of the Magistrates and people: by whose permission also Peter Wirtem had leave to begin againe to preach; but after a few Sermons, by Rotman's instigation, he was expell'd by the Anabaptists; who being now become more inso∣lent and daring, tooke upon them to challenge Fabricius and others to dispute with them. The Magistrates gave way hereunto, ordering withall that they should use no arguments or authority, but such as they brought out of Scripture, or the writings of Orthodox men; ap∣pointing some sufficient and learned men, who, as Judges, hearing and examining what could be alleadged on both sides, should decide the controversie; and what they determined should stand ratified, and ac∣knowledged by all, for the speedier abolishing of contentions and quarrells, and the restoring and establishing of peace in the Church: but Rotman and his fellows would not stand to these conditions. When as therefore they would not agree to this ordering and decision of the matter in hand, they came to be slighted generally, and scorned by the common sort of people. To wash away which shame and contempt, they devised a more effectuall and compendious course, and it was thus. One who was sufficiently instructed to act his part, was subor∣ned by the rest to counterfeit himselfe inspired on the sudden by the holy Ghost, and to run to and fro up and down the Citie, calling out
upon the people, as he went along, to repent, and be baptized againe; that otherwise, the heavy wrath of God would suddainly fall upon them all. What tumults happened among the people hereupon, is easie to imagine, every one that had been rebaptized crying up the same a∣maine, and that too in the same manner. Many therefore fearing the fierce anger of God, so much threatned by them, were perswaded, be∣ing otherwise men of an honest meaning, but herein betrayed by their owne simplicity and weaknesse. Others also yeelded to them; but to no other end, but to save what they had: for the Anabaptists handled them that stood out in a very rough manner, turning them quite out of all. This hapned about the end of December, whereupon their Tea∣chers now began to look out againe, having concealed themselves as I told you before, in their severall lurking holes: and so gathering a great concourse of people in the Market-place, they cryed out amaine to slay all such as had not been rebaptized, esteeming them in no better a condition then Pagans and Infidels. Next they seized upon the pub∣lique magazine of Armes, and the Court Hall, besides the violence they offered to the houses of private men, and those of best quality. There were some, who to save themselves and theirs, had got them into a place of the Citie, which was naturally disposed for defence, and by this meanes they tooke many of them. This bickering with the Ana∣baptists, who had fortified themselves in the Market house, lasted so long, till at length, giving Hostages on both sides, they came to a com∣position; wherein it was agreed upon, that every one should enjoy their own Religion, depart to their owne houses, and keepe the peace for the time to come. Rotman in the meane while, and Bernard Knip∣perdoling, the ringleaders of the faction, although they seemed out∣wardly to advance the composition, yet under hand sending letters to the neighboring Townes, they invited them of their own Sect, that leaving all they had, they should forthwith repaire to Munster; tel∣ling them withall, that what they lost thereby, they should speedily regaine againe with ten-fold usury. Moved by these large swelling promises, they came thither in great numbers, women aswel as men, every one devouring great matters in their hopes, especially they of meaner condition. The Citizens, especially they of the wealthier sort, perceiving the Citie to fill with strangers, withdrew themselves as conveniently as they could, leaving the Anabaptists and promiscuous multitude behind them. This was in February, a little before Shrove∣tide, in the yeare M. D. XXXIII.
The one side being by this meanes weakned, the Anabaptists fell to chusing a new Magistracy, all of their own faction. They made like∣wise two new Burgomasters, Knipperdoling being one of them. And not long after, they set upon St. Maurices Church, firing it, with all the houses neere it. Then they fell to robbing and spoiling all the o∣ther Churches, especially the Cathedrall. And after all this mischiefe, in the last place, running through every street of the Citie, they called out upon the people to repent. Then changing their note, they war∣ned all the wicked, (as they term'd them) straightway to quit the place, except they had a mind to run the hazard of their lives. Then ta∣king armes, they presentlie forced all such as were not of their owne Sect, out of the Citie, making no reckoning of either age or sexe; in∣somuch, as many women great with childe, miscaried in this heady & tumultuarie flight. Next they seize upon the goods of them they had driven out. And although this happened, but the day before the Bi∣shop besieged the Citie; yet some in their flight thence, falling into the Bishops hands, were entreated no better then enemies; and it cost some of them their lives, and among them one or two were Ministers of the Gospell. Peter Wirtem, of whom I spake before, being in some danger, was delivered by intercession of the Landgrave. The other Townsmen warned with the feare hereof, seeing what danger they that had left the Citie had run themselves into, being well meaning men, were forced in a manner against their wills to stay there still. A∣bout this time John Matthews a Prophet, for that terme they use, of high esteem among them, commanded that every one should bring into the publike what gold, silver, or other moveables whatsoever they were possessed of, threatning death to such as should faile hereof. And a house was publikely appointed for the same purpose. The people being terrified with the severitie of this Ordinance, were fain to obey. And to avoid all deceit herein, by keeping back any part of what they had, two maids forsooth, and they Prophetesses, were suborned, pre∣tending to reveale whatsoever couzenage any one should commit there∣in. Neither brought they together onely what was their owne, but their goods also were brought in common, whom they had turn'd out of the Citie. In the next place the same Prophet commanded, that no bodie should have, or keepe by him, any other booke, save the Bible: that all other bookes should be brought and burnt in publique. This commandement hee said he had received from God. Bookes there∣fore were brought together in great number, and consumed in the
flames. A certaine Smith by chance at the same time, called Hubert Truteling, had cast forth some jesting speeches against them they called their Prophets. This comming to be known, they called together the multitude, and appoint others to be ready in armes; here they accuse and condemn the fellow: this mov'd the people exceedingly. The first that laid hands on him was the Prophet I told you of, throwing him down, and then running a pike into him, yet the wound proved not mortal, although he ran at him with his ful strength. Then he comman∣ded him to be removed to another place, where he shot him with a musket which hee snatcht out of a young mans hand that stood by. But when as this neither could speed him, he said God had revealed it to him, that the time was not yet come that he must dye; and that moreover God had revealed his grace unto him. However hee dyed within a few dayes after. Hereupon the Prophet taking a long speare, and running violently through the Citie, cryed out, that God the Fa∣ther had commanded him to beate the enemie off from the Citie; but comming necre the enem es quarters, he was met by a common souldi∣er, who presently ran him through. And although his predictions fell short, and failed him now in a second businesse; yet his fellow Pro∣phets had so infatuated and be witched the people, and set out the mat∣ter in such a dresse, that they much lamented the losse of him; fearing withall, that some heavy judgment hung over their heads, having so worthy and eminent a man taken from among them. But Iohn of Ley∣den being also a Prophet, and of next esteem to him, bids them all be of good cheere; for that it had been long before revealed to him, that hee should come to such an end; that hee would take his Widow home to himselfe, and make her his wife. Two daies before Easter they ran into the Churches, and there fell a ringing all the bells at once. Not long after Knipperdoling prophesies that they who were now in high place and dignity should be brought low enough; and that others again should be preferr'd and rais'd from an humble and meane condition: and that he commands all the Churches should be destroyed, maintaining with a great deale of gravity, that this Commandement proceeded from God himselfe. Wherefore upon this asseveration, he was obeyed with a great deale the more cheereful∣nesse and diligence. About the same time Iohn of Leyden delivers a sword to Knipperdoling, & orders him to be the common Headsman: for that it pleased God to have it so, that he who had lately borne the highest office, having been Burgomaster, should beare now the mea∣nest,
and be no better then a hangman, he being so far from refusing it, that he seemed to entertaine his new place with a great deale of joy and thank∣fulnesse. The Bishop of Munster had for some Moneths maintained the war alone, upon his own charges: but now Herman, the Archbishop of Collen, and John, Duke of Cleus. sent him Money, Ammunition, some Troops of Horse, and Companies of Foot. The Archbishop also came to the siege, to sit in councell with them; and not long after they made some assaults upon the Ci∣tie in severall places; but seeing no hopes of storming it, they raised seven Forts about it, thereby to keepe all manner of provision from coming to them; intendng that some Companies of Horse and Foot should lie there all the winter. The Bishop of Munster in the mean time demanding aids for the contimance of the siege, of all the Princes and Cities lying upon or neer the Rhine, as being his neighbours, and whom the hazzard and danger might in some sort concern, as well as himself. Hereupon a meeting was appoin∣ted at Coblentz, Decemb. XIII. M. D. XXXIV. After an assault made upon the City to no putpose, John of Leyden com∣poses himself to a sound sleep, and there for sooth he dreams for three daies: being wakened, he vouchsafes no man a word, but makes signes for paper, and therein he writes down the names of twelve men, and among them some of the best Gentry that were left; these were now to govern the Commor∣wealth in chief, and to have the ruling of all in his Israel. Now when as by means of this reverend Jury, he had made way to become King himself, he proposes to the Teachers some certain tenents of his own devising, which he requires to have confuted by them by testimonies out of Scripture, which if they could not do, he would then commend them to the multitude to be ap∣proved of and established; the chief of them was this: That a man is not hound to one wife, and, that a man may have in marriage as many wives as he pleased. But when as the Teachers seemed to impugne this his opinion, he cals them all into the Court, and that in presence of his 12. men; here in a generall Assem∣bly he plucks off his cloak, and flinging it upon the ground, together with his New Testament, he swears, and beares witnesse by these tokens, that this Doctrine that he had caused to be published, was revealed unto him from Heaven, and in terrible words threatens them with the heavie displeasure of God, in case they consented not. At length they agreed, and the worthie Teachers, for three daies together, preached of nothing but Matrimony. So he on the sudden got him him three wives, whereof one was the great Pro∣phets Iohn Matthews, whom we spoke of before. There were others like∣wise that followed his example, so that at length it came to be a matter of the greatest credit, to have many wives: but some of the Citizens were
mightily displeased hereat, and giving notice one to another through the City, they called together all such as loved the Gospell, into the Market-place, where they apprehended the Prophet and Knipperdoling, and all the rest of the Teachers. Which was no sooner known, but the common people broke in strait with Armes to their rescue, killing out of hand some fifty of the Citizens, with severall torments: some they bound to trees, and others to stakes, and so shot them, whilest the chief Prophet cryed aloud, that they that made the first shot at them, did God very pleasing service: the rest they put to other manner of deaths, but all savouring of exact cruelty. Towards the end of Iune there arose another new Prophet, a Gold-Smith, he calling the whole multitude into the Market place, acquaints them all, that it was the will and command of their heavenly father, that Iohn of Leyden should be made King of the whole world: and that setting forth with migh∣ty forces, he should promiscuously slay all the Kings and Princes of the earth, only he should spare the common people; that is, such as had loved ju∣stice and truth, and should at length sit on the throne of his father David, till such time as the father should againe require the Kingdom at his hands: that in the mean while the ungodly being every where suppressed and utterly de∣stroyed, the righteous generation only should reigne in this life. This was no sooner proclaimed in publique, but Iohn of Leyden strait way fell down upon his knees, and lifting up his hands to heaven; men and brethren, quoth he, I have had, these many daies since, all this revealed unto me; and was my self very unwilling to have it made known, but now to confirm it, the heavenly Father hath made use of another Minister. Thus he became King: the first thing he did was to abrogate the authority of his twelve men he had chosen: and as the fashion of Kings is, he makes choice of his Peerage and Nobility to attend him: he commands likewise two Crownes to be made him, besides a Scabbard, Chaine, and Scepter, and and other ornaments of Royall Majestie, and all of the purest and choicest Gold. Then he appoints set daies, on which he would heare all kinde of suits and complaints that should be brought before him. As often as he came abroad, he was attended by his Officers and chosen Nobility: next unto him followed a couple of youths, both on horseback; he on the right hand carried the Crowne and Bible, the other bare a naked Sword: his chief wife went in the same pompe and state: For I told you he had many at the same time. In the Market place he had a throne raised for him, all covered with cloath of Gold. All actions and complaints which were brought before him, were for the most part con∣cerning wives and divorces, and these were wondrous often, in so much as many that had lived to a good age, one with another, came now to be par∣ted for being man and wife. It happened as the people stood in the market∣place,
thick and close together in the croud to heare, that Knipperdoling get∣ting up upon their backs and heads, and creeping along on his hands & knees among them, and breathing in their faces, would say to every one as he passed, The Father hath sanctified thee; Receive the Holy Ghost. On another day dancing in the Kings presence, (for so wee must now call Iohn of Leyden,) Thus was I wont, saies he, in former time to dance with my whore; but now the Father hath commanded me to performe the same in sight of the King. Being troublesome, not knowing when to make an end, the King went his waies displeased. Then gets he into the Chaire of State, and plaies the King too, till the other returning in the interim, quite turned him out of his seate, and so into prison for three dayes. During the Siege they wrote a booke and published it, calling it the RE∣STITVTION. Among other matters in this booke they maintaine, That the Kingdome of Christ shall be such here on earth before the finall day of judgment, that the godly and elect shall reigne, the wicked every where be∣ing quite destroyed and consumed. They say also that it is lawfull sor the peo∣ple to depose their Magistrates. Also, although they had no expresse com∣mand from the Apostles, for the usurping of such jurisdiction, yet they who were now Ministers of the Church, ought to assume to themselves the power of the sword, and by force to constitute a new forme of a Common-wealth. More∣over that none excapt he be a true Christian indeed, ought to be endured in the Church. And more yet, that none can possibly be saved, that brings not in all he hath into the publique, reserving nothing for his private possession. Luther and the Pope of Rome they terme to be false Prophets, but Luther to be far worse then the other. Marriage also they esteemed to be polluted and impure, where the parties were not inlightened with true faith; accounting it no better then fornication or flat adultery. These fond opinions of theirs have specially been confuted by Melancthon, Justus, Menius, Vrban King, and that learnedly and at large, in their severall writings of this subject. After some weekes, the new Prophet as I told you of, blowes a Trumpet through every street of the Citie, and commands all the people to appeare armed before the Cathedrall Church doores; for that they intended now to drive away the enemie from before the Citie; and being come thither, they found good cheer ready prepared and drest. Whereupon they sate down, as they were bid, some foure thousand of them; and after them some thou∣sand more feasted, who had been in the meane while upon the watch. The King and Queene with their followers were the chiefe waiters at this feast. Having eaten their meate, and almost made an end of their good cheere, the King comes and gives every one of them bread, with these words. Take ye, at ye, decl ye the death of the Lord. Then the Queene taking the cup,
gave it about saying: Drinke ye and declare ye the death of the Lord. After this, the Prophet before mentioned gets up into a pulpit, and thence he askes the people whether they would obey the Word of God or not, then they all affirmed they would. It is the command said he then, of our Father, that some Teachers of the Word, some 28. should be sent abroad, who going forth to the foure corners of the world, should preach the same doctrine which is taught in this Citie. Vpon this, he names such as should goe, and appoints them which way they should steare their course. To Osenburg were sent VI. as many to Warendorf. To Lusat IIX. and so many more to Cosfield. After this the King and Queen supped with the rest of their Officers, and them that were designed to be sent abroad. In the midst of sup∣per the King rises, pretending he had forgotten some weighty businesse gi∣ven him in charge by the Father. By chance they had a souldier in their hands lately taken; to him the King goes and accuses him of Treason, as it were another Iudas, and himselfe cuts off his head: Then he comes againe to supper, and here he relates his bloody deed, passing it over with a jest. Af∣ter supper they that were appointed were sent away about shutting in of night; besides provision for their journeys, every one had a piece of gold gi∣ven him, which they were commanded to leave in those places, that would not admit of their doctrine, as a testimonie of their ensuing destruction, and everlasting perdition for their refusall of peace and so wholsome doctrine. When they were come to the severall places whither they were directed, they first raised a great cry every where about the Towne, warning all men in generall to repent, threatning destruction to them otherwise in a short time. This plain trick effecting nothing, they took their cloakes and spread on the ground before the Magistrates, casting thereon the money which had been delivered to them: then assuring them that they were sent by God the Father, they freely ffered them peace, which if they would entertain, they must bring together & communicate all their possessions: if they refused this proffer of theirs, then that the piece of monie should remaine as a token to witnesse against their heinous unthankfulnesse and unbelief. For that now the time was come, foretold by all the Prophets, wherein God would have ju∣stice to be observed over the whole face of the earth. And when as their King should by the diligent execution of his office, have brought matters to that passe that justice might reign every where, that then Christ would again deli∣ver up the Kingdom to his father. Vpon this their wild preaching, they were apprehended, and at first dealt with in a friendly manner; but this doing no good upon them, they were afterward questioned upon the rack concerning their faith and course of life, as also concerning the strength of the Citie. But their ansers were, that they only were the men, whose doctrine was true;
which likewise they would make good with the very hazard of their lives. For that since the Apostles age hitherto, the word of God was never taught aright, nor any justice to be found among men. That there had been but four Prophets at all since Christ; whereof two were just ones, David and Iohn of Leyden; the other two unjust ones, the Pope & Luther; but of the two, Lu∣ther the worst. Being questioned why they forced innocent men out of the Citie, and from their estates, contrary to their agreement, & promise past un∣to them, taking into their possession their wives, children, and all they had; and by what places of Scripture they could defend this justice forsooth of theirs? To this they replyed, that the time was now come, wherein Christ had promised, that the mock should possesse the earth. That so of old God gave to the Israelites all the goods of the Egyptians. After being examined concer∣ning the forces & store of come they had in the City, and withal about their wives they made several answers; but to the last that most of them had above 5. Moreover that they daily expected fresh forces from Frizland & Holland; that as soone as they came, their King would issue forth with al his armie to conquer the whole world, & stay those Kings who had not administred judg∣ment & justice. After their tryal, when as yet they would not acknow ledg any other Magistrate, saving their own King, but persisted stubborn in their own, wilfull humour, they were all of them beheaded but one, who by chance made an escape. But now the City was so straightly besieged, that there was no passage out left any where. Therefore the Citizens fearing a famine and apprehen∣ding the danger they were in, entred into a consultation of laying hands up∣on the King, and delivering him up bound to the Bishop. But the King ha∣ving notice given him therof, chose out twelve from among al the multitude, whom he imagined would prove most faithfull to him to these he committed the chief care & charge of the City, assigning them every one their particular place to defend, besides these he appointed himself a guard to suppresse al kind of commotions and seditions that might arise among them. Having done this, calling the whole multitude before him, he promises them, they should be freed from the siege, and all kinde of want which might ensue thereupon, before Easter next. But for his twelve chief Commanders. to them he pro∣mises far greater matters, they forsooth should be Marquesses, and Dukes, and Princes, and I know not what, assigning them every one their Provinces by name, what Signiories and Castles they should be made Lords of; resol∣ving only to spare the Landgrave, for that he hoped, as he told them, that he in time should come to be one of themselves. Wee told you before, that there was a meeting ordered of the Princes and Cities of the Rhenish Provinces at Coblentz in Decemb. John Frederick the Prince Elector of Saxony came of his owne accord to this Assembly. After
deliberation, speedie aids were assigned to the Bishop: 300. horse, & 3000. Foot for three moneths. These forces, and the managing of the whole War was committed to Wirich Count Oberstein as Generall. Here also they a∣greed, that other States of the Empire should likewise be solicited for aides; And, because the Emperour was himselfe in Spaine, that Ferdinand therefore the King of the Romans should be requested, that a publique Dyet, upon this occasion might be appointed against April following. Then they sent Let∣ters, earnestly advising the besieged to yeeld themselves up, and to desist from an enterprize, then which the Sun it selfe never beheld any more detestable, and to be abhor'd: withall threatning them unlesse they did obey, and submit themselves to their lawful Magistrate, that the Bishop who how besieged them, and whose rights they detained, should not want the assistance of the whole Empire for his just reliefe, and redresse of his losses. This was about the end of December. They returned an answer towards the middle of Ian. CO. IO. XXXV. and that in many words, but nothing to the purpose: yet so, that they still justified & maintained what they did. As for what they were charg'd with∣all, about setting up a King, they made no answer at all to that. But in their private letters to the Landgrave, they indeavour to excuse it, adding moreover many things else concerning the utter destruction of all the ungodly; and of the deliverance and Kingdom of the godly in this life. Withall they sent to him the book I told you before they published, entit'led the Restitution, coun∣selling him to repent, and not as the other ungodly Princes, to make warre a∣gainst them who were innocent men, and the very people of God. The Land∣grave having perused, as well their book as their letters, and himselfe noting down with his own hand, what he conceived amisse therein, hee orders his owne Divines to make answer thereunto. And because themselves had signi∣fied unto him in their letters, although but in few words and that too some∣what obscurely, that their King was not so much set up by themselves, as ap∣pointed and placed over by God himselfe, he demands of them why they ur∣ged not those places of Scripture, upon the authority of which they imagi∣ned it lawfull for them so to doe; withall what fore-running signes and pro∣digies they had to approve and make it good by? For that God by all his Prophets, long before hand foretold of the comming of Christ; & that with that evidence and plainnesse, that not only the Tribe or stocke of which hee should be descended, was manifestly expressed, but also the very time and place where he should be borne. They had desired likewise in the same letters that their Cause might have a faire hearing: whereunto the Landgrave an∣swer'd, that there was now no place left for that; seeing that they had assumed to themselves the power of the sword, and had been the authors of so much
mischiefe and calamity; that every bodie began now plainely to perceive what was their main drift and aime, the suppressing of all Lawes, the over∣throw and utter ruine of Common-weales. And that as their attempt for the maine of it, was altogether ungodly and execrable; so this their request, to have a hearing of their Cause, was wholly feigned and counterfeit. That for his part, he had formerly sent unto them faithfull Ministers of the Gospel, by whom without all question, they had been rightly instructed. But whereas they now rejecting the wholsome doctrine of such Teachers, had fall'n from their obedience to the Magistrate; had with violent hands seiz'd upon the goods and possessions of their neighbours; had taken to themselves variety and choise of wives; had elected and set up a new King among them; had denyed that Christ had taken on him humane nature from the Virgin Mary: had maintained and asserted the freedome of mans will; had forcibly con∣strained the people to a communication of their goods in publique; had deny∣ed pardon and absolution to laps'd sinners; that in all these they had foulely violated the Lawes, as well humane as divine. They having received this Answer from the Landgrave; made their re∣ply, and withall set him a booke, composed and written in the high Dutch, concerning the Misteries of Scripture. And in their Letter they set a faire and specious glosse upon their own cause, together with a defence and justi∣fication of their opinions. But in their booke we spoke of, they made a di∣vision of the course and succession of all times, of the whole world, into three parts or ages: That the first world, from Adam to Noah, perished indeed by the deluge of waters: That the second, which is that wherein we now live, shall be destroyed by fire: But their third and new world, which they maintaine shall be hereafter, is that, wherein righteousnesse and justice shall beare the sway; but before this last shall begin to dawne and shed its light in the eyes of men, it must necessarily be, that this old one that now is, be first purged by fire; which shall not be neither, before Antichrist is revea∣led, and his power utterly supprest and trodden downe under foot. That then it shall come to passe, that the throne of David which was cast down, shall be reared up again and established; and Christ shall again receive his kingdome here upon earth, and so shall all the sayings of the Prophets be accomplished. That this present world is like the age wherein Esau had the power and sway in his hands; for that now righteousnesse and equity are put to silence, and the godly ones only afflicted: But as from the Babylonish captivity, so from the great miseries and calamities of this present age, there shall at length appear a day of ransome and restitution, a day of freedome and liberty for the righteous; wherein the wicked shall abundantly receive the reward of all they have done maliciously against the Saints of God, as is fore∣told
and threatned in the Revelation. Now this Restitution is to happen im∣mediately before this blessed age of the world, which is yet to come; so that all the ungodly and wicked ones being suppressed all the world over, the seate and dwelling place of justice shall be adorned and beautified. The Landgrave having perused this book of theis, imployes some of his owne Ministers to write and publish an Answer against it. There was a meeting of some Cities of the Empire at Esling, who among themselves made a Decree and agreement, that those who formerly met at Coblentz, had no power or right to impose any burthens upon them, for that the consent and authority of the Emperour, and all the States of the Empire were to be required therein. Whereupon they wholly reject that Order, promising mutuall aid and assistance among themselves, in case my one of them should be called in question, or indangered hereby. Withall they make Remonstrance, that whatsoever should be ordered and decreed by the publike convention of the Princes and States of the Empire, in a lawfull manner, in behalf of the Common-wealth, that therein they would most readily ex∣presse their duty. Now in February, there happening a great penury and scarcity of Come, insomuch as many perished by reason of hnger and want; one of the Queens pittying the sad condition of te pepe in her discourse to her com∣panions, expressed her minde so far, that she could not once think it, that it was the good will and pleasure of God, that poor people should daily be de∣stroyed in this manner for lack of food. The King, who had his Store-hou∣ses sufficiently replenished, not only for necessity and use, but even for Riot, having notice given him hereof, brings her forth into the Market place, toge∣ther with his other Queens, and commanding her to kneele down, strait way he strikes off her head, disgracing her dead body, as if she had been some com∣mon strumpet. The rest of them applaud the action, giving thanks to their heavenly Father, upon which the King fell a dauncing, encouraging the peo∣ple also, who had nothing left them but bread and salt, to daunce likewise, and to be merry. Easter being now come, and no signe of deliverance yet appearing, the King, who had made them many glorious promises, to devise some thing; whereby to excuse himselfe to the people, for sixe daies together counter∣feits himself sick: After this he comes abroad into the Market place, and there he tells them how he had bin riding upon a blinde Asse, and that the Father had laid upon him the heavie burthen of all their sins; that now therefore they were become cleane, washed and purified from all their offen∣ces. And that this was that deliverance, which he had promised them, and that here with they ought all to remaine contented.
Among other things, which about this time Luther published in the High Dutch, Alas, saith he, what, or how shall I complain, and bewaile the sad condition of these wretched and forlorn men? Most certaine it is, that evill spirits in abundance have taken up here their habitation and refi∣dence. Howsoever, we ought deservedly to praise the infinite Mercy, and goodnesse of God herein. For although by reason of the contempt of the Gospel, and the reproach of Gods Name, and the effusion of godly mens blood, Germany hath deserved to suffer the fierce wrath and displeasure of God; yet for all that, he did restraine the rage and furious attempts of Satan; and suffered him not to goe on with full swing, and carreere; but in mercy gave us gentle warning, and admonition; And especially by this Tragedy, or play, of Munster, which had but little skill, or cunning in it, he fairly invited, and call'd us to the amendment of our lives. For with∣out all doubt, except God had held him in with a strong bridle, he be∣ing so subtill a spirit, and so much his crafts-master, had certainly acted his part in a farre more dangerous manner. But now, seeing the good∣nesse of God had curbed him in, and abated his power, he rages not, and plaies his prancks, according to his owne will and desire; but onely so farre, as the Divine permission had given him leave. For this evill Spirit, all whose endeavour is to subvert the Christian Faith, would not likely make use of such meanes, as to perswade the marriage of many wives at once, thereby to effect, and bring about what hee aimed at: because the hainousnesse, and foulness of the thing it self, being confessed of all hands, he knew full well how all men, not yet bereft of their right reason, would abominate it, and cry it downe with shame. The Civill polity indeed, and government, may in some sort be troubled and shaken hereby; but Christs Kingdome must be assaulted by other kind of battery then this. He that will undertake to inveagle, and draw men into snares, must by no meanes affect Empire and command, much lesse act the Tyrant. This be∣ing detested alike by all men, and all eyes being broad open to observe and interpret whereto such counsells tend; they must goe to worke by more hidden meanes, as is were by-way pathes, if they intend their designes shall obtaine wished for issue, and take effect. A sordid and uncouth at∣tire, a behaviour of the countenance to composedness, and austerity; a hanging of the head, with dejected looks; frequent fastings, and an utter refusall of the very touch of money; abstinence from flesh-meats, and mar∣riage; a deniall of obedince to Magistrates, and a generall disrespect to all kind of temporall, or civill dominion, with an outward profession however of extraordinary humility in themselves. By these meanes in∣deed,
and by such close policy as this, even wise men have been over∣reacht; and by such dark, and mysterious courses, some have made a way and entrance to great sway and Power. But, as here, by extream impu∣dence, to arrogate and usurpe the power of a King, and according to the unrulinesse of unbounded lust, to take away wives; that this was the trick of some shallow and untaught Devill; or else, if hee had all his cunning, and sl ghts about him, that he was so fetter'd, and chain'd by an over∣mastering Power, that he culd not make use of his tricks at his own plea∣sure. Which no doubt God does to no other end, then that wee should entertaine a more reverentiall respect of the Divine Providence, and be the sooner excited to Repentance, and amendment of our wayes, before God give him liberty for the full ex rcise of his practises; who certainly then will set upon ut wih redoubled forces. For if this same poore, and con∣temptible Scribe-Devill, can of himself raise such Tumults and Vproares; what shall we doe, when the great Devill himself, with all his knowledge and Arts about him, shll come with full saile against us, and give us a broad-side; being both a cunning Lawyer, and a crafty Divine? Wherefore no such great feare, or thought, ought to be entertained concerning this so untrim, and untutor'd a Devill. Besides I am fully perswaded, that this Paegeant, and meck-show is not so well approved of by all in the City; but tht it occasions great grief, and sad thoughts of heart, to most there; who no doubt with teares, and sighes, daily Petition for, and expect a deli∣verance from Gods hands; as formerly happened in that tumultuary in∣surrection of the Rusticks, and ill advised people, lately among us. And I could w sh from my heart, that there were no spirit in the whole world, more cunning, and crafty then is this Munster-Devill: For so long as God doth not quite take away his Word and Gospel from among us, there can certainely be but few, and those not very wise, who will suffer themselves to be drawne away by so sotish and unsober a master. Not∣withstanding I must confesse, that when the wrath and anger of God is kindled against any people, there is no errour so unreasonable or absurd, which the Devill cannot easily perswade them unto; as wee plain y see it happened in the Doctrine of Mahomet. For though the whole compo∣sition, and frame thereof, be but a continued piece of extreame folly, and sensuality, yet upon the removall, or rather putting out of the divine light of Gods Word among them, it assumed to it selfe that strength and vigor, and spread it self to that large extent and power, which at this day Chri∣stendome beholds, and witnesses, with no lesse wonderment them ha. And indeed, except God had by his Goodnesse and Providence, repressed
the attempts and insolencies of Muncer,Thomas M¦cer. Sleida l. 5. Germany had now been in no better a condition. For although the Devill, by Gods permission, can sometimes blow a small spark into a generall flame, and scath-fire; how∣ever there is no more compendious way of extinguishing it, then by the Word of God. For seeing all the Armour of our enemy is uncorporeall, and spirituall, it is not Troopes of Horses, or other warlike preparations, that can quell and overcome him. Now as for those Bookes written, and published by them of Munster, wherein in lively colours they paint, and set forth to view their owne folly and madnesse; In the first place, their Doctrines containe in them extreme forpperies, and absurdities; and that in matters of faith. For speaking of Christ, they say hee is not sprung of the seed of the Virgin Mary, to use their own words; although they con∣fess him to come of the seed of David. Here they unfold not the mat∣ter sufficiently, as it requires. And certainly the Devill herein conceales some monstrous mystery for his owne ends, intimating unto us, and that too not obscurely, that the seed or flsh of Mary, can not deliver and save u. But hee loses his labour: For the Scripture tells us, that Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, which word in all Languages,Isai. 11.1. Gal. 4.4. is under∣stood of the Childe, which being conceived and fashioned of the flesh of the Mother, is brought forth into the World. Againe, whereas they condemne former Baptisme, as profane and unholy; therein also they shew their little skill. For they conceive, and think of it, not as a thing of Gods appointment, but onely as the worke of man. Wherefore if what∣soever the wicked conferre or receive, ought thus to be slighted and reje∣cted; I wonder indeed why they also refute not, and fling away, gold, and silver, and other treasures, plundred from the ungodly; and devise not, and coine for themselves some new invented materialle. For Baptisme is the worke and creature of God, as well as all these. When an ungodly man sweares, hee does wrong to the Name of God: but if the Name of God be not a true Name to him, he offends not. He that robs or steales, or com∣mits rapine, breakes the Law of God: But if the Law be not a true Law to him, hee trespasses not. So also, if the former Baptisme be nothing, neither doe they sinne any thing that are baptized therewith. Why therefore doe they detest this Baptisme, as an ungodly thing, when as according to their own confession, it is nothing? If the Marriages of former times are, as they say, to be accounted for fornication, and adultery, seeing they were con∣tracted, as they will have it, by those that wanted faith; doe not they, I pray you, confesse themselves to be the children of Harlots? Now if they be illegitimate, and bastards, I would faine know, by what right they come
to inherit, and enjoy the priviledge of those places they live in? Truly it would be but reason, seeing they are such, that they should be made un∣capable of inheriting; and that in this their new way of marriage, they should find themselves also some new meanes and possessions, which as least may have a fairer and honester title. For it is not seemly methinks, that such good and godly men forsooth, should maintain themselves upon such whorish and unlawfully gotten goods; or else be forced, poor soules! by plaine violence, and robbery, to pillage and plunder from other. As for that ridiculous Kingdome of theirs, which they creame of, there are so many, and so maniest impieties in this one businesse alone, that I need not make any more words of it: and indeed perhaps, what I have already said concerning it, may be thought unnecessary, and too much; especially see∣ing the whole subject thereof hath abundantly enough been discussed, and laid open, by the labours of other men. At the Dyet, which at the request of the Princes of the Empire, Ferdinand King of the Romanes held by his Deputies at Wormes in Aprill, the Cities which hitherto had contributed no monies to the Warre, in the first place made their Protestation, that they appeared not here, out of any conside∣ration of the Decree passed at Coblentz; but out of obedience to the Em∣perour and King Ferdinand. Whereupon there happened a great debate between them, and the Princes about the contribution. At length sup∣plies were appointed for five moneths; and twenty thousand Crownes or∣dered to be paid in monethly. Likewise it was decreed, that upon storm∣ing or taking in of the City, the innocent people should be spared; and that honest men, who were either kept in by the Siege, or had formerly quitted the place, should have their goods restored them. Upon the pub∣lishing of this Decree, the Bishop of Munster delivers over his Army to the command of Oberstein. But these publike summes being negligently col∣lected, and indeed not before it was too late, the Generall was not able to performe any extraordinary service. Besides, the Commanders, in a ge∣nerall mutiny of the Souldiers for want of pay, were many times brought in hazard of their lives. But when as things were brought to that wretched and lamentable passe within the City, that very many died daily of the famine; and many al∣so stole away, and scap'd from thence, but so starv'd and spent with hun∣ger, that they were pitied by their very enemies, into whose hands they sell; The Commanders perswaded, and promis'd the Towns-men, that if they would deliver up their King, and some few more besides, they should be excused from all particular, as well dammage and danger.
The Citizens, although they were wondrous willing so to doe, yet de∣terr'd by the cruelty, and watchfulnesse of their King, they durst not at∣tempt any thing. For he for his part, was so resolute and obstinate, that so long as any thing was left, whereupon himself, and some few others might be kept alive, he never intended to yeeld up the Town. The Com∣manders therfore in the Army send to them the second time, and forewarn them, that they send out no more, no not so much as women, or children. This was the first of Iune. Next day, they of the Towne returne an Answer; complaining, that they could not be admitted to a lawfull hearing; adding withall, how hardly, and grievously they were dealt with, and that without any deser∣ving on their parts at all; That if any body would take upon him to de∣monstrate their errour, they would be ready in all dutifull manner to ac∣knowledge it. Then they expound a place in Daniel, concerning the fourth Beast, which was far the fiercest of all the rest.Dan. 7.7. But their Letters end∣ed with this close, that by the helpe and assistance of God, they would continue in the confession of that Truth, which hitherto they had main∣tained. Now all this was pen'd according as the King had appointed, and directed it. Things in the City being brought to this extremity, and as it were to the last cast, there were two men, who had made an escape thence, who falling into the Souldiers hands, one of them passing his owne word for his faithfulnesse, was suffered to goe to the Bishop; and both of them set downe a way how to gaine the City. Oberstein, and the Bishop having heard what these fugitives could say, entred into Counsell thereupon, and Iune the 22, demanding a Treaty with the Townesmen, they exhort and perswade them to yeeld themselves, and save alive the multitude, which by this time was ready to perish with famine. They, their King being pre∣sent, made answer by Rotman; but so, as that they meant not to forgo their former resolution. Two daies after, about eleven of the clock at night, Oberstein, without any noise, draws up some of his forces close to the City, and by meanes of one of the fugitives, some Souldiers chosen of purpose, creeping along the Trench, at length got into their worked, killing the Corp du Garde. Others followed close at their heeles, and finding a small gate open, some five hundred of them, with some Officers and Colours, got into the City. But the Towns-men gathering into a body, stopt the passage, that the rest could not breake in; and yet with much adoe it was that they kept them out. So making good the gate againe, they straightway affaulted them
that first made the breach and entry, and slew many of them. Thus for an hour or two, there continued an eager skirmish on both sides. But they that were shut in, finding by chance another gate, with no strong guard at is, forc'd it open, and so made an entrance for their fellows, who present∣ly broke in like a sea. Howsoever at first the Townsmen made head against them, fortifying themselves in the Market-place. But at length despairing, having lost many of their men at the first encounter, they all cryed out for Quarter, which was readily granted them. At this very bout the King, and Knipper doling were taken. Rotman forsaking all hopes of life, and run∣ning desperately into the thickest of the enemies, was slaine; utterly refu∣sing to  himself alive into their hands. The City thus taken, the Bishop seiz'd upon halfe the booty, and the Ammunition belonging to it: and so dismissing the Army, hee onely re∣serv'd two companies as a guard for his own person. There was this yeere in Iuly, another dyet also of the Empire held at Wormes, wherein K. Ferdinand, by his Deputies, made a motion, that now the City was taken, the Anabaptists through the whole Empire, should e∣very where be destroyed and made away. Also that the Princes would move the Pope of Rome for a Generall Councell. They made reply, that order had been taken by former Edicts, what was thought fit to be done with the Anabaptists: And as for a Generall Councell, that the Emperour himself had divers times solliciced the Pope therein; and that therefore, for their pares, they could say no more to it. At the same meeting, the Bi∣shop of Munster demanded reparation of dammages, and the costs he had been at during the warre; complaining withall, that the monies agreed upon, had not as yet been paid in to him. When as nothing could certainly be determined of, there being but few of the Princes and States there present, another Dyet was appointed there, to begin the next November following, where then should be a full hea∣ring, both concerning the Account and expences of the War; and also it should be determined, what forme of Government should be established In the City for the time to come. When the appointed day was come, King Ferdinand's Embassadour first relates, and makes known the causes of thi present Assembly, and moves among other things, that they would conclude upon an agreement, that the City now lately regained, might conins, and enjoy its former Religion. The Bishops Agent layes open and decla es, how great charges & expences he had been at for the whole time of the War; hw great a debt he had contracted thereby; how having regained the Cy, to prevent more stirre and danger, hee was constrained
to raise two fortresses within it, and to put Garrisons in them; of all which he desired that a speedy consideration might be had. Hereto answer was made; That the Bishop had taken into his hands, as well the greater part of the booty, and all the Ammunition, as the Citizens goods; all which belong'd to the common right of the Empire; that it was fitting an even estimate being made, that all this should be considered in the bill and ac∣count of his expences: and what else was desired, should have a reaso∣nable and faire consideration had of it. Next it was determined, that the Bishoprick of Munster should be at the disposing of the Empire, accor∣ding to the antient custome, That all the Nobility, Gentry, and Citizens, except such as were Anabaptists, should be suffered to returne, and freely to enjoy their owne; That the Bishop should order matters of Religion, according to the Decrees of the Empire: That at the Spring next ensu∣ing, the Agents of the severall States, and Princes, should meet at Mun∣ster, and there taking-examination of the Citizens behaviour, should ac∣quit the innocent; and levell all such Forts and Workes, as the Anabap∣tists had rais'd: That the Bishop likewise should raze those Fortresses he had built, and should with all convenient speed deliver out of Custody, and punish according to their demerits, the King, Knipperdoling, and Crech∣ting, who were his Prisoners. As for the Decree about the execise of Religion, the Elector of Saxe∣ny, the Landgrave, the Princes of Wittenberg, and Anhalt, openly declared, and protested, against any assent thereto: Some Cities likewise did the same; Neither would they agree to the laying levell of the old Workes about the City; as for demolishing those lately rais'd, they made no great matter of that. The King, and his two fellow Prisoners were led up and downe the Towne in sight of the Princes; and that more for sport, and pastime, then for any thing else. Upon this oc∣casion, and opportunity, the Ministers that came along with the Land∣grave entered into discourse with the King, and disputed with him con∣cerning some of his opinions; as about the Kingdom of Christ, and the Ci∣vill Magistrate, concerning Iustification, and Baptisme; of the Supper of the Lord, the Incarnation of Christ, and of Marriage; And by the Testi∣monies of holy Scriptures, they did so much good upon him, that though they could not wholy allter him, hee with some reluctancy still defen∣ding his own; yet they so weakned him, and turn'd him, that at length he in a manner generally yeelded unto them; which some thoughs, hee did more out of a hope to save his life, then that hee was throughly convicted by their Arguments. For the second time they came to visit him, hee
made them promise, that so he might receive his pardon, hee would bring the business so about, that al the Anabaptists who were in Holland, Brahant, ENGLAND, & Frisland, in great numbers, should be hush'c and silenc't, and in all respects yeeld obedience to the Magistrate. Then they disputed with his Companions, both face to face, and by writing, concerning Mor∣tification, the Baptisme of Infants, the Communion of goods, and of the King∣dom of Christ. When they were brought to Telget, the King being demanded by the Bishop, by what authority he had arrogated, and assumed to himself such Power and Licence over his Citie and people? The King demanded like∣wise of him again, How he came by any such command, or right of pos∣session? The Bishop replying, That hee had it confer'd upon him by the consent of the Princes, and People; Why and I, answered the King, was cal∣led thereto by God himself. The 18. of Ianuary they were brought back a∣gain to Munster, and every one committed apart to severall custody. The same day also came the Bishop thither, together with the Archbishop of Colen, and the Ambassadours of the Duke of Cleve. The two daies follow∣ing were wholly spent in wholsome and godly admonitions used unto them, to reduce them from their idle conceits. And the King indeed ac∣knowledged his offences, and sought to Christ, by Prayers, for the forgive∣nesse of his sinnes. But the other two would by no meanes confesse any fault; but continued with a great deale of obstinacy maintaining their er∣rors. The next day the King was brought forth unto an high place, raised from the ground, and there tied to a stake. Here two Executioners tore his flesh with red hot Pincers. For the three first plucks, he was silent, and made no great expression of what torment he felt: but afterwards incessant∣ly, with a great deal of vehemincy, hee besought God for mercy, and par∣don. Having been tortured and torne in this manner, for a whole hour and more, he was at length run through the breast with a sword, and so dyed. His two Companions were put to the same torment, and execution. Their dead bodies were trust up in Iron hoopes, and hung out for the pub∣like view, from the highest Tower in all the City; the King indeed in the middle; but so, as that he hung the full height of a man above the other two. And thus Knipperdoling found his own Prophecy made good agains,Vide pag. 8. and that too in regard of the second part of it. . . FINIS.
