P3324A 99899650 154333
modern bookplate Francis Groyn of Lansanor in the County of Glamorgan. And of Ford-Abby in the County of Devon Esq.r 1698.
MEDICAMENTS For the Poor; Or, PHYSICK For the Common People. Containing, Excellent Remedies for most Common Diseases, incident to Mans Body; made of such things as are common to be had in almost every Coun∣try in the World: and are made with little Art, and smal Charge. This Book is of admirable use for, 1. Purging Medicines, for Choller, Flegm, Melancholly, or Watry Humous. 2. Vomits. 3. Such things as evacuate by Sweat, Spittle, the Pallate, Nostrils, or Insensibly. 4. Womens Disea∣ses. 5. Worms. 6. The Stone. 7. Poysons. 8. The Head over-heat, or over-cooled. 9. The Eyes. 10. The Joynts. 11. The Nerves. 12. Breathing. 13. The Heart. 14. The Stomach. 15. The Intestines. 16. And for Diseases of ill Conformation. 17. Or in Faulty Magnitude. 18. Or in Number. 19. Or in Scituation, and Connexion. 20. Or in dissolved unity. First Written in Latin, by that Famous and Learned Do∣ctor, John Prevotius, Phylosopher, and publick Pro∣fessor of Physick in Padua. Translated into English, and somthing added, By Nich. Culpeper, Student in Physick, and Astrology. London: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign of the Prin∣ting-press in Cornhil, neer the Royal Excharge. 1656.
The Printer to the READER. I Thought it convenient to give thee notice of some Particulars to be minded in this Book. 1. That thou hast not more in the Title Page, than is in the Book (as is too often used by many in these times) For every one of the twenty Particulars there named, is distinctly treated on, under that Head, and somtimes much more, as thou mayest easily find, if thou pleasest to peruse the Contents be∣fore the Book; by which thou mayest easily turn to the page in which each Head is treated on.
2 If thou meetest with hard words that thou dost not well un∣derstand, look at the end of Rive∣rius Practice in English, and most of them are there explained. 3 Things that are here but briefly touched, are much more largely treated on in Riverius Pra∣ctice of Physick in English 4 For the rest of Mr. Culpepers VVorks that are yet unprinted, I refer thee to his VVives Informati∣on and Testimony, printed before this Book. I remain, Thine, to serve thee, Peter Cole.
The Contents. THE Beginning. Page 1 Physicks that purge the Belly. Page 3 Strong Purgers in a Chollerick Cause. Page 4 Purgers in a Flegmatick Cause. Page 6 Purgers in a Melancholy Cause. Page 9 Medicaments that soften the Belly. Page 10 Things that mollifie the Belly in a Chollerick Cause. ibid Medicaments that loosen the Belly in a Fleg∣matick Cause. Page 12 Medicaments that soften the Belly in a Melan∣choly Cause. Page 14 Lenitive Clysters. Page 15 Loosening Suppositories. Page 16 Purgers by the Belly. Page 17 When Choller Predominates, what Medica∣ments are Convenient for a gentle Evacua∣tion. Page 19 Strong Purgers. Page 20 Violent Purgers. Page 21 Such things as purge Flegm gently when it is predominant. Page 23 Strong Purgatives. Page 25
Such things as Purge Violently. Page 28 A Drink. Page 30 A most pleasing Pouder. Page 31 A Bolus. ibid Pills. Page 32 When Melancholly prodominates these will Purge gently. Page 32 Such things as purge Strongly. Page 34 Such things as purge Violently. ibid What things will purge gently, when watery Humors prevail. Page 40 Purging Clysters. Page 46 Sharp Suppositories. Page 48 For Vomiting Medicaments. Page 49 What things move Vomit gently. Page 49 Purging Vomits. Page 51 Such things as void Flegm strongly that is predominant. Page 53 Medicaments that evacuate by sweat. Page 63 Medicaments that evacuate by Spittle. Page 67 Medicaments that evacuate by the Pallat. Page 72 Medicaments that evacuate by the Nostrils. Page 74 Medicaments that evacuate insensibly. Page 77 Digesters. ibid Discussives. Page 79 Rubificatives. Page 83 Medicines that augment necessary Matter where it is dificient. Page 85 Medicaments that encrease Milk. Page 86 Things that encrease Seed. Page 88 Medicaments that alter the Cause of the Dis∣ease. Page 90
Medicaments that prepare Choller. Page 91 Preparatives for Flegm. Page 94 Preparatives for Melancholly. Page 97 Medicaments that allay Acrimony. Page 98 Scouring Medicaments. Page 101 Remedies to soften hard things. Page 110 Remedies that move Preternatural Matter that lieth stil. Page 119 Remedies that move the Courses. ibid Helps for Delivery of Women. Page 125 Remedies to drive out the Secundine. Page 126 Remedies to open the Hemorroids. Page 127 Remedies to force out the dead Child. ibid Remedies that quiet the Matttr, that is car∣ried with a wrong Motion. Page 229 Remedies that Root out the Cause that is offensive in the whol substance. Page 231 Remedies for Worms. Page 233 Remedies to break the Stone. Page 237 Remedies that move Corruption. Page 240 Remedies contrary to Poyson. Page 245 Remedies for Symptoms that are Ʋr∣gent. Page 257 Medicaments that alter a sick distemper of the whol Body and of the parts. Page 268 Medicaments that alter the Head that is over∣cooled. Page 271 Altering Remedies for Eyes that are over∣cooled. Page 274 Arthritick Remedies, for the Joynts that are overcooled. Page 276 Remedies for the Nerves over-cooled. Page 279
Remedies for the parts of breathing. Page 282 Cordials for the Heart that is over-cooled. Page 285 Stomach-heating Remedies. Page 288 Remedies that alter the Intestines? when they are over-cooled. Page 293 Remedies of the Matrix, either over-heat or over-cooled. Page 306 Remedies of Diseases in ill Conformation. Page 310 Remedies of Diseases in faulty Magnitude. Page 350 Remedies for Diseases in Number. Page 363 Remedies of Diseases in Situation and Con∣nexion. Page 367 Remedies of Diseases in dissolved Ʋnity. ibid
TO THE READER. ALL those that were famous in the Art of Physick, and by taking care of the health of Man gained to themselves great Honor, may be supposed to have laid the first foundation of all their glory in the Cottages of Poor Men. For since two things chiefly commend a Phy∣sitian; skill to cure the sick, and great charity to the Poor, without which there can hardly be so much sence of anothers misery that can invite one carefully to lend his utmost help. These two are so united, that a Physitian can hardly be approved amongst Rich Men and Princes, unless he hath shewed himself to be such a one by his frequent Practice amongst the Poor: For they that abound with all those things, the want whereof makes life to others not so desirable, will suspect the skill of such as begin, but now to Practice; and who have not been emnent by many experiments, and famous Cures, that are divulged by the Testi∣mony
of the common People. And the Physi∣tian alone shall not easily perswade great Men, to whom he may be called, that he hath seriously taken care for the Disease, but rather for his own gain and profit, who hath not sometimes done his best endeavors to help poor distressed Men, and by such a Custome, learned to deal gently with those that are sick. And this is the Cause, that, those who begin to study Physick, and by the profession of it, seek for renown and much profit, must in the first place make it their greatest care, that when by study they have learned the precepts of Physick, they may know how to apply it to Men of mean fortunes that are Sick; and from thence they may happily begin their first Practice. In which business, a smal estate is no little hin∣drance to the endeavors of the Physitian, when oftentimes not only fit Nourishments cannot be afforded to sustain the strength of Nature, but also fit Remedies for the Cure; much dear and costly Physick fetched out of the Apothe∣caries Shops, would undo the Poor and so make a new addition of more misery to the for∣mer. Nature is liberal to provide for the necessities of the Poor, and hath sent forth many matters for Medicaments, that may be found almost every where, and with little Art may be prepared for every use. In which a Physitian ought to be as wel skilled, as he should be in Medicaments that are for the Rich as Galen writes, 6. de Comp. Medicam. Per Loca. Cap. 1. Especially since those Obvious
Remedies are not onely profitable for the Poor, But as necessary for the Rich, when they are upon a Journey, if perchance they should fal sick, when they are farr from Cities, and Apothecaries Shops. This Treatise therefore shal be concerning such Remedies as are easie to be procured. Thus far I have followed in this Epistle the Expressions of the Famous and Learned Doctor, John Prevotius. My intent in Publishing Books of Physick in English is not to make Fooles Physitians. but to help those that are Ingenious, Rational and Industrious, though they have not that knowledg of Tongues that were to be desired. I have and shal in my Books of Physick follow the most Honest and Learned in that Art; But let me warn thee now (as I have often before) That there is great danger in Physick if they be not rightly prepared and given in their due quantities. And alwaies remember, thou shalt give an account to God for al thy actions done n the Flesh; Therefore when thou hast to do in what concerns the lives of Men; do nothing but what thou wouldest do, if thou wert sure the great and dreadful day of Judgment were to begin the next hour. I shal say no more but this; I am resolved not to give over, until I have Published in Eng∣lish whatsoever shal be necessary to make an Industrious, Diligent, Rational Man a knowing Physitian. This is the aim and indeavor of. Nich. Culpeper.
Mris. Culpepers Informa∣tion, Vindication, and Testi∣mony, concerning her Hus∣bands Books to be Published after his Death. Courteous Reader, SO great are the Afflictions wherewith our Heavenly Father hath been pleased to exer∣cise me his poor Hand-maid, that I have not only lived to see my dear Husband, (the Stay and Solace of my Life) taken from me: but it hath been my hard hap also to see his Re∣putation, and Memory (which will be dear to all Posterity, for the Works he hath written for the Common Good of this Nation) blemished, and Eclipsed, by the covetous and unjust Forgeries of one, Who, though he calls himself Na∣thaniel, is far from being an Israelite in whom there is no guile; who was not content to publish a Hodg-podg of indigested Col∣lections, and Observations of my dear Husband deceased, under the Title of Culpeper's last Legacy; but to make the Deceit more taking, he steeled his Forehead so far, and brased it so hard, as not to be ashamed to forge two Epistles, one in mine, and the other in my Husbands Name; of the penning of which, he nor I, never so much as dream'd: And yet he impudently affirmeth in my Name, that my Husband Laid a severe Injunction on me to publish them for the general Good, after his decease; and
that they are his last Experiences in Physick and Chyrurgery. And in the Title of his Book, he saith, They are the choycest, and most profitable Secrets, resolved never to be published till after his Death. All which Expressions in the Title and Epistles, are as false as the Father of Lyes; and every word in them, for∣ged and feigned. And he knew well enough, that no discreet, ho∣nest man, that was a friend to my Husband, or me, would ever have agreed to such infamous and dishonest Practices; and therefore I desire all Courteous Readers of the Writings of my Husband, to take notice of this Deceit, and to assure themselves that it never entred into his head, to publish such an undigested Gallimoffery, under the promising and solemn Name of his Last Legacy, and that whereby he gained his Reputation in the World, as the Imposter makes him speak in his forged Epistle. And I desire any indifferent Reader, that hath observed my Hus∣bands lofty, and Masculine manner of expressing himself in his Prefaces, and Epistles Dedicatory, whether in case he had been minded or disposed to take so solemn a farewel of the world, as the Forger makes him to do; whether, I say, he would have done it in such a whining fashion, and so in the Stile of a Ballade∣maker, as to say, And now, if it please Heaven to put a period to my Life, and Studies, that I must bid all things under the Sun farewel: Farewel to my dear Wife and Child, farewel Arts and Sciences, farewel all worldly Glories, adieu Readers. Cer∣tainly my Husband would have been far more serious, and materi∣al, in such a case, as any discreet man will judg. Neither can it be thought, that in such a solemn Valeduction, he could possi∣bly forget his wonted respects to the Colledg of Doctors, to whom he did so frequently address himself, in divers of his Wri∣tings. Courteous Readers, I shall say no more touching the abuse of the Book-seller, only to prevent (as much as concerns me) thy being abused for the future, know, That my Husband left sevey∣ty-nine Books of his own making, or Translating, in my hands, and "I have deposited them into the hands of his, and my much Honored Friend, Mr. Peter Cole, Book-seller, at the Printing-Press, neer the Royal Exchange (for the good of my Child) from whom thou mayest expect to receive in Print, such of them as shall be thought fit to serve thee in due season, without any Disguises or Forgeries, unto which I do hereby give my attesta∣tion. Also my Husband left seventeen Books compleatly perfected,
in the hands of the said Mr. Cole, for which he paid my Hus∣band in his life-time: And Mr. Cole is ready and willing (on any good occasion) to shew any of the said seventy nine Books, or the seventeen, to such as doubt thereof. And if any Person shall question the Truth of any part of this Vindication, or Epistle; if they will take the pains to come to me, I will face to face, justifie the truth of every word thereof, as I have subscribed my Hand thereunto in the presence of many Witnesses. I profess in the Presence of the great God, the Searcher of all hearts, before whom Mr. Brooks and I must one day give an ac∣count of all our Actions; That I have not published this Epistle or Vindication, out of any disrespect to Mr. Brooks (for I much respect the man, and would he glad to serve him to my power) but only to cleer my Husband from the folly and weakness cast up∣on him by the means above expressed. And out of tenderness to Mr. Brooks, I first tried other means of keeping, and afterwards of repairing my Husbands Credit, and then stayed long to see if be would repair (in any measure) the wrong done to my Hus∣band, and my self. I desire to be From my House, next door to the Red Lyon in Spittle-fields, October, 18. 1655. Your Servant (in, and for the Truth) Alice Culpeper. Mris. Culpeper did the 18. of October, subscribe this Epistle in Vindication of her Husband's Reputa∣tion, before Ten Witnesses, as she had done ano∣ther Epistle on the ninth of October, almost in the same words with this, except neer the Conclusion.
The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden-Hall, London, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printing∣press in Corn-hil, neer the Exchange. Ten several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physick and Astrologie. 1 The Practice of Physick, containing seventeen several Books. Wherein is plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, Diss∣erences, and Several Sorts of Signs; Together with the Cure of all Diseases in the Body of Man. Being chiefly a Tran∣slation of The Works of that Learned and Renowned Do∣ctor, Lazarus Riverius, Now living; Councellor and Physi∣tian to the present King of France. Above fifteen thou∣sand of the said Books in Latin have been Sold in a very few Yeers, having been eight times printed, though all the former Impressions wanted the Nature, Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the Medicines for the Cure of them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle. 2 The Anatomy of the Body of Man, Wherein is exactly described, the several parts of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many larger Brass Plates than ever was in English be∣fore. 3 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the Col∣ledg of Phyfitians of London. Whereunto is aded, The Key to Galen's Method of Physick: 4 The English Physitian En∣larged; being an Astrologo-Phy∣sical Discourse of the vulgar Herbs of this Nation; wherein is shewed how to cure a mans self of most Diseases incident to Mans Body, with such things as grow in England, and for three pence charge. Also in the same Book is shewed, 1 The time of gathering all herbs, both Vulgarly and Astrolo∣gically. 2 The way of drying, and keeping them and their Juyces. 3. The way of making and keeping al manner of useful Compounds, made of those Herbs. The way of mixing the Medicines according to the Cause, and Mixture of the Dis∣ease, and the part of the Body afflicted. 5 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Women. Newly enlarged by the Author in every sheet, and Illustrated with divers new Plates. 6 Galen's Art of Physick with
a large Comment. 7 A New Method both of studying and practising Phy∣sick. 8 A Treatise of the Rickets, being a Disease common to Children; wherein is shewed, 1 The Essence, 2 The Causes, 3 The Signs, 4 The Reme∣dies of the Disease; Published in Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bates, and Dr. Regemorter, tran∣slated into English. And cor∣rected by N. Culpeper. Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physick for the Common People. Health for the Rich and Poor, by Dyet without Physick. A Godly and Fruitful Expo∣sition, on the first Epistle of Pe∣ter. By Mr. John Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex. The Wonders of the Load∣stone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswitch. An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Mat∣thew. By Mr. Ward. Clows Chyrurgery. Marks of Salvation. Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism. Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions, Natrative, and Speech. Vox Pacifica, or a perswasive to peace. Dr. Prestons Saints submission and Satans Overthrow. Pious Mans Practice in Parliament Time. Mr. Symsons Sermon at West∣minster. Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. Mr. Phillips Treatise of Hell. — of Christs Genealogy. Eaton on the Oath of Allegi∣ance and Covenant, shewing that they oblidg not. Eleven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Burroughs lately published; also the Texts of Scrip∣ture upon which they are grounded. 1 The Rare Jewel of Christi∣an Contentment on Phil. 4.11. Wherein is shewed, 1 What Contentment is, 2 It is an Holy Art and Mystery, 3 The Excel∣lencies of it, 4 The Evil of the Contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it. 2 Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10.3. Wherein is shewed, 1 The right manner of the Wor∣ship of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving the Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel Conversation, on Phil. 1.17. Wherein is shewed, 1 That the Conversations of Beleevers must be above what could be by the Light of Na∣ture, 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3 And surable to what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added,
The Misery of those men that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psal. 17.14. 4 A Treatise of Earthly-Mindedness, Wherein is shewed, 1 What Earthly mindedness is, 2 The great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Verse. Also to the same Book is joyn∣ed, A Treatise of Heavenly-Mindedness and, Walking with God, on Gen. 5.24. and on Phil. 3.20. 5 An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the Prophesie of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chap∣ters of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of Hosea, being now compleat. 8 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding Sinfulness of Sin, on Job, 36.21. 9 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1.1. 10 Of Hope, on 1 John. 3.3. 11 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5.7. Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. Viz. 1 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Ho∣liness, opened and applied from Christs Priestly Office. 2 Satans Power to Tempt, and Christs Love to, and Care of His People under Tempta∣tion. 3 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or, the Overflowing of Christs Fulness received by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impos∣sibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual Life, and In-being of Christ in all Be∣leevers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding-place in time of Gods Anger. 10 Christs Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts. A Congregational Church is a Catholick Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in New Eng∣land. A Treatise of Politick Po∣wers, wherein seven Questions are Answered, 1 Whereof Power is made, and for what ordained. 2 Whether Kings and Gover∣nors have an Absolute Power over the People. 3 Whether Kings and Governors be sub∣ject to the Laws of God, or the Laws of their Countrie. 4 How far the People are to obey their Governors. 5 Whether all the people have, be their Governors. 6 Whether it be Lawful to depose an evil Go∣vernor
7 What Confidence is to be given to Princes. The Compassionate Samari∣tan. Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians. The Best and Worst Magist∣rate. By Obadiah Sedgwick. The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By Mat∣thew Newcomen. A Sacred Penegerick. By Stephen Martial. Barriffs Military Discipline. The Immortality of Mans Soul. The Anatomist Anatomized. King Charls his Case, or an Appeal to all Rational Men concerning his Tryal. Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises. A Vindication of Free Grace; Endeavoring to prove, 1 That we are not elected as holy, but that we should be holy; and that Election is not of kinds, but persons. 2 That Christ did not by his Death intend to save all men, and touching those whom he intended tosave, that he did not die for them only if they would beleeve, but that they might beleeve. 3 That we are not justified properly by our beleeving in Christ but by our Christ, beleeving in him 4, that which differenceth one man from another, is not the improvement of a common ability restored through Christ to all men in general, but a principle of Grace wrought by the Spirit of God in the Elect. By John Pawson. Six Sermons preached by Doctor Hill. Viz. 1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthen∣ing Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4 The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength. 5 The Best and Worst of Paul. 6 Gods eternal preparation for his Dying Saints. The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech on the Scaffold. The King's Speech on the Scaffold. The Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John Cordel. The Discipline of the Church in New England, by the Churches and Synod there. A Relation of the Barbadoes. A Relation of the Repen∣tance and Conversion of the Indians in New England; By Mr. Eliot, and Mr. Mayhw. The History of Montross: and his Actions for Charles the First. His passions for Charles the Second King of Scots. The Institutes of the Laws of England by John Cowel, Octavo. A description of the Grand Signiors Seraglio; or the Tur∣kish
Emperors Court. By John Greaves. Octavo. The reigning error Arraigned at the Bar of scripture, and Rea∣son. By Franscis Fulwood. Octavo. The state of Future Life. By Thomas White. Twelves. The Royal and delightful Game of Picquet, written in French, and now rendered into English. Octavo. De copore Politico: or, The Elements of Law, moral, and politick. By Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury. The History of the Rites, Customs, and manner of life, of the present Jews throughout the World. Octavo. The London Dispensatory in Latin in Folio. The London Dispensatory in Latin in Twelves. A Poem upon the late Fight at sea, between the two great Fleets of England and Hol∣land. These several Books of Physick and Chyrurgerie will shortly be printed in English. Riverius Observations, with fifteen hundred and seventie other Histories and Observa∣tions of other men. Riolanus Anatomy. Bartholinus Anatomy. All the Works of Daniel Sen∣nertus, except some few, not proper for Translation. The Idea of Practical Phy∣sick, being a compleat Body of Physick. And Fernelius his Works. There wilspeedily be printed these Several pieces of Mr. Bridge of Yar∣mouth. Viz. 1 Scripture Light the most sure Light: compared with, 1. Re∣velations and Visions. 2. Na∣tural and Supernatural Dreams. 3. Impressions with and with∣out Word. 4. Light and Law within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience. 7. Humane Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology. Delivered in three Sermons on 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Christ in Travel: Wherein, 1 The Travel of his soul. 2. The first and after effects of his Death. 3. His Assurance of Issue. 4. And His satisfacti∣on therein Are opened and cleered in three Sermons, on Esay, 53.11. 3 A Lifting up for the Cast-down, in case of 1. Great sin. 2. Weakness of Grace. 3. Miscarriage of Duties 4. Want of Assurance. 5. Affliction 6. Temptation. 7. Dissertion. 8. Unserviceableness. 9. Discou∣ragements from the Condition it self. Delivered in thirteen Sermons on Psalm, 42.11. His Four Sermons concerning 1 Sin against the Holy-Ghost. 2 Sins of Infirmities. 3 The False Apostle tried and Discovered 4 The Good and means of Establishment.
Francisci Tayleri, Capitula Patrum: Hebraicè & Latinè edita Una cum Annotationibus sensum locorum difficilium Ex∣perimentibus. Francisci Tayleri, Lamentati∣ones Jeremiae vatis, Denuo è fontibus Hebraicis translatae, cum Paraphrasi Chaldaica, Ma∣fora magna & parva, & Com∣mentariis Rabbi Shelomoh, Jarchi & Aben Ezrae, è Buxtorfii Bibliis magnis ex∣cerptis. These Books of Divinity wil speedily be printed. Mr. Burroughs, on 1 Cor. 5.7. and 18, 19.29. And fifty nine Sermons on Matthew, 11.28, 29, 30. Seventeen Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, being the substance of many Sermons preached in New-England.
Mr. CULPEPER'S PHYSICK FOR THE POOR OR Common People. The Begining. IN setting down of Physicks that can easily be prepa∣red, the best way is to distribute such remedies as are sound out, into such a Method, that every one may know readily how to bring forth the Matter which
he must chuse, to begin, or to go forward with in the cure of a dis∣ease since therefore the remedy, which hath its indication from the cause of the disease, is found out last, but must be first put in execu∣tion, and before al things, the cause must be taken away, that so the dis∣ease may be over come. 7. Meth. Chap. 12. Those Medicaments that are contrary to the causes of diseases, do deservedly challenge the first place, and they are many, as the causes are many: For some of them do impair, or weaken, and evacuate the Matter that offends; some again increase that which is wanting; and others do correct the ill quality of it; some do hinder disorderly motion, or else recal rest that is faulty, to its natural Station; others do root out the cau∣ses that are Peccant, by their who kind (as they say) against Nature and Substance. We shal begin with such as evacu∣ate, and the rather, because that poor people by reason of ill diet, abound
with more Excrements, than the rich do: & so usually fal into diseases from ill humors, rather than from Ple∣thory. Physicks that evacuate are divers, for some do sensibly evacuate the Matter by the Belly, by Vomit, by Urine, by Sweat, by Spittle, by the Pallate, by the Nostrills. Others do digest insensibly, and turn it into Vapors, and these take place in the Cure only after sensible evacuations. Physicks that purge the Belly. Some of these respect only the im∣purity of the first passages, nor do they extend their forces beyond the neighbor region of the Mesentery, and these are called Lenitives; others do purge the second and third Regi∣on of the Body, and are called Catharticks and Purgatives. The Belly is loosned by Physicks taken at the Mouth, or cast in by Clysters, or else by Suppositories. Those that are taken at the Mouth,
are of two sorts for some of them do strongly purge the Belly, and bring forth the Excrements; others work more weakly, which are princi∣pally to be used, to keep the Belly loos that the Natural Excrements of the first Concoction may not too long be retained. Strong Purgers in a Chollerick Cause. Whey Clarified and so drank from three pound, to eight pound, with∣in one hour space: but it wil be more effectual, if in the first Cup you dissolve one dram of common Salt. Un-huld Barly Water, drank with∣in the time of half an hour, from two pound, to six pounds; especially if it be boyld with Raisons and Prunes The fresh Juyce of the purple Violet, from one ounce to two ounces: with one cup of Barley or fountain Water. The Juyce of Damask Roses, drank the same way. The Juyce of the Garden Gourd, gently
boyled with a fourth part of Ho∣ey, and a little common Salt, drank from three ounces to five ounces. All these must be corrected by steeping of Wormwood in them, if a weak stomach chance to abound with choller. The Juyce of Succory clarified, from Three ounces to five or six oun∣ces. Common Oyl that is made of ripe Olives, boyld with thrice as much Fountain Water til the moysture be consumed, drank alone, from four ounces to six ounces, especially in the pain of the Heart. The fresh Flowers, of the Cherry Tree or the Peach Tree, one smal handful, eaten in a Sallet. Musk Roses, in number, four. Eaten in a Sallet, especially if they be yet moyst with Dew. Twelve sweet Prunes gently boy∣l'd in Honey Water. You may also prepare from Prunes, a What Rob or Sapa is, and how to mak several sorts thereof and the several uses of them, you may easi∣ly learn in my last edition of the Lon∣don Dis∣pensatory in Eng∣lish Rob, like to Sapa, of smal Charge, and very pleasant, such as here followeth.
Take sweet Prunes, one pound, sweet Cods sliced three ounces, Fountain Water or sweetish white Wine three pound, boyl them at a gentle fire, til the Matter grow thick, then strayn it through a Hair Sive, & then boyl it again, to the consisten∣ce of a Sapa, of which, for a Sufficient Purge, give one ounce and half, either by it self, or with a smal Cup of Water or Broth. you may boyl it thicker, like an Electuary, for such as wil take it only in a Bolus, but you must add a fourth part of Honey, that it may last some time uncorrupted, and you may give one ounce of it, or one ounce and half. Purgers in a Flegmatick Cause. Take red Sugar one ounce, in the broth of a Pullet, or Water of Cori∣ander. Also take fine Sugar, from one ounce and half to two ounces the same way.
Good Metheglin not boyled, taken from eight ounces to about one pound. But the windinss of it must be corrected with seeds of Annis, Fennel or Coriander. Sweet Wine with the third part of raw Honey from four ounces to nine ounces, adding also the sweet Seeds, that it may not stretch out the Belly. The decoction of Fenugreek with a fourth part of Honey, or else alone with Salt, from four ounces to six ounces. The Herb Mercury, eaten like Pot-hearbs, seasoned with Salt and Oyl. So also is the Decoction of it good from four to six ounces, adding Salt to it. The pouder of both Hysops, from two drams, to four drams, with Oxymel, or about one measure of the Decoction of it given alone, or else with Oxymel. The Pouder of crude Tartar from half a dram to two drams drank in
Cock-Broth, or Honey and Water, or in the Decoction of Hysop or Poley. Rosin of the Larch Tree unwashed from three drams to five, for those that are in years; but give children about one dram in Bolus or Pills. For this end may be provided a laxative Oxymel that is very effectu∣al. Take eared or femal Mercury two handfuls, common Wormwood one handful, Honey one pound, Fountain Water three pound, let them boyl at a gentle fire to the consi∣stence of Honey, then ad Hysop and Poley of each one handful, the best Vineger half a pound, boyl them again to the consistence of Oxymel, and then strain them, the dose is from three ounces to four ounces alone or in Broth. Also there are Pills easy to get and of smal cost, Made of washt Aloes, which may be given from one scru∣ple to two drams or thereabouts. And Garzias ab horto writes that if the leaves of Aloes are cut and boyled
with a little Salt, the Decoction drank to about eight ounces wil Loosen the Belly without any harm, four or five times. Purgers in a Melancholy Cause. Take the pouder of Fumitory dryed in the shade, about three drams in Water and Honey Or, Take the fresh Juyce of the same Herb, from two ounces and half, to four ounces or there abouts, in Cla∣rified Whey or Broth of a Pullet. So the Decoction of one handful of it is good, especially with Raisons, and a little Salt. Tartar used as was said before. The Cream of Tartar is given from one dram to three drams, in Broth, or some other Liquor. Of Tartar, and a little of the Leaves of Senna of Alexandria, to stimulate it: a very effectual Pouder is made, and it is very pleasant. It is thus made.
Take the best crude Tartar, one dram, or Cream of Tartar one dram & half, Leaves of Senna one scruple, seeds, of annis, or fennel, or cinnamon half a scruple, fine Sugar half a dram, mingle them and make a Pouder for one Dose. Medicaments that Soften the Belly. We must use these remedies that do not Purge strongly, rather to hinder the retention of the Excre∣ments of the first Concoction, than for any other necessary and quick Evacuations; and such are these. Things that Molify the Belly in a Chollerick Cause. These following Herbs boyld as Pot-hearbs, and their Decoctions are profitable, namely, Sorrel, Atri∣plex, Blites, Lettice, al kind of Sor∣rel,
Mallows and the stalks thereof, Spinach. These Herbs soften more, if they be boyled with Raisons, in fat Broth or seasoned with Oyl and a little Salt. Sweet Cherries boyled, especially with their broth and sprinckled with Sugar. Also Juyce of Cherries thickned with Honey, from one spoonful to two spoonfuls, either taken alone or with Broth. Peaches byoled and sprinkled with Sugar. Sweet Apples byold. Corinths without stones, and al of that kind either taken alone or steep∣ed in Clarified Whey til they swel, or boyled in White Wine, or Broth and sprinkled with Sugar, taken one ounce or two ounces at a time. Sweet Prunes raw, their outward skin being pulled off or boyled in Wine, and sprinkled with Sugar. The Juyce of Ptisan, especially made of husked Barley.
Barley Bread. Oyle of ripe Olives eaten largely at Meals. The cheif use of al these, as of those that follow, is at the first course or when the Stomach is empty, a∣bout two hours before Meat. Medicaments that loosen the Belly in a Flegmatick cause. The sprouts of Stone Sparagus boy∣led and seasoned with Salt and Oyl. Oat-meal in Meats or Gruel. Colworts, cheifly those that are cur∣led, being gently boyled, & seasoned with Oyl and Salt. Also the first Broth of Colworts, wel boyled and seasoned as before. Likewise the Juyce of Colworts pressed out and drank in Broth, from two to four ounces. Beets vsed in the same manner, the white Beet is held to be more effect∣ual then the Black or Red.
The Leaves of Marigolds Boyld, and seasoned with Oyl and Salt. The first Broth of Chich Pease, or Lintels with Oyle and Salt. The Broth of all Salt fish. New Figs very ripe. Dry Figs six or seven soaked in Milk or sweet Wine, until they swell. Some also in the spring time strew fresh Damask Rose Leaves on Figs, which Leaves they often change for the space of Fourteen dayes, and putting them, pressed close together, into a Vessel, they lay them up for their use: and use to Eat two or three of them before meat. New Walnuts, or for the lack of them, dry Walnuts soked in Water, until they be Soft, and then Eaten with Salt. Branny Bread or that which is course, which is made more effect∣ual with Raisions and Senna of Alex∣andria. Bran alone Boyled in Broth. The Decoction of Sweet Cods.
Medicaments that soften the Belly, in a Melancholly cause. Capers seasoned with Salt gently Boyled, are eaten in Sallets with Oyl and Vineger. The young sprouts of hops, that first come forth, Boyld and seasoned with Oyl and Salt; they loosen more effectually, if you Drink the Broth after them. All kind of new sweet Grapes, but especially whilst the dew yet hangs on them, they are not so effectual, when they are hanged up to be kept. Sweet Wine drank. Sawces made of the Juyce of Wine Sod, that is, new Wine Boyled a little. To these may be referred prunes and Raisons, especially in adust Me∣lancholy. Vineger is made to season Sallets and to keep the Belly Soluble, after this fashion.
Take Crude Tartar one dram: or Cream Tartar half an ounce: Leaves of Senna three drams, good Cinnamon, or Annis Seed one dram: the sharpest Vineger one pound: make infusion a natural day, and keep the Vineger for use. Also Vineger of Currence in which Tartar hath been insused a whole night, is not uneffectual. Lenitive Clysters. Clysters are made presently at a very smal rate, to purge the Belly: of one pound, of Flesh Broth, Oyl of Olives or Line Seed Oyle, and the dregs of Sugar, of each three ounces: Common Salt one dram: mingle them. It will be Cheaper, and more clen∣sing, if a Clyster be made of natural Salt Sea-Water, or Mineral Water, one pound: common Oyl three ounces: Or.
Take the Decoction of Mercury, Mallows, Beets, and Bran, one pound: Juyce of Colworts, or Honey, or Juyce of Beets, two ounces: com∣mon Salt one dram: mingle them for a Clyster. If there be need of any great Loos∣ning, Augment the Quantity of the Oyl to four or six ounces: or Omit∣ting the Oyl, increase the quantity, of the Decoction made with a great deal of Mallows, Marsh Mallows, Brank-ursin, and pressed out strong∣ly. If there need Cooling, the Leaves of blew Violets, Pellitory of the wall, and Barley must be added to the Decoction. If the what that is, see my tran∣slation of Riverius Practice of Physick in the Physical Dictiona∣ry at the end of the aforesaid Book. Expulsive faculty be weak you must double, or treble, the quan∣tity of Salt. Loosening Suppositories. Suppositories, made of one ounce of Honey, or the dross of Sugar Boy∣led
hard, adding a little Salt to it; If the Expulsive faculty, be sluggish, do mildly stir up the Belly to void out the excrements. Also the Roots of Radish or Beets, Cut into form of Suppositories, and smeered with Oyl, or Butter, with or without Salt. The same is done with the stem of the Colwort. Also a Fig turned the out side in∣ward, and made like a Suppository, anoynted with Oyl and Salt. So Suppositories are made of Spa∣nish Soap, or with Lard, or a Candle, anoynted with Oyl or Butter. Purgers by the Belly. Those Medicaments that draw forth the excrements, by the Belly, and are called Purgatives and Ca∣tharticks, though they hardly drive forth the Humors single, but mingled together, yet they take their Name from the Excrement that
they most effectually purge. For which reason they may be reduced to four ranks, according to the diver∣sity of Humors that they purge forth: Namely to Purgatives of Choller, Flegm, Mellancholy, and Watery, or Bloody Excrements. We may again divide all these severally, to distinguish them the better, into gentle purgatives, which purge Mildly without gripings, from the parts that are about the Liver: into forcible Purgatives, which drive forth from the remote parts, and from the hollow Vein, not with∣out some trouble: and Violent Pur∣gatives or furious, which draw from the furthest parts, and if they be not well Corrected, they do their work most vehemently, and weaken the Patient. With this distinction it is an easy matter for any one to make choise of Purgatives, according to the different Scituation, and the part that is affected, and for the greater or lesser resistance of the Humor that must be purged, and for the strength or weakness of the Sick that must endure it.
When Choller Predominates, these Me∣dicaments are Convenient for a gentle Evacuation. The wood of Amara Dulcis Boyled; from one ounce to two ounces, with a quantity of Annis Seed or Fennel-Seed. The Yellow rind of the Black Alder-Tree dried in the shade, and cheifly at the beginning of the spring; taken to four scruples: it is corrected, with some aromatical Seed, and the Black Rind that is out-most; and therefore it is dried, Boyled and bruised al together. Monks Rhu-barb, or the Herb Pati∣ence of Mathiolus, the pouder of the dried Root is given from one dram, to one dram and an half in warm Broth, with five or six grains of Ginger or Hysop. Blew Violets dried in the shade, are taken, from one dram to two drams: with the Broth of Chich Pease, or gar∣den Pease, Boyled Moderately. The great Bind-weed of Mathiolus,
Bovled; from one handful to two hand∣fuls. It is corrected with such things, as bind the Stomach, cheifly with the Myrtle Berries, Rosemary, and wild Ga∣linga. These Purge Strongly. The lesser Centaury, in a Decoction; from two drams to three drams, in eight ounces of Water: till half be consumed, adding Liquoris or Raysons to correct the bitterness; it is given in Pouder to one dram, or thereabouts, in the Decoction, of Prunes or Raysons, cheifly in Barley Water. Gratiola dried, is administred in Pouder, to one dram: in Wine or Broth, altered with things that Corroborate the Stomach. When it is green, it is Boyled, from one dram and an half to two drams: some of the Succories, especially being Boyled with it. Petty Spurge, in Pouder about four scruples: drank in Honey Water, with a little Vineger.
These Purge Violently. Dogs Cole, the Juyce of it, whilst it is fresh, and the Herb first dried in the shade. The same thing doth Scammony, but it is corrected with Quinses, or the Smoak of Brimstone, which is a new Invention, and it makes the Medica∣ment gentle enough, and void of all taste; either of these being grossely poudered, is spread upon a brown Pa∣per, and poudered Brimstone is cast up∣on the Coals underneath, so that the Paper over it may receive the smoak: so soon as the matter begins to Melt, it is taken away and reserved for use: and so may Scammony be safely given, from five grains to fifteen: but if it be pre∣pared with Quinses: ten grains are sufficient; it may be given in some convenient Liquor, or made up in Pills, or Bolus. Of these spoken of, divers purging
Medicaments, may presently be provid∣ed; concerning which we must generally take notice, that the purgation will be made more gentle, if purgatives be mixed with Lenitives of the same kind, which must be understood proportio∣nably, of all other purgatives, for Ex∣ample. A potion to purge Choller may present∣ly be provided thus. Take Raysons half an ounce, sweet Prunes eight, The Lesser Centaury two drams, Fennel Seed half a dram, Barley or common Water eight ounces, make a Decoction at a soft fire, til half be con∣sumed, strain it, and give it to drink. If you will have a Bolus. Take the Roots of patience in pou∣der one dram: the flowers of the Lesser centaury, half a dram, the pulp of Ray∣sons clensed from their stones, or the what Rob is, & how to make it, you may easily learn if you Read the Translation of my Lon∣don Dis∣pensatory: under the Title Rob you shall find twelve several sorts of Rob, by which (with di∣ligence and care) you may make any other sort, of Rob. Rob of Prunes thickned, six drams: Ginger six grains: mingle them and make a Bolus. If you meet with a Patient, whose Stomach abhors all Physick, then make purging Prunes, or Currence, or Figs, if you steep the said fruit in some of
these purging Decoctions, that purge Choller, so long that the fruit swel, and then six Prunes or three or four Figs, or half an ounce of Currence unto one ounce, will be sufficient for a purge. So you may provide these fruit to purge any other Humors, only chan∣ging the matter of the Purgative Li∣quors, that they are soaked in, accor∣ding to the matter of the disease, whe∣ther it be Blood, Melancholy or Flegm. These gently Purge Flegm, when it is predominant. Agarick infused all night, in Liquor, in which Ginger is first soaked, or Hy∣sop or Time, or some other like hot and sharp Herb, and then it is dryed, As they make Agarick in See the way of making, Thoches of any sort, in my Tran∣slation, of the Lon∣don, Dis∣pensatory, of the las Edition. Troches: it is given, beaten into Pouder from half a dram to one dram, in Pills, or Bolus, or drink of Oxymel: it is infused from four scruples: to three drams: or there∣abouts, especially, in Honey Water. Asarum of Mathiolus, Purgeth every
Part of it, but the Root most effectual; it is given in Pouder, from one dram to two drams, with Oxymel, or Water and Honey. The pulp of the Seeds, of wild Saf∣fron is given; from two drams to five drams or thereabout; the Emulsion of them, is given in sweet Wine, strong Wine, or Broth; it is corrected with such things as heat, and corroborate the Stomach, as spike, wild Galingal, Rose∣mary, &c. The Juyce of the Berries of Buck∣thorn, or dying-thorn, wherewith the the Book-binders do Colour the Coverings of their Books Yellow, is given in substance, from three drams to six drams: it is corrected with sweet Herbs, Seeds or Spices, especially with Ginger. The thicker Rind of the Elm Pou∣dered; is given from two drams, to half an ounce or thereabouts in Wine, or the Decoction of Hysop. Radix cava, or the Root of Bulbus, Fumitory dryed in the shade, is given in substance poudered one dram, in some convenient Liquor.
Of the Buck-thorn, there is made a pleasing Syrup two ways, and to be kept for the Poor. after this fashion. Take the Juyce of the Berries of dy∣ing Buck-thorn clarified two pound, clarified Honey two pound and an half, Boyle it at a soft fire, to the consist∣ence of a Syrup, straind through a wide Linnen Cloth, after wards whilst the strained Liquor is yet hot, cast in of the best Cinnamon in Pouder three drams: Ginger one dram and an half, mingle them and keep it for your use, Or. Take of the said Juyce strained, and Boyled by it self, til a fourth part be consumed, one pound: clarifed Ho∣ney eight ounces: Boyl them toge∣ther, to the consistence of a Syrup, when they are Boyled, and taken from the fire, cast in two drams of good Cinna∣mon. Give either of these, from one ounce, to one ounce and an half, in Wine or Broth of Flesh, or in the Decoction of Hysop, or Poley, or Time. Strong Purgatives. Take the Root of Esula, the greater,
or the less, which is commonly the more effectual. The Root is used, first steeped in Rose Vineger, or Vineger of Quin∣ces, and then dried and kept for occa∣sion. If these Vinegers be wanting, common Vineger is altered, with some Stomachicall Astringent, as with Roses, Barberies, wild Pomgranat Flowers, or Quinces, the Tendrells of Vines, Flowrs of the wild Vine, or Myrtle Berries, it is given in Pouder, from six grains to twenty grains, it is In∣fused, from one scruple to five scruples: or thereabout, in Wine, or Metheg∣lin. The Rind of the Root Esula of Ve∣nice, is of the same nature, prepared and given the same way. Garden-Broom which they cal spanish Broom, the Leavs, and Seeds, are given in substance, from one dram, to two drams: in Infusion, or De∣coction; from two drams to half an ounce. It is corrected with Aromati∣cal Wine, or some Odoriferous stoma∣chical remedies. Al the parts of cornerd Broom do the same effects; exhibited the same way.
Common Hermodactils or Meddow Saffron of Dioscorides; the Roots of them digged up before they flower, and especially before the Leaves come forth, endure no boyling or infusion, the Pouder is given from two scruples to two drams in Pils, or Bolus, or Lo∣zenges, or alone in drink, in Wine, or Broth. The force of it must be sharpned with some tart thing, as with Ginger, Hysop, or Time, also it were good to ad some Antidote to correct the Wind∣iness of it; as, amongst common anti∣dotaries, are Rue, Goats Rue, or wild Angelica Root, and the purgation wil be the safer The Root of the yellow, wild Daffo∣dil is given in substance, from two drams to half an ounce in Wine or Broth: it is corrected with odoriferous stomach strengthners. The dry Root of the black wild Vine of Mathiolus, is given in Decoction; from one dram and an half, to three drams. In substance poudred from half a dram to one dram and half, or thereabouts; it is corrected with the Pills, or seeds, of Citrons, or Orenges or with spike.
These Purge Violently. The yong sprouts of Bryony, half a handful, Boyled as Pot-Herbs, and taken, The Juyce of the yong sprouts of the same, taken in Wine, or Broth, or the Decoction of Hysop, Origanum, or Calamint, from one dram to two drams. Little Cakes of Wormwood, fryed in Oyl, that is distilled from the sprouts of Bryony, do the same. The Root of Bryony dried, and Boyled from one dram to three drams, or thereabout, or the substance from one scruple to one dram, or there∣abouts, may be taken in Wine, or Broth, being corrected with Wormwood, or some thing to strengthen the Stomach. The pulp of the wild Gourd is steeped, from five to twenty grains, decocted from ten grains or thereabouts, to twenty four grains, it is corrected with some Stomach strengthner, and that, by
the slipperiness of it, can make the De∣coction sooner; as Mallows, Fegreek, and Citron Seeds, tops of Wormwood, or Cinnamon. To this belongs also strong Wine, as wormwood wine, that for one night hath been wasted in a hollow wild-Gourd. The gourd that is Pear-fashion, doth the same, but some-thing weaker, and therefore the Dose is all most double. Chamelaea, especialy the Leaves of it, are Boyled from half a dram to one dram: in substance they are taken from ten grains to one scruple, it is corrected with Wormwood, and Barley. Thymelaea doth the same, the same way given. Laureola the Male, which Mathiolus cals Chamaedaphne, and the Foemal, which he calls Daphnoides, do the same, but not so strongly, it is Boyled from one dram to three drams: but given in sub∣stance from fifteen grains to one scru∣ple, or to two scruples, and is corrected the same way. All the Tithymals, except that with Broad Leaves, which doth Vio∣ently Purge Watery Humors, are
given many wayes; the Milk of it is given from five to twelve grains, the smal Branches and Leaves, are given in substance, from half a dram to four scruples, the Rind of the Root is given in substance, from one scruple to one dram, but infused from four scruples, to three drams or thereabout. Of these sundry remedies may be compounded, and be used presently, or be reserved for use. for Example. A Drink. Take prepared Agarick four scru∣ples: infuse it in three ounces of the Decoction of Hysop for ten hours, then strain it, and add Oxymel one ounce and an half, mingle it for a draught, Or. Take the Roots, of Esula prepared two drams, the Leaves of Laureola, be∣ing fresh, one ounce, Leaves of Myr∣tles, and Hysop, of each one handful, Fragrant White Wine, two pound and an half, Clarified Honey, one pound:
Boyled all at a gentle fire, to a mean consistence: then add Annis Seed one dram, Coriander Seed prepared half a dram, Cinnamon one dram, Boyl them again to a Syrup, strain it, and keep it for use. The Dose is one ounce and an half to four ounces. A most pleasing Pouder. Take Hermodactills, cleansed from their outward Skin, one dram, Tartar, crude or prepared one scruple, Ginger, six grains, fine Sugar half a dram; mingle them, and make a Pouder to be given in Wine. what Bolus is, & the way of making them, you may see in my Eng∣lish Dis∣pensatory. Or the end of my Pra∣ctice of Physick, in Folio. A Bolus Take agarick prepared two scruples, Tartar half a dram, Cinnamon five grains, the pulp of Figs, or Raysons cleansed from their stones half an ounce; mingle these for a Bolus.
Pills. Take Hermodactils, and Agarick prepared, of each one scruple and half▪ Ginger six grains: make a Pouder, and with Honey, or Oxymel; form it into Pills. When Melancholly predominates, these will Purge gently. Dodder Boyled, from six drams to one ounce and an half, for one Dose, and it is thus corrected with Worm∣wood. Take Herb Dodder, one ounce, topps of common Wormwood two Pugils, or two drams, common Water ten oun∣ces: let al be Boyled to the consumption of half, add to them about the end; Seeds of Annis, or Fennel, grossely brui∣sed half a dram: strain it for one draught; if you Boyl under half an ounce, it opens only, but purgeth not. Epithyme of Greece, for there it grows naturally, may be used in sub∣stance,
to half an ounce, in clarified Whey, or Milk or some such cooler, in Decoction; from six drams to one ounce and an half; but it must be Boyled moderately. The slow purging qua∣lity it hath, is corrected with tart things, as Pepper or Ginger: In the place of it, Time may be used, which hath the same force, and must be so prepared: but in Europe the Black Time is most commonly used. That which is white and grows in Syria, is more effectual, but it is better, in the Deco∣ction of it, to use other Melancholy purgatives, than to use it alone, because it Purges slowly. The Root of Polypode in substance, is given from one dram to four drams in Cock-broth, or Cream of Barley; it is Boyled from six drams to ten drams; it is corrected with such things as dis∣cuss Windiness, and such as are a little astringent for the Stomach, as Citron Seeds, or Orange Seeds, or Corriander Seeds, or Spik of Italy. The great and smal Leaves of Senna are used in substance, from one dram to two drams; they are infused from
two drams to six; but they endure not Boyling, they are corrected with sweet Seeds, and other things that dispel Wind. By infusion is made Senna Wine, of which half a Cup may be given, observing the former proportion, for a just Purge: But if it be only to loosen the belly, then every Dose of Wine must contain no more then one ounce of Senna infused but one night. These Purge strongly. Consiligo of Mathiolus, which Tragus thinks to be Black Hellebore, and Dodonaeus thinks that it is Buphthalmus, hath the same vertue, but somthing Weaker, as hath Black Hellebore of the Apothecaries, and it must be pre∣pared the same way. Foemale Sannicle of Fuchsius, the Root of it is of the same force, and needs the same preparation. These Purge Violently. Purgative Antimony: and it is made so
by being thrice Calcined with the dou∣ble weight of Salt Peeter, at a fire not too Violent, and stirring the matter con∣tinually with an Iron that it burn not. It is given in substance for Children, from four grains to nine grains, and to those that are of ripe years, from six grains to twelve grains, and to them that are hardly purged, from twelve to sixteen grains; give it in any Li∣quor, or in a spoonful of a Panatella or Ptisan, it will work the more easely, if you add some Grains of cremor Tar∣tar. The Root of Black Hellebore pre∣pared: there are divers preparations of it, whereby this Medicament maybe made as gentle as Senna, commonly the rind of the Root is infused in the stron∣gest Vineger, and then is dried in the shade for use. It is given in substance from one scruple to about two scruples; in Decoction from one dram to about two drams; in infusion from half a dram to four scruples; it is corrected with sweet Seeds, chiefly of Daucus and Nymphya which are the proper cor∣recters of it.
If you would make it to Purge gent∣ly, and would use it instead of gentle Purgatives, before you dry it for your use, let it Boyl a while in Vineger, for so it loseth much of the force, or when it is Boyled, or infused, as they ordinarily prepare it, do but cast away the first Decoction or Infusion, and Pour on new Liquor to the same Root, for the second Infusion, or Decoction to be administred. Moreover, of Hellebore they prepare a double extract, one more effectual then the other. First, Take Roots of Black hellebore, washt in white Wine, and cleansed from their filth, one pound: slice them and infuse them twenty four hours in four pound of the best white Wine, adding to it, Flowers of the Water Lillies one handful, Daucus Seed two drams, or the Root of Daucus, half an ounce, about the end, boyl them gently, that the Roots may grow soft, and swel; then press them in a press; let the Juyce be strained, and purified, and thickned, sensibly, by a gen∣tle heate; and when it is as thick as
Honey, add a fourth part of Mastick; the dose is from half a scruple to one scruple; in Pills or Bolus. The second is the more ordinary. Take Roots of black Hellebore, be they green or dry, so much as you please, boyl them in eight times so much water, til a third part remains, then crush out the Roots most forcibly: add the Expression to the Decoction, and pressing both of them through a double strayner, thicken them toge∣ther to the consistence of Honey; ad∣ding an eight part of Mastick: when the Juyce is thick, you may give it from sixteen grains to half a dram: in Pills or Bolus. Also, of Hellebore is made a purg∣ing Apple, if the smal Roots preserved, and dried, be stuck into an Apple, and that Apple be roasted, then pul out the roots and let the Patient eat the Apple: or if the roots ly in the Apple, for the space of a Natural day being stuck in, then cast away the roots and eat the Apple raw. Lastly, of Hellebore is made an Oxi∣mel, or any purging syrup, if the roots
be boyled in it, but they endure great boyling: there is almost the same purg∣ing faculty in black Hellebore you buy in the shops, which Mathiolus cal's, black Hellebore with a blew flower, and black Hellebore that hath a greenish flower, which Mathiolus calls bastard black Hellebore; but the first purgeth with less trouble then the latter, which therefore wants the better pre∣paration, and must be given in less quantity. Of the foresaid things, may be pre∣pared a Syrup most profitable and plea∣sant for poor people, to be kept to Purge the Melancholy Humors; thus, Take Roots of Black Hellebore pre∣pared three ounces, Borrage, Bugloss, Fumitory and Dodder, of each one handful, Pome Citrons cut into pieces half a pound, Fountain Water five pound; let them boyl at a gentle fire to the wasting of three pound, then cast away the Herbs; add Juyce of sweet Apples half a pound; Boyle them again til half be consumed: then press all forth strongly, strain them and cla∣rify them; add purified Honey one
pound, Boyl all to the consistence of a Syrup; the Dose is one or two oun∣ces. But, presently such Medicaments may be made, as for Example, a drink. Take Leaves of Senna three drams, Seeds of Fennel or Annis one dram; infuse them twelve hours in the De∣coction of hops, four ounces, or the De∣coction of Raysons, and make it Boyl once, and then strain it; add What Oxymel Simplex is, and how made with the vertuet thereof, you may see in my Tran∣slation of the Lon∣don Dis∣pensatory, of the last Edition. Oxymel Simplex (namely to open the passages and to scour thick Humors) one ounce, mingle them, make a Potion. A Bolus may be made presently thus, Take Leaves of Senna in pouder one dram, Tartar, Annis Seed or Cinnamon, of each one scruple; the pulp of Rai∣sons purged from their Stones half an ounce; mingle them and make a Bo∣lus. Pills may be made thus. Take Leaves of Senna two scruples, Root of Black Hellebore half a scruple, Seeds of Daucus and Cinnamon of each fix grains; pouder them and with Oxy∣mel make Pills. Such a pouder may be made.
Take of Purging Antimony eight grains, Cream of Tartar one scruple, Cinnamon and Sugar of each half a scruple; mingle them, make a pouder to be given in Wine or Broth. Or, Take Leaves of Senna one dram, Tartar and fine Sugar and Cinnamon of each one scruple; mingle them, and make a pouder for one. When Watery Humors prevail, these will Purge gently: The Root of the white Thistle bea∣ten to Pouder, is taken from one dram in Wormwood Wine, or Oxymel; or in Decoction from two drams to half an ounce, it is corrected with sweet Seeds or Wormwood. The Root of the wonderful Herb of Spain that carryes a diverse coloured flower is taken any way to two drams. Wild Mercury in a Decoction one handful and an half, or Boyled as Pot Herbs, and seasoned with Oyl and Salt and eaten.
Garden flowerdeluce, that bears a blew flower, the Juyce of the Root newly pressed forth, and purefied from two ounces to three ounces, or thickned from two drams to half an ounce, chiefly in Wormwood Wine. The Root of Anthora Scraped, from one scruple to two scruples, taken in Wine or Broth: it needs no correcter. The Root of wild Cucumber dried, given in substance from fifteen grains to about half a dram, it is infused, bea∣ten grosly from two scruples to about five scruples, it is Boyled from two drams to half an ounce: It is corrected with things that help the stomach. But the best way to give it, is to infuse it a night in Wormwood Wine. Four Sprouts of Dwarf-elder, that have four Leaves, Boyled in Wine or Broth, and eaten as Pot Herbs. The Root of the same steeped in Wine, from two drams to three drams. The Juyce of the flowers and fruit of the same is given from five drams to one ounce, in strong Wine or Broth corrected with Wormwood.
The pouder of the Seed of the same is given from half a dram to about one dram in the same Liquor. The Juyce of the same thickned with Honey, to the consistence of a Syrup; is given from half an ounce to one ounce, either alone, or in wine or Broth. The Elder Tree doth the same, pre∣pared the same way, only there is a greater purging Quality in the Rind of the Root then in other Parts. The Juyce of the wild Lettice, from three drams to about six drams, with Honey or Oxymel or sweet Wine, cor∣rected with wormwood. The Husked Seed of the common Ricinus, the What Emulsions are, see my Translation of Riveri∣us in the Physical Dictionary at the end thereof. Emulsion of it, is given from one dram to three drams with wine or fat Broth, corrected with some Spice; or infused, or lightly bruised; from three drams to six drams. Soldanella or Sea Coal is given in Decoction of fat Broth, from one hand∣ful to two handfuls, also the yong shoots are eaten, as Pliny saith, or the yong Tendrels, Boyled like Pot-Herbs. They are corrected with stomack Cor∣roboratiues.
Out of this plant may be made a plain extract to be kept for use, and it is very pleasant, if the Juyce of the Leaves be pressed out, Clarified, and thickned, and be made into Pills with a fourth part of Mace and Mastick, or if it be made thick with a fourth part of Honey, and an eight part of the Juyce of wormwood, the Dose will be from one dram, to two drams or there∣abouts. The Root of the white Vine which Mathiolus makes to be the third Kind of Clematitis, Boyled from about half an ounce in wine mingled with Equal quantity of water: it is corrected with temperate Stomachicall things; namely with Coriander Seed or Myrtils. These Purge Vehemently. Ricinus of America, it is taken from half a grain to a whole grain, or the Seed is steeped all night in wine; or else drink the emulsion of the Seed in Broth. Granum Dende of Avicennae, which Mountebanks sel up and down for the Seed of Ricinus of America, doth the same effect as Ricinus of America doth. The Seeds of Cataputia, if they be
great are given from seven to ten, but if smal, from eight to fifteen. Or else made into Pills or Bolus with Figs, or taken in Emulsion, with Hydromel; they are very troublesome to the Sto∣mach, therefore you must drink after them, Broth altered with Wormwood, and Seeds of Citrons or Orenges. Tithymal with broad Leaves, given according to all the parts of it, in the quantity, and manner aforesaid con∣cerning the other Tithymals that Vio∣lently Purge fleam. Of the foresaid may be prepared a pleasant and profitable Syrup, to be kept for use. As, Take the Roots of ordinary Flower∣de-luce fresh, six ounces, wild Cu∣cumber dried in the shade, two ounces, Roman wormwood and Origanum, of each one handful, pleasant white Wine two pound and an half: make infusion for five hours, then Boyl them at a gentle fire to the Consumption of a third part, strain it; then add clarified Honey one pound, Boyl all again to the consistence of a thin Syrup, add about the end, Cinnamon or Annis Seed two drams.
The Dose of this Syrup will be from one ounce to two ounces at the most. Presently compositions may be made thus; For a Potion. Take the Roots of wild Cucumber grossly bruised one dram, tops of Ro∣man wormwood one handful, Seeds of Annis, Fennel or Cinnamon one scruple, the best Wine three ounces, infuse them all night, in the morning, strain them; to the straind Liquor add Oxy∣mel Simple one ounce; mingle them for a drink. You may Leave out Oxymel if you please. For a Bolus. Take the Juyce of Flower-de-luce thickned three drams; the tops of wormwood in Pouder half a dram, Annis Seed half a scruple, Figs half an ounce, mingle them for a Bolus. Pills. Take Seeds of dwarfe Elder two scruples, or the Roots of wild Cucum∣ber one scruple, Cinnamon half a scru∣ple, Pouder them, and make Pills of them with Juyce of wormwood what may Suffice.
Purging Clysters. Purgatives that are given in Clysters are used for a two fold end, namely, either to stirr up the Faculty Expulsive that is very dul, as is used to be done in the Sleepy Diseases are most excellently treated on in Riveri∣us Practice of Physick in English, Sleepy Diseases; as the Palsey and Dotings, and they are therefore called Tart Clysters; or else to draw the Excrements from the remote parts that are ordained for Evacuation or for revulsion sake They are prepared the same way and in the same quantity as we sayd already of lenitive Clysters. adding only to the Decoction for a common Clyster some purging Herbs; as centaury the less, or Gratiola in a Cholerick cause; the sprouts of wild Saffron, broom Leaves, the pulp of Coloquintida bound up in a wide Cloth, the Roots of Esula, or sow Bread in a Flegmatick Cause, the Roots of Black Hellebore in case of Melancholy; the Leaves of Dwarf-El∣der, or the Elder Tree in a watery
Cause; but that they may Purge, and supply the place of a Medicament to be taken at the Mouth, they must not be cast in beyond the quantity of eight ounces; namely the same quantity that may be also taken at the Mouth, and a Clyster to Purge the Entralls, must go before, for so a Purgative Cly∣ster may be held in many Hours, and it is fitly actuated by the Heat of the Intestines. But the quantity of Medi∣caments to be taken at the Mouth, must be doubled in Clysters; because they are not so easely brought to action by the Intestines, as they are by the Sto∣mach. As for Example, to pul back and to Purge Flegm, such a Clyster may be made. Take Leaves of Mallows, Beets, Ori∣ganum, Chamomel of each half an handful, pulp of Coloquintida bound in a Skin half a dram, Seeds of Car∣thamus two drams, Fountain water one pound, Boyl them to the Consump∣tion of half, to the straind Liquor add of the dregs of Sugar or Honey two or three ounces; make a Clyster.
Sharp Suppositories. Purging Suppositories, seem to have no purgative power of themselves, that is, to have no drawing quality to fetch the Humors from the remote parts to the Intestines, but only to stir up the Belly, when it is slow to expulsion; by which stirring up, sometimes by ac∣cident it fals out as it doth in purgati∣ves; that the excrements that ly in the Veins, and distant Parts, are thrust out by the Belly, but not by the Medicament drawing them, but only by the Expul∣sive Faculty awakened: Whereupon sometimes sharp Clysters supply the room of a Purgative Medicine, and are more safely given to any that are weak, then Clysters are. Sharp Suppositories are made of Honey or the reliques of Sugar boyled hard, adding for every ounce of them from one grain to ten grains of Coloquintida, Scammony, or of both Hellebors, or of the Milk of Tithymals, or Esula, and
some Sharp Salt, as Salt Armoniack or Salt Nitre, for Suppositories. For Vomiting Medicaments. There are two sorts of these also, for some only Purge the Stomach, being Void of all attractive vertue, and these belong to the Rank of gentle Medica∣ments; others again evacuate the su∣perfluities they draw to the Stomach, and are Purgatives. The former, of themselves hardly provoke one to Vo∣mit, unless they offend some Stomach that nauseats them very much, but they need some outward help to stirr them, as by putting the Finger or a Feather into the Throat; but the lat∣ter provok Vomit without any out∣ward help. These move Vomit gently. In a hot cause: Warm Water or Bar∣ley
water, fat Broth, water and Oyl, they are all given luke-warm, from one pound to two pounds, to those that are of ripe years, but to Children, from eight ounces to one pound. In a cold cause, that is thin: the De∣coction of Citron Seeds or Orange Seeds in Broth, to one pound with two oun∣ces of Oxymel. The luke warm Decoction of bay Leaves, to one pound. The Root of Daffodil Boyled and eaten, or the Decoction of it drunk in the quantity aforesaid: The Pouder of the Root of bettony, from one dram to three drams with Broth and Oxymel. The Pouder of the Pompion Root, from one scruple in the same Liquor. The Decoction of Snails in hedges, in water or Broth. In a cold cause and thick: the Juyce of Radish from one ounce to two ounces with Broth and Oxymel. Nitre from one scruple to one dram with Metheglin or fat Broth. Broth taken with Oxymel or Honey, with which mingle one scruple of Gin∣ger, Hysop or Pepper.
Purging Vomits. All those things that Purge by Vo∣mit, do also move the Belly, and there∣fore they are then to be Chosen, when nature is more enclined to Purge up∣wards; they may be brought to three ranks, as they were that Purge the Belly. Some are gentle, that draw only from the Parts that lie round about the Stomach, and with smal trouble move the Stomach, others are strong, and draw more effectually from the Remoter Parts, and trouble the Stomach something more. Some are violent, which draw vehemently, and Evacuate matter that is very thick, or such as is contained in the remotest Parts, and cause Vomit with great for∣cing of the Stomach. When Choller predominates, these are gentle: The Yellow rind of the Black Alder, when it i fresh, Poyled in water or in Broth from two drams to four drams.
The Seed of Garden Cresses Pouder∣ed, drank in water from three drams to six drams. Mountain dwarf-Cherry, of Gesner, which Tragus makes to be Sea-Purslain swallowed down from five to eight Cherries, especially in water or warm Broth drank after them. The Root of Asarum draweth all most equally, Choller and Flegm; it is infused from two drams to five drams; the substance in Pouder is given from one dram to two drams. These are strong. The Juyce of the Root of Mandragora from half a scruple to a whol scruple in Honey Wine; and we must use it warily, for it is not with∣out danger. Where Flegm predominates, these Vomit gently: Agarick unprepared, from two scruples to two drams in fat Broth or Oxymel. The Seed of Bastard Senna with Bladders, is given in substance from one dram, to two drams, and is infused from two drams to half an ounce; it is corrected with spiced Wine. The Seed of Bastard Senna with Scor∣pion
Cods doth the same. The flowers of Garden Broom, and the green branches steeped, or Boyled; from two drams to half an ounce in Broth. The Seed of Spargula poudered, from two drams to four drams, in sweet Wine or Broth with Oxymel. These do strongly Void Flegm that is pre∣dominant. The Seeds of Staves-acre, about one dram & an half in Pouder, with plenty of sweet wine: you must drink fat Broth upon it, until you fal to Vomiting, least if it stay too long, the Stomach should be inflamed. The fresh Leaves of any of the Tithy∣mals Boyled, with sweet Wine, from one dram and an half to four drams. The Juyce of the Leaves of Tobacco from one dram to two drams in Broth, that is altered with the Seeds of Citrons or Oranges. White Vitriol from half a dram to one dram in Broth. These Void Flegm Violently. The Seed of the Peascod-Tree pou∣dered, from half a dram to one dram;
the rind of the same dried, and pou∣dered doth the same, but somthing more weakly. Those Medicaments that are com∣pounded of these, are almost of the same Kind, as for Example. For Choller: Take Barley Water one pound, Oyl of Olives that were sufficiently ripe two ounces, Root of Asarum in pou∣der one ounce; mingle them for a drink. For Flegm. Take Broth that is altered with the Seed of Citrons or Oranges one pound, Oxymel two ounces, Juyce of Radish one ounce, crude Agarick two scruples; mingle them for a drink. If you please to make a syrup for a Vomit, it may be as this. Take the green branches of Garden broom one ounce and an half; bay Leaves & Tobacco Leaves of each one handful, Seeds of Citrons or Oranges Grosely poudred two drams, Common Water two pounds, let them Boyl un∣til half be consumed; strain them. In the strained Liquor, infuse for twelve hours, of the Roots of Asarum and raw
Agarick, of each three drams, strain them again, and clarifie it, and add to it of clarified Honey one pound, Boyl all at a gentle fire to the consistence of a Syrup; the Dose of it, is from half an ounce to one ounce in Broth and warm water. Of the same kind is this Electuary, which is very effectual. Take the Roots of Asarum, and crude Agarick of each half an ounce, Roots of Betony and Pompions of each two drams, Cinnamon one dram, Annis Seed half a dram, Pouder them to very fine Pouder, and mix them with Honey clarified four ounces, and make an E∣lectuary, the Dose of it is from nine drams to almost twelve drams, in any Liquor that is pleasant. For Melancholy and black Choller that are predominant. None but strong and Violent Medicaments are conveni∣ent; because the Humor being of its own nature the most heavy, is some∣thing more hard to draw upwards than other Humors. These cause Vomit strongly: prepared Antimony, the Flower, the Calx and
the Glass of Antimony are easily pre∣pared: but the Tincture is somthing more difficult, and so is the Oyl, which being precipitated into cold water pas∣ses into white Pouder, not unlike to Flower. All these are given in sub∣stance from three grains to six grains, in a Panatella, or Ptisan, or some Stomach-Conserve, or Aromatick Wine, cor∣rected with wormwood, Rosemary, and other a little astringent Stomach-remedies, they are steeped from four grains to ten grains, chiefly in strong Wine, or wormwood Wine. Of this is made a most pleasing Syrup, Evacuating most easily both upwards and down∣wards, beyond all other Antimonial Medicaments. thus, Take the Flowers or the Glass of An∣timony, one dram and an half, the best white Wine one pound, infuse it for two days, natural: strain it, and add to it, Honey clarified ten ounces; Boyl them to a Syrup. The Dose is half an ounce to one ounce and an half or thereabout, taken by it self, or in some pleasant drink. These work Violently: the prepar∣ed
Root of white Hellebore, or the pith pulled out, and the Root steeped in Rose Vineger one day, and dryed again in the shade for use: in the place of Rose Vineger, take Vineger of Quince which is better, or some other, that is altered with something that is a little astringent, and cooling for the Sto∣mach, it is given from half a scruple to one scruple, not in substance, least the Mouth of the Stomach should suffer Convulsion, but, in infusion, which is done two wayes: the first is the way of the Antients, who did stick the smal Roots of Hellebore into a Radish for one night, the next day they cru∣shed our the Juyce of the Radish, and gave one ounce of the Juyce in Ptisan, or a thin Panatella may be used in the place of it, for to moisten the Mouth of the Stomach, that it fal not into Con∣vulsions. The second is better and more plea∣sant than the first. As take half a scru∣ple of the Root; stick it into a piece of a Quince, and Boyl it in the same, then take out the Roots, and give that for a Bolus to eat; or the Juyce pressed out
of the Quince may be put into Wine, or fat Broth, altered with the Seeds of Citrons, and so drink it. White Hel∣lebore is made far more gentle, if the Root with the pith pulled out, after due infusion, be Boyled in Vineger, and be then dried and kept for use. Where watery Humors are predomi∣nant; these are accounted gentle: the Juyce of the Root of Dwarf-Elder from one dram and an half to three drams in fat Broth, altered with tops of Wormwood. The Juyce of the Root of the Elder-Tree doth the same, taken in the same Dose. The Berries of Water-Elder taken to two drams, drink fat Broth after them, as we taught before. Strong Vomiting Medicaments, the Leaves of Spurge pulled upwards, are given in the same Broth from one dram, to one dram and an half. Stronger. Elaterium, by reason of the bitter∣ness, taken in Pills or Bolus. It is com∣monly mixed with some Aromatical Pills, it may be mixed with the pulp
of a Fig with a little Wormwood, which is done by expression. The fruit o wild Cucumber, is given from three grains to ten grains, but that which drops out of the fruit only prick∣ed is given from two grains to six. Medicaments, that Evacuate by Urin, by which not only the ways of the reins and the Bladder, but also the whole body is purged, by the help of the Veins and Arteries. They are made of Diuretick Medicaments, whereof some are properly so, hot and dry, and sharp and of thin Parts; others impro∣perly so, that have but remiss heat, or enclining also to cold, but yet are of thin parts, which are to be used cheifly in Feavers, or when the Reins or Liver are over heat; unless perhaps there be present, some corrupt Venemous matter in the veins that requires speedy Evacuations, which is better and sooner performed with proper and hot Diure∣ticks, the cheif and the most Obvious in both kinds are these. Proper what Di∣ureticks are, see y Translation of Rive∣rius and the Dicti∣onary at the end thereof. Diureticks; Asparagus, prin∣cipally the Root, Smallage Seed, or the common Sesely, the Root and the
Seed of Carduus, the Root of Cucum∣bers and the seed, common Seed, the Roots of al sorts of Eringos, the Roots and Seeds of Fennel, the Seeds of both Rochets, the Leaves and berries of the Bay Tree, also the Roots and the Rind, wild Mints, Turnep Seed, the Root of Prickly, Rest-Harrow, Penniroyal, all the parts of common Parsley, the Roots of both kinds of Radish, Mad∣der Roots, the yong sprouts of Knee∣holme, the Tendrells, and the Roots, Savory, wild Time; the Seeds are given in Pouder, from half a dram to one dram, (the same must be understood of Medicaments that are Diureticks improperly) some are Boyled in Wine or Water, but best of all in Broth of Chich Pease: yet the pouder of the Roots is given also, especially of those that are of a woody substance, as of Rest-Harrow, and the Bay Tree. Of these, some may be Compounded pre∣sently. This Pouder is most effectual. Take the Roots of Rest-Harrow two drams, the Seeds of Rochet and Bay Berries of each one dram, Cinnamon
half a dram, mingle them, make a Pouder: give one dram in Wine or warm Broth of Chich Pease. It is more pleasant, if it be infused all night: then give it one Boyl, and strain it, cast away the Dregs, and then drink it. It will be made a more effectual remedy yet, if you put in some drops of the Liquor which comes from Salt put into a hole in a Radish, kept in a moist place til it melt. To Anoint the Privities, such an Oyl is made presently, which help the Voiding of the Urin. Take Bay Leaves, Hors-Mints, wild Time, Pennyroyal of each one handful, Chamomel one handful and an half, Radish Roots half an ounce, Cummin Seed two drams, common Oyl one pound and an half, white Wine one pound, make an infusion for four hours; then Boyl all til the moisture be con∣sumed, and then press all out, and strain it again. A Plaister also may be made of a Radish cut, and Boyled with Leaves of Parsley and Smallage and Penny∣royal, then bruise them all and lay
them to the Privities. Improper Diureticks; Seeds of Gourds, Cucumbers, Citruls, and Me∣lones (make Emulsions of them,) of Mallows, Gromwel Seed, Alkekengi, Kernels of Cherries, Stones of Medlers, Shels of Filbird Nuts, the Juyce of ripe Lemmons, the Leaves and stalks of Straw-Berries, Maiden Hair, the Roots of both kinds of Brambles, of Grass, especially Reed Grass, of Liquoris, Cnkfoyl, and Radish the Rind peeled off, also the Broth of red Chich Pease is profitably administred, with a fourth part of Juyce of Lemmons, this drink is held for a secret. Take the Juyce of Pellitory of the Wall three ounces, the Proth of Chich Pease four ounces; mingle them for to drink. This also is supposed to be of the same kind. Take Liquoris half an ounce, com∣mon Water half a pound; Boyl them at a gentle fire til half be consumed; strain it and add to it Juyce of Lem∣mons one ounce; mingle them. Also for a speedy remedy may be
given with great profit, two ounces of the Juyce of Radish in strong Wine that is hot. Outwardly may be laid a common and excellent Plaister of the Leaves of Pellitory either alone, or pounded with a Radish, and so fried in a frying Pan with Butter and Oyl, and laid hot to the Privities, if you can get Oyl of Dill or Camomel it is better than com∣mon Oyl. Medicaments that Evacuate by sweat. These also are of two sorts: some are properly to cause sweat, which Melt the matter and turn it into Va∣pours; others are improperly so, which make the matter easily convertible, and so by accident cause sweat, and these are very convenient for the smal Pox at the beginning, and for hot affects of the Skin, and hot Feavers when the motion of Nature is out∣wardly inclined toward the Skin. Proper for sweat, are the Decoction
of Garlick, of Box Wood (with which the French Pox is as easily cured as with Guaiacum,) of Germander, great Celondine, Carduus Benedictus, Juni∣per Wood, and Bays, and of sweet Chervil: they are given from four ounces to eight ounces or thereabouts, and they are made more effectual be∣ing Boyled in Water and Honey and white Wine. The same Decoction purified and thickned with a gentle heat afford plain extracts; that may be given to one dram or thereabout, or els mingled with good Wine, or the Decoction of some improper sweating Medicaments, or made into Bolus, or Pills, and to drink after them three ounces or there∣abouts, of the Decoction. For example. In the Diseases of the nerves and Joynts from a cold Defluxion; make such a Decoction. Take Wood of the Bay-Tree, and Box Tree of each one ounce and an half, cut them smal and infuse them one day in five pound of common water, add Leaves of Betony, Ger∣mander and Ivy of each one handful;
let them Boyl at a gentle fire til a third part be consumed; strain it to be drank at five Times. Improper Medicaments to move sweat. The Decoction of Camomel, Chervil, Fumitory, unhulled Barley, Millet, Lintils lightly BoyIed, Roots of Hops, Cynkfoil, Tormentil, Leaves of common Pimpernel, Scabious, and Winter Gelliflowers. Of these is made a common Syrup, called the Syrup of St. Ambrose, of one part Wine, and two parts of the De∣coction of Millet. Other Medicaments may be sud∣denly made, as for example; in a Cuta∣neous effect, make such a Decoction. Take the Leaves of Scabious and Fumitory dry, of each one handful, Roots of Hops half an ounce, Barley Water one pound and an half, Boyl all at a gentle fire to the Consumption of almost the half, and strain it out for one draught. When the smal Pox appear: Take Leaves of Pimpernel one hand∣ful, Scabious half a handful, of the first Decoction of Lintels one pound, Boyl
them til a third part be consumed, strain it out, to drink at one draught. The Decoctions of these are given in greater quantity, than are the Deco∣ctions of those that are properly to cause sweat. Namely from about eight ounces to two pound. And you must know that sweat can hardly be procured by the help of these Medicaments, unless the force of them be derived outwardly to the Skin by attracting Medicaments; by the bene∣fit whereof, the pores of the Skin also are loosned and prepared for sweat: therefore about an hour and an half after the taking of a potion to sweat, the Body must either be put into a dry Bath, or some hot natural or artificial Bath; or els must be wel covered with Garments; or els hot Tiles must be applyed to him, or vessels ful of hot Water; or the Skin must be gently rubbed, or Cupping Glasses without Scarification must be applied on divers Parts, as necessity shall most require.
Medicaments that Evacuate by Spittle. Those things that unloose the Stuf∣fing from the ways of breathing, are called, from their office, Expectorating Medicaments, all which may be compre∣hended under a tripple difference, for some are convenient for thick spittle, namely incisers and scowrers; others are for thin and unsavory spittle, as dryers, and a little thickning; others again are to temper Salt spittle, and to hinder the corroding of it. Therefore when the spittle is Mo∣derately thick, a What Lohoch is, see the end of Ri∣verius Practice of Physick in English. And the Dispensa¦tory in English. Lohock is needful of water and Honey, or Oxymel, crude Honey, a Decoction of Figs, Liquoris, sweet Cods, Raysins; adding a quan∣tity of Colts Foot, Lungwort or Scbi∣ous; for the Pouders of these Herbs may be mixed with the Oxymel, to the consistence of a Lohoch, or a Soft Electuary, in which form the pouder of Iris, is used to good profit, mixt with Oxymel.
For Spittle that is very thick, these are proper: the Decoction of Oak of Jerusalem, Elecampane, Hatchet-Fetch Hysop, Horehound, Savory, Time, long Aristolochia, the Pouders of these are mixed profitably with Oxymel for a Lohoch, or they are mingled with Ho∣ney in form of an Electuary. Or; There is Compounded a sweet drink with Oxymel, and the Decoction of the said Herbs, as also by the infusion of them, Hysop Wine is wont to be made, and Wine of Elecampane; which the Antients used Ordinarily. The common people use to make a profitable Electuary of the Roots of Elecampane Boyled in Water, (it were better to take Methegsin or sweet Wine) and passed through a Hair sieve, and then mingled with twice as much of clarified Honey, and Sod to a just consistence. Besides these, the Pouder of Brim∣stone doth profit well, or the Flower mixt and taken with a rear Egg. The Seed of Nettles mixed in Lohochs, or Aqua-vitae with a third part of Sugar, made into a confection, or mixt with
Oxymel. So the Pouder of the Lungs of a Fox taken from half a dram to one dram in Wine or Metheglin, to be drunk, or mixed for a Lohoch. Saffron drank in Wine from half a scruple to a whole scruple. Sows Lice washed in Wine, and in∣fused to one dram al night in white Wine; then pressed forth and drank, the dregs being cast away. The Rozin of the Larch or Firr Tree, licked or swallowed down in Bolus: for a licking Medicament it must be dissolved in clarified Honey, for it will mingle very well with Ho∣ney. A most excellent Balsom may be made for this purpose. Take Oyl of ripe Olives (for the rich take Oyl of sweet Almonds) that is not rank, half a pound, sweet white Wine four ounces, let them Boyl til the moisture be consumed: then add Flower of Brimstone three ounces, stirr them continually and very Softly at a gentle fire; and when the Flowers are dissolved: add Rozin of the Larch Tree or the Firr Tree, or if it can be
had, the Gum of the Firr Tree two ounces and an half, mingle them to perfection. It may be put into Lo∣hochs, or taken inwardly with the foresaid Decoctions or with white Wine. But that the spittle may come forth the more easily, least the Humor that is thick, should grow dry with the use of these things, it is best alwaies to add some Emollients and loosners, such as are for Lambitives and internall uses, the Root of Liquoris, the pulp of Raysons, Roots of Mallows and Marsh Mallows. It is good to Anoint the Stomach outwardly with Butter, chiefly that which is rank; either alone or mingled with the Mucilage of Mallows and Marsh Mallows. An Application of a Colewort Leaf well anoynted with Putter, and sprinkled with Pouder of Cummin Seed, and so laid hot to the brest is much spoken of. When the spittle is thin and unsavo∣ry: the Decoction of round Aristolo∣chia, Iuiubes, wild Plumbs, Golden
Rod, Penniwort, Veronica, the Juyce of somewhat sowre Pomegranats, ei∣ther by it self, or with a little Honey. All sorts of licking Medicaments made of white starch, Gum Arabick, Tragant, all Physical earth, with Ho∣ney or Oxymel, mixing a quantity of Brimstone or Mirrh, or round Aristolo∣chia, or the Cream of Ptisan with some white Starch. For Salt spittle, the Decoction of Barley, Iuiubes, Liquoris, Raysons sweet Prunes, are convenient, and chiefly in the Decoction of the Feet and Head of a Calf, Kid or Lamb, also of Snails, and Snails of the woods. Emulsons of sweet Almonds, and of the four lesser cold Seeds chiefly adding the Flower of starch: the Cream of Ptisan, or a Panatella with the same Emulsions, adding also the Emulsion of white Poppy Seed, when the Saltnes is urgent: the Juyce of sweet Prunes licked up. Fresh Butter licked, as also added to the Meat we eat, and Anointed on the Stomach outwardly. If you please to make a Syrup for this use.
Take the Juyce of sweet Prunes, the Juyce or Decoction of Purslain, of each half a pound: Clarifie them, and add to them ten ounces of purified Honey: Let them boyl to the consistence of a Syrup. The use of it, is for a Lohoch, and for Syrups. Medecines that evacuate by the Pallat. The Any that desire to know ex∣actly the Diseases of the Head, and the cures ther∣of, let them read Riverius Practice of Physicks by me transla∣ted into English. Head is purged three waies: By the Mouth, by the means of the Channels of the Pallat, namely, by Ma∣icatories, Cargarisms, and Anointings of the Pallate. For a Masticatory in a hot cause, a Pa∣per is good, especially a brown Paper, figs, bitter Almonds, or Peach Kernels, Raisons, a whol piece of a Pome Ci∣cron, the peel of an Orange. In a cold Cause, are good, the Roots of Cyprus, Acorus, both Angelica's, Gard , Master-wort, Seeds of Fennel, Annis, Seseli, Siler montanum, Grains of Juniper, Bay-berries, and the tender Leaves.
These are more violent, and are fit for extream coldness; the Leaves of Sciatica Cresses, Water Pepper of Hors-Rhadish, Garden Cresses, Savory, Mountain Hysop, wild Penyroyal, wild Rue, Root of Pellitory, Country Mu∣stard seed, Mustard seed, Staves-acre; which, that they may the more easily be chewed by the Teeth, they must be mingled with a little yellow Wax, and so made into little Bals or Morsels. For a Those that desire to know more fully what they are, and their use, let them read Rive∣rius Pra∣ctice of Physick, and the Physical Dictionary at the end thereof. Gargarism, which is proper only in a cold cause, are convenient, the Decoctions of Calaminth, Germander, Hysop, Bay Leaves, Lavender the grea∣ter, Penyroyal, wild Time, Italian Spike, which are partly gargarised, and somtimes held hot in the mouth. The most violent Gargarisms are made of the Decoction of Herbs, that were set down for the strongest Masti∣catories, and chiefly, if we put some Aqua vitae in, or some of the Confection Diasinapi, which the Italians cal Mo∣starda. For to anoint the Pallate, which Re∣medies have place also alone, in a cold Cause; the said Decoctions are useful,
with honey thickened to the consistence of a Syrup. Moreover, Aqua vitae, or common Mostards, or some soft Electuary made of the foresaid things. As for Example, Take Bay-berries, and Juniper, of each two ounces: Mustard seed, and Leaves of Savory, of each one handful: Seeds of Annis, and Fennel, of each one dram: Roots of Aco∣rus, and Master-wort, of each two drams, pounded and siefted: Mingle all with two pound of clarified Honey. Make an Electuary. Medicaments that evacuate by the Nostrils. Of things that purge the Head by the Nostrils, some of them by their acri∣mony cause one to sneeze; and these are very fit for a very thick Humor that is pact close in, and where the Expul∣sive Faculty is dull. Some again pro∣voke the Humor without sneezing; a∣mongst which, some may be safely u∣sed, even when the Head enclineth to heat; others belong only to a cold hu∣mor, and head.
The Pouders of all the propounded Remedies for strong Masticatories, if they be blown in, or snuffed up into the Nostrils, they cause one to sneeze. The Decoction of Gith, or black Hel∣lebore, the Juyce also of the Root of Sowbread, Briony, and Elaterium, dis∣solved in other liquid Nasals. The same is performed, but somthing more gently, by the Root of Sowbread cut like a Tent, and put into the Nostrils; and the Shel of an Orange candied. Also without sneezing, the head that is over hot, may be evacuated with the Decoction, or Juyce of Mallows, or Blites, especially the white Blites; Leaves of Betony, or Coleworts, and Barley, Roots of Beets put into the Nostrils, especially if it be wet in warm Water; also anointing the Nostrils with fresh Butter. In a cold Cause, Decoctions are good, or the Juyce of Pimpernel, Bettony, Roots of white Beets, the great Celon∣dine, Ivy of the wal, Garden Hysop, Root of Flower-de-luce that is green, Marjoram, Sage, Tobacco. The Indians also use to make Tents
of a round fashion, of the Roots of Sowbread, or Flower-de-luce, and to anoint them with Butter or Oyl, and put them up into their Nostrils, or else to steep them in water, when they wil not use them for sneezing. Moreover, The Fume of the said Herbs, when they are dry, is very con∣venient, especially of Marjoram, Hysop, Time, taken through a Cane; by which they take the fume of Tobacco. Er∣rhines also may be made of them. As for Example. In a cold cause, Take the Juyce of the Root of Flower de∣luce made thick, the Juyce of the Flowers of Ivy made thick, of each two drams: the Pouder of Marjoram, or Time, one dram: Fresh Butter half an ounce: mingle them for a Liniment, and anoint a Ten of Cotton to put into the Nostrils. Or, Take the Juyce of Blites clarified by fil∣tring very well, four ounces: Agarick grosly poudered one ounce: make infusion for one night, strain them the next day, and draw it up warm into the Nostrils, and it will won∣derfully purge the Head without any great Commotion.
Medicaments that Evacuate Insensibly. The matter these are made of is of a large extent. For all hot things by rarefying and turning the Humors into ayr, do evacuate insensibly, so do all dry things by restraining moisture, and all astringent things by pressing them forth, may be reckoned in the number of these: but things that digest are properly so called, which do by degrees turn the Humors into vapours: and those that discuss and do it by heaps, that dissipate also gross Humors: and blistering Medicaments that do both vehemently, and by violent heat re∣move the matter that lieth deep, that is not sufficiently attenuated, and draw it to the Skin. Digesters. Amongst these the most obuious are: wormwood, Dill, al kinds of Smallage, Chamomel, stinking Chamomel, Foe∣nugreek,
Roots of Reeds, white Lil∣lies, Lin-Seed, Honey, Melilot, Rose∣mary, Mallows, chiefly strong Wine; these may be given in Decoction, Sy∣rups or Electuaries. Of the same may be made Oyls, by descent, and Fomentations for use outwardly; to which these that follow may be added, that are not to be given inwardly, as the Roots or Sow-Bread, wild Cucumber, Daffodils, the Leaves of Dwarf-Elder, Elder-Tree, Allum, Nitre, Vitriol, common Salt. Also outwardly may be used alone to anoint with rank Butter, chiefly that which is Salt, and Oyl with Salt. For Fomentations: the water of quick Lime, the water of hot Baths, sweet water that is very hot, strong Ly, hot Lees of Wine, the mud of hot Baths, or the holes in the Baths, hot Sand, hot Ashes with or without Bran, and Salt made up in a Bag. For Plaisters: Snails bruised with their Shells. Old Cheese, with the Decoction of Salt flesh, especially Hogs flesh, and beaten together for a Plaister.
Bean Meal made up with Wine or the former Decoctions, adding if you please Oyl, Oxymel or Honey. Privatly to consume the Milk sud∣denly, and without danger, that it may not clotter in the breasts: women hold these for secrets, which either will not or cannot give suck: the green Leaves of wall-Nut Trees carryed in their bo∣some. A Liniment made of an equal portion of Honey and Rozin, laid on constantly with a Linnen Cloath. A Cataplasm of Bean Meal and Oxy∣mel, or the Decoction of Parsley, or Mallows Boyled with Vineger. A Fomentation of equal parts of Par∣sley and Vineger, adding a little Saf∣fron to it. Discussives. Amongst these the easiest to provide are: the Seeds and Flowers of Agnus Castus (by the steeping whereof is made an Oyl that is very Proper against
the Cholick) Garlick, the Root of Both Angelicas and the Seed, Annis Seed, Seeds of Oranges and Citrons, and the Pills of them, also Calamint, especially of the Mountains, Seeds of Cummin, Caraway, Daucus, Fennel, Hysop, Maisterwort Root, the Berries and wood of Juniper, Lavender, the Leaves and Berries of Bays, that are good for the Cholick and Pains of the Matrix, Lupins, Marjoram, dry Mints, Bazil, Origanum, Poley, Pennyroyall, Rue, Savory, wild Time, Italian Spike, Time, all which are given alone or mingled in forme of a Decoction, Sy∣rup, Electuary, or the Pouder of them to one dram, may be drank in Wine, or strewed upon Meat. Hitherto appertain Aqua-vitae, and Old Wine which the Antients were wont to give with Pepper grosely bea∣ten. You may prepare, at a Cheap Rate, a most effectual Tincture, whereof one or two drops drank in Broth or Wine doth powerfuly, discuss winds, and put into a hollow Tooth that Akes from a cold cause, or but layd to it, presently
takes away the pain. And this is it: Take Black Pepper beaten grosely two ounces, the best Aqua vitae eight ounces; put all into a Viol of a streight Neck, and keep it wel stopt eight days in a hot place, and you shall have a deep Red Tincture, to be kept in a Glass that is stopt fast. If you will make an Hippocras Wine, you may do it thus. Take Seeds of Annis and Fennel of each two drams, Roots of Angelica, Acorus, Master-wort of each half an ounce, Leaves of mountains Calamint, Lavender, Marjoram, and dry Mints of each one handful, Bay-Berries one ounce; Bruise them all grosely and put them into a Cullender, and strain through it the best white Wine, doing it so often, until the matter seem to have lost its sent and Acrimony; drink one or two ounces of this Wine by it self, or with some other Liquor. Fomentations may be made out∣wardly of the Decoctions of the said Herbs; but most effectual are the fumes of them, that rise by quenching a Fire∣stone,
or a Mil-stone in the said Deco∣ctions. But the Decoctions are made more strong in the best Wine, or strong Ly, and natural brimstone waters. Also a bag of Millet torrefied, is very good, with the Flowers of Chamomel, and Cummin Seed, or the Leaves of Rue; by which the pains after Child∣birth are mightily asswaged. Some extol the pulp of Coloquinti∣da, with a third part of wormwood put into a bag. This is held for a secret, to dry up the water that puffs up the Belly: A Plaister made of equal Parts of the Leaves of Rue and wormwood bruised, and made with Honey, to a Cata∣plasm. Also a fomentation of quick-Lime quenched in brimstone water of the Baths, is excellent. For anoyntings: Remedies may be presently made, such as are the Oyls made by descent from the said Herbs. For example. Take Bay-berries, one ounce: Leaves of Rue, one handful: Common Oyl, half a pound: the strongest Wine, three ounces. The Ber∣ries
being grosely beaten, and the Leaves chopt, make infusion for three hours; Boyl them til the moisture be consumed, then strain them. To al these, add a large Cupping Glass, with a great Flame, and set it on the part that is puffed up; to which, for the discussing of wind, Galen ascribes a power, as it were an Inchantment. Somtimes also without: discussing winds are drawn out of the Body by some Instruments that Chirurgious use, that work suddenly. So the winds are drawn forth that extend the great Inte∣stines, thrusting in (after a Clyster given to void the Excrements) a dry Syring, and drawing it downwards. Hippocrates used Smiths Bellows. By the same way the winds that fil the Matrix, by help of a Syring, with a long thin Neck, may be drawn out. Rubificatives. They are called Rubificatives, be∣cause they make the Skin extream Red.
When we have made use of digesters and discussers, and cannot prevail, then we must use Rubificatives, as in an Old Hip-Gout, and as it often comes to pass in a stubborn, heavy Head-ach: These are laid to the Skin, Bruised, and made like a Cataplasm, either alone, or with hot Vineger; and the most usual are these that follow: Garlick, wake Robin, Blew flower, Flea-bean, water Pepper, Sciatica Cresses, Hors-Radish, wild Pennyroyal, Mustard, Staves-acre, common Crowfoot. Also a Plaister may be made by it self of Pi∣geons, or Gooss dung, or of dry Pitch melted with a fourth part of some hot Oyl, as of Rue, or Bays, and laid often on the part, and then pulled off again, until the part first Waxeth red, then swels a little, & then sinks down again: for if it be let alone no longer than whilst the part groweth red; it is ra∣ther to be called a heating remedy, and such as helps the member to nourish∣ment, than that which Evacuats insensi∣bly. Wherefore on a cold, and dry Sto∣mach, & Limbs that are wasted with the Palsey, it is of excellent use, after due
Evacuations of the Body. Thus much for Medicaments that re∣spect the matter peccant in quantity. Medicines that augment necessary Matter, where it is deficient. Somtimes good Humors are wanting, and some things that proceed from them; al which are augmented of them∣selves, by the help of Nature changing good Nutriment; but they are produ∣ced by accident, with the help of such Remedies as remove the things that hinder Nutriment. Therefore al these Remedies that strengthen heat, and that allay the distemper of the humors, and of the inward parts by heating them, encrease blood; the Catalogue of these must be sought for amongst things that alter: and for this reason, those things that ingender Milk and Seed, the first whereof is necessary for the Nutriment of the Infant that is born, the latter for Procreation, do properly belong to Nutriment, because
both of them proceed from blood; yet improperly those Medicaments may be said to ingender milk and seed, by the help whereof, the blood is more easily and plentifully altered into the Nature of them both. Medicaments that encrease Milk. Those Medicaments are said also to encrease milk, that correct the impure blood, make it run, and spread, drive it to the breasts, and draw it thither. Those correct it, that purge naughty humors which pollute the blood, and others that allay the excessive qualities of the blood. Such are, in a hot distemper, Barley Water, and Broths altered with mal∣lows, green Knotgrass, and Sow-thi∣stles. The milky juyce of Sow-thistles, and Dandelyon, mixt with Broth, and taken from two, to three spoonfuls, is much approved. Also the Pouder of Natural Crystal is
given with great profit, and is held for a Secret, taken in any of the said Deco∣ctions, from half a dram to a dram. In a cold distemper, a Decoction is good, especially of the tops of dry Dill in Broth, and of new Annis Seeds, or Garden Cresses, of Fennel, of fresh Po∣ley, or Leeks boyled in Water. Broths altered with Dill, do spread, and by a certain propriety drive it to the Breasts: So do Smallage, green Par∣sley, white Chiches, and all kinds of milk Trefoyl, common milk-wort, and Perewinkle, used the same way. Blood is drawn to the Paps by frequent sucking, gentle rubbing, and loosening Fomentations: the best are made of hot white Wine. Also of the Decoction of Chamomel, and Dill, that are green; as also of mallows, Lin-seed, Roots of marsh-mallows, if they be boyled in Wine or Water. If these profit not, Rubificatives must be applied until the Breasts wax red. For this purpose amongst the Cretians, they were wont to strike and rub the Breasts with the Leaves of green Net∣tles;
by the frequent use whereof, the Dugs were said to grow so great, that they would yield milk enough. Amongst the cheapest Remedies, these are thought to engender much milk: Hens Eggs, white Wine, Rice boyled in milk, Grewel made with fine Wheat Flower and milk, or Pottage; also Pottage made with fine Wheat flower and white Wine, adding there∣to, yolks of Eggs, and Butter: But the meat is made more pleasant, if you put Sugar in the place of the Flower. Things that encrease Sperm, or Seed. Those Nutriments chiefly serve to augment Sperm, which by a Physical force, move hot and thin Vapors, fit to cause erection of the Yard. The cheap things are these: Flesh of Ducks and Geese, cooked especially with Garlick; the Brains of Calves and Pigs seasoned with Pepper and Salt, Beef Broth boyled with green Mints or Rochet, the Juyce pressed out of the
Lungs of a Ram rosted, Swans Eggs fried with Butter, all kind of shell Fish seasoned with Pepper, the Polypus, the Cuttle, and Crab seasoned the same way, Mushroms also seasoned with Salt and Pepper. Amongst Pulse, are the white Chich Pease, Beans, and Kidney Beans. Of Fruit, are Hazel Nuts, Chest-nuts, mad Apples seasoned with Oyl, Salt, and Pepper, sweet Apples and Grapes hanged up for to be eaten. Of Herbs, is Garlick, yet yong and fresh, Artichoaks, Asparagus. Young Onions, especially Scabious, Rochet, Clary, Turneps, Rape-roots, Parsnips, and Alizander Roots, with Pepper and Salt. These are thought to be more effe∣ctual; the thickest Root of all the Saty∣riums, the Pizzle of a Bull, or Hart, Boars stones, and of Foxes, and a Boar Pig that hath engendred, washed in white Wine, and dried in an Oven. The Pouder of these may be drank mixed together, or else a part in white Wine to one dram. This Pouder most easie to be provi∣ded,
is most effectual: Take the Pizzle of a Bull, and Borax of the Apothecaries, of each three drams: the most substantial Root of Satyrion, two drams: Ginger, and Cinnamon, of each one scruple: Saffron half a scruple: Mingle them, and make a very fine Pouder; give of it in the morning, and after Supper one dram, in a little of the best Wine. Medicaments that alter the Cause of the Disease. The Cause of a Disease is peccant di∣vers waies; namely, by an open, and a secret quality. This requires Preserva∣tives against Poyson, that is either ori∣ginal, which is corrected by Medica∣ments that are cold, hot, moist, dry, or derived from the original, as thick, thin, tough, hard: Hardness comes from driness and congelation; so doth acri∣mony. To these are opposed such things as make thin, such as thicken such things that cut, scour, soften, dis∣solve clotted matter, and such as meti∣gate: which things correct the first
qualities, and thickners, thinners, and toughness that proceed from them. They are wont to be called Concocting and Preparative Remedies, because by the allaying of the qualities that ex∣ceed, the humors are the more easily conquered by the Natural heat; and if there be any of them wholly unfit to be concocted, they are thus made fit to be driven out with more ease. Other Remedies that take away the sharpness and hardness, do not only serve to pre∣pare the humors, but to mollifie the parts that are exasperated and harden∣ed. Also those that scour away tough∣ness, do very much serve for other uses, as for al foulness of the Skin, and for filthy Sores, and therefore they are to be numbered apart, after those things that prepare the humors. Medicaments that prepare Choller. If Choller be thin and hot, Barley is good, Lettice, Purslain, Water-Lillies, blew Violets; the Decoctions of these,
from eight ounces, to one pound, or thereabouts. The more effectual are, the Juyce of Barberries, sour Pomegranates, Bastard Corinths, and the Juyce of unripe Grapes wel purified, which may be ad∣ded to the said Decoctions, from one to two ounces. The last Remedy, is clarified Whey, with the Emulsion, of one dram, or thereabouts, of white Poppy Seed, or Garden Nightshade, and great Hous∣leek added to the Decoctions. In this case, we must forbear to give sweet Syrups. If Choller be thick, either by adusti∣on, or by the mixture of other Humors, cold attenuative Medicines are good, or such as are temperate, as Sorrel, Juyce of Lemmons, Citrons, Oranges, that are ripe, Gum, Cichory, green Maiden-hair, Endive, Strawberries, Li∣verwort, Hawkweed, all the Sorrels, wild Endive, Sow-thistle, Dandelyon, four Trefoils, Seeds of Melones, Citruls, Gourds, and Cucumers; of which, E∣mulsions are made. Of the said herbs, are made Decocti∣ons
with flesh Broth, or Water, to which may be added about two ounces of the Emulsions of the said Seeds, or of the Juyce of Citrons, Lemmons or Oran∣ges. Also the Juyce of Herbs clarified may be given, from one ounce to three ounces, in Broth, especially in the win∣ter Time, when fresh Herbs cannot be had. Of these clarified Juyces, Syrups may be presenty provided, if an equal quan∣tity of clarified Honey be added to them, and so Boyled to the consistence of a Syrup, it is mingled with the De∣coctions from one ounce to two oun∣ces. Oxymel simple may supply the want of all these, about one ounce being put into the Decoctions, and Syrups of them al are very useful for this Humor, if there be no adustion, for which, the best thing is Clarified Whey to about two pound with the Emulsion of the foresaid Seeds.
Preparatives for Flegm. All these heat and attenuate, and if the Flegm be very clammy and thick, they cut also and scour away: the same belong to Salt flegm, it they be tem∣pered with those thing we mentioned to prepare Choller. Therefore if flegm exceed not in thickness and toughness, these are con∣venient. For the Head, betony, Germander, Goats Rue, Marioram, Rosemary, Sage, Arabian Stoechas, the Root of wild set∣wall. For the Eys, Celondine, Eyebright, Fennel, Vervain. For the nerves and Joynts, ground Pine, Juniper Berries, Hog Fennel, Primroses; For the Breast, Figs, Liquoris, lung∣wort, Colts-foot, Scabious. For the Heart, Root of Angelica, holy Thistle, Caltrops, Herb Bennet, Ground-Ivy, Lavender, Pimpernel,
Scordium, the Root of Swallow wort. For the Stomach: Wormwood of all kinds, cheifly the common wormwood, pills of Oranges and Citrons, Seeds or Mints. For the Liver, wormwood, Agrimo∣ny. For the Spleen, Ceterach, Epithime, Fumitory, the rind and Root of Cap∣paris, and Tamarisk. For the Matrix, Mug-wort, Maiden-Hair, Calamint, Feaverfew, Pennyroy∣all, Savin. For the Reins and Bladder: Smallage, Sparagus, Fennel, Parsley, Knee-holm. For the whole Body, Cinquefoil, Tormentil, Oxymel, rich Metheglin. Of these; Syrups may be made, or Decoctions in the Broth of a Pullet or sweet Wine, to which it were good to add Oxymel from one ounce to two ounces. Decoctions are unprofitable for the Stomach and Intestines, because they pass so soon from the affected part. Therefore Oxymel only is good, to two ounces; or a Syrup made of the foresaid Herbs. To which may be ad∣ded
to discuss winds, an Emulsion of the Seeds of Citrons, or Oranges, to two ounces, or thereabouts, in fresh Broth. Or after the Custom of the Antients, Oxymel may be given, wherein the tops of Wormwood have been soaked all night. If Flegm be too thick and clammy, we must never leave out Oxymel, which must be added to Decoctions convenient, wherein must be boyled some of these cutting Herbs, and scou∣ring, namely, Hysop, Horehound, Po∣ley, Savory, wild Time, Time, Goats Marjoram. If you would make an Oxymel sud∣denly, which may be like Oxymel of Squils for its cutting and scouring Fa∣culties, it may be such a one to free the Obstructions of the Bowels. Take Leaves of Bettony, Agrimony, Worm∣wood, Fumitory, Cink foyl, of each one hand∣full: Hysop, Horehound, and Time, of each one handful and an half: Roots of Sparagus, Fennel, Parsley, of each one ounce: Fountain Water four pound: Honey two pound. Let them boyl at a very soft fire til the Ho∣ney be clarified perfectly; then strain
them, and add of the best Vineger one pound, Annis Seeds two drams; Cin∣namon and Ginger, of each one dram. Boyl al at a gentle fire to a Syrup; then strain al again through a wide Cloth. Preparatives for Melancholly. If Melancholly be not adust; Borrage, Bugloss, Dodder, stone fern, Maiden∣hair, Liquoris, Hops, Balm, Fumitory, Harts tongue, sweet Prunes, are conve∣nient; and to their Decoctions, Oxymel is profitably added, by reason of the Vineger that cuts the thickness of the Humors. If the Humor be adust, things that prepare thick Choller are to be used, and moreover the Juyce of sweet Ap∣ples, which hath a peculiar prerogative here. Also it may be mixed from one, to two ounces, with the Decoctions of the said Herbs. Also a Syrup may be made of it, ta∣king one part of clarified Honey, and two parts of Juyce of good Apples cla∣rified,
and so boyl them to the consistence of a Liquid Syrup, to the consumption of one third part. Medicaments that allay Acrimony. Those things allay Acrimony, which either temper it, with a pleasant moi∣sture, and water the matter; or else do anoint it with an Oyly, clammy sub∣stance, whereof there is excellent use in cutting the pains of the heart, and bloody-flux. These water and temper it: Foun∣tain Water, or River Water, sweet Al∣monds, Emulsions of the four great cold Seeds husked, Barley Water, and the Cream of Ptisan made thereof, Ju∣jubes, Lettice, all Milk, especially of Heifers, and Cows, Whey, Liquoris, sweet Prunes, and Apples, Water Lil∣lies, Purslain, Sow-thistles, the Fruit of Winter Cherries, Nightshade, both Housleeks, Venus Navil. Of the Herbs; Decoctions, or Syrups, are made which are made more sweet,
and fit to temper the Humor, if you take Wine in place of Honey, and boyl it with an equal part of the Juyce of the Herbs, to a due consistence. Of these also are compounded, Medicaments that are proper for some parts. For pain of the Eyes, from sharp De∣fluxions, a Cataplasm of a sweet Apple boyled in Milk, is good, and laid warm to the Eye. For the heat of Urine, the Decoction of Liquoris is singular, either alone, or with the Fruit of Winter Cherries, ta∣ken dayly, six ounces in the first repast, when the Stomach is empty. For the Gripings of the Guts, the Decoction of great Housleek in Rain Water, or two ounces of the Juyce of it in the Broth of a Chicken. To these, add Lead only for outward uses to anoint with, Oyls being beaten in a Mortar of Lead till they become thick. The white and water also of an Egg, are very unctious: so is white Starch in meats, new Butter, the fat Broth of the Entrals and the head of a Kid, Calf,
also of the feet of Hogs and Calves; old Oyl, chiefly boyled with Fountain Water till the moisture be consumed. Amongst Herbs, are Mallows, Marsh∣mallows, Roots of Borrage, and great Consound; for the Decoctions of these herbs are mucilagenous. It is held for a Secret for the heat of the Urine, to drink the white of an Eg with the like quantity of Juyce of Lemmons. For the bloody flux, the Decoction of Marsh-mallows altogether. Hitherto appertains the feet of Par∣tridg broyled; the Pouder whereof given to one dram, in Water of Corian∣der, if a feaver be present, or if there be no feaver, in black Wine, will cure an old Dysentery in three daies. For painful Ulcers, and Clouds that are joyned with Ophthalmia, or redness of the Eyes; the Balsom of Sugar dis∣solved in the white of an Eg that is hard boyled, and it is made excellent after this fashion. Put poudered Sugar into a glass that is first wel washed with strong Vineger: then boyl it upon the Embers to a perfect redness: after that dissolve
it by Deliquium in an Egg boyled hard, and the yolk taken out. For outward Remedies; are profita∣bly added, Goats and Deers Suet, fresh Hogs Grease, Kids fat, (whereof with Apples, is made the common Pomatum) the Marrow of four-footed Beasts, Wax, especially white Wax, and the Mucilages of Lin-seed, Foenugreek, Flea-seed, Quinces, the Roots of Marsh mallows, Mallows; of all which there is a peculiar use in healing the choppings of the skin: yet the Mucilage of flea-seeds, and Quinces, is given in∣wardly, with inward Medicaments for pains of the Heart. Scouring Medicaments. Scouring Remedies seem to be con∣trary to such as allay, and temper, be∣cause they wipe away the clamminess, and what is fast to the Parts they scour off; of which kind are all salt, nitrous, sharp, bitter things, which are good for al foulness of the Skin, foul Ulcers, and
Obstructions: But because the matter of these, is manifold; to avoid all con∣fusion in so great variety, we shal prin∣cipally lay down here, such scouring Medicaments as are proper for the foulness of the Skin; and others that take away Obstructions, and purge Ul∣cers, may be sought for in the Title of things that open obstructions, and breed flesh in Wounds, of which afterwards in the mustering up of Medicaments that respect Diseases. These clense the Skin weakly: Bitter Almonds, Peach Kernels, Juyce of Lemmons and Citrons, Butter, chiefly that which is salt, Antale, Mother of Pearl, Bean flowers, husks, and meal, Foenugreek, Bran, unhulled Barley, Flowers and Roots of white Lillies, Leaves and Berries of Bays, Dock, the wild and the sharp, especially the Root of it, Milk, and the whey of it, Litharge, Mallows, Root of Solomons Seal, Sca∣bious, al Natural Baths moderately hot. Of the Herbs are made Decoctions for Lotions and Baths. Of the rest are made divers Remedies
to beautifie the face, and take away the spots; as also for Scabs and Itch. To wash the face, and to make the hands white, these are singular good: Bitter Almonds, or Peach Kernels brui∣sed, and with milk brought to the form of a Cataplasm. Also Bean meal wrought with whey or milk to the consistence of a liquid Liniment. Bread of Barley meal stamped with milk, boyled a little, and when it is hot, rubbed on gently. Also Lac Virginis is much commended, which is made of one part of Litharge, and two parts of Vineger, they are mingled and shaked together, and soa∣ked for three hours: afterwards the Vineger being filtered, Rain water is put in, or Fountain water, in which a little Salt is dissolved. The most excellent to beautifie the Skin, is of this kind. Take Antalia, Mother of Pearls, of each equal parts: Pound them grosly, then lay them bed upon bed, with the Juyce of Lemmons, and put them in a moist place till they dissolve; and then use
the Liquor as it is, or else distilled through a Filter, or Balneo. For Itch and Scabs, these are the best Unguents: Take Litharge of Gold beaten and sifted, three ounces: Rose Water, and common Oyl, (Oyl of Roses is better) of each four ounces. Drop in the water first by little and lit∣tle, stirring of it constantly in a Morter, with a wooden Pestel, till the Pouder have drank up al the water, and be wel mingled with it; then add the Oyl by little and little, stirring them alwaies til they be wel mixed. Or, Take fresh Butter two drams: the Root of the ditch Dock boyled and pulped through a sieve: common Oyl, and Juyce of Lemmons, of each one ounce: Bay-berries finely pouder∣ed and searced, two ounces. Mingle them, and make a Liniment according to Art. The Juyce of Lemmons may be left out, and yet the Composition wil be ne∣ver the worse. These do moderately scour for Lo∣tions and Baths: Salt water, Bath wa∣ter, Sea water, Nitrous water, Allum water, the Urin of a Boy that is sound,
May-dew, the Juyce of sour Grapes, white Soap, the Decoction of Agarick, the Roots of Canes, Ivy of the Wals, Lupines, the black Vine, and of Olean∣der. For Oyntments, serve al the Rozins, chiefly of the Larch, and Turpentine Trees, Mirrh, the inward Rind of the Elder Tree, Goats-horn burnt, Cuttle∣bone burnt, new Tobacco, the Pouder of common Salt. Of these, some Remedies are made, proved good by Experience, both for Scabs, and Spots of the Face. For the Scab, Take the Leaves of Oleander, poudred and sifted, two drams: common Salt, one dram; fresh Butter, one ounce and an half. Mix them for a Liniment. Or, Take the Leaves of Tobacco, one handful; Oleander, and Bays, of each half a hand∣ful, Butter, three ounces. Beat them in a Mortar, til they be al well mixed; then Melt it over the Coals, and press it out strongly. Or, Take Bay-berries, Ashes, Salt, of each one dram: common Oyl, three ounces: Wax two drams. Mix them for a Liniment. Or,
Take Rosin of the Larch, or Turpentine Tree, two ounces; fresh Butter, one ounce: Oyl of Bays, Juyce of Lemmons, of each half a dram: burnt Cuttle-bone, or Ceruss, or Litharge, one dram: common Salt two scru∣ples. Mix them for a Liniment. Or, Take the middle Rind of the Elder Tree, Leaves of Tobacco, of each half a handfull: common Oyl, three ounces. Boyl them at a gentle fire until the Moisture be con∣sumed (a sign whereof is, If the Oyl poured into the fire, flame sud∣denly without Cracking) make expre∣ssion, and strain it; then add most fine Pouder of Mirrh, two drams: Yellow Wax, one dram and an half. Mingle them, make a Liniment. Also this following Stone, if it be dissolved in some convenient Liquor, and then wash the place affected, with it, it takes away both Scabs and Itch. Take Roch-Alum, one ounce and an half: Litharge of Gold three ounces, Borax of the shops, Sea Salt, and white Lead, of each one ounce; the best Vineger one pound: Rain Water, half a pound, the Ceruss, and the Litharge, must be poudered and sifted: then Boyl them in an unglazed Pot to
the hardness of a Stone. For Spots of the face. Take May dew purified by filtring, two pound: Juyce of Sour Grapes, or Lemmons, or Oranges, one pound: Roots of white Lil∣lies, and Solomons Seal, of each two ounces. Make infusion for two days, in Hors∣dung, the Vessel being close stopt; then distil them by the heat of the same Dung, to make a Lotion for the Face. Or, Take white Soap dissolved into froth with May-Dew, or Vineger, two ounces: Meal of Lupins, half an ounce; mingle them and stirr them diligently, and with a soft fire Boyl them to a mean consistence: after that, add to them, the Oyl of Peach Kernels, three ounces. mingle them and Boyl them at a gentle heat to the con∣sistence of an Unguent; wherewith anoint the Face, and the Hands, before you sleep; and in the morning wash them with a Decoction of Bran. These do strongly cleanse for Baths, & Lotions; Brim-stone Baths, Barley, the Decoctions of Briony Root, Black-Hel∣lebore, Centaury the less, Sowe wort, Elecampane Root, especially if you add a little Salt, and Alum.
For an Epitheme, the Water of quick Lime. For Oyntments: Borax of the shops, Nitre, Brimstone, black Soap, Ashes of the Vine Branches, Lime washed perfectly, the pulp of the Root of Elecampane, Oyl of Tartar. Of these; remedies are compounded that are most profitable and proved by Experience. For a crusty Scab, and like to the Leprosy, Amatus Lusitanus saith that this Unguent removes it, like to an Inchantment: Take Roots of Elecampane Boyled in Vi∣neger, and pulped through a Sieve, two ounces: Salt Butter, Rosin of the Larch Tree, or Turpentine Tree of each half an ounce: common Salt finely poudred, two scruples: Brimstone one ounce. Mingle them for an Unguent. Or, Take quick Brimstone, two drams: Ashes of Ʋine Branches, common Salt poudered, of each one dram. Bind them in a fine Cloth and let them Boyl, in common Oyle, four ounces; Vineger, or Juyce of Lemmons one ounce. Boyl them til the moisture be consumed, and with this matter, being
hot, anoint the part that is Scabby. Or, Take quick Brimstone, half an ounce; common Oyl, three ounces; Dissolve it: then add, beaten Salt, and Ashes, finely sifted, of each one dram: a little Wax: mingle them for a Liniment. For a Lotion. Take Roch-Alum, common Salt, and Brim∣stone poudered, of each one ounce: Black Soap one ounce and an half: Barley one handful; white Vineger, half a pound: common water, six pound. Boyl them til half be consum∣ed; strain them, and keep them for use. For spots of the Skin. Take Black Soap dissolved in a strong Ly, two ounces, Borax two drams: boyl them til they be thick. Then add, the husks of beans finely poudered, half an ounce; Oyl of Peach Kernels, three ounces. Mix them diligently til they be wel united, and make a kind of Soap. In the place of the said Oyl, you may use common Oyl two ounces; Oyl of Tartar, one ounce. Mingle them, and anoint the place, morning and evening, and wash the Skin with some of the said Decoctions.
Of this kind is the Sope that the Venetian Women use to deck their faces, Hair and Hands. The composi∣tion is, this. Take damask Sope, four ounces: dissolve it in Juyce of Lemmons, what is sufficient. Then add, Oyl of sweet Almonds and of Tartar, of each two ounces, let them stand in the Sun and be stirred every day, until they grow as thick as an Unguent. The part is anoint∣ed with this; and then it is washed with the Decoction of Barley or Bran. Old spots & Morphew are taken off with the water of Quick-Lime made with Whey; wherewith the discoloured place must be often touched in them when the Skin comes off; restore it a∣gain with Unguent of Litharge, descri∣bed amongst weak scouring remedies. A man of great fame used this re∣medy for a high Secret, and so picked great store of Money out of the Po∣ckets of great Ladies. Remedies to soften hard things. Though the hardned Humor may
seem to be corrected by softening only, yet every hardness requires not Re∣medies of the same force: For cold and dry Humors that are hardened by con∣gealing, are melted with Heaters only, without any notable drivers; which things are properly called Softeners. Yet Milk and Blood when they are Clotterd, and congealed, seing they fal to that by want of their proper heat, they require things that heat excee∣dingly, or such as attenuate and cut. Lastly, Milk made like Cheese, re∣quires cold and moist things, with some Thinners of parts, because strong heat seperating the Whey from the thicker part, turneth it into Cheese. Emollients, and proper remedies to Melt, are of two sorts: Some are fit for Scirrhous Humors, which are somewhat stronger, and discuss the melted matter: Some are gentler and are fit for hardned Humors, without any singular stuffing, or plenty of mat∣ter: the use thereof must also precede in Scirrhous affects, before strong Emol∣lients, that what is congeled may be the more easely melted and more safe∣ly discussed.
The gentle Emollients, are, marsh-Mallows, Borrage, Bugloss, Brank-Ur∣sine, Fenugreek, Liquoris, Lin-Seed, white Lillies, Mallows, Melilot, Ray∣sins. Of these may be made Decoctions, Syrups, Electuaries, for inward uses: Also they serve to make outward Fo∣mentations, Unguents, and Cataplasms, which are chiefly prepared with Butter, fresh Tallow, but especially of Mans Fat, and of the new Wax, the Mar∣row of four-footed Beasts, the Grease of Sheeps Wool, common Oyl of O∣lives wel ripe, Suet, and the Mucila∣ges of Marsh-mallows, Mallows, Foenu∣greek, Lin-seed. For Fomentations serve particularly, moist wool that is properly the washing of wool, and water and oyl warm. Compounds that are easie to provide, are of this kind. For an Oyntment, Take Roots of white Lillies, Mallows, Marsh-mallows, of each one ounce: Chamo∣mel, or Dill, of each one handful: white Wine four ounces: common Oyl that comes of ripe Olives, eight ounces. Boyl them till
the moisture be consumed, then press and strain them. Or, Take the mucilage of Lin-Seed and Roots of marsh-mallows, of each one ounce, Ox marrow and fresh Butter of each one ounce, common Oyl three ounces, new Wax three drams: mingle them for an Unguent. For a Cataplasm. Take Roots of white Lillies one ounce, Leaves of mallows one hand∣ful, Boyl them gently, then melt two ounces of Butter with them, and make a Cataplasm. Or, Take Roots of marsh-mallows Boyled & pulped through a Sieve two ounces, meal of Lin-seed and Melilot, of each one ounce and an half, Roots of white Lillies half an ounce: Ox marrow one ounce, common Oyl three ounces, Decoction of mallows, what will be sufficient, make a Cataplasm. These are stronger that follow; for they are all used outwardly, except the Saffron and the Root of sharp Bind-Weed, which it may be Agreeth with Judian Sarsa, both in kind and vertue: the rest are seldome given alone but
mixt with more gentle Emollients. For Fomentations therefore, add Roots of bryony, Sow-bread, wild Cucumber, and Flower-de-Luce fresh, with the Decoction of these; an effectual Fumigation may be prepared by quen∣ching a Fire-stone or a peice of a Mil∣stone in it. Bitumenous waters of Baths, serve of themselues for Baths and Fo∣mentations. For to anoint, Goose fat and Deers suet are good, so is Oyl pressed out of Nuts, the Lees of Oyl, and Oyl of Peter. For Plaisters, take the roots of Ja∣cinths, Daffodil, fresh Leaves of Tobac∣co, and the flowers of Flower-de-Luce. By themselves, these serve instead of a Plaister: Bitumenous Dirt, Ox Dung, chiefly mixed with Lees of Oyl, and Old Cheese Kneaded with Broth of Salt flesh. These Cerats they add: dry pith, Rosin, Colophonia, Bitumen, Jet, Ammoni∣acum, which makes a Plaister it self if it be dissolved in sharp Vineger. Of these may divers medicaments be presently compounded that are effect∣ual
against Schirous Tumors. For exam∣ple. For an Oyntment. Take Sowbread and wild Cucumber of each half an ounce: white Lillies one ounce: Chamomel and green Tobacco of each one handful, Leaves of Spurge, Laurel half a handful, common Oyl one pound, white Wine four ounces, Vineger two ounces, Boyl them at a soft fire til half be consumed, then press them out. A Cataplasm. Take a whole Onion Boyled in Vineger one ounce, flowers of Blew flower-de-luce steeped in white Wine one Pugil, Goose grease half an ounce, beat them altogether and make a Cataplasm. Some make a Cerate of white Pitch only, which they cal Burgundy Pitch, which they hold for a secret and prefer it before Amoniacum. These dissolve and hinder clotted Blood; Vineger, Posca, Oxymel simple, the Decoction of Round Aristo∣lochia, Calamints, Savory, Time, the shels of green Nuts.
Yet the Decoctions are made stronger with Posca, as the runnet of a hare drank to one dram with Water and Vineger. A present and excellent remedy is made of a Ly of Vineger, Salt and Honey, after this fashion. Take of Ly three ounces, Vineger two ounces, clarified Honey half an ounce, common Salt one scruple: mingle these at a soft fire, for to drink. Also if Oxymel be prepared, boy∣ling Honey with the first Wine that comes forth without pressing, til al the scum be taken off, it will be a pleasant and effectual remedy. For curded Milk; gentle softners are convenient, mixt in Fomentations with Garden Smallage, mountain Smallage, cummin, fresh Mint, and Rue, adding a little quantity of Vineger. In Cataplasmes: Bean Meal, Lintels, with Oxymel or Mulsa, for Vineger. This following Fomentation is ap∣proved. Take Leaves of Mallows, Roots of Marsh∣mallows, Herbs, Garden Smallage, Moun∣tain
Smallage, Roots of Fennel, of each one handful, Leaves of Bays, Flowers of Chamo∣mel, of each one Pugil, common Water six pound. Let them Boyl till a third part be consumed, to foment and wet the Breasts; of the rest, an excellent Plaister may be made. These that follow are proved reme∣dies. Take Turpentine often washed in white Wine three ounces, three whole Eggs, Saffron one scruple, Yellow Wax two drams. Mingle them, and make a Cerate to be Spread on a Linnen Cloth, leaving a hole that the Paps may come forth to be suck∣ed. Or, Take Bean Meal three ounces, common Oyl two ounces, Turpentine one ounce, two Yolks of Eggs, Saffron one scruple, with the Decoction of Mallows and Parsley, made with Vineger what is sufficient. Mingle them and make a Cataplasm. Also fresh Butter washed very well in the Decoction of Mallows, and mingled with the Pouder of the Roots of Mal∣lows or Marsh-mallows, to the consi∣stence of an Unguent, and laid on upon a Colewort leaf, is a most excellent re∣medy
for pained breasts and hardned by the Milk stopped in them. This also is singular: Take common Oyl of ripe Olives, new Wax of each, a like quantity: mingle them, then wash them wel three times in Rose water, and lay them on with a Colewort leaf. The same remedies serve for clotterd Milk, tempered with cold and moist in∣gredients, and with a greater quantity of Vineger. Yet A Plaister of Bran exceeds them, or of Barley Boyled with Vineger, ad∣ding thereto a little Saffron. Also a Cataplasm of Bean Meal with the Decoction of Night-shade that bears winter Cherries, made with Vineger, which is made most effectual if you mix the Runnet of a hare with it, and fresh Butter. Hitherto we have spoken of remedies to correct the manifest quality of the causes of Diseases: but the hidden quality, since it is venemous, and is in those things that are faulty in sub∣stance, it requires remedies against Malignity, which we shall set down
afterwards, amongst those remedies that are opposite to the cause that is preternatural by the whole kind. Remedies that move Preternatural Matter that lieth stil. Want of motion in those things that by nature should move at certain times, fals out principally when the courses are stopt, or in hard Labour in Child-Birth, or when the Secundine staieth behind, as also when the blind Hemor∣rhoids are bread within; these are remedied by such things as procure the courses, help Travel, drive out the Secundine, and the Child that is dead, and also provoke the secret Piles. Remedies that move the Courses. Those things that properly move the Terms, do melt the Blood and open the Orifices of the Veins: the matter
whereof being it is of large extent, Galen distinguisheth it into three Ranks, Gentle, the use whereof is when the Terms are diminished: Mean which are more fit for the Terms that are stopt; Forcible, such as are used as the last remedies when other helps profit not; and these are not given inwardly, but in Pessaries, or infusions. The Chief and most Obvious amongst the gentle, are, Maiden-Hair, Red Chiches, the first Broth of them, Cats∣tails, of Walnut Trees, flowers of Stock∣gelli-flowers, dried in the shade, white Lillies, flowers of Balm, common Maiden-hair, Cinkfoyl, of these are made Decoctions and Syrups, chiefly with Aromatical white Wine. These remedies are counted to be the most effectual of them. Take maiden-hair or common mai∣den-hair half a handful, flowers of wall∣flowers dried one ounce, sweet white Wine six ounces, make infusion for twelve hours, then Boyl them softly; till a third part be consumed strain it, add Saffron three grains: mix all for to drink hot. Or,
Take Walnuts that are dry but not rank, half an ounce, Broth of red Chiches four ounces, Odoriferous white Wine two ounces: Boyl al to a third part, strain them, and add Saffron three grains, or Cinnamon six grains. Mingle them for a potion. Also the frequent use of walnuts is held to move the courses by their property, and therefore women make profitable Cakes and Puddings of Nuts, green Parsly Leaves and Saffron. To anoint the Hipogaustrium out∣wardly; is made an Oyl of wall flowers, by setting in the Sun, or else of Lillies: also presently an Oyl is made by descent, of the Roots of white Lillies, and the tops of Dill and Chamo∣mel; The Mean are; round Aristolochia, Mugwort, all spices, amongst which Cinnamon and Saffron are preferred, Garden daisies, double-toung, calamint, chiefly of the mountain, both the Dittanies, the Root of sword-flag, Featherfew, marioram, Mercury, Horse∣mints, Bazil, Penniroyal, savin. Of which are made, Decoctions, Syrups, Electuaries, or one dram of their Pou∣der
is given in white Wine that is spiced. To these: dry remedies, as Pouders, Bolus and Pills, borax of the shops is profitably adioyned, or mirrh, flowers of brimstone, and Nettle Seed. The Decoction of Garden Daisies dried, is held for a secret given in white Wine spiced. Also the Decoction of Nettle Seed one ounce in white Wine. So is the Decoction of the Leaves of Garden Groundsel, plucked off down∣ward, in white Wine or Broth of red Chiches. Also bastard Dictamni of Mathiolus, either in Decoction or in Pouder, and drank in white Wine. Also one dram of the sowrest Leaven or thereabouts, dissolved in white Wine, and drank without or with a little Saffron. So is the Seed of Nigella one dram with one scruple of Cinnamon in white Wine. Also this Pouder is most effectual. Take Borax of the shops one scruple, Cinnamon, Roots of round Aristochia,
Leaves of Savin and Dictamni of Crete, or Nigella seed half a scruple, fine Sugar two scruples, mingle them, and make a fine Pouder to take at once in the Broth of red Chiches, or the best white Wine. Also Physick Wine may be made, whereof four ounces drank hot in a morning for some days together, before the usual time the Terms are wont to come down will forciblly provoke them: and it is thus made. Take Hearbs; Mugwort, mountain Calamint, Penniroyal Savin of each one Pugil, Cinnamon, Annis Seed of each one dram, Saffron one scruple, cut the Herbs and bruise the Seeds and for twenty four hours infuse them in strong white Wine two pound, then Boyl them a little and strain them. Outwardly the waters of hot brim∣stone Baths are convenient, also the Decoctions of the foresaid Herbs, wherewith are provided Fomentations and infusions for the matrix; also fumes are made which much be used on such as are subject to fits of the Mother, burning under them such things as smel
sweet, which may be used indifferently for others, by mingling sweet and stinking things together: for sweet smels do open the passage of the Ma∣trix, and stinking things do stir up the Expulsive Faculty to Vacuation. For a sweet smel Spices are good, Bay-berries, grains of Juniper, Mario∣ram, Mirrh, Roots of Dog-Fennel, Savory, Time. But for a stinking smel, serve Bitu∣men, Jeat, Rue, brimstone, and some ordinary Gums, but chiefly Asa-foetida, and Sagapenum. Lastly pessaries are singularly com∣mended of Garlick Bruised with Oyl of Spik, also of the Juyce of mercury, or the Juyce of the Root of Dwarf-Elder made up with Wool. For a secret are held the Leaves of the greatest plants, put under the naked foles of the Feet, and worn there. Violent remedies which are mingled with other remedies, either pessaries or internal Medicaments, are the Roots of Cuckoo-pint, and Dragons, of Briony, Coloquintida, Sowbread, both Helle∣bores a Gal but chiefly of an Ox water
Pepper, and the Seed of Staves-Acre. Helps for Delivery. Those things that move the Terms do also help to deliver, but beside them, these do singularly yeeld help, the Dung of a Hawk drank one dram in white Wine. The Dung of a Falcon, the same Dose drank in white Wine. The Testicles of a Horse that is gel∣ded, cut into slices and washed in white Wine, and then dried in the smoak, the Pouder of it is given to one dram in spiced Wine. The Root of Horse-toung, the Herb Motherwort, the Pouder of them is given a whole spoonful, or the Juyce in hot white Wine. Fallopius holds it for a great secret, to take one scruple of Borax of the shops in the Decoction of Featherfew, or Savin. Also the Travail is made the more
easie, if Women eat Snails in their meats some days before their Delivery. Also a Turtle Rosted, whose Belly is stuffed with Bay-berries, Juniper berries and Cinnamon, being eaten every other day before the time of Child-Birth. But outwardly when the Throwes are upon them the Eagle-stone bound to the Thigh is a help, so is the Jasper, and the coral used the same way, and the Load-stone held in the left hand. Remedies to drive out the Secundine. Those things that were now pro∣pounded to be taken inwardly to help Delivery, do also help to drive forth the Secundine. But particularly these are good, the Decoction of Sage in white Wine, the Root of the Bay's of Alexandria, Seed of Hony-suckles, the Seeds or Root of Sesely of Marcelles the Pouder of them is given to one dram, in hot Wine or the Decoction of Sage, also the Pouder
of Bay-berries is effectual to one dram, taken in white Wine or water, or the Decoction of white Lillies. Also this Pouder is commended. Take Roots of Round Aristolochia and Mirrh of each half a dram, Pepper one scruple, make a Pouder to be taken in a Decoction of equal parts of Mai∣den-hair and common Maiden-hair. Also these are held for approved, the Pouder of dictamni drunk in some convenient Liquor and the foresaid Pouder of the Testicles of a Horse. Remedies to open the Hemorroids. If the Blind piles swel, they may be opened by rubbing them with the Leaves of Borrage, of a Fig-Tree, wild Cucumber and Briony; also the inter∣nal use of Aloes helps, but if these do not profit you must set on the Leeches. Remedies to force out the dead Child. Those things that expel the Secun∣dine,
force out the dead Child also. Especially, vertue is ascribed to Dittany, both in drink, and per∣fume. Also the milk of the first litter of a Bitch being drank is very good in par∣ticular. Water Parsneps taken for a Pot-herb in meat. The Juyce of Scordium drank to half an ounce with Saffron. The fume of Pigeons dung, of brim∣stone, of the cast Skin of a Serpent. Also we must not neglest in this case such things as tied to the Thigh do ease Child-Birth. Amongst the approved remedies these two are extolled. Take mineral Chrisocolla two scruples, or Borax one dram, Cinnamon and Saffron of each one scruple; mingle them, make a Pouder to be given in white Wine or the Decoction of Mug∣wort. Also take Chrysocolla of the mines, or Borax half a dram, Dictamni one scruple, Juyce of Savin half an ounce, white Wine what is sufficient, or if there
be a Feaver take the Decoction of com∣mon maiden-hair, or maiden-hair three ounces; mingle them. Remedies that quiet the Matter, that is Carried with a wrong Motion. Such things as are moved preter∣naturally, are quieted by revulsion to the opposite part: and those that repel from the part that receiveth, and such as make a stop between the part that sends, and the part that receiveth, also by things that thicken the matter that runs, and by such as bind up the passages, by which the flux is conveied. Those things intercept, which are set down to prepare thin Choller, and such as by an unctious quality do asswage the acrimony. All those things that bind up the passages do repel also, of which we shall speak a little afterwards, and besides those, all cold and moist things that by thickening intercept, of which we spak before.
Those things make revulsion, namely such as are called Rubificatives, reck∣oned amongst those things that Evacuate insensibly; also Vesicatories made of Cantharides, in Cerats or Plaisters, or of Crow-foot, or the Roots of the lesser Crow-foot bruised alone, and laid on for a Cataplasm. The Form of a Cerate: Take Whole Cantharides half an ounce, Seeds of Ammeos three scruples and an half, Rosin five drams, Wax two drams. Mingle them for a Cerate for four Vesicatories fit for a Body that is of ripe years: for Children and softer bodies half so much is sufficient. For a Plaister for four Vesicatories: Take three or four drams of Cantharides, (for a harder or softer constitution of the Body) Mustard four scruples, Seeds of Ammeos one dram, the sowrest Leaven one ounce and half, the sharpest Vineger what is sufficient. Make a Plaister. The sharpest Vineger, is Vineger of Squils, and that which may be presently made of the Decoction of Garlick, Wake-Robin, or red Onions: or the said Cantharides are bruised and made
up with crums of new bread, or with Figs; then moisten the matter with the sharpest Vineger and make a Plaister. Also a Bladder may be presently raysed, by dropping on scalding Oyl or water, but so that the matter may be sprinkled through a large hollow Cane, least it should spread further than is fit: or else the Oyl must be dropped on the part that is fenced about with a Circle of Wax or such like, so large as you desire to make the Blister large. Remedies that Root out the Cause that is offensive in the whole substance. Those Bodies offend in substance, and are Preternatural by the whole kind, that stick in the wounded part; as Worms, Stones, Poysons, Corruption; for these, are proper, such things as can draw them out, kill the Worms, break the stone, Preservatives against Poysons, and such as can remove Corruption, Remedies that draw out: These
though they must hold proportion with the Bodies that are fastned in, for which cause several remedies draw out several matters; as the Load-Stone draweth Iron, Amber draws Chaff: and some are indifferent to draw out any things contained in Wounds: namely Pimper∣nel, Roots of Canes, Root of round Aristolochia, Dittany, the upper Root of Sword-flag, a Lizards Head, Bee-Glew, the Root of stinking Gladdon, the middle rind of the Teil-Tree, Bird-Lime; al which are put into Plaisters, either bruised alone, or else are applyed with Wine to the wound. Some do attribute a wonderful force to draw forth all things that are fastned in, and that from the deepest parts of the body, to a Fox Toung pulled forth in the month of May and dried; and when you wil use it, steep it in Wine until it grow soft, and so lay it hot to the Wound. Some again ascribe the same force to the fat and Skin of a Hare, prepared the same way, but it differs something from things that draw out, by the manner of application, for it draws not
things fastened in toward it self, but drives them from it; and therefore it is not laid on the mouth of the wound, but on the part against it of the same member; as if a Blow being given to the forepart of the Head, some thing sticketh in it, they say it wil be driven out by laying the said matters to the Noddel. Remedies for Worms. Of these some do only kil them, and some kil them and drive them forth: of remedies that kil them, some are most fit for broad worms; some for round worms, and some for the bots. Other things there are that are contrary to all kinds of Worms, and for their singular faculty by which they kill Worms may be set down for the poisons of worms. These kill broad worms; Garlick, Bay-berries, the Roots of foemal fern, the great Turnsole, the Root of the Pomegranate, the rind of the Root of the mulberry, nigella Seed, Walnuts,
Tobacco, Vitriol; they are given in substance to one dram, or in Decoction; chiefly in Vineger or sweet Lixivium. These things kil the round worms, and the Bots; Vineger, Juyce of Oran∣ges, Citrons, Lemmons, Cole-Seed, Roots of Bistort, Carduus Benedictus, Roots of Grass, Bole-armoniac, Mother∣wort the Herb, Cross-wort the Root, Vervius, Juyce of Purslain, Root of Divels-bit, Terra Sigillata, Tormentil, Root of Swallow wort. These kil and drive them out; all kinds of Wormwood, Southernwood, bitter Almonds, Salt Bath waters, Seeds of Citrons and Oranges, Germander, white Dictamni, the Root of both Gentians, Lixivium, Lupins, Mirrh, Horehound, peach Kernels, flowers and Leaves, Rue, Scordium, brimstone, nettle Seeds. Of these; some remedies are suddenly made that are proved by experience. For example in drink, thus: Take the Emulsion of one dram of the Seeds of Citrons or Oranges prepared, four ounces of sweet Lixivium, adding sweet Wine two ounces. Mingle them. Or,
Take Wormwood in Pouder one scruple, Put it into an Orange that is moderate∣ly dried, with a little Sugar and Vineger; Boyl it on hot Embers, then press it out to drink. These are accounted secrets; either the Tops of Eupatory of Auicenna, or of Sea Wormwood that bears Seed, given from one scruple to one dram or there∣abouts, in Wine or milk or some such Liquor. For external remedies: are presently provided, Epithems of Aloes and Mirrh, bruised with Vineger, or mingled with Ox Gaul; also Fomentations with wormwood, made hot on a fire-hot Tile, & sprinkled with Vineger, or with peach Leaves stamped with hot Vineger. For to anoint: such an effectual Oyl may be provided. Take these Herbes: common Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus, Scordium, Tobacco, of each one handful, Root of Sowbread half an ounce, Coloquintida two drams, common Oyl two pound, sharpest Vineger half a pound: Boyl all at a soft fire, til the moisture be consumed, press it out; add to the strained matter, Mirrh one ounce, in
Pouder: Boyl them again at a gentle fire tll the Mirrh be dissolved, then strain them. But these are the very poysons of worms: Harts horn, Hemp-seed, or Leaves or Juyce, Corallina, or Sea∣moss, the Juyce of new Elecampane, the Pouder of Earth-worms, Goats-rue, Quick-silver well cleansed. Also common Mercury wel prepared may be given, (I say well prepared) to one scruple or thereabouts, made up into a Pill with leaf Gold. Also Wine is effectual, wherein the said Mercury hath been steeped al night or wel stirred with it: it is well purged for this end, and made without danger if it be stirred wel with the Juyce of Rue in a Glass Vial til it be perfectly white. A pleasant and effectual Vineger is provided; if in one pound of Vineger, there be steeped two days, Tops of St. Johns-wort one Pugil, Rasped Harts-horne half an ounce, broken Cinnamon one dram, then strain it for use: it is taken in Sallets, or in a Spoon, with a little Suger.
Remedies to Break the Stone. Writers have set down, a great many more, than are approved to be good, unless we may suppose this to proceed from the diversity of the stones: for some Medicaments break Stones in the Kidneys, by which the stones of the Bladder is not touched, nor can al those things that dissolve soft brittle stones, and that are made of Sand, not yet compacted together, break in pieces hard stones that are Glewd fast, and made of a clammy and dryed matter: again, some Medicaments break the smal Stones and that are gravelly, and drive them out by their ruggedness, which can work noe effect upon the greater Stones in the Kidneys: there∣fore it is worth the labour to distinguish these remedies into a three-fold order: into those that dissolve a hard stone; into those that dissolve a soft stone, and not yet fast compacted out of Sand, and into those that drive out smal stones
and Gravel. Of all sorts these are the most Obvious to be provided. For smal Stones and Gravel. The shells of Wood-Nuts, the Seed of Yellow Mash-mallows, or Abutylon, the Calx of the shells of Eggs, the stone of Spunges, the winter shells of Snails, the bones of the Head of a Pike in Pouder, the stone found in the Head of a Snail, Crabs Eyes, stones of medlars, Mallows Seed, Golden Rod, these are given in Pouder, one dram in Broth of red Chiches, For a stone that is yet soft and gra∣velly, Ammi, Roots of fullers Teasels, the Bark of Bay-Trees, Eringo Roots, Root of an Ash, the Root and Rind of Broom, the Seed of both Rochers of Mathiolus, the Seed of the lesser Bur∣dock, wild Mints, the Seeds of Nigella and Rose Corn, the Rind of Radish, in a Decoction. They are given in Pouder to one dram in the Broth of red Chiches, or some Diuretick Decoction. For a stone that is hardened and grown great. The Pouder of a Bears Tooth, the Ashes of a Calcined Gras∣hopper,
the Kernells of Cherries, borax of the shops, Maiden hair with a trem∣bling tail, the Ashes, and the flesh, and the dried Blood of an Old Cock, Cherri∣tree Gum, the Ashes of yong Swallows, the Juyce of Lemmons, the Ashes of a Hare burnt Skin and all, the Ashes of earth worms, Sow-lice washed in white Wine, burnt and dried, Pimpernel, Saxifrage, the fruit of Bladder Night∣shade, or Alkekengi, the Root of Saxifrage, Goats Blood, also hares Blood and Foxes Blood dried, the Ashes of Scorpions, land Calthrops, Roots of Nettles, the Seeds of Blew Violets; these same do move powerfully, drive out Sand, and are convenient for the soft stone. Of compounds, easily to be provided: these are the most approved, and are held for secrets. Take Goats Blood, the Goats being first kept in Gardens of Saxifrage for a Month, and the best Mirrh, of each half a dram, Broth of Red Chiches three ounces, Juyce of Lemmons one ounce. Mingle them to drink. Or, Take the Blood of a Fox, taken from him
when he is alive, and white Wine, of each equal parts. Boyl them at a gentle fire in a Glased Pot, to the form of a Fur∣menty; give five ounces of it for eight days together. Or, Take Sows-Lice prepared one dram, Aqua vitae half an ounce, Decoction of red Chiches nine ounces. Pour the Aqua vitae into the Broth, whilst it is hot, and take this warm six hours before meat for nine days together. Or, Take Borax of the shops one dram, the Broth of Red Chiches four ounces, Aqua vitae two drams. Mingle them to drink. Or, Take Seeds of Blew Violets half an ounce, the Decoction or the Water of Veronica or Golden Rod six ounces. Make an Emulsion to be given for seven days. Also Take the Juyce of Caltrops, chiefly, that on the land, six ounces. Drink it warm by it self, or with Juyce of Lemmons, so the Juyce of Golden Rod drunk for some dayes is held most effectual. Remedies that move Corruption. Although these do not immediately
Root out matter that is preternatural by the whole kind, but do rather yeeld assistance to Nature that labours to concoct it: yet when the matter is concocted, that it may be more soon and safely purged out, they do medi∣ately concur also to this work. Those things do by themselves move corruption, that do maintain the heat of the part, either by the likeness of their temper, or by the influence of their heat, hindering the stopping up of the pores: Those things do move corruption by accident, which Repress the exceeding, of the matter, and make the Blood that is mingled so pliable, that it is over∣come by innate heat. For the parts and Constitutions that are over-hot; Boyled Onions, fat Figs, Saffron, Fenugreek, Lin-Seed, the Root of white Lillies, Frank insence, are convenient. And outwardly, Goose Grease, Goats Tallow, Leaven, and all kinds of Rosins. Plaisters may be presently made thus: Take dry Pitch melted in Oyl what may suffice, make a Plaister. Or,
Take any kind of Rosin, Yellow Wax, of each equal parts. Mix them for a Cerat, to which you may add a fourth part of Goose Grease, and so make an Un∣guent. Or, Take Roots of white Lillies Boyled and stamped, two ounces, Meal of Lin-Seed and Fenugreek of each one ounce, Saffron one scruple, common Oyl one ounce and an half, the Decoction of white Lilly Roots what is sufficient. make a Cataplasm. Leaven by it self kneaded with Goats Grease is most effectual. For parts and constitutions that are temperate these are fit: Marsh-mallows, Mallows, sweet Almonds, Butter, Yolks of Eggs: to which in outward Medi∣caments may be added mans fat, Cocks fat, fat of Wool, Whey, Yellow Wax, Bees-glew, Wine, Wheat Meal purged from the Bran, common Oyl of ripe Grapes, that is not too Old. Some living creatures serve for Plai∣sters, chiefly yong Whelps. Of the rest, Plaisters may be made suddenly thus. Take Wheat Meal or Crums of Bread moderately Leavened two ounces, common
Oyl one ounce; hot Water what is sufficient. Make a Cataplasm. Or, Take Leaves of Mallows one handful, But∣ter one ounce. Fry them together in a frying Pan, then beat them for a Ca∣taplasm. Or, Take Roots of Marsh-mallows Boy∣led and passed through a hair sieve two ounces, Meal of Fenugreek or Wheat one ounce, two Yolks of Eggs, common Oyl one ounce and an half; mingle them and make a Cataplasm. This is an excellent Unguent to ripen corruption, and to break an Impo∣stume. Take the sharpest Leaven and Yolks of Eggs, of each equal parts, common Oyl and Saffron of each a little, make an Unguent, and lay it on with a Cole∣wort Leaf. For parts and constitutions that are cold, these are convenient: hot water powred on, water and Oyl, Milk, Barley Meal, quinces Boyled in Milk, Leaves of Blew Violets, and Bird-Lime of Apple-trees A common Plaister is prepared of crums of bread with Milk and common
Oyl or Oyl of Roses. or. Take Leaves of Mallows and Violets of each one handful, boyl them and bruise them, adding Barley Meal and common Oyl or Oyl of Roses, of each one ounce; mingle them and make a Cataplasm. If it fal out in respect of ill matter, that causeth the tumor, that there is need of such things as move corruption by accident, that is, of such things, that must equal the excess of the pec∣cant matter, which otherwise were convenient for hotter constitutions, they wil be convenient for colder tu∣mors, because they attenuate and heat the cold, thick matter; and such as are convenient to colder constitutions, will be convenient for hotter constitutions, because they restrain the heat of the matter. Whence it is clear that those tempe∣rate remedies set down, wil be most fit for al occasions, sometimes mixt with hot, and sometimes with cold ingredients, as the affect that wants suppuration in∣clines most to heat or cold.
Remedies contrary to Poysons. Such are properly Antidotes, that by the property of their substance, or by their whole temperament, do op∣pose the force of Poysons. Those Medicaments are called so improperly, which do vanquish Poysons by some apparent exceeding quality: such are contemperating Medicaments, that are opposite of Poysons in excess. Coolers, that are opposite to Poysons that inflame; and heating cordials that are contrary to Stupefying Poysons that extinguish heat. Though there are proper Antidotes fit to be given for all Poysons, yet what is truly a kind of Poyson, can be known by no proper signs; whence it comes to pass that we are alwaies Ignorant of al Antidotes that are contrary to al Poy∣sons: the knowledg whereof may therefore seem sufficient both for the prevention, and cure of Poysons. To make the matter more clear,
there may be assigned three ranks of Antidotes against Poysons; some are chiefly opposite to Poysons that are bred in us; either from some extra∣ordinary putrefaction, or some other vnspeakable corruption, and those are especially useful in Malignant Feavers and the Plague: others afford help when we have taken Poyson: others do cure us when we are Poysoned by Bitings, by wounds or by sight. Antidotes for Malignant Feavers and the plague: those that are hot are con∣venient for a cold Time and a cold constitution: but cold and temperate are best in hot Time and for a hot con∣stitution. The hotter kinds are, holy Thistle, Star Thistle, the Pills and Seeds of Ci∣trons, the Root of white Dictamni, Mirrh, great Chervil, Scordium, Divels∣bit, Goats-Rue, Scorzonera, great Valerian, the Root of Swallow-wort. The temperate are; the whole Citron, the Juyce of it, as of Oranges also and Lemmons, Borrage and Bu∣gloss, Bistort, Bole-armoniack, both Blew-bottles, Harts-horn, common
Pimpernel, Cinkfoil, Scabious, Tor∣mentil, Terra Sigillata. Of these; some Medicaments may be made cheap enough, that are not inferi∣our to the most precious Bezoarticks brought from Forrain Lands. First; this Syrup is most profitable, made of the whole Citron, which is temperate enough, and fit for all con∣stitutions. Take a whole Pome-Citron sufficiently ripe and ful of Sap, weighing one ounce; and break it on a Grater, the Root of Scorznera one ounce, the Herb Scordium one pugil, Seeds of holy Thistle two drams, Water distilled out of the Juyce of pleasant Apples and Sorrell of each two pound, spirit of Vitriol four scru∣ples, or in the place of it, Juyce of Lemmons two ounces. Bruise what must be brui∣sed and make infusion for thirty hours, the Vessel being very well stopped; then let them Boyl gently to the consumption of one third part, afterwards press them out strongly; let the strained Liquor be clarified by degrees at a gentle fire, infusing alwaies some flowers of Oranges or Citrons til it be perfectly clarified; then add fine
Sugar one pound and an half: Boyl it at a most soft fire, to the consistence of a Liquid Syrup, the Dose is half an ounce to two ounces. Also an Oxymel that is somthing hotter is excellent. Take holy Thistle, Goats Rue, Scabious, Bugloss, Sorrel, of each one handful, Roots of Scorzonera, Tormentil and Swallow-wort of each one ounce, Fountain Water four pound: make infusion for one day: then add, the best Honey one pound and an half, Boyl them at a soft fire til the Honey be well purified; having made expression and well strained it, add of the best Vineger, in which the whol Citron bruised on a grater hath been steeped and Boyled, ten ounces; Boyl al at a gentle fire to the consistence of an Oxymel. Also an effectual Vineger may be prepared, of which one or two spoon∣fuls may be put in Broth that is altered, or taken with meats. Take a whole Citron Rasped with a Rasper, prepared Harts-Horn, Bole-Armoniack of a Yellow Colour, of each two drams, Roots of Bistort, Tormentil, of each one ounce, Seeds of holy Thistle one dram, Leaves of
Scordium one pugil. The best Vineger filtred, that it may cover al, about four Fingers high; bruise al the ingredients grosely, and infuse them in the Vine∣ger, in a Vial very well stopt, and let them stand in the Sun, or in some hot stove for some days; stirring the matter dayly, vntil the Color of the Vineger do not seem to be changed any more; then strain it, and keep it for use in a Glass Vessel stopt. This pouder is profitable for malig∣nant Feavers Take Yellow Bole-Armoniack, pre∣pared Harts-Horn, Roots of Bistort and Tormentil, Seeds of holy Thistle, Sor∣rel, Citron Pills, of each one dram, Camphir and Saffron five grains; mingle them for a Pouder. The Dose is half an ounce to one ounce, in Broth or Bolus made with Juyce of Citrons or Lemmons; it may also be put into a panada, or Ptisan: also the Pouder may be made up with a little Gum-Tragacanth dissolved in Rose Water or Juyce of Citrons, made into a hard Ball like to a Bezoar∣stone, which being dried again will
hold its vertue the longer. Outwardly the foresaid Vineger wil be profitable, altered with a whole Ci∣tron to smel to, and for Epithems for the heart; being added to waters or Decoctions that are convenient. Some say that Brimstone held con∣stantly in the mouth, doth preserve from the Plague. These things taken, are good for Poysons, besides those we mentioned before; amongst things that are hot; Ammi, the Roots of both Angelicas, the Root of Anthora, Annis Seed, round Aristolochia, all spices, Seeds of Cole∣wort, Root of white Thistle, flowers of Clove gelli-flowers, Root of Cross∣wort. The flowers and Tops of heath, Root of Elecampane, Juniper Berries, Root and Seed of Lovage, Turnep Seed, Wallnuts, Root of Pulemonia, Garden Rue, Root of One-leaf. The more temperate are: Water kept in a vessel of Serpentine stone, Jvory digged up, Harts-Mushroms. The Decoctions of Acorns of the Oke Tree, Seed of St. Johns-wort, earth of Malta.
The Pouder of those aforesaid, may be given to one ounce in the best Wine, or in warm Vineger, or both mixt toge∣ther. Compounds may be diversly provid∣ed as every man pleaseth. It is a famous and Antient Antidote, that is made of a Walnut, with three Leaves of Rue, and a Fig taken every morning. Also Theriaca Diatessaron is easily pre∣pared for this purpose. Take Roots of Gentian and Juneper berries, (but against Poyson I should prefer Bay-berries) Mirrh, Roots of round Aristolochia of each two ounces, clarified Honey two pound, make an Electuary. There are also famous Pouders a∣gainst Poysons and the Plague, that are easily made: as that which is called Griseus Caesaris, and Saxonicus, the des∣criptions whereof are to be found in Wickerus Lib. 2. Antidot. Spec. Sect. 20. This vineger also is good against Poy∣sons and the Plague. Take Roots of wild Angelica dried
in the shade, Juniper Berries of each one ounce, mirrh half an ounce, Leaves of Rue one pugil, Cinnamon one dram; bruise all grosely, and infuse them and digest them for eight days in the best Vineger, (Rose Vineger is better) one pound and an half, then strain it, and take every morning one spoonful fast∣ing. Outwardly they commend a Radish cut in peices, and born under the Arme-pits, provoking the Patient to sweat in the mean time. These Oyls are famous of the great Duke, of Scorpions of Mathiolus, in the Room whereof, other Oyls not so hard to make, and of as much vertue may be compounded. As, Take Oyl of ripe Olives (the riper the better) three pound, white Wine spiced one pound and an half, Roots of Gentian, Tormentil, Maister-wort, Swal∣low-wort common Angelica, of each one ounce, tops of St. Johns-wort, Leaves of Tobacco, and Rue, of each one handful, grains of Juniper and Bay∣berries of each half an ounce, make in∣fusion according to art for spur days in a
vessel very well stopt, then let them Boyl til the moisture be almost spent, press them out, and strain them. Against bitings and wounds that are venemous, inward Antidotes are con∣venient, mixt with cordials. But outwardly the same are good mingled with attractives, that draw the Poyson to the wounded part, and keep the wound open, til the venom be purged out; such are all the hotter Agents and Rubificatives, of which we speak else where. But properly Antidotes are, Ammi, Seed, long Aristolochia, Bdellium, both Dictamni, the Roots of both sword-flags, the brains of Dunghil-Cocks, Origanum, Pimpernel, Saxi∣frage, Root and Seed of the Clot-Bur, Goats-Rue, Goats-beard, and the Leaves of all kinds of Scorzonera, and the Juyce of the Roots; all those are taken in hot white Wine. The Antidotes that I set down a∣gainst Poysons taken, do almost the same thing: But this must be generally taken notice of, that the flesh of any Venemous Creature layed
to the biting or wound, that that crea∣ture made, doth draw out the venom: whence it comes to pass that the Pou∣der of water Serpents, but especially of Vipers is so famous, against the poyson of al Serpents; and if we may beleeve report, it is good to cure and to preserve also against al venoms, so that if the pouder be once taken to half a dram in spiced Wine; some maintain that the body is made im∣pregnable against al poysons for many days. This pouder is prepared three waies, and first thus. Take the Heart, the Liver, and the three first back bones of a Viper or wood Snake, dry all in an Oven, beat them into Pouder, add the root of Maister-wort an equal part and mingle them. Secondly Vipers flesh, the entrals being taken out (except the Heart and the Liver) must be cut, and seasoned eight days with Salt, then put al into a Sive that is wel guarded on every side, and underneath rayse a sweet perfume, four or five times a day constantly,
casting on fire coles, the pouder of Myrrh, Bay-berries, grains of Juniper and Cloves, and when the flesh is found to smel very wel, put it into a glased pot, wel covered with a cover of clay, and put it into a Bakers oven, and let it stay there, until al the sub∣stance of the flesh with the bones can be brought into a most fine pouder: the new Physitians ascribe more vertue to this pouder than to the antient confe∣ctions of Theriac or Mithridate. Thirdly, Vipers flesh being excellent wel washed in white Wine, saving the Heart, and the Liver, must be gently dried that it may be beaten to pouder, and so used by it self. Besides these, the poyson of mad Creatures hath certain Antidotes, with which, being taken for forty days to∣gether, the wound in the mean while being kept open, madness and fear of water is quite driven away. These are, Madwort, the ashes of river Crabs, the root of the wild rose, and common Pimpernel. They are given alone or mingled from one dram to two drams, in white Wine, they are mingled pro∣fitably
with the root of Gentian. Galen provides his Antidote of one part of Frankinsence, Gentian five parts, and ten parts of river Crabs burnt. Also some report, that this pouder is proved by experience, to cure the fear of water, given in white Wine from half a dram to two drams, dayly three hours before meat. Take Leaves of Polypode, Rue, Vervin Sage, Plantain with narrow Leaves, Leaves of common Wormwood, Mints, Mugwort, betony, Balm, St. Johns∣wort, Centaury the less, of each equal parts, dry them in a paper and beat them to Pouder. Thus far concerning remedies that oppose the principal cause of the disease, from the taking away whereof; the cure of material diseases must begin, unless there be somthing else that is urgent and so draws the cure to it: for that must be presenly taken care for, neglecting the cause and the disease for a time, if that urgent thing gives no delay, but threatens the patient with sudden death. Now these things are said to urge
immediately and by it self principally; the weakners of the vital spirits, in all faintings and swounings; but medi∣ately and secondly all vehement pains, continual watchings, all immediate Evacuations, from whence there is fear of the dissolutions of the spirits. These things urging, such remedies as strengthen the spirits must be set against them, such as ease pain, pro∣cure rest, stay fluxes; if the disease or the principal cause, by reason of its violence, and the weakness of the sick, do sometime come to be urgent; as feverish heat in an Old man, and the thickness and clamminess of flegm, in an exquisite quotidian Feaver, they require no other remedies than such as are of themselves contrary, concerning which we have partly spoken, and we shall speak something afterwards in the number of remedies that alter diseases. Remedies for Symptoms that are Ʋrgent. Those remedies that strengthen the spirits, do refresh them also, either by accident, taking away the causes
whereby they are dispersed, whereof we shall not now speak; or of them∣selves, by affording matter out of which the spirits may be soon ingender∣ed, and by Corroborating the inbred heat of the heart. The heart is strengthened with Cor∣dials, concerning which we shall speak, when we speak of Medicaments that are opposite to the disease in distemper. They afford fit matter to be turned into spirits, as also Nutriments that are of good Juyce, and thin substance, amongst which are pleasant Wine and sweet smels, because they yield thin vapours next to spirits, unto the heart. In a hot cause, cold or temperate sents must be prepared, such as are made of Vineger, Roses, Camphir, Violets, Mirtils, the Pills of sweet Apples, and Quinses that are grown Yellow. Vineger altered with these ingredients is the best, making infusion for some hours, or gently Boyling them, also to alter the Ayr, water must be sprinkled in the Chambers that is mingled with Vineger, and it is good for sents to put to the Nose.
In a cold cause, smels must be made of the flowers of Citrons, Oranges, Lem∣mons, the Clove-gelli-flowers, Jesamin, Lillies of the Valleys, Roots of Ange∣lica, Ciperus, Carden setwal, Leaves of Calamint of the Mountain, Marjo∣ram, Balm, Mint, Rosemary, Spik, Lavender, Time, Citron Pills, Bay∣berries, Juniper berries, and all kind of Spices; The best is made of the best Vineger, or Wine altered with the foresaid in∣gredients. Also the smel of rosted meat is ex∣cellent, stuck with Cloves and Cinna∣mon, as also Bread that is hot, and sprinkled with Malligo or some prin∣cipal Wine. For the same purpose may Oyls be provided with no great labour, from Spices, and very cheap, to anoint the Nostrils & the heart, if there be made, with clear common Oyl without dregs, and the Pouder of Cinnamon or Cloves, a matter like to Liquid Pitch; which must stand some days in a close Vessel, and then be put into a Press and pressed forth.
Such as ease pain are threefold: namely such as cure by taking away the cause of pain; proper Anodynes, which letting the cause alone, yet asswage the sense of the part; and stupefactives, that wholy take away the feeling of it, or else cast the sick into a sleep. Those that cure, belong not to this place, for they are as large in extent as diseases and the causes of them, by which the continuity of the part may be dissolved. Proper Anodynes are, Marsh-mallows, sweet Almonds, warm water, Dill, green Chamomel, Fenugreek, Lin∣seed, Mallows, Melilot, Yolks of Eggs, fat Broth. Besides these, for Fomentations out∣wardly, are convenient, living creatures their entrals being taken out whilst they are hot, the Lungs and the kel, of living creatures, water and Oyl, greasy Wooll, Sheeps Milk and Cows Milk hot, wheaten Bread moderately baked and yet hot. For Unguents, Hogs fat, Hens fat, Calfs fat, Mans fat, Butter, Suet, Mu∣cilage of Lin-seed Mallows, Marsh-Mallows,
Fenugreek, and Oyls made of the said Herbs and Seeds Boyled in them. But beside common anodines, there are some others that do properly be∣long to some certain parts, which there∣fore may be called specifical anodines. For the pain of the Head from what cause soever, this Oyl is most effectual. Take the Juyce of Vervain very well puri∣fied two pound, simple Oyl of Roses one pound. Distil it at a gentle fire of Embers, let the distilled Liquor be poured on again, and distilled again, and so do three times; for the Juyce will mingle with the Oyl inseparably, and in that, being warm, dip in a Linnen Clout to lay to the Forehead, and anoint the Sutures. For pain of the Teeth. The Oyl of Box distilled by desent is extolled. For the pain of the Chollick, a sure remedy is, one dram of a Mans Skull prepared, and taken with one scruple of Armis Seeds, in a cold cause: but with Coriander Seed if the cause be hot.
Also the pouder of the Testicles of a gelded Horse, taken to one dram, after the same fashion. This Oyl is exceeding good for the pain of the Hemorroids. Take Fig-wort four ounces, great Celon∣dine two ounces, the Sponges that grow on the sweet Eglantine, in number four, Seed of Agnus Castus two drams, common Oyl two pound. Cut the Roots, bruise the rest grossly, set them in the Sun for a month, and keep them for use: Or in∣fuse them for eight days in a hot place; then Boyl them til the moisture be con∣sumed, and make expression, and after that strain them. For pain of the Breast, the Oyl of Lin-seed drank two or three ounces is singular. For pain of the Joynts this Fomen∣tation is approved. Take Leaves of Mallows, Dwarf-Elder and Plantain, of each one handful, Smiths Water two pound. Boyl them to the Con∣sumption of a third part: press them out and strain them, and dissolve in the Liquor, Salt-peeter purged with Brim∣stone (which they cal Salt of Prunella)
half an ounce, and dip a Linnen Cloth in it and lay it hot to the part. Narcoticks indeed laid to the part do stupefie, but being taken or smelt to, or applyed to the head, they cause sleep. They differ in the intension of their quality, from properly called sleeping Medicaments, because these by their moderate coldness and moisture pro∣cure sleep, but those by the excess of both qualities bring out deep sleep, and if they be used too largely they cause Carus and Apoplexy. Yet there is some degrees of these Narcoticks, for some are more gentle; the use thereof is not so dangerous; some are more violent, which must not be used but upon very urgent pains and watchings. The more gentle to be used inwardly, are white Poppy Seed, to about one dram; but outwardly in Lotions, the Leaves of Garden Night-shade and Poppy. The more violent, are Hemlock, white Henbane, Mandragora, Opium, round Stramonium; Black Henbane, and long Stramonium, are best to be let
alone, by reason of the great hurt they do to the Bowels. Of others, are made fit sents and Loti∣ous for the Feet and the Head; but inwardly, only Opium, and round Stramonium, may be used. The Seed of Stramonium is given in substance from half a scruple to one scruple, or thereabouts; but infused from one scruple to two scruples, it is corrected with good Wine. Opium is given from two grains to five, corrected with Saffron, or Popper, and so made into a Pill, or infused in the best Wine. Oriental Opium is somthing stronger than Opium of our Country; but because outlandish Opium is often brought to us Sophisticated, and some∣times is sold very deer, it were better to make it pure of our own Country; Poppy, after the way that Quercitanus hath taught us. Take what quantity you please of Garden Poppy Heads, that carrieth a red flower, so soon as the first flowers appear displaied; bruise them in a Stone Morter with a woodden Pestle: put the matter into a spacious Glass, and pour on so much
of the best white Wine Vineger, til the matter be very wel wet, & the Vineger swim above al, two fingers breadth; let them digest for about fifteen daies, and when the Vineger grows red intensive∣ly, put the matter into a Linnen Bag, and press it out strongly: what is expressed let it Evaporate at a gentle fire to the consistence of Honey, and whilst it is yet hot, cast it into cold water, that it may Coagulate; then take it out and wipe off the moisture. But of compounds there are two that are the best, and easiest to be provided of all that are found in shops. The first is of Guajnerus for outward use. Take Opium, Juyce of Henbane, Juyce of Mandragora, of unripe Mulberries, Lettice, and of Ivy Tree, of each one ounce. Dissolve the Opium in the Juyces, when that is dissolved, wet a Sponge in it, and dry it again, at the Sun, for fifteen daies, when you would use it, dip your Sponge in warm water, and put it to the Nose of the Patient, this Sponge will keep its vertue for some years. The other serves for internal uses,
namely Laudanum, which in two daies time may be made. Thus, Take the extract of Saffron one scruple, the extract of the species of Diamoschu two scruples, extract of Opium prepared four scruples. Mingle them, and with three drops of distilled Oyl of Cloves, soften it. The Saffron and species are extracted with Aqua vitae, but the Opium with distilled Vineger. Opium also is prepared, if it be cut thin, and dried at a gentle heat, so long until it will fume no longer, and being rub∣bed between the Fingers, will crumble to Pouder: the Dose of this is from about one grain and an half, to five grains; it easeth pains, stops long Watchings, and staies immoderate and sharp Fluxes. Also Narcoticks provoke sleep, but far more vehemently than true sleep∣ing remedies do, by so much as deep sleep requires stronger means than sleep doth: whence it is, that when true sleeping Medicaments will not prevail, we are forced to use Narco∣ticks or heavy sleeping remedies now mentioned.
True sleeping Remedies, are, sweet Almonds, and the Emulsions of them, all sorts of Milk, Garden Lettice, fresh Moss of Trees, Water Lillies, great Housleek, Blew Violets, Venus Navel, and smal Wine mixed well with pure Water: the Exhibition of these is several. Flesh Broths are altered with Lettice and Violets. An Emulsion of sweet Almonds is made with the Decoction of Lettice; Lettice is eaten Boyled, seasoned with the Juyce of Oranges, or Pome-citrons, or Lemmons. Decoctions are made of Herbs for Lotions of the Head and Feet. Also an unguent may be made to anoint the Nostrils and the temples, suddenly with Oyl. thus, Take these Herbs, Lettice, Water Lillies, great Housleek, Garden Night-shade, of each one handful: common Oyl eight ounces. Boyl them at a gentle fire, til the moisture be consumed; press them out, and strain them. The Oyl of Violets and Water Lillies of the shops serve for the same use.
All those things serve to stop Fluxes, which stay the matter that is moved with an ill motion; by repelling it, pulling it back, intercepting it, and binds up the passages; therefore they belong not to this place. Those things that are most proper to stay Fluxes, shall be mentioned in the Catalogue of astringents. There remains therefore, to number up those Medicaments that drive away Diseases; the use whereof is most fit after the causes that are urgent are taken away: now of Diseases there are three general Heads; Distemper, ill Conformation, and Unity dissolved. Medicaments that alter a Sick distemper of the whole Body, and of the Parts. Though there be eight sickly kinds of distempers, four that are simple, and so many Compound; yet it is not necessary to make eight sorts of altering Medica∣ments. First, Because Compound distempers
are cured with simples that alter, being mingled together, and so as need requireth they make a Compound quality; then because amongst simple qualities, moisture and driness are com∣monly taken away with hot or cold remedies for Excrementitious moisture is cured, both with hot things that rarefie and consume, as also by cold things that press out, and by dry things of both kinds that stay moisture. But sickly driness, being it presup∣poseth a want of native moisture, which cannot be restored with Physick, but with Nutriment, is better cured by good Diet, and some heat restored in the part that is dried, by the benefit whereof the blood may be drawn thi∣ther, and more easily digested. There∣fore it will be sufficient to set down Medicaments that heat the parts that are over cooled, and such as cool the parts over heated: for both these being mingled together, it will be an easie matter to Compound an active, temperate remedy, and which is, amongst the passives, moist and dry, as necessity and the distemper that must
be removed, shall require. Moreover, seeing there are two kinds of altering Medicaments, some are certain, by which some certain parts seem to be most affected; others are uncertain, which work indifferently upon the whole Body; it will be sufficient to propound such altering Remedies that are certain; because the distemper of the whole Body, follows the hurt of some Principal part, the Remedies whereof bring help also to the whole Body. Certain altering Remedies take their name from the part which they help: Cephalicks, are for the Head, Ophthal∣micks for the Eyes, Arthriticks for the Joynts, Neuroticks for the Nerves, Pneumonicks for the parts of Brea∣thing, Cordials for the Heart, Stoma∣chicks for the Stomach, Hepaticks for the Liver, Spleneticks for the Spleen, Nephriticks for the Reins, Histericks for the Matrix. Medicaments that alter the Head. Hot Cephalicks, and such as are
convenient for the Head that is over cooled, the most Obvious are these: Southernwood, Betony, Box-Wood, Calamint, Germander, Hysop, Bay-Leaves and Berries, Lavender, Marjo∣ram, Piony, Rosemary, Garden Rue, and Water-Rue, Sage, Savory, wild Time, Stoechas, Time, Misleto of the Oak, wild Setwal Root, Water of hot Baths of Brimstone drank in due or∣der. Of these may be made Decoctions, Electuaries, and Medicinal Wines, in the place of Confections and Conserves of the shops. For Example. Take the Filing of Box Wood two ounces: Misleto of the Oak cut very smal, one ounce: common Water six pound. Make infusion for fiften hours, afterwards add, Leaves of Betony, Calamint, Marjoram, Sage, of each one handful: Root of Piony half an ounce: Bay Berries two drams. Make Decoction at a gentle fire, til a third part be consumed; then strain it, and give half a pound of it at once for somedaies together. The Antients, in the cure of a di∣stemper that was not very new, admi∣nistred
their medicaments for about four days together, by whose example we do usually proceed now. Example of an Electuary. Take Betony, Calamint, German∣der, Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage, of each one handful, Savory, Hysop; of each one pugil: Bay-berries and Fran∣kinsence, of each two drams: clarifi∣ed Honey four times as much: mingle them, and make an Electuary. Give about two drams of it for many days, either before you give the de∣coction, or when you go to bed. Medicinal Wines are more commen∣ded, made of the infusion of Rosema∣ry and Sage. Outwardly Lotions and droppings down, either of Brimstony bath waters, or of the Decoctions of the Herbs be∣fore mentioned, chiefly prepared in a Lixivium, to which you may ad roots of reed, leaves of Asarum, and Ivy of the wal. Of the same Herbs, adding a quan∣tity of Frankinsence, may pouders be prepared to strew on the futures. Also fume of Time and Marjoram
taken by a pipe, is good, the same way that men take Tobacco. Lastly, Oyls may be made of the de∣coctions of the same hearbs, to anoynt the Nostrills, the Temples, and the Su∣tures. These cool what is over hot; Black-Cherries, the skul of man burnt, barly, flowers of Privet, Purslain, Roses, flowers of Willows, the tendrells of Vines, and al things that procuresleep, of which decoctions may be made. The water of Iron baths rightly used is excellent. Outwardly frontalls are made of Pasca, chiefly altered with Willow leaves, Myrtills, Lettice, Violets, Night∣shade. Irrigations for the Head, are made of the same decoction or of warm Milk. Oxyrhodina are made of Oyl of Ro∣fes, and Violets with a fourth part of Vineger. Sents are provided of Roses and Vio∣lets. Vineger altered with these flowers is most useful, adding a little Cam∣phier.
Also Oyl made by insolation, of the flowers of Willows, for to anoynt the Nostrills, and Temples, is commended. Altering Remedies for the Eyes. For Eyes that are overcooled, with, or without any defluxions of thick mat∣ter, these things are convenient. Great Celondine, Eye-bright, Fennel, Garden rue, Vervain, whereof are made deco∣ctions and Electuaries for necessary in∣ternal uses. The use of Wine altered with Eye∣bright is approved. Fomentations to use outwardly are made of the said Decoctions, to which Pimpernel may well be added, & Fenu∣greek wel washed, also a little Saffron and Aqua vitae. So a Fomentation of Sea water is good with a little Saffron in it. This following Collyrium is singular, to strengthen the Eyes, and to discuss al clouds and suffusions confirmed, also for al cold defluxions, what affection
soever they have brought upon the Eyes. Take Malligo Wine three pound, Wheat corns and Fennel seed, of each half a handful, choice Cinnamon brui∣sed two drams, Cloves beaten four scruples, Leaves of Rue and tops of Bays half a Pugil; make infusion for a Natural day, then boyl them at a very soft fire til a fift part be consumed, strayn it out, ad two drams of Tutty prepared; mingle them, and when you would use it, shake the Decoction and trouble it; if it be provided for a Cloud and a Pin and Web, set it up in a brasen vessel, otherwise keep it in a Glass for your use. For Eyes overheat, Cephalick reme∣dies for internal uses are convenient. For outward uses a Fomentation, and frequent dropping in of warm Milk is good, wherein Frankinsence set on fire is quenched. If the flux be very sharp ad the fourth part of the white of an Egg. When the payn is urgent and the de∣fluxion very sharp, put in a little of the emulsion of white Poppie seed, made of the same milk.
Also make a Cataplasm of a sweet Apple boyled in milk and bruised, which wil surely help. So Fomentations of warm river water in which Frankinsence hath been quen∣ched sometimes, are good. Arthritick Remedies. For the Joynts that are over cooled, these are convenient. Chamaepytis or ground Pine, Juniper-wood and berries, Helichryson, Mastich-wood, al kind of Rozins, chiefly of Turpen∣tine, Sage, and the Root of pricking Bindweed. Amongst Compound Medicaments two are excellent: the first is the use of Turpentine for about fifteen daies, min∣gled with Groundpine and made up into Polus. Thus, Take Ground pine two drams Turpentine two drams. Mingle these, and make a Bolus to take at once. If the Body be over moist, it will do well to mingle with them half a scruple
of Troches of Vipers, or some of the Pouders of Vipers Described; these Boles are given alone, or about half an hour before the taking of some conve∣nient Decoction. Another Decoction is made of the Wood of the Mastick Tree, to be taken for many daies, with a slender Diet, as necessity shall require, as for Exam∣ple. Take Mastick Wood two ounces, Juniper or Misleto of the Oke, one ounce, Fountain Water six pound. Cut the Ingredients and infuse them for a natural day: then add Leaves of Betony, Herb Jvy, Rosemary, of each one handful. Boyl them at a soft fire til a third part be consumed, then strain it, the Dose is seven ounces at a time. Outwardly are convenient, Baths and mud of hot Baths, of Brimstone and Alum. Also Fomentations, of the best Red Wine altered with Herb Jvy, Dwarf-Elder, Rosemary, Tobacco, and the Leaves of Mirtils, adding a little Salt and Alum. Anointings also with Fox Grease.
Then to strengthen the Joynts, the Mother of the Wine being hot, and rubbing of them with Old Oyl and a fourth part of Salt is approved. The Turks with good succes do Burn their Joynts, but it is with a gentle fire not too troublesome, for they dip a Linnen Cloath in Aqua vitae, which they set on fire and lay it to the Joynt, and so extinguish it. It is approved, that the pains of the Joynts though they be Old, are either cured altogether by the use of the fol∣lowing Aqua vitae, or else are made far more gentle, and less frequent. Take the tops and Flowers of Rosemary two parts, Aqua vitae rectified three parts. Make infusion in a Vessel very wel stopt for fifty hours; then distil it in Balneo, the Vessels being fast luted on all sides. Take one dram of this Water, or one spoonful once every week, and every morning wash your face with it and the Joynt affected. For the Joynts that are over hot these are convenient inwardly; Mens Bones Burnt, mingled with other coolers, to about one dram.
Also the Decoction of the Wood of Mastick Tree, with Roses and Mirtil Leaves added to it. Outwardly, Posca is good, chiefly with Rose Vineger and rain water Steeled, or with Smiths Water, altered with Roses, Vine Leaves, and Mirtils; to which with profit may be added to discuss the Humor, a part of the stone Prunella. For to anoint; the Oyl of Roses, Mirtils and of Frogs is useful. Also Remedies are presently made by Decoction, of the same Ingredi∣ents. Such a Liniment will be very profi∣table to asswage pain proceeding from a hot and sharp defluxion. Take Oyl of Roses and Mirtils of each one ounce, the Mucilage of the Seed of Quinses, Flea-seed and Mallows, of each two drams, Wax washed often in Fountain Water, half an ounce. Mingle them, and make a Li∣niment. Remedies for the Nerves. For the Nerves over cooled, especi∣ally
these are profitable, Germander, Castoreum, the Brain of a Hare rosted, lesser Centory, Root of St. Johns-wort, Lavender, Mirrh, Pine Kernels, Dog Fennel, Primrose, Italian Spik, Sage, and Pitch-smelling-Trefoly. Of these things, some are compounded most effectual; but especially a Decocti∣on, such as is, that described for the Joynts, adding to it Germander, and Primroses. Also a Bolus of Turpentine, with about one dram of the roasted Brains of a Hare, and about one scruple of Casto∣reum. Outwardly these have singular use; Baths and Mud of hot Baths, that are Bitumenous and of Brimstone. Also Fomentations of strong Wine altered with the said Herbs, adding a little Aqua vitae. For Oyntments, Oyls are made of the Decoctions of the said Herbs, wherein some quantity of Earth-Worms washed in white Wine, hath been Boyled. Two singular Liniments are made for the cold affects of the sinews, whereof the one is excellent for the Cramp that
comes of Repletion, the other for the Palsey, astonishment and trembling. The first is made of Stellions. Thus. Take Stellions, five in number, or in the room of them green Lizards: in∣fuse them alive in Oyl of Chamomel, eight ounces; and when they are dead, let them Boyl in it, til their flesh be con∣sumed, then press all out, to which add the third part of the dripping of a roasted Goose, that was filled with Frankinsence, Lard, Mirrh and a little Saffron. Another is provided of Goose Grease thus. Take Leaves of Germander, Herb Ivy, Sage, Primrose, Lavender, St. Johns-wort, of each one handful, grains of Juniper half an ounce, Mirrh and Frankinsence of each three drams, Castoreum one dram and an half, Saffron half a dram. Moisten the Herbs with Aqua vitae, then buise them, and with all these make a stuffing, to stuff the Goose full withall, and stick her with smal sticks of Cinnamon, then rost her on a Spit: gather the dripping up, and when no more will drop, cut up the Goose, and Boyl her in white Wine
for an hour, take off all the fat that swims on the top, and mingle with the former dripping. Some ascribe so much to Oyl of Earth Worms washed in strong Wine and then distilled in the Sand; that they affirm a Palsey may be cured by this only. To Sinews that are over heat the same things are convenient, that were set down for the Joynts, except only burnt Bones. Remedies for the parts of Breathing. These Remedies, both hot and cold, which bring forth the matter that sticks in the passages of Respiration, were set downe in the Catalogue of those things that Evacuate the Breast by Spittle: for the same may be fitted to correst the distempers of the Lungs, but besides those, some things are Peculiarly good to heat and dry the Breast. The Waters of hot Baths that proceed from Brimstone, Drunk.
Some Figs steeped in Aqua vitae, until they swel, Eaten when the Stomach is empty, and as one goes to bed. The Decoction of Enula Campanae, Coltsfoot, Hysop, Hore Hound, Lung∣wort, Savory, Time. The Decoction wil be the better, if it be made with an Old Cock that is stuffed with these Herbs: also ful sweet Metheglin will be altered with the same very fitly for ordinary drink, or else make an Oxymel with them, and take two ounces every morning. Also sweet Wine is excellent, if it be altered with Hysop or Time. But the use of Brimstone exceeds them all, and of Turpentine, or some kind of Rosin, but chiefly of the Larch, or the Firr Tree. Give daily, one dram of Brimstone, but especially, that which is prepared, and brought into fine Pouder taken in a rear Egg. Rosin is given to two drams, which is better if it be drank hot, dissolved in two ounces of Oxymel. Outwardly are convenient, Brimstony Baths, and to stay long about such Baths
of Brimstone, in an Aire that is ful of hot Vapours, and that have a drying force. Or lay Cataplasms to the breast, of Meal of Fenugreek, Melilot, Pouder of Hysop, Calamint, and some Brim∣stone mingled with Honey, and with white Wine and Lin-seed Oyl in a just quantity. To a Breast that is over-heat; these do good, besides what was set down before, to expectorate Salt flegm, to drink Mineral Waters that proceed from Copper and Vitriol, as also from Iron and Steel. Use of Milk, unless some Distillation hinder, and the Decoction either of Red Sanders, or Rose Wood, especially of the Root, to be drank for many daies, with a thin Diet enchning to cold, chiefly of Barley, and the four great cold Seeds, The Decoction may be of this fashion. Take REd Sanders, or Rose Wood, cut smal, five ounces, Roots of Succory and Barley, of each half an ounce, Fountain Water Steeled two pound. Make infusion fifteen hours, then let them Boyl til half be con∣sumed,
strain them to drink at twice. By the use of this Decoction; hot bodies that are subject to a Consumpti∣on may be preserved from it, as also from Spitting of Blood that is like to follow. Also the frequent use of Conserve of Roses at going to bed is commended, as also taken in the morning on an empty Stomach, especially if some drops of tart spirits of Brimstone be put to it. For outward cooling, it is sufficient to anoint with Oyl or Unguent, made of Violets. Cordials. There are many Cordialls to be made of the Antidotes that are prescribed against poysons that are taken, but all that I propounded were only preserva∣tives against Malignant Feavers and the Plague; but besides these, there are some that are convenient for the heart that is over cooled, as Spices of al sorts, Pills of Oranges, sweet Angelica, Mary-golds, Mountain Calamint,
Clove-gelli-flowers, the Herb Cardiaca, Herb Bennet, Lillies of the Valleys, Ground Ivy, Lavender, Balm, Mints, all sorts of Bazil, Root of Butter Burr, Rosemary, Spik of France, and Italy, Mead sweet. Of these, Syrups may be made, De∣coctions, Electuaries, also Pouders, and Spices to be strewd on meats. The best for this purpose are the Compounds set down before, for Poy∣sons taken, and such as are bred in the Body and bring a Malignant Feaver. Also hot Remedies to refresh the spirits that I also propounded. So there may be a Physical Wine provided which is of it self a great friend to the Heart, for example. Take Herbs, Mount Calamint, Carduus Sanctus, Scordium, Goats Rue, Lavender, Balm, Rosemary, of each one handful, Roots of Avens, white Dictamni, Maister-wort, Orange Pills, of each one ounce, Mirrh, Cin∣namon, Cloves, of each half an ounce, Saffron one dram Beat them a part into Pouder, then put them into an Hippocras bag, and poure on the Pouder, the most
pleasant white Wine six pound, five or six times: of this Wine you may give about two ounces at once; if you poure on Aqua vitae so, the Remedy will be more effectual, and the Dose will be to one spoonful. For outward Remedies, prepare bags of the said Herbs, and Spices, to be worn on the Region of the Heart. Also Fomentations of Spiced Wines altered with the same things, alwaies adding some Saffron to make them pe∣netrate the more. Lastly, Unctions may be made with Oyls made of the Decoctions of the same simples, or Spiced Oyls made the same way, and you shall find this in the Title of those things that refresh the spirits. For the Heart over heat, those things are convenient that are more tempe∣rate, that were set down against Ma∣lignant Feavers, and besides those, Ivory, flowers of Willows, Mother of Pearl prepared, Mirtils, Water Lillies, the Bone of a Stags Heart, sweet Ap∣ples, Roses, Sanders, Violets Of these you have some Compounds
amongst the Antidotes against Pestilent Feavers. Also the use of Conserves of Violets or Roses will be most profitable, with one scruple of the Salt of the Mother of Pearls, for one Dose. The Salt is thus made, dissolve the Mother of Pearl Burnt, in hot Water of Borrage; adding a part of Rose Vineger, then distill them by filtring, and lastly Coagulate them, making away al the moisture by Evaporating it. Externally Epithems are made of the water of flowers of Willows, Roses, wa∣ter Lillies, adding the Juyce of Citrons or Lemmons, or Rose Vineger to make them penetrate, and if Camphire can be had readily, put in four or five grains of it. Instead of Water you may take the Decoctions of Borrage, Bistort, Blew bottles, Water Lillies and Vio∣lets with the same Juyce, with Rose Vineger. Stomach Remedies. The chief heating Stomach Reme∣dies,
and easiest to be got are, all sorts of Wormwood, but especially the common, and the Sea wormwood, the Pills of Oranges and Citrons and the Seeds, bitter Almonds, Gentian the less, Mints, Origanum, Rosemary, and all Spices, amongst which the best are Zedoary, Ginger, Galangal, and Pepper. Of Compounds, easie to procure, wormwood Wine and Oxymel of wormwood are approved. Aqua vitae altered by steeping worm∣wood in it that was dried in the shade, adding some Spices if you please. The best Wine (such as may be made, being poured through Spices, sweet Seeds, or the foresaid simples bruised) to be taken the quantity of two drams for many daies, fasting; with one or two grains of Pepper grosely beaten. Also it is good to drink the Water of hot Baths that come from Brimstone; such an Oxymel is most profitable, if you give every day one spoonful, or some other. Take Herbs, Wormwood, Calamint, Rosemary, Mints, of each one handful, Pills
of Oranges or Citrons, one ounce, Seeds of Annis and Cinnamon, of each one dram, Honey, one pound, the best white Wine, half a pound. Boyl all at a soft fire til the Honey be wel clarified: to the strained Liquor, add the best Vineger half a pound; Boyl them to a Syrup; when it is cold, cast in Ginger finely poudered two drams. Also it it singular good to take every day in a rear Egg about one dram of Mastich in Pouder, with a little Ginger of Zedoary. Outwardly, it is profitable to drop down the Water of Baths of Brimstone, which, when those waters are wanting, may be prepared of Wine, especially the best red Wine that is altered with the said Herbs; of which also may be made Fomentations. The common people use to make excellent Fomentations of common wormwood, Mints, Origanum, Cala∣mint, Lavender, of each one handful, tops of Rosemary, half a handful, com∣mon Oyl, and Spiced Wine, of each one pound, let them Boyl at a soft fire til the moisture be consumed, press them
out, and strain them, so keep them for use. For the Stomach over heat these are good, the Juyce of Oranges, soure Grapes, Barberies, sharp Cherries, the fruit of Cornus, Quinses, the Juyce of soure Pomegranates, the flowers of the wild Vine, Hypocistis, sharp Apples, unripe Mulberries, sharp Pears, wild Plums, and the Juyce of them, bastard Corinths, Roses, Services, the Juyce of Rhus or Sumach, Sorrel, Trifoly, Goose∣berries, sharp Wine well mingled with water. You may give the Juyce or Decocti∣ons of the said fruit and Herbs, with an Emulsion of the four great cold Seeds. Also it is very convenient to give Asses or Goats Milk tempered with about a fixt part of some of the said Juyces, least it change into a burnt smel. Moreover, to drink of Bath waters that proceed from Copper, or Vitriol, or Iron, is wel approved; such waters as are in Italy, are called Chalderianae, Lu∣censes, Niceranae, and the Blessed Virgin in Mount Ortho.
Outwardly, Fomentations may be used, and Epithems, or the Decoction of Roses, Myrtles, flowers of wild Pomegranates, Quinces, Pomegranate Rinds, Hypocistis, the wild Vine, adding to them some Rose vineger. A most profitable Plaister may be made of the pulp of a Quince, boyled in Rainwater, or steeled water, sprink∣led with a little pouder of mastich and red Roses. Instead of Quinces, you may take sharp Apples. Oyntments may be made of Oyl boyled with the said Herbs, til the moi∣sture be consumed, alwaies adding a little wax, washed somtimes in Posca, that the force of the Remedy may stick the longer to the place affected. For a dried Stomach, where there is want of inbred heat, nothing is better than milk taken for many daies, about five or six hours before meat. You must take it by degrees from four oun∣ces to six ounces or thereabouts, new milked, and with about a fourth part of Honey that it Wax not soure. Outwardly, Fomentations are good made chiefly of Oyls, that are not very
hot, or else received into moist Wool. Also Pications are useful, made with Pitch melted with a little Oyl of Wormwood, and laid upon the part until it wax a little red; in the mean time the Stomach must be cherished with a yong Puppy, or your own hand, or a yong Maid lying upon it all the night. Remedies that alter the Intestines. The same Remedies almost are good for the Intrals, as are for the Stomach, by reason of the Affinity of Parts, and Propriety of their Substance. But for the Intestines over cooled, as it fals out often in the Collick, especial∣ly these do profit: Cummin Seed, Bay∣berries, Rue, and the Pils of Oranges; the Pouder of them may be given to one dram in spiced Wine, or an Emulsi∣on of the Seed of Citrons, or Oranges. The most commendable is, Wine that is made Physical with the long steeping of Orange Pils, both to cure
the pains of the Collick, and to pre∣serve one from it, if it be dayly used. Theriaca Diatessaron, is excellent for the same, as it is described amongst the Antidotes; one dram of it given alone, or with spiced Wine. The same things may be given in Clysters, in any of these forms; to which you may very wel add Oyl of Nuts, the Decoction of Coloquintida, and Turpentine, or Rozin of the Fir∣tree, or Larch-tree, dissolved in Oyl. As for Example: Take the Decoction of Chamomel, Bay-Leaves, Colequintida bound up in a skin, one pound: Oyl of Bays, or Oyl of Nuts, three ounces: Crude Honey, and Turpentine, of each two drams: Common Salt two drams: mingle them for a Clyster. Outwardly, Unctions of Oyl of Bays, and Rue, are principal good; as also the mud of Baths from Brimstone. For the Intestines over heat, these things are profitable: All things that cool the Stomach, and the Liver; but the chief are Bath-waters proceeding of Copper, and Vitriol, and Iron, drank with an empty Stomach.
Milk added to Clysters, and often bathing the middle Abdomen with Posca, that is somthing cold; with which Re∣medies the pains of the Intestines pro∣ceeding from thin, and most sharp chol∣ler, are easily and soon abated. For the Liver over cooled, these are convenient; Wormwood, Agrimony, Germander, al the Gentians, Lavender, the wood and berries of Juniper, Poley, French Spike, and Italian Spike, to which ad Spices, and the hotter Diure∣ticks. Amongst Compounds, strong Wines are most approved, made Physical with wormwood, and Spices, such as were set down for the Stomach. Also the Decoction of Juniper wood, is excellent, adding the tops of worm∣wood, which wil be more pleasant if you add a quantity of clarified Honey, chiefly if it be boyled with the best wine to the consistence of a Syrup; for by this means, divers Decoctions may be made of hot Diureticks and Spices, alwaies adding wormwood to them. Outwardly, Fomentations will be good, made of spiced wine, altered with
the foresaid Ingredients. Also the mud of Baths that come from Brimstone. Oyntments are made with Oyls com∣pounded of the same Simples by Deco∣ction, such as were described for the Stomach. Lastly, Little bags made of the same things put into a fine cloth, and worn upon the Region of the Liver. But for the Liver over heat, these are the best amongst Simples: Sorrel, Suc∣cory, the pulp and seeds of Gourds, Citruls, Endive, Liver-wort, Hawk∣weed, Barley, al sorts of Docks, Lettice, Milk (if there be no obstructions, nor a Feaver) chiefly that which is four; pulp and seeds of Apples, Purslain, wild Endive, Sow-thistle, Dandelyon, Sorrel, Trefoyl, whey of milk alone, or with an Emulsion of the four great cold Seeds. Decoctions are made of Herbs in wa∣ter or broth, or the Juyces are pressed out, which are kept til winter, both cla∣rified and thickened: they are mingled from one ounce to two, with broth in winter time; but these from one or
two drams, are either mingled, or made up into Bolus, or else are dissolved in some Liquor. Also Herbs are eaten, boyled after the manner of Pot herbs, in water, or flesh∣broth. A Prisan is made of Barley, which is made the more pleasant, made white with the Seed of Melones or Gourds: the use whereof is good also in a Pana∣tella. To al these, Natural Mineral waters may be added, that proceed from Cop∣per, Vitriol, or Iron, that were mentio∣ned to temper the heat of the Stomach; for there is nothing better to cool the Liver, than the orderly drinking of these waters. Outwardly Epithems are convenient, of Juyces, and the Decoctions, especial∣ly of Cichory, and Sow-thistle, with an eight part of Rose Vineger, or com∣mon Vineger, in which a little worm∣wood and Roses have boyled. Also an Oyl to anoint with, may be prepared of Violets and Roses, which would be more effectual, made with the Decoction of the Herbs mentioned,
with common Oyl, til the moisture be consumed. But a bath of sweet water, is better than any Remedy, used for the whol body after due Evacuations, unless a Feaver hinder. For the Spleen over cooled, these are proper Remedies; Seed of Agnus Ca∣stus, borrage, bugloss, roots and rinds of Cappars, stone-fern, Dodder, root of Fern, seed and bark of Ash-tree, Fu∣mitory, the ripe berries of Ivy of the wal, Harts-tongue, the flower and root of Hops, root of water fern, Tamarisk, Time, Teucrium. The Pouder of these may be drank to one dram for forty dayes in wormwood wine, or steeled wine, or Smiths water. Of these may be made Decoctions suddenly, Physick wines, and Electua∣ries. The Decoctions of Ash wood are ex∣cellent, and Tamarisk, Mountain Teu∣crium, and Germander, especially made with water wherein new steel hath been quenched, or with Smiths water elrified. Some make these Decoctions with
Vineger, but chiefly wherein Raisins have been steeped, to diminish the Spleen that is grown too great: if Vine∣ger of Squils be at hand, it were good to mix it with the Decoctions, to half a spoonful. Wines are prepared by the infusion of the same Herbs, and they wil be better, if you add steel that is prepared with Brimstone, which preparation may be made suddenly, as for example. Take Leaves of Germander, Dodder, wall Ferne, Fumitory, Buglos, of each one hand∣ful, Seeds of Ash, berries of Ivy of the Wall of each two drams, Time and Wormwood of each one pugil, Steel prepared one ounce, the best white Wine three pound. Make infusi∣on in the Sun or some hot place for eight daies, stirring the matter alwaies once and again; then strain the Wine and take every day four ounces, four hours before meat, and before ordinary exercise. Electuaries may be made of the same herbs, adding prepared Steel to them, or Ammoniacum, and four times so much Clarified Honey. Some there are that ascribe a won∣derful
effect to Ivy berries poudered and mingled with honey to an Elect∣uary, or drank in Wine or Broth of Chich Pease to one dram for forty daies. Outwardly are convenient, Fomen∣tations of the Decoctions of Emollient Herbs, adding thereto the Roots of Briony and Sowbread, Ivy Leaves, and Tobacco, dwarf Elder, and wormwood to corroborate the parts, with some quantity of white wine and vineger, in the end of the Decoction to make the better penetration. The Fume of this Decoction received is good, by quenching in it a piece of a sire-stone, or a mil-stone. Also Fomentations made of Hemp Yarn boyled in a strong Lixivium, and being laid hot and moist to the part, are exceeding profitable. Also the mud of itumenous Baths u∣sed for fifteen or twenty daies, is com∣mended. After Fomentations, let the parts be anointed with Oyls made suddenly, by boyling together, or else apart, Sow∣bread, Priony, Cappars, flowers of
Broom, Tobacco, Ivy Leaves, Colo∣quintida, in common Oyl with white wine and vineger; til the moisture be consumed, adding some wormwood, or bitter Almonds to preserve the strength of the part. After convenient use of Fomentations and Oyntments, apply a Cerate to the part, as that which is usual, made of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vineger of Squils, or provide somthing of the same faculty, of the pouders of the said Sim∣ples, adding some little of the foresaid Oyl, to a sufficient quantity of the Pine∣tree Rozin, or white Pitch, and new Wax. Also Bee-glew is commended that is yet swelling with Honey, bruised by it self to the form of a Plaister, adding a little Mastich to help the strength of the part. To this place appertains a little bag, that is stuffed with equal parts of wild Cucumer, pulp of Coloquintida and wormwood laid to the Spleen. These cool the Spleen that is over∣hot, the same that were propounded for the Liver; but there must be some
temperate Attenuatives added to them; by reason of the thick Juyce the Spleen is nourished with. Such are, Strawberries, Maidenhair, Hops, Sparagus, Trichomanes, vineger, Smiths water clarified; with which Decoctions are altered, Fomentations and Epithems; not forgeting to add some wormwood to outward Reme∣dies, to strengthen the part. The same things belong to the Reins and the Bladder, by reason of the community of their office, and nearness of the parts. Therefore, for these overcooled, all those hot Diureticks laid down in their proper place, are profitable. Also Betony, Chamomel, the Root of long Cyperus, added to the Decocti∣ons and Electuaries. But these are judged to be better to heat the Urinary passages; water Baths that proceed from Brimstone, drank, for many days together, fasting, to some pound weights; putting in some smal quantity of Annis Seed or Fennel or the like Diuretick in Pouder, for the first Cupp, or some Rosin of the Larch
or Firr Tree, to about two drams, taken in Bolus, either by it self, or with some little Pouder of some of the hotter Diureticks. Also white Wine of the best, altered with some of the hotter Diureticks is most convenient for this business. Outwardly to sit in waters of Baths, that proceed from sulphur is an appro∣ved Remedy. Fomentations of the Decoction of hot Diureticks, with hot white Wine. Oyntments, with Oyl of Bays, or some such like, prepared presently; you have an example of it amongst the Diureticks. Cataplasms are commended, made of Onions and Garlick Boyled with white Wine, and bruised, and laid on by themselves, or sprinkled with the Pou∣der of Cummin Seed or the like. Clysters made with the foresaid Oyl are often to be given hot, and with Wine altered with Chamomel, Bay Leaves, Penniroyal, wild Time, and such like heaters that cause Urin. Add to all these strong Motion, by riding, running, Walking; whereby the
Region of the Loyns is heated. But for the Reins over-heat, these things profit inwardly; Decoctions of the fruit of Alkekengi, Marsh-mallows, Sorrel, Barley, Lettice, Mallows, water Lillies, Purslain, Grass, Roots of Sowthistles, with the Emulsions of the four great cold Seeds, or the Juyce of Lemmons. Moreover Clarified Whey, with the Emulsion of the four cold Seeds. Also steeled Milk unless some obstru∣ction of the Reins hinder it. Drinking of sharp Mineral waters, of Copper, Vitriol or Iron, such are in Italy the Lucenses, Noceranae, Chalderianae, and at Padua, of the blessed Virgin. Also to eat Strawberries, Lemmons Melons, Citruls, Gourds, Barley, Let∣tice. Outwardly, doth profit, a Bath, to sit in of sweet waters, chiefly altered with Violets, Pellitory of the wal-Let∣tice, Mallows, the Decoctions whereof are also profitably given in Clysters. In the place of Baths, Epithems are good of warm Milk, either alone, or with the Decoction of Mallows, or of
the foresaid Herbs, adding Juyce of Lemmons to them to make them pene∣trate. When heat is urgent; add the Leaves of Housleek, Garden night-shade, and Alkekengi, and sometime of white Henbane, to the Decoction. The most effectual is the Juyce pres∣sed out of the inward scrapings of the gourd, either alone, or laid on with other things. Also sudden Oyntments may be pre∣pared of Oyls, wherein are Boyled, the slowers or Leaves of water Lillies, Blew Violets, Damask Roses, green Frogs. Upon urgent necessity, (which falls out in an exquisite Diabetes) the Seeds of white Poppy, and white Henbane, out of which also Oyls are made by ex∣pression, very effectual for the pur∣pose. Apply to the Reins, and the parts about, fresh Leaves of water Lillies, when the party goeth to bed, and let him wear in the day time, in the place of them, a thin plate of Lead, or a simple Cerate, made of Yellow Wax, often washed in Rose water, or the said
Decoctions and Oyls, which must be of∣ten taken off, least growing hot by the Cloaths upon it, it may foster the heat of the Reins. Remedies for the Matrix. No cold things of themselves are kindly to the Matrix (because it is the place of generation) yet if it shall stand in need of them, when it is over heat, they are necessary for to help it, which are set sown to help the Reins and the Liver; only with this caution that to outward Remedies, some things must be added that cherish the natural heat of it, and foster its peculiar property. But when it is over-cooled, these principally are convenient; amongst common things, Mugwort, Angelica, Calamint, the Root of long Cyprus, Daucus, white Dictamny, Nip, Leaves and Berries of bays, Lavender, Fether∣few, Marjoram, Balm, Garden Mints, and wild Mints, and Greek Mints, Origanum, Poly, Penniroyal, Rose∣mary,
Rue Savory, Sage, wild Time, French and Italian Spik; sweet Tansey, Time, and all Spices, amongst which the best are Cinnamon, Saffron, Ga∣langa, Mirrh, Mace and Nutmeg. The Pouder of these may be given, to one dram in Spiced Wine or Broth, or else Electuaries may be made of them, adding thrice as much of Clarifi∣ed Honey. To this end serve all kind of Aroma∣tical Spices, that may be had at cheap rates, of which take one dram in Wine. But Decoctions and Physical Wines are preferred before other Medica∣ments, because by reason of their moi∣sture they can more easily be conveyed to the Matrix. The best Decoctions are made of Pid∣geon Broth, the Belly of the Pidgeon being stuft with the said simples, as for Example. Take Herbs, Calamint, Penniroyal, Balm, Mints, of each one handful, tops of Rosemary and Lavender, of each one pugil, Bay-berries, Nutmeg and Galanga, of each one dram. Cut the Herbs and bruise the rest grossly,
and put them together within the bel∣ly of a Pidgeon; then boyl them in water sufficient at a very soft fire, un∣til the flesh be perfectly boyled; then press all out strongly, and strain it: give two ounces of it, or thereabouts, daily for many daies. Physick Wines are made by the Infu∣sion of the said Ingredients, or by thrice pouring the wine upon the said pou∣ders put into a long bag. Women use to provide Wines by De∣coction, and that presently, but they are not so effectual, because the thinner parts are evaporated. Also to drink the water of Baths from Brimstone seasonably, doth wonder∣fully maintain and correct the heat of the Matrix. Outwardly do profit, Insessions, Bath waters from Brimstone, or Baths altered with the said Herbs, putting into the Matrix a hollow Pipe, that by that, the force of the Medicament may come to it. The same Liquors, as also Physical Wines are conveniently used, conveied by injections to the secrets.
Also Fumigations of Spices and sweet Herbs are good. Pessaries are commended, such as may be presently provided, Thus. Take the Pouder of Bay-berries and Rue, of each one dram, Mirrh half a dram, Juyce of Fetherfew or Peniroyal or Spiced Wine one ounce. Mingle them, and with carded Wooll or Cotton make a pessary. Or, Take the best Honey one ounce, Juyce of Mugwort half an ounce. Boyl them to a fit consistence, then add Pouder of Ga∣langa, or the Spices of vulgar Aroma∣ticks one dram: mingle them for a pessary. Also Fomentations must be applyed to the lower part of the Belly, with Spounges, pressed out with mineral waters, or of the Decoctions of the foresaid simples, chiefly in strong Wine. But no Fomentation is better, than the mud of hot Baths applyed to that part for some daies. Anoint the same place with Oyl of Spik, Bays, Rue, and other things made of the Decoction of the said sim∣ples, as for example. Take Herbs Calamint, Marjoram, Fe∣therfew,
Mints, Lavender, of each one hand∣ful, Bay-berries and Galanga, of each two drams. Pound what must be pounded, and infuse all in one pound and an half of common Oyl and half a pound of Spiced Wine for six hours, then Boyl them at a soft fire till the moisture be consumed. Some ascribe a peculiar vertue to strengthen the Matrix, to Santoline, which Mathiolus makes to be Foemale Southernwood. And these are the most common and ready Remedies to alter, whereby the distemper of every part, and of the whole Body may be corrected. Remedies of Diseases in ill Conformation. Due Conformation, convenient Mag∣nitude of the Similary parts, of which the Organ consists, do make the Con∣stitution of the Organ; also convenient and fit number to which apt connexion is referred: therefore we shall Recite four chief heads of faulty composition,
namely, a Disease in conformation, in Magnitude, in number, in Scituation. There are four ill accidents that befal Conformation: namely, in figure, the insensible passage, being open or shut, Cavity or sensible passage being enlar∣ged or streightened, and the superficies being smooth or rough. A Disease in figure hath no Remedies that are proper for it, but it is either cured with the help of Chirurgery, or with Medicaments that respect other Diseases, on which it dependeth. For it is made either by faulty Conformati∣on in the Womb, or violent motion in the birth, or the unskillful swathing by Midwives, or walking when the Legs are weak, disjoyntings, and errours of the Chirurgion in curing Fractures and Luxations, which want the help of Chy∣rurgery, but of those we do not speak in this place. But the part brought again to its due Conformation is strengthened out∣wardly with Fomentations and Cerates, which are made of Astringents, but chiefly those that are hot, and shall be described very shortly.
Now if the figure be spoiled by too great Repletions, or extream in any Emp∣tines, or by some inclinations of one part toward another, by reason of a Palsy or Convulsion, as it falls out when the Nerves or the Tendons are cut, or from some hard Cicatrice, or great swelling; it is cured by such Remedies as empty, strengthen the Nerves, soften hardness, of which we spak already, also with such as refresh the part that is too empty, and such as glew dissolved unity, of which afterwards. Rarity, or the opening of the insen∣sible passages which Men cal Porosities, which in great Joy poured forth, and Diaphoretical sweatings, is often the cause of death, it is cured by Coolers, Astringents, and Emplasticks, or such as draw up the pores. Such things as are most obvious to be applyed outwardly; are the sprink∣ling with cold water and so much the more if it be cooled with Snow, or Ice, or first altered with cold astringents, of which we will speak afterwards. Anointing of the Body with Oyls that are actually cold, especially of
unripe Olives, or altered with cold astringents, as Roses, Quinces and the like, Also the coldest Ayr is best, that with the cold of the Ayr, the pores may be contracted. If these things Suffice not, lay on Burnt Gip with cold water, as a crust upon the Body. If Rarity possess the part, as when by reason of rarity of the yard, the spirits cannot be conteined in the hollow Nerve, to cause strong erection, those Astringents that shall be by and by pro∣pounded must be applyed to the place affected, especially hot, because so they strengthen the more. For the Density or astriction of those passages, if it proceed from any matter that is impacted, hot detergents are most convenient, and such as attenuate, which shall be propounded to take a∣way obstructions that come from thick matter that is impacted. If it proceed from cold and driness, things that are moderately hot and that attenuate without drying are needful, of which there is notable use to dispose
the Body to necessary sweating, and to make the Body transpirable, which is procured to drive away the internal corruptions of Feavers, and to take off all Cutaneous spots. Such are Baths of warm water, Fo∣mentations of water and Oyl, or warm water, chiefly altered with Dill, Cha∣momel, Marsh-mallows, Roots of white Lillies, Lin-seed, the flowers of com∣mon Jasmin, and wall-flowers, Boyled, till half be consumed. Also Unction may be made with Oyl very hot, first rubbing the part softly, or let the Body be gently rubbed with the Palm of the Hand, dipt in the same Oyl, or some Spiced white Wine, ad∣ding one half of the Decoction of Vio∣lets and Mallows, in common water, if there be a strong Feaver present. Also the rubbing it self with soft Cloths, taketh away the thickness of the Skin, and Cupping Glasses do it more effectually, with or without Sca∣rification. Also for the Amplitude, or Laxity and Dilatations of the Cavities or sen∣sible passages, astringents are conveni∣ent,
which do so much the more forci∣bly thicken them, as the passages are smaller. The matter of astringents is of very long extent; they may be reduced to three Ranks, where the choice of every one for use may be easely found. Some do but a little bind, the use whereof principally is to corroborate the parts, and they do bridle excreti∣ons, which are not altogether unpro∣fitable, yet by their quantity and con∣tinuance, they may weaken the strength. Some do moderately bind, which have a principal force to repel all Fluxes from the parts that receive them, and to stay all Fluxes that are hurtful. Lastly, some astringents do compact the parts that are loosened, and are to be used, when by the force of the de∣fluxion, and vehemency of Evacuation, there is imminent danger; as it falls out most commonly when the matter that flowes is very thin, and comes through passages that are very much loosened with the continuance of the defluxion.
In a cold cause let such Remedies be made choice of, that bind with heat, or without any manifest coldness. But in a hot cause those things will help which work by cooling. And of all kinds of astringents, these will be most easely provided for sud∣den Remedies. Upon a cold cause these bind a little; all kinds of Wormwood, but especially Sea Wormwood, Egrimony, Be∣tony, Coleworts wel Boyled, Coriander Seed, Cummin Seed torrefied, the Root of long English Galingal, the Hulls of Beans, Mastich wood; and Leaves, Garden Mints dried, Mastick, Rice dried, Rosemary, Sage, common Scabious, Frankinsence, Rosin of the Larch-Tree or Firr-Tree Boyled hard, sharp Wine, or any other Wine steel∣led. The dry Pouders of those are given inwardly, by themselves in sharp Wine to one dram or there abouts and some∣thing more. Also Decoctions of Physick Wines, amongst which, the best is Wormwood Wine, or made of Mastich wood, or
Mastich, or Rosemary, or Sage. Also ordinary drink is profitably al∣tered with the Seed of Coriander and Mastich, and the said Pouders are strewed upon meat. For an inveterate Gonorrhea with∣out any heat of Urine, the said Rosins Boyled in Rain Water, or steeled water, taken for many daies fasting, are profitable, and made into Pills to one dram, with one scruple of dried Mints or the Seed of Agnus castus. Also one scruple of the Pouder of Mastich taken for some daies in a rear Egg four hours before dinner, will stay the same. The same Pouder taken the same way, if you drink a draught of worm∣wood Wine after it, staies an Hepatick flux properly so called, and Old fluxes of the Belly, and vomiting also that proceeds from the weakness of the Sto∣mach. Outwardly Oyntments may be made of common Oyl of unripe Olives (they cal it Omphacinum) or of Oyl of ripe Olives altered with wormwood, dry Mints, Rosemary, or Mastick wood, or Mastick.
Or Liniments made presently, such as this following is. Take Mastick in Pouder one dram, com∣mon Oyl one ounce, Yellow Wax, what is sufficient. Mingle them and make a Liniment. Little bags are made of Cummin Seed torrefied, and Rice dried at the fire. Or moist Fomentations of sharp red Wine, that is altered with the said Herbs. Or a Cataplasm of the shells of Beans, dried Rice, the Pouder of Wormwood, Oyl and sharp Wine. Of Mastick and Frankinsence, Cerats are made, adding to them Oyl of worm∣wood and Rosin of the Pine-Tree with Yellow Wax what is sufficient. For long continuing defluxions of the Eys. It is good to wash the Eyes often with the best white Wine, in which Frankinsence set on fire, hath been thrice quenched, adding a third part of River water, if the defluxion he sharp. These bind Moderately, Bean meal heated at the fire, eaten in meats, Ches∣nuts,
Avens, Black Knapweed, the green shells of Wallnuts, Lintels well Boyled and the Juyce, the Roots of Water-fern. Also the Pouder of the Black Grape half ripe dried in an Oven, taken one dram for many daies in Wine that is a little sharp, is propounded by Septalius, as a great secret to cure an Hepatick flux, also it cureth the flux of Women, being taken in Aromatical Wine made Physical with Rosemary, Sage, or Mints. For the hot affections of the Jaws, this doth profit singularly, the Deco∣ction, or the Juyce of the green Rinds of Wallnuts for a Gargarism, for which purpose a Syrup is made with Honey and the Juyce Clarified. The Juyce of Lintells well Boyled, taken with a little of the Pouder of Galanga, or Nutmeg, in the morning, four hours before meat, cureth vomi∣tings and scourings that proceed from the weakness of the Stomach. Avens, and the Root of water Fern Boyled in Red wine, or bear into Pou∣der, is singular good against the falling
out of the Intestines and the Matrix. Ontwardly, Mill dust added to Plai∣sters is good against Pissing of Blood. Earth worms in Plaisters are good for the Nerves that are wounded. Salt and Roch Allum, put into Deco∣ctions of Red wine, are for to corrobo∣rate the parts. Baths of Allum and Gip, (such as are in the Mountain of Grattas in the field of Padua) are good to strengthen the Limbs that are distempered by long defluxions. The mother of the wine hot, is com∣mended to corroborate the Joynts. The crum of bread tosted and sprin∣kled with strong wine, and with the Pouder of wormwood or Mints is good to fortifie a weak Stomach. These bind strongly, great Sanicle, Garden dropwort, especially the Root, all the Cranes Bills. especially Pidgeons Foot, Herb Robin, Mouse-ear. The Decoction of these is given, or the Pouder to one dram Also the Pouder of a Spunge burnt is most effectual, and the inward Skin of Chestnuts.
Of the Juyce of Herbs, and the Pou∣der of Roots mingled, bread may be made, baked so hard as Bisquet, which being beaten into Pouder may be mingled with meats, to be taken with∣out loathing. Outwardly Fomentations are prepa∣red of the Decoctions of Herbs, with sharp wine, adding some Allum to them. The Juyce of the fruit of Guajacum of Padua, when it is half ripe pressed forth through a Linnen Cloth, or received by a Spunge, stayeth the most desperate flowing of the Hemorrhoids; therefore it may be thickned with Al∣lum, and be kept for use. Also Goats-dung beaten with Vineger and laid on, stops all fluxes of Blood. The Leaves of common Nettles bea∣ten til the Juyce come forth, and put into the Nostrills like a Tent, stayeth bleeding at the Nose be it never so Violent. But in a hot cause these bind a little, Rain water, steeled water, water of Mineralls of Iron, such as is the water of Padua, of the Mountain, Ortho.
Vineger, Posca, Root of Succory, Leaves of the Cypress Tree, dried Strawberry Leaves, Barley torrefied, of which a Ptisan may be made with steeled water, steeled Milk, Tree Moss, Mirtills, Purslain, the Clot Burr, spotted Ars-mart, Pear Tree of the Orchards, four Prunes, the Leaves of Sloes, Pond-weed, the flowers of Roses, especially the red, the Seed, Down. Cups and Root, the flowers and Leaves of Wil∣lows, Housleek, Mullen, the Leaves and Tendrells of Vines, Venus Na∣vil. Of these may be provided chiefly Decoctions, amonst which against in∣veterate defluxions the Decoction of the Roots of Roses in some of the fore∣said waters is excellent. Also this drink, by certain experience stayeth in one day every hot excremen∣titious Bloody Flux of the Belly. Take the Juyce of the greater housleek and spotted Ars-mart of each three ounces. Boyl them to the Consumption of a third part, and give it in drink. Outwardly may be prepared Fomen∣tations, Baths, Emplaisters, Epithems,
and other forms of Medicaments, as need requires. These bind moderately, the Juyce of Oranges, Citrons, Lemmons not ripe, wilding Leaves, Leaves of wild Pome∣granates, Barberries, Sheppards purse, the inward Rinds of Chestnuts, Cistus, Dog Tree, and the fruit of it, the fruit of the Cypress Tree green or not yet ripe, flower of the Sun, Acorns and their Cups, Herb-trinity, Hypocistis, the flowers of the wild Vine, the flowers of the purple water Willow, all the Sea Lavenders, the common Blood∣stone, sour Pomegranates, Quinces, Pomegranate Rinds, Nose-Bleed, unripe Mulberries, Leaves of the Olive Tree, Adders Tongue, Plantain, wild Pear Tree, the fruit of the bastard Co∣rinths, the Leaves of Brambles, unripe Mulberries, Sow-wort, Iron-wort, Yar∣row, all Medicinal earths, the Elm, Golden Rod, and all these almost may be found in most places. The dry Pouders of these may be given to one dram, in Bolus, or drink, or some convenient liquor. Decoctions may be made of the
Herbs, but the Juyces are more effect∣ual, the Dose whereof is from one ounce to two ounces. These are held for secrets to stop all fluxes of Blood, the flowers of purple Loose-strife to one dram, given several times in sharp Red Wine. Also this Syrup; Take the Water of Knot Grassor Yarrow five ounces. Let the Blood-stone be so long in this Liquor, til the Liquor be of a colour like Blood, then add to it the Syrup of Quinces or Pomegranates one ounce, mingle them for a drink; or in the place of a Syrup put a little Sugar, to make it Penetrate, and some Juyce of Lemmons, or sharp Pears, or some other that is of a plea∣sant tast. To stop the Laskes of the Belly and vomiting, make a great hollow in a Quince, or some sour Garden fruit, (Apples of an Iron colour are best) and fill it with white Wax, put it into a Paper and roast it in the Embers, give a peice or two of this strewed with the Pouder of unripe Mulberries, a little before meat. For to stay Pissing of Blood.
Take the Decoction of Golden-Rod in Rain or steeled water, four ounces, the water of the whites of Eggs two ounces, Juyce of Lemmons two ounces. Mingle this to drink. For outward Remedies, Oyls are made suddenly of the Decoction of Quinces, Cypress Nuts, and of the Pine-tree, and other Herbs, adding Posca to it: let them be Boyled til the moisture be consumed; the use of these is for Oyntments or Unguents, with which, Litharge Boyled in Vineger may well be mingled. Epithems may be made with Posca and whites of Eggs. Fomentations and Insessions of the Decoctions of Herbs. Defensatives for wounds, are made of Bole-Armoniack, or any other Medici∣nable Earth, and the common Blood∣stone; being mingled and stirred with the whites of Eggs to the consistence of a Liniment: the Sediment of a Wet-Stone affords matter for a Plaister to stay al fluxes. Rulandus doth frequently extol a Plai∣ster of Potters Clay burnt, and Boyled
with Vineger, laid hot to the part, to stop Blood that forcibly runs out of any part. For the Stomach a Plaister is profi∣table, made of a Quince, Boyled in four Red Wine, or adding some Crums of bread to it softned in Vineger. These bind strongly, amongst the most common Remedies, Grape stones, the Kernells of the Pomegranate dryed, the flowers of purple flower-gentle, the inward Skin of wood Nuts, Chervil and the Root, great Comfrey, middle Comfrey or the great Daisey, Horstail, Galls especially unripe, Rupture-wort, the Root of the Yellow wild Flower-de-Luce, the true Blood-stone, com∣mon Hares-Foot, wild Apples, unripe Medlars, the Rind of the Root of Mul∣berries, money wort, Verjuyce, Juyce of Sloes, Knot-grass, the Root and Leaves of the Oak, the Bark that is be∣tween the Tree and the outward Rind, unripe Services Sumach, male Sanicle, dead Nettles, Bloody-rod of Mathiolus or, female Dog Tree. Of these, some are peculiarly com∣mended for some fluxes, though all of
them may be used generally where there is need of great astriction. For the overflowing of the Terms, these are accounted approved, the shel of the Root of the Mulberry, the Root of the dead Nettle, Grape stones, and Pomegranate Kernells, the Pouders of all these are given severally to one dram, with Red Wine or some Liquor that is fit for it. For Spitting of Blood, the Blood-stone taken with Sugar of Roses to one dram, or laid in astringent potions, til it look like the colour of Blood, or put into a Bag, and beat into very smal Pouder, and so strain Wine often through it, or any other ordinary drink. Against vomiting and any immoderate and inveterate fluxes of the Belly, these two Electuaries are the principle. The first, Take of the Roots of Yellow wild Flower-de-Luce, Boyled in Rain Water, and passed through a Hair sive, two parts, Old Sugar of Roses one part. Make an Electuary ac∣cording to art: the Dose, is from half an ounce to one ounce. In the palce of Sugar of Roses let the Poor take half
so much Clarified Honey, Boyled in rain water or steeled water, wherein the youngest Leaves of the Oak have Boy∣led some time. The other. Take the Roots of great Comfrey Boyled in the Decoction of the Root of Garden Dropwort, and passed through a Hair sive, two parts, Old Sugar of Roses one part, or parts alike. Mingle them, make an Electuary, the Dose is the same with the former. If it be provided for Hepatick fluxes, (and it doth very happily stay them) you must add a fourth part of Comfrey, wormwood, or a twelfth part of worm∣wood, Mastick. For the same purpose the Decoction of the Root and Yong Leaves of the Oak is excellent, made with red Wine, adding a little wormwood to it, if it be drank daily to two ounces or there∣about, five hours before meat. Other Remedies may be made for other uses, as every one pleaseth. Outwardly Crude Gip is conve∣nient, mingled with Cerats and Plai∣sters. Also Hogs dung, and Asses dung, ei∣ther
fresh, or else in Pouder: by either of these, al immoderate fluxes of Blood are presently stopt, if it be laid on with the white of an Egg, and blown in. Guainerius saith, that he used Asses dung inwardly, and Syrup of Sugar prepared with the moisture of the fresh dung pressed out; as a chief Remedy to stop immoderate fluxes of the Terms, and other extraordinary Eruptions of Blood. Oyl of the Dog-Tree, and the Root of the Oak made by descent, exceeds all the rest by an astringent faculty. Moreover, of the Decoctions of Herbs are made Fomentations and Baths. Cataplasms are made of unripe fruits beaten with Posca, and moderately Boyled. Also an Unguent may be prepared suddenly; but the Unguent of Chest∣nuts, and Comitissa may supply the place thereof. Take unripe Galls, Cypress Nuts, the Ker∣nells of Red Grapes, Pomegranate shells, the middle Rinds of Chestnuts, Mastick, of each half an ounce, Oyl of unripe Olives, or of Roses
often washed in Allum Water, one pound, white Wax three ounces. Let the dry In∣gredients be beat into Pouder, and steeped in the Juyce of Sloes, or unripe Services, or Verjuyce, or the Juyce of astringent Herbs, and let them be dried at a soft fire; adding thereto before they Wax hard, the Oyl and the Wax, min∣gling all gently by stirring it. If you had rather have it for a Cerate: take Rosin three ounces, and Wax five ounces, to the said quantity of Oyl and the Pouders. Streightness and Closeness of the Passages comes to pass five waies: by obstruction, constipation, Compression, cleaving together, and by sinking down: whence the differences of Diseases in streightness are taken; which, as they differ by generation, and variety of their causes, so are they taken away by diverse Remedies. Obstruction is properly called so, that streightness of the Passages that comes from things that are contained within contrary to nature, not that are united and sticking to the passages; such are Vapours and Humors that
abound too much, or that are too thick and clammy, also corruption, Clotts of Blood, and Milk, Thorns, and little Bones that stay in the Throat and hin∣der the passage, Hares Stones, worms, dregs that stick to the Intestines. Corruption shut up in Impostumes, is taken away by opening the Impo∣stume; which is done with Iron or actual fire, or by a potential Cautery; of which a little after. That which sticks to Ulcers is taken away with Sarcoticks, of which we shall speak in the cure of Ulcers. That which is poured forth into other Cavities, as into the sharp Artery, is taken away with such things as cut and cleanse, Clots of Blood are to be dissolved by Remedies that are else∣where set down and are to be evacuat∣ed by purging the Belly, also by Urin, Spittle, for the situation of the part affected, by Purgations and Diureticks, and expectorating Medicaments set down before. Also such Remedies as dissolve Clotted Milk and discuss it, are evident by those things that have been said.
Things that stick in the Gullet, if they can be seen, let them be drawn out with Iron Instruments; if they re∣move the least from their place, by Sternutation, Coughing, or vomit provoked by putting in the Finger, or a Feather into the Throat; also by drinking plentifully, or by swallowing down some solid Gobbet not much chewed and lastly by swallowing down a spounge, first dipt in Rozin, that the thing may stick to it, and then drawn up again by a long thred tied to it. If Hairs and other things that come from without, appear, they must be taken out with Chirurgions Instru∣ments; if they be hid in the Stomach and Intestins, they are driven out by vomit or purging, as the sick is incli∣ned. Concerning such things as Purge the Belly, and drive out the excrements, and further concerning Remedies against stones and worms, and such as discuss abundant and gross vapours, we spake, amongst the Remedies that take away the cause of the Disease. Obstruction from fullness, or abun∣dance
of Blood, is taken away by a thin diet, that is not of the best and much Juyce; by strong exercise, and much rubbing, as by Medicaments that dry the whole Body; and by sensible Eva∣cuations, namely opening the Veins, Scarifications, Cupping with scarifying, Leeches. Bad Humors that are many, thick and clammy, by which frequently the Me∣senterium, the Liver, Spleen, Matrix, Reins, and Veins and arteries of other parts are stopped; require Medica∣ments, first that are cutting, attenua∣ting, and cleansing, lastly Purging. Concerning Purging medicaments, we spake abundantly at the beginning; those are of another kind, that are set down for to prepare gross Humors, but because these that unstop the passages are of larger extent than such as pre∣pare the Humors, and there is a very frequent use of them in the cure of Feavers, Hypochondriacal Melancho∣ly, the cure of the Spleen, Jaundice, the want of the Terms; it wil be worth our pains, to Reckon them up more distinctly, and to set them down in
three ranks, namely cold, temperate and hot, that so the choice of them may be the more easy. Cold Remedies that unstop, are con∣venient in the more acute Feavers, parts that are hot, and obstructed by Humors thickned by adustion; a∣mongst which the most Obvious are, Sorrel, Juyce of Citrons and Lemmons that are sufficiently ripe, Succory, En∣dive, Straw-berries, Roots of Grass, Liver-wort, Hawkweed, the Roots of all the Docks, Seeds of Melons, Pom∣pions, Citruls, Cucumbers, gourds, Sow-Thistle, Garden Endive, Dandelion, four Trifoyl. Of these; are made Decoctions with water or Broth, for Syrups, which will be the better; if you add an Emulsion of the four great cold Seeds. Whey of Milk Clarified is effectual by it self, but it is made most effectual by adding an Emulsion of the said Seeds, or if it be altered with opening Herbs. The Clarified Juyce of Herbs is mingled with Broth for a present Syrup, to two or three ounces, the greatest use
of the Juyce of Citrons or Lemmons is in meats and Medicaments, as also of the Emulsions of the Seeds of Melons and Gourds, as also those more Liquid Panadoes, and Ptisans of Barley, as they are commonly called. For ordinary drink, the Decoction of sour Trifoyl is pleasant enough, of Sor∣rel, Straw-berries, and Grass, which may be made more sharp, adding a quantity of the Juyce of Citrons or Lemmons. But this is the thing that is most ne∣cessary, which sour Roots perform, to deceive the sick withall, that one still calling for drink, that they make the water sharp, and it may be made of the colour of Red Wine. Those that are most temperate, wherein there is no notable excess, of heat or cold that can be observed, are most convenient for Chronical Feavers, from the adustion of Humors, which is grown cold: also for Melancholick Doseases, namely for Hypochondriacal Melancholy, and such as are grown hard: amongst simples, such are, Mai∣den Hair, Waters of sour Mineralls,
Hops, Liquoris, Trichomanes, five Leave Grass, all which are added to the Decoctions of the other cold Ingre∣dients. Many more Compounds may be made for every Mans desire: for cold things mingled with those that are equally hot, in the same proportion, do make temperate. For this end, sometime Clarified Whey is altered, with Egrimony, Roots of Asarum, Dodder, with a little worm∣wood, than which, there is nothing more profitable for the affects and Dis∣eases of Melancholy. The same way may be given the Juyce of Succory thickned with the Juyce of Agrimony, and a little prepa∣red steel, to be taken in Bolus before any opening Decoction. Also Honey and Sugar added to the Juyces and opening Decoctions of cold things, make temperate Reme∣dies. For this purpose especially two com∣mon Syrups do serve, that are easy to be prepared, namely Oxymel Simplex, & simple Syrup of vineger, which consist of
one part of Vineger, two parts of Ho∣ney or Sugar, and one fourth part of water. But the three following Remedies of this rank are the best, and easy to be made. First Smiths Water Clarified for ordi∣nary drink; with Water is made a weaker Mulsum, adding half as much of Honey or Sugar. The second: one scruple of Cremor Tartar to one dram, added to opening Broths. Thirdly: prepared steel, without which, Schirrous hardness, and obsti∣nate obstructions will hardly be Remo∣ved. The use of these is manifold, and so is the preparation: the most easy, and the soonest made, and the best, is this. Let steel be beaten into thin and long Rods, or little Plates: for by putting to them a roul of Brimstone they will melt, and fall into the Water that is put under them, and then they must be ground into a most fine Pouder; this Pouder is given from half a scruple to
two scruples or thereabouts, either in Bolus, Electuary or Wine. The fashion of a Bolus is this. Take Juyce of Egrimony, Borrage thick∣ned, of each one ounce, Steel prepared two scru∣ples. Make them for two Boluses, to be taken a little before an opening De∣coction. The Electuary is thus. Take the Pouder of Egrimony, Maiden-Hair, Stone-fern, Harts Tongue, Roots of Cinkfoyl, Eiquoris, steel prepared, Leaves of Senna, of each one ounce, Cinnamon one dram & an half, the pulp of Raysins Boyled in white Wine, and pulped through a Hair Sive, one pound, Syrup of Apples only, or for the Poor, Oxymel simple, two pound. Mingle them for an Electuary according to art, to be taken to about one ounce, four hours before Dinner. It is given in Wine two waies, either drinking the fine Pouder of steel ming∣led with Wine, or preparing steeled Wine. This will be an excellent Pouder for one Dose. Take prepared steel and Cremor Tartar of each one scruple, Cinnamon half a scruple.
Mingle them for a Pouder. Steeled Wine will be made, if in four pound of Fragrant white Wine; you put in steel prepared and Leaves of Senna, of each one ounce, Cinnamon two drams, opening Herbs, and pro∣per for the part obstructed, three hand∣fulls, let them stand eight daies in a hot place, and stirr them often; strain them for your use, and give two or three ounces to drink; also a most ex∣cellent steeled Syrup may be prepared after this fashion. Take prepared steel so much as you please, pour upon it the sharpest vineger, that it may swim above it four Fingers breadth, & let it stand in a hot place, un∣til it hath drawn out the tincture of the steel: then by inclining the Vessel, pour it from the grounds: and to this Sugar, or Honey Clarified, the double propor∣tion; moreover half an ounce of Ray∣sins, and one pugil of the tops of worm∣wood to every pound of Vineger, Boyl them at a genle fire to the consistence of a Syrup, then strain them, the Dose is one ounce, with a Deeoction that is proper for the part affected.
Those things that are applyed out∣wardly must be mingled of softners and discussers; such are the Fomentations of the Decoction of Mallows, Marsh∣mallows, Melilot, Foenugreek, Dill, Chamomel, and a quantity of worm∣wood, to Corroborate the part; ad∣ding about the end of the Decoction, some white Wine, and Vineger to help the Penetration. After the Fomentation; make an Oyntment of Oyl prepared by Decocti∣on, of things aforesaid, such as is des∣cribed amonst those that soften hard∣ness. The hotter things that unstop, are convenient for a cold temper, and a cold time, as also for long Agues; such are these common simples: wormwood, Egrimony, Smallage, Mugwort, Aspa∣ragus, Betony, chiefly the Root of Capers, the Rind, Stone-fern, German∣der, Dodder, common wild Carrot Seed, Root of Elecampane, Fennel, Rind of Ash, Fumitory, the common and the Yellow, Root of Gentian, Harts-Tongue, Fetherfew, white Horehound, or wild Mints, Parsley, Penniroyal,
Madder, Knee-Holm, Tamarisk, Sa∣vory, in the use whereof, those must alwaies be chosen, that are proper for the parts affected, and are propounded amongst the alteratives. Also Syrups and Electuaries and De∣coctions are made of those things we have spoken of, as the occasion shall be. The Decoctions are made the more effectual in the Broth of an old Cock or Pidgeon, if you can procure it. Also Physick Wines are supposed to be best, as wormwood Wine, when the weakness of the Bowels is of long con∣tinuance; and of these Wines, adding half the quantity of Clarified Honey, are made Syrups that are profitable and pleasing; but the Wines are made most effectual, adding steel to them, as we shewed before. A something ful Mulsum will be the best to drink, if it be altered with the Herbs propounded: as also al com∣pound Oxymels made with the same for a Syrup, such as is the ordinary Syrup of the Apothecaries, made with the five opening Roots, Smallage,
Asparagus, Fennel, Parlley, Butchers Broom. Also the use of Vineger of Squils is extolled, added to Syrups and Decocti∣ons, to half a Spoonful. Some there are that prefer before all these, the use of the Root of Cuc∣kowpint, often infused in Wine, and stil dryed again, til it hath lost almost al its Tartness. It may be also added to Electuaries, but the fine Pouder of it is oftner used, given with Wine or Broth. The fashion of it may be Thus. Take preparedsteel and Wake-Robin pre∣pared, of each half an ounce, Cinnamon one dram and an half, Fennel Seed half a dram, fine Sugar one ounce. Mingle them. It is made more effectual by adding to it, one dram of Salt of wormwood: make a very fine Pouder, the Dose whereof is about one dram. Or, Take Cuckowpint prepared one ounce, tops of common Wormwood (Salt of Worm∣wood is far Better) one dram, Cinnamon one dram and an half, fine Sugar to the weight of them all. Mingle them and make a Pou∣der.
By themselves mineral Waters that come from Brimstone do open excee∣dingly, and from Nitre, drank after that the whole Body hath been purged: as also common Turpentine given in Bolus, about one dram and an half, which also may be drank, If it be stirred with a little of the Yolk of an Egg, and the Water of Egrimony, or Wine be put to it, by little and a little to two or three ounces, alwaies stirring it, til it be perfectly white. Outwardly Fomentations may be used of the Decoctions of digestives and Emollients, adding about the end of the Decoction, white Wine and Vi∣neger, not forgetting Herbs that are proper for the part affected, of which al∣so Oyls may be made by Decoction, for Oyntments. Bucheting and droppings of Waters that proceed from Brimstone are the most excellent, and such as proceed from Pitch, and the mud of the same, applyed as they ought to be. Constipation of the Cavities, is pro∣perly called streightness that grows from things that are bred within, and
stick to the part, namely, from Tumors, Flesh, a Callous, or dead Child. Things that drive out the dead Child, were propounded amongst the Remedies of the Cause that is peccant in substance. We shall treat of Tumors amongst the Deseases of augmented Magni∣tude. Flesh and a Callous, as they are not hard to be taken away with Instru∣ments of Iron, when they may be seen, so they are taken away only with Physicks, and that with much more difficulty, when they are hid within the Body: and since Flesh is softer than a Callous is, it requireth more mild Remedies that either dry strongly, or heat very gently; but a Callous requries, either Corroders, or such as putrefie. Therefore for flesh these are conve∣nient, round Aristolochia Roots, Anti∣mony Calcined, Roots of Black Helle∣bore, burnt Allum, burnt Galls, the Ashes of burnt Honey, common Red Lead, Ashes of Roots of Gentian, Oy∣ster Shells, especially such as are burnt,
Lead Calcined with Brimstone, the Ashes of burnt Spunges; the Pouders of all these are mingled with Unguents, or infused in Liquors. The following Oyntment is appro∣ved for excrescences of flesh; but first of all, it takes away little flesh in the urinary passages, and that without pain, if it be put on the end of a Candle, for it sticks very fast, and doth not ex∣coriate the parts that are sound. Take Honey burnt to Ashes, prepared Tutty, fresh butter washed, washed Turpen∣tine, Yellow Wax, of each half an ounce; burnt Allum half a dram. Mingle them and make a Liniment according to Art. This Pouder also is excellent descri∣bed by Mercatus, Lib. 2. de recto Praesi∣dior. usu. Cap. 7. Take Verdigrease, Auripigment, Vitriol and Roch-Allum, of each equal parts. Bray them with the sharpest Vineger, and make them into fine Pouder, and set them in the Sun in the dog daies; the Pouder being dried, must again be made fine with Vineger poured on, and put into the Sun the second time, and this must be done for the space of ten daies; then:
Take Litharge of Gold, poudered and sifted, one part: Oyl of Roses two parts. Boyl them to the consistence of a Plaister; take an equal part of this, and mingle with the said Pouder for your use. Also this Pouder takes away all Ex∣crescences, by Certain proof. Take the Shells of Walnuts, Spunges, Roots of round Aristolochia, of each equal parts. Let them be dried together in a Pot put into an Oven, that they may be beaten into Pouder; and with this Pouder strew over the part affected, first anointed with Honey. These take away Callous matter, amongst the most common Remedies, Orpiment, Spanish Green, Quick-Lime, Lees of Wine burnt, Lees of Vineger burnt, burnt Vitriol, Oyl of Brimstone and Vitriol. All these things in use, are tempered with milder Remedies, some∣times in greater, some times in lesser quantity, as need requires. An Example of them in Infusion. Take the Decoction of round Aristolochia, Black Hellebore, Marsh-mallow Roots, half a pound, Oyl of Brimstone or Vitriol half a scruple. Mingle it for an Infusion.
For an Uncrion: Take burnt Vitriol, and Allum burnt, of each one dram: fresh Butter very wel washed half an ounce. Mingle them. If you add the Pouder of white Pop∣py Seed, or Henbane, you make a Remedy wholly without Pain. The Pouder of Mereatus used by it self is most effectual. This is exceeding good that is more easy to provide. Work Quick-Lime with Honey, like a past, and dry it in an Oven, that it may be beaten to Pouder, to be strewed upon any Callous or su∣perfluous Flesh, first anointed with Honey. Compression of the passages, since it comes from al things that press upon the passages, and by any intervenient thrusting either of Heaviness or Exten∣sion, or Violent impulsion, or astriction, it hath no peculiar Remedies; for heavi∣ness & extension, proceed from the plen∣ty of matter, and are taken away with such Remedies as Evacuate sensibly, or insensibly; of which we spake be∣fore. Extension from wind is removed with discussers.
Violent impulsion frequently followes Luxations, depressions, and fractures of the Bones, which are cured by Chi∣rurgery. Violent Astriction, follows most commonly outward causes: as bands bound too fast, which must be untied. Growing together of the passages, is made by a mutual Glewing together of the sides, when Nature fills up the wounds of them by the coming of good Blood thither; and this is cured only by an incision Knife, or Iron Instru∣ment that can part the sides that are Glewed: but after seperation, the sides must be well fenced, that they may neither touch one the other, or grow together again; therefore the growing together of the inward parts is incurable because they cannot be cut. The sinking down of the Cavity, if it fal out by reason of Evacuation of the matter that should be contained within it, it is cured by Nutriment only to re-generate necessary matter. If it proceed by reason that the sides of the Cavities are contracted by over∣much
driness, or fal down by over∣much Relaxation, it is cured by moisture, or great driers, for moist∣ning, the more gentle emollients are convenient, and such as are properly called Anodines, propounded in their proper places; for drying digestives and discussers are most fit, being ming∣led with astringents, the most forcible that were set down before. When the superficies is too plain it is taken away with Remedies that scour, and then with driers. Things that scour, are all such that were propounded for to prepare Flegm. To take away obstruction, by the stuffing in of gross and Clammy Hu∣mors, and to scour the Skin, natural Salt waters have a kind of prerogative, and artificial waters also, and Honey added to Decoctions which are princi∣pally made of bitter things, as the Roots of Gentian, Elecampane, long Aristolochia, and Centory the less. For drying, things that Evacuate insensibly are most fit, being mingled with the strongest astringents, of which before.
When the superficies is rough, it is cured with softners, and such as are properly called Anodines, when it proceeds from driness: but particu∣larly the roughness of the Throat, and the top of the sharp Artery, which fals out very frequently, is cured by those things that Purge the breast by Spit∣ting, which are propounded for Salt matter. But if it proceed from sharp Biting matter that lightly Rakes the superfi∣cies, it is taken away by such Medi∣caments that temper sharp Humors, both by washing them away, as also by suppling them with a tempering vertu; of which we spake amongst the Reme∣dies that alter the cause of the Disease. Remedies of Diseases in faulty Magnitude. Natural Magnitude, is made faulty, either by excess or defect, when it is augmented beyond its proportion, or els diminished. The kinds of Magnitude
diminished, are reckoned to be, Defect of Nourishment, or Leanness of all the parts, and Marasmus, or a Consumption of the whole Body, following a Hectick Feaver, or wasting away; for Leanness of those that recover after sharp Dis∣eases, scarse deserves the name of a Disease, because it quickly goes away, so soon as the Disease on which it de∣pended, is removed. Of Magnitude increased, which men call Tumors, all the differences are taken from the cause, which in general is four fold. The first is a solid Body according to substance, belonging to the soundness of the Body, whence come grossness, from overmuch fat; Hypersarcosis, from some excrescence of flesh, Ruptures of the Bowels, and the Caul, when the Guts or the Caul fal down, which also makes a Disease in scituation. The second is a Humor, or some thing like to a Humor, whence comes that they call Phlegmne, from Blood, Oedema from Fleam, Erysipelus from Choller, Schirrus from Melancholy, a kind whereof is Tophus, and Struma,
Cancer, from Black choler, Carbuncle from burnt Blood; and from a watery matter like to a Humor, Hydrocephalus, & the Dropsie of the Abdomen, and the Matrix. The third is, that which comes Preter∣naturally from the Humors, as puffing up from wind. The fourth is, that which growes in the whole kind Preternaturally, from a various and unspeakable corruption of the Humors, whence comes properly an Impostume, or little Swelling with a little Bag, namely Meliceris, from a matter like to Honey, Steatoma, from a fat matter like to Sewet, and Athero∣ma from a matter like to Gruel. A particular Consumption, such as falls upon those parts that are held with a Palsie and Convulsions, requires first such Remedies as can Purge out the foulness of the Body by the passages convenient: then Nourishments that can make good Blood; lastly attractives that draw Blood to the part, and can stirr up the heat of it and strengthen it. Gentle rubbings til the part wax red,
and Swel a little, will perform all these. Also Baths of sweet water something hot, wherein Herbs are Boyled, proper for the part, to be used til the part Swell a little. Or Fomentations, and Wettings with water and Oyl, Milk, sweet Wa∣ters, altered with Mallows, Marsh∣mallows, and Herbs that respect that part. Last of all, the most prevalent Re∣medy is pication, til the part wax red and swell: and these things are to be done, after concoction, before any more meat be eaten. In a Consumption of the Eyes, there remains no place for pications or rub∣bings, but only, for Fomentations; the best whereof are made with Milk a little Saffron, or of the same Boyled with Mallows, Violets, Marsh-mallows, and Fennel, or with a sweet Apple, brought to the form of a soft Cataplasm, with a little Saffron. A hot Marasmus without a Consump∣tion, which is curable, is chiefly over∣come with the use of Milk and Baths:
Womens Milk sucked out of the Breasts, or Asses Milk, or Goats Milk new milked drank with a little Honey or Sugar, taking by degrees from three ounces, to seven or eight ounces; about five hours after the drinking of Milk, a Bath of sweet Water is to be used, which must be kept somthing hot til the time the sick come forth of it; and then is he to stay a while til he is a little cold with it, for the uniting of heat, and retaining of Nourishment; or presently after the Bath, the Body must be gent∣ly rubbed with the Palm of the Hand, wet with Oyl of Violets and sweet Almonds, somthing cold. If there be a Consumption the Bath must be let alone, and the Body must be rubbed only before meat, after the manner we now spake of, and he must apply him∣self to Milk, and he must use also such Remedies as concern the Ulcer of the Lungs. If the use of Milk be forbidden by reason of the causes set down in the 5. Aph. 65. He must use instead thereof a Ptisan of Barley. Some hold this Ptisan for a secret, which is presently provided, and
must be taken twice a day. Take Barley Meal six parts, fine Sugar one part. Place them bed upon bed in a Glased Earthen Pot, and the first and last bed must be Sugar: then making a Cover of Past, put it into the Oven after the Bread is drawn forth. And it will be baked sufficiently the third time, or putting of it into the Oven. For a Ptisan. Take of this baked Meal two ounces, Broth of wood Snails, or Snails four ounces. Mingle them. But for an Ulcer of the Lungs in par∣ticular this is commended. Take one dram of the Pouder of Yarrow, dayly in Broth or some convenient De∣coction. Also a Cake of dried Folefoot taken dayly made with Butter and Sewet of a Hog. Some prefer Sugar of Roses with Bole-Armoniack, or some such Medi∣cinal earth, and the Blood-stone used for some months together, above all other Remedies. Gross Bodies are brought lean, af∣ter
fit Evacuation of the Body. First, with a thin diet, and many hot and frequent rubbings of their Body, then by the daily use of some attenua∣ting and drying Remedies, amongst which, the most commended are, one dram of Ash Keys in Broth, with half an ounce of the best Vineger, or one Spoonful of Vineger of Squills, in a good quantity of Broth before meat; some ascribe the same vertue to Oxy∣mel of Squils, or the Troches of Squils. Also the Seed of Ameos, or the Seed that is in Elder berries can do as much, taken to half a dram, drank in the De∣coction of the Ash. But the greatest force lieth in the Pouder of Vipers to dry the Body, of which we spake amongst the Antidotes, if half a dram of it be taken in Broth or Wine, four hours before meat, and so much the more if the Body be lustily exercised after the taking of it. To this place belong all things that provoke sweat and Urin. Those Remedies take away excres∣cences
of flesh, be they from a Callous or flesh, that are Remedies of Consti∣pation, of which we spake before. A Hernia of the Caul, can be taken away by no other means than by cut∣ting, which is ful of danger, it can hardly be helped by streight Ligature. But a Hernia of the Intestins is easily Glewed together in Children and Boys, with outward use of astringents and fit Ligature. But in people that are of years, if it be Old, it is held hitherto by Physitians to be incurable, without Chirurgery: yet use, that is the best master of things, and Judg of Reme∣dies, hath taught us not long since; that the Ruptures of men of years, and that very great ones, and of long continu∣ance, have grown together by the use of Medicaments only, and a convenient course of diet, and that within three∣score daies at the longest, in manly and in Old Age; but in forty daies in Yong men, and at mans stature; by the help of which Remedies, Boys are cured within twenty daies: unless the falling of the Intestins into the Cods be very great, and all most grown Habitual.
And these Remedies may be Ranked amongst those, that are easie to be pre∣pared, since they are compounded of a few things, and those, not fetcht from forrein Countries, only one excep∣ted, The first is this: Take one dram of the Herb Two-blade, in half a Cup of red Wine, Boyled with the Leaves of the same Plant, every morning five hours before dinner. And let the place affected, be dayly anoynted with Oyl of four Olives, wherein a whole land Hedg-Hog that is Old, hath been Boyled, with his Skin and al, til the flesh be consumed. The second. Take for threescore daies one Cup of strong red Wine, altered with one ounce, of Rupture-wort (the whole Herb with the Roots must be taken, and the tendrest can be got) first bruised, and during the said time, a Spunge must be laid to the place affected; that is first dipped into the same red Wine, and then pressed out. The third. Take one dram of Pou∣der, of equal portions, of Rupture wort,
Wall-Rue and Asparagus and Horse-Tail, in half a Cup of strong Red Wine, for the time spoken of before; and let the place be anointed twice every day, with common Oyl or Oyl of St. Johns-wort, wherein live Lizards, by long standing of it in the Sun, are con∣sumed. The fourth. Let a Cerate be laid on, made of equal parts of Bdellium and poudered Aloes with the white of an Egg; and the same time let the sick take one dram of the Pouder following in half a Cup of the best Red Wine, five hours before Dinner. Take Roots of great Comfrey, Herb Ben∣net, common Hedg-Hysop, the less, Two-Blade, Horse-Tayl, Coriander prepared, Juyce of Roses, steel prepared with Rose water, of each one ounce and an half. Mingle them, and make a fine Pouder of them all. The preparing of the steel is this. That the filings of Steel or Iron, be quen∣ched in Rose Water, and then dryed in the shade, and then again be set on fire, and quenched a-fresh in the same Water, until it can be poudered very fine.
But in the use of these Medicaments, this rule is generally to be observed: that a Truss be constantly worn, and the sick must take care he hold not his breath, nor use strong exercise, nor eat or drink, meats or drinks that are windy. Remedies for Tumors that proceed from Humors, are manifest by what hath been said, since they must be di∣rected to the taking away of the cause, which must be repulsed at the first: but in the augmentation, they must partly repel, and partly digest; in the state, they must digest, or if it can be, bring to suppuration: but a Tumor that is very hard, must first be acurately soft∣ned, then digested and dissolved. Therefore some few things shall here be only annexed, that are found to be proved for some Tumors, and are Re∣medies easie to come by. For an Erisipulas of any part whatso∣ever. Take fine Wheat flower so much as you please, put it into a bag of thin Weaving, and lay it to the part, at any time of the Defluxion.
For kibes that are Ulcerated: this is a most excellent Unguent. Take Leaves of green Tobacco, the inward, Rind of the Elder, of each one handful, Roots of the Male Daffodil sliced, one ounce, common Oyl one pound; Boyl all at a gentle fire, til all the moisture be consumed, then press all out strongly, and add Frankin∣sence finely poudered half an ounce, Yellow Wax six drams. Mingle them for a Lini∣ment, and anoint the part affected with∣in: then for Fingers that are pained, let it be rubbed strongly on them til they grow very red and hot. This is also good for fowlness of the Skin and for Morphews. Against the swelling of the Feet from weariness, long Disease or contu∣sion. Take the Meal of whole Wheat (that is not sifted) half a pound, pouder of worm∣wood half an ounce, Roses one ounce, sharp Red Wine what may be sufficient. Make a Cataplasm at a soft fire: adding about the end, compleat Oyl of Roses one ounce and an half. Marke an Unguent. Lay it on twice a day. For hard swellings not Ulcerated, a
singular Remedy  purging of the Body: give for four daies together one dram of the Pouder of common Gladiol, which groweth most frequent∣ly amongst Corn, and take it in Broth altered with the Root of Pilewort, four hours before meat. And lay upon the part, a Plaister of bruised new Wax, not yet purified from the Bees and the Honey: but if you cannot have it, then lay this Cerate. Take the Pouder of Lizards dried in an Oven, one dram and an half, Juyce of Tobac∣co, Yellow Wax and Burgundy itch, of each half an ounce. Mingle them and make a Cerate, in the place of Burgundy Pitch, which is rare in Italy, take Colo∣phonia. For a Cancer not Ulcerated, that is not yet come to any notable Magni∣tude; nothing is better than the long using of the Plaister of Aquapen∣dente, after a sufficient purging of the Body. Take Meal of Millet one pound, Oyl of Rses (worked in a Morter of Lead with a Leaden Pestle, til it become of the
colour of Lead) sive ounces, sweet Wine four ounces. Make them to a Plaister, with a sufficient quantity of the Decoction of Garden Night-shade, Sowthistle, and Golden-Rod of each alike, made in pure Water. For watery and windy Tumors, Re∣medies propounded amongst things that discuss, are proper. An Impostume with a little bag, is not cured by Physical means only, but the whole Bag must be drawn forth; or if that cannot be done, after the Tumor is opened, it is to be consumed, partly with putrefying Remedies, partly with eating Causticks; of which we have Spoken already. Remedies for Diseases in Number. Since that a Disease in number Wan∣ting, is made to be according to the de∣fect of something belonging to the complement of the Living, a Disease in number Augmented must properly be considered, according to the additi∣on
of some natural thing, that is Re∣dundant in number. Yet by use and abuse of names, Stones, Worms; a Pin and Web are referred also to Diseases in number. Remedies for Worms and Stones are to be found amongst these things, which respect the cause from the whole sub∣stance. For a Pin and Web, these amongst Remedies easie to come by, are the most convenient, being applyed Warm to the Eye, but especially by the help of an Ocular Cupping Glass; that the Remedy may work longer and stron∣ger. Take Herbs, Celondine, Fennel, Vervain Rue, of each one handful; Honey of Roses half a pound, of Rape Roots bruised two ounces. Stamp the Herbs and set all mingled together in the Sun, and let them be stirred daily; after forty daies press out the Juyce, to be kept for use in a Brasen Vessel, and drop it into the Eye by it self, or mingle it with more gentle Eye-Salves. Another. Take fine poudered Sugar, Boyled in a Glass Dish upon Ashes, til it
wax Red, likewise Vitriol purged from the dregs, and exposed to the Sun til it Wax white, of each equal parts; with this Pouder fill the hollow of an Egg Boyled til it be hard, then binding both parts of the Egg fast toge∣ther, steep it four daies in water of Eye-bright, or white Wine that is somthing sweet; wherein Eye-bright hath first been Boyled, or Seeds of Fennel or Siler Montanum, keep the Liquor pressed out, in a Glass for your use. Another. Take white Wine somewhat sweet very well purged and Clarified, one pound, Fennel Seed three drams, Indian Cloves one dram and an half. Steep them for twenty four hours, then strain them: to which add afterwards Aqua vitae two ounces, Antimony once melted, with an equal quantity of Salt Peeter, two drams; then infuse them again for two daies, then keep them for your use in a Glass Ves∣sel. Another. Take the Juyce of Onions, drop it in by it self, or else allaied with a little sweet white Wine. It is a most excellent Eye-Salve and which won∣derfully takes away the inflammation
of the Eye, when there is any. Also there is a singular Collyrium described amongst the Remedies for the Eyes, which when need is, may be made me effectual, by mingling some kind of Gall with it, or of the second Collyrium that was propounded, or the Juyce of a white Onion lightly Boy∣led with Milk. But a Disease that is properly in number augmented, which followeth abundance of matter, and the strength of the Plastick faculty is better cured by burning and cutting, than by con∣suming Medicaments. A Disease in number deficient, if it be natural, is altogether incurable, be∣cause it proceeds from want of matter, and the weakness of the forming force, also an accidental deficient, if it fal out in a Spermatical part, it is incurable; but in a fleshy part somtime it admits of cure. It requires the same Remedies that an hollow Ulcer doth, or a Com∣pound wound, because the part is wanting by the same causes, namely, cutting, burning, Corroding, putrefa∣ction, and the like.
Remedies of Diseases in Situation and Connexion. A Disease in situation and Connexi∣on, is either Connatural, and it comes to pass, when the matter is taken away in the time of forming, or it is acci∣dental, and falls out usually by rea∣son of three kind of causes, from Lax∣ation, or disjoynting of the Continent parts, from solution of unity, and Violent extension from too much Re∣pletion, or drivers. The fault of the Plastick quantity admits of no cure. The other three causes require the same Remedies, that a Disease in figure doth, which doth necessarily accom∣pany a Disease in sctuation. Remedies of Diseases in dissolved Ʋnity. Of dissolved unity there may be as∣signed
two chief kinds, an Ulcer, and a wound. That comes from an eating cause, and so must necessarily have joyned with it, loss of substance. A wound, is all other kinds of dissol∣ved unity, without an eating cause; whether it be a simple solution of uni∣ty, or with loss of substance, as in a Com∣pound wound. And though for the diversity of parts, often times all these things are changed (for an Ulcer in the bone is called rot∣tenness, a wound fracture, when the Nerves are brok, it is called convul∣sion, when they are pricked, Puncture, and when the flesh is bruised, men call it contusion) yet stil they hold the same nature, so they differ not in generation; for whatsoever Ulcer proceeds from a sharp and corroding matter, such as are the Humors, and sharp Bloody mat∣ter, harsh Poysons, and Medicaments that are putrefactive, and causticks, ac∣tual fire, corruption, moisture, into which the substance corrupted is dis∣solved, as in a Gangrene: al other causes that dissolve the continnity, by cutting,
breaking, Knocking, Contusion, they make a wound only taken in a large sence. A simple wound, or solution of con∣tinuity without loss of substance; is cured by Glutinative Medicaments, which by drying, Binding, Sticking, force the lips of the wound together, and bind them fast: which Union can∣not be made immediately in the Bones, because of their hardness, but it is made by the means of a Callous, the matter whereof, glewing nourishments afford. But fractures are fastened and con∣firmed by the same glewing Remedies, of which there are two ranks, such as are moderate, and such as are forcible: those belong to a aprt and constitution that are moist, these belong to parts & constitutions that are more dry, and to a Bloody wound. Moderate Glutinatives; the most Obvious are: the white of an Egg, St. Peters-wort, Tutsane, Yarrow, Shep∣heards-purse, the fruit of Creeping-Balsam, new Cheese, and Glew made of it, Horse-Tail, Herb Bennet, Cistus,
Flower of the Sun, the Grass Ischaemon, Plum-Tree Gum, ground Ivy. The Herb Siciliana, Herb Trinity, St Johns-wort, Adders Tongue, Yarrow, Leaves of Medlars, Ophris, Plantain, wild Pears, Damask Roses, the Bramble, the Male Sanicle, Germander, Scabious, Veronica, Golden-Rod, Leaves of Elms Of these, may be made vulnerary drinks: also they may be given inward∣ly in other forms. They are laid on outwardly either bruised, or strewed on in Pouders, or pressed out and dropped in, or Boyled, chiefly in sharp Red Wine, and their operation is helped by Ligature, by which the Lips of the wound united are held together. There are some other things, where∣by wounds that are simple and new, are presently joyned together, applyed by themselves & bound on; namely Rosin of the Larch or the Firr-Tree, Pellitory of the Wall bruised the bruised Leaves of Tobacco, dry Pitch, spotted Ars∣mart, beaten Oyl made by insolation, or the Leaves of Adders Tongue, or
the fruit of the Balsam Apple. But the chief of all, and like to a west Indian Balsam, (than which to knit wounds together, there is nothing bet∣ter) is the Oyl that is drawn out of the flowers of St. Johns-wort, shut into a Glass, and made by heat of the Sun beams, by descent. Also Earth Worms washed in Black Wine and beaten, are good: also amongst easie to be provid∣ed, may be set down that they call Oleum Hispanum, described in the five Books of Chirurgery of Aquapendente; by which in twenty four hours time, wounds are said to be healed. These Glew together Violently; Lions-Foot, the flowers of flower-gen∣tle, middle Comfrey, the less Comfrey, unripe Galls, all the Cranes Bills, but chiefly Pidgeons Foot, Hypocistis, Hares-Foot, Rinds of Pomegranates, Leaves of the Olive, chiefly the wood Olive Tree, Mouse-ear, Knot-Grass, Juyce of Sloes, the tender Leaves of Oaks, Stone-Comfrey of Lobelius, Dog-berry Tree. The way of dispensing of all these is the same with the former.
Outwardly, the flew of a hare burnt, Asses dung, burnt Spunges, and brought to Pouder, and Honey Suckles used what way soever. But if the part be only contused, without any sensible solution: corro∣boratives are convenient, mixt with digesters and anodines: of this kind is Lead beaten with Wormwood, Worm∣wood heated on a Tile and sprinkled with Vineger, bean Meal with sweet Wine made into the form of a Cata∣plasm; also Flower of Wheat together, with Black Wine, Pouder of Roses, Wormwood and Oyl of Roses for a Cataplasm. Arsmart bruised and sprinkled with hot Wine, Fomentations of hot Water, especially Sea water altered with Wormwood. Moreover this Liniment is the best of all to heal all contusions, which wonderfully also asswageth the pain of the Swoln Hemroids, and takes away the pain of the Teeth, being softly rubbed on the Gums. Take common Oyl one pound, the Mar∣row of an Ox Leg, Yellow Wax, Bosin of the
Firr-Tree, or Pitch (vulgarly called Rose,) of each three ounces: fresh But∣ter four ounces. Let them all melt at a soft fire, and when the Marrow is melted take them off. An Ulcer is either superficial, or deeper. That is, either actually so, when the top of the Skin is wanting, as the fret∣tings in Children; or is potential, that by the force of an external cause quickly comes to be so, unless it be hindered, as is burning, which if it be presently helped there followeth no Ulcer. A superficial Ulcer is cured with the more mild inducers of a Cicatrize: burnings are cured with the same when the Bladders are broken. But you may keep the part unhurt, if you lay on these things that follow, in time: namely writing Ink, Liquid Vernish applyed with a very soft cloth: a whol Egg with Oyl of Roses, or stirred together by it self; Oyl made by Decoction of the middle Rind of Elders; white of an Egg very well beaten with Vineger, adding a littie raw Allum to it.
These two following Uuguents are the most excellent; with the former, of which the parts being anointed, you may handle fire without any harm. Take the Juyce pressed out of the Marsh∣mallows, Roots, and all, six ounces: Oyl of El∣der four ounces, Crude Roch Allum one ounce. Boyl them at a gentle fire to a mean consistence, add new Wax one ounce and an half, mingle them. The second. Take common Oyl, three ounces, new Wax one ounce and an half, Yolks of Eggs rosted under the Ashes, in number two. Dissolve them and mingle them, til they become like an Unguent, spread it on a Cloth, and renew it twice a day. Also an Unguent of Ising-Glass is much commended, and of Allum Plum∣beum, mingled with Vineger in equal quantities. Also Juyce of Marsh mallows wrought with the white of an Egg. A deep wound must first be filled with flesh, with Remedies called Sarcoticks, which do scowr away the thick excre∣ments of the part, and consume the thin; then we must bring it to Cicatrize with
Epuloticks, which by their great drying, do not only consume the excrements, but the Blood also, and do harden the upper Superficies of the Ulcer, and do as it were turn it into Skin. Sarcoticks, or Remedies that fil up the Ulcer, are as large, as there be differences of hollow Ulcers. For an Ulcer that is very moist, re∣quires Remedies that are very great driers, so that such Remedies as are convenient to Skin a plain Ulcer, are necessary to fil a hollow Ulcer that is over-moist, but an Ulcer that is very foul requires strong cleansers. But this is principally to be observed, that astringents be not mingled with great driers and scourers, for they will fasten the excrement to the Ulcer, and so make it more deep and spreading. Therfore there may be set two degrees of Sarcoticks; the mean, that belong to a soft part, and to an Ulcer that is not over-moist and foul: And the Violent, which agree to a drier part, and are fit for an Ulcer, that is very moist and foul. Moreover there is no hopes to fil up an Ulcer by the help of Sarcoticks,
unless those Impediments be first taken away, which hinder the Regeneration of the substance that was lost, as the Flux of any matter, that is ptenan in overmuch plenty, or ill quality, the distemper of the Ulcerated part, a cal∣lous bred in the Ulcer, or Rottenness of the Bone, corruption or destemper. These things take away the Flux, namely such as evacuate; make revul∣sion, repel, intercept, contemperate, and corroborate the parts affected, by the faultiness whereof the excrements are renewed, of which we spake before in the Remedies of the causes, and Dis∣eases of the similary parts. The dictemper of the ulcerated part, is corrected by contraries, of which we spake also: but in a Gangreen there is so great Humidity of the part and dis∣solution of the inbred heat, that there is need of an actual or a Potential fire; but of the two, the first works quicker, and strengthens the part more. For a Gangrene in beginning, or where there is danger thereof, as in great blows from great Guns, there is nothing better than the following Bal∣som,
if Lint be dipt into it and laid to the wound, with which also all foul Ul∣cers, if there be malignity in them, are happily cured. Take flowers of Brimstone three ounces, complete Oyl of Roses half a pound, the best Red Wine four ounces. Let them infuse for eight daies at a gentle fire, alwaies stir∣ring it til the Wine be consumed, then strain it, and dissolve therein two oun∣ces of the best Turpentine. Mingle them, and keep it for your use. Also for Ulcers that proceed from thin Choller, as smal Blisters, or such as eat not deep, and for an Ulcerate Erisipelex, when the Humidity of the part Joyned with Acrimony causeth great trouble in the cure; the follow∣ing Unguent of Elders profits excee∣dingly, for with it not only Ulcers of the similary parts, but burnings of al kinds, and almost al foulness of the Skin are cured. Take common Salt and the best Red Wine of each three ounces, dissolve the Salt in the Wine, then add of the middle Rind of the Elder half a pound, infuse them for two hours, then add compleat Oyl of Roses one
pound and an half. Boyl al at a gentle fire, til the moisture be almost consumed: then to the residue of the rind add fur∣ther, compound Oyl of Roses half a pound, Salt dissolved in Wine as before, half an ounce. Boyl them strongly til al the moisture be consumed, that the rind become dry and crumble, with this Oyl diligently presled out, Boyl Litharge of Gold prepared and sifted two ounces, to which being exactly. Boyled, add the foresaid Oyl, and let them Wax hot, last of all put in the following ingredients pulped through a Hair five together, namely, of the best Ceruss one ounce, Lead burnt with Brimstone and not washed seven ounces and an half, Yellow Wax what is suf∣ficient to make an Ʋnguent. A Callous is taken off most safely with a pair of Nippers, or with actual fire where it may be done; if it cannot, then it may be taken on with corroding Remedies, described amongst the means of thickning the Cavity: by the reason of this Impediment there do often remain incurable Fistulaes, which can∣not be cut, nor handled fitly every way by occessary Medicaments; for these the
following Balsom is convenient, where∣by the deep Fistulaes of the Anus and the Testicles have been often cured. It is thus easily prepared. Take Cranes Bill, or Pidgeons Foot cut, two ounces, Root of Flower de Luce very well washed three drams, Root of Black Hellebore prepared two drams, Wheat Corns one hand∣ful, bruise them grossely, and infuse them for one day, in one pound of sharp Red Wine; then add Oyl of St. Johns∣wort and Mirtills of each three ounces. Let them Boyl at a gentle fire til the moi∣sture be consumed: make expression and strain them, then add Bitumen, and Mirrh of each one dram and an half, Let them stand at a soft heat til they be perfectly melted, then add of Rosin of the Larch Tree and Firr Tree, (and if you can get it of occidental Balsam) of each one ounce. Mingle them at an easie fire and make a Balsom to be dropt into a Fistu∣la, and to be put in with Tents. To take away Spungy Flesh that abounds in an Ulcer, use the Remedies described for a Disease in constipation by Flesh and a Callous. Yet to these add the following
Pouder to make an Escar, whereby Malignant Ulcers (as Malignant Scro∣phalous matter, and ulcerated Cancers) if they be smal, and new are happily cured. Take the Root of great Serpentine, gathered in June, and cut in pieces and dried in the shade, and of white Arse∣nick of each one ounce, Pouder them, and mingle them, and set them in the Sun til the beginning of October, in a great Bellied Glass well stopt, and shake them often, then keep the Pou∣der for this use: namely wash the Ulcer often, and foment it with a wet Linnen Cloth with Water of Water Lillies, or the Decoction of the same; the next day after strew on the Pouder, making a defensative, for the same parts with some Cerate, least the Pouder spread further than it should, the escar will fal out of its own accord in twelve daies, and the cure must be ac∣complished with the strongest Sarco∣ticks. The Bone that is under the Ulcer being bare, must be corroborated by the strowing on of Pouders, that Flesh may grow upon it.
And these are made of equal parts of the Root of Dog Fennel, round Aristo∣lochia Flower-de-Luce, Mirrh and Frankinsence. And if it have already contracted any Blackness, there is need of an Iron to scrape it off, and of actual fire; then the Pouder must be strewed on. If the Bone be Rotten, it must be taken away by Instruments of Iron and an actual Cautory. Yet somtimes it fals out by reason of the narrowness of the Ulcer, and the windings in it, that the Bone under∣neath cannot be touched by Iron Instruments, or fire, and can hardly be perceived by the probe, in which case some sharp and drying Remedy must be poured in for some daies that the rottenness may be taken away: of this sort easie to prepare, are the Decoctions of Aristolochia, gentian, Wake-Robin, poured upon Calcined Tartar shut up in a Bag. The Spirit of Tartar is more labori∣ous which is chiefly commended for this purpose, if it be tempered with some convenient Liquor. The impe∣diments
being taken away, the use of Sarcoticks wil be afterwards profitable, or of such as fil up the Ulcer, a Cata∣logue whereof now followeth. For an Ulcer that is not over moist and foul, and for a part that is very soft; mean Sarcoticks are convenient; namely Salt and Nitrons Mineral Wa∣ters, Betony, Gentian Root, Mints, flower-de-Luce, Honey suckles, Boy∣led Honey, the Clot-Burr, al kind of Rosins, Scordium, Wheat, Frankin∣sence. Of Herbs, Decoctions may be made, for washings and infusion; also Un∣guents may be made suddenly, making Oyl first by Decoction, then adding a quantity of Wax, & if you please some Honey also and Rosin, or Pouders, which are especially provided of Roots and Frankinsence. Also a simple Pouder of Herbs may be sirewed upon the Ulcer. For outward Remedies, add Tobacco and the Lesser Centory. The form of an outward Unguent may be of this kind. Take Leaves of Betony one handful,
Tobacco half a handful, common Oyl four ounces. Cut the Herbs and Boyl them in Oyl, til al the moisture be consumed: then add common Rosin one ounce, new Wax half an ounce, Pouder of the Root of Flower-de-Luce or Frankin∣sence two drams, mingle them and make an Unguent. The more forcible, and such as are proper for a sordid Ulcer, and a part that is more hard, these are convenient: round Aristolochia Roots, good Henry, Colus Jovis, Horehound, Raw Honey, Mirrh, Root of Dog Fennel. In outward Remedies, Chimney Soot, Blacking of Pitch, Lime very wel wash∣ed, dry Pitch, Liquid Pitch mingled with Honey, the shels of Periwinkles, and the shels of al Sea Fish Burnt, and the Ashes of all Sarcotick Herbs. These may be made of divers forms, as in Liniments, Unguents, Pouders, Juyces and Decoctions. Also the Leaves of good Henry, and Colus Jovis lightly bruised, and laid on with the Back side, cure al Ulcers that are hard to be cured. To these belong the Balsam of Brim∣stone
discribed, which wonderfully fils up hollow Ulcers; Rulandus makes an Unguent of it, that is very much commended for all rebellious Ulcers, As. Take the Balsam of Brimstone three oun∣ces, new Wax half an ounce, Colophonia three drams, Mirrh, the wait of them all. Let the Mirrh finely poudered be strewed in by degrees to al the rest when they are melted and wel mingled: and let them be Boyled at a soft fire, alwaies stirring them with a Spatula, until they are singular well mixt, which common∣ly fals out in a quarter of an hour: then take it from the fire, and let them cool easily. Yet the Plaister of Theophrastus gives place neither to this Remedy nor to any other, and it is easie to be provided, whereby Old, rotten, stinking Ulcers, that are very hollow and foul are won∣derfully cured, and it may be laid to all hollow Ulcers, if for Ulcers that are troubled with a sharp Defluxion, and very tender, it be tempered with the Unguent of Elder discribed before for St. Anthonies fire, adding a greater or
lesser quantity, as the sence of the part is more quick, and the necessi∣ty of regenerating Flesh be more or less. The Plaister is this. Take ten Yolks of Eggs, clear Turpentine half a pound. Mingle them with a wood∣den Spatula to an oinment, in the same Vessel they must be Boyled, and this wil be done in half a quarter of an hour, then add Honey to the weight of them al, stirr them strongly and quick∣ly that they clotter not: then Boyl them at an easie Coal fire, moving them constantly, then increasing the fire, til they become of a brownish dark colour, more like to Black, then Yellow or Reddish. An Ulcer and a wound, that is filled up to make an equal superficies with the sound part, is healed with Epulo∣ticks, or such as cause it to Cicatrize, whereof some are milder, and more convenient for soft parts, some are for parts and constitutions that are har∣der. The more violent, should they be
made use of in a soft part they will make a Cicatrize but so hard and Cal∣lous that it may hinder the motion of the Joynt. The meaner that are most Obvious are these: Potters Earth, or white Chalk, Horse-Tail, the flowers of both Pomegranats, Ceruss, Cotton burnt, the Ashes of Lint, Pennywort, Scuttle Bone, burnt Spunge, flew of a Hare burnt, Root of Tormentil, al Medi∣cinal Earth, Litharge, and al cold things that are moderately astringent; also the cold Air of it self wil make a Cica∣trize; dry forms work more strongly than the moist do, therefore Pouders applyed with Lint are good. But to avoid the inequality of a Cicatrize and hardners in a conspicuous part, it sufficeth to use Liniments or Unguents. The most excellent is the Unguent of Elder already propounded against Herpes or the Wolf. Other Remedies may suddenly be provided of Ceruss, or Litharge, with a fourth part of Oyl of Roses, or
the like, and a little Wax: Mingle therewith the Pouders that are more drying if need require. The more Violent are all cold Re∣medies that dry forceably, propounded elsewhere, to which you may add mineral Waters, of Allum and Gip, such as is that of Padua, of the moun∣tain of the Sick, the Calx of Antimony very well washed, common Lime wel washed, the Calx of Vitriol, Gip, the filings of Iron often sprinkled with Rose Water or Plantain or the like, and dried that it may be poudered: the Scales and dross of Iron washed, Lead burnt alone and washed, the shels of any Creatures burnt & washed, all which (except Iron and other astrin∣ents propounded) are applyed out∣wardly either in the form of a Pouder, or mingled with other more mild Unguents. Hot Baths serve for ba∣things and to sit in. And these are most of them Medi∣caments that are easie to provide, with which in any part of the world, and without the help of Apothecaries, any kind of Disease may be cured.
The way, where there is need, to mingle these things readily without great provision of Instruments, is not dark to be understood, and collected out of what hath been said, and is scat∣tered here and there through the whol Book.
FINIS.
