P3232 E124_29 99872910 125357
A REMONSTRANCE OR DECLARATION, Of the names of the Knights and Gen∣tlemen that take part with Sir Ralph Hop∣ton, and other Delinquents, in Devonshire, and Cornewall with the number of their Forces. Also the names of the Knights and Gentlemen that stand well affected to the Parliament. The names of those which stand for the King. Sir Charles Wray, Sir Robert Raynton, Mr. Pollard. Mr. Ingleby, Sir Iohn Venner, Mr. Fortescue, Mr Drake, and others, in the North part of the County. Mr. Berry, Mr. Ackland, And others, opposers of these Malignants. Sir Iohn Banlet, Mr. Ash, Jn the East part▪ opposed by Sir George Chudleigh, Capt. Gifford, And divers other well affected Gentlemen, which stand for the King and Parliament. London, Printed by THO. FAVVCET Octob. 29. 1642.
decorative strip with a central French fleur-de-lys flanked by two alternating Tudor roses and Scottish thistles A Remonstrance of the Knights, and Gentlemen, that takes part with Sir Ralph Hopton and other Delin∣quents in Cornwall and Devon, as also the manner of the well affected to the PARLIAMENT. MOst worthy Sir, having so fit an opportunity by this Post,s J embolden my selfe to present you those few lines, humbly intreating you to pardon my boldnesse, There may be divers rumours and flying reports of the condition of our Countie, J will not make repetition of wordes, nor write more then what is needfull, for the troubles we endure at this present, J am sure you are sencible of, and it is apparant∣ly knowne; to end which, God in his
goodnesse grant an happie conclusion, and to let you understand the state and condi∣tion thereof, J will relate it in briefe; There hath beene no little combustion since the Earle of Bath and his Chaplaines apprehending, the County is greatly divi∣ded amongst themselves, and great combu∣stions betweene these severall Gentlemen, viz. Sir Charles Wray, Sir John Venner, Sir Ro∣bert Raynton, Mr. Pollard, Mr. Fortescue, Mr. Drake, Mr. Jngleby and others, who stands for the King alone in the North part of the shire. Master Berry, Mr. Ackland and others, op∣posers of these Gentlemen. Sir John Banlet, Mr. Ash and others, for the East and Southams for the King. Sir George Chudleigh, and his Sonne in law Captaine Gifford and other Gentlemen for the PARLIAMENT in that part, so that you see there is a great bead sprung up and gotten together, and they have divi∣ded
themselves into three parts, which is about 5000. Two thousand of which are drawne to Jlfarcome, expecting ayde of the Welsh from the Lord Marquis of Hartford or the Lord Herbert, but wee heare Mar∣quis Hartford is come to his Majestie; o∣ther three Thousand towards Plimonth and Dartmouth, expecting ayde from Holland, if not according to expectation, that then to march into Cornwall where there is a great partie. Master Arundell hath the greatest Forces there and is able to raise more men then halfe the Gentlemen in that shire, and hee alone was the first that began the Rebellion there, next under him is Sir Richard Vive, Sir Christopher Wray, and Mr. Cooles, as for Sir Nicholas Slaning, J beleeve he is greatly abused, for having little or no resistance, he was constrained to yeeld to Sir Ralph Hop∣tons request; for it seemed so by the story, for hee manfully resisted him and lost sea∣ven Men before Sir Ralph Hopton entred his Castle.
J can no wayes disparage Sir Raph Hop∣tons actions, for hee carrieth himselfe nobly without doing any mischief or great spoile, But Sir Bevill Greenevile hath beene a Ty∣rant, especially to his Tennants, threatning them to thrust them out of house & home, if they will not assist him and his confe∣derates; J may boldly speake it to my griefe, that he is the onely persecutor of these parts. We have looked long for as∣sistance and dayly expect it till which time we shall live in misery. The Earle of Bed∣fords Forces billitted up and downe, are but few in number, so that little service is expected till a grenter supply be raised. There was on Thursday last at Minmoore-heath 4. troops of horse, and a Regiment of foote, under the command of Master Ar∣rundell, and Sir Bevile Geenevile, exercised without any resistance; and there was no little daring of Master Carmenowe, Sir John Speccott, Sir Gyles North, and Master Trefuses to meete them, so many, for so many; at last marching out of the Feild
Master Trelany one of the Deputies Liev∣tenants with his Regiment of foote tooke Sir Bevile Greenevile his Cornet, and Cap∣taine Spicer and his Lievtenant Prisoners, and are at this present at Bodnam Goale, Sir Bevile tooke some of his company which are Yeoman of worth, and detaines them likewise. The Lord Mohone doth no great spoyle, but his greatest malice is at the Lord Ro∣berts house at Truro. There hath beene lately landed in some Creeke in that County 10. or more Semi∣nary Priests which is newly come out of Flanders, and harbored at Master Arrundell his house, they are mercilesse creatures, and endeuoureth by many meanes to the Papists in that County to use a speedie dispatch for the voting out of the Protestants there and there is great way laid for the apprehend∣ing of them. Sir Raph Hopton hath sent to the Governour of the Jsle of Silley for some therein, but they stand upon their guard be∣ing men with stones able to contend with
the whole world, and faine would Sir Ralph and his Cavaliers set footing there, but Ma∣ster Stukeley the Governour thereof who is both wise and politique, durst not trust or entertaine his motion, wee have nothing more to say but onely this, our Countrey is very weake for want of Armes, and those few we have are very defective. There hath beene more substantiall Armour found in Master Chichesters house at Arlington, and at Master Courtney his house, both Recusants, then in all our whole County, (the Gentry excepted) at the searching of these Gentle∣mens houses, there were many wounded. Thus desiring your answer of his Maje∣sties affaires in the North, J leave you to Gods protection and rest your assured friend and kinsman, GYLES PRESCOT. From Plimouth, the 21. of October, 1642. FINIS.
