S4871 99897992 137586
A SPEECH To His Highness the Prince of ORANGE, By a True Ptotestant of the Church of England, as Established by LAW. THere is no Good Protestant nor any Body that loves the Liberties of England, who must not (Great Sir) extol your Undertaking and bless God for your so great and so unbloody Success; and those that are sensible how well you have used the power you have had in the World, must wish that that and your Glory may increase: and what follows, is far from designing the diminution of either, pardon the Ex∣pression, if I say it is to confirm you in your own Noble Resolutions, and to precaution you against the suggestions of such men as may cultivate their own Interest with greater regard than your honour. Your honour lies in your keep∣ing close to the sense of your first Declaration: That Declaration obliges you in the sense of most, and I think all honest men, to refuse the false glitierings of a Crown, restores us to our Liberties, secures the Protestant Religion, is good and merciful even to Papists, makes you the great Arbiter of Europe, gives you opportunity to resettle its Peace, and call to an accompt that great Distur∣ber, the King of France, for the real Invasions he as made upon it, and to punish him for the Insolencies he has offer'd to your self. This Management will be speak you great without Ambition, inspir'd with the Roman Genius, which lov'd to plant Liberty and Good Manners, more than Empire. And tho the King be restor'd to the Title, and as much Power as is useful and safe, yet we shall always bless when you are nam'd, joyn our Arms unanimously with yours, to make all France happy by a Restoration of the Assembly of the Estates, and to relieve the Protestants too, by reviving the Edict of Nantes, to pull down the pride of that haughty Man, and approve the English Nation, under your Banners, the Scourge of Tyrants. These are the great Things you may chuse for your share, and I pray God direct you. t if instead thereof, you pursue other measures, and you are either crowned your self, or allow your Princess so to be, you must dethrone your own Uncle and your Wives Father, hazard our Liberties by sudden and uncertain Wars, blemish the Protestant Religion with the Deposing Doctrine, unite the Papal Force, strengthen the French King, make your Great Self appear rather ambitious than a Benefactor, create Strong Factions, such as you can never imagine will be compos'd, till the Restoration of the King, if you seriously reflect upon our Tempers, of which the present Fermentations give some proof. Consider then, Great Sir, and be great by being good, that the present may adore, and after Ages for ever admire You. Let me add one thing more, which is seriously reflected up∣on by those that are even truest to the English and the Protestant Interest, which is, that it is in your power to prevail with the King to give so much in∣to the Peoples hands, as will make them safe; whereas if the King by a high hand returns, he can then act without controul; and the Infirmities which we are sorry to see in Your Health, makes it even doubtful whether Nature has lent you time enough to finish so great Enterprizes; and then God knows what may be the sad Bargain we shall be forced to strike at last: Consider therefore in time. LONDON, Printed for E. I. 1689.
