S5754 45578459 172373
REASONS why those of the People called Quakers, Challenged by George Keith, to meet him at Turner's Hall the Eleventh of this Month called June, 1696. Refuse their Appearance at his Peremptory Summons. WHereas G. K. hath after his wonted Irregular and Unruly manner, Challenged divers of us to Defend our Selves against such Charges as he has to Exhibit against us at Tur∣ner's Hall▪ These are to Certifie all whom it may con∣cern, That the Reasons why we Decline any such Meet∣ing, are as follow: 1. Because the said G. K. has given us such fre∣quent Proofs of his very passionate and abusive Behaviour, at the many more Se∣lect Meetings we have had with him, in all manner of Sweetness, Long-suffering, and Patience on our side, to satisfie and preserve him from these Extreams: That we cannot assure our selves now of any better Entertainment, or that the Meeting can have any desirable Success for a through Information. 2. We Decline to meet, because it is not an agreed Meeting on both Sides, which it ought to have been; and where that is not, or cannot be Adjusted, the Press is the next fair way and Expedient, which he has begun with, and now seems to decline; Nor hath he sent us a Copy of his Charge or Indictment against us, which also he ought to have done. 3. That he has two of our Books which lie hard at his Door, in Vindication of us and our Doctrines from his Exceptions, and which he has not yet Answered; so that he is not upon Equal Terms with us; and therefore we think his Challenge, Appointment and Summons, unfair; and that all that are not partial will be of the same mind with us. 4. Such Publick and Ʋnlimited Meetings are too often attended with Heats, Levity, and Confusion, and Answer not the End desired by sober and enquiring Men. Besides, that it lets up a Practice that Authority may judge to be an Abuse to our Liberty, and so draw that under Reflection, as no Friend to the Civil Peace. 5. We know not what Religion or Perswasion this Wavering Man is of, or what Church or People he adheres to, or will receive him, with his vain Specula∣tions, that have led him to desert us; Nor who are accountable to us for him and his Irregularities and Abuses; the generality of such Assemblies usually making ill Auditors, worse Judges, and no good Security for our Satisfaction. And we must therefore take leave to say, It seems to us an indirect way of Disquieting and Inva∣ding our present Liberty, That so Irreligious a Meeting should be held, whose End is to abuse other Men for their Religion. If this should be Imitated by all the several sorts of different Perswasions in this City, what Heaps and Confusions must necessari∣ly ensue! 6. Wherefore lastly, Be it known unto all, That for the sake of Religion, the Li∣berty granted us, and the Civil Peace, we decline to meet him; and not from any Apprehensions we have of his Abilities, or our own Consciousness of Error, or Injustice to the said G. K, whose weak and unbridled Temper we know is such, that what Learning and Parts he hath, have not been able to ballance and support him on less Occasions so that we may say they are in ill hands; and if he proceed as he begins, they will be employed to an ill End, which his (poor Man!) cannot but be, unless he change his Course; which we heartily pray for, that a place of Re∣pentance he may find; and, through a true Contrition, the remission of his great Sin of Envy, and Evilly Intreating the Lords People and Way, which we profess, and which he the said George Keith hath long and lately both Professed, and Zealously Vindicated, as such. London, 10th 4th Month, 1696. Signed in Behalf of the Persons and People (called Quakers) concerned. Tho. Story. Ben. Bealing. London, Printed by T. Sowle, in White-Hart-Court in Grace-Church-street, 1696.
