T1328 45578468 172382
To all our Generous and Charitable Countrey-Men within the CITYES of Dantzick and Konings-berg, and the Kingdom of POLAND. The humble Representation of the Principall and Masters of the Marischall Colledge of ABERDEEN in SCOTLAND. Sheweth, THat the Edifice of our Colledge having, from its first found∣ing after the Reformation from Popery, continued mean and incapable to lodge our Students, or allow conve∣niency for our publick Solemnities; We being pressed with the daily Disadvantages of so small and incommodious a Building, were forced to begin a New-Work, which by the favour of Heaven and charitable Contributions of pious Persons we have now near compleated: and is so spacious, stately and conve∣nient, that its no less an Ornament to the City, then an Advan∣tage to the Colledge. And as this Work hath been much ad∣vanced, and in a great measure carried on by the Charity of our worthy Countrey-Men in Dantzick, Konnings-berg, Elbing and other Forreign Parts (all whose Memories shall ever be honour∣ed by Us, and some of Whom for their great Liberality have Chambers appointed in the said New-work for their Name and Friends) and our money being now exhausted, in order to the perfecting and furnishing of the Fabrick, we are under a Necessity of having Recourse to the Piety of Those of Our Countrey-Men who have not had Opportunity to extend their Charity for so good a Work. And therefore have Recom∣mended to Our trusty and good Friend Mr. James Robertson Merchant, (whose love to Religion and Learning, and kindness to this Town and Colledge have Encouraged Us to offer Him this Trouble) that He may present this Our Address to all Those who are true Lovers of their Countrey, and wish the Advancement of Religion, and Increass of Learning; And that he or any intrusted by him may receive from them what Con∣tributions they shall be pleased to allow for the finishing of our New-Work; and as We shall never be wanting to offer up our Prayers for the Prosperity of our Benefactors; so we shal duely Record the Names of all Those who are pleased to allow Us any Assistance in Our Publick Registers, and by the Mo∣numents of Our Gratitude render the Memory of their Cha∣rity as lasting as the Society on which it is bestowed. This is solemnly Promised and shall be Inviolably and Faithfully Performed by June 2d 1699. MARISCHALL Colledge of ABERDEEN, IAMES OSBURN T. P. GEORGE LIDDELL S. M. P. ROBERT PATERSON Principal. GEORGE PEACOCK Regent. IAMES MORE. Regent. ALEXANDER MORE Regent. WILLIAM SMITH Regent.
