T1461 669.f.4[72] 99869107 160694
heraldic badge of the Prince of Wales CP ICH DIENE To The Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled. The humble petition of the Gentry, Clergy, and others Inhabitants, subscribed of the Counties of Flint, Denbigh, Mountgomery, Carnarvan, Anglesey, Merioneth, being the six Shires of Northwales. As it was presented this present March the 5th. 1641. Accompanied with thirty thousand hands. WHereas the present condition of the Church of England (in the publique liturgy thereof in the ancient liberties and forme of government as they doe now stand established by law) hath been lately brought in question, and manifold petitions from the severall quarters of this Kingdome and other such like addresses concerning the same have been presented to this Honourable house. Wee his Majesties faithfull Subjects in the Principalities and Counties of North-Wales whom it equally concer∣neth, and as strongly tied in duty and conscience, doe likewise presume to make our humble Remonstrance, and we doe it after a long silence and expectation joyned with some feares. And first, for those things which concerne the publique service of God as they be of nearest importance, and we nothing doubt but you will take unto your tendrest thoughts, so we doe earnestly propound and prostrate before you that dangerous consequence of Innovation in matters of so high concernment: as we conceave and leave it to your owne great wisedomes to Iudge, what scruples and jealousies are like to arise, if we be taught a new and different way of serving God after a full perswasion of the lawfullnesse of that which is prescribed according to the word of God, not without the deliberate and concurrent approbation and Industry of the most learned of the Protestant Church of this and other Nations, and the possession of so many yeares in the practise thereof, and al since the blessed time of Reformation. The meere report hereof hath already produced no good effect, breeding in the minds of ill disposed persons Insolence and contempt, in others perplexity and griefe, not knowing how to settle themselves, or forme their obedience in such distractions and sometimes repugnancy of commands. Then for the outward policy and forme of government, under the Iurisdiction of Bishops, bounded by law and kept within their owne limits. It is as we believe, that forme which came into this Island with the first plantation of Religion here, and God so blest this Island, that Religion came early in with the first dawning of the day very neare or in the time of the Apostles themselves, And in the succession of all after ages the same hath been constantly maintained among us, and that without any eminent interruption or gainesaying even till these our dayes. And now from the comfortable experience which we feele and which our Fathers have told us of the conveniency and moderation of this government together with the antiquity of the same (a strong argument of Gods speciall protection) we doe in all humility represent and pray that the same may be still preserved entire in all the parts thereof, professing yet withall that we heartily disclaime all scandalous Innovation and Popish corruption whatsoever. And we are the more incouraged in this suit, because we finde it to be the unanimous and undivided request and vote of this whole Country, who cannot without some trembling entertaine a thought of change. In all which we do not presume to give any rules, but as it becomes us, humbly declare and open our owne breasts, & labour to deliver our owne soules in testimony of our Loyalties and discharge of our consciences, who shall ever take comfort to finde the same way of honoring God, continued in his owne House of prayer, the Lawes of the Land put to actuall exe∣cution, the peace and government of the Church preserved, the rumord alterations declined, and the distractions already too visible arising thereupon avoyded. And as we doubt not but your great wisdomes will take care that our Doctrine, and Discipline established shall be still in force, and observed, untill by some absolute Law, and the opinions of learned Convocations, or Synod (according to the Custome of our prudent fore-Fathers in best times) it be otherwise ordained. So shall we never cease to pray for a permanent blessing upon your Counsells, and resolutions, to the generall happinesse of Church, and Kingdome. London printed for. F. Couls and R. Phillips. 1641.
