T1443 669.f.5[52] 99869614 160765
To the Honorable the House of Commons, Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of VVATFORD, in the County of HERTFORD. Sheweth, THat the Petitioners having with all duty and affection taken notice of Certaine Propositions of both Houses of Prliament concerning the raising of Horse, Horsemen and Armes, for the defence of the King and both Houses of Parliament; And being assured that whatsoever shall be brought in, shall not be im∣ployed upon any other occasion, then To maintain the Protestant Religion, the Kings Authority, and his Person in his Royall Dignity, the free course of Justice, the Laws of the Land, the Peace of the Kingdome, and the Priviledge of Parliament, against any Force which shall oppose them: The Petitioners, (although but a small handfull) mindfull of their late Protestation, doe, in all humility and rervencie of affection, offer to this Service 1270. li. in Money and Plate, (the greatest part whereof is already brought in, and the rest shall forthwith be made up) and likewise have provided 50. able and serviceable Horses and Riders ready to be Listed; Not intending to rest in these proportions, but resolving to part with all they have, if need be, in pursuit of their said Protestation; Which as they seriously considered of, before they took it, so they resolutely prepare themselves to make it good to the last drop of their blouds: And they neither doe, nor can desire better security for what they now or hereafter shall bring in, then The Publique Faith of both Houses of Par∣liament. They therefore most humbly pray, That this Honourable House would vouchsafe to accept of this Present of their Duty, and to take into your grave Consideration the Propositions and humble Desires of the Petitioners hereto annexed, and to recommend them likewise to the most Honourable House of Peeres, if in your wisdome you shall think fit to grant the same: And that you would move their Lordships to concur with this Honoura∣ble House herein, for the encouragement of the Petitioners, and of all others that shall desire to follow, or rather to out-goe them in this necessary Service. And they shall ever pray, &c. Propositions humbly offered by the Petitioners. 1. THat in consideration of the great summe already advanced, and the hope of inlarging it, there may be compleat furniture of Saddles, Bridles and Armes for such Horse and Horsemen as they shall enroll, and cannot be furnished and armed by themselves; And the same Furniture and Armes to be delivered to John Leonard, and Zachary King, Gentlemen, who shall be responsall to both Houses of Parliament for them, at all times, upon reasonable warning, unlesse the same happen to miscarry in any Service appointed by the said Houses. 2. That you would give the Petitioners leave to recommend unto You John Bird Gentleman to be Captaine of the said Horse, and that they may nominate the rest of the under-officers thereto pertayning, and that they may bee admitted to exercise the same so long as they shall behave themselves worthy of that trust and service. 3. That for the better satisfaction of both Houses of Parliament in the exercising and preparing of the said Troope of Horse for the service intended, you would please to receive into your present pay a Lieutenant, and one Corporall that have had experience in service, and are expert in their duties, who shall be recommended to you by the said Master Bird, and the rest of the Petitioners, if you shall finde no cause to refuse them. 4. The Captaine and the rest of their officers may recover their pay so soone as monies shall come in to defray that Charge. 5. That the said troope of Horse may continue at Watford (it being not distant above 15. miles from Westmin∣ster) and be trayned and exercised there, or neere thereabout, untill both houses of Parliament shall please to com∣mand their service elsewhere. Die Veneris 1. Julii. 1642. AFter the Petition had beene read, and the Propositions assented unto, one of the Petitioners was called in, and Master Speaker by command of the House told him, Your Petition hath been read and well accepted, and all your Pro∣positions assented unto. That this liberall offer and subscription of a businesse so neerly concerning the safety of the King, Religion, and Kingdome, is an acceptable service to the Common-Wealth. Therefore this House hath commanded me to give you thankes for your Zeale for the publique, and the good service you have done herein, and desire you to returne their thankes to the rest of the Petitioners who have given so ample Testimony of their good affections. Die Veneris 1. Julii. 1642. ORdered that the Petition of the Inhabitants of Watford, in the County of Hertford, this day read and approved of by the House of Com∣mons, be Printed, H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Do. Com. Printed at London for JOHN BELLAMY and RALPH SMITH. 1642.
