T1359 669.f.23[33] 99864900 163689
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Monck. The Unanimous Representation of the Apprentices and young men Inhabiting in the City of London. Humbly Sheweth, THat the glory of our Nation, and the greatest comfort of our Lives in our Civil Inte∣rests, consists in the Priviledges and Liberties to which we were born, and which are the undoubted Inheritance of all the free people of England, among which the grand and Essential Priviledge which discriminates free men from slaves, is the inte∣rest which every man hath in the Legislative power of the Nation, by their Repre∣sentatives assembled in Parliament: without which, however we may flatter our selves, or be flatter'd by others, we are truly no better then Vassals govern'd by the will and pleasure of those who have no relation to us or our common Interest. Now how much this dear Priviledge of the People hath been assaulted by the open violence of some, and secret artifice of others, and to what a deplorable condition we are brought at this present period, when heavy taxes are imposing upon mens Estates, and new Laws upon our Persons without any consent of the people had in a free Parliament, and how generally through the said distractions in Government trading is decayed, and how much we are likely to suffer therby in our times and places, we cannot but Remonstrate to your Excellency, constrain'd through the sense of our present sufferings and apprehensions of greater to implore your assistance, most humbly beseeching your Excellency by that ancient love you have born to your Native Countrey, zeal to our Liberties, by that great renowne you have lately gain'd in opposing the cruel Rageing of the Sword by the common cries of the People, and by the hopes and chearful Expectation of all England now fixt upon you; And, lastly, by your own personal concern in the same common cause as a free-born English man, that you would please to use those great advantages Divine Providence hath now put into your hands to the se∣curing your Native Countrey from those dangerous usurpations, and preserving us in those Liberties to which we were borne. That no Tax may be imposed, nor new Law made, nor old abolisht but with the consents of the people had by their Representatives in Parliament, freely to be chosen without terrour or limitations, and freely to sit without any Oath or Engagement previous to their entrance, without which special Liberties the Parliament cannot in any construction be esteemed the free Assembly of the People; And by your Excellency's asserting of those our undoubted Rights in your present advantages, you will certainly by the blessing of God, and unanimous concurrence of the People accomplish our ends, and will thereby gaine the hearts and hands of the whole Nation, and the City in particular, and purchase to your self a name that shall make every true English man call you blessed, and Posterity shall hereafter delight to recount the famous Acts of their worthy Patriot. This was delivered to his Excellency at St. Albans, Thursday, Febr. 2. 1659. by persons Elected for that purpose, and had a very cheerful Reception. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, Anno Dom▪ 1659.
