T1408A 669.f.24[7] 99870319 163738
TO THE HONOURABLE CITIE OF LONDON. Tbe Humble Petition of Philip Skippon, Ef{que} SHEWETH, THat your Petitioner was a very eminent Instrument in carrying on the Work of Reformation; and that he did promote the Good Cause with the same zeal and endeavours as he did advance himself; whereto he is in gratitude obliged to say, you were (if not more forward) yet equally prompt with your Petiti∣oner. But now so it is (may it please your Honours) that he finds all that former affecti∣on towards him so cold since his Patron Oliver forsook this light, that he fears you will bring his gray haires down with sorrow to his grave. He would attribute this change of your favourable and benigne Aspect to the various mutations of the Times, but that they look so inauspiciously and dangerously on him, he dares not think on them for his life, although the pleasure and delight of that is already fled with his money beyond Sea, from whence he is alarum'd the Dutch will not part with one stiver since they heard of his disgrace. In this streight and exigence he hath betook himself to his Book of Corollaries, the Christian Souldiers Exercise, but to very little consolation, for there's not a word of returning his Coine again, but a long frivolous Discourse of Patience, which he never intended for himself. And oh that one ray of Comfort more would shine forth from the Bodkins and Thimbles and the bright Plate-candlesticks in Guild-hall, how would he improve such an advantage to his external happiness! But alas those Silver daies are done, and this iron Age hath overtaken your poor Petitioner. Nevertheless, in regard of his Service at Leistithiel, where he alone despaired not of your Cause (for Essex had left him in the lurch, and 'twas his best course to shew confidence) be pleased to consider him in this his distress, and befriend him in these following Requests. That You would be pleased by interposing Your powerfull assistance with the Governours of Suttons Hospital, to get him admitted a Pentioner there; or rather that You would please to obtain for him from the Parliament the next vacancy of a poore Knight at Windsor; otherwise your Petitioner, for all General Moncks detestati∣on of Oaths and Abjuration, will set up for himself a Knight of the Post, that's a Military as well as Civil terme, and will serve to compensate his lost Command of Major General. And your Petitioner shall pray, &c. LONDON: Printed for William Waterson.
