T153 669.f.17[88] 99870606 163335
HEar, O Earth, ye earthen men and women: The Heavens have given Fire to lighten the Cabbal in man; and a voice from that enlightenedment shall be declared from the Lords Tent, stan∣ding in the bounds of Eltham, called by name, The middle Park. And on the sixth day of June next, three days together, shall be declared from the Lords Tent the Law literal, with its ingresment into its spirituality, which is the Gospel; and what the Gospel is, and its end. In these two cyphered names, Law and Gospel, lies included the whole wis∣dom of God; but not to be reached by dead mens spelling. And in the Lords Tent is the Creation vivificated, in colour, manner, and matter, and to be viewed by any one, until the end of the days of De∣dication. And unto the Lords Tent is indrawn the Geographical Trine, which is the Tent of Judah: its leadans is for carrying back the Captivity of the Jews, and the re-building the Temple in Hierusalem. And unto the Tent of Judah is combined the Tent of Ephraim, which is the Cosmogra∣phical imbindement, which doth typifie the ten thousands of Ephraim. Brethren, for the building the Lords Tent, hath the Lord laid my habitation waste; I have dwelt amongst Dragons; my soul hath suffered its destruction: the arrows of God have stuck in me. But now my bitter∣ness is past, past, past. Brethren, ye Jews and Gentiles, this is my second Voice or Edict: I have but once more to lift up my voice for my peoples gathering. Ye Wise-men, I do not look at what doth appear in corporality, but I see in Fire, what by Water, Earth, in and by the Winde or Air, shall be produced. HO for the holy Wars in these Nations, beginning at France; that is one Exce. Astrologers, this I do demand, Whether in Ignis Cassopeah the Lion be ef∣fuigitated before Man, or Man before the Lion; that is an Exce for ye. By that, know where I modiate my consanguinement to speak your words. Priests, this Insert is my Text for my three days above mentioned, if the devils spirits do not hinder me. May 8. 1654. By me Theau Ram Taniah, Leader of the people. Named, Theauraujohn. Called, Thomas Totni, Gold-smith, at the three golden Lions without Temple-bar. depiction of sword crest
