T1638 47683499 172958
TO THE IGHT HONOURABLE THE HOUSE OF PEERES NOVV ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the YOUNG-MEN, APPRENTICES, and SEA-MEN, in and about the Citie of LONDON. humble submission Sheweth, THAT your Petitioners have lyen a long time (as is well knowne) under unsupportable pres∣sures, for the redresse of which, many Petittions have been exhibited, yet to this day hath not been obtained that reliefe which our necessities required, and our hopes did promise, but our miseries doe daily increase and grow upon us, Trading is extraordinarily decayed, and feares greatly multiplied, by reason of that desperate height of malice and power to which the Rebells in Ireland have attained, and which they goe on still to perfect, by those new sup∣plies of ayd and strength they do receive, and by reason of the exposednesse of this Kingdom, unto dangers, foraigne and intestine, for want of a present Posture of defence, both which en ruine unto this Kingdome. WHEREFORE your Petitioners are constrained humbly to supplicate, that our poore distressed Brethren in Ireland (according to His Majesties command, and the Commons earnest desire) may be forth∣with powerfully ayded to suppresse that abominable Rebellion of the bloody Papists,; That the Kingdome at home may be speedily put into such a posture of Warre and defence, as may enable them against all forreigne Invasion, and domestique plots and conspiracies of Papists, and their adherents: That the hindrances there-thereof, whether persons or causes, may be declared, In asmuch as your Petitioners cannot but conceive, that such persons are either factors for, or actors of the rebellious rout in Ireland, or of some forreigne power, in∣tending ruine to his Majesties Kingdome: And such causes as are alledged, can be but fained pretences; And that the heavy pressures lying upon us, and growing insupportable, by the delay of reliefe, may be timely re∣moved; Your Petitioners greatly fearing, that if present remedy be not afforded from the hands of this ho∣nourable Parliament (as from wise Physitians) multitudes will be ready to take hold upon that remedy which is next at hand: Oppression (as Solomon saith) making wise men mad. And your Petitioners shall ever pray, &c. Petition was delivered the 26. of January, 1641. (by three Freemen, five Apprentices, and five Sea-men, (being chosen by rest for that purpose) and was thankfully received and read. London, Printed by R. Oulton & G. Dexter, and are to be sold by William Larnan, 1642.
