T1743 669.f.21[45] 99869927 163540
To the Supreme Authority THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonvvealth of England, Assembled at WESTMINSTER. The hearty Congratulations and humble Petition of thousands of well-affected Gentlemen, Freeholders, and Inhabitants of the County of Kent, and City of Canterbury, HUMBLY SHEWETH, THat upon the first report of your being invited to that Supream trust, from which you were illegal∣ly interrupted, we were surprized with joy in the hopes of our approaching deliverance: and beholding your Declaration manifesting your resolution (in the strength of God) to endeavour the settlement of this Commonwealth upon such a foundation, as may assert, establish, and secure the Liberties of the people, both as men and Christians; Your Petitioners are filled with hope, that a price being once more put into your hands, you will endeavour to compleat and perfect what you have de∣clared; that the sincerity of your engagements may be made conspicuous in the eye of the world, by the reality of your righteous Actions. And although we cannot omit to expresse the fears in some, of a re∣lapse, by the continuance of many in places of trust, who in April 1659. laboured not onely to make the Name of a Commonwealth odious, but to plunge us into a more dangerous gulf of Tyranny and slavery then we were in in 1640. yet we are rather perswaded, that the God of Heaven, after his long chastisement both of you and us (who hath made the Mountain of Monarchy become a Plain, by restoring you to your intrusted Rights) will carry you on to accomplish greater things then hitherto our eyes have seen: That the present Age may joyfully conclude your last Works to be more glorious then the former, and future Gene∣rations triumphantly sing, Many Parliaments have done worthily, but you have excelled them all. Wherefore we take boldnesse humbly to offer at present to your Grave and serious Conside∣rations, These few particulars following. 1. That for the future settling of this Nation, upon the firm Basis of a free Commonwealth, you would be pleased to make such provision for securing of the Government, as that no usurping spirit might be able to bring us back to Monarchy, nor introduce Oligarchy upon us; and that the future Elections may be so set∣tled, that the good people may be freed from fears of the Old Enemies and Neuters getting up to Lord it over us, by putting such qualifications on the Electors and Elected, as may not give up our dear-bought Freedome, and as may appear just in the sight of all. 2. That for the prevention of forraign Invasions, and domestick broyls, the Militia of this County, and other parts of the Commonwealth, may be timely settled in the hands of faithfull men, that have in these trying times been stedfast to the Interest thereof. 3. That all which professe faith in Jesus Christ, and live peaceably in godliness and honesty, though different in apprehension in matters of Faith and Worship, may be equally protected and incouraged; and that the vexatious and intolerable burthen of Tithes may be taken away, and no other forced maintainance imposed on the tender Consciences of such as maintain their own Ministers. 4. That all such faithful persons that have been illegally removed from places of trust Military or Civil, or have quitted their imployments for Conscience-sake, and faithfulnesse to this Common-wealth, may be invited and restored to their former capacities. 5. That the mischievous Inconveniences, Irregularities, Delayes, and Chargeableness of the Law may be rectified, by distribution of Justice to the People in their severall Counties; and that the great cheats in Sales and Mortgages may be prevented, by settling of Registers in each County. 6. That you would be mindfull for the quickning of Trade so much decayed, principally that of Clothing, which greatly concerns this County; the fail whereof hath greatly impoverished and ruinated many fa∣milies. In the Prosecution of which, we shall, with the utmost hazard of our lives and estates, stand by you against all opposers, and with hearts bowed down to the Father of spirits implore strength for you. This Petition was presented the 4th of June; and the Petitioners being called in, they received the thanks of the House for their good affection to the Commonwealth. Printed at London for Livewell Chapman, 1659.
