T2764 669.f.6[76] 99871117 160937
A TRVE NARRATION Of the surprizall of sundry CAVALIERS Being sent from Nottingham to Oxford, as they were lodged at BRACKLEY. And also of A Cabinet and Packet of writings, and other things of great value, cast into a Field of standing Oates to be thereby concealed, but discovered and taken avvay. Many of the fore-said CAVALIERS were sent to Banbury Castle. August 29. 1642. All sent in a Letter from a vvorthy Minister in Northampton shiere to a Gentle-man of that County now in LONDON. Printed by Order of one of the Committees for Printing. YEsterday in the after noone, some Troopes of Horse, which (as is said) were sent from Nottingham to Oxford vvere discovered, and pursued by some of this Country from Daventree to Brackley, and upon notice gi∣ven of them to Banbury, The men of Banbury did rise in Armes, and raised the Country, and came to Aynoh this last Night, a great Com∣pany, Horse and Foot armed, and raised the Town here and at Croton, and all as they vvent, to meet vvith these Troopes. And so it vvas; that the Troopes, both Horse and Men vveary, had taken up, to stay at Brackley, and had bespoken their Suppers; but suddenly Newes came to them, that they vvere pursued and beset; and thereup∣on their Trumpet sounded a March, and they hastened to get Horse and packe away; but the Towns-men had barracadoed the passage and stopped them, and the pursuers and Towns-men took of them 18. men and 24. horses of service: And in this hurry and con∣fusion, it seemeth that the Captaine had sent away a Cabinet and packet of vvritings, and other things of great value, by a Servant to goe before for Oxford; but the Mes∣senger (as it seemes) mistooke his way, and for feare did hide his Carriage in a Close of Oates, neare to Pimlico house and vvandred to Croton, and there asked for Lodging, vvhere hee vvas taken by Mr. Clarke and the Constable; and the Forces of Banbury and the Countrey comming to Croton presently upon it, they forced him to discover all, and so hee brought them to the place vvhere his matters vvere hidden: viz. vvritings (they thinke a Commission) letters, money, rich cloathes, &c. vvhich they tooke, and they carried the man and all these to Banbury. Old Burburough vvas one of them vvho did find these matters, and hee carried the man behind him last night through Aynoh to Banbury; meane vvhile all the residue of the Country vvent to Brackley to secure the Towne, and from thence did put themselves into a March, and pursued the Troopes vvhich vvere gone on the vvay tovvards Oxford, and on the vvay they tooke their Trumpetter and 3. more of the Company, vvhom they brought this morning through Aynoh, and carried them to Banbury. At Brackley they tooke from the Troopers great store of money and clothes, especially linnen.
