T3091 669.f.10[2] 99869095 162543
A true Report of the great Costs and Charges of the foure Hospitals, in the City of London, in the maintenance of their great number of poore, this present yeare, 1644. as followeth. CHildren kept and maintained at this present, at the Charge of Christs Hospitall in the said House, in diverse places of this City and Suburbes, and with sundry Nurses in the Countrey—758 The Names of all which are registred in the Bookes kept in Christs Hospitall, there to be seene from what Parishes, and by what meanes they have beene from time to time admitted. Children put forth Apprentices, discharged, and dead this yeare last past—100 In respect of the troubles of the times, the meanes of the said Hospitall hath very much failed for want of charitable Be∣nevolences, which formerly have beene given, and are now ceased, and very few Legacies are now given to Hospitals, the Rents and Revenues thereunto belonging being also very ill paid; besides the want of bringing Cloth and other Manufactures to London, which have formerly bin brought to Blackwell-Hall, the Hallage whereof was a great part of the poore Childrens Maintenance, which being decaied, by these and other meanes, the said Hospitall hath not beene able to take in any Children for two yeares past. THere hath bin Cured this yeare last , at the Charge of St. Bartholmewes Hos∣pitall of maymed Souldiers, and other diseased Persons, to the number of—1122 All which have beene relieved with Money and other necessaries at their departure. Buried this yeare after much Charge in their Sicknesse—152 Remaining under Cure at this present, at the Charge of the said Hospitall.—249 THere hath bin Cured at the Charge of St. Thomas Hospitall, this yeare last past, of diseased Persons, wherof a great number have bin Souldiers, who have bin re∣lieved with money and other necessaries at their departure—1063 Buried this yeare after much charge in the time of their Sicknesse—248 Remaining under Cure, upon the charge of the said Hospitall at this present—265 THere hath beene brought to the Hospitall of Bridewell, within the space of one whole yeare last past, of Cavaleers, and wandring Souldiers, and other vagrant peo∣ple, to the number of—1128 Many whereof have beene very chargeable to the said Hospitall, for Apparrell, sicke dyet, and Surgery, besides their ordinary dyet, and other provisions and charges expen∣ded about them, which could not be avoded, by reason of their necessities. And there are now kept and maintained in Arts and Occupations, and other severall workes and labours, at the charge of the said Hospitall, to the number of 134 Apprentices, and o∣ther Persons. The Hospitall of Bethlem is of great antiquity use and necessity, for keeping and cu∣ring distracted persons, who are of all other the most miserable, by reason of their wants, both for soule and body, and have no sence thereof. That the charge thereof is very great, there being kept and maintained with Physick, dyet, and other reliefe, 44 distracted persons, constantly at least, and the rents and re∣venues thereof very small, not amounting to two third parts of the yearely charge, and therefore is a fit object of Charity.
