T3367 E462_28 99864522 162205
Terrible and bloudy NEVVES From the disloyall Army in the NORTH Declaring their perfidious and tyrannicall proceedings to the whole Kingdom of England: As also the raising of new Forces in the Kingdome of Scotland, to assist Monro against Lieutenant Generall Crumwell. And the Lieutenant Generals Declaration touching the Scots. Likewise, a Declaration of the proceedings of the Levellers in Liecester-shire, under the command of Col. Martin, and their Proclamation at Market-Harborom. Also, strange Newes from the Prince of Wales, and the Resolution of the Souldiers in Holland, touching His Highnesse. Printed in the Yeer, 1648. Sept ye ii
STRANGE NEWES FROM THE LEVELERS. Declaring Their proceedings, under the command of Col. Mar∣tin, in Liecester-shire, and other parts adjacent, to the great terrour and amazement of all his Majesties liege People. SIR, COlonel Martin's approach with his Levellers in these parts, hath allarm'd the Country, and put themselves into a posture to receive him,
for preservation of their ancient rights and libertes, a∣gainst their new design of levelling, who by their strange, politick, and subtill delusions, have wrought into the hearts of divers people to ingage with them, especially, among those who are of a desperate for∣tune, and mean condition, the basest and vilest of men resorting to him. They rob and plunder exceedingly wheresoever they come, saying, They will levell all sorts of people, even from the highest to the lowest, and that he that hath the most, shall be equall with him that hath the least; but we hear that Col. Martin hath given command, That no souldier whatsoever shall dare to plunder or use violence against any, but that they behave themselves civilly, executing nothing contrary to order. If these Orders be truly observed, in all probability they will grow very numerous, if not timely suppres∣sed. Major Fincher using all means possible to accom∣plish the same, but as yet he hath found great opposi∣tion, notwithstanding the late blow given them in Berk∣shire, the manner thus. Major Fincher being commanded against the afore∣said Col. Martin, fell upon his forces, routed them, and took some prisoners, but rallying again, its reported that they did some execution upon Major Finchers men, and afterwards forced their way into these parts, who of late deports themselves with far more civili∣ty then formerly. On Tuesday last a party of them came to Market-Harborow, which put the Market people into a great fear, some running one way, and some another: where∣upon
the Levellers perceiving this, made Proclamation neer the Swan, and at the Crosse, That no violence or wrong should be executed upon any, neither would they in the least disturb or hinder the Market. After which, they staid a while at the Crown, and so departed peace∣ably: the Lord Grey is with his forces about Ashby-de-lazouch, and Col. Martin since the fair carriage of his men continues about Rockingham, which is all at pre∣sent, from Your most assured friend, W. TURVIL. Liecester 7 Septemb. 1648. Terrible newes from the Scottish Army, concerning the proceedings of the Scots and Irish Forces, against the English forces, &c. SIR, The proceedings of the Scots and Irish ap∣peares more visible and inhumane then formerly, their actions are tyrannicall, their wayes most insuffe∣rable, and executeth nothing but bloud-thirstinesse and cruelty, tending only to utter ruine and desolation: they have burned downe divers stately buildings in these parts, executed some of my Lord Whartons Te∣nants, and threatens others, which causeth the Coun∣try to rise and joyn with Lieu. Gen. Crumwell, inso∣much that there will be a sudden engagement. The L. Generall hath declared himself very gallantly to the Country people, touching the preservation of their lives and estates from the Scots, which takes excee∣dingly amongst the Inhabitants The Committee of e∣states have given out orders for raising of more for∣ces to assist Monro.
We hear that Gen: Munro with his Army is march∣ed on this side Appleby, preparing for an ingagement, his forces consisting of about 8000. and it is reported that 5000. more are joyned with him from Scotland. Our Intelligence saith that he is resolved to fight Lie. Gen. Crumwel, and the rest of the English Forces, resolving rather to die, then yeeld ground, unlesse up∣on advantage. Our forces desires to ingage, but could not passe by the way of Cumberland for want of provision, that County and Westmerland being exhausted, besides the wet weather and mountainous wayes makes cariages and Artillery unpassable had there been provision; in hose respects we passed by Skipton upon Craven, & so by the East Coast, where we shall have better op∣portunity to meet our enemy, who we are informed is past at Steinmore in the Bishoprick of Durham, where is plenty of provision and Anti-covenanters, who bid them welcome to as much benefit, as Colche∣ster got by entertaining the Royall party. Upon Satterday last Munroes Army randezvouzed at Borough neer Stainmore in the Bishoprick, who ma∣stered neer upon 8000. horse and foot, English, Scots and Irish, well armed and resolute. At which Randevouz we hear, that Munro decla∣red himself at the head of each Regiment, intimating His resolution to live and die with them, add to fight it out to the last man. Then he called a generall councell of all his Officers where it was agreed, That the Scots and Irish should be commanded back to Perith, and the English into the Bi∣shoprick, and that within two dayes they march up to the
Randezvouz at Hexam Moor in Northumberland, which accordingly they did, where was a great appearance, Sir Philip Musgrave joyning with them with a strong par∣ty of horse: the train of Artillery likewise came up, as also 20 piece of Ordnance: and its generally reported here that 5000. more are comming out of Scotland, which if true they will make a very considerable Ar∣my. Divers English resorts from these parts to Mun∣ro, who are by their great Landlords incouraged, and promised to sit rent-free for the future. We march slowly, because we wait the coming of Col. Gen. Lambert with 4 Regiments whom we expect daily. Sir Wil. Huddleston (a papist) hath raised a con∣siderable party for the King, and besieged Cockermouth the Lancashire forces are gone to suppresse him. Col. Fenwicks horse and some Dragoons went neere Barnick, relieved the Holy Island, storm'd Fenham Ca∣stle neer the Isle, in which was a Scots Garrison, took divers prisoners, put the rest to the sword: they sum∣moned Hagerston Garison, but the Scots sallying out of Berwick forced them to retreat. Richmond 6 Septemb. 1648. The last Newes from the Prince. Letters from Holland say, That great preparations is made at the Hague for the entertainment of the Prince of Wales, and that divers Courtiers are gone from thence with Coaches, to attend his Royall person from the Brill. The common report is, He is to rig the ships again, and those prizes which be got in the Downs, he intends to sell, and with the money to levy some forces. Among the States it was disputed, whether he should be entertained by them in a publike way, or whether so much per diem
should be allowed unto him for some time. The result its said was, that one hundred pound should be allowed un∣to him per day. Hague Septemb. stylo novo. Other Letters say, That divers of the old soldiery are much discontented at the proceedings in England, and vexed at divers great Ones who were at sea with the Prince, being resolved never to engage where such perfi∣diousnesse and treachery abounds. The Duke of York is come from the Brill to this City, the Prince daily expected but loath to leave his shipping. Divers of the Lords are come ashore, and the greatest part of the Navy gone to Gorce. Haugue 8. Sept. 1648. FINIS.
