T3399 669.f.21[26] 99869896 163521
Twelve Plain PROPOSALS Offered to the Honest and Faithful OFFICERS and SOƲLDIERS of our English ARMY. COnsider, Sirs, I beseech you, that nothing can keep off Kingship, and prevent your and our destruction through the prevailing power of a single Person, assisted by a disaffected Party in the Camp, City, Court and Country, but 1. That you remember from whence you are fallen, and do your first works; return and stand to, or fall with the Good Old Cause of God and your Countrey. 2. That without delay, you speedily purge the Army of all self-designers, (how great soever) and introduce in their steads, such as have faithfully served and suffered for what you fought. 3. Commit the Conduct of the Army to five or seven persons who through∣out your late Declensions have stood untainted in their integrity. 4. Recal (for the prosecution of what is proposed) that Parliament who changed the Government from Kingly to a Commonwealth, and whom the late Protector interrupted April 20, 1653. 5. Enter into a solemn Engagement with all your Civil and Christian Friends, for defence of your Country and its Cause, with the hazard of your Lives and Estates. 6. The Parliament once sate, you may in a humble and petitionary way pre∣sent them with Proposals, as 1. speedy provision of pay for the Army: 2. Set∣ling the Militia of City and Country in confiding hands: 3. Securing of Garisons and Cinque-Ports within the three Nations: and 4. that endeavours may be used to beget a right understanding betwixt all their Forces by sea & land. 7. Consider that heavy work is made light by active and orderly endeavours; for secrecy and celerity are the wheels of the greatest Actions. 8. Consider that Treachery, when withstood, turns Coward; and when feared, becomes the most cruel Tyrant. 9. Consider that Court-Dyals are gazed on by all in the day, (or whilst the Sun shines) but by none in the night. 10. Fear them not whose courage is cowed by their Consciences. 11. Be not dellatory, but active and industrious in doing your duties, and casting off those loose corns, which will rather interrupt, then reform; and travail in your Good Old Cause without tyring; and let your Courage assist your Swords to cut through all difficulties. 12. Consider that if providence should oppose you (as there is no ground to be∣lieve it will) in this cause, yet by living or dying in its defence, you will have forti∣fied your Memories against all events: for whilst you are your Countries Mar∣tyrs, it will to eternitie remain your most memorable Monument. Now thus resolved, fear no over-match in multitudes, where God (the great Master of Mi∣racles, whom you have often tryed in the mount of extremities) is on your side, he will turn your enemies Arms into Legs, and their Heads into Heeles; however, it is better to dye of the Re∣medy, then the Disease. London, Printed by J. C. for Livewel Chapman. 1659.
