T781 E356_11 99861687 113828
ΨΕΥΔΕΛΕΥΘΕΡΙΑ. OR, Lawlesse Liberty. SET FORTH IN A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE Right Honourable the Lord Major of London, &c. in PAULS, Aug. 16. 1646. By EDVVARD TERRY, Minister of the Word, and Pastor of the Church at Great-Greenford in the County of Middlesex. The Law was not made for the righteous man, but for the lawlesse and dis∣obedient, for ungodly, and for sinners. 1. Tim. 1. 9. Ye shall keepe my statutes and doe them, I am the Lord. Levit. 20. 8. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreame, or unto Governours, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evill doers, and for the praise of them that doe well. 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. Some mocked: and others sayd, We will heare thee againe of this matter. Act. 17. 32. Imprimatur. Sept. 11. 1646. John Downame. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold by Charles Greene, at his shop in Ivie Lane, at the signe of the Gun. 1646.
To the deservedly Honoured, Sir GILBERT GERARD, Ba∣ronet, and Sir JOHN FRANKLIN, Knight Knights for the County of Middlesex, in this present Parliament. Right Worshipfull, THere is no condition whatsoever, can priviledge a fold∣ed Arme: For if Idlenesse had beene better then La∣bour, our first Parents had never beene put into the Garden to dresse it: but they must labour then in their innocent estate, because they were happy: and so much more must every one of us in his sinfull conditi∣on; get up and be doing, that he may be so. The Church of God is a Garden enclosed, so Cant. 4. 12. otherwise called, the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, Isaiah 5. 7. Now, Laberandum in vinea, Labourers are for this vineyard, where they shall ever finde, never want worke: they there∣fore which dare be idle and loyter heere, are worthy to be cast out. The Apostle compares the Church of God to a building, Ep. 2. 20. the beau∣ty whereof hath ever beene such a great eye-sore to all ungodly men, that their mouthes of wickednesse have still extended themselves wide against it, crying of it, as they of Jerusalem, Psa. 137. 7. Rase it, rase it; and their hands of violence lifted up, to downe with it, downe with it, even to the foundation thereof. The case being thus, he is not worthy to be e∣steemed a member of the Church of God, who labours not with the very utmost of his endevours, one way or other, to uphold, defend, main∣taine, enlarge this building, to keepe this vineyard from waste, this Fa∣bricke from ruine, which could not possibly continue, were it in the po∣wer of men or divels to destroy it. And if ever Distractions, Dissentions, Divisions, threatned the wel-be∣ing of a Church and State (as they alwayes doe) the Church of God in this Kingdome, at this time, is in very much danger; wherein a generall liberty is taken, in matters which concerne Religion, by people (of what spirit I know not) to doe what they please, not what they should. Our malady we see, and cannot chuse but complaine of; and if there be not a speedy cure thought on to apply unto our hurt, the whole King∣dome may shortly take up that saying, and make particular application of it, prudens, sciens, vivus, videns{que} pereo. For my selfe being lately called to that publicke place where this Ser∣mon
was delivered, I thought it my duty to fall upon some subject that might have relation to our present times and distempers. In which you may please cleerely to behold the necessity of Government, as well in Church as State, Then, how generally it is disaffected, and by whom: esteem∣ed the heaviest of all burthens: who therefore doe what they can to throw it off: which meditations, as they then passed through the eares (as I feare) of many who then heard them: (for this I am sure of, that abundance of this spirituall seed every where miscarries) so they now most humbly desire leave to take the boldnes, that through Yours, they may passe in∣to the hands of others, that may consider them at leysure and upon bet∣ter advantage. Vox audita perit, litera scripta manet. That which we only hear may easily slip from us; when as that we read, & may read againe, in proba∣bility may stick by us. And the Lord in mercy make this thus successeful. For surely there were never any people under heaven that enjoyed and wanted more instruction then we doe: when we seriously consider how that Almighty God hath laid wide open before us the Books of his revealed will, of his mercies, of his judgements: yet though we have been taught abundantly by precepts, we have not learned: been prest upon by mercies, we have not regarded: and chastned too by the keenest, the sharpest of all temporall judgements, we have not been taught▪ Doubt∣lesse, the body of this Kingdome was exceedingly corrupted, when it could not live, unlesse it bled, as it hath abundantly done, and yet the cure is not perfect, nor ever shalbe, till Reformation make up that breach, which ungodlinesse hath troden downe. Now there is no Reformation to be hoped for, without Religion: and no life, no power of Religion, without Government, to order it, guard it, encourage it. Which Church-Government, that Great Councell (of whom your very worthy Selves are a part) have resolved speedily to establish. The City of London are ready to taste, and like, and entertaine it. We in the Country do excee∣dingly want it, and the present want of that most desired issue of your great labours, is ready to fill us with as much impatiency, as poore Ra∣chel expressed for want of children, Gen. 30. 1. Now the Lord send it, and settle it throughout the whole King∣dome, and make all those that shalbe called, to act in this great work, like Joshua, who when he was appointed to be a Leader and a Gover∣nour of the people, Deut. 34. 9. was full of the spirit of wisedome: And fill them full of the spirit of zeale too, for the house of God, that Gods glo∣ry
in the increase of his Church, may be ever before their eies, ever in their aime. And the Lord make us who are Ministers of the Word, in a speciall maner to apply our selves unto all those, with whom wee shall have to deale in all love, and meekenesse, and tendernesse, and pru∣dence, that so good and so great a worke, be not quite mar'd by an un∣godly, indiscreet or carelesse handling. And the Lord give us argu∣ments to perswade those that have long continued in blindnesse, and consequently have beene ignorant of the necessary truths of God, now to encline their eares unto wisdome, and to apply their hearts unto understanding, Pr. 2. 2. that they may be while they are in a ca∣pacity of helpe, entreated to suffer God through Jesus Christ, to save their soules: and let God arise and have mercy in building up his Sion amongst us, that after our Eclipse, he may appeare unto us in glory. There was never yet any good and great worke carried on without much opposition. From which, if that worke of Church-Go∣vernment, so seriously and long debated by You, had beene exempt∣ed, I should have joyned with those that had most questioned it. But now a great and effectuall dore is opened unto you; God having so blessed the way you have resolved to goe, that he hath given it a free en∣trance into the hearts of many of his people; And you have many adver∣saries; and it cannot be otherwise, so long as there are such a number amongst us, who are like bad Wares, which are for Darke shops, or like unto Bleare-eyes, that cannot endure the Light. Most worthy Sirs, I dare not flatter you, and I shall not, if I tell you that it hath been ever my thoughts, as the thoughts of very many more, who have best meanes to know you, that you have done your parts in this great worke. The advantage of whose prayers, you shall never want to carry you on, in it, through it: and then whatsoever the suc∣cesse be, you may wash your Hands. The Lord who only can, most gra∣ciously assist, and abundantly recompence the unwearied paines of you All. I have this only to adde, in relation to your particular Selves, that if my deare and tender respects unto you, cannot, your pardon may ex∣cuse him for this boldnesse, who is, Your Worships, in all Christian observance Edward Terry.
TO THE READER. Reader, EVer since the world hath been planted with two different Seedes, all the words and actions of men have been exposed unto severall inter∣pretations, as this following Sermon expected, and found; (which occasioned this preface) at which if they who tooke most excepti∣on, could but know, how tender I am of thinking amisse, much more, of saying or doing any thing that may justly grieve the spi∣rits of any who truely feare God: He would enter into considera∣tion, whether I in reprooving, or he in meriting just reproofe deser∣ved most blame. It would trouble any one who hath not quite lost himselfe, to consider how these present times have distracted a very great number amongst us by variety of opinions: Many of which though they agree in the maine, (when a great number goe very much further and doe not) so quarrell and contend about the list and fringe of Christs gar∣ment, as if they meant to rend in peeces that seamelesse coate which must cover our na∣kednesse. Alas Christ hath suffered abundantly for us already; why then deale we so inju∣riously with him, as to teare open his wounds afresh by sad oppositions, as if he were now to be divided twixt Paul, and Apollo, and Cephas, which thing the Apostle reproves and complaines of, 1 Cor. 1. 12. amongst whom, some were taken with St. Pauls mi∣nistry, some with Apollo, some with Cephas, admiring one of them to the prejudice of the rest. And there were some that said I am of Christ. And what were these? But peo∣ple of severall factions in the Church of Corinth, the last of which (though we may pa∣rallel them all) were of the very selfe same minde, that many amongst us; are growne such perfectists, that they esteeme themselves above all ordinances, and therefore shame∣fully neglect them: So depending (as they say) upon Christ, that they care not for any Preacher in the world, they regard them not, they refuse to heare, or pray with them, especially if they be orthodox, or rightly principled. God hath sent forth abundance of light and truth, Psal. 43. 3. Truth sufficient to establish, annd light sufficient to guide us; and it would be very sad, if an over curious search after new light, should put us out of the way, the old way, the good way,  6. 16. and so make us to hazard the losse of old truth. Alas, what would we have? What doe we expect? A new Christ, a new Passion, a new Resurrection: What would we be? Members of a glorious Church that hath nei∣ther spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such thing, Ephe. 5. 27. we must wait for that hereafter; Why in the meane time doe so many sad quarrells, sharpe contentions arise amongst us? When we have, said and done what we can Knowing, Beleeving, Doing, or Faith, & Pra∣ctise well studied that they may be known, include in them a Christians whole duty here. And doubtlesse a number shall one day finde, (if ever they returne againe unto them∣selves) themselves most miserably deluded, that have hoped to finde, some other, some nearer, and more safe and certaine way to Heaven, then that by which all the holy men of God have passed, then that, which hath been pointed out unto us, by the lives of the Saints, and enlightned for us by the flames of the Martyrs. Yet it is most notoriously manifest, that there are too too many amongst us, that prescribe a shorter passage to Hea∣ven,
then any of those worthies have sound, by removing all those blocks and rubs which the Law of God casts in a Christians way thither, to make it more difficult: Which Doctrine if it were as true as it is plausible, he were worthy to perish without party, that would not close with it: But this I am sure of, that not any one of those holy men of God mentioned in the sacred story before the comming of Christ, nor any since, whose praises are in the Gospel, have made it appeare unto the world that there is any such way to be discovered: That blessed Apostle himselfe, who was such a chosen vessell, who had such abundance of Revelations, 2 Cor. 12 7. was never acquainted with this; if he had, certainely he would never have complained so much, so often of the Law which gives such a strength to sin and such a sting to death, 1 Cor. 15 56 He would never have so complained of that body of sin, of that body of Death which was in him. And therefore Reader, let me entreate thee now before thou leave me, to have the patience seriously to consider of, these following particulars. First, and in a speciall manner to take heede of spirituall Pride, that great sin which banes thousands, by sad and severall mistakes, in entertaining a floating knowledge, for true wisdome; a distempered heate, for true Zeale; Conceits and conceivings a∣bout Religion, to be true Religion indeede. Oh how doth this Pride swell, bladder, puffe up thousands like empty vessells, to make a great sound; Putting low and base esteemes upon others; Like the people of China, who boast that themselves only have two eyes; when all the people in the world beside, have but one. Know thou, that the most excellent Christian in the world is most humble; And that a good man is first in another mans, last in his owne commendation. Secondly, know that there is a naturall aptnesse, and propensity in all, to set up Idols in their hearts and heads, Ezek. 14. Where they are hardly discovered, and whence not ea∣sily remooved, which they doe not only love, but dote on, and therefore they hug, and dandle those deformed issues of their owne braines, as women doe the Children of their bodies, and esteem, what ever others thinke of them, as the Crow their Bird most faire, Woe unto them saith the Prophet, that call evill good, and good evill; that put darke∣nesse for light, and light for darkenesse, and woe unto them that are wise in their owne eyes &c. Isaiah 5. 20. 21. because wisedome presumed on, and drawne from the broken cis∣terne of a mans owne braine, is in the reputation of God, and hath as great an woe be∣fore it in that Chapter, as the sins of Covetousnesse, or Oppression, or Drunkennesse. Thirdly, take this for granted before hand, that there is very much deceit in appea∣rance, if not, our blessed Saviour had spared that precept in the seventh Chapter of Iohn v. 24 not to judge of things according to appearance, but to judge righteous judgement. Because many things that appeare, are not what they appeare to be: Because Satan that he may the more certainely deceive, can transforme himselfe into an Angel of light 2 Cor. 11. 14. Lastly, in all thy undertakings before thou conclude of any thing, order thy actions, and thy resolutions by those words in the nineteenth of Judges the last verse, first, consi∣der, secondly, take advice, thirdly, speake thy minde, or resolve what to doe: Or as that Scripture is rendred in the former translation 1 consider, 2 consult, 3 give sentence. First, seriously consider of the thing in question; for Inconsideration, and Prejudice were never made for competent Judges. Consider of things whether they be true or false. Now for the triall of truth; Antiquity must ground, and bottome it: The un-erring word of God must balance and trie it: And the lives and practises of all the holy men
of God, whom God hath proposed to us for examples must ratifie and confirme it, and this scrutinie must be most impartially carried. First, truth is grounded upon Antiquity; it was from the beginning, for there are no new Divine truths, quod verrum antiquum, quod falsum recens. Secondly, the word of God must ballance and trie it, and therefore trie before thou trust. Beleeve not every spirit, but trie the spirits whether they be of God, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Repaire to the Law and Testimonie &c. Isaiah 8. 20 Prove all things, hold fast that which is good, 1 Thes. 5. 21. Loane not to thine owne understanding, Pro. 3. 5. But be∣leeve how that others who labour to get the knowledge, the right interpretation of Gods revealed will declared in his word; First, from God by prayer; Secondly, from men by conference; Thirdly, from Bookes by reading; And are further able to reade the holy Scriptures in that language wherein they were first written, may be able (to speake no more) to give the sense of a Scripture as well as thou, that canst but, or happi∣ly scarce reade it in the English. For thy further and better instruction therefore: Secondly, consult not with men only of thine owne opinion, but with others also: for if we will see things aright, we must sometimes make use of other mens eyes, as well as of our owne; for in our owne there may be some defect, and we know that pore-blind, and blood-shot, and squint-eyes cannot see well, the last looking over, or besides the ob∣ject, and the other two cannot well discerne things as they are. And thirdly, when thou hast wisely considered, and carefully consulted, then resolve: And that thou maiest so doe, to the quiet and comfort both of thy selfe and others, know that the wisedome which is from above is first pure, then peaceable, Jam. 3. 17. and therefore follow peace and holinesse, Heb. 12. 14. Never think thou art too good, too upright, too holy, too religious, ever in the right use of all good meanes, seeke, labour, strive, study, covet to be better, for this is a justifiable covetousnesse, 1 Cor. 12. 21. and fol∣low peace too, every one striving to exceed one another in love, for this is a godly emu∣lation. Thus have I inserted something by way of Preface before these following meditati∣ons: if this, or they shall prove any way usefull, I have my reward: if otherwise, my very hearty desires to cast in my mite, by offering some word in season amongst those many (by much more worthy) that have made themselves publicke, shall be my comfort. Thine, as far as thou art a friend to Truth, and Peace, Ed. Terry.
PSAL. 2. 3. Let us breake their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. THis Psalme is Davids, for so the Apoostles tell us Acts 4. 25. that God by the mouth of his servant David said; why doe the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vaine thing? &c. And this Psalme was pen'd by David (as is most probably conceived) after his victory over the Philistines, who gathered themselves against him, when the people had made him King in the roome of Saul. And now that we may make as much of this Psalme our owne this day as may help us to the cleerer understanding of this text, I beseech you take notice, that the three first verses in it, are a narration of the at∣tempts of many wicked men against the Kingdome of David as the Type, and against Christ too, as the Antitype, or person typified in this Psalme. The carriages, projects, attempts of these wicked unruly men, who would cast off subjection; are exprest here in the first verse by way of interrogation, why doe the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vaine thing? &c? the Prophet admiring their folly, in going about that, which was impossible for them to effect, why doe they rage? Or come tumultuously together as men in an uproare (for so the originall word implies) no∣ting their pride and fiercenesse, as in horses from whom the Metaphor is taken, which neigh and rage before they rush into the battel. But why? to what purpose is all this? when God who can, will maintaine Davids right, as he most thankfully acknowledgeth, Psal. 9. 4. thou hast maintai∣ned my right, and my cause &c. he must be King, though he have many ene∣mies, not only amongst the meanest, but mightiest to oppose him; whose attempts, studies, power, pollicies, rage shall prove to be of none effect, for when they conceive mischeife, and travell with wickednesse, they shall bring forth
a lie, as it is Psal. 7. 14. for Christ shall confound them, he shall first scorne and laugh at their attempts v. 4. (God speaking there after the manner of men) for God will make them to know how that they which reckon without him, must reckon againe. He will speake to them in wrath, vexe them in displeasure, as it is verse 5. or he will handle them roughly (for so tis in the originall) breaking them in peeces like a potters vessell verse 9. their wound shall be incurable, their ruine irrecoverable, like the breaking of an earthen vessell, once broken, never to be repaired. Yet notwithstand∣ing this their associating and leaguing together, their animating and encou∣raging one another in this evill way, is positively laid downe in the 2▪ and 3 vers. of this Psal. in the 2 verse illustrated from the persons con∣spiring; Kings and Princes, I and the people to, as verse 1. And second∣ly by the persons against whom they doe conspire, the Lord and his A∣nointed, encouraging one another in this their rebellion, as if there were no power either in heaven or earth, to contradict them, as you may ob∣serve in the words of my text, they saying let us breake their bands asun∣der &c. The words I have read unto you are words of mutiny and discon∣tent, which as they are spoken here, I would have looked upon and con∣sidered, as Mariners behold some sea-markes, not to steere too, but from them, for feare of Rocks or Sands they discover, for there is nothing di∣rectly held forth in this text for a Christians imitation, but caution. In which there are two words which need some explication, and they are bands and cords which here signifie the same thing. Let us breake their bands asunder and cast away their cords from us, the word  Musar which signifies bands, comes from  Jasar which signifies to chastice, properly it is put for discipline and correction and so it signifies bands, by which the unruly are hampered and tamed. Here by a Metaphor it signifies, and is put for Lawes; as the Lawes of God, publi∣shed by David, or the Lawes of Christ, published by himselfe, and his A∣postles; the Lawes published by the Lord and his Ministers whom he useth in his rule and government. The words in this text containe in them a resolution, and the thing re∣solved on, which you may consider together in this following paraphrase. Let us breake their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us, thus en∣couraging one another in their rebellious attempts, as if they had said, neither the Lord nor his Anointed shall raigne over us, and howsoever they thinke to impose upon us their Lawes and Ordinances, that with these, as with strong bonds and cords, they may fetter us; yet let us, which is
the thing they resolve on, bestirre our selves, and play the men; let us shake off the yoke of such servitude, and wholy reject their government, for who are Lords over us? This text is rich and full, and may fitly be compared unto Ezekiels roule, mentioned in the 2 Chap. of his Prophesies, ver. 10. that was writ∣ten within and without, that which is written without, or that which this Scripture by necessary consequence first holds forth unto us, is this, that. Obs. 1. Good Lawes are as bands, and cords for discipline, to keepe people in obedience. Secondly that which lies within the text, is first for the generall this; that, Obs. 2 Rebellious spirits affect nothing so much as lawlesse liberty, to do what they please without controll. Hence it is that they here consult of breaking these bands. For being restrained, Obs 3. These spirits thinke themselves in bondage, or as Prisoners in bands when they are required to yeeld obedience unto equall and just Lawes. Therfore they would cast away these cords, that they may not restrain them. And lastly that these rebellious spirits may be loose at liberty, to do what they please, not what they should. And that they may effect their desires in this Obs. 4. Rebellious spirits animate, and hearten, and stir up, and encourage one another, in this ungodly enterprize, to cast off all subjection. Let us breake their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Thus for the ground-worke of this Mornings exercise, have I presented unto you, what this Text holds forth to me. The observations, as I conceive, are proper, naturall, pertinent, and perspicuous from this Scripture. And my discourse shall be plaine to; So that if any be come hither this day, for the vanity and froth of wit; (as I know how that these quesie times pester every great Congregation, with some such hearers) if any be come to this place at this time, as pamperd bellies use to go to feasts, where nothing can please the wanton palat, but some odde sawce, or new invention: I am not provided for the entertainement of such. But for you, beloved, that are come hither to heare, that you may learne, learne, that you may know, know that you may beleeve and do; Beleeve and doe, that you may live. Favour me so much, as to afford me your most diligent attention, while by Gods most gracious assistance, I shall take a further view of the particulars I have observed; And first of the first, Obser. 1. Good Lawes are as bands and cords for discipline, to keepe people in obedience. Good Lawes are the nerves and sinewes of Common-wealths, which hold altogether; the want whereof, like to great depopulations, lay all
things common. They are as mounds unto vineyards, as bounds to Seas; or as walls and bulworks unto frontier towns, to keep all in safety. Hence it is, that Princes and Magistrates, in relation to their places, which are to defend the people in all their just rights, are called the shields of the Earth. The want of whom, he that reads the third Chapter of I∣saiahs Prophesies, may finde in that which followed, when God threat∣ned to take away the mighty man, and the Iudge, and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, &c. But what was the consequence of this? The Text tells us, v. 5. The people should be oppressed every one by another, every one by his neighbour, &c. For what were those else, whom God there threatned to remove, but the very stayes and strengths of Jerusalem and Judah? and so of all Cities, and Nations, of all publike and politike Bodies wheresoever. And he which runnes, may further read, how that this people of Israel, as they enjoyed many comfortable, so they were acquainted to with many sad and dismall times. And if ye seri∣ously consider their story, ye shall finde that it was never worse with them, then when there was no King in Israel, but every one did that which was right in his owne eyes, Jud. 17. And however it may be true, that the government of man over man, came first from sin, (as I finde it excel∣lently observed) First, because God gave soveraignty unto Adam over fishes, and birds, and beasts, not over reasonable creatures made to his owne likenesse. Secondly, because the first righteous men we read of, were shepheards and heardsmen, over beasts, not Kings over Nations. And Thirdly, because the name of Servant, or underling, was never im∣posed in Scripture, till Noah denounced it against his accursed sonne, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren, Gen. 9. 25. Yet the nature of mankinde standing as it doth, corrupted so farre, that without the head of Authority, we could not live, nor converse to∣gether; God therefore in infinite wisedome, hath appointed this means for the suppressing of those many, and those intollerable injuries and violences, which otherwise we should be subject unto. And therfore Reason. 1. First, for order sake, there must be government; a superio∣rity and an inferiority, a command and a subjection, a mastery and a Dominion in every order of men specially designed. The body Politike is very fitly compared unto a naturall body; which must not be all head, or hand, or foot, but distinguished into superior and inferior parts, for e∣very member to doe its particular office. The Heart or Soule sitting in
the middest of the body, as a King upon his Throne, and according to the dictates of the heart, the tongue speakes, the eyes looke, the feete move, the hands stir, &c. Now a body Politike may most fitly be re∣sembled to this Naturall body, wherein there are parts, as the Apostle speakes, more and lesse honourable, 1. Cor. 12. yet all tending to the mutuall decency, service, and succour of the fame body. The Aegyptians made an Eie and a Scepter, the Embleme, by which they figured their government: a Scepter for Jurisdiction and power; an Eie for watch∣fulnesse and discretion. And certainely a Kingdome without order and government, is like the body of that fayned Giant Polyphemus, with∣out an eie, or rather like a body without an head: or, (which most fitly resembles it) like that confused Chaos before the Creation, where heighth and depth, light and darkenesse were mingled together. In the begin∣ning therefore when heaven and earth were first made, God establish∣ed a superiority and rule, in other creatures after their kinde, and after∣wards in man. So Gen. 1. 16. God made two great lights, the greater to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the starres also. And one starre to differ from another in glory, 1. Cor. 15. 41. And present∣ly after, when he had created man, he invested him immediately with imperiall authority to subduethe earth and to rule in it, v. 28. And to what other end is it called the host of Heaven, Gen. 2. 1. but to shew, how that Metaphor is taken from an Army, where there must be superiority and subordination, command and obedience, without both which, it cannot subsist? For if the spirit and soule of obedience be taken away, what can follow but Ataxie and Confusion? Reason 2. Secondly, there must be Government, and Discipline, for necessities sake, to curbe and restraine all tumultuous and heady spirits, all offensive and disordered persons, whether in Church or Common∣wealth. The Lawes of God were first written in the fleshy tables of mans heart; but sin did either blot or wear them out thence. Then the wise∣dome of God thought fit to write them upon tables of stone, that they might be lasting, durable permanent. But these Lawes of God thus writ∣ten, and commended, and commanded unto man, where slighted, and neglected, and forsaken by him, and therefore Irenaus well observes in his first booke against heresies, that therefore God appointed King∣domes and men to rule in them, because man forsaking God, did wax feirce, lawlesse, masterlesse, and being not sufficiently awed by the feare of the Lord, God therefore put upon them the feare of man, that fearing
humane Lawes, they should not devoure, destroy, consume one another as the fishes of the Sea, and the beasts of the wildernesse, and the fowles of the aire doe. And for this reason there is an absolute necessity of Lawes, to curbe, and restraine, and to keepe people under obedience: for were it not for these our beds would not be suffered to lie under us; our meate would be pulled out of our mouths, our clothes would be torne off our backes; rapine and violence, would destroy us. Vse. Now for application, this being so, as it must needs be granted to be truth, What just cause have all people, who live under good Lawes to blesse God for them. To one who asked the question why the City Sparta had no wals, twas answered, that the Citizens had good weapons in their hands, unanimity in their hearts, and to both these good Lawes to order them. We want no weapons, and these sad times, have made almost e∣very one amongst us a man of war. And would to God that we had just cause to boast of unity, and mutuall agreement amongst our selves. But for good Lawes, certainly we of this Nation, have as great cause to be thankfull, as any people under the Cope of Heaven, ever had. And oh that we had as just cause to prayse God for their due execution likewise! But alas we have not. Oh justice! how faintly doest thou draw thy breath, while thou sufferest so many desperate sinners, and so many dange∣rous seducing Schismaticks, to march boldly by thee, and not bidst them stand? Alas how doth the whole Land stinke of that beastly sin of drun∣kennesse, that sin which robs a man of himselfe, and leaves a beast in the skin of a man. That sin which is like the serpent that stings two waies, for it kills the body, and slaies the soule too, yet how doe those Tents of wickednesse, those Thrones wherein Satan dwells, those unnecessary tipling houses, which so multiply Transgressors, and transgressions a∣mongst men, increase amongst us? How doe Pride and Luxury strive for the upper end of the table? How doth the very breath of most despe∣rate swearers, and blasphemers even poyson the very aire of the Kingdome wherein we live? And how doth the stone out of the Wall, and the Beame in the Chamber, cry out aloud against oppression? And how hath the Error of Religion made many amongst us so wanton, that they know not what to have, nor what to hold? Surely as the Prophet Isaiah complaines Isai. 24. 20. The transgression of the earth (of this earth whereon we live) lies hea∣vy upon it. And now O justice how doest thou degenerate from thy selfe, while thou sufferest thy sword for want of drawing to rust, or else for feare, or for some other ie respects to be lock't up in the scabbard?
I am not come hither to declame against the administration of justice in this honorable City (this City so renowned for exemplary govern∣ment the world over) though I must tell you that if I knew any just cause to invite me hereunto, I should not spare. But this I am sure of, that there is an intollerable, an unanswerable fault some where, when so much wickednesse goes unpunished, when so many errors, schismes, heresies, some of which destroy, as the rest doe blast the profession of Religion, are suf∣fered amongst us, though we have lifted up our hands unto the most high God in a solemne League and Covenant to the contrarie. Or if they meet with any rebuke from some, it is but such a one, as that too-too much indulgent Ely (who brought up his sonnes to bring downe his house) gave his sonnes 1 Sam. 2. 23. saying why doe you so, or such things? A strange thing in Ely to punish the Thefts, Rapines, Sacriledge, Adulters, Incests of his sonnes with why doe you so? what was this but to shave that head which deserved to be cut off? Doubtles (as I find it excellently ob∣served to my hand) it is with sins in the soule as with humors in the bo∣dy, a weake dose doth but stir, and anger, and more dangerously disperse them, not purge them out. So that tis certenly a great violation of justice, not to proportion the punishment to the offence. To whip a man for murther, or to punish the purse for Adultery or Incest, to burne treason in the hand; or to award the Stocks for Burglarie is to patronize evill in∣stead of avenging it. Of the two extremes rigor is more safe for the pub∣lique-weale, because the over punishing of one offence keepes many from committing the same. Elies sonnes did thus wickedly while they acted a part in Religion. And are not there some amongst us, who under specious pretences to ad∣vance, persist in courses that undoubtedly in conclusion if God prevent it not, will undermine roote out Religion from amongst us? Religion I say then which nothing should be mor deare unto us, yet this is knowne, and suffered, and if it receive any cheeck from some, it it such a one, as doth rather encourage, then daunt offenders, ubi nunc Lex Anglica? dor∣mis? Oh yee Lawes of England what doe yee? where are yee? are yee asleepe? I told you even now what great cause we of this Nation have to blesse God for good Lawes, and suffer me to acquaint you in the next place, how dearly in many respects a number in this Kingdome have missed these last few yeares while destruction hath been amongst us, the bene∣fits which otherwise might have been enjoyed, by the execution of
those good Lawes, if their current had not been more or lesse obstructed. I cannot deny but that while the sword of war is in a Land it cannot chuse but marvellously clash with the sword of justice; and many things will be done, and cannot be avoided while it continues under such a sad condi∣tion, and in regard the sword hath beene in the hands of many of such ill principled hearts: I speake not of all, for there be many whom God hath stirred up personally to appeare in this his great worke, who de∣serve all honour, as well for their Piety as Valour; but of some, the ve∣ry refuse and dregges of Mankinde, in whom that old Proverbe is veri∣fied, Armatis Divum nullus Pudor: That they feare neither God nor Man, as you may observe in their most debauched lives, in doing what they please, and in their Hellish language too, whose mouths are full of cursing and bitternesse, which they belch out, setting their mouthes e∣ven against Heaven; for they seldome take that Sacred dreadfull Name of GOD, into their most desperate prophane lippes, but when they blaspheme that Name, which should not be once mentioned, but with awfull Reverence: or when they desire God to damne, to refuse them. Now by the way, let me adde this, that if God should ratifie that in hea∣ven which they desire (miserable wretches as they are) against them∣selves on earth, and say ex ore tuo, from thine owne mouth will I now condemne thee; Oh! how sadly miserable would their condition be? Nemo miserius misero, non miserante seipsum: Who can be more miserable then those, which will not be mercifull unto themselves? Yet besides all these, give me leave to speake it, though it be a very sad, a very horrible truth, that divers things have beene done (or if not, very many in this Kingdome deserve to be punished for crying and complayning with∣out just cause) by some others of those, who have most shamefully a∣bused that trust reposed in them by our most deservedly honored Parlia∣ment, that needed not, that ought not, that should not have been done. Things which no language can excuse; things, which scarce any act of oppression in former times can parallell. Very horrible things have beene committed in the Land. —pudet haec opprobria nobis, Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse refelli? The consideration whereof should put colour in our faces, and cover us with shame, if we be not past, beyond a blush, when wee consider that many griping evills might have been, and have not beene preven∣ted, or because boldly acted, have not beene most severely, most exem∣plarily
punished. And therefore it is high time for us, who are the Lords Remembrancers, to speake by the pound and talent, to reprove in words of weight, for the gentle spirit of Eli is not sufficient to amend children that are past grace; and therefore we must crie aloud, speake out, speake home, speak all, though we lived in times that would ham∣per us in those bands and cords in my Text, for our plaine and impartiall dealing. Now that things have beene so, we may sit downe and sadly complaine: but why they have beene so, we need not much to won∣der, when we consider the next particular in this Text: that, Obs. 2. Rebellious spirits affect nothing so much as Lawlesse liberty, to doe what they please, without controll. Rebellious spirits, who are they? Such as cast off subjection, such as breake the yoke, burst the bands, as the Prophet speakes, Ier. 5. 5. The yoke, the bands, which should restraine, regulate, order them, and all be∣cause they affect nothing so much as Lawlesse liberty. Lawlesse liberty, and what is that? When men doe what they please, not what they should; notwithstanding all restraint of Lawes and government to the contrary. This too, too much belov'd liberty, without doubt is marvai∣lously affected by the corrupt nature of man. Tis a sin of a very ancient growth, for it tooke its first rise from the very first transgression. In the garden of Eden, amongst those many plants which God made, some for ornament, and some for use, some for sight, and some for sent, and some for taste: not farre from the goodliest trees of Life and Know∣ledge, grew the bitter root of disobedience: I call it so, because the forbidden fruit grew on that tree, of which our first Parents tooke and tasted, though they were commanded not so much as to touch it, Gen. 3. 3. The taste whereof did not only infect themselves thorowout, but the corrupt nutriment thereof, did also convert it selfe into the whole body of their succeeding linage. Mee thinkes there is very much in that first story of Disobedience, to illustrate this point: when our first Pa∣rents in their estate of Holinesse, who had power in them to Obey, as well as Disobey, and God had told them that of every tree in the garden they might freely eat, the tree of Knowledge only forbidden, Gen. 2. 16. 17. And though there was no comparison betwixt the Maker, and the murtherer of Mankinde, the Father of Truth and the father of lies, betwixt a God and a divell: and the one had forbidden but one tree, and had fenced it (as it were) with a double hedge of a double death, temporall, eternall; yet when the Serpent came to the woman, with a
meere contradiction to the voyce of God, Ye shall not surely die, Gen. 3. 4. how credulous and forward was shee to entertaine his suggestion? Our first Parents tooke their fall by their owne wilfull Disobedience, and we fell in them, Ro. 5. 19. Their Persons infected their Nature, but our nature ever since infects our persons. Ne mali fiant times, nascuntur: We are borne bad, as well as become so; our sin sticking more close to our nature, then our skin doth to our flesh. And it is no marvell now, if our nature so marvellously corrupted, be ready to break every branch of the tree of Good, which God commands, and of the tree of Evill, which God forbids; this sinfull corruption being like a violent stream, which the longer and further it runnes from the fountaine, runnes with the greater violence. After the flood when the people began to multi∣ply, they grew heady, exorbitant, violent, unruly, little lesse then mad, for they went about an impossible worke, to build a towre whose top might reach to heaven, Gen. 11. And God there sayth of them, v. 6. that they would be restrayned in nothing they imagined to doe: that is, if they were let alone: therefore Almighty God caused their tumultuous action, then begun in Pride, to end in Confusion. In whose example that rebellious spirit which is in every one by nature, is drawne out to the very life. And doubtlesse, were it not for these bands and cords in my Text, and for those hookes and bitts which God hath put in the jawes and no∣strils of men, they would be more unruly, more untamed, then all the creatures of the world beside. Man being estranged from the wombe, is rea∣dy to goe astray as soone as he is borne, Ps. 58. 3. Being of a disobedient and a gainsaying spirit. There is a pertinent story to this purpose, which Valerius (as I remem∣ber) relates of a Roman, who had very long, and voluntarily confined himselfe within the walls of Rome, and with very much content, but af∣terwards when he was commanded, not to goe forth the gates of that City, that place which before was his Paradise, now by reason of that word of restraint, became his Prison. And, Reason. It must needes be thus, because rebellion and disobedience is naturall as kindly to man in generall, as the very flesh and bones he carries about him. Adam left it as a Patrimony, as an inheritance unto all his Posterity; and Eue gave perversnes in her milke, every one natu∣rally harbours a Rebell in his breast. Nitimur in verita, which causeth him to thinke forbidden fruit most faire; forbidden pleasures most sweet▪ forbidden waies most secure. This made the blessed Apostle himselfe sad∣ly
to complaine Rom. 7. 23. of a law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind. I see a law in my members, that is sin ruling like a law in my members, in the faculties of my soule and body, or like a law governing, and ruling my actions. Rebelling against the law of my minde, that is against that renued spirituall part in me, which like a Law too commands me a∣nother way. Ʋse. I shall not adde much by way of inference or use in the applica∣tion of this particular, because that which I might here insert, will fall into that which followes from this text. But I beseech you give me leave before I proceed, to let fall a very sad complaint; and to leave a most just reproofe behind me. A complaint, and reproofe of some parti∣culars which former times were scarcely acquainted withall. A com∣plaint and reproofe of the Preachings, and Printings and actings of thou∣sands at this time in this Kingdome, a very lively comment, on this par∣ticular in my text. Bo Deus ad qu tempora reservati sumus! Good God in what times doe we live, when so much lawlesse, unwarrantable, un∣justifiable liberty, is taken by men, to doe what they please without con∣troll. Oh how hath the Pulpit been abused, (since the hedge hath been downe about our Church) by a liberty, which without doubt, Posterity will not beleeve, could be taken at such a time at this; when he that plea∣seth consecrates himselfe, when the lowest among the people, without a∣ny lawfull Call, or Commission, take upon them to be publique Teachers of others: For an outward call or commission I am sure they have none, and if they have an extraordinary and an immediate call from God, which would manifest it selfe in more then ordinary guifts, let them make this appeare, and we will hold our peace; and moreover, we will reverence them, and lay our selves at their feete, as they in the fourth of the Acts and 34. 35. verses when they had sold their possessions brought the money and laid it downe at the foote of the Apostles: But till they can make this appeare, I know not with whom more fitly to compare them, then with those vagabond Jewes, ists, which tooke upon them great mat∣ters, to dispossesse those which were troubled with evill spirits Acts 19. 13. and there were seven sonnes of  which did so verse 14. and the evill spirit answered and said to them, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are yee? The Devils could easily espie the want of Commission in the sonnes of Scva; when they adjured him by the name of Jesus whom Paul preached, saying, Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know, but who are ye? As if he had said, your warrant is not good, your
are not strong enough to remove me. And doubtlesse there are no such chaines of Authority, no such linkes of iron to binde the Nobles and Prin∣ces of the earth, and to restraine Devills, as in those tongues, which God hath armed from above, and enabled, and set apart, and sent cut in his service. Or these which before we named are like those mockers of the true Prophets (for they want no slighting nor reviling tearmes for them) those mockers mentioned Jer. 23. 25. who call the people together and tell them they have dreamed, they have dreamed when they deliver dreames indeed. Now as Pauls spirit was stirred up at Athens, so should the spi∣rits of all godly, honest, and Orthodox Ministers and people be now stirred up in England, when we doe further consider how that all those ancient and damnable heresies, recorded by Irenaeus, and Epiphanius, which we hoped had been long since buried in forgetfullnesse, are rack't up a∣gaine out of their corruption, and preached by some, and applauded by o∣thers, and defended by more. And no marvel, for they are a people in ge∣nerall (to give a breife character of them that shall doe them no wrong) of proud, uneven, unquiet, untractable, unpeaceable, uncharitable spirits differing and dissenting much amongst themselves, carried away head∣long by the violence of their owne wills, which they improperly and by misconceiving call their consciences, whose wills are very much too hard for their understandings, which makes them so wedded to their owne conceivings, that you may assoone remove Rocks from their places, as these from their conclusions, and therefore nor fit to be disputed withall; being like mil-horses, in the evening just there, where they began their morning circuit: having two generall all replies for all objections, as if you proove a thing plainely by Scripture, their usuall answere is, that you in∣terpret this or that Scripture so, but they conceive of it otherwise, or you apprehend so or so of such a question in dispute, but they think other∣wise. Like Petilian the Rayler who when Austin had confuted him, from the Authority of all the Ancient Fathers, answered, Omnes Patres sic, ego autem non sic if all the Fathers thinke so, i'le thinke otherwise. So that as Lactantius wrote of some Idolaters in his time, that they feigned what they pleased, & then feared what they feigned: So these conceit what they like, and then beleeve themselves bound to justifie their wild conceivings, which hath caused such a multitude of strange opinions amongst us, that we of this Nation are in very great likelihood to come into the proverb, that if a man cannot find his Religion in Poland, nor Amsterdam, let him seeke for it in England.
In the second place, oh the boldnesse and liberty of the Presse, if wee consider those odious Pamphlets it often squieseth out. There was a Pam∣phlet of ancient date, but, yet in memory, which did beare the name of Martin-mar-prelate. And we had a Pampleter of late who named that most deformed issue of his idle and crazed braine, Martin mar-priest, And we have had a Martin-mar-Prince too, as any one might lately observe, who could have the patience to reade, that greatest pretender to wit, amongst all our penniworths, now happily silenced as I hope, who in his most odious, and scurrilous Pamplets would often force in some occasion, to trample upon Majestie. And we have a Martin-mar-people to, he, I meane, whatsoever he be, who was the Author of that (I know not what bad enough to call it) intituled by that most desperate Incendiary, the Authour, A Remonstrance of many thousands, which he afterward calls, Your Sovereigne Lord the People: which damnable and seditious Pamphlet alone, hath enough in it, (if God did not restrain the fury and madnesse of the multitude) to set the whole Kingdome on fire. As if the spirit of Nero had possest the breasts of some amongst us: encouraging them to fire the Kingdome, as he did the City of Rome, and then to make themselves mirth before the flames. And to these, what a number have we had beside, who in severall printed papers, have endeavoured to convey unto the people (who want a spirit of discer∣ning) many most dangerous, lying, and seducing doctrines, to pervert and undoe the simple. But Lions will teare, and Serpents will sting, and Dogges will barke and bite, and venemous plants will poyson, let us say what we can or please, to the contrary. But as David sometimes asked in the like case, Ps. 120. 3. so will I. What shall be given, or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? The Prophet answers himselfe in the 64. Psalme, that their tongues which they whet and sharpen like swords, shall fall upon themselves. A fooles mouth is his destruction, saith Salomon, Pr. 18. 7. And if any of theirs we have named, bee so in conclusion, (which Repentance forbid) they may thanke themselves. In the mean time; Let us not marvell at any thing Lawlesse Libertines either say or doe, when we seriously consider the third observation in my Text. That, Obs. 3. Rebellious spirits thinke themselves in bondage, or they esteeme themselves as prisoners in bands, when they are required to yeeld obedience unto equall and just Lawes. Therefore they will breake those Bands that restraine them, cast a∣way those cords that hamper them. They will breake them, if they
can, their will shall not be wanting to doe it; so that if they cannot break them at once, they will unfold their linkes and twistings, (for so the Originall word  Natha, heere Englished to breake, signifies) so that, as I sayd, if they cannot breake them at once, they will ravell and untwist them, and so breake them by degrees. Thus violating the civill sanctions of man, and the equall, righteous, just commands of God. The ordinances of man which contradict not the Lawes of God, to which we are commanded to yeeld obedience; for so the Apostle exhorts, 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. Submit your selves unto every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, &c. And the equall, righteous, just commands of God, to which is required sincere, constant, and universall obedience; I shall not be ashamed while I have respect unto all thy commandements, saith David, Ps. 119. 6. as if he had sayd, I shall be ashamed, or I shall come to shame, if I have not. The glory of any Church or State, is Gods presence in it; for when God is gone, all is gone, the glory is gone, quite departed. The holy Ordinances of God manifest his presence, especially where the word and Sacraments are with all faithfulnesse offered, and with all thankful∣nesse received, submitted to, and improved by the people to their parti∣cular advantages. This purity of worship puts an inward beauty upon the Church which is all glorious within; as administration of good Laws by government, to keep all in safety and order, a lustre and glory which is outward upon it. Now there is nothing more manifests the truth of Religion, and the excellency of a government, then the generall op∣position they both meet withall in the world. These rebellious and re∣fractory spirits we have named, are sufficient to prove this, if we enlar∣ged no further. But we will adde something more, where first let mee remember you of a passage you have often heard, Act. 28. 22. where the blinde Iewes call the true professors of the doctrine of Salvation, a Sect that were every where spoken against: An hundred false Religions may live together in peace, but against the truth, the whole world hath been stirred up, because that alone beats downe the Empire of the De∣vill: Many lies may concurre and agree together, but never can falshood agree with truth. In Rome at this day all Religions are tolerated but the true, under the shadow of the Popes owne chaire. And it was wont to be an anci∣ent proverbe in that City, That is must needs be good which Nero persecuted; he was such a cruell bloody monster, a very prodigie of mankinde: so
it may be more truly sayd of those most holy commands of God, that they must needs be good, because the Divell and all wicked men so una∣nimously oppose them; So, of Government, (for it is a very great convi∣ction to me) that the Church government resolved on to be established in this Kingdome, and now establishing, (and the Lord speedily settle it), is a good government, that hath very much of God in it: Many cleere footsteps for it in the word of God, which other wayes now contend∣ed for have not; and is the government which God would have, which God will set up and maintaine; because it is so much slandered, contra∣dicted, resisted, by a number amongst us, who would be left to their li∣berty; who because, they have now too too long gone loose, cannot endure to thinke of being strait laced. This I am sure is true in experi∣ence, that the longer it is before a colt be backt, the more unwillingly by farre, at the first, doth he endure his Rider: and the longer it is be∣fore a Bullocke comes to the yoake, the more hardly is he brought to it, and the more at first he struggles and strives with it. And doubtlesse, the longer a people goe under reines let loose, the harder will it be by farre to curbe and restraine them. The law, saith the Apostle, was not made for a righteous man, but for the lawlesse and disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, &c. 1. Tim. 1. 9. for the lawlesse and disobedient, sayth the Apostle, and because it curbes and restrains them, therefore they esteem themselves in bondage, or as prisoners in bonds, being required to yield obedience unto it. For, Reason 1 This is the principall reason why all rebellious spirits think thus, because good Lawes meet, and crosse, and contradict, and oppose them in their evill wayes, in their unjustifiable courses, because they meet them and reprove them, and set in order before them, the things that they have done, as it is Ps. 50. 21. In every commission of evill, in every omission of good, in every, even the least fayling in duty whatsoever: they shake the secure man out of his seat: they disturbe the filthy per∣sons upon their beds of lust, who undoe one another by their filthy em∣bracements: all shameles prostitutes, who sell their soules with their bodies, dealing with all those they pretend to love, as Monkeys and Apes sometimes doe with their little-ones, they kill them with kindnes: they tell these who thus stretch themselves upon the bed of lust, that though they sleepe securely there, their destruction sleepes not, their damna∣tion slumbers not,  in 2. Pet. 2. 3. They awake the Drunkards, crying out, Ioel 1. 5. Awake yee Drunkards, weepe and bowle, &c. They debase
proud ones, foretelling their fall, Luc. 18. 14. Every one that exalts him∣selfe shall be abased: They startle the bold prophane swearers, with the weight of their guilt, Exo. 20. 7: They acquaint Oppressors with those screech owles of woe, which cry aloud from the beames of their cham∣bers: And they tel the Covetous who are like the Mole, that bury them∣selves under every clod of earth, or like the barren wombe, or unsatia∣ble Death, that will never be satisfied, of enough mould in the grave, and of enough fire in hell: They meet with Formall professors of Reli∣gion, who make Religion nothing but a complement, and they tell them that of all tempers in Religion, a luke-warme temper is the worst. Because thou art neither hot nor cold, but luke-warme, i'le spue thee out of my mouth, sayth the Spirit to the Church of Laodicea, Re. 3. 16. That is, I will make thee who art but a Church in shew, to be no Church at all, it being all one in the account of God, to deny the Faith, and not soundly and sincerly to professe it: They unmake the double faced hy∣pocrites, who only act Religion, play devotion, who are all for shew, and nothing for substance; making Religion a cloake, and they tell them, that as Religion is the best armour in the world, so it is the worst cloake; and whosoever put it on for no other end, it shall in conclusion do them no more good, then that disguise which Ahab put on, in which he perished, when he fought with the Syrians at Ramoth Gilead, 1. Ki. 22: They convince blinde errors, by cleere and orthodox truths: And tell them that receive not the love of the truth that they might be saved, that for this cause, God shall send them strong delusion that they might beleeve a lie, that they might be damned, who beleeve not the truth &c. 2 Thes. 2. 10. 11. 12: They cast downe imaginations and every high thing which exalts it selfe a∣gainst God, 2 Cor. 10. 5. In a word, They meet with sinners at every turne, and because they doe so, these cannot away with them; and therefore may be fitly compared unto that fiery meteor, which causeth thunder the more streightly it is wrapt, and bound up in the cloud, it breaketh forth with the greater violence and noise. Or they are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, to which the Prophet compares them, Isaiah 57. 20. foming and raging most against those truths of God which oppose them most; as the tempestuous Sea doth against those Rocks and Bankes, and bounds, which hinder its course, and keep it in. Ʋse. Breifely now for application of this point. I shall addresse my speech unto every loose, lawlesse libertine in the world, and first desire to let him know, that there is no liberty but servitude in sinne; no li∣berty
but in the freedome from sin, and secondly, they whosoever they be, that cast off Gods yoke, whose service is freedome, and yeeld obe∣dience unto the commands of Satan (for every one in the world serves one of these two Masters) they are meere bondslaves unto him they serve, for all the services that the Devill imploies his servants in, are, (whatsoever men may thinke otherwise of them) no better then a very toilesome drudgery a very base bondage. Heare the truth of this in some particulars, as in the sin of covetousnesse, wherein Ahab may be our ex∣ample, who, because he could not possesse Naboths Vineyard according to his coveting desire, it troubled him so, that he was heavy and sad, and spiritlesse immediately upon it, 1 Ki. 21. we may observe the like in that sin of envy which Solomon tels us is the rottennesse of the bones Prov. 14. 30 a sin that is plagued by it selfe, that hath much justice in it as one well ob∣serves, for it eateth up the heart & marrow of her Master, as he desireth to eate up the heart of another. And againe—Surgunt de nocte Latrnes. The Theife wakes while the true man sleepes, and is more troubled to breake open, than the true man is, to guard his house. The not Adolte∣rer, the filthy uncleane person useth the twilight, the evening, the blacke and darke night, Prov. 7. 9. that he may compasse his lust, while the chast man sits quietly in his house. How did the unnaturall Lust of Amnon vex him till he had obtained his desire, so that he fell sick for his Sister Tr, and after he had satisfied his unnaturall appetite, he was as sick of her as he was before for her: he hated her exceedingly saith the text, his Lust en∣ded in loathing, so that the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her 2 Sam. 13. 15. what fruit had yee in thse things whereof yee are now ashamed saith the Apostle to the Romans? Rom. 6. 21. for as sin makes men past shame that they may commit it, so it brings shame if the sinners conscience awake after the committing thereof. See this farther in that most beastly sin of drunkennesse, how it causeth woe, and sorrow, and contention, and babling, and wounds, Pro. 23. 29. Nay who can count the hurts that by drunken distempers come both to the body and soule? First to the whole body, especially to the head, and stomach, and liver, and those more noble parts, as also the rheumes, gouts, dropsies, palsies, apoplexies, inflammations, and other distempers hence arising. Oh how doth the excesse of wine, and any other strong liquor, fire the bloud, casting the body into feavers &c? And secondly how doth it inflame the soule too, filling that with lusts as hot as hell? So that drunkards shall one day be forced to confesse what they will not
now beleeve, as it was spoken in another case 2 Ki. 4. 40. Oh there is death in the pot. And therefore the Greeke Poet spake wittily, that if the head-ach were to be before the wine; men would be sober: if those sad consequences which oftentimes follow beastly distempers, were to be endured before hand; people would not be drunke. And if those most filthy and loathsome diseases, the just consequence of incontinency, were to be suffered before these acts of filthinesse were committed, people would be chast: yee heare what oftentimes befalls those two brethren, as one of the Ancients calls them Drunkennesse, & Lust, saying, Nunqua ego ebrium putavi castum, drunkennesse and chastity being incompatible: yee heare how its often with these two sworne servants of the Devill, whereas the sober, chast, temperate man who desires to possesse his vessell in holinesse at the Apostle speaks 1 Thes 4. 4. to glorifie God in his life, feeles, knowes none of those things. You may helpe me with your meditations herein; for the like may be said of many other worker of darkenesse, which the Devill imploies his servants in, serving divert lusts as the Apostle speakes Tit. 3. 3. , being as slaves to lusts engaging them to every sin; one lust drawing a wretched sinner into one sinfull course, others haing and pulling him into other evill waies, making poore wretches thus misera∣bly distracted and seduced, as it is Jer. 9. 5. to weary themselves to commit iniquity, or to moile and toile to goe to hell. How have many misera∣ble people been content, meerely led by the instigation of the Devill, and enflamed by him? the Devill who is most tyrannicall, where he is most obeyed, to submit unto commands that have been most heavy, hate∣full, yea most unnaturall, as those who caused their Sonnes and Daugh∣ters to passe through the fire to Molach Levit. 20. 3. I could aboundantly inlarge, Ile only ad this, that if Satan have had such power to perswade poore, mis-led, seduced creatures to submit themselves unto such unrea∣sonable imposiions, n thinks every one who hath not quite lost himself should be more readily induced to yeeld a most cheerefull obedience un∣to God his most holy, righteous, equall, just commands whose Commande∣ments are not grievous 1 Iohn 5. 3. To put their neckes under that yoke which rebellious spirits here in my text throw off, because his yoke is easie, his burthen is light, Mat. 11. 30. And that thy heart may not be hardned, that thou maiest not be quite undone by the deceitfullnesse of sin, observe but this one rule when e∣ver thou art tempted unto any thing that is evill, to view the tentation
on both sides, to take notice as well of the certaine bitternesse, as of the apparent sweete that is in sin, which sin is fitly resembled by those Locusts mentioned in the 9 C. of the Rev. who had the faces of men, and the haire of women, but to these, they had the teeth of Lions, and the tailes of Scorpions, and there were stings in those tailes. The Devill, when he tempts a man un∣to any thing that is evill, presents nothing unto the sight of man, but what may please, content his corrupted nature, those most fearefull and sad consequences of sin, as death, hell, judgement, and everlasting sepa∣ration from the presence of God, the Devill keepes out of sight, that the misery of a wretched sinner may not be knowne till it be felt, not felt till it cannot be possibly avoyded. And to conclude this point: Let all be exhorted, who wilfully rebell against the just commands of God, to read their sinnes acted in the ex∣amples, and smitten too, upon the backes of others. How was it with A∣hab who cast off God, and joyned himselfe to Idols, as the Prophet Hosea phraseth it? Hos. 4. 17. Tis sayd of him, 1. Kin 21. 20. That he sold himselfe to worke wickednesse in the sight of the Lord, but afterward he lives to rue, to repent his bargaine. No sooner had Pharaoh asked that bold blasphe∣mous question, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice, to let Israel go? Ex. 5. 2. but presently the frogs, the lic, the flies, the caterpillars, which the Prophet calls Gods great Army, Ioel 2. 25. rise up in armes to tell him, and these poore, weake, despreable creatures, will not give proud Pharaoh over, till they have humbled him, and magnified their Maker. Pharaoh and all Aegypt might heerese, how weake they were, and what in impotent power they served, when they could neither resene themselves, nor yet be delivered from the incursions of frogs, lice, and flies. There is a very memorable story, which I dare affirme for truth, that many yeares since, I brought from the Easterne India, where I li∣ved at the Court of the Great Mogol, for more then two yeares. The story is this: There was a great Cavalier and Nobleman of that Court, that was much in credit with that King; and that he might keepe that favour, esteemed it, the highest point of Religion to flatter the King, which made him a great neglecter and contemner of God. Upon a time this wretched man sitting in dalliance with one of his women, she pluckt an hayre from his breast, his nipple, in wantonnesse, I conceive without the least thought of doing him hurt; the little wound, that small and unexpected instrument of death made, presently began to foster, and in short time after, become a Cancer incurable. When the poore
wretch saw that he must needs die, he uttered these words, which are very well worth the recording and remembring: Who would not have thought, (sayd he) but that I, who was bred a Soldier, should have died in the face of mine enemy, either by a sword, or a lance, or an arrow, or a bullet, or the like instrument of death, but now too late I am forced to confesse, that there is a great God above, whose Majesty I have ever despised, who needs no bigger a Lance, then an Haire to kill an A∣theist. Oh, let us further collect out of those many menaces and threatnings denounced against this sin in the booke of God, what their end is like to be, that obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousnes, that obey not the Gospel of God. And what in conclusion this sinne is like to cost, and when we haue cast up our whole reckoning, we may borrow those words to put at the foot of our accompt, which Abner spake to Ioab, 2. Sam. 2. 26. bitternesse in the end. And lastly, let the resisters of lawfull authority, that will not submit unto Gods deputed lawfull substitutes heere on earth, read the story of Corah and his Company, Iud. 16. swallowed up quicke by the earth: the earth opening its mouth wide against them, that had so opened their mouthes wide against Moses. And let them looke over the story of Zimri, 1. Kin. 16. who slew the King his master, and then sate upon his Throne; but hee enjoyed his so ill-purchased honour but a little while. The triumphing of the wicked, sayth Iob, is short, Iob. 20. 5. So this wretched man found it: for when he had reigned not seven yeares, nor seven months, nor se∣ven weekes, but seven dayes: as in the Roman story there is mention made of one Caninius, who when after much adoe hoe had obtayned the Consulship, he then enjoyed it but seven howres: So when this wicked Zimri had reigned but seven dayes, he set on fire his usurped Palace, and burnt himselfe in the flame. And looke upon Absolon, who rose up against the King his father, against the loynes from which he fell, and see how he sped afterward, 2. Sam. 18. And looke upon Achito∣phel who was guilty of the same crime, and see what became of him, 2. Sam. 17. In one word, let me remember all (who cast off subjection, who doe their utmost endeavour to breake or throw off those bands and cords heere,) of everlasting chaines under darkenesse, which will ham∣per them to purpose heereafter. Yet notwithstanding this, and much more that might be added, to this purpose; Obs. 4. Wicked men animate and hearten and stir up one another to cast
off subjection. Let us breake their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us. In that wicked cariage of the sonnes of Iacob towards their brother Ioseph, you may cleerely see this truth. In the 37. of Genesis, Ioseph Dreames, and tells those his night-visions unto his brethren: they inter∣pret them and say, v. 8. Shalt thou indeed reigne over us? shalt thou have dominion over us? Thou one of the yongest sonnes of our father? Shalt thou? and for this they hated him, sayth the Text. Ioseph went foorth to seeke brethren, in the 14. but he found murtherers: for as soone as ever they perceive him comming towards them, they say one to an∣other, v. 19. Behold this dreamer commeth, come now, let us stay him. So soone as ever they see their brother; all their eyes, and tongues, and hearts, and hands are against him, and they presently forget themselves, not only to be brethren, but men; for they take their brother, and they cast him into an uncomfortable pit (as if they meant to bury him alive) and then sit downe to eat bread, v. 25. with the lamentations of their bro∣ther in their eares, nor once remembring by their owne hunger, what it was for their brother (as he might have done) to famish for want of food. And what was the reason of this their most unnaturall, and more then bruitish cariage towards their brother? you had it before, their great feare of being afterward in subjection to him. Thus the Philistines animate, and hearten and encourage one another, 1. Sam. 4. 9. saying, be strong and quit your selves like men, ô ye Philistins, that ye be not servants unto the Hebrewes. The Scriptures are full of expressions to this purpose, so that if wee needed further testimony for the confirming of so cleer a truth; I could invite you to looke into the 83. Psalme, from the beginning of the 2. to the 9. verse, where you shall finde a number of people of such unruly spirits, as this observation in my Text takes notice of, consulting with, or consent, or with one heart, leaguing themselves together, and making confederacies, a Edom, and the Ishmaelites, Moab and the Hagarens, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tyre, &c. But what to doe? To take crafty counsell against the people of God, to consult against his hidden ones, v. 3. And who are these hidden ones? Gods deare children, whom God hides and will protect. Hee hides them as men hide Jewels, and other pretious things, keeping them in the safest places where they may be secured. But, however, first they consult together against them, and then they speake out their
thoughts, v. 4. saying. Come let us cut them off from being a Nation. And certainly, there were no living for any good man in the world, if the Divell and his cursed instruments, could do but halfe so much mischiefe as they would. God holds forth his people as lights to the world; these wicked ones in stead of walking by their light, doe their uttermost to extinguish it. God sets them forth as examples to the world, by which these men might learne to order their conversation right: But they are so farre from being guided, governed, ruled by them, that they had ra∣ther deny them their being, then make them their example. Come say they, let us cut them off: Esteeming them unworthy of any place in the world, for whose sake the world was first made, and for whose sake it hath beene ever since continued; for were it not for those few Righ∣teous, that are intermingled with these many wicked on the earth, the world could not stand. All wicked and ungodly men in the world ow∣ing their lives, their liberties, all the good things they doe enjoy heere, unto these few, whom they scorne, oppose, and persecute. Now what may be the reason why tumultuous, heady-minded mem, doe thus combine and animate one another in a spirit of opposition, to cast off subjection? Reason 1. First, because all wicked rebellious spirits are led by the same evill Principall, to cast off obedience, and therfore keepe and flock together, as beasts of the same herd, or, as birds of the same feather do: And they act together likewise, like companions in mischiefe, and bre∣thren in evill. And therefore the Prophet Michah compares them to Briars, Mich. 1. 4. and the Prophet Nahum to Thornes, Nah. 1. 10. fol∣ded and claspt, and twisted, and interwoven one within another, to doe mischiefe. Hence that monstrously wicked Abimelech, who knew not how to obey as he ought to have done: and therefore drew the bloud of seventy of his Brethren to make way for his usurped government, is compared to a Bramble, Jud 9. 14. A right Bramble he was indeed, who grew in the base hedge-row of a concubine: A Bramble that scratcht and drew bloud to purpose. Reason 2. Secondly, because all wicked men who throw off subje∣ction are guided by the same spirit, the spirit of the Divell, who rules, sayth the Apostle, in the children of disobedience, Eph. 2. 2. And ever since the Divell and wicked men received their doome, to be chayned for e∣ver heerafter under darknesse; they cannot endure to think of Bands or Cords, or any other thing beside, that may restraine them.
Vse. Now to make use of this; and first let me tell you for Instructi∣on, from that which springs from the bitter root of stubbornesse, disobe∣dience, and refractorinesse in this Text; this honey, this sweet, may be extracted. As, if it be so that wicked men can thus animate, and hear∣ten, and encourage one another in the wayes of evill; every one heere assembled may now prevent me & say, that what we have hence obser∣ved inferres and inforceth upon us a lesson for our imitation▪ to follow those we have named, in their diligence, & eagernes, & joint consent in acting; as to leave them in the evill and obliquity of their actions, to be as active in good, as they are in evill. To instance in some particu∣lars: How many Separatists goe on violently, in an unwarrantable course, as Cyprian wrote to Cornelius of five Schismatickes that had ta∣ken shipping, and sayled to Rome, with their mart of lies, as if the Lord of heaven, who rideth upon the Cherubims, could not overtake them. What stone doe these leave unturned, what thing doe they leave unat∣tempted? per mare, per terras, per saxa, per ignes: as Christ spake of the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 15. Compassing sea and land to make Proselites, or some of their owne profession. The Idolaters at Ephesus, as if they had been the sonnes of Noise and Tumults, cry up their baggage Diana, for the space of two houres together, Act. 19. Great is Diana of the Ephesians, quasi vocibus cultum ejus reparaturi, as Chrysostome on that place: as if they meant with their loud outcries, to hold up her honour, and to blow up all opposition against her with her very breath. And thus the Idolatrous Preists of Baal cried long from morning till noone, and loud too, saying Oh Baal helpe as 1 Ki. 18. And the inhabitants of Samaria feared, and mourned, and made much adoe for their Idol. Like∣wise Hoses 10. 5. To the like purpose Micah complaines Judg. 18. 24. yee have stolen away my Gods; and what have I more? Or what have I more to lose? Let me tell you in a word by the way, that these were proper Gods to rely on, that could not secure themselves. O excellentm insaniam! as Chrysostom observes upon this passage, were thy Gods such ones that a man might steale them? O notable folly! To rely upon such helps, Gods per Antiphras, for the workeman made them and therefore they are not God, Hoses 8. 6. for if the fire spare them, rust, or rottennesse, or time will consume them. But the morall of Micah his speech is good, for the losse of God is the losse of all things, who never forsakes us till he be first forsaken by us; so the enjoying of a sweet communion with God, is the enjoyment of every good thing beside, but this by the way. The Pro∣phet
David makes mention of some that hasten after another God Psal. 16. 4. Festinant they hasten with speed, or as Tremelius and Junius reade it from the originall, Dotant, they endow them with guifts, or they give a dowry to them, there is nothing so costly which they will not bestow, which they will not willingly cast away upon their Idols, which caused the Israelits being tainted with this sin, to strip their Wives, & Sonnes and Daughters of their Ear-rings to make a molten Image, Exod. 32. they thinke nothing too much, too hard to doe, to endure for them, and therefore they did not sticke to sacrifice their Children unto them: what tedious pilgrima∣ges doe some Papists trudge barefoot, and how doe they afflict their bo∣dies with whippings, watchings, fastings? And I have observed this a∣mong Heathens that they impose many sharpe and voluntary penances upon themselves, far above all those: the Romanists boast of as some of them will put massy fetters of iron upon their leggs, and then as fast as they are able, goe hundreds of miles barefoot, upon the ground (very hot and parching in those Climes) to visite the Sepulchers of their deluding Saints. Others will voluntarily fast till nature be almost quite decaied, & there be some who sequester themselves from the world, and live remote upon the tops of Hills, the residue of their lives, sometimes many yeares: after which retirement, they never suffer the razor to come againe upon their heads, and they let their nailes grow like birds claws, as it is writ∣ten of Nebuchadnezzar, when he was driven from the society of men, Dan. 4. 33. and further these Votaries being thus retired will sterve ra∣ther then stirre from their Cells, and therefore they are releeved by some that live neerest to them. Thousands there be in those parts that will rather chose to dye like the Mother and her seven Sons mentioned in the 2 Mac. and 7. Chap. then eate or drinke any thing their Law forbids them: Such meate and drinke as their Law allowes them, they take on∣ly to satisfie nature, not appetite; hating gluttony, and esteeming drun∣kennesse, as indeed it is, a second madnesse, and therefore use but one word in their language for a drunkard and a madman. The Mahumetans, what occasion soever they have either by pleasure or profit to divert them, will pray five times every day. And the Pharisee could tell us Lu. 18. 11. that he was no Extortioner, nor unjust person, nor an Adulterer &c. Now let us put all this together, and then let us hold up our heads if we can for blushing, and heare our owne shame, receive our just re∣proofe, which is the second thing I shall infer from hence. 2. Ʋse of reproofe I say when we consider the unity, agreement, ac∣cord,
that is in wicked men, their teaching, animating, stirring up one another, in whom there is unitar, contra unitatem, conspiracy, agreement in error, in evill; and so little unity, agreement amongst us for truth. How dare we in matters of God, so flag and faint, and dissent as we doe, ferventissimi in terrenis, in coelestibus frigidissimi: shewing nothing but heate and earnestnesse in earthly, nothing lesse? in heavenly things! Shall Schismaticks, Hereticks, Pharisees, Papists, Turkes, Infidels, Idolaters of all kinds, solicite bad causes with such earnestnes; and we, the cause of God, so faintly? They were wont to say of cowards in Rome, that there was nothing Roman in them; and may it not be as fitly applied unto many of us who professe our selves Christians? There is not that Christi∣anity in us which may bring comfort to us; if there were, we should be more remisse in our owne quarrels, more fierce and forward in the cause and quarrell of God. Oh how doe a number amongst us even shame the Religion we professe by professing of it! What a sad thing is it to consider, that a Pharisee should be chast, and a Christian filthy: That an Heathen should be temperate, sober; and a Christian drunken: That a Mahumetan should pray five times every day, and he that professeth him∣selfe a Christian, scarce voluntarily goe to God in prayer, five times in a weeke, a moneth, a yeare: that they who professe themselves Christi∣ans should come short of them that come short of Heaven! The mora∣lity of millions of Heathens may shame us, their lives condemne ours: The Nations which call not upon the name of God are more righteous then we, who have justified the Jewes, and Turkes, and Heathens. Our idolatrous and ignorant fore-fathers shal rise up in judgement and con∣demne as, for they followed what they knew, but we know the will of God, and follow it not. Considerare pudet quantus ferver quae cura &c. was the complaint sometimes of Jerom that he was ashamed to con∣sider, how solicitous many were in temporall, and how sluggish we in spirituall things: He was ashamed to thinke, how that so many thou∣sands should drive like Jehu furiously in the waies of evill, Superstition, Error, Idolatry, Profanenesse, and the like; and we in the waies of God, goe a snayles pace, like the Egyptians in the sea, when their Chariot wheels were off, Exod. 14. 25. That evill men of all sorts, should have their tonguet bent like bowes for lies, as the Prophet speakes Jer. 9. 3. and we not valiant for the truth, shewing no courage for it, as if we durst not owne the cause of God. Dormis tu Petre? Was an heavy check our blessed Saviour gave St. Peter, Marke 14. 37. sleepest thou Peter? Are the high Preists consul∣ting?
Are the Souldiers anding themselves? Is the Son of God neere his betraying? And sleepest thou, Peter? And, is there an ayming at the head of Authority now, an endeavour by some to lay all even and levell? Is there a striking at Religion, in an endeavour after liberty therein? which liberty threatens us, which liberty hath already extreamly hurt us; —saevior armis, Libertas nocuit;— Which liberty if it be permitted, continued, will undoubtedly undoe us: And shall any disciple of Christ, that hath beene taught of him, bee now so sleepy, slothfull, sluggish, as if the matter in hand concerned him not? Let us not beleeve that any would be ever contented to die for Christ, that will not speake for him: that they would ever bee wil∣ling to affoord Christ their blood, who will not doe so much as lend him their breath. Now for a corollary or conclusion. It was an excellent commen∣dation that Quintilian sometime gave of Vespasian the Emperour, that he was patientissimus veri, most patient in hearing truth: Let his com∣mendation be, ours. The life of Preaching is application, and the life of Application, is the applying of truths unto our particular selves. And therefore that we may be now yet more particular, in bringing home the truths we have heard, into our severall bosomes: First, do rebellious spirits cast off the Yoke? aime at nothing so much as destructive liberty? Let us be exhorted to submit unto it, to yeeld o∣bedience unto all the holy, equall, righteous, just commands of Almigh∣ty God, and say with the Apostle, howsoever they may seeme crosse and contradictory unto us; that the Law is holy, and the commandement is holy, and just, and good, Rom. 7. 12. And let us write this truth amongst those things we would most remember, that Jesus Christ never was, ne∣ver wilbe a Saviour to any, unto whom he is not a Lord. Further, Let us submit our selves unto every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, &c. as be∣fore it was urged from that in the 1. Pet. 2. 13. Secondly, is there such an unity, an agreeing, a love, a liking amongst many we have named to compasse their evill ends; Let us take up heere in the first place a further sad, and a very just complaint, of the dis-uni∣on, mis-agreement, censoriousnesse, uncharitablenesse, rash judging and condemning, that so swells up the breasts of many amongst us, who professe themselves Christians, yet they want charity for them, for whom Christ had blood; who, because we cannot assent unto them in
all their mis-grounded opinions, therefore they cast us off, away, as filthy ragges. Oh love I thou duty and ornament of Christians, thou glory of Saints, thou delight of God, where art thou? how art thou gone? how art thou departed from us? where shall we seeke thee? where shall we finde thee? Surely in owne hearts, or else woe be to us. And secondly, though difference in opinion hath so banished love from many amongst us, that they cannot afford us a good word; yet we may not deale with them as they deale with us: but learne to know, that if love be of God, as S. John speakes, 1. Jo. 4. 7. And every one that loveth is borne of God, and knoweth God: so he that loves not, knoweth not God, as it followeth in the next verse. And if love be the fulfilling of the Law, as the Apostle tels us, Ro. 13. 10. If the whole Law be abridged in that duty of love; then the want of love must needs be the violating, the breaking of all the commandements of God. Thirdly, let us learne hence, what the Prophet David exhorts us to in a like case, Ps. 109. 28. Though they curse, yet blesse we. And though they hate, yet love we. Let us love their persons, and any thing beside we see of God that is lovely in them, whatsoever they may thinke of us, though we may not, we must not, by any meanes close with them in their opinions. In all our demeanour towards them, carrying our selves as Joshua did to Achan, Josh. 7. who retayned the affections of a Father, while he was executing the office of a Judge. Fourthly, let us be exhorted to make much of that most excellent grace of the spirit, Love: love to God, love to one another. Lets make much of love: for tis love which conveyes all mercies to us. Let us lay hold on it, as the Patriarchs did apprehend the promises, most elegantly set out by the Apostle, Heb. 11. 13. by a Metaphor of saluting, They saluted them, they kissed them, they hug'd them, they embraced them. So let us doe this grace, that findes such little, such cold entertainment from many, from most. This grace of love, which God himselfe so li∣keth, that he calls himselfe by the name of Love, 1. Ioh. 4. 8. : Fellow after charity, saith the Apostle, 1. Cor. 4. 1. The originall word is very emphaticall: for it signifies to pursue, or follow a thing eagerly; it implies in it a singular love to the thing we follow, which makes us take any paines about it; to follow a thing as having it in chase, the Metaphor being taken from Hunters, who will not leave what they pursue, till they have taken it. Thus must we follow after love and charity, that we may Have it, and Harbour it, and Exercise
And lastly, let us labour after unity, as first unity and agreement a∣mongst our selves. Secondly, unity in the profession of the true Reli∣gion we professe, as unity in doctrine, and unity in discipline, which would marvellously unite our hearts together. There is but one Lord, one Faith, oxe Baptisme, one God and Father of all, saith the Apostle, Eph. 4. 5. 6. All in unity. And God is the God of order, not the Author of Confusion, 1. Cor. 14. 33. The body of a Church or State is then strongest, when the multitude of believers have but one heart, and one soul amongst them all. As he that observes the cariage of the Primitive Christians, shall finde this word , which signifies one consent, one heart, one mind, in the 4 first Chapters of the Acts, often applied unto them. Which unity in the truth of Religion, is the firmest band twixt man and man, , the very knot and tie of all communion and consoci∣ation. On the contrary, as division of tongues in the eleventh of Gene∣sis, hindred the building up of Babel, then: so division of hearts hinders the setling and building up of the Church now. And as Plankes and Timbers joyned together make a ship, but disjoyned, shipwracke: and as connexion of stones and timber make an house; dissipation, a ruine: so, unity and agreement of Christians build up a Church, as dissension puls it downe. And as they say of Bees, that when there is a stirre and strife amongst them, it is a signe that their King is about to remove and leave the hive; so strife, schisme, dissension in Religion, to the hazard of it, is a signe that God either hath, or is about to leave a people. One of the maine scandals the Iewes take from the carriage of Christians, is their dissention and disagreeing one with another: which they in∣terpret to proceed from want of unity of truth in the foundation of Christian Religion, by which they are startled and scared from the Go∣spel. And some Papists have sayd of us, (and I would there were no truth in it) what one Preacheth in the morning, another contradicts af∣ter dinner: and what peace and accord can there be in that house, say they, where the husband is a Calvinist, the wife a Lutheran, the servant an Oecolampadian? &c. And what settlement can we expect, while one is a Brownist, another an Anabaptist, another an Antinomian, ano∣ther a Seeker? and all these happily under one roofe: another an Every∣thing, another a Nothing. What can we looke for lesse then confusion, (as a most grave, learned, orthodox, eminent man, famous in his gene∣ration, observed) while we have Doctrine against Doctrine, Prayers against Prayers, Faith against Faith, Religion against Religion? the
most fearfull consequences of which destructive waies were written in the murthers, massacres, tragedies, wasts, somtimes committed in France and both the Germanies: and the reason, the pretence of all that caused those their so great miseries, only that which immediately before we na∣med. The Anabaptists in the upper Germany, as Sleidan reports, framed an imagination to themselves, that by the will of God, the Ancient Magi∣stracy must be quite rooted out from the earth. And said (and happily they beleeved it too) that they had speech with God, who enjoyned them to kill all the wicked in the Land, and to constitute a new World consisting only of the innocent: What slaughter and havock this caused, what profusion of bloud betwixt the Nobles and Commons, Germany then felt, and smarted for; and Histories will relate to all Posterity. The pre∣sident whereof may make the World take heede, how they be drawne by fanaticall spirits, into these or the like desperate and damnable cour∣ses. And if this hath been the fruite of such dangerous destroying waies, let any one be judge that hath not lost his understanding, whether it be fit, for every Subject in a Realme, (for if it be granted to some, it would be in justice to deny it unto others) to be priviledged in his house; to have a God to himselfe, a Priest to himselfe, a worship to himselfe, as Micah had in Mount Ephraim, and whether it be fit for people to preach and beleeve, and obey and pray, as themselves please. But what may be done in this case, may some one say? The minds of private men are as free as Emperours, every one is a King in his owne house as Telemachus said; And nothing is so voluntary as Religion: Yee may shift the bodies of men from place to place, but yee cannot change their minds, advice may doe more then threatning, and faith commeth rather by perswasion, then compulsion; I answer, first we must speake to the conscience by good Counsell, by faire meanes, by forcible-convincing arguments; But if the eare of conscience be stopt up against us, if per∣swasions prove unprofitable, if exhortations, convicting arguments car∣ried on in love and mercy will not serve the turne; we must then speake to the eare of the body, to their Inheritance, to their Liberty. Let the body tell the conscience I am afflicted, the Inheritance I am diminished, Liber∣ty I am restrained for thy sake, I tell yee, that these have been arguments, which have done much good; as Austin affirmes of the Donatists, and Circumellions in Africa, that being terrified by paines, they began to enter into consideration with themselves, whether they suffered for con∣science,
or for obstinacy. But it may be againe objected that some have not been bettered hereby, he answers this objection, Ideo negligenda est medicina, quia nonnullorum est insanabilis pestilentia? Shall we therefore reject physick, because the sicknesse of some is incurable? I confesse that a man should not suffer for a meere default in his understanding, but if the fault be in his will, it alters the case, and without doubt a number even now among us mistake their will for their conscience, which may easily be done, for they lodge both in the same soule, & therfore they may be easily taken one for the other: Now as the rectified good will of man must not be without fruit: So the stubborne depraved will of man must not scape without punishment, the voluntary default of a mans will being the just cause of all his suffering, Clavis sapientiae frequens interroga∣tio questioning is the Key of knowledge, he that never askes, cannot at∣tain to knowledge, and he that ever askes shall never receive satisfaction. When people are become such scepticks, that they will question every thing, and receive satisfaction in nothing; doubt whether the Sun have light, or the fire heate, or the like doubts in other things, which should not be questioned, such must be regulated. Tertullian is of the same minde with Austin, that it is meet that Hereticks and Schismaticks too, should be compelled to doe their duties, if they will not be perswaded to doe them. I say compelled, if allurements and perswasions will not serve the turne, they must not alwaies be entreated, he that hath a Phrensie must be bound; He that hath a Lethargy must be prickt up; And they which strengthen themselves in error or schisme, & diffuse them amongst others, to the prejudice of Church or State, must be violently pul'd out of them. Undoubtedly the sword was never appointed, for Authority, on∣ly to make a shew before it, and therefore that Magistrate is worthy to be disarmed, who beares the sword in vaine. And the Keyes were never left unto the Church, to be worne as golden Keyes for honour, or orna∣ment, or to be kept in the pocket, but to let in some, and to lockout others as occasion is offered. These things command and teach saith the Apostle to Timothy 1 Tim. 4. 11. In the beginning of that Chapter, there is menti∣on made of some that in the latter times should depart from the faith giving heede to seducing spirits, speaking lies in hypocrisie. Now that which was contrary to this the Apostle must command and teach; Command the very selfe same word that is used Acts 5. 40. which the Captaines, and Officers, and High-preists used, when they commanded the Apostles they should not speake any more in the name of Jesus
they commanded them, it is a word of authority which Judges use upon the Bench, for men to hearken, or not to hearken to, at their perill. So St. Jude speakes of some that did separate themselves, not having the spi∣rit, Jude v. 19. and such must be saved with feare  save them by feare, discipline, censures, for so I conceive that place is properly inter∣preted, for feare is there opposed to compassion, of some have compassion v 22. putting a difference twixt them that erre of weaknesse, or unavoy∣dable ignorance, and them that doe it out of wilfullnesse, and pervers∣nesse, the first must be dealt more gently withall, others must be more roughly handled. Saved by feare v. 23. pulling them as a brand out of the fire, wherein otherwise they would be unavoydably consumed. I beseech you let me not be mistaken, in that I have now delivered, insector vitia, non homines: I know it is a very great act of injustice, to be angry at the offender and not at the offence, I assure you therefore tis mens faults not their persons which here stirres me up to make com∣plaints. I shall ever desire to be most tender of those in whom I can dis∣cerne any impressions of God. And I know it had been better for me that I had never been, then that I should live, to condemne the generation of the righteous. And for my part, my witnesses are in Heaven and in my owne breast, that so farre as I can know my heart, I doe not wish to live a minute longer, then I shall unfainedly desire to honour those that truely honour God. And ever since it hath pleased God to reveale himselfe in any measure to me; I could love Religion in russet, in raggs, as well as in the gayest dresse: And shall labour, by Gods grace, while I live, to give most respect, where I finde most goodnesse. But when the error of Religion turnes mens braines, and so makes them to fight against the truth of it; I cannot chuse but complaine: I know that Zeale is good, excellent good, and hath its due deserved commendation both of God and man, and cursed be they that goes about to extinguish that holy fire, that Zeale which is well grounded, well ordered; grounded upon know∣ledge, and carried on with discretion. But I know that there is as much difference twixt Zeale, and Zeale, as there is betwixt Religion, and Su∣perstition, and therefore to be carried on violently either by a mis-groun∣ded or a mis-governed Zeale, may be cursus celerrimus, but praeter viam, a swift violent motion, but quite out of the way. Fourthly, are those rebellious spirits we have named so resolved in their waies, that they leave no meanes un-attempted to bring their de∣vices to passe (as before we observed;) O let us now labour to be as wise,
as active in our generation as they can be in theirs. And Oh that we had been so, Oh that we would be so. Twas Jehu's question 2 Ki. 9. 32. who is on my side who? It may be now the Lords; When the mouth of wic∣kednesse is opened so wide, when the mists of error thicken so much; and when the wings of schisme spread so far over us; and there is not that endeavour which ought to be, which might be, to dispell those mists, to clip those wings, and to stop that mouth: qui non vetat peccare cum pos∣sit, jubet, we are guilty of every sin, which we might, and doe not pre∣vent. If we had wrought wisely, as we might, as we should have done; we should have dealt with Schismes and Divisions while they were gro∣wing on us, (which, because we did not, have done us already such ap∣parant mischeife) as wise men doe with Snakes, Vipers, venemous crea∣tures, they stay not till they have stung or bit them, but they crush and kill them before-hand, that they may neither bite nor sting. It is a sad thing to dally and foole with dangers, especially those which are spiri∣tuall, till by our connivence they strike through the life of our Religion. It was therefore very good counsell which Demosthenes sometimes gave unto the Athenians that they should not expect till evill came, but prevent it: we should be wary before the wound, and meet with diseases that we would not have take hold on us: Be apprehensive before-hand of danger, taking all evills that they may not much hurt us, at the very first bound, that our providence in this case may prevent our too late Repentance. Yee know how that it is much easier to quench a fire-brand then a great fire; and to put out a great fire on the hearth, then that which is far lesse in the top of a chimney. And the Lord rouse us up out of that spirit of slum∣ber into which we are fallen, that we may not be like the Smiths dog, whom neither the hammers above him, nor the sparkes of fire falling round a∣bout him, can awake. And Lastly, let us all resolve to be as active for God as any other in the world can be against him. They say in Philosophy, that the foundation of naturall life is feeling; so no feeling, no life; and so the want of spirituall feeling argues a want of spirituall life: in which respect that may be ap∣plied unto many, what St. Paul speakes of the wanton widow mentio∣ned 1 Tim. 5. 6. that they are dead while they live; being so un-apprehensive, so un-affected, so insensible of what may trench upon God and his cause. Tis an observation in nature that the more quick and nimble the sense of feeling is in a man, the better is his naturall constitution: So our ten∣dernesse, our sensiblenesse of Gods honour or dishonour, above all other
things, expresse the goodnesse of our spirituall temper. And doubtlesse it is now high time for all that feare the Lord, to speake often one to another as they did Mal. 3. 16. To stirre up one another unto a godly jealousie, o∣ver Gods whole cause, his worship, his Church, his Children. It was a brave resolution of Tully when he was Consul of Rome, which he uttered in his first Oration against Catiline, Intelliges me acrius vigilare ad salutem, quàm te ad pernicius Reipublicae. Thou shalt know that I will be more wakefull for the safety, then thou canst be, for the destruction of the Commonwealth: So should every member of the Church, especi∣ally those whose places make them more publike, resolve, to be more vi∣gilant for the setling, flourishing, enlargement of the Church, then others can be malicious for the ruine thereof. Tis an high commendation that Moses gives to Levi Deut. 33. 9. who said of his Father, and Mother I have not seene them, neither did he acknow∣ledge his Brethren nor his Children; his neerest naturall relations giving place to his spirituall, and so should ours: And as that was the ground of his; so will it be a ground likewise of our highest commendation. Ʋbi de Religione, ibi quoque de vita agitur, as Philo Judaeus excellently spake, our very lives (I and our soules too) hold upon our Religion, and therefore we must act for Religion, for that which concernes Gods Glo∣ry, the Churches and our owne eternall good, as we would act for life: is a word vsed in the 13 of Luke the 24. which hath very much in it, for it implies thus much, that when we deale either with God, or for God, we must strive as wrestlers doe for mastery, or, as Combitants doe for victory, or else, as a man strives and struggles for life, having the pangs of death upon him: Pro aris & focis was the ancient proverbe; First for Gods rights, and after, for our owne. And therefore it is very well observed of Aeneas, how that though he were eminently renow∣ned for his deare respects to his Father; yet when the City of Troy was sack't wherein he then was, he first rescued, and exported and then . First his Gods, and then his Father. The morall, the Lesson taught from which story is exceeding good: That we must first, for-most with the neglect of every thing beside, appeare for God. To which Purpose, the carrage of Moses is most observable, a very meeke man, above all the men that were upon the face of the earth, for the spirit of God gives him that testimony, Numb. 12. 3. which made him not to regard, in not ta∣king notice of, but trampling as it were upon all injuries done unto him∣selfe, as if they had not been done, as you may observe Exod. 17. and in o∣ther
places, yet when God was dishonored; he shewed himselfe to be a man of another spirit, in vindicating His cause, as you may reade at large in the 32. of Exod. And thus our blessed Saviour (of whom Moses was a type) how most contemptuously was he vsed while he was upon earth; as we reade in his story: and, how willingly did he give his cheeke to the smiters, and his back to the scourges; and when he was most shamefully reviled, he held his hands, yea and he held his tongue too, for he reviled not againe, 1 Pet. 2 23. But, when he saw the Temple dedicated to the ho∣nour of his Father, prophaned; he laies about him, in overthrowing the tables of the money-changers, in casting them out that bought and sold there, nay whipping and scourging all out thence Joh. 2. 15. Of which carriage of our blessed Saviour, all the Evangelists take speciall notice. O now let us looke upon their examples, and get this instruction from them, to be very forward in the cause of God. And let every one of us who desire the happinesse of the Church and State wherein we live; Labour to act wisely, religiously and boldly in our proper spheares, whether we be Magistrates, Ministers or People, let's resolve by God his asistance against all sinnes, which, if we take not heede, will undoubtedly destroy us: And against all schismes too, that may, if we be not wary, unavoydably undoe us: and against every evill beside that may hinder either our present, or our future happinesse; To pray them downe; To preach them downe; To smite them downe, And to live them downe. I could aboundantly en∣large, but I am in a Sermon, not in a treatise: And therefore that I may not be farther injurious to your Patience, I will abruptly breake off as in the midst of a sentence. FINIS.
