V253A E818_19 99860432 112552
A BRIEF RELATION OF THE Strange and Unnatural PRACTICES OF WESSEL GOODWIN, MEHETABELL JONES the wife of EDWARD JONES, and ELIZABETH PIGEON the wife of JOHN PIGEON. Prov. 2. 16, 17. To deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the stranger that flatters with her words. Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the Covenant of her God. Prov. 30. 15. The Horseleech hath two Daughters, that cry Give, Give. Printed in the Year, 1654.
TO THE READER. READER, I Here present thee with a most stupenatous Relation of a father, formerly loving his children even to doting, and now without any just provocation abhorring his owne flesh: of two sisters that heretofore were transcendent in the profession of Saint∣ship, and now apostatized into Libertine and unnaturall practises: the Apostle saith, he that provides not for his family hath denyed the faith, and is worse then an Infidell: here shalt thou see a father so far from providing for his dutifull children, that he strips them of all that which God hath given him, and gives it to strangers; the Apostle saies of these latter dayes, that there shall be seducers, that shall creep in∣to houses, and lead captive filly women, laden with sins, led away with divers lusts: here behold seducing women cun∣ning in wickednesse, creeping into a silly mans house, and lead∣ing him captive to their wicked purposes, and to his owne and his families utter ruine. Stories make mention of certaine Sea-Monsters whose upper parts are the resemblance of beautifull women, and the neather parts of an ugly fish, who by their melo∣dious voices entise the unwary passengers to attention, and then suddenly seise and devoure them; here behold two Land Sirens or monsters, being neither maides, wives, nor widowes, ha∣ving only the shape of women, charming with the musick of their fained speeches, a silly old man, and suddenly seising and devou∣ring
both him and all his family. I doe professe in the presence of God; I am not conscious to have set downe one passage that I scruple the truth of it; to most of them I have been an Ocular witnesse. That which is most remote from my owne knowledge hath severall times been related to me by their owne husbands. My intention in this publication is not to defame the parties here∣in concerned, but to discover the truth which by their feigned pretences and foule practises hath been grievously defamed: I have also considered, that haply this narrative may light into the hands of old Mr. Goodwin, and who can tell but when he shall see in this true glasse his whole shape at once, and behold what a deformed Creature his sinfull converse with these women hath made him; who can tell I say, but he that hitherto hath stood out against all the reproofes and admonitions of godly friends, and Ministers, professing that he valued their reproofes no more then the dirt under his feet, by the powerfull assistance of the Spirit of God his secret thoughts may rebound within him, his heart throb, his bowells be moved, and he may smite upon the thigh, and say, what have I done? Reader, here thou wilt see a Land-wrack, where there are in these perilous times more rocks and quick sands then in the great Ocean, and all for want of minding the Compasse. Let it teach thee to keep to the rule of Gods word, to grow in Grace, and to stand fast in sound principles, to stand amased at thy owne vilenesse and Gods good∣nesse, so wilt thou be humble and thankfull, and be preserved from the snares of seducers. Farewell.
MAster Wessell Goodwin, one of the principal subjects of this relation, was borne in the Borough of Southwark, where yet he liveth, bred up in the mystery of a Dier; of whose Descent and parentage I will not mention one word, that I may contract my discourse, keeping close to the subject I have undertaken. About the twenty sixth of his age, he married Mistris Ellenor Armestrong a Liecester shire Gentlewoman of an an∣tient honorable Familie, a woman of the most excellent frame of spirit that I ever met with, judicious, sober, vertuous, and above all, religious, a Charitable heart, that would seldom send away the poore without a double Almes, relief for the body, and good coun∣sel for the soul; that in some things seemed parsimonious, that on just occasions shee might be the more liberal; that could finely di∣vert her Husband from his follies, and yet give him all due respect; by her he hath four children, three sonns, one daughter, all hand∣somely educated: for many years they continued in good corre∣spondency of affection, till towards her latter daies, that his folly would admit of no restraint. Amongst other extravagancies, he was ever strangely given to musick, to which he had a ravenous appetite; five pounds for pricking out two or three lessons, which when he had, he understood like Arabick; thirty pounds for a Lute, of which he had with other sorts of fiddles, a whole roome full; and which is the wonder, can ply of none, only admires them, ten pounds at a time to a musick Master for a months teaching (or rather playing to him.) And as at Virginia Tobacco, and at the Barbadoes Sugar is put in the place of money, so many hundred weight for a field or a Cow, so doth he
fondly thinks musick to be that which answers all things. I'le give but one instance from an hundred, coming one day to see his Daugh∣ter Vernon, he used these words to her Husband, Sonne, quoth he, I am sorry I cannot doe for you as I would, I see you have a great charge, and trading is bad, which I doe consider, and therefore will bestow upon my daughter a suite of Mr. Rogers his new les∣ons. I am sorry to spoile paper with such fooleries; but there is a necessity that the sequent truth may the better appeare. I might add his training up all his children to musick, and so farr as they gave way to his musickal distemper, so far they were dutiful and obedi∣ent; so far as they slighted musick, wicked and rebellious; for in∣stance, his second son being intended (through his Mothers im∣portunity for a Prentice) accordingly he was put to an able writer to perfect his hand; but still he plies him to have a great care of his Lute, and would needes have brought him a musick Master to the house where he boarded; and when by the youth and his son Vernon he was told he had musick enough, and could not now so unseaso∣nably atend so much musick, he fell into a great rage against his said son Vernon, telling him he had Corrupted his son with his counsel, but should corrupt no more of his children. About the 58 yeare of his age, his vertuous wife fell sick of a painfull disease contracted by melancholy, of which in a few mo∣neths she died. I should not mention any of the private unkind∣nesses with which she long strugled, and at last sunke under, only this particular I may not omit. When she drew neare her death, some few dayes before her departure, overhearing the musick which was daily in the next roome, she desired one of her sons to call in their father, to whom with a broken sad voice she said, Husband, you well know what a burthen this Excesse of musick hath been to me all my life; must that which hath been so much affliction to me in my life, be brought to my death bed? may I not dye out of the noise of it? pray for∣beare, I have not many houres to live, and then you may have your fill of musick. To which he replied not one word, but went out in discontent and so fel to his musick againe. The third day after, shee departed this life; a little before her death shee called to her her son in Law and daughter Vernon, desiring them amongst other requests to see to the Education of her two
younget sons, the Eldest being a little before married to a vertuous maid of an honest and Religious Neighbour familie, for which shee much rejoyced, hoping that her eldest son now taken into partner∣ship with his Father, and matcht with a stay'd discreet wife, the Old man would the more delight himselfe in his children and condition and take himself off from his extravagant musick. To which purpose shee then also desired her children to labour by all fair wayes to take him off from that company, especially from the frequentation of Mr. Edward Jones; and that not so much out of dislike to him as to his wife, whom shee saw to be a subtil undermining woman, that would be ready to make her own advantage of old Mr. Good∣wins weaknesse. I told you before, that the eldest son, Andrew Goodwin, was upon his marriage taken into partnership with his father, into a Stock of Eighteen hundred pounds, of which two thirds are the fathers, and one third the sons, as by Indenture appears: which partnership is to continue eighteen years: a little before Mr. Good∣win had cast up his estate, and found his neat stock to be two and twenty hundred pounds, a fine competency; though nothing to what he might have honestly raised out of his Trade (which for the quantity, I verily believe to be one of the best Dyers trades in England.) In this partnership it was agreed that Andrew Good∣win, being the better accomptant, should keep the books, and cash, and looke after the street businesse, and old Mr. Goodwin to follow the trade within doors; and so they began very comfortably toge∣ther. About three months after Mrs. Goodwins death, Mr. Good∣win going to see his son in Law and daughter Vernon, after some abrupt passages, he began to tel them that his house wanted aguide, and he had found a Godly woman that would be a fit wife for him; this he pretends to desire with much passion, when (as it now ap∣peares) he was sent by Mrs. Jones and Mrs. Pigeon her sister to act this cheat to delude the world: which is plaine by what Mr. Pigeon hath affirmed under his hand and seal. Which attestation of Mr. Pigeons lyes deposited in the hands of Mr. Cooper Minister, and the Elders of the Parish of Olaves Southwarke; by which writ∣ing he affirms that long before, even in the life time of Mrs. Good∣win deceased, Mr. Goowdin had engaged to marry Mistris Jones.
But this pretended passion lasts not long, for within ten dayes af∣ter Mr. Goodwin returnes againe to the house of his said son in Law, tels them, that he saw now that God had not appoynted this match for him, but that God had provided for him a wife so eminent in Piety and wisdome, that his former wife deserved not to be named the same day. And when he was entreated by his said children to discover who this rare woman was, he utterly refused to reveale it; yet his daily converse and familiarity with Mrs Jones put them in strange thoughts; but still the businesse was to them but tanquam Nubibus, very dark, till time the Mother of truth hath made it more apparent and notorious, as by this ensuing discourse ap∣peares. Let the Reader note, that Mr. Goodwin is a member of Mr. Coopers Congregation, Mrs. Jones a member of Mr. Kiffins Church, and Mrs Pigeon of Mr. Hansard Knowles. Now because Mrs. Pigeon is the chief agent and contriver in these sinful projects, I shall give this brief discription of her: She is one that can transforme her self into an Angell of light, and having her tongue tipt with Scripture, can with teares, sighes, gesture at com∣mand, set off what she would have beleeved, as Gospell, though very false, thereby to ensure such as hearken to her Charmes; no sport to her like catching credulous persons with her faire Saint-like expres∣sions, making sure prey of all that she can thus draw into her toyles; and so implacabe, that when she hath once got an advan∣tage, nothing shall satisfie her but the utmost rigour, which she will rise at midnight to prosecure. This finely qualified Gentlewo∣man was wife to Mr. Starkey an Apothecarie; but she soone (as is beleeved) woried him out of the world with her wicked impe∣rious usage; She had by him (as is thought) one childe, and a faire estate. After a while she marries with second husband, one Mr. Pigeon, a Lieutenant in the then Lieutenant Generall Cromwells regiment. Shortly after her marriage with Mr. Pigeon, she returnes to her old imperious carriage, as will appeare by this story. She askes Mr. Pigeon what he would doe with his estate, if he should die? he sayes, he hopes to have children by her; she replies, she hopes he loves her so well that he will trust her with his children, and presses him to promise, that if he dye he will give her all: he endeavours in a loving way to divert her; but she insists pe∣remptorily
in her resolution to make him sweare to give her all; which he still refusing, she absolutely refuses to admit him as a husband: and yet to worke him to her purpose, did behave her selfe very amorously towards him, and besides her personall allurements did many times urge him to drinke aqua coelestis, vinum viperatum compounded with provoca∣tive drugs, and many other provocative meats and drinks for many dayes together, promising him that if he would sweare as aforesaid, she would be to him according to his owne heart: yet did he for good reasons still refuse to con∣sent, and she still pursues him, till one morning practising the very height of amorous behaviour towards him, and yet pe∣remptorily refusing him, unlesse he would swear, he fell into such a passion, and was so transported, that he became alto∣gether senselesse, feeble and irrationall, so that she feared he would never returne to his reason againe; in which conditi∣on she then besought him for Christs sake to speak to her as formerly: but all in vaine, for he was no wayes sensible of what he said or did. She now much affrighted at this strange accident, applies her selfe to one Doctor Burges a Physician, who coming to him in that condition, gave him two vomits in one day, which through excessive straining brought him even to the point of death: yet after being a little recover∣ed, and his understanding somewhat returning, he besought God that he might regaine his understanding; which it plea∣sed God to restore him, though he remained a good space very feeble. In this condition he said one day these words to her, Sweet heart, thou hast often told me that thy love to me was greater then to thy former husband? didst thou ever deale by him after this manner? she then terrified in conscience, said indeed she served him so once, restraining him her company so long till he committed a sin, for which he was tormented in his conscience, and fell into such an a∣gony that as she then said, she thought he would have dyed. She then promised the said Mr. Pigeon never to doe the like again: she said, that by this carriage of hers she procured of Mr. Starky to give her all his estate except some trifling legacies, and made no provision for his childe: yet at his death he
framed a new Will, wherein he otherwise disposed of his estate; which last Will she found meanes to nullifie, by plea∣ding that he dyed Non compos mentis. Notwithstanding all this, she after a while returnes to her old practises, and so wrought with Mr. Pigeon at the last, to part with his estate to her, as is well known, and did yet after this run away from him, and then againe after a while retur∣ned; and thus would she frequently doe according as the dictates of her unconstant mind and her projects led her. Now we must return to Mistris Jones, whose turn must now be served. Shee must be freed from her husband, that so shee may be free for old Mr. Goodwin, who is now so taken with her, that he can enjoy himselfe no where but in her company: scarce one day in the week but he is at her house, spending his time in dalliance with her. And Mr. Pigeon affirms, that about the year 1646. sojorning then in the house of his Brother Jones, he set himselfe to observe their carriage, and at one time he saw Mistris Jones take Mr. Good∣win about the neck and kiss him: at another time, being (as they thought) in private, he saw her take Mr. Goodwins hand, and putting it under her apron, holding it against the bot∣tom of her belly, with many repeated mutual kisses, she say∣ing, oh my deare Love! At which Mr. Pigeon being much scandalized to see his Sister Jones so behave her self to Mr. Goodwin, she being a married woman, and her husband in the house, went presently and told his wife what he had seen, and that he would tarry there no longer, for that he believed the house was a Bawdy house, and that her Sister Jones was Mr. Goodwins whore. Mistris Pigeon perceiving they were discovered to her husband, told him then that in∣deed Mr. Goodwin was a Suiter to her Sister Jones, and that she would make it a match. She then also told him that Mr. Jones was no longer her sisters husband before God, but had for∣feited his right in her: she then affirmed to him also, that Mr. Goodwin of a long time had been a great friend to her sist∣er, and had given her several sums of money, thirty pounds at a time: All which passages Mr. Pigeon in presence of good
witnesses hath offered to make oath of before any Magistrate. Now the Lute and the Lute Master is quite laid aside, Mr. Goodwin speaks not one word more of musick; he hath found another manner of Lute that is easier to play on, which he had been long before a turning; And Mr. Pigeon having with his estate divested himselfe of his authority, must now seeme to like of all his projecting wife doth, that so at any rate he may buy his peace. He is (as I said) entertained, and with Mr. Knowles, called to counsell: Mr. Jones must now be turned off, and to that purpose a writing is drawn by Knowles; and having notice that Mr. Jones is at the Ram Inne in Smith∣field teaching a scholar on the Lute, Knowles comes up, askes him if he be the man; which being acknowledged, he shews him the bill of Divorce, and after that he had briefly in∣formed him that he hath forfeited his interest in his wife, bids him without more adoe set his hand and seale to the bill of Divorce. Where note, that Mr. Jones, having lived 16 or 18 yeares in lawfull wedlock with his wife, by whom he hath five children alive, yet upon the sole information of his wife, without any judiciall examination or processe, must be di∣vorced. Mr. Jones astonished at this strange greeting, askes him by what authority he could make divorces between man and wife? but Mr. Knowles would not debate the matter, but peremptorily bids him signe, or he would fetch authority from the Counsell of State to compell him. Mr. Jones mo∣ved at this insolent language, tells him he would not subscribe; and that if he departed not speedily, he would kick him down stayres: away runs M. Knowles in a great fright to acquaint his Clients with his successe. Mr. Jones returning home, Mrs. Pigeon falls to threatning of him. Mr. Jones, that could not indure to be so abused in his owne house, bids her depart his house; she replies with insolent language, and he replies to her with kicks in the breech, and by force turnes her out of doores presently. She findes out Mr. Pigeon, who to be out of the sight of the wickednesse he dayly saw at his brother Jones his house, had taken a chamber in Woodstreet, where he had often desired his wife to remain with him; but she refused, and commands were now out of season. Mrs. Pigeon
coming as aforesaid to her husband, aggravates with all her cunning the violence Mr. Jones had done her. Mr. Pigeon, hat was now throughly sensible of his wives insolent behavi∣our, and his brother Jones his being most injuriously dealt withall, and all to gratifie a silly old man, and a covetous naughty woman, tells his wife that he would not meddle in the businesse, and that he had often warned her to depart her brother Jones his house, where there was no reason she should abide against his consent, to make breach between man and wife. Away she flings in a rage, and to be briefe, enters an action against her brother Jones in her husbands name, though without his consent and knowledge, of 500l. and never rests untill she have lodged Mr. Jones in the Counter: and this not onely for revenge, but to mortifie him, and make him fit to set his hand to the bill of Divorce, which at last he submits to, or to something equivalent. About this time, whether for plotting or rejoycing I know not, but there was a merry meeting at Mr. Pigeons. chamber, Mrs. Pigeon and her good sister Jones are come, and all waite for Mr. Goodwin to passe away the time, Mrs. Pigeon falls a jeering of her husband, who discontented at these doings was walking too and fro in the chamber: sister (quoth Mrs. Pigeon) doth not my husband looke a little like my brother Jones? yes indeed doth he, quoth she; he prayes them to forbeare, and in the meane time up comes old Mr. Goodwin with a fine white capon under his arme: as he enters the roome, Mrs. Jones flies to him, throwing her selfe into his armes, saying, Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Jones and I am now parted for ever, and you must keep me. The poore deluded old man being overjoyed, takes her in his armes, tells her, it was the best newes to him that ever came to towne, and that he would provide for her, with more to that purpose. Mr. Pigeon stands in admiration at these doings; at the last breaks out into these words; Now quoth he, I see the cause my brother Jones was put into the Counter: when Mrs. Pigeon, enraged at her husbands plaine dealing, tells him he is as bad as his brother Jones, and therefore takes his part; saying, you are, you are, many times over. Mrs. Jones, in imitation of her sister, and Mr. Goodwin in imitation
of his sweet-heart Mrs. Jones, joyne with her in the same ex∣pressions, with their fists bent against his face. Mr. Pigeon overcome with their uncivill revilings, after severall admoni∣tions to no purpose, was faine with some blowes to correct their folly, and thrust them all down staires headlong. Mr. Goodwin coming home to his house, where he had now been a long time missing, and being by his neighbors demanded where he got his black face, tells them, it was onely a violent fit of the tooth ach; when as for some years before he had not one tooth in his head, at least visible. And as mischiefs seldome come alone, shortly after this combate, as Mr. Goodwin is coming from Mrs. Jones house to his owne, in the dead of the night, he is againe assaulted in Bartholmew lane, and grievously beaten: some say, it was Mr. Jones, some say Mr. Pigeon; but by whom is not perfectly knowne: assoone as he got quit of his enemy, in stead of going home to his owne fa∣mily, he returnes back to Mrs. Jones, well knowing in whose quarrell he had received those sore buffetings: it was fit she should see what a martyr he was for her sake. There he lay about ten dayes in a sad condition, but the joy of Mrs. Jones company made him forget his paine, and speeded the cure, which else might have been dangerous. Amongst them, (to salve his reputation) they give out, that a horse had thrown him downe, and trampled upon him. Mr. Jones being now released prison, it is first agreed be∣tween him and his late wife, that she shall depart the house and leave him with the children and goods; she departs for a fortnight into the country, at her returne (knowing his houres of absence) when he was abroad teaching his scholers, she comes privily in with her maid, a bold wench for her turn, and secretly carries away all the best linnen and goods of va∣lue, leaving the poore man with all his children in an empty house, and all this still she did to bring him to her owne con∣ditions; which were, that he should depart the City, and so leave her free to the embraces of old Mr. Goodwin. She long before, with her sister Pigeon, often solicited him to goe be∣yond seas, alledging to him how bravely he might live there, and what money he might get by his faculty of playing on
the Lute; which he would not hearken to then, but is now compeld to depart the City, stript of wife, children, estate, carrying away nothing but the bare clothes on his back, and all to give place to an old mans lust, and a naughtie womans covetousnesse. Before his departure, he in private expostulates the matter with Mr. Goodwin, askes him what wrong he had ever done him, that he should deale so perfidiously by him, to draw his wife out of his bosome? and with what conscience, and by what law he could contract himselfe to his wife, he being yet alive? at the first the seduced old man denies it, but having proved to him how he had sundry times found him kissing her, and at one time with his hand under her apron, and that he had also by Will given her all, or the greatest part of his estate, which he could prove by the party that drew the Will, the old man at last convinced, confesses the Will, and the contract, adding, he might lawfully doe so, Mr. Jones having (as he affirmed) forfeited his right as a husband to her. Here I must make a short digression, to informe the Rea∣der, what ground Mrs. Jones alledges for her separation from her husband, which I received from Mr. Jones his mouth. Coming home one day, and finding his wife very fine, rea∣dy to goe abroad, he askes her whither she was going? she tells him to see such a friend: He replies, wife, you know I would not have you converse with that woman. She tells him violently she would goe; he tells her, if she goe, he will never come in bed with her more, and this with some rash as∣severation. Away she goes, the poore man in much trouble, goes abroad againe amongst his scholers, and coming home at night, findes his wife very strange: when bed time came on, thinking to goe to bed with his wife, she bids him remember his vow, which she would take order he should never break: and so to this day would never more admit him as a husband. Since she gives out, that he hath committed folly, which she pretends she can prove: for my part, I beleeve it a scandall devised, the better to accomplish her wicked project with Mr. Goodwin.
But to returne; away goes Mr. Jones to Norwich, where he hath ever since remained in very honest repute lamented of all that heare his sad story. I told you before, that at his departure he left her all his estate; amongst other, he had a Lease of some houses in St. Johns street, worth about 25l. per annum; he tells her, that in respect she keeps the children, he is content she should re∣ceive this rent towards their maintenance; and accordingly being now at Norwich, sends the acquittances quarterly to one Mr. Fletcher, a discreet freind of his, to deliver them to Mrs. Jones: but she refuses them, goes to the tenants with old Mr. Goodwin, and in her owne name demands the rent, offe∣ring her acquittance for their discharge; which they refuse as insufficient: yet at last yeeld to pay her, she mentioning in their acquittance, For the use of my husband Edward Jones: but she rather then by such acquittances she should acknow∣ledge Mr. Jones her husband, from whom she now accounts her selfe divorced, refuseth; and so the rent for this foure yeares hath layen dead in the tenants hands. Indeed she hath often threatned them, but when that would not prevaile, she let it rest, well knowing Mr. Goodwin hath enough, whose purse is free to her use. Immediately before that Mr. Jones went away, that she might have a sure intelligencer at Mr. Goodwins house, she puts her son, of about 14. yeares of age, under the colour of a prentice to Mr. Goodwin, utterly against his fathers consent, who was very desirous to have put the boy to some trade sute∣able to his strength, being a weak limbed childe: but she was violent, and would not neglect any meanes that might carry on her project; she and her sister Pigeon were resolved to come in after themselves, and therefore it was needfull (as theives usually doe) to thrust in a little theife at the window to make way for the great ones. This boy (being a flye youth) serves for a little Mercurie, to carrie messages, appoint meetings, be∣tray the young man, and is frequently found behinde the doore listning what passages passe between the old man and his children, who perswade him against these women, and desire him not to entertaine this boy, that was unserviceable
for his trade? but all in vaine, for Mrs. Jones her will is a Law, and now is Mr. Goodwin at her house night and day, at rack and manger; all the towne rings of their scandalous converse: but he is so bewitched with her, that as it is reported of leprous persons, into whose flesh you may thrust needles to the head, and they feele nothing; so though reproofe, ad∣monitions, prayers, from children, neighbours, Justices, Mi∣nisters, assault him daily, yet he is insensible of all. His owne Minister Mr. Cooper, a judicious, learned, ten∣der-hearted Christian, labours much with him, sets the scan∣dall notably before him; and at last thinking thereby to awa∣ken him (all other meanes having proved uneffectuall) with the consent of the Eldership suspends him from the Sacra∣ment, which he values so little, that to this day he so conti∣nues, without so much as once desiring to be restored, pro∣fessing his conscience is cleare, and that he values the reproofs of Ministers no more then the dirt under his feet: Thus he goes on from bad to worse, and when he wants mony to supplie Mrs. Jones and his owne irregular expences, he goes to the merchants, takes up severall summes of mony, 100l. at a time, never acquaints his son, whose businesse it was to re∣ceive the debts, and so brings him into confusion in his ac∣compts: at other times takes up stuffes upon credit, where∣with he cloaths Mrs. Jones and all her children, carries them in coach out of the towne, there they revell for whole weeks together, Mr. Goodwin payes all. Now these good sisters pos∣sesse him at their pleasure, and plye him daily to beware of his children, tell him what a shame it were for so wise a man as he is to take counsell of his cradle, these are their very words; and that his children would governe him as if he were a very childe, when as they affirme to him, that there hath not lived a wiser man then he since King Solomon. Thus they cajole and inveagle a most pittifull weak man, who is so taken with these dissembling women, that he ac∣counts it his greatest preferment to waite upon them up and downe the towne like a halfe-penny serving man, and when he comes neare them, can scarce speake for joy, and seldome comes to them without some present for back or belly.
A discreet friend of mine affirmed to me that he saw one evening Mr. Goodwin going into Pauls ally; and that as soone as he was entred, he saw the transported old man fall a dancing, and capering, that he protested he thought he had been distraught: The neighbours that have daily seene him come into the ally, observe, that as soone as he is entred, he falls a smiling; nor have they been wanting to reprove them to their faces, telling Mrs. Jones, that it was a shame they should converse so scandalously; but that the truth was, he loved her for her smooth flesh, and she him for his full purse: the very children have taken notice of their behaviour. A little girle of about foure yeares of age, daughter to one Mr. Cherry, is sent by her mother to Mrs. Jones of an errand; at her returne she tells her mother, old Mr. Goodwin is there, and that she saw him put up his hand under her smock sleeve up to her shoulders, playing and tickling her, when as modest Mrs. Jones cryes, Away Mr. Goodwin, take away your hand, or I will make you no more pye-ale: a maid servant to Mr. Wright told me, that there was a voyce heard in their house, saying, Mary Mason, my sister and I intend to lie abed to morrow all the forenoone, if any body come, let in no body into my chamber unlesse it be honest Mr. Goodwin. Now Mrs. Jones, that licks her lips at profit, not at the wi∣thered old-mans kisses, casts about how she may make all yet surer; now she accounts all the old mans estate hers, and therefore plots how she may improve it, and prevent any dis∣appointment from his children; she causes Mr. Goodwin to send frequently to her his chiefe journyman, one Anthony Rawlins, that all along had been Pimpe major to this villany; he gives her account of the trade and custome, how it is, and how it might be managed: for these services the old man lets him filch what vailes he will: This knave seconds the old mans report, that his son is an ill husband, that will bring all to ruine: this allarmes Mrs. Jones, who hath now no visible subsistance but Mr. Goodwins estate; she was, for some yeares before her husbands departure a schoolemistris, teaching needle workes, but he once gone, all that was presently laid aside. Here observe, that Mrs. Jones and her sister have by this
time made all Mr. Goodwins family of their confederacy ex∣cepting the young man, and his wife, and one Roger Crey, the eldest prentise, an honest, religious, sober fellow, that had often spoken freely and heartily against their practises, pro∣fessing that these women would ruine the family. It pleased God that this fellow fell sick, when presently the two sisters are sent for, they physick him, he growes worse; young Mr. Goodwin intereats his father that some able Physici∣an might be advised withall; the old man refuses to give his consent, boasting highly of the great skill of those two she. Doctors: in Conclusion, the young man doubting some false play, privately carries his water to an able Physician, Doctor Burnet; at the first sight of the water he tells him, the party was a dead man, past all recovery; and that if good help had been sought in time, in all probability he might have done well. Mr. Clarke a skilfull Apothecary on the Bridge is also consulted, and he affirmes the same. Still these women plye him with their druggs, telling his Mr. there was no danger; though he lies raging in the violence of a burning feaver, in all probability caused by the contrary medicines they had administred to him. The evening before his death, the two sisters come in their hackney coach and make new applicati∣ons to the poore departing man, who so long as he had his senses, had earnestly beg'd of his Mr. that he might take no∣thing that came from them, well knowing how they hated him; yet never could obtaine any succour but what came from their hands: which what it was I leave to God and their owne consciences. In the best construction that can be made, they did very wickedly, to trifle away a mans life, being igno∣rant of his disease; and in that consideration, if no other, are guilty of his bloud, which God will one day make inquisiti∣on for, and avenge. That night they sate up in the hall with a good fire and ale, to see what would become of him, and about three of the clock he departed: when, whether terrified with the guilt of what they had done, or what other consi∣deration, but presently they tooke coach and departed, though in the dead of the night. Some moneth after young Mrs. Good∣win dyed, a vertuous young woman, whose sicknesse occasi∣oned
more visits from these good Ladies, and might have done more physick; but they were now out of credit, and her pa∣rents watc'ht diligently that she should take nothing that came from them. It is generally believed that she dyed of griefe, having her heart broke by the occasion of the practi∣ses of these women. In my hearing she hath often made bitter complaints, saying, these women had disgraced the family, and would be the ruine both of her husband and father in law. Now the project thrives apace, two of their great opposers are by death removed out of the way, there remaines onely the young man to be dispossess'd, and then all is their own: in order to which, they first order the old man to tell his son, that his family wants a guide, and that he is resolved to bring Mrs. Jones to take charge of his family. The young man in a great deal of distraction acquaints his friends with this newes, and according to their advice, endeavours to perswade his father by faire meanes not to disgrace the family by bringing in a woman that was reported to be his whore; and seeing his father persist, that he would bring her in, tells him plainly that he hath an interest both in the stock and trade, aswell as his father, and that seeing her coming in tends to the ruine of both, he is resolved to oppose it, and if she comes, to thrust her out by head and shoulders. This the old man reports back againe, and they are for the present at a losse. You may wonder that active Mrs. Pigeon hath been so little mentioned all this while; but she is not idle but hath her irons in the fire, she sees how successefully her sister Jones with a little of her help, hath rid her selfe of her husband, and therefore now she plots how to shake off also her shackles of matrimony. You may remember that Mr. Pigeon, to satisfie her violent importunity, had made over to her all his estate, which was very great; well thinking by such an unparalleld act of love to binde her to him in duty and affection for ever; but what can oblige such savage natures? she returnes to her old disobedience as before you have in part heard. It was a common practise with her, if at any time he refused to act her wicked projects, to run away from him sometime for a week, sometime for a moneth: amongst other of her devices, it be∣ing
immediately after the late Kings death, she makes shew of much discontent against the actings of the present Gover∣nors; she projects to her husband to draw up a declaration against them, and their proceedings, which he must subscribe and avow, and then he should be her dear husband, and she vowes to stand by him to the last in it. Let others thinke their pleasure, for my part, I beleeve this was a plot laid to have de∣stroyed Mr. Pigeon; but he wisely refused to act in it, repro∣ving her pragmatical spirit, for which she vowes to be revenged of him: then Mr. Knowles is sent for, who according to her instructions had framed a bill of divorce, which he then per∣swaded Mr. Pigeon to subscribe, alledging he might lawfully in the sight of God doe it, and at last did prevaile with him to subscribe. Not long after Mr. Pigeon is againe reconciled to his wife, and Mrs. Pigeon did then also subscribe two writings with her hand and seale, which Mr. Pigeon hath still by him, wherein she covenants to forget all former discord, and to be to him a loving and dutifull wife; yet after this she ran away severall times, and began now to fall into intimate ac∣quaintance with a merchant living at Clapham, from whose company to this day Mr. Pigeon could never reclaime her: Sometime she would come and stay a week, and then to this Merchant againe, and though Mr. Pigeon did before good witnesse upon the Exchange admonish the said Merchant to abandon her company, and gave him reasons which did in∣duce him to thinke that she was the said Merchants whore, yet they still persist in their familiarity: now Mr. Pigeon be∣ing commanded into the Isle of Jarsey, at his returne, his wife being lately delivered, they were againe with much adoe re∣conciled, yet was her old project still on foot; for Mr. Pige∣on having one night got cold by his carefull tending of the childe, he said to her, Sweet-heart, I fear I shall have the Gout, for I have a paine in my wrist that shoots into my finger; she presently with violence affirmes, that it was the Pox: he per∣swades her, and she opposes, and at last resolves to send for Mr. Knowles to be advised by him. Mr. Pigeon the next day meeting casually Mr. Knowles, acquaints him with their diffe∣rence, tells him if he will come and endeavour to perswade
his wife to reason, he would take it kindely: Mr. Knowles re∣plies, it was Mrs. Pigeons custome first to resolve upon things, and then to aske counsell; and further said to Mr. Pigeon, that he need not thinke Mrs. Pigeon spent his money upon him, for he had never received but five pounds for himselfe, and five shillings for the poore of their Congregation; he said, if Mr. Pigeon would be at home that evening, he would come and endeavour to perswade her; which accordingly he did. Mrs. Pigeon conducts him into an upper chamber from her husband, where they were together about halfe an houre, and then came downe together into the roome where he re∣mained; and she then began to make grievous complaints, insisting chiefly on two heads, viz. that he had the Poxe, and that she was in feare of her life. He then asked her what ground she had for it, and if he had threatned her since he came home? she replied, he had not, but that he had a paine in his arme, which she knew was the Poxe. Mr. Knowles said, that he had a paine in his arme, and she might aswell say so by him; and added, that she was his wife, or else she was a whore. She still insists; she was afraid, and could not be satisfied. Mr. Pigeon mildely said thus to Mr. Knowles, Sir, you hold my wife too hard, she pretends I have the Poxe; if you thinke fit, we will presently send for two able Physicians, and I will submit to a search. Mr. Knowles replies, he spoke fairely: yet seeing this would not satisfie, Mr. Knowles frames a speech in this manner, Mr. Pigeon, pray take my advice, and goe from your wife, and I will warrant you she will send for you againe. Mr. Pigeon amazed at this advice, replies, God hath given me counsell in his word, that every man should have his owne wife, and every woman her owne husband, to avoyd evill; and I cannot leave Gods counsell to take yours. He replies, in some cases a man might leave his wife: Mr. Pige∣on answers againe, there must be a joynt consent of both parties, and he being the chiefe cannot consent. Mr. Knowles againe and againe presses him to goe from her. Mr. Pigeon tells him, I will not leave Gods counsell to take yours: and if this be your counsell, pray depart the house. Mr. Knowles presently in discontent goes down the stayres.
Mrs. Pigeon endeavours to run after him, crying out, Mr. Knowles, Take him with you, Take him with you. Mr. Pigeon takes hold of his wifes skirt, and intreats her with all gen∣tlenesse to be ruled; Mr. Knowles comes up the stairs againe, layes violent hold of Mr. Pigeon, wringing him by the finger to make him let goe his wise: but not so prevailing, (there having not as yet past one blow) he layes down his Claoke, and running to Mr. Pigeon, catches him by the throat, stirkes twice at his face with his fist, calling him base unworthy fellow; and still sorely pincht his throat. Then Mr. Pigeon by violence throwes off Mr. Knowles, who feeling him too strong for him, runs down the stairs, calling to his assistance many rude per∣sons, who violently laid hold of the said Mr. Pigeon, his wife taking part against him: Being thus invaded, he had no other way but by violence; many stroaks lighted upon his wife: and he professeth that he was so transported by this strange provocation, that he can scarce give account of what he did, untill he had quitted the room of these people: amongst the rest, in this medly, Mrs. Pigeon hath got a strange black face, which by her art she yet makes more visible, and then with Mr. Knowles and several other persons, she applyes her self to the then Lord General, screwing her wits to the utmost to work revenge: and in fine, so endeavoured with her smooth tongue, that she procured to have her said husband dismist the Army: since which time she hath lived in constant separation from her husband. Now is Mistris Pigeons work done, and she at leisure to act in her sister Jones business, who (as I told you) was at a plunge, by reason of the short-answer young Mr. Goodwin had given his Father. But Mrs. Pigeon, (to whom no villany is diffi∣cult) relieves her: they presently conclude upon this plot, Mr. Goodwin hath a younger Son, James Goodwin, a weak head∣ed child, about seventeen years of age; him they get into their Circle; and first they be labour the simple boy with their sophisticated arguments, and gain him a proselite to their ten∣nents: now he is maillable. In brief, they presently clap up a Match between this boy, that a little before was inten∣ded for a prentice, and Mistris Jones her daughter, a girle
of about fifteen years old, but so small, that she looked more like one of eight or nine at the most. After short woo∣ing, they are married together. This was a strong subtil de∣vice, worth Mistris Pigeons Invention. By this match Mr. Goodwin and his concubine are become brothers and sisters, and who can find fault at decent familiaritie between such? By this the women have got an interest in the estate and fa∣mily, that they dare own to the world, which they durst not before: This brings them boldly into the house to reside; Mrs. Jones pretending that because her daughter is such a childe, she hath the more need of a guide. In a word, this device drawes a faire skin over a great many scabby places at once; and so they without any more Ceremony all enter the house, bringing all their children and retinue with them. Mrs. Pigeon is so taken with her policy, that at her first arrival, walking alone up and downe the yard, she was heard to say to her selfe aloud, So, now I have broke the yce. And now seeing the game so fair before her, she resolves to have share her self: and therefore whereas before Mr. Good∣win had by Will given Mrs. Jones 1000l. Mr. Goodwin di∣rected to Mr. Colborn, Mrs. Pigeons Secretary and fast friend, when a new Will is framed, by which he only gives her 500l. Now they are setled with their families, and Mr. Goodwin is so ravished, that he hath got his brace of Mandlins so neare him, that no ground can hold him. The only thing that yet hinders, is, that Mr. Goodwins eldest son and part∣ner is still in the house, and hath a clear interest in the Estate and Tarde, and they have resolved that nothing lesse then all shall satisfie their wicked appetites; in order to whose casting out, they had therefore some months before appointed the old man to set an Accomptant of their own at work, to make up all accompts between father and son, who by the instructi∣ons given him, had brought in the ballance or net stock, all debts paid, to be 1516l. of which, as they order it, there is coming to Andrew Goodwin for his third part, only 150l. They give out that by his ill husbandry he hath brought the estate to this; and that there was more assigned
him by the accompt then his due. Whereas it is constantly beleeved by all the friends and neighbours, that for one shil∣ling the son hath wasted, the father hath wasted three; who could not be accused of any other vice or unthriftinesse, but that when he saw his father would not be reclaimed from con∣verse with these wicked women, on whom he visibly spent his own and his sons estate; when he saw that his father by taking up money and wares in a disorderly way had brought him into confusion in his accounts, and that his father in all places where he came was so evill spoken of for his shamefull scan∣dalous frequentation of these wicked women, unable to beare up under such a burden, he gave up himselfe to melancholly and carelesse stupidity, that he let his bookes run into some disorder; of which (as you shall see) they make notable ad∣vantage. And therefore now Mrs. Pigeon assisted with Mr. Good∣win, drawes up a note; which before witnesse she delivers to young Mr. Goodwin, therewith charging him within four∣teen dayes to depart the house: which when he had perused, he demanded of her, by what authority she could warre him out of his house? She replied, it would be his best way to depart without dispute, for as she then told him, she had never yet undertaken any designe but she brought it to perfe∣ction. Presently (in the young mans absence) she causes the old man (who did nothing but by her order) to bring in a Smith; him she in old Mr. Goodwins name commands to break open the young mans counting house, takes away all his pa∣pers and monies: from thence they ascend to his chamber, break open his trunke, take away what they please, and while the young man amazed, is considering what to doe, the fourteene dayes expire. They presently in the old mans name enter an action against him, and at one of the clock after midnight they send forth their property James Goodwin to fetch two bayliffes of the Borough, and two Sergeants which they had prepared, and bring them over the ditch as theeves into the house, where they finde the unnaturall old man with these women waiting, who presently set them to work: The
poore young man not dreaming of such barbarous villany▪ was fast asleep in his bed. Having furnished them with an iron crow, they all ascend, and presently fall to forcing open his chamber doore: the young man awakened with the noyse, thinks no other but that it was theeves breaking in to murder him, flyes to the window, cries out murder, and then pre∣sently sets agreat chest against the door: which when they could not force, the bayliffs being at a stand, Mrs. Pigeon, (that gives all directions) Cryes, Mr. Goodwin, it is your own house, you may bid them break down the wall: which the simple old wretch bid them doe. The young man in a∣mazement, perceiving they had made a breach in the wall, and having no weapon to defend himselfe, and now seeing they were Officers, suffers them to enter, and so they seize him, violently haling him away in the dead of the night. Which was those subtil womens policie, fearing in the day time, had they done this Divelish action, they might have been by the neighbours throwne into the ditch headlong. Away goes the old man with Mrs. Pigeon to the Bridg foot, where with the City Sergeants they waite the bayliffs, who had promised to deliver him at the Bridg foot: But the bayliffs, sensible that they had done that already which they could not Justifie, would gratifie them no further, but carry him prisoner to St. Margarets Hill. Young Mr. Goodwin in this distress, seeing all tending to ruine, and that these women were resolved to cozen father, children, and creditors of all, bethinks himself of one Mr. Henry Crosse, to whom he owed 500l; to him he confesses a Judgement, which Mr. Crosse presently executes, enters the house, seizes the goods, and carries away to the value of a∣bout 1000l. to St. Margarets Hill. Now these cunning women are againe at a plunge, but Mr. Colborne their sure friend rescues them: by his advice they procure two Appraisers, who are instructed, and appraise these goods but at 403l. which money Mr. Colborne layes down, being indeed Mrs. Pigeons money, having the mana∣ging of all her estate. This money paid into the bayliffes hands, the goods are released, and returned to Mr. Good∣wins
possession. And now being attentive to all advantages, finding they had been surprized by this Judgement, to stop all gaps for the future, they fall upon a new designe to make all sure for ever. The old man must confess a Judgement for all that he hath in the world; but to whom? This mon∣ster could not be brought forth by women; Mr. Colborne must be the man midwife; in short, Mr. Goodwin confesses a judgement, and Mrs. Pigeon having first turned the old man and all his servants out of doors, she before witness sei∣zed of all for the use of Mr. Henry Colborne formally, and for her selfe and Sister Jones virtually. And now all is secure, and the plot they had been seven years hatching is now perfected: as for the 403l deposited in the bayliffes hands, they find meanes by Mr. Colbornes help to procure that: in regard young Mr. Goodwin hath but a third share in the stock, therefore Mr. Crosse the Creditor shall receive but the third of the 403l. seised, and so by or∣der of Court Mr. Crosse receives his third, 134l, and the two thirds return to Mr. Colborne. Thus are Mr. Goodwin, Father and Son, brought to a mor∣sel of bread, neither having one penny left. But Mr. Good∣win the father is taken into his late house, as a poor jorney∣man to Mr. Colborne; and which is to amazement, so far from being sensible of what he hath done, that he proclaims to all comers that he had rather be Mrs. Pigeons Journy∣man, then to be Master of all without his two women. The young mans children being in the house, are turned out of doors, and old Mr. Goodwin (by order of Mrs. Pigeon) forbids all his children (the young traitor James Goodwin excepted) to come upon the ground: His daughter Vernon coming one day to see him, by Mrs. Pige∣ons command, he takes her by the arme, and thrusts her out of doors: and now they insult and vaunt beyond measure. Old Mr. Goodwins children seeing all ruined, and that their father is now captivated more then ever to these women, they joynt∣ly present a petition to the Justices of the County and Borough of South-wark, representing therein their sad condition; from whom they obtain a warrant to bring these women before
them to St Margarets Hill; where the business being debated, Mr. Goodwin was seriously reproved and admonished to forsake the scandalous company of these women: but the debate growing long, and it being late, the Justices adjourned the meeting, and hearing of this business to the next week after. When being againe met, and some new Justices that had not heard the former debate, amongst the rest, Mr. Gold of Clapham appeares, and is very eager in the vindicati∣on of these women, especially of Mrs. Pigeon, whom he saies was a most Angelical woman, and that she could discourse to admiration: and he said that this prosecution of Mr. Good∣wins children was but a rage of jealousie for matter of estate, and that the whole army of England should maintaine the reputation of these Gentlewomen: these were his words. Some other of the Justices insisted to have Mr. Goodwins children produce their proofs of what they had alledged in their peti∣tion: to which they replyed, their witnesses were ready, but would not appeare, unless they were summoned by order of Law, left they should incurr trouble from these Litigious women; the Justices upon debate finding the witnesses living for the most part in Red Cross Street, out of their Jurisdicti∣on to summon them, they dismissed the business with only an admonition to old Mr. Goodwin, to forsake the company of these women so prejudicial to his reputation. Thus in all they prospered: onely the severall Churches to which they are related, that knew their shifts, which were now become very scandalous to their Congregations, after severall admonitions to them to forsake this scandalous socie∣tie, and all in vaine, they cast them out of their Churches and all communion with them. Since which time I cannot learne that they owne any Church at all, but for the most part spend the Sabbath at the Dye house.
A POSTSCRIPT to old Mr. GOODVVIN. BEfore I conclude, I would lay a few considerati∣ons before you; though I have very little encou∣ragement, you have with so much scorne rejected the admonitions of godly Ministers and others, that it will be no wonder if all I can say make no impression. Yet who knowes not that the Instrument as well as the season is in Gods hand? And therefore I will now speake my whole heart to you, and I pray God set it home to your thoughts. You are now arrived at old age, about sixtie three, as I guesse; the holy Ghost saith, Gray haires are a Crowne, if they be found in the wayes of righteousnesse: and on the con∣trary, that a sinner of an hundred yeares old shall not escape unpunished; consider then first, what God hath done for you, what a wife did he blesse you withall, a woman for piety, wisdome, fidelity, frugality (I am confident) hardly to be matcht, though your Dalilahs have sought to asperse her; but they doe but heave stones in the ayre, which will fall on their owne heads: for while her body lies rotting in the ground, her name yeelds a sweet savour in the hearts of all Gods people that knew her, while these stinke above ground. And she came not to you emptie handed, but brought you a good estate, when you had little or nothing to take to; by her God hath given you foure dutifull children, and so they appeare to all that know them, though you most unworthi∣ly call them wicked Chams and rebels:
For your daughter Vernon, name the time that ever she disobeyed your lawfull commands; how many times hath she upon her knees beg'd of you to forsake the company of these women, whose evill fame hath blasted your former good name? how many houres hath she spent on her knees in begging of God to open your eyes? For your son Andrew, how many men would have bin proud of such a son; though there were no more then his outward shape? and never could be taxed for any miscarriage till you gave up your selfe wholly to company with these women, who with all their art and malice have daily exasperated you against him: which behooved them to doe, well knowing that he being your partner in Trade, there would be the less hopes for them, while there remained any good Correspon∣dence between him and you: and when you were thus whetted, you would come home and revile him with most unmanly terms before all the boyes, enough to break a stronger tempered spirit then his; and when you had so far dull'd and sotted him with this usage, that you thought your project ripe, then on the sudden you take him by the throat like a fellon or murderer: oh Mr. Goodwin, are these things true or no? I appeale to your own conscience; where were the bow∣els of a father, when you let in the Marshals men at midnight, furnished them with iron bars, and accompanied with your women, broke in upon him in his chamber, and scarce allow∣ing him time to put on his cloathes, dragd him to the jaile in the dead of a cold winters night? For your second son Thomas, an honest plain hearted man, beloved of all that know him; and yet because he will not justifie you in your sin against his own conscience, but hath in a dutifull manner beg'd of you to forsake these women, you refuse to owne him, and tell him you will never leave him one penny. And for your third son James, you have done him the greatest wrong of all: for, that he might as a propertie be instrumentall to your sin, you have caused, or suffered your women to poyson his principles with their corrupt tenents; you have betraid him yet a childe, and most shamefully unfit
for such a relation, to marriage with the daughter of her, that hath ruined your name and estate. Thus in particular have you wronged all your children, and in general by making over all your estate, which by the Law of God and nature ought to have descended after your decease to them, to Mr. Colborne. Solomon saith, that the good man is merciful to his beast: and Mr. Goodwin (whom his women affirm is as wise as So∣lomon) is unmerciful to his owne children. The Apostle saith, No man hates his own flesh are you (Mr. Goodwin) no man? or will you make the holy Ghost a liar? And what hath been the incentive to all this unnatural dealing? your love, or your lust to Mrs. Jones; you can name no other; that you might enjoy her, another mans wife, her husband alive. You have stifled your conscience, scandalized the Gospel, reviled Gods Ministers, suffered your selfe to be cut off from the Sacrament and Communion with the Church of God, ru∣ined all your children, and basely requited your vertuous wife deceased: and all this to gratifie two sinful women, that now they have obteined their ends, begin to slight you, and no doubt when through the infirmities of old age you shall be able to doe them no more druggery, will cast you off and ex∣pose you to want and misery. This all the world foresees; for women of their profession doe alwayes so. Did not Mrs. Pigeon, when she had stript her husband of all he had, cast him off, though formerly her dear husband? Be yet perswa∣ded, your children would yet rejoyce in you, and care for you, though stript of all your estate by these women. Doe you not perceive how they have ensnared you, and wound you about with their nets, as the spider doth the silly fly? first, they entangled you with musick, and many yeares held you under that pleasing note; then they cast over you the net of pre∣tended piety, and fained extraordinary holyness; and then they snare you in the net of love to Mrs. Jones, which they work you to believe is lawful; and lastly, lest you should break from all these, they throw over you the strong iron net of the Law, and that doubtless will hold your estate fast, which is the thing they seeke for, whatever becomes of you.
I shall conclude all with a short paraphrase upon part of the seventh chapter of the Proverbs, and let all men judge how it fits this occasion. Verse 6. And I saw amongst the simple, and consider∣ed amongst the children, a young man destitute of understand∣ing, who passed by the street, by her corner, and went towards her house. Which how frequently you have visited, let all red Crosse Street and Pauls ally testifie. Verse 9. In the twilight, in the evening, when the night began to be black and darke. I and at noone day, in the light of the Sun. Verse 10. And, behold there met him a woman with a har∣lots behaviour, and subtile of heart. Verse 11. Shee is babling and loud, whose feete cannot abide in her house. 12. Now she is without, now in the streets, and lies in waite at every corner. This is so perfectly Mrs. Jones her picture, that nothing can be more alike in all the circumstances. 13. So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impu∣dent face said unto him. For this I referre you to Mr. Pigeons attestation mention'd before in this booke. 14. I have peace offering this day; I have paid my vowes. 15. Therefore came I forth to meet thee that I might seek thy face, and I have found thee. 16. I have deck't my bed with ornaments, carpets and laces of Egypt. 17. I have perfumed my bed with mirrhe, aloes and Cyna∣mon. I am in Gospell order, rebaptised, a member of Mr. Kif∣fins Church, and professe according to the Antimonian light, that God sees no sin in his children: and therefore, Verse 18. Come let us take our fill of love, untill the morn∣ing; let us take our pleasure in dalliance. 19. For my husband is not at home; he is gone a journey far off.
I have sent him to Norwich, whither he is forced by my wicked usage. 20. Hee hath taken with him a bag of Silver, and will return at the day appointed. I have stript him of all, not leaving him one penny in his purse; and taken order if ever he returne, to have him clapt up in the jayle. Judg what a Saint the harlot is in these four last verses, in comparison of Mrs. Jones: she owns her hus∣band, lets him carry away a bag of money, and expects his returne. 21. Thus with her great craft she caused him to yeeld, and with her flattring lips she entised him. 22. And he followed her straightway as an ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a fool to the correction of the stocks. 23. Till a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, and knowes not that he is in danger. 27. Her house is the way to the grave, which goes down to the chambers of death. The Lord open your eyes LEt the reader take notice, that at the time of young Mr. Goodwins arrest, there was an accompt drawne up by one Mr. Lewis a Scrivener, by the appointment of old Mr. Goodwin and his women, by which it appeares, that there was then a clear estate (all debts paid) of 1516l. Of which Mr. Crosse recovered 0134l. Rests 1382l. To be devided (with the yearely benefit of the Trade) be∣tween Mr. Coleborne, Mrs. Jones, and Mrs. Pigeon.
Two words to Mrs. JONES, and Mrs. PIGEON. NOT that I have any confidence to prevaile with you by any thing I can say, but that you may be warn∣ed and left without excuse: I am not ignorant of your dispositions, scoffing at any thing that crosses your projects. Indeed you are arrived at such a proficiency in sin, that because with painted words, elevated, and then presently dejected Eyes, that send forth teares at command, double sighes, and broken sobs; solemne Imprecations to what you would assert, promptnesse to rebuke sinfull expres∣sions or behaviour in others, when there are such persons by as may witnesse your zeale; seemingly great tendernesse and scrupulosity in smaller matters, readinesse to quote abused Scripture for all you doe; in all which you are incomparably practised; because with these you have not onely charmed a weak old man; but even many seeming wise persons (not ac∣quainted with your subtilties) are deluded by you, so that some of them have stiled you most angelicall Creatures. I say, having these abilities and applauses, I much doubt you beleeve also that even God himselfe allowes of all you have done. But let me whisper a word to your consciences, if you have any. I pass by here what you have done to your respective hus∣bands, and divers other persons I could name. I will only put you in minde what you have to answer for poor old Mr. Goodwin, and his children, all whom (for your covetous sinful ends) you have ruined; some of them by your meanes brought already to a morsel of bread. Was there ever such a
desolation brought upon a family, to inrich those that lately had not the least title, or interest in the family? That Mr. Goodwin (father and son) that six yeares a gone lived in good credit, and with a good stock, and a gaineful trade, through your injurious invasions and subtil sleights, are neither of them at this day worth a groat: the whole Estate, house, stock, and Trade under the covert of Mr. Colbornes name, being translated to you. Nay, by the industry of Mr. Colborne the Scrivener, and Mr. Hat the Attorney, you enjoy all this un∣der a Legal title; so that thus fortified, you triumph and laugh at all that dare oppose you, and you are now fixed in your sinful purchase. But here Remember, though man cannot call you to accompt, God will; and by how much the more religion hath been a cloake to this wickednesse, by so much the more severe and dreadful is your punishment like to be. And though Mrs. Pigeon sayes, I never took any designe in hand but I prospered in it; yet let her remember, that Gods word sayes, The prosperity of the wicked shall slay them: let them both remember, that while the thief steales, the Hemp growes; that while sin ripens, the reckoning day comes on apace: that while they are revelling with their Sage-ale, and Marmalade, and dividing the spoyles of Mr. Goodwins estate, his children are spreading their wrongs daily before God, to whom they appeale for Justice against you, and to whose dreadful barr they summon you both, with your assist∣ants, to answer this horrible wickednesse. God hath given you both warnings of late; as you tender your souls, be a∣wakned by them to repentance. Remember, you must shortly dye, and for all these things God will bring you to Judgement. Ecclesiastes. 12 ult. For God will bring every work to Judgement, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evill. FINIS.
READER, I Am informed, That these women, taking the advantage of the Authors not publishing his name, give out, that all is lies and slanders. In the first place consider, if it be not reasonable in perillous times to beware of per∣rillous persons. Again observe, that the substance of it is matter of Fact: Of the truth whereof, if thou wilt be at the pains, thou shalt be the Judg: For example, Dost thou doubt of the truth of old Mr. Goodwins behaviour to his for∣mer wife? ask Mr. Vernon in Bevis Marks: or of Mrs. Pige∣ons behaviour towards her two husbands? ask Mr. Pigeon, Mr. Wolf a Shop-keeper upon Exchange: of Mrs. Jones her behaviour to her husband? ask Mr. Hill a Lute-maker in the Strand, Mr. Fletcher at the Earle of Warwicks, Mr. Horne in Little Saint Bartholomewes: or of Mr. Goodwins scanda∣lous converse for these many years with Mrs. Jones? ask Mr. Vernon, Mr. Pigeon, and all the neighbours in Pauls Al∣ley: or of their obscene carriage in private? see Mr. Pigeons Attestation in the hands of Mr. Cooper, Minister of Olaves Parish: or of the suspected death of Roger Crey? ask Mrs. Brown in Pickle Herring, and all Mr. Goodwins servants: or of Mrs. Pigeons invading Mr. Goodwins Estate, under pre∣tence of freeing him from his children? ask Mr. Henry Col∣burn Scrivenet: or of the ejecting young Mr. Goodwin in that in humane manner? ask Mr. Goodwins servants, and all the neighbors on the Green-bank. In fine, that there may not want Testimonies, even these women have set to their Seal: For instance, take this short, but real story. In page 28. of the Narrative, there is a short parallel made between Mrs. Jones and the Harlot, in Prov. 7. 20. is this Note, I have stript him of all, not leaving him one penny in his purse, and ta∣ken
order if ever he returne, to have him clapt up in the Gaol. This was printed above three Months agone, and about a month agone comes Mr. Jones to London, his businesse, to see his children, and to receive and settle the rents in St. Johns street, which is well known he intended to divide every pen∣ny amongst his children: at his arrival being constrained in his affections, he went to his house to see them, where hee found one of Mr. Goodwins servants called Silvester Smith, a Gentlemans Son of Estate in Nottinghamshire, courting his daughter Mary Jones, a Girle about thirteen years of age, with whom the said Silvester is since contracted in marriage. Where note how these wicked women do wind and screw themselves into good families, as formerly they did by James Goodwin, and the elder sister, though both were children, and shamefully unfit for such a relation: and their designe herein not so much to prefer these children, as to become in∣terested in the estates of other men. But to returne, while Mr. Jones in a civil loving way is discoursing with them, Mrs. Jones and Mrs. Pigeon both in the house, sent and entered an Action for 400 l. against Mr. Jones in Wood. street Counter, at the pretended Suit of one Mr. Mountague a School-master of Ockingham in Barkshire, and brought away two Sergeants, who at his coming down arrested him, and carried him away Prisoner to the Counter. The next morning one of the Ser∣geants went to these women (as I conceive) to demand his Salary: when Mrs. Jones asked of him, if Mr. Jones were in the prison; and being informed he was, she then fell into a violent Crocodile passion, with tears bewailing his condition: The Sergeant then told her, he was there by her order, and that if she would withdraw the Action, he would presently release him: she then cryed out with vehemency, Oh no, by no means; he must lye in prison, and we have more Actions to charge him with. Away in admiration of this divelish dissimulation comes the Sergeant, and at his heels Mrs. Pi∣geon to the Counter, and in the names of several persons en∣tered four Actions more against him, to the value in all of about 1000 l. of all which Mr. Jones protests he oweth not one penny. Since they have let fall the four last Actions, and
did on Wednesday, February the 2d come to a Tryal upon the 400 l. Action. But first Mrs. Jones is dispatcht away to Oc∣kingham to prevail with Mr. Mountague to own it, who (as is verily believed) all this while knew nothing of it: which they well hope she cannot fail to effect, his wife being also sister to these good Ladies, a chicken of the same brood. Things thus disposed, to tryal they come, where when Mrs. Pigeons Counsel (Mr. Lane) told her it was not probable Mr. Jones should owe Mr. Mountague, 400 l. and he have nei∣ther Bill nor Bond to shew for it; and though she offered to make Oath of it, he told her that would not carry it; but wish'd her rather, if she could swear that Mr. Mountague had disbursed any money for Mrs. Jones and her children since his absence: she then, ad omnia quare, made Oath that Mr. Jones ran away from her sister five years agone, leaving her neither bread, nor money to buy bread: though it can be proved, they were two years at least solliciting him to be gon from his wife, and at one time offered him 10 l. to be gone, and all that they might carry on their intended project with old Mr. Goodwin. But to make short, by this Oath she ob∣tained a Verdict for 60 l. for Mr. Mountague, which Mr. Jones not any wayes able to pay, must remaine prisoner in all pro∣bability during life: which considering his melancholly tem∣per, impatient of a Prison, I verily believe will not be long. And now let the ingenuous Reader judg of the fidelity of the Nar∣rative, and the wickedness of these women. FINIS.
