V253B E884_1 99866363 118634
THE TREPAN: BEING A true RELATION, full of stupendious variety, of the strange practises of Me∣hetabel the Wife of Edward Jones, and Elizabeth Wife of Lieutenant John Pigeon, Sister to the said Mehetabel. Wherein is Discovered The subtil Method whereby they Cheated Mr. Wessel Goodwin, a Dyar in Southwark, and all his Children of a fair Estate: With sundry Copies of Letters, perfumed Locks of Hair, and Verses they sent him, and many other notable devices Belonging to The ART of TREPANNING. Prov 6.26. For by means of a Whorish Woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread, and the Adul∣teress will hunt for the precious life. Printed in the year, 1656.
Mr. Goodwin being a man professing Religion, they put on a great seeming shew of Holiness, whereby they with fained words stole into the very heart of this poor old man, and then made merchandize of him, & finding his wife a judicious dis∣creet woman, not to be gained neither with the lute nor the mu∣sick of their deceitful tongues, they secretly insinuate to Mr. Goodwin that his wife did not shew that duty & respect as she ought, but aimed to govern her Husband, though all the neighborhood will justifie her to have been a most vertuous wo∣man, & a faithful, loving, respectful wife; how far they pre∣vailed with this device to make division between them, is well known to some, but seeing they are both dead, I forbear any men∣tion, but Doct. Mayerne her Physician told me, that the Dis∣ease she died of was Grief; she died, ann. 1647. and very op∣portunely for their purpose. A little before her death, with the help of some friends, she prevailed upon him to take his eldest son Andrew into Partnership with him, who having newly married a vertuous young maid of good Parentage, might be a stay and comfort to the old man after her decease. Well, Mrs. Goodwin is dead, & Mr. Goodwin now more then ever frequents Pauls-alley in Red cross-street, the place of these two sisters abode, now they begin to act strongly, and close first with him in this manner, they tell him Mr. Jones is a wicked man, and in the sight of God no husband, having forfeited his interest, & she free to marry whom she please, & having muffled this shallow old mans conscience by many sub∣til insinuating devices, draw him first into a league of love with her, then for the fairer carrying on of the business, Mr. Hansard Knowles is imployed to draw a Bill of Divorce
between Mr. Jones and his wife, although he had lived 18. years in lawful wedlock with her, and she have by him 5 Chil∣dren: then by many practises they endeavor one while to per∣swade Mr. Jones to be gone beyond Sea, Mrs. Pigeon offer∣ing him a sum of money if he would so do; but that failing, they arrest him in fained actions & cast him in Prison, & by those practises so afflicted him, that at last he yielded to quit the Ci∣ty, and so went into Norfolk, where to this day he abideth. Mrs. Goodwin and Mr. Jones thus removed, the game playes fair, now Mr. Goodwin is there day & night, nothing but dalliance & entertainments, carrying them into the Coun∣try, spending his own & his son & partners estate upon them, now they possess him at pleasure, cause him at two several times to make his Will, wherein he gave to Mrs. Jones 600. l. that so they might have that for a Pledge in case he died before the Design were perfect; one of which Wills at the request of Mr. Goodwin, by the direction of Mrs. Pigeon, was drawn at the Mewse by Lieut. Pigeon, husband to the said Eli∣zabeth, though much against his mind, but to buy his peace with his imperious wife: & the other by Mr. H. Coleborn, Scrivener, at his house in Budge Rowe. And here having mentioned Mr. Pigeon, I must give you a brief accompt what life he leads with this projecting woman, who being thus active for her sister, you may imagine is not idle for her self; she was formerly the widow of one Mr. Starkey an Apothecary at London-stone, whose death (as she hath since confessed to Mr. Pigeon) she procured; soon after she married Lieut. Pigeon, then an Officer in the Army, a man of good parts and a fair estate; shortly after their marriage she woes him to
make her a promise upon Oath, in case he died, to give her all his estate; which he for good reasons refusing, she peremptorily refuseth him her Bed, and yet at the same time uses all the a∣morous practises she could imagine, plyes him with high pro∣vocative meats & drinks to inflame; & then after all, will you swear to give me all? if you will not, if you touch me I will cry murder; by these & many other practises, not fit to be mentioned, at the last she obtained her end, and prevailed with him to make over all his estate to Hen. Coleborn & some other pe sons in trust for her: and wheras by this he thought he had won her for ever, she now is more insolent then before; now she makes him a drudge in all her Projects, and if he stick at any thing, then two Beds, and then if you touch me I will cry murder, and now consults with her Confessor Mr. Knowles how she may be Divorced from him, till at last Mr. Pigeon over-come with their practises, gave some words to Mr. Knowles which occasioned a fray, in which Mr. Knowles, Mrs. Pigeon, and some rude persons that Knowles called in were soundly beaten; but this beating they so improved, that at a Court-martial they procured Mr. Pigeon to be Cashier∣ed the Army and Imprisoned; and to make all yet surer, she with some persons fit for her purpose makes Oath before the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, That she went in danger of her life, and so obtained a Writ of Special Sup∣plicavit, which she kept dormant by her to awe him from coming near or disturbing of her, and so Mr. Pigeon quit of imprisonment, with-draws also into the Countrey: Now they carry all before them, all things favour them, now they ply Mr. Goodwin to take heed of his Children; now they
draw all Mr. Goodwins servants into their confederacy, excepting on Roger Crey that detested their practises, he falls suddenly sick, they Physick him, and boasting of their Skill, charge his master to use no other Physician, and that he counterfeited, till the Disease grew so high, that Andrew Goodwin privately carried his Water to Doctor Burnet, who said he was a dead man, and that he died for want of means in time, & accordingly that night he died in their hands. Another obstacle was young Mrs. Goodwin, who hath often, before good witness, affirmed, That her heart was broke with their wicked practises, in making dissention be∣tween Father and Son, and the apprehension of the Ruine she saw coming upon the Family; but the Grand Rub in the Project was Andrew Goodwin, whom they sought all ways imaginable to cast out of Partnership, by daily exaspera∣ting his Father against him, by breaking open his Counting∣house and Trunks in his absence, Mrs. Pigeon sending for the Smith, and causing him in the old mans name to do it, and taking thence all his Papers and Accompts, then causing Mr. Goodwin to imploy one Mr. Lewis an able Accomptant, to make up the Accompts between Father and Son in order to his casting out and their getting in, to whom as the said Mr. Lewis affirmed before the Commissioners, she offered 30. l. as a Bribe, if he would so draw up the Accompt as that An∣drew might have nothing in the Stock, and so be cast out as a Bankrupt: And the better to colour their coming in, which they were now ready for, they draw into their snare James Goodwin the youngest son, a silly school-boy, who was then fitting to be put to prentice; this Boy they having first prin∣cipled,
draw into a marriage with Mrs. Jones her eldest daughter, as meer a Child as he, and presently they are mar∣ried, and so these two succesful projecting sisters with their Children and Servants come all to inhabite at the Dye-house, where now they bestir them: they first warn Andrew, the Partner, to depart the house within 14. dayes, Mrs. Pigeon telling him, She never undertook any Design but she brought it to perfection: the 14. dayes expired, being in Novem∣ber, 1653. about mid-night, they send out their engine, James Goodwin, for two Sergeants, and two Bayliffs they had hired, having before entred an Action of 1000. l. against the said Andrew for pretended breach of Cove∣nants, these Officers are brought in as theeves over the ditch, Andrew having the Keyes of the Gate in his Chamber where he was fast asleep in bed, Mrs. Pigeon brings them up, furnishes them with an Iron Crow; and the Door pro∣ving difficult to be forced, she cryes, Mr. Goodwin, Let them break down the Wall, it is your own House; so they seized and carried him away to Prison, and then by assigne∣ments, and bills of sale from old Mr. Goodwin, and such like devices, with Mr. Hen. Coleborn's help, she got posses∣sion and title to Mr. Goodwins and his Sons whole Estate; what followed you will finde in the ensuing Relati∣on, and the Report drawn up by the Worshipful Commissio∣ners, by Order of His Highness the Lord Protector, to which I refer you. ERRATA. PAg. 3. line 20. for do, interest read so interest: pag. 7. line 33. dele all: line 35. for sharp read strange: Pag. 8. line 28. for into his Grave, read into disgrace.
THE TREPAN. IN the precedent Relation of Mistris Jones and Mistris Pigeons practises, you have seen them by many subtile and wicked steps, become possessors of all old Mr. Goodwins and his Sons Estate: While old Mr. Goodwin was alive, they wrought at a distance, drawing from the old man, now and then, sums of ten, twenty, thirty pounds at a time, as upon Oath hath been witnessed; be∣sides much good Provision he supplied them withal, both for back and belly. But she, now dead, this would not sa∣tisfie them, they saw they had an admirable subject, and that encouraged them to a higher design: An old man, that though he had a weak head, yet an obstinate will; a man, though inexorable to the faithful counsel of true friends, especially if it thwarted his appetite, yet more facil than a Child to yield to the seductions of glavering Flatterers; for which trade these two Sisters are most exquisitely qualified: and to all this they had the advantage of many years ac∣quaintance, had studied his Temper, and could work him to their pleasure.
In brief, by many deceitful stratagems, which the un∣wary old man perceived not, they wrought him, as you have heard, to make a sinful adultrous Contract of Marriage with Mistris Jones, to give her by Will a great part of his Estate, to a most unnatural hatred of all his dutiful Children, to betray his Son James, a child, into marriage with Lydia Jones, a mear child also, that so they might have entrance into the house to cast out his Son and Partner Andrew in a most inhumane manner; and in fine, by Judgments, Bills of Sale, Assignments, and such practises, to make over all his own, and his Sons Estate, to Mr. Henry Coleborn for the use of Elizabeth Pigeon; who thereupon takes Possession of the House, Stock, and Trade, utterly excluding Andrew and the rest of the Children from an Estate of 2000. l. which Mr. Goodwin, by assistance of a provident Wife, had been almost 40. years labouring for. Thus far the former Relation gives you account; now I proceed to a Discovery of what they have since acted, wherein (besides my promise not to prevaricate from the truth) the Reader shall have such unquestionable proofs as will silence all Cavils; and stranger things than these you hear not often. But first I must here give you an account of Mr. Edward Jones: In the former Relation you have seen how after five years absence from London, being constrained in his affecti∣ons, he comes to London; and going to Pauls-Alley to see his Children, was, by these two sisters procurement, in five several Actions, in all to the value of about 1000. l. arrested and cast into prison, though of all this he owed not one pen∣ny, and of divers of those men, whose names they had used, had never seen their faces: There he continued many months, and had he not been supplied by his Tenants in St. Johns street, must there have perished. During his imprisonment, they often send his Children to him, who are instructed to ask him ensnaring questions, that so they may feel how he resents his Condition: and when they fonnd him (as they thought) indifferently morti∣fied, then they endeavour to draw him to their wicked
Conditions: the chief of which were, First, That he make over all his Estate to his Wife by Trustees; and, Secondly, and chiefly, That he immediately depart the City with en∣gagement to return no more, that so she might be free for old Mr. Goodwin: The first part he enclined to upon Con∣ditions; but the second he utterly rejected, and so the Treaty broke off. And now Mr. Jones somewhat en∣couraged by the honesty of some of his Tenants, who sup∣plied him with the Arrears of the Rent due five years in their hands, ever-since his departure; all which Mistris Jones might have received Quarterly upon Mr. Jones his Acquit∣tances which he sent her from Norwich, but she utterly re∣fused, because by those Receipts she must acknowledge Mr. Jones to be her Husband: and Mr. Goodwins purse being then full, she let the Rents (as aforesaid) rest in their hands, which proved happily for Mr. Jones in this Condition. And now observing Mr. E. C. the Counsellour to be very active with these two sisters; and judging that it must be upon some Consideration that a person of Mr. C 's rank should do, interest himself in his Wives Cause, he procured a trusty Friend to go to Mr. C his house at Marybone, who there saw several parcels of Mr. Jones his Goods in a Parlour, viz. Two ancient Pictures of value; but not being admitted into any other Room, he cannot tell what there was more, but these he knoweth to have been Mr. Jones his Goods. Where∣upon Mr. Jones exhibited a Bill in Chancery agaist Mistris Pigeon, Mr. C. and several others for the examination of the Counterfeit Actions he was Arrested for, and the Discovery of his Goods; and by this means got a Release of those Counterfeit Actions, and was quitted and immediately went again into the Country: During this unjust imprisonment, he spent almost 80. l. which he affirmed he intended to di∣vide every penny amongst his Children. And so con∣cluded that Trepan, with losse and disgrace to the two Sisters. And here having made this degression, I shall also insert the Trepaning of one Esay Aspinwal by Mistris Pigeon: He was some years since Apprentice to one Mr. Hardy a Salter
neer Guild-hall, and now living in Lambeth. Near to this youth there lived a Maid-servant, one Mary Northcote, aged about 36 yeares; this wench leaving her Service, was after entertained by Mistris Pigeon: where after a while Mistris Pigeon over-hearing her in the night to Sigh and Groan much, she tells her Husband she must know what this meant; Mr. Pigeon checking her pragmatick nature, still prying into the secrets of others, diswaded her all he could, but she vowed she would know: and to be short, the next day got this Wench into her Inquisition, and never left ra∣king in her Conscience till she discovered to her, There had been some love between the said young man and she; and further confessed, That he had layen with her above forty times, and had promised her marriage. Whereupon Mistris Pigeon sends for the young man; Mr. Pigeon still diswading her from medling in this matter, and advising her rather to turn her away: but she replyes, You are a fool; Now will I have out of this Wench what Service I please: the young man came, she Catechises him into a Confession, causes him to write and subscribe it, and so dismisses him; who having after some few years finished his apprentiship, and set up a little Shop for himself; which Mistris Pigeon in∣formed of, sends for the young man, and having before∣hand all her instruments in readiness, demands of him if he will now marry her Maid? The young man replyes, That he was new set up, his Stock small, and did not yet see how he should subsist with a Wife, and therefore desires some respite: But Mistris Pigeon not rhus satisfied, gives the Trepan-watch-word, and presently two Sergeants appear, who hale him away to a Tavern in Wood-street to capitulate, where Mistris Pigeon follows; the poor young man by this time had sent for his Brother, a Country-man in Town, who hearing the Case, and seeing into what hands his Brother was fallen, over-come with grief before he could utter him∣self, swelled so, that the very buttons burst from his doublet, and at last fell into a most bitter lamentation; and then re∣presenting to Mistris Pigeon his Brothers youth, his Fathers affection to this Son, who so soon as he should hear of this,
(being an antient godly Gentleman in the Country) would die with grief, and therefore beg'd, that rather than ingage him in this unequal scandalous match, he might make her some reasonable satisfaction with Money; (which was the word Mistris Pigeon watcht for) she demanded 500. l. for a Dowry to this old crackt Vastal, for whom a clean Whip had been a fitter recompence for seducing a poor youth to such wickedness: But the Brother urging his Fathers po∣verty, and the unreasonablenesse of such a Sum; in short, to rescue his Fathers grey hairs from the grave, and Mistris Pigeon being informed that their Father had given him and his Brother 50. l. a peice, she urged, that if they would give her all, he should go quit; which at last they yielded to, and Bonds were sealed, and after a short time the Money paid to Mistris Pigeon, to the utter undoing of both these young men; the said Esay not able by this means to keep open his Shop, went away, and could never since be heard of: Fifty pounds of this Money was bestowed in marriage with this flawed piece to a Shooe-maker, one Mr. Cheval, next to Algate under London-Wall: and for the other 50. l. whether Mistris Pigeon have since given to this huswife, or (as is most probable) reserved in her own hands for Brocage, is uncertain: and so also concluded that Trepan. And now I return to the main story. Mistris Pigeon now in possession of all Mr. Goodwins and his Sons Estate, casts about how she may improve it, and make it a standing thievery; she first plods to all the Custo∣mers, and with her dissembling pretences, alleging all is still done for the good of old Mr. Goodwin, prevailed with some to continue their Work to the house, and some new Custo∣mers are acquired, as Mr. John Gold of Clapham their very great friend. And because some scrupled the safety of their Goods, she procures Mr. Coleborn to give his security, as he, in whose Name she bought and sold, retained and dis∣charged all, and Christmass now at hand, that being the u∣sual time of Payments, she hastens and importunes them to pay into Mr. Coleborn the last years Money, about 1200. l. and earned in the Partner-ship, who gives them Discharges;
and encouraged with the visible gains she saw in that Trade, she plyes it on all hands, while Mistris Jones (a heavier piece) acts her part with old Mr. Goodwin to keep him in a good humour: now that he and his Children are stript of all; but active Mistris Pigeon is every where at the Mer∣chants for Work, at the Salters for Wares, prying and watching that the Servants shall get no vayls, except honest Mr. Anthony Rawlin that for former good services must be a little connived at. In the mean time, that Andrew may not disturbe her, one while she threatnes to bring him to Tryal of the 1000. l. Action she had formerly caused him to be Arrested in: Ano∣ther while commends his good nature, but seduced by his wicked Brother Vernon: and now having settled all, she thinks she may a little retire her self, partly to attend o∣ther Projects, and partly to abate the clamour of people that speak of her and her Sister Jones, as those that had Cheated Mr. Goodwin and all his Children of all. Mistris Jones then is left in deposito, yet Mistris Pigeon between whiles comes in her Hackney Coach to take accompts, and see how all is managed: and thus she runs through 1654. and part of 1655. boasting of her great Gain. But now the Trade began to sink a pace, and they as fast in their re∣putation, nor could they with all their art keep on the paint which daily peeled off from their bold deluding faces: which Mistris Pigeon observing, and well knowing that the Dyers Trade, if not supplied with Work, is rather fit to bring her behind hand, than to advance her; she therefore in a man∣ner quite with-draws both her purse and presence, leaving Mehetabel to help up the old man; but she that by this time saw through her sisters Craft, who had used her only as a bait to Catch old Mr. Goodwin, while Mistris Pigeon caught the Estate, and had now secured it under Mr. Colebourns Name to her own use, and being now unwilling to abide all the reproach, while her sister had all the gain, she also with draws to the old Den in Pauls-Alley, where her sisters leads her a sad life. But in what a case now is old Mr. Goodwin, bereaved of
Estate, Trade, Credit, and which he values more than all, of the Company of his two precious friends; now must he to his old march again to Red-Crosse-street, where he often comes, but finds not his former entertainment: when the two sisters used to come and meet him at the Garden-door with How do you, dear Sir, precious Mr. Goodwin? Very well, I thank you: Indeed Sir you are not well: Indeed I am very well: Indeed, Sir, you are not, the Lord knows you are not well, you look as if you were not well: Indeed I am very well: Are you indeed? Then the Lord be praised: and this with such accent and gesture, as made the poor old mans bowels and brains melt within him; and then out came the Capon, and the stuffs, and then nothing but meri∣ment mixed with, Dear Sir, have a special care of your Son Andrew that he do not undo you; and be sure you take no Counsel of your Children, for that were to be ruled by your Cradle: Thus would they draw this poor inconsiderate old man into their snare under pretence of Love and care of his Person: but the Fish once caught, off goes the bait. Now that all is in their hands, and that he comes to them stript, with his empty pockets hanging out, now nothing but quar∣relling and cavilling questions about the Trade, railing be∣cause he goes not amongst the Customers for Work, quar∣relling at every word he saith; and when he shews her how they are necessitated for Money and Wares, she having drawn all dry, and that he and the Servants are fain to take up Wares and Provisions upon their own Credit, then like one of King Pharaoh's Tax-masters that would have them make Bricks or Money without straw; she tells him plainly she will pay none of his Debts, and bids him work for his living. About this time Mr. Henry Coleborn, Mistris Pigeons great Friend that had sheltered all her wicked Projects, falls very sick of a sharp Disease, the Physitians doubt him, and send him to Tunbridge, there he grows worse and worse, and perceiving himself not like to live, he comes back for London; Diligent Mistris Pigeon meets him upon the Road about the mid-way, and by her feined care of his welfare, never leaves
till she have perswaded him into her Coach, and so bring him to take up his Lodging at the Rat-trap in Pauls-alley: The pretence of his coming there was, that he might be out of the noise of businesse: but the design that she might perfect some Projects that she had in her head, whereof one was to have made a Match between his only Son and her Daughter; but that failing, her next great businesse is, that he assign over all the trust both of Mr. Pigeons annd Mr. Goodwins Estates to her Brother Edward Thorold, a shallow harmlesse creature of himself, whom she had sent for out of Lincoln-shire to supply that part; her Trade being just like the Cut-purses, that when he hath done his feat in a throng, he hath his bone-setters at hand to receive the Purse and convey it away. Mr. Coleborn had not been there long, but he extremly dislikes both his entertainers and entertainment, and was often heard say with much passion, Oh that I were out of this house, these be strange women! I suppose he meant in Solomons sense; These women (quoth he) are a delusion, pray let me go to Betty, (a kinswoman he had at Darking) but M stris Pigeon kept him so long vexing his heart with her Conveyances and Assignments, that he could not be remo∣ved, but there expired to the shame and grief of all his friends; many of whom (for the very dislike of that infa∣mous house) would not come to his burial; and to the wonder of all men that so Politick a man as Mr. Coleborn should suffer himself, in that last act of his Life, to be so Trepand into his Grave. Presently after Mr. Coleborns Death, came Mr. Pigeon to Town, who appears like one from another world, having with much patience for four years born all his Wives inso∣lencies, and seeing no amendment, but that every day she grew more violent and mischievous, (as appeared by the late ruine of Mr. Goodwin and his Children, and now awakened with his own wrongs, and the cryes of Mr. Goodwins Chil∣dren) he resolves once more to take her into his custody, and try if he can yoke this untamed Heifer: in short, he appears with a Coach and four Horses, and half a dozen
Servants, and having sufficient authority, enters this Dra∣gons den, seizes and fairly conducts her into the Coach, and so carries her into the Country to his house; all the street looking on, and rejoycing at the riddance (as they hoped) of such a troublesome neighbor. To tell you her behaviour by the way, her throwing a glass of Wine into Mr. Pigeons Brothers face, while she bowed and made shew as if she would drink to him; her crying Murther, and accusing her self to have spoke Treason against the Lord Protector; her confessing her∣self a Whore, and desiring the Justice to send her to Bridewel; her affirming Mr. Pigeon to be none of her Hus∣band, and Doctor Homes that married them, a knave: and many other such freaks, would be tedious: But this I must not omit, at her first nights lodging on the way, Mr. Pigeon took her in private, and began to this effect; Wife (quoth he) have we not yet plaid the fools enough, shall we yet proceed in these scandalous contestations, making our selves Town talk, so that our Children, when grown up, will be ashamed to own us for their Parents. When she presently replied, Are you in earnest, would you have a Reconcilia∣tion, fall down at my feet and ask me forgivenesse. This, and such-like, was her behaviour. In short, a Justice of the Peace, at her request, undertook to draw up an Award be∣tween them, the substance whereof was, That whereas she denyed and disclaimed Mr. Pigeon for her Husband, and no hopes of Reconciliation, he Awarded Mr. Pigeon his Land again, and 500. l. in Money, part of his former estate; and she to have liberty to return to London, and live from Mr. Pigeon till they can better agree. But now Mr. Goodwins Children seing all desperate, their Father deaf to all perswasions, Resolve at last to Petition His Highnesse the Lord Protector, who was pleased to re∣fer the Businesse to several worthy Gentlemen in the Bur∣rough of Southwark; who presently summon Mr. Goodwin and his Women before them; where, to avoid repetition, the substance of all the former Printed Relation was fully proved, in so much that Mr. Goodwin, seeing how things were
likely to go, went home and presently took his Bed, from whence he never rose more: his sicknesse caused some in∣termission of this Examination, and indeed many wayes gave great seeming advantage to the Women as you shall see; and if formerly in his health they plyed him with their pestilent flatteries, now more than ever; so that for six or eight dayes before his death, they were scarce an hour ab∣sent (one or other of them) from his Bed-side, with great expressions of seeming tendernesse to him, yet scarce suffer∣ing his Children to look upon him; and when at any time any of them came to see him, and with bleeding affections minded him of his Spiritual Estate, then, Pray forbear, you trouble your Father, he would fain take his rest; Dear Sir, Do they not trouble you? And knowing that of a long time they had so tutored him, that he durst not answer but as they dictated to him; Mistris Pigeon would say, Mr. Good∣win, Have I ever wronged you, is it we or your Children that have ruined you? And then comes Mehetabel, Dear Sir, Speak as in the sight of God, was I ever Naught with you? was I ever Contracted to you? Thus would they, especially, before such persons as they thought for their purpose, worry this poor dying man, making him spend his last breath (that should have been spent in making his peace with God) in justifying of their wickednesse. The last of December, 1655. he departed this life; so soon as he was dead, Mistris Pigeon sends for his Children to know if they would bury him; and if not, she would: They asked, Who had his Estate? She replied, Alas! He hath not left one penny: all here is mine. In short, notwith∣standing the Children were robb'd of all: they agreed, and so told her, That they would bury him. And Mistris Vernon in her haste said, If we bury him, we will know how he came by his death. This word (it seems) stuck with Mistris Pigeon, and therefore contrary to this agreement, at Nine of the Clock that night, she sends them word, That she had for∣got her self, and now remembred that Mr. Goodwin had charged her upon his death-bed, That none of his Children should have any hand in his burial; and that if they came
to bury him, she would oppose then: this alarmed the Children, who went that night (though very late) to the Justices of the Borough, from whom they obtained an Or∣der requiring these Women to permit them quietly to have accesse to the Body, and perform such offices as were re∣quisite. This Order Mistris Pigeon peremptorily before good witnesse refused to obey: and while Mr. Vernon went to the Justices to acquaint them with this Contempt of their Order, and was now returned with the Constable, and their Warrant to apprehend and bring them before them, he finds Andrew and Thomas Goodwin in the Bayliffs hands, Arrested Prisoners, for Trespasse of coming upon Mistris Pigeons pretended Ground, and coming to the house, finds the doors barricadoed up, and a peremptory refusal to obey either the Officer or the Warrant: and here I cannot but affirm, That I believe Mr. Goodwin died not a natural death, and omitting what might be charged upon them by altering his Diet from wholesome Kitchin-food to Sage-Ale, Mar∣malade, strong Extracts, which though in this kind sparing∣ly used may be good, yet being turned to a constant Diet must needs destroy Nature and burn up the radical moysture of his body; insomuch that his Apothecary, a judicious skilful man affirmed to me that those excellent Cordials he gave him in his sicknesse, revived him no more than cold water. I say omitting all this, I judge they were yet more directly instrumental to his death by using some wicked practise upon him to destroy him; and there are these signs, First, That for three or four dayes before his death he constantly complained of a great burning in his bowels: Secondly, His frequent violent retchings to vomit, in one of which retching fits he died; both apparent signs of poy∣son: that which seems to confirm this, is their refusing to suffer his Children to bury him, or to see the Body, though back'd with the Magistrates Authority. After they once heard their intention to have the Body Dissected, 'tis true, the third day after his death, they sent to the Doctor to tell him that he might come and visit the Body outwardly, but by no means they would not have it opened and Dissected:
if you ask why they should so wickedly rid themselves of their old friend who loved them so dearly to his last? I answer first, the trade was now utterly lost and henceforth he could be but a clg and a reproach to them: Secondly, the trade being gone, and he having no maintenance but from the co∣vetous churlish hands of Mrs Pigeon; & his Children still fol∣lowing him with their prayrs, he might come to have his eyes opened. But lastly, Mrs Pigeons great fear was, that now that the whole project was before the Commissioners in Exami∣nation, who being judicious quick-sighted-Gentlemen, and Mr. Goodwin being a shallow weak man, and perhaps exa∣mined privately, might so ill manage hs Defence as might spoyle all; of which she had a shrewd example the first day of Examination, where when she was accused by Mr. Pigeon to have brought old Mr. Goodwin six years agone to the Mwse, and there caused him to make his Will, by which he gave by her direction 600. l. to her Sister Jones; which when Mistris Pigeon was Examined upon, she with dreadful asse∣verations and appeals to God, utterly denied; saying it was lyes in every circumstance: yet when Mr. Goodwin, who by reason of his deafnesse scarce heard what they said, was Examined, whether it were so or no, he Confessed all, there∣by putting a deadly affront upon Mistris Pigeon: adde to this their being constantly at his Bed-side in his sicknesse, not suffering, as I said, his Children scarce to speak to him; and at one time warning Mistris Vernon, while she was carefully attending her Father, to go off the ground, or they would Arrest her Husband for Trespasse, whereby they had oppor∣tunity to do what they would, and they (she-Doctors or Quack-salvers, whereof they have both for many years made profession) prescribing Physick as confidently as if they were Members of the Colledge: These are some grounds of my belief, which the Reader may judge of, and the full discovery thereof I refer to the great Day. But to return; The door being fast barred up, and the old man nailed in his Coffin, mistris Pigeon once again falls to new devices. The third day at night, when the body began now to putrifie,
she sends messenger after messenger at ten of the Clock at night to the Children, requiring them to come and bury the Body, or it should for good and all remain unburied: But they being now advised by the Magistrate not to pro∣ceed, and by the Doctor that it was too late to make Dissection, the thing they aimed at, they positively refused▪ by this proffer mistris Pigeon thinks to take off all suspition of his death, and now seeing this Project fail, she resolves on the sudden to bury him in state: she invites all the chief of the Parish; and amongst the rest, forgets not the Wor∣shipful Commissioners, giving them to understand they should all be served with Gold Rings and Gloves: but they all, except Mr. Samuel Hyghland, (who presently bit at the bait) with just scorn rejected this bribing Device: Seventy or Eighty Rings are provided: The Posie by mistris Pigeons device out of 1 Cor. 15. Sown in dishonor, raised in glory. She can for all purposes make use of abused Scripture to colour her sin, though at other times she saith, she cares not if the Bible were burnt, as was proved; but let any man look on the Context, and see any Exposition that ever was made upon that Scripture, they will find the Apostle meant not the least in her sense, but speaks only of the Body, which by death is become a loathsome spectacle devoid of all beauty and lustre. There is another text which with a little of mi∣stris Pigeons strayning, would have done better, viz. His death to me is Gain. What think you mistris Pigeon after you had cheated a shallow old man of an Estate of 2000. l. and when he could do you no more drudgery, to go, or be sent out of the world, then a parcel of fine Gold Rings, with Mors mihi lucrum, would it not have argued your ingenuity? Well, the Fourth day at night was the burial: and Mr. Goodwins Children, considering all the fore-mentioned pas∣sages, though invited, refused to joyn with them that had brought their Father with so much disgrace to the Grave, but went and attended the Corps at the Grave, which at last comes; and next the Corps, in a Coach, Mr. Hat, mistris Pigeon, and mistris Hat; whom Politick mistris Pigeon brought with her to be her buckler and awe the people; she
having of late been several times assaulted by the Boyes, but now look to your selves, here is Mr. John Hat, the Guild-hall Atturney, that if you be uncivil shall make his Actions of Assault and Battery flie about your ears: yet the people railed upon them all the way, now and then saluting them with handfuls of kennel dirt; and I am perswaded in that emotion of the people, had any of Mr. Goodwins Children but held up a finger, they had run great hazard of their lives; there as I am informed was Cousin Charles Tho∣rold and his Lady, who followed not as the people after Absolom, in the simplicity of their hearts, but in the simple∣nesse of his understanding. As for Mehetabel, she was so overcome with Passion, not of Grief for the losse of her dear friend, but of fear of the losing her dear life that she kept under lock and key at the Dye-house: indeed had she appeared, I think the best of her bargain would have been to be sent to gage the depth of the mud in the mill-pond. Mr. Goodwin buried, the Commissioners proceed to a finall Examination of the Businesse; and upon the whole, finding clearly how they had cheated Mr. Goodwin and all his children, they made a Proposition to Mris Pigeon, That wheras she pretended the Estate hers; first, by Assignment to Mr. Coleborn for her use; & then, by his Assignment to her Bro∣ther Thorold; by which, as Mr. Hat then pleaded for her, she had a legal Title at Law, which he enforced with all his Guild-hall Rethorike, till the Commissioners commanded him out of doors, that if she would deliver up the Estate as it was when she invaded it, and give a true Accompt as well of her Receipts as Disbursments, they would repay her all her Charges with 100. l. advantage: which she with scorn refused, saying, It was hers by Law, and by Law she would keep it. So the Examination ended, and the Worshipful Commissioners, according to what was alleaged and proved, drew up a Report of the Case to His Highness, which is here annexed verbatim, with the Attestation of Mr. Kiffins Church, and Mr. Pigeons Affidavit.
The REPORT. ACcording to your Highness Command upon the Reference of Mr. Goodwins Childrens Peti∣tion unto us, we have several times Met, and called before us the Persons concerned in the said Pe∣tition, Complainants, Deffendants, Witnesses; We take leave upon the whole to submit this Accompt unto your Highness, as the Result of our Consciencies upon an impartial search. 1. That there hath been just Scandal given to the People of God by the too familiar Converse of Wessel Goodwin (since deceased) and Mehetabel the Wife of Edward Jones, when being admonished by the Elders of their respective Churches, yet after the said admonitions, and promises on their parts of forbearance, they not on∣ly came together as before, but justified their so doing; and that after the Exclusion of them from the Ordinances and Congregations, as is alledged in the Petition. 2. For a covering to the shame of this evil familiarity, there have been an agreement of Marriage contracted with the assistance of Elizabeth Pigeon, sister to the said Mehetabel, between Mr. Goodwin and Mistris Jones a∣foresaid, and they have endeavoured to prove it lawful, notwithstanding that Mr. Jones, husband to the said Me∣hetabel, be yet alive. 3. In Order to the gaining of Mr. Goodwins estate (which was the Design laid between them 8. or 9. years since) by the said Mistris Jones and Mistris Pigeon, they found it requisite to remove Andrew Goodwin, eldest Son of Wessel Goodwin, setled upon Marriage in partner∣ship with his Father in the Dye-house-stock and Trade;
we say they Outed the said Andrew by fraud and force in this manner; they brake open his Counting-house and Trunks, taking out thence his Accompts & Books whereby he is disabled to make good his Stock; then they brought an Accomptant to Ballance the Accompts between the Fa∣ther and Son, and to this Accomptant Mistris Pigeon proffered thirty pounds as a bribe to falsifie the Accompts that no estate might be found due to the said Andrew, that so he might be cast out of the said partner-ship for the ends aforesaid. Then they proceed to warn the said Andrew out of the house; which he refusing to obey, they brought in Bayliffs at midnight and brake open his Cham∣ber door and took him by violence, Mistris Pigeon stan∣ding by incouraging and abetting the Bayliffs who haled him thence to prison; In which extremity the said An∣drew was forced to confess a Judgment to one of his Cre∣ditors, to whom he owed one hundred and thirty pounds, whereby part of the estate was taken in execution; which being by Mistris Pigeons procurement appraised at a ve∣ry under rate, she brought her friend in trust to pay down the money; and by other subtile practises got possession of that whole estate to the value of above fifteen hundred pounds, and by this means framing a kind of Title by co∣lour of Law doth keep and dispose of this estate at her plea∣sure, defrauding thereby the Children, your Highness Pe∣titioners. 4. That we did according to your Highness Advice endeavour to compose the whole business impartially ac∣cording to rules of Justice and Conscience, profering to Mistris Pigeon (she being the chief Patroness, Contriver, and Manager of this Project) upon her giving us a true Accompt of all her Disbursments upon the estate to repay her all with an advantage.
But all our tenders in behalf of the wronged Petitioners were by her rejected with scorn, she pleading her preten∣ded Title and Property by Law. Now lastly, Whereas your Highness requireth our Opi∣nion in this Case, we take leave in this our capacity to de∣clare, That the merits and matter of the Petition are true, and the Petitioners greatly injured, not only by the said Wessel, but principally by the two Sisters, Mistris Jones and Mistris Pigeon, who had wholly captivated the weak understanding and affections of the said old Mr. Good∣win even to his death, and now impudently possess the whole estate; And our Opinion further is, That it were a righteous thing in the sight of God and man to repair this loss and injuries upon the said estate, and the Usurpers of it; yea, and that something exemplarily penal be inflicted upon these Women, that others may be deterred from the like attempts. And seeing your Petitioners are utterly disabled to wage Law, their Adversaries having the Estate, we conceive it a most Honorable Work that your Highness interpose your Authority, that some compendious way be taken to de∣termine this business. Christopher Searle. William Cooper. Cor. Cook. John Hardwick. White-hall, March 14. 1655. His Highness referreth this Report to the speedy and special Consideration and Order of His Highnesses Privy Council. Intr. Nath. Bacon.
The Attestation of Mr. Kiffin's Church. THe Church having by several Witnesses heard that Mrs. Jones did frequently give entertainment to one Mr. Goodwin, did make further enquiry thereinto by some Bre∣thren appointed to that end, who speaking to her about it, received this Answer, That it was only upon a Christian ac∣compt, they being long acquainted together, having at that time no particular proof of any thing, did at present de∣sist any further dealing with her, only ordered some Bre∣thren that lived nearest her to exercise more then ordinary watchfulness over her; and after some time we by them un∣derstood that she had dispossessed her Husband Jones of all he had, and was gone into the Country and Mr. Goodwin with her; and making further enquiry into her conversati∣on in that matter, had proof that she did use very familiar unseemly carriages to Mr. Goodwin, and promised that if all things were clear, she would take him to be her Husband; which words and carriages she being dealt withal in the Church for, she denied the carriages, but confessed she did use words to him to that effect, and with many tears presen∣ted her condition to the Church, touching the evil conver∣sation of her Husband Jones; and did promise that for time to come, she would not frequent the company of Mr. Good∣win; upon which promise the Church solemnly admonished her, and so left it: not long after we understood that Mistris Jones did more frequently then ever we heard before, give entertainment to Mr. Goodwin, he being daily at her house, & very late at night, if not all night, which neighbors taking notice of, took occasion thereby to speak very reproachfully of Profession, to the grief of several of our Members which lived near her; who reporting the same to the Church, she was sent for by the Church: and when she came and was charged with this Scandalous Conversation, together with her breach of Promise, she then laboured to justifie her Practise; and told the Church, That she had been with se∣veral learned Divines, who had given in their Opinions that
she was free from the Law of her first Husband by the Law of God: We finding her obstinate in the evils she was charged withal, and resolved to go on in the same without any regard to the honour of God, scandal of Religion, or former Engagement, did judge it our duty to cast her out of the Church, which accordingly was done for the abovesaid evils. Witness our Hands, George Gosfright. William Angel. William Warren. John Sowdin. William Kiffen. John Battey. But to draw to a Conclusion, Mr. Goodwins Children pur∣sue the Report, and present it to His Highness with all the Commissioners hands, except Mr. Highland, who refused to subscribe, not (as he affirmed before good witness) that he doubted the Fraud, but questioned the matter of Scan∣dal; now hereby hangs a tale, but it is an old one, and therefore I forbear. Now the Children having presented the Report to his Highness, who expressed a high Resentment of it, and commanded an extraordinary Order to be drawn referring it to the speedy and special care of his Highness privy Council; who after two months attendance by the Children, were pleased to cast it out, and refer them to the Law: And the Children considering Mistris Pigeon is in Possession, and they ruined and stript of all, do refer it to the Great Judge of Heaven and Earth. Thus you have seen Mistris Pigeon Rampant in all her Pro∣jects which hath since emboldened her to a new strange at∣tempt: For observing Mr. Pigeon very active to assist Mr. Goodwins Children both before the Commissioners, and at White-hal, first she attempts him by M Hat, who advised him in presence of good witness, not to meddle to assist those beggarly people Goodwins Children; but seeing Mr. Pigeon out of an honest sence of their wrongs, not to be taken off, he then threatned him with the Gaol: but Mr. Pigeon still pursuing the honest Cause of the Children, they consult and at last resolve upon an old Writ of special Supplicavit, long since taken out of the Chancery upon articles that Mrs. Pigeon
and her bold Maid Mary Mason, and one Mistris Newton had delivered upon Oath; in which they affirm, That she had been grievously beaten by Mr. Pigeon (not half enough) and that she went in danger of her life: and upon these Articles they procured the Writ; which directed to the Sheriffs, they issue out a Warrant for Mr. Pigeons appre∣hension: this they deliver to a hair-braind Sergeant one Capt. Bunne, whom they instruct; and he contrary to the Warrant which directed him to take Mr. Pigeon and carry him before the next Justice, and there that he put in security for the Peace, and so be discharged: But Cap. Bunne who now is in the bryars for his pains, refusing to carry him be∣fore the Magistrate, throws him into Prison, where Mr. Pigeon having put in Bayl, was Released, and is now in pur∣suit of the Discharge of the Writ, and so of his Bayl. Here follows the Copies of several Letters written by Mrs. Jones and Mrs. Pigeon to old Mr. Goodwin, as they were found in his Study after his death; which Letters, with se∣veral Locks of Mrs. Jones her Hair, remain in the hands of Mr. Samuel Vernon at the lower end of St. Ma∣ry Acts, for all that desire to peruse; and good proof up∣on Oath, that these Letters are their own hand-writing. The First is a Letter from Mrs. Lydia Walsal, the elder Sister to these Women, and late Wife to Doctor Walsal of Sandy in Bedfordshire directed to Mr. Goodwin. My very much esteemed good Brother, I Am very glad to hear of your health, and the health of yours: but sorry to hear your oppression of busi∣nesse: the Lord for his Christs sake, either increase strength, or take off trouble. Brother, I much thank you for your good leave to enjoy my good Sister, by whose means I have received ease: I hope I shall find more good: and besides I am not yet satisfied with her good Company, and therefore beg your leave that I may
enjoy her one week more at least, that we may be refresh∣ed each by other, for hitherto my poor dear Sister hath done nothing but toyled:☞ If you receive her two inches less in the wae, who can help it? For up be-time she will, and to her day-labour, but her Wages must come from Heaven, for I can never requite her Love and pains: My Husband and good Sister remember their Loves. Your ever loving Sister, Lydia Walsal. Can any other Inference be made from this, than that Mrs Jones was either Mr. Goodwins Wife, which (for that her Husband is yet alive) she cannot lawfully be or his Con∣cubine; such Embraces can hardly allow any other con∣struction: but Mrs. Pigeons distinction salves all; Mr. Jones is her Husband by the unjust Law of man, and Mr. Goodwin her Husband in the sight of God. The next is from Mrs Jones. HOnoured Sir, I have been much troubled about my leaving you, and could wish my self with you a∣gain if I could, because I was never-more restlesse than now: let me receive a Word or two from you, it may be that may a little satisfie me, which shall for ever engage me to you. Your faithful friend, Mehetubal Jones. This agrees with the former from Mrs. Walsal, and con∣firm there was a secret union between them. Another from Mrs. Jones, and hath for Superscription, To my dear Sister, Mrs. Montague at Ockingham; but the in-side Contents are, GOod Mr. Goodwin. I desire to hear how you do, and how you have digested your double meat of two
Gooses: truly one will stick by you longer than I hope the other will stick in your stomack: however the ribs of one is devoured by you, yet the other will stick by the ribs, and be as the rib taken forth of the left-side, ever before you, bone of your bone and flesh of your flesh: so I rest. Yours to serve you, Mehetabel Jones. This wants a Commentary in a Letter written by Mrs. Mountague, there is mention of a Goose sent as a present to be eaten by the two Sisters and Mr. Goodwin, it should seem in their merriment Mr. Goodwin jestingly called Mrs. Jones Goose, a word frequent with him; and upon this Mrs. Jones writes this Letter, and now riddle my riddle. A Fourth Letter from her sayes, GOod Brother, I had a wearisome journey: yet if I could have possibly got my Sisters leave, I had come to London as this day: truly my heart is there; for I am willing as the Lord hath commanded, to help to bear your burthen more then formerly: having recover∣ed a little breath, I am willing to draw in this easie yoke of Christ, if it must be so, but humbly beseech him to make it somewhat easier than it hath been: viz. When she lived with her Husband Jones:☞ here is adultery and blasphemy together. The rest of this Letter is a parcel of Instructions in a Religious dresse, whereby she captivated the silly old man; but being tedious and impertinent, I omit them. In a Fifth she saith, HOnoured Sir, I wish I could conveniently write at this time to you: but I thought fit to let you know, That I fear it is intended that your Cousin Arm∣strong shall serve in Richards place. I doubt not but the Lord will give you wisdom and directions in all things; which shall be the Prayer of Your faithful friend till death, Mehetabel Jones.
This Letter was written seven years agone, by which you see they governed all at the Dye-house long before they came there; for a beck from her, or her Sister, was a Com∣mand to him; indeed Richard Armstrong was one that ha∣ted their practises upon Mr. Goodwin, and therefore though an excellent Workman, must not be entertained. And that you may further see how they governed him, in a Sixth she saith, SIR, if any one whosoever should send for you, or come to speak with you, know they do it to intrap you: I pray if so, go not to them, till you come to me: but if you hear not from any, I shall not look for you till to morrow in the afternoon. This is the same hand, but hath neither Super, nor Sub∣scription, was ever poor man so barnacled with a cunning Strumpet: let the businesse be of what consequence soever, he must not speak with any till he have consulted with her, and have her leave; it should appear that some of her Ro∣guery was now in danger of discovery. In a Seventh, she sayes, HOnoured Sir, The Lord hath made our journey very comfortable: but now I fear our return will be imbittered by the want of that, which of all earthly things is most desired, viz. Mr. Goodwins company:☜ It will not be convenient for us to come to you in regard of many satisfactory reasons which I can give you: Dear Sir, let us see you. And in a Post-script Mrs. Pigeon writes thus, SIR, Now God hath put you to the Tryal of the strength you thought you had: you said you could sub∣mit to the Will of God though it should be the losse of
your dearest Friend (viz her Sister Jones) now therefore chear up,☞ and know this stroak is the love and good will of our dear Father: I need say no more. Do you not think that Dame Celestina, the famous Spa∣nish Bawd, was a Fool in comparison of Mrs. Pigeon? she wanted this rare art of Canting in a Religious tone: the sum of all is, That about this time Mrs. Jones by the Justices and Mr. Kiffins Church, was warned out of Mr. Goodwins company, and had engaged to them to refrain it because of the Scandal. Now see how Mrs. Pigeon can dress this trade of Harlotry, thereby to caiole the conscience of this deluded old man. The Eighth from Mrs. Jones. WOrthy Sir, whom I do truly honor, let me be∣seech you have a special care of taking cold, or working to morrow: our next neighbor is dead of a loose∣nesse, consider your age and weaknesse. I have been ve∣ry ill, but am something better: since I heard from you I have sent you a Wastcoat, pray send me word if you will wear it. I exceedingly fear your falling into a Fea∣ver, if you take pains before you have recovered your strength. Your faithful friend, M. Jones. Who would not part with Estate, Credit, Children, Friends, a good Conscience and all, to keep such a friend in a corner? So truly saith Solomon, The lips of a strange Wo∣man drop as a honey Comb, and her mouth is more soft than oyl. The tongues of these two Sisters being tipt with, Dear Sir; Honoured Sir; Precious Sir; and pretending to admire his wisedom, while they laugh in their sleeves to see his extreme weaknesse and credulity. But by these arts they held him fast and were admired, while his Children and friends that deale plainly with him, were reviled and scorned.
Yet again this Cogging Huswife in a Ninth. EVer honored Sir, Dear Brother, I humbly beseech you not to be offended at my going so suddenly away, for the truth is, I was necessitated to go to the farther end of the Garden,☜ (viz. The House of Office) and then my Sister Mountague fell instantly sick, so sick that she thought she should have died, so that I was forced to be with her a little, but instantly I came down: Sir, I beseech you that I may speak with you: please not to trouble your self for any thing whatsoever: for if you know as much as I, you would rejoyce: Take heed of your Son Andrew. Thus Harlots and Hypocrites discover their rotten hearts while they over do: Is not this a strange obsequiousness that Mrs. Jones cannot go to unburthen Nature but she must A∣pologize for it: What a dutiful Concubine is Mr. Goodwin like to have. But all this Dissembling is but to prepare him for the close, to alienate him from his children. Once again in a Tenth Letter. SIR, I hear that Mr. Tarleton is to be to morrow at Mr. Vernons; I beseech you give me leave to put you in remembrance of your former wise discreet Carriage, never to be forgotten, which was when you have been in the like Surprisal: First, A Reserved strangenesse: Secondly, Not to enter the Lifts of Argument: Third∣ly, If they come directly upon you, either to intrap you, or else to Examine or Charge you with that which you are not willing to disclose, or justifie to them the lawfulness of (viz. The Adulterous Contract with her) then I have observed your Serpentine wisdom to daunt their boldness with a seeming angry displeasure,☜ fenced with Resoluti∣on to seek Wisdom from the Wise and wonderful Coun∣sellor, in such matters wherein his Glory and your good
is so nearly concerned,☞ (viz. His Marriage with her) Sir, this hath been the Armor wherewith the Lord hath de∣stroyed all their Goliahs, Counsels, Plots, and Stra∣tagems: I hope a Monitor will be doubly welcome to you, which brings no Reproof, but an Olive-branch, a Remembrance, or Memorial of your former Vertues: for such a friend I remain, Mehetabel Jones. Was there ever such a Trepan, such glavering in a bold dissembling Woman, and such obtuse folly in an old man; at one time she tells him there hath not lived a wiser man than he since King Solomon: and in this rabble of impudent non∣sense of Serpentine wisdom, and discreet Carriage, never to be forgotten; and yet thus laden with deep understanding, he must have an inchanted pad-lock hung upon his lips, not be trusted to utter one word: and being thus clawed with im∣putation of wisdom, as it is strange to see how greedily weak and shallow persons do affect to be accompted wise; and this was one of the snares they held him fast with: you would wonder how exactly he would follow those directi∣ons: Urge what you would, ask him twenty questions, not a word. At this very meeting, being earnestly pressed about the Contract with this Woman, by my self and others; Mr. Goodwin, Are you married to mistris Jones? are you Contracted to her? and such questions as he was not willing to disclose to us, or justifie the lawfulnesse of them, as Mrs. Jones saith, With a Reserved strangeness, and a seeming an∣gry displeasure, fenced with Resolution to be wholly guided by Mrs Jones, his wise and wonderful Counsellour, it being a mater that so nearly concerned; their being preserved from shameful Punshment; dd he with silence and frowns answer all our demands: So that you would have thought him inchanted.
The Eleventh is a Copy of a Letter written with Mrs. Jones own hand, with direction to Mr. Goodwin to transcribe, and send it to her Sister Pigeon as from himself, and begins thus, Mistris Pigeon, THrough the unusual, unheard of, unnatural dealing of my Children, who joyning with my Son An∣drew, and using his Name and Power, which Power was given him for his and my Good, to be used for the good of the Trade: But he drawn aside by his own evil Heart, and the temptations of Satan, and seduced and seconded by his wicked Brethren and Sisters, whom the Prince of Darkness hath used as his Instruments to bring upon me all these sore Calamities as are visible this day, which as I think I may say my Case is with∣out compare, & that in my old age (excepting Davids and Jobs) But not to reason with flesh and blood, in that al∣though I would say it were far better to have them taken away Obedient Children, then to have them live as Ab∣soloms as mine does, and their Printed Libels does wit∣ness (God knowing my innocence, to whom I appeal as a Righteous Iudge) But I leave all this as a long pa∣renthesis and come to the Business: When they were thus suffered to be Scourges, Scourges said I, nay Vi∣pers, Scorpions, endeavoring to eat out the Bowels from whence they proceeded, then the Lord God used you as the only means to keep me from a visible Ruine, as far as the eye of Reason could reach: Now therefore my de∣sire is, if you have any farther thoughts towards me, through your love and tenderness, That you would not do any thing for me in any of my Childrens Names how O∣bedient soever at present:☜ for I had far more Cause of Hopes of those that have endeavored my Ruine then hi∣therto of James: I therefore desire that you would do that which you shall do for me in those Names that you can Trust and Confide,☜ neither shall I now nominate any for
sufficient Reasons known to my self (viz. to Mrs. Jones) and having found your faithfulness all along, I leave to you,☞ desiring you to Nominate whom you shall think fit: only this I desire, That the Power I have formerly had in the House I now dwell in, may be continued to me, and Notice given me when things are settled: and I shall leave it in Writing how my Desire is, That that Estate I shall have, shall be Disposed of after my Death: for which, I shall have great Cause to Remain, Your thankful Friend. This Letter is a Compendium of all the Villany these Wo∣men have acted; where first you plainly see how they go∣verned this poor weak man at their pleasure, making him own all their wicked Projects and Designs, as if they were his own Desires. See here how they to accomplish their own purpose the better, to fil his heart with bitterness against all his Children: No marvel when his Daughter Vernon se∣veral times upon her knees with tears in her eyes, hath be∣sought him to refrain the scandalous Society of these Wo∣men, she could obtain no better answer then, You are a cur∣sed Cham: And thus did they wh him continually against them, that so they might possesse him and all his Estate. Again, see with what Atheistical boldness they direct him to appeal to God of his innocency, when their own hand Wri∣ting discovers to all the world, that the bottom was an Adul∣terous Contract with Mrs. Jones, and manifest injustice and cruelty to all his Children; by their appointment stripping them of that which by the Law of God and of Nature be∣longed to them: and see how blasphemously they paint all this with Religion. Again, see how they make him grosly Lye, to pleasure and justifie them, when they had been eight years plotting to cheat him of all his Estate, and have now effected it; then must this poor besotted Creature tell Mrs. Pigeon, That the Lord God raised her to keep him from Ruine: This is the sublime Art of Trepanning, to gull a man of an Estate of 2000. l. and then make him write a long E∣pistle of Gratulation, and slavish Acknowledgement of her
Love and tenderness. Here also you plainly see James Goodwin was used as a meer Property; he must (a silly young School-Boy, though to his utter Ruine, the scandal of Religion) be married to Lydda Jones, a she Babby, that so these Wo∣men may have a door opened to get in, and throw out An∣drew and his Father, and possesse all the Estate: and this no sooner done, but Mrs. Pigeon calls him Loggerhead and Puppy; and Mrs. Jones his Mother directs his Father to ex∣claim against him in this Letter to Mrs. Pigeon. You see al∣so how she directs Mr. Goodwin to beg of Mrs. Pigeon that as she had hitherto cheated him, so she would go on and perfect this model of Theevery. Lastly, you see what pro∣vision Mrs. Jones makes, that nothing after his Death may come to his Children, he must reserve a Power in the house, that at his death he may bequeath it to her, which accor∣dingly he performed by his Nuncupative Will on his death∣bed, desiring the House might go to his dear Sister Jones. Now having made him do all this dutiful drudgery, to make him amends, she writes him a Love Letter which be∣gins thus. MY D. P. H. viz. My dear precious Heart: My D. K. H. viz. My dear kind Heart, I much de∣sire to see you, which let me when your first opportunity will permit, and spare so much time from your sleep while as to write a large Epistle, not in Characters, but at large in long-hand, not with H. and  till death: but in words at large and full, so full, as may put me fully in a whole Sheet filled on both sides, which shall be more welcome to me than my Winding-shéet, and be the Mes∣senger your self,☜ (else how shall the Sheet be filled on both sides?) so you shall not fear miscarrying: I have wan∣ted such Shéets long: and truly, now I long for such a Shéet brought with your hand, which shall be most kind∣ly welcome: and for which if you bring, I shall ever be yours till death. This Letter is subject to a double construction, if in cha∣rity you will take the literal meaning, why does she so urge
over and over for him to come in person; but I leave every man to his freedom, and make the best of it you can; it is stark naught, and wicked. And further, that the old man may see she is all on flame in Love to him, she is turned Poet, and inspired with a Bottle of Sge-Ale, she greets him in these strains. We have drunk your Ale, and for it send▪ the commendations of your dearest friend; although the liquor be but small, the givers Gift doth equal all. This is the Gift which you did send, grave pye-baked Sage-ale to your friend: but as you sent it in good part, so drank it we, with all our heart. In drinking it, we did remember him that was the Bottle sender. If me you blame for want of wit, it was the Ale that out with it. And with the Bottle back I have sent, for him that wants more then is spent. Your Friend, Mehetabel Jones. Who can blame poor Mr. Goodwin for telling his Daugh∣ter Vernon, That his former Wife deserved not to be named the same day with her, she could not Poetise and scratch Ri∣baldry Rhymns till they bleed again. Many other parcels of her venereous Poetry I finde, but being hob-nayl tattered stuffe I omit; only beg leave for one Sample more of her inchanting Madrigals; which with a parcel of her Hair richly perfumed (though all will not keep it from stinking) was found with the rest; and thus it Chimes, forth: Accept this Bracelet from your friend, the owner knows it is your due, because she belongeth unto you. This paper read, let it see the flame; if you grant not this, you are to blame:
For she that writ it, would for you burn paper, and her fingers too to light your snuff; which she has done, and burnt both fingers and her thumbe, Burn it, then your friend I will rest; if not, say not you love her best: The hours I count, the minutes too, make haste, farewel, adieu, adieu. Here is a Stanza of thirteen to the dozen: might not this think you be sung to the tune of Down Turn-bull street as she did passe, she heard a Bird sing in a Glende, the chiefest of whose Note it was, no pleasure to a bounteous friend, in a corner. But set jesting apart, here you do plainly see by Mrs. Jones her own acknowledgement, what Propriety Mr. Good∣win had in her: again, here she vaunts her practises upon his old ge by lighting his snuff with her Adulterous intice∣ments. And lastly, see how in a secret consciousness of her wickedness she directs him to burn her Letters, that her wicked deeds might not come to light. I conclude wth a Letter from Mrs. Pigeon, the great architect of all this villany, written with her own hand for Mr Goodwin, with order to transcribe it & send it to Mr Warup the Bayliff of the Burrough; for not only Mr. Goodwins tongue, but his hands must be crampt, and he must not dare to write one word but by their Copies, though as wise as Solomon, they dare not trust him with the least service, which by the way confirms me in the opinion, That when the Project was brought to examination before the Commissioners, they saw an absolute necessity of his being translated to another world. The Letter begins thus: MVch honored Sir, being Coheirs with me of my gray-hairs, it is my great encouragement to be∣seech
you to end this strife, and at least to Repay my two third parts of the Goods taken in Execution by the Son of my own Loyns, taken by me into Copartnership in a Third of my Trade, and the Stock given by my self: Know Sir, it was to have Rest in my old age by him who is the saddest Trouble: Now God hath made you my Vmpier, for the Lords sake let it be such as may not bring my gray Hairs with Sorrow and Suits to the Grave; but with Peace give me back my two Thirds, for which I shall say, Let a Blessing rest on the head of yours for the sake of Your Servant, Wessel Goodwin. Thus though this Serpent wind in secret pathes, upon the Rock in many places her slime discovers her: You have heard before, how Andrew Goodwin being in that manner cast out, confess'd a Judgement to a Creditor, and the Goods thereupon taken in Execution, and by Mrs. Pigeons Craft undervalued and sold by the Bayliff to Hen. Coleborn for 403. l. of which the Creditor Recovered only the one Third part; and Mrs. Pigeon by this Letter procures the o∣ther two parts to be paid back to her; and accordingly she Received it, pretending for Mr. Goodwin. But what should fools do with money: let Mr. Coleborn and Mrs. Pigeon have money that are wise and subtile, and know how to im∣prove it. Many other Letters to this purpose there are from Mrs. Pigeon and Mrs. Jones, but fearing to nauseate the Reader with this gear, I forbear. I shall conclude with Mrs. Pigeon, and as it is a custome in forrein parts when notorious male∣factors have by some stratagem escaped the hand of Ju∣stice, then they draw their picture as near as may be to the life, which being fixed upon publick places of Execution, gives notice to all men what manner of person he was, that so he may be discovered: So will I, as near as I can, draw Mrs. Pigeons picture, which I refer to all to judge: for her outward Person, she is somewhat taller than the ordinary size of women, a little thick shouldered, and inclining to
fatnesse; indeed her out-side is tolerable, were it beautified with an honester mind. In this and the former Relation you may judge somewhat of her Nature by her practises, but all that falls short, nor is it possible to describe all the furni∣ture of that dark Charnel-house of sin: 'tis true that she hath very good natural endowments, an excellent memory to retain, a quick fancy to invent, an eloquent tongue to perswade, which improved in honest actions would much adorn her; but being abused, to deceive, to work mischief, spoyl, ruine, and as is feared murder also, renders her but so much more guilty to God, and hateful to all good men: these abilities joyned with her artificial helps, as an insinua∣ting gesture, harmonious accent in speech, tears, smiles, deep sighs, shutting her eys as if she were the contracted mo∣del of piety and modesty: these will she use with such cunning advantage, that she creeps into the bosoms of many that hear her, and with these she hath been heard to say she can make a fool of the wisest man alive: and when she hath bleared and muffled the understandings of those that heark∣en to her; she turns her about to her Gossips, and brags how she hath caught them. She hath the skill to observe all tempers, and frames her speech, gesture, actions sutably, she will endeavour to catch a wise man with sophisticated Reason, as Mr. Hen. Coleborn; a weak man with a preten∣ded love and care of their good, as Mr. Goodwin; a cove∣tous man with bribes, as Mr. H; a cholerick man with pro∣vocation, as Mr. Pigeon; yet notably commanding her own temper, so that as I have seen her, especially when she hath some Web of mischief upon the Loom, let the injured person vilifie her never so much with upbraiding of her wickedness, call her never so many uncouth Names, she discovers no more passion then if she understood not one word of what is spoken. A Religious man she orders as she pleases, let him be of what Principle he will, she will turn her self into such an Angel of light, that he shall cry out she is a most Angelical Creature; would she work a Revenge (as she is of a most vin∣dictive nature) she considers what defamations are most easi∣ly
received, and hardest to wipe off; amongst others, her most frequent is, Such a man took Physick, his wife knew not of it, it must needs be the French Pox; and to persons of whom was never the least cause of such suspition, she will say be∣fore company, Have you never had the French Pox? speak as in the sight of God: let them Reply what they will, some dirt will stick; she is the very Proteus of this age, can shape her self into all forms; in one Company speak of no∣thing but heaven; in another, as at Islington before good company, call for a filthy bawdy song; nay, she can make every thing about her act a part; would she win compassi∣on from her Judge, she appears all in mourning, melting like Niobe in tears; nay, where it may stand her instead, by art can make her face as black as her garments, as tis affirmed she did before the Court Martial; but if she be before such as she thinks another bait may take better, she will appear in gorgeous Apparel, her neck and brests bare, her com∣plexion beyond a natural fairnesse; these are some of her Moral parts: I conclude with her Religion, which to tell you what it is, were to shape a Coat for the Moon; and as one saith, 'Tis impossible to draw a face that is so often va∣ried. I have thought sometimes that had she been of the Masculine Sex, she is rightly qualified for a dangerous He∣retick. She is Proud, Wilful, Eloquent, and vafrous; with these she hath run through all the forms of these times; and having examined their Principles how they would tend and square with her Projects, hath quitted one after another, and is now setled in Quakerism, which she extols for the only way that fits her designs; in this fond way there is a Principle that carries it smooth, a declining of the written Word of God for an infallible rule of Practise; and there∣fore (as was proved before the Commissioners) she said she cared not if the Bible were burnt: and being guided by a light within, Ah, quoth Mrs. Pigeon, here's a way fits me; I have a light within that directs me to Renounce my Hus∣band, make another mans estate my own, to rob, spoyle, ruine, work mischief, murder, any thing, the light within guides me to it, and warrants me in it: As for that other
Principle of the simpler sort of Quakers, of making Restitu∣tion, that is to be imputed to their ignorance, being but Babes in knowledge to me; and their weakness is to be pi∣tied. These are some few life-touches, by which you may know Mrs. Pigeon. I Conclude with a Three-fold humble Request; 1. To every godly Magistrate in this Nation, that shall come to an un∣derstanding of these things, that they will (out of zeal to the glory of God, the honour of Religion, the publick well∣fare, love to Justice, hatred to Sin, compassion to the poor ruined persons herein mentioned, as they shall have oppor∣tunity) do impartial justice upon these women, that they may be a terrour to all evil doers, and a shelter to the op∣pressed. 2. To every godly Minister in this Nation by this ex∣ample to watch diligently over the souls of their people, that they keep up with all care the authority of the Scripture as the infallible Rule of all our practise, and that they in their places beg of God either to convert or bring to speedy shame such Apostates that have brought so much shame and disgrace upon Religion. And Lastly, To every Religious Lawyer, that shall by reading this, come to the knowledge of this woful Case, that they will in tender commiseration of the sufferings and wrongs of these poor undone Children (who by the wicked insinuations of these women were made Fatherless many years before their Father died, and are divers of them now reduced to extreme poverty) finde a vacant our to consider of some way of Relief in some Court of Justice or other, and that they will give them their best as∣sistance, and this let them be assured of, though they have no Money, they shall have a double fee of hearty Prayers for rich blessings from him that hath promised to hear the Fatherless and oppressed.
A Post-script to Mr. John Hat. SIR, YOu were lately warned by a wise religious Gentleman to take heed by Mr. Coleborns example of burning your fingers in Mrs. Pigeons Projects, you slighted that Admonition; you are now warned again, remember Mr. Cole∣born, no perswasion of Friends could prevail with him to a∣bandon Mrs. Pigeons company; fat Fees would not let him see his folly till death and a guilty Conscience stared him in the face, and then too late he abhorred them: Mr. Good∣win; Children, in the bitterness of their sorrows, did make their complaint to God, and they did then summon Mr. Coleborn, these women, and your self, (they being by cunning tricks of Law made distitute of Relief on earth) to appear at the impartial Bar of Gods Tribunal to answer this great wickednesse; since that Mr. Coleborn is gone, and you and they must suddenly follow: what think you, will this business of Mr. Goodwins and his Childrens Ruine hold Water when you shall come to gaspe for breath, as Mr. Coleborn before you? and that you shall remember there was a poor weak man, Mr. Goodwin, he had four dutiful Children, and by al∣most forty years painful labour and the assistance of a vertu∣ous provident Wife in an honest calling he had gathered a competency of 2000. l. to support his Family: Mistris Pi∣geon, a woman of an infamous name, without consent of her Husband fees me, by subtil slights of Law she compasses this Estate, I go up & down with her from place to place and justifie her Purchase, avowing that she hath as good a Title to Mr. Goodwins Estate as any of the Commissioners had to theirs; and tell them, the Complaints of Goodwins Chil∣dren are but as the shearing of Hogs, A great cry, and a little wool; I counselled her, after she had gotten all the Stock, to
pick the bones, fall upon the house, break up Coppars, Ci∣sterns, Pipes, convey, sell, make havock of all, not leave so much as the little houshold Goods given by old Mrs. Good∣win at her death (by her Husbands consent) to his Children, but carry all away; and when any made scruple to buy these stoln Goods I tendred them my Security to warrant their Bargain: let the Children beg, starve, no matter, I have my Fee: I perswaded Mr. Pigeon with all the Art I could to have no hand in assisting those beggarly people old Goodwins Children, and when that would not prevail, threatned him with the Jayle, and effected it. I say, when you shall re∣member all this, and a great deal more I am not privie to, what will you say? you say now she is your Clyent, and yet Lawyers do not usually lodge their Clyents in their houses, and send their Children to board at their houses, nor wait upon them about streets from place to place. I could say ten times more, if you have any spark of Grace or Humani∣ty, repent and endeavour a restitution, and know that your doom is before you, and by that time you can well turn a∣bout you, there will be no Remedy.
Sennor Juan Gold. HArto se maravillan muchos personas Discretos que un hombre de vuestra calidad quiere poner su nombre y reputacion en tanta peligro para con ame∣nazes rabiosas y loores mentirosas sostentar la fama destas malditas mugeres, como sy le yua de la vida en despecho de la verdad aueri guarlas por santas y angellicas aunque su hechas las declaran por Diabolicas: Sy V. M. fuesse hombre necio como el pobre Sr Goodwin difunto la escusa seria facill, pero siendo hombre d'entendimiento da lugar a muchos de creer que no es sin causa q'uel marido le ha defendido la frequentacion de su muger, paraque V. M. se desanganne enteramente mira y considera la Historia precedente, y sy de aqui adelante no aboresce y huye estas infamas mugeres yo con otros creere, que no es oro todo que reluze. FINIS.
