W282B R42732 38875666 152479
GOOD NEWES From the TRAINE BANDS AND AVXILIARS. Being a true Relation of their meeting with the Lord Generals Forces, and what exceeding joy was exprest at that instant on both sides. Likewise the number of the Forces which are so happily met, and with what cheerfulnesse they goe forward, couragiously chasing the enemy before them. Also a true Narration of the raising the siege at Exeter: and the prosperous proceedings, successefull skirmishes, and good estate and condition of Glocester. VVith the manner of the Lord Generals marching through the Countries. Sent from a Souldier there, bearing date Septemb. 2. and writ upon his knee without doores, waing hous room, lest he (losing that opportunity) had kept his friends from the truth. This is lenced and Entred in the Hall-Book according to Order. Prnted at London by Bernard Alsop. 1643.
THE TRVE COPIE Of a LETTER Sent from his Excellencies Army by an Auxiliar to his Master in London. Loving Master, MY humble service remembred unto you, and to my Mi∣stress, with my love to Ma∣ster Newby, and to all my fellow servants. Sir, I had writ unto you before now, but onely I
had no newes, and now having so con∣venient a Messenger as this Bearer, I thought good, as it is my duty, to write unto you, and to informe you of what Newes we have in our Armie, which is as followeth. Yesterday, being Friday, was the first day that we met with my Lord Generall with all his Forces, and our five Regi∣ments: We met upon a place called By∣ards Greene, where was a gallant show both of Horse and Foot, with extraor∣dinary great rejoycing: And indeed my Lord Generall hath a gallant and stately Army of Horse, which amounteth to the number of six thousand compleat, and more Foot, so that upon our Muster wee were conceived to be betwixt sixteene or seventeene thousand at the least, besides a brave traine of good Artillery. It is not in my power or ability to expresse the triumphant rejoycing and exraordinary shouting that was expressed at the time of our meeting. And now my Lord Ge∣nerall
and his Army are marching on the one side, and we on the other side of the Countrey, but not so farre distant one from another, but that we are alwaies within two miles one of another at night. Upon our march yesterday there came newes throughout to all our severall Companies in the Armies, that the siege is raised before Exeter for certaine: be∣sides, Glocester is in very good condition, for they have fired the enemies Salleries, and scattered their foot in abundance, insomuch that it is as much as the horse can doe to keepe up the foot to main∣taine the siege, lest they should runne away. These are the very words that the Messenger related concerning these two places. At this present we are in Oxfordshire, some fifty miles from London, but do not know certainly whether we shall march for Oxford or no; but we hope we shall forthwith hasten for Glocester.
We have already coasted all Bucking∣hamshire round, and I thinke so we shall doe all the other Countries as we goe; for though as yet we are but about some fifty miles distant from London, we have marched at least threescore and tenne miles, for wee cannot march directly straight forward; but yet neverthelesse, thankes be to God, our enemies doe flye before us wheresoever we come. This day it is supposed that my Lord Generall will set upon Banbury, for we are not above five miles from it. We have not layd still but one day since we came forth, so that if farre tra∣vell, and hard fare, and no lodging would make us Gentlemen, then we should be Gentlemen presently. But the Lord be praised we take comfort in it. We hope to see Glocester by the next Tuesday at night, and are very confident through the ayd and assistance of Almighty God) to raise the Siege with a great deale of courage.
All our neighbours, God be praysed, are in very good health. And so with my humble service remembred unto you I rest, From Soulden in Oxfordshire this 2. of Septemb. 1643. Your faithfull servant, Anthony VValby. I pray you pardon my bad writing, for I had never a house to write in, but upon my knee. We looke to fight with our Enemy every day. FINIS.
