W297 R213055 99897918 171095
A True Account From on Board the Good Ship CAESAR, In Her Voyage to the EAST INDIES. Captain — Wright Commander. SIR, HAVING this Opportunity, I could not forbear giving you this Brief Account of a Signal Victory which Providence gave us over Five Sail of Py∣rates. The full Relation would take up more Time, and more Paper (which is a scarce Commodity with us) than I can spare at present; but however, I doubt not but that you will take this Hasty Relation in good part. Upon the last day of October, 1686. being upon a Sunday Morning, we happen'd to meet with Five Sail of Ships (at a Place called St. Jago, where we usually touch to take in Fresh Water, and Fresh Provisions) who came up to us at first with French Colours, but they were soon changed into Spanish Colours, and one of them hoisted up the Bloody Flag, which immediatly alarmed Us, and made Us put our selves into a Condition of Receiving them, and they as immediatly set upon Us; We lost all our Boats, and were forced to throw
Three Thousand weight of Bread over-board, and several other things, that we might have Room enough to Play our Great Guns. For Five hours space we had a very hot and sharp Engage∣ment: Their Admiral and Vice-Admiral intended to have Boarded Us upon our Sides, and another upon our Stern; yet we saw none bold enough to dare to take possession; for at the same time we had the luck to give them our Broad∣sides, and likewise our Small-shot from our Forecastle, Poop, Quarters and Decks, which we showred on them like Hail; till at last the Villains were forced to march off with the loss of their Boult-sprit, Fore-mast and Mizen yard from those Three Ships which attempted to have Boarded Us. We sup∣pose their Aim was at the Money which we had in the Ship, which was Eighty two thousand Pounds, besides the Cargoe; and if they had taken Us, We should have been worth to them Two hundred thousand Pounds, besides the Ship: We had One hundred and twenty Souldiers on Board of Us, which did Us a great deal of good Service. We had but one Souldier killed, and one Sea-man lost his Arm, by name Francis Stephens (a Water-man that used to Ply at Puddle-dock Stairs,) and we had about seven more woun∣ded; but we are certain that they have lost several of their Men, besides a great deal of damage done to their Shipping; for at last they were forced to fall a Stern to make good the damage they had received from Us, which questionless was very considerable; They were Ships of Burthen, and could not have less than between Twenty and Thirty Guns a-piece, and a great many Men on Board, of which they carried but few away. If I had had leisure, I should have given you a Fuller and more Particular Account: but this is in Substance the truth of the Action, in which I was engaged, who am Your Humble Servant, William Walford. June 8. 1687. This may be Printed, R. P. LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, Jun. and are to be sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers Hall. 1687.
