w3585 e399_36 99862234 160393
VVorks of Darkness Brought to LIGHT. OR A true Representation to the whole King∣dome of the Dangerous Designes driven on by Sectaries in the ARMY: As also laying down the unreasonableness of their DEMANDS, Which if not granted, they refuse to DISBAND. Together with VII. new QVERIES propounded to the ARMY. LUK. 3.14. And the Souldiers demanded of John, saying; And what shal we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any man falsly, and be content with your wages. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1647.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. TO The disobedient Army under the Conduct of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. Much to be lamented Gentlemen and Soldiers, IT greives your freinds and glads your enemies, that you who have been famous for your victo∣ries should now become infamous for your dis∣obedience: It may be said of your practises, as it was of the writings of Origen, ubi bene, ne∣mo melius, ubi male nemo pejus: what things he did wel, none did better; wherein he did ill, none did worse; the same may be said of you, whiles you did wel in obeying the Parliament, encountring with your enemies, none did better; but when once you did ill, in disobeying the Com∣mands of this state you serve; and in picking quarrels with your freinds when you had no enemies to fight withall, in this none did worse. It hath made me wonder that you whose Tenets are, you must not fight for Religion, should stretch your Consciences so far on the tenter-hook of your own designs, as to fight against it: I know most of your Persons, and have read all your Papers with a bleeding heart and weeping eye, my very soul mourning in secret for the proud and imperious language; vain and carnal confidence, Peremptory and high demands, weak and groundless jealousies, sinful and ungodly compliance (with all parties to carry on your own) which is scattered up and down throughout all your pa∣pers; Lies have been your refuge, and under falshood have you hid your selves. That your selves and the Kingdom might see I do
you no wrong, I shal produce your own party and Papers, to give palpable Demonstration to all the world, that you have contrived and carried on your designs with falshood and deceit. From your Party I might evince it thus; did not Cromwel (your great Ring∣leader into Disobedience) solemnly protest and promise upon his life and honor many times and oft in the House of Commons,Cromwels Promise falsi∣fied. that the Army should disband and lay down all their Arms at their door, when ever the House Commanded them? now whether your papers agree with his promise, the world wil witness. It seems he can take that liberty of Conscience with the Papist to pro∣mote the Catholique cause, per fas et nafas, by right means or wrong, by truth or falshood: This palpable breach of Cromwels ingagement makes all indifferent men beleive that this promise of obedience was only made; that your purpose of disobedience might be the less suspected, and the practise of it the more easily pro∣moted. Is not this like the practise of Garnet and Jesuite, who (a little before the powder-plot was to be acted) did lay his Com∣mands on the Papists to obey their King, and keep themselves qui∣et? and all was that the plot might not be suspected. If Crom∣wel follow Garnets steps, I would have him take heed of Garnets end. 2. The falshood of your Papers I could declare in many par∣ticulars, which I wil scan and survey in this following Treatise; I shal in my Epistile instance in one Palpable falshood only. In your letter to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Councel of the City of London:These in breif are our desires and the things for which we stand, beyond which we shal not go. See the Letter from Sir Thomas Fairfax and the cheif Commanders in the Army to the Lord Major, Alder∣men and Common-Council of the City of London Da∣ted from Roy∣ston, June 10. 1647. P. 4 li. 14. you signify what your desires are, and the things for which you stand, beyond which you promise you shal not go. And in your See the De∣claration from Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax and the Army from St. Al∣banes. June 1. 1647. P 12. l. 29. Declaration 4. daies after this you have these words. There are besides these many particular things which we could wish to be done, and some to be undone; but these proposals afore-going present, being the principal things we bot∣tome and insist upon, we shal (as we have said before) acquiesce for other particulars in the justice and wisedom of the Parliament. In which words I cannot but give you to take notice both of Pride and falshood. 1. Pride, in that in some particulars only you wil acquiesce in the wisedom and justice of the parliament, in other things it seems you wil not; Touching those proposals in your Declaration you wil not acquiesce in the justice and wisedom of the House; in those you seem your selves the most Competent judges on intollerable pride! 2. The falshood of those words appear in
this; although you bound up your selves by promise, that beyond your desires exprest in your letter, Dated 10. of June, and your Proposals in your Declaration at St. Albanes, June 14. you would not go, but acquiesce in the justice and wisedom of the Parliament for other particulars; yet have you since the time you made that promise imperiously demanded, and Peremptorily insisted upon about 20. Particular Proposals more, in your Humble Remon∣strance, dated June 23. and in your manifesto dated June 27. and in other Papers. Thus have you made lies your Refuge, and un∣der falshood have you hid your selves. Having thus dealt plainly with you, I shal now retire into a corner and weep for you, and that upon these 4. Considerations. 1. Considering the Temptations you lie under at this day. Your selves confess it in the opinion and humble advice of the Councel of War at Bury, 29 of May 1647. pag. 7. line ult. Oh 'tis the houre of your Temptation; the Temptation that I conceive lies upon you, is this; that you have many of you been used so long to Command that you have forgotten to obey; that many of you from deep penury have aspired to gainful offices, and from being cloathed in raggs, are now arrayed in Scarlet; this I fear wil be a prevailing Temptation upon you to make you unwilling to dis∣band, knowing that then you must return to your obscure dwel∣lings and callings, to be Tinkers, Tapsters, Taylors, Tanker-bea∣rers, Porters, Coblers, Bakers, and other such mean trades, of which you could not subsist before these wars. 2. Considering the Designs you drive at; among many this is the summ of your desires, to new-mould the House of Commons; which you call purging (but others think corrupting) the House. Oh then M. Peters would be busy abroad to get in some famous Common-wealths-men, such as Hughson the Shoo-maker, Hobson the Taylor, Quarterman the Marshal. These in your account would be faithful Members in the House of Commons. 3. Considering the indirect means you use to drive on your de∣signs, and that by fraud falshood, stattery, and Compliance with all sorts of men. Comply you do with the King to permit his ma∣lignant Chaplins to come to him, and have common prayers read before him, contrary to the order of both Houses; Comply basely you do with malignants: a new smooth tearm for them you have
in your Remonstrance found out; least you should displease them too much in calling them Malignants: therefore you call them the Kings late Partakers,See humble Remonstra. P. 12. l. 27. and desire for them more then ever they durst desire for themselves. Doubtless these helpers shal be your shame and ruin, as the reeds of Aegypt, shal they be unto you to fayl and wound you. 4. Considering the ill Consequences that either have or may fall out. as 1. Have not you strengthned the hands of the wicked, and greived the hearts of the godly wise? 2. Have not you stirred up a spirit of disobedience in many people of the land against the Par∣liament? 3. Have not you rendred the Parliament base and low before the people? 4. Have not you countenanced and encouraged all the desperate Sectaries in the Kingdom? 5. Have not you ble∣misht and contemned a godly and Orthodox Ministry, and encou∣raged illiterate mecanick unworthy fellows to preach, where, and when, and what they list? 6. Have not you permitted all scan∣dalous Ministers, that wil, to read the Common-prayer-book within your quarters? 7. Have not you hardned the Kings heart in his former wayes, in allowing him his seducing Chaplains who have caused him to erre; and to have as free a use, within your quarters, of the Common-prayer-book, as ever he had when he was at White-hall? 8. Have not you exceedingly retarded the releif of Ireland; had you not rather to pick quarrels with your freinds here, then to fight with your enemies there? 9. Hath not your approach to London raised the price of Provisions, and interrupted the Trade of this City, above 200000.l. weekly? These incon∣veniences we have already felt, what yet we may further undergo the Lord knows. I have no more to say, but to Commend this following subject to your Patronage, wherein I shal endeavour to set forth to the world and your own Consciences, the Dange∣rousness of your designs, the unreasonableness of your demands, together with some new Queries to your Consciences. in the mean time rest, Your humble Servant, if you wil not presume to be the Kingdoms Masters, Tom Tell-troth.
VVorks of darkness brought to LIGHT; OR A true Representation to the whole Kingdom of the dangerous Designs &c. driven on by the ARMY. Oye Inhabitants of ENGLAND; WIth what face can ye endure a smal Councel of war to controul and disobey the great Councel of state? Are ye weary of the Common Law, or rather wil∣ling the Marshal Law should rule you? wil ye de∣light rather to see Souldiers in Buff, then Nobles in their Parliament Robes? Had ye rather the Land should run down with tears and blood, then flow with milk and honey? wil ye be beguiled with the flattering words and plausible pretences of a Revolted Army? wil ye suffer the Army under pre∣tence of justice to bring you under oppression, and under the no∣tion of Liberty to bring you into bondage, and under the name of Saints of light to act the part of the Angels of darkness? That you might not be deluded for time to come, I shal breifly dispatch these 3. particulars. 1. Shew the Armies dangerous designs. 2. Unreasonable demands, together with some new Queries to their Consciences touching their refusal to disband at the Command of the two Houses of Parliament. I begin with the first. viz. the dangerous designs driven on by the sectaries in the Army; why they refuse to disband. I shal re∣duce to 7. heads, which I shal make appear by plain and Demon∣strative Reasons.
The first grand design the Army drives at, is to new-mould the Honorable House of Commons;. Design. to increase the numbers of Inde∣pendent Members, that so they might carry the Votes of the House as it shal please themselves, that if it were possible they might pro∣mote their wicked designs in a Parliamentary way. This design is so clear, that he that runs may read it; since the writs were Issu∣ed forth for new elections to fil up the House; how Industriously have the Independent Party endeavoured to fil the House with In∣dependent Members; using M. Peters by perswasion in the Pul∣pit, and the Army by terror, to deceive and affright the people, forcing many places in the Country to chuse Souldiers, and others, men of no considerable interests in the Kingdom, to be Members of Parliament: yea their violence against the XI. Accused Members, manifests this to be the design, declaring to the Parliament in their Papers,See the Ar∣mies humble Remonst. p. 14. that they must take some extraordinary courses, til the XI. Members be suspended the House, and some other of their de∣mands satisfied: And not being content with this they vent their spleen also against other Members of the House of Commons, bran∣ding them with the ignominious tearm ofSee the Armies hum∣ble Remonst. P. 10. P. 14. a Party, men that drive their own interests, Accomplices to the Members accused, accusing all them to be disaffected to the publique good, who are not affe∣cted to their own Party. Tis clear by this the new moulding the Parliament is the first and grand design. The grand design and main intent is to new mould the Parliament. The Army then and Country-clown wil turn the Kingdom upside down. To destroy the House of Lords;2. Design. The Petition of Lambes Con∣gregation to the House of Commons,See that seditious Peti∣tion from Lambes Con∣gregation. that none might have a ne∣gative voyce; doth directly justle out the power of the House of Peeres. The Sectaries are not ashamed to say that the Lords of this Realm ought not to sit in Parliament, unless they do come in by Election as Members of the House of Commons do? this wil more evidently appear if ye read those seditious Pamphlets against the House of Lords, written by the Sectaries. It is said in one Secta∣rian Pamphlet,See the just man in bonds. P. . that the Lords are but painted puppies and Da∣gons, that our superstition and ignorance, their own craft and impudence have erected; no natural Issues of Laws, but the
mushromes of Prerogative, the wens of just government; putting the body of the people to pain, as wel as occasioning Deformity, sons of conquest they are and usurpation, not of choyce and Ele∣ction; intruded upon us by power, not constituted by consent, not made by the people from whom all power, place, and office that is just in this Kingdom ought only to arise. And in another sediti∣ous Pamphlet 'tis said thus;See Pearl in a dunghil. p. 3. why presume ye thus O ye Lords; set forth your merit before the people. Remember your selves, or shal we remember ye? which of you before this Parliament min∣ded any thing so much as your pleasures, plaies, masks; feastings, buntings, gameings, dancings &c? For what other have you been but a meer clogg to the House of Commons in all their pro∣ceedings? how many necessary things have ye obstructed? how many evil things have ye promoted? And in another Pestilent Pam∣phlet 'tis affirmed;See Remon∣strance of many thou∣sands. p 7. that the Lords must stand to be chosen for Knights and Burgesses by the people, as other, the freemen and gentry of this nation are. Yea there is another seditious Book in∣tituled An Al-arm to the House of Lords, which contains in every page of it, railing against the Peers of the Realm;See the book intituled an Al-arm to the House of Lords. the several passages would be too tedious for you to read or me to write, let this suffice to let you see the endeavours of the Sectaries, to over∣throw and alter the very foundamentals of the government of the Kingdom; now least you should imagine that this spirit of dis-af∣fection to the House of Lords should be confined, only within the breasts of the unknown Authors of these seditious books; it is meet I should let you know that this malignant humour runs as blood throughout the veines of all the Sectaries; when the Secta∣ries, in and about London, Petition, 'tis only to their own House of Commons, they never take notice of the Lords House at all; witness that factious Petition from Lambes Congregation, and a∣nother Petition from the Sectaries of London, delivered to the House of Commons, by that Turn-coate Samuel Warner, Tich∣bourn and others, in opposition to the Renouned Remonstrance of the City, which was humbly presented to both Houses; but their seditious Petitions, but only to the House of Commons. By this it appears that destroying the Lords House, is the 2. Design driven on by the Sectaries. Ye nobles all be ware a fall The Brownists do against you brawl.
They say you shal not sit an houre If th' upper House yeeld not to th' lower. To cut off the King if he sides not to the Independent party.3. Design. 'Tis true, of late they seem to appear for him to gain Malignants on their side, but 'tis notoriously known how their Principles are di∣rectly against Monarchy: What desperate speeches have some In∣dependent Members uttered against the King! yea it wil never be forgotten how inraged the Independent Members of the House and Sectaries of London were against the City Remonstrance, chiefly because there was this passage in it; for the preservation of the Kings person according to the Covenant: Yea the Sectaries publish to the world in Print that the King for his mis-government must lose his life:See the just mans Iustification, P. 1. 'tis said in one Pamphlet  that You (meaning the House of Commons or else the rude multitude) should think of that great Murtherer of England (meaning the King) for by the impartial Law of God there is no exemption of Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, &c. more then of Fishermen, Coblers, Tinkers or Chimney-sweepers: and elsewhere 'tis saidSee Argu∣ments prov∣ing that we ought not to part with the Mili∣tia Arg. 10. that according to Pro∣testations, Oathes, and Covenants He (meaning the King) ought to be brought to exemplary and condign punishment, he being the greatest and most notorious Delinquent in the whole Kingdom, &c. Yea they speak their minds more fully in another PamphletSee the Remonst. of many thou∣sands. p. 6. We do expect, according to reason, that ye should, in the first place, declare and set forth King CHARLS his wickedness openly before the world, and withal to shew the intolerable incoveniences of having a Kingly Government from the constant evil practices of those of this Nation; and so to declare King CHARLS an enemy, and to publish your resolution never to have any more. By all this it appears that the Sectaries intend, as the 32 Syrian Captains did (1 King. 22.31.) to fight neither with smal nor great but with the King of Israel. In laying down this Design I would have none of you conceive as if I were a Malignant Royalist (I hate Arbitrary power and Tyranny in Princes as much as any) I only mention this that Malignants might not be brought into fools paradise to joyn with the Army, conceiving them to be for the Kings honor and safety who are the greatest enemies of both. Malignants all beleeve this thing Sectarians would destroy the King:
Yea they do wish there might be none For to succeed him on the throne. To introduce an universal Liberty and Toleration for all sorts of false and heretical opinions.4. Design. All the sectaries in the Kingdom labor with might and main to promote this; in one Pamphlet 'tis boldly asserted,See Williams Bloody Tenet of Persecution for the cause of Conscience in the preface to the Parlia∣ment p. 2. that it is the wil and command of God, that since the coming of his son the Lord Jesus, a permission of the most Paga∣nish, Jewish, Turkish or Antichrist an Consciences and Worships be granted to all men in all Nations and Countries: And elsewhere 'tis said,See Com∣passionate Sa∣maritan. p. 5. that Liberty of Conscience is to be allowed to every man or sort of men to worship God in that way or manner as shal appear to them most agreeable to Gods Word. Numerous Pamphlets there are abroad besides broacht by the seducing Chaplains of the Army and their accomplices as Mr Dlls Sermon before the Parliament; many smal and trivial Tracts of M. Saltmarshes, M. John Goodwin in his blasphemous book intituled Hagio mstix &c. and in his im∣pudent Queries against an Ordinance of Parliament for the Sup∣pression of Heresies, with abundance of other Pamphlets which cry up this their Diana of Toleration; yea these Army-Chaplains have so corrupted their hearers and disciples from the simplicity of the Gospel that the whole Army now contends for Toleration by the sword in the Field, which their Teachers could never make good by Argument eit er in Press or Pulpit: Yea the whole Army declare this to be the design. Ile give you the Armies wordsSee a Letter sent from Sir Tho Fairfax and the cheif Commanders in the Army to the Lord Mayor, Alder∣men & Com∣mon Councel of the City of London, Da∣ted from Roy∣ston, Jun. 10. We wish that every good Citizen and every man that walks peaceably in a blameless conversation, and is beneficial to the Common∣wealth may have liberty and encouragement, it being according to the qust policy of all States even to justice it self. By this you may see the intendments of the Army if they prevail in this present un∣dertaking. The great Diana cry'd up in the Nation Is a licentious lawless Toleration: All in the Land own not this cursed Action, Only a base or discontented Faction. To pull down the godly and orthodox Ministers of the Kingdom and to open a wide door (as in the days of Jeroboam) that the  of the people may take upon them the Priests office;5. Design. He
who in Jobs account, should not be worthy to set with the doggs of his flock, is judged meet by Sectaries, to be Pastor over the flock and sheep of Christ. The prophanest sort of men in the land, did never so grosly abuse godly Ministers, as all the Sectaries do at this day.See M Dels preface to his Sermon before the Parliament and in his reply after. They abuse them in their names, calling them the Preists of Baal: in their office, making them to be but the Props and Toes of Antichrist. Yea they account Ministers Calling to be Antichri∣stian, their maintenance to be Jewish, their preaching to be legal, and their persons contemptible. And wil not they, think you, pul down them to set up phanatick and phantastick Teachers of their own? then poor Paul Hobson the Taylor, Quarterman the Mar∣shals man, & Hughson the Shoo-maker, with multitudes of mean and illiterate fellows, wil serve to be the Armies Evangelists. Ye Presbyterian starrs, in Christs right hand Though Armies pul you down, yet shal you stand. Out live you shal these troubles, do what can Hobson, or Hughson, Del, or Quarterman. To keep off Independent Members (many wherof are guilty of capital crimes) from a due & legal tryal.6. Design. Tis only the sound of the Trumpet, and noyse of the Drum, that makes the cries of the people cannot be heard against the Tyranny, Bribery, and injustice of the Indepen∣dent party. were it so that the Army were disbanded, that the free-born Subjects of England should not be terrified by an Ar∣my; there are thousands in this Kingdom who would fully prove many of them to be brought into the House upon undue and illegal Elections; that they have treasured up vast summs of money, ob∣structed justice, retarded the Releif of Ireland, and acted many other intollerable injuries to the Common-wealth, which would make them an abhorring in the eyes of all the people; Fleet-wood, Harrison, and Ireton, with many others know, were the Army disbanded, their elections would be questioned; Seeing they cannot continue themselves Members by right, they wil do it by power; yea Leivtenant General Cromwel knows, there is some body in the world that can accuse him of that, and prove it clearly to his face, which would make him blush, and beCromwels lascivious carriage. ashamed to enter within the House of Commons doors; very unbeseeming a man of his condition and profession. His own guiltiness in this and
other things; as also the guiltiness of many others of his faction, makes them unwilling to disband. Great are the summs I know not what Which Independent Members got. The ground of not disbanding now is plain Least question'd they should be for unjust gain. Least of some Members there be an ejection For coming in by an undue Election. With Parliament and City they wil fight Least Cromwels lusts and lies should come to light. If all these Designs take not; their last Design, is,7. Design. to go over into Ireland under Cromwel, and the rest of the Independent Officers; if they cannot be Masters here, they would be Lords there; if can∣not befool this Kingdom, they would inslave that: Ireland is but a Reserve, if cannot procure a Tolleration in England, they make no doubt to establish it in Ireland; field Marshal Skippon, and Major General Massey wil not serve their turn, therefore they re∣fuse to go under their Command; if their Commanders be not Sectaries, they rather fear a suppression, then look for a Tolleration. Ere they tread Irish ground for Cromwel they wil cry Skippon content them cannot nor Massey. The reason is, they are not of their Sect, Which makes the Army wholy them reject. The state to their own tearms if cannot tye England must suffer stil and Ireland dye. Thus I have endeavoured to lay open the dangerous designs dri∣ven on in the Army; which I dare affirm with so much confi∣dence, that I would have you beleeve nothing to be true, if you find not all to be true. If you ask me what are the likeliest means to prevent these dangerous Designs? I answer briefly. 1. All the Counties in the Kingdom should Petition Humbly the Parliament, for the speedy disbanding of the Army, they ha∣ving as much from the state as they can expect; the Declaration a∣gainst them revok't, the act of Indempnity inlarged, and most of their Arrears presently to be payd, and all to be unquestionably secured; what can they as Souldiers desire more?
2. Those 5 Counties, Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, Buckingham, and Hertford, should declare humbly to the Parliament how they are abused, in that a seditious inconsiderable party of such County, should presume to present Petitions to Sir Thomas Fair∣fax, under the name of the whole, which they wil not own; they likewise should represent how surreptitiously the Petitions were gotten, by whom fomented, contrived and subscribed, that they might come to condign punishment, for so high an affront against the Parliament. This would gain more Honor to those Counties then they have lost, in having such a factious party in the midst of them. 3. Those Sheirs and Burroughs for which the XI. Honorable (though accused) Members serve, should Petition the Parliament, that the Knights and Gentlemen legally and fairly chosen by them, should be Commanded to attend the service of the House, til the Charge can be proved against them. 4. All the Kingdom should Petition that none may be Members of Parliament, nor have any I ce in trust of this Kingdom, who either renounce or refuse to take the solemn league and Cove∣nant. 5. We should Petition the Honorable Houses, they would be pleased to hold on their Resolutions in sending overfeild-Mar∣shal Skippon, and Major General Massey, these two valiant Com∣manders to be in supream Command for the business of Ireland. 6. Petition the Parliament, that they would suppress seducers and false teachers, who creep into comers perverting many from the truth and simplicity of the Gospel: as also that they would sup∣press seditious pamphlets printed by Sectaries and malignants a∣gainst the Parliament. Having finisht the first head, laying down the designs the Army Drives at, together with the Remedies to prevent them; I come now to the 2. head, To lay down where∣in the unreasonableness (I had almost said Treasonableness) of the Armies demands doth consist. 1. Their first unreasonable Demand is (which they call reaso∣nable)See the Armies hum∣ble Remonst. p. 10. that the Army may be payd up equal with those that have deserted it though invited by the Parliament to do it. Is this a rea∣sonable Demand, that they that have deserted the Army out of conscience and obedience should have no more of their Arrears then
they that stand out still in disobedience against the Parliament? 2. Their second Demand is more unreasonableSee the Ar∣mies humble Remonst. p. 1. l. 1.2 We have ground to claim more then they or rather that they or some of them should forfeit their Arrears. that they that deserted the Army (though out of obedience to the Parliament) should forfeit their Arrears; or at least that the Army should have more of their Arrears payd them then the deserters of it shal; were not this to justifie the wicked and condemn the righteous; to punish the one for obedience and reward the other for disobedience, which would be a provocation in the eyes of God, neither consisting with equity and conscience in the Army to demand, nor with the justice and honor of the Parliament to grant, to punish one for obedience and reward another for disobedience. 3. Their third unreasonable Demand is to require more security for their arrears then any in the Kingdom ever yet desired;See the Ar∣mies humble Representa∣tion, p. 15. l. 3. the credit of the Excise and the profits arising out of Delinquents Estates, and Or∣dinance of Parliament wil not content them; though millions of mo∣ney have been lent upon this security: Were these terms offered to all other Officers and Souldiers in the Kingdom they would thankfully accept it as a due and safe recompence for their service. 4. Their fourth unreasonable Demand is to limit the Parliament to a very day to grant their desires, else to threaten them to their faces; which is such an affront to a Parliament that never was of∣fered in this world. In one of their Papers they prescribe the very day when they must have a moneths pay;See Humble Remonstrance p. 14. l. 15. in another paper they declare that it they receive not security and assurance to themselves and the Kingdom of a safe and hopeful proceeding and that by Thursday night they must be forced to take extraordinary courses. 'Tis worthy your notice that this Demand of theirs was presented to the Commissioners at S. Albans Iune the 23. being Wednesday, and yet were so impudent to terrifie the Parliament, that if they did not gratifie their desires the very next day following they must be forc'd to extraordinary courses; they would allow but a day to the Parliament to consider of their Demands; which is such a high breach of the priviledg of Parliament that I cannot but stand a∣mazed and wonder with what conscience we can suffer, or with what face they can indeavor the subverting of the indubitable pri∣viledges of Parliament. 5. Their fifth unreasonable Demand isSee the Ar∣mies humble, Remonst.  2. l. 6. that there be no listing of new forces in or about London, when themselves do gather
together the most notorious Sectaries in the Kingdom to their Ar∣my; yea draw their Train of Artillery from Oxford; take many loades of new arms out of Windsor Castle; seize upon powder coming from Northampton to London, fortifying some Garrisons, and do all things in preparation to a new war: yet the Parliament and City must sit stil, look on, and all lie at their mercy; whether this be reasonable, I leave to all indifferent men to judg. 6. Their sixth unreasonable Demand is thatSee humble Remonst. p. 15. l. 12. the Members ac∣cused be forthwith suspended or sequestred the House, and that be∣fore any particular Charge or Proofs were brought in against them. Is it reasonable that those honorable persons who are but Mem∣bers accused should be suspended the House, and yet Na∣thaniel Fines a condemned Member should sit still in the House? Is he fit to sit as judg to condemn others, that is a condem∣ned man himself? Behold, O ye people, the justice of the Army! Is it reason that Colonel Long, who is only charged (but not proved) by the Army to be a Coward, should be suspended the House, and yet poor Nat. Fines, who is a Coward upon Record, adjudged by a Councel of WAR to dye for Cowar∣dize, must still sit in the House? 7. Their seventh unreasonable Demand is in the behalf of the King and Malignants, for whom the ARMY is now become dissembling Mediators: they desire thatSee humble Remonst. p. 12. l. 26. provision be made for the rights, quiet, and immunity of his MA∣JESTIES Royal Family and his late partakers, &c. How far they will extend this comprehensive term, Immuni∣ty for the KINGS Family and his late partakers, none but themselves know: in part we may know what they mean: so much Immunity hath the KING and his late partakers already from the ARMY: viz. His Chaplains about him, and Cringings and Common prayers in use be∣fore him: which how agreeable this is to the Directions of PARLIAMENT which have been given, or the Co∣venant which hath been taken, I leave to wise men to con∣sider.
