W377 E85_39 99872907 125354
THE MODEST VINDICATION OF HENRY VVALKER. In answer to certaine scandalous Pamphlets, forged and vented abroad in his name (without his privity.) Against which, as also the authours thereof, together with the popular aspersions of many other turbulent spirits, He doth protest; and before Al∣mighty God, clear himselfe to all the world. MAL. 3. 16. Then spake they that feared the Lord, every one to his neighbour, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a booke of remembrance was written. Augustin in Psal. 31. prae. Ʋnusquisque audiat, & sicut sibi conscius fuerit, ita vel doleat corrigendus, vel guadeat approbandus. Let every one heare, and as he is conscious to himselfe, so let him either grieve being to be corrected, or rejoyce being to be approved. LONDON, Printed in the Yeare of our Lord, 1642.
The Epistle Dedicatorie▪ O Pierce my heart with fervent love of thee!God. The beauty of thy face, Lord, let me see! Rise from thy cloudy Eastern cloysters black, Spread forth thy glorious beames and be not slack, To thawe my Icie heart, which sinne hath frosen, Assure my conscience, Lord, I am thy chosen. And thou my Sovereigne,The King. Charles, all Europs splendor, Thine enemies terrour and true Faith's Defendr, Thy love preserv'd my life, not heathenish fate, In thy Majestick face, true Princely state: When malice plotted mischief everie houre, Thy clemency prevented all their power: That God which grac'd thee with a Royall Crowne, Crown thee with grace, thy Honours with renown. * All you poore soules whose eares have been abused,People. With scandalous reports and eyes traduced With charmes of turbulent spirits; new take and view, This Declaration honest, plain, and true. Per Henry Walker Cantab.
The modest Vindication of Henry Walker. IT is an ancient saying of the learned.The Cinick Philosopher If a man would be in safety, and partaker of happinesse, he must of necessity have good friends, or sharp ene∣mies, that the one by good and wise admoniti∣on, or the other by notable injuries may cause him to withdraw himself from doing of evill. They from the instinct of nature, but we by the Law of God are taught to govern our selves with the reason of a true Academicall prudence, who being Christians are bound to shew forth the effect of that title which we beare. And I pray God, that I (with the Philosophers industrious Bees) may gather the driest,Xenophon. and most precious hony of faith, and patience, from the bitter time of these my troubles,As Theophr¦stus saith. not desiring revenge, (for that would hurt me more then them) but praying for their conversion who causelesly have sought my ruine, bequeathing unto them Antistines blessing: even all the good in the world, except valour, which may make them rashly to venter upon my life.As Lisander Admirall of of the Laced¦moians bei reviled with many bitter speeches said to him who offered him that inj¦ry. And I could heartily wish, that all those who have spued out their envy against me, may, (by humble contriti∣on before Almighty God) empty their soules of that wickednesse wherewith they appeare herein to be replenished; Concerning a foolish ridiculous Pamphlet of Tobie & his dog, put by the authour into Taylours hands, and (by him) bastardly fathered upon me, hoping thereby to advance the profit of the presse: As also another, (as false as foolish) of my life and conversation, composed by, and printed for those who never knew a reason of what is therein maliciously forged: with Sermons printed, pretended to be mine: and many other inveterate fictions so farre from modesty, Religion, or humanity, that (however some poore soules may be traduced to
believe them yet) upon mature deliberation, I am confident, that a∣ny rationall understanding may easily perceive the guilded poyson of invective lyes wherewith I am therein maligned, by such who have not onely fathered their own filthinesse most impudently upon me, but have so farre abused others, that they have gloried in the vast conceit of prevailing to make such men odious to the world, who indeed are happy patternes of Piety: amongst whom I am no wayes worthy to be named, though their enemies have now beene mine.hil iniquius am ut ode∣t homines os ignorant omsi res me∣ur odium, ertull. Nothing is worse (saith a Reverend Father) then to hate men whom they know not, though they deserve to be hated. But what would that good man have said, had he now lived to see Religion thus ma∣ligned, and Peace violated, whereby so great a destraction is raised, both in Church, and state? the setling whereof who can expect whilst so many are seperated from, and will not be reconciled to God? for (as Bernard saith) how shall mans Peace be ratified before God,aenam mo∣stabit pax minum co∣ Deo, si to apud ho∣nes non po∣tua esse sua ria? when Gods glory is violated with men: his worship despised, his faithfull Ministers contemned, and the fruit of the Altar, and the meat of it not regarded? Mal. 1. 12. Concerning the Petition to the Kings Majesty, for which the Law hath passed on me, I doe not, neither did I ever deny, that the written copie was mine, Epist. . 1. 12 with which how the printed Pamphlet a∣greed, and wherein it differed, I passe by it with a modest silence: the law hath passed on me, and I freely submit to the censure of the Court of Justice,gust. on . 8 5. knowing the truth of Augustine his words, Iustice and Peace, are two friends. Yet can I not passe by the providence of God herein, rendring thanks to my dread Soveraigne, that his graci∣ous Majesty would be pleased to cast the eyes of his clemency on so poore a subject,pleased  Majesty to  a speciall  to the ges, not to ddle with life, or any  or mem∣ of my body (when so distressed) to limit the fury of my adver∣saries; which gracious favour of his hath obliged my subjection to the highest pitch of Loyalty: and soared my affection so high, to love and honour him, that could I lay downe my life to do him ser∣vice, I should think my death a blessed sacrifice. And thus much I can safely, and ingenuously protest before Al∣mighty God, (and let my best thoughts fade, and hopes of blessing
vanish, if my pen dissemble with my heart) that the uttermost of my intents (therein) extended no further then the glory of God, the honour of His Majesty, and the peace and tranquility of the Church and State; being confident, that as England was under his Royall fa∣ther of blessed memory, so is it under His Royall Majesty the hap∣piest nation in the world, in a Prince endued with true Majesty, and piety;Humilisspir sedulus cor facilis assat &c Forcis i praelio, manserus in imper &c. merito  go expetirus estab univer populo, ut om∣nes ad eum venirent d¦centes, ecce nos ossa sua, &c. Ambros. lib.  Offic. cap. 7. humble in spirit, diligent in heart, affable in speech, valiant in battell, mercifull in government, the Princely qualities commended in David by Ambrose. Who doth not know the lustre of the Throne to be so glorious in His Majesties pious Reigne, that all the Princes in the world, in their greatest glory, are but as shadowes be∣fore His splendor? O Royall Soveraigne, how art thou worthy to be honoured, worthy to be loved, worthy to be desired of all that come unto thee, saying we are thy bones? &c. And concerning those clamorous speeches, which are rumored abroad, that I should throw the said Petition into His Majesties Coach, upon what grounds or by whom it should be raised I cannot tell, neither can I say any thing of it, onely thus much I can inge∣nuously protest, that I am not onely innocent, but ignorant of any such act, and so farre cleare, that I am absolutely free from all such intention in my self, or privity in others: I tooke none of them from the Presse, because I then apprehended danger in what was printed, and had the Printer put out what I forbad to print (yet never writ) that which was chiefly questioned had not beene printed: But for my part because I was not charged with it, neither heare it reported by any credible person of their owne knowledge: I doubt the truth of it: yet thus much I say, that if any man did presume to doe it, it must needs be censured an high attempt, and worthy of condigne punishment. But that which strikes me into the greatest admiration, is, to think upon what grounds the imagination of any mans judgement should apprehend mine to be tainted with Brownisme, or faction; yet have some malitious turbulent spirits branded me for a Separatist, and scandalized me with preaching in Conventicles, when as God
knowes I am so cleare from any such action, that I was never yet a member of any separated congregation: I pray God so to heare my prayers, as I have been a faithfull member of the Church of Eng∣land, established by the Lawes of the Land, and free from conven∣ticling with Papists, Brownists, Anabaptists, or any factious As∣semblies whatsoever; I have still laboured to practise that grave advice of Augustine, which teacheth me not onely to assemble in di∣vine worship with the Congregation my self,dduce eos  domum ei tecum, qui  in domo  recum. ugust. epist. 0. but also to bring those into Gods House which remained under my roofe. I deny not, but I have, and still doe desire, and hartily pray to God, that there may be a Reformation of such things in the Church as by Authority shall be found fit to be reformed, according to that direction which God himselfe prescribeth in his holy word, yet with this caution that it is not for private persons, but belongs to au∣thority to regulate the differences, and dissentions both in Church, and State,Rom. 13. to the guidance whereof every subject is bound to submit because they are the powers ordained of God, Rom. 13. There∣fore I say no more of that, onely thus much; I cannot but take notice what great cause we have to give thanks to Almighty God, that we have so Religious a King, whose splendour shines brighter amongst the glorious starres of His prudent Senatours in the two Honoura∣ble Houses of Parliament then all the Princes in the world. When can we expect a through Reformation if not now? Should Gods poore saints expectations in England now be thwarted, how would their glory then be vailed? but God be blessed their hopes, though deferred, are not lost, for the glory is not departed from Israel. Others question my calling, which was never yet questioned by Authority, stumbling at my former life, because mechanick, to so holy a function. Give me leave to speak plainly, because truly, it is well known where I was born, that I was bred a Scholar, though taken from the Schoole to the shop; I returned again to that in which I most delighted, namely, learning; and remained a student in Queens Colledge in Cambridge, till not onely by a Certificate from the said Colledge, but also by a Testimonie under the hands of severall able
Divines I was held fit to be received into Orders; after which being examined by the Arch-Bishops Chaplain of these Diocesses, I gave him such satisfaction of my fitnesse that he subscribed examinavi▪ & approbavi, whereupon the Arch-Bishop gave me a ft, under his own hand which produced Letters dimissary out of the Court: Then re∣pairing to the Arch-Bishop of York, then Bshop of Lincoln, I was presented to him by a Minister, who supplied the Arch-Deacons place; and from the said Bishop received the charge of a Deacon, and he laid his hands upon me, at which time almost twenty more Students of the two famous Universities of Cambridge, and Oxford, were also received into Orders. And moreover I am resolved to ap∣peal to Authority so soon as opportunity wil permit, by whom if I be not held fit, & to whom if I give not good satisfaction, I will freely submit to their censure, calling upon God to direct both thē & me. Me thinks I heare those words of S. Augustine (as it were) sounding in mine eares, O homo! in praeceptione cognosce quid debeas habere, in correptione tua te vitio non habere, in oratione quid vis habere. In English thus, O man! acknowledge in everie precept what strength thou shouldest have, in every reproofe what strength by thine owne fault thou wantest, and in everie prayer, whence thou mayest have what thou wantest. Lord grant, that I may so pray, so know, and so practise that I may glorifie thy name, honour my King, doe my duty, practise love, know my self, and discharge my consci∣ence before Almighty God, and all the world, which that I may do, God of his infinite mercy assist me with his holy Spirit. Amen. FINIS.
