Y104A 47683589 173044
,  new way of Wooing. A merry conceited Young-man being in company with a Proud, Scornful, Jeer∣ing Lasse at St. Albones, he taking notice of her person and Carriage, present∣ly Composes this paper of Verses, as he thought suitable to her deserts; his way lying to London, threw the song into a Stationers shop, as soon as he found them, gets it printed for profit, and sends them through England for pleasure; when the Young man returned back, he presented a Ballad to his Mistriss and departed. Though London Girls have many Rimes and Catches, Yet often times they do meet with their matches. To the Tune of the Zealous Lover, or, A Fig for France, &c. AS through St. Albone I did pass I Heard a scorful Cckney Lasse From London thither came to dwel; For pride she others did excel, She often u to ok and éer Some Young men of Northampton-shire, Till at the last an honest lad, Did eer this wench and made her mad. Quoth he, I'me but a simple Youth Yet I delight to speak the truth; Obseve my Languae seiously It's clearly void of slattey, nd that you  say is very strange, When Lovers Complements do change, or some young me praise their sweet hearts uch higher than their true deserts▪ Then give me leave and i'le prepare My foolish fancy to declae▪ And set orth thy imperfect parts That never gained young mens hearts; I ne're saw Phenix in my days, Therefore thy beauty i'le not praise Then prethée ben't so co to me For I am not so fond of thée. Thy scurvy scornful rouling Eyes Of my heart ne're shall make a prize, Thy béetle Brows and tallow face Makes young men run from thée a ace; Thy hae is like my Sorrels mane The words I speak are very plain, Or rather like unto Jane Shore, Which makes me think thoult be a whore▪
WHen thon dost smile I think thy lips Look like a basket full of Chips, Thou canst not smile as Maidens do When Young men come in Love to wooe, Thy voice is shrill, thy spéeches bold Shews thou wilt be an ugly scold, Then prethée ben't so co to me For I am not so fond of thee. Thy looks at first I could hate thro on  fire, My heart withur was i sta'd It vext me wh  heard thee nam'd, No happines  ée Whilst I was in thy company, No Lov to thee can be allow'd Thou alwaies art so devillish proud, I will not promise much content To thée although thou dest consent; If thou yield to be my swéet heart, Ile make thee go to Plow and Cart, And ile whip Lawrence quite away Wk's bete▪ for thy health than play, Then prethee ben't so coy to me. For I am not so fond of thee. The Ladies that in Court do dwel gallant Clothes shall thée excel, They wear rich Sattens fine and rave, And Linsey-Wolsey thou shalt have; No musick thou art like to hear But in the Spring time of the year; tter speak uh without a Lye Than promise much and falsifie, Whilst Lovers walk on pleasant plains my Love through dirty Lanes, hedches, ditches, mires and bogs hear the Musick of the Frogs. Somtimes wée'l tumble on the grass, Thats pleasure for a London Lasse; What saist thou canst thou fancy me▪ Speak or avoid my company. If thou wilt yield to be my Wife, Ile buy m Girl a penny Knife, Ile travel Europe ere I have done In find my Love a Whistle spoon A Baby osome costly Knack, That thou maist keep it for my sake If thou dost slight me in this case Ile dash m shoos about thy face. If that thou wilt not yeild to me Ile set my Little Dog on thee▪ A Dog with Ladies much in fame And little Cupid is his name; If Cupid at thee bark and bite, Hee'l make thee Love me day and night, But if thou canst not fancy me, I ne're shall die for Love of thée In our Countrey there's gallant Girls Thats worth their weight in gold and pearls Becs they'r Uertuous Chaste and fair, London can With them, when they are right in tune Their cheeks are like the Rose in Iune▪ O uch a Lass what ere betide I'le chuse to be my loving bride. Fare well thou scornful Drab quoth he, Thou never shalt intangle me Pluck off thy patches and the Paint For thou art but a seeming Saint, Remember Pride will have a fall, I speak to scornful Damsels all, If I have done thée any wrong Speak now or ever hold thy tongue, London Printed for I. Clark. at the Bible and Harp in West Smith-field Finis
