1 38876068 152307
L—GLEY C—S His Lamentation in New-Gate; Who lies there in danger of his Ears for Printing and Publishing Se∣dition and Treason, for this Five Years last past. A SONG. I. COME Whigs out of fashion, of me take compassion, my Ears are in danger, my case may be yours; Long, long have I reigned disturbing the Nation, now, now am made Captive to the higher Powers: With Pacquet & Pamphlets, abus'd Church & Chaplets, With C—s Damn'd Courants did abuse the King so, That none can defend us, till Tyburn befriend us, and send us a Hunting for Tapskie below. II. The loss of our Charter, and Colledge the Martyr, his Flayls are all seiz'd, and our Arms made a prey; We have lost Ignoramus, both Jew, Turk, and Tartar, no Plots nor Caballs to recover the Day: Since Tony left squinting, our Cause has been sinking, and our Party for Tyburn advancing you know; There's none can defend us, till Tyburn befriend us, and send us a Hunting for Essex below. III. The Law for a Livery, will put me i'th Pillory, a damn'd hard Wooden Ruff for a Saint of the Cause; Had a Tory my place, I wou'd flear and look merrily, with hardened Brick-batts I'de pelt him with blows. When my Head peepeth thorough, the Tories will hollow, at poor L—gley C—is cry O Raree Show; Now none will defend us, till Tyburn befriend us, and send us a Hunting for Russel below. IV. Poor Colly was Whipt too, for stretching an oath or so, and Damn'd Tory Rutland, too hard for us all; These dayly misfortunes will all our Designs undoe, would his Founain-Tavern wou'd sink, burn, or fall. But alas I am Gailed, and must not be bailed, as we serv'd the Papists, must we be serv'd so? There's none will defend us, till Ketch does befriend us, and send us a Hunting for Walcot below. V. Wou'd I were with Patience, I'de keep in his Stations, and save both my Ears, for the Doctor may want, I fear they'l be crapt if I live till next Sessions, then Prance for his Swearing, may sweat and look blank, But after a Coller, oft cometh a Halter, my Neck like my Ears are in danger, you know, There's none can defend us, till Ketch doth befriend us, and send us a Hunting for Sidney below. VI. Poor A—ld is Pounded, for Lying Confounded, by Wooster, which he did most basely defame: Poor Giles he was Pillar'd, 'cause A—ld was wounded, tho' by his own hands, Sir, in Jack-an-Apes-Lane; Now Giles he is Bailed, and A—ld is Goaled, there may lie and Rot too, for ought that we know: There's none will defend us, till Ketch doth befriend us, and send us all head-long toth' Old Rump below. VII. Mowbery and Balderen, Swore more like Fiends, then men, they both have been perjur'd ten thousand times o're: They had but one Wife, and she still lay between them, they being our Saints, tho' she cou'd be no Whore; Dangerfield Swore too, all sorts of Oaths, black and blew, tho' he had been Carted, and Pillar'd before, Yet they still escaped, tho' worse no Hell raked, Then why may not I, that can Rebel no more? VIII. Yet that fortunate Hour, they got out of the Tower, both Wildman and Trenchard. Old Charlton and all: I may find Friends too, tho' Jefferies lookt sower, and Pardon perhaps, when I come to White-hall; Guineys five Thousand too, (for Printing of Treason) due, like some for Ploting; a kind Recompence; While others for Loyalty, in the Goal dayly Dye, I'le into the Country, and live like a Prince. Printed for J. Dean, Bookseller in Cranborn-street, in Leicester-Fields, near Newport-House, 1684.
