16868 99892255 182958
The Constant Lover. Who his affection will not move, Though he live not where he love. To a Northerne tune called, Shall the absence of my Mistresse. YOu loyall Lovers that are distant, from your Swéet-hearts many a mile, Pray come helpe me at this instant, in mirth to spend away the while, In singing swéetly and compleately, in commendation of my love, Resolving ever to part never, though I live not where I love. My love shée's faire and also vertuous, God grant to me she may prove true, Then there is naught but death shall part us, and Ile ne're change her for a new, And though the fates my fortunes hates, and me from here doe farre remove, Yet I doe vow still to be true, though &c. My constancy shall ne're be failing, whatsoe're betide me here, Of her vertue Ile be telling, be my biding farre or néere, And though blind fortune prove uncertaine, from her presence me to remove, Yet Ile be constant every instant, though &c. Though our bodies thus are parted, and asunder many a mile, Yet I vow to be true hearted, and be faithfull all the while; Though with mine eye I cannot spye, for distance great my dearest Loue, My heart is with her altogether, though &c. When I sléepe I doe dreame on her, when I wake I take no rest, But euery moment thinke upon her, she's so fixed in my brest, And though farre distance may be assistance, from my mind her loue to moue, Yet I will neuer our loue disseuer, though &c. To thinke upon the amarous glances, that haue béene betwixt us twaine, My constancy and loue aduances, though from her presence I remaine, And makes the feares with groanes & feares, from watery eyes and heart to moue, And sighing say both night and day, alas I liue &c.
The second part, to the same Tune▪ I To her will be like Leander, if Hero like shée'le prove to me, For her sake through the world Ile wander, no desperate danger I will flée, And into the Seas with little ease, the mountains great themselves shal move, Ere faith I breake, let me ne're speake, though &c. Penelope shall be unconstant, and Diana prove unchaste, Venus to Vulcan shall be constant, and Mars farre from her shall be plac't, The blinded boy no more shall ioy, with Arrowes keene lovers to move, Ere false I be sweet-heart to thee, though &c. The Birds shall leave their Airy region, the fishes in the aire shall fly, All the world shall be at one religion, all liuing things shall cease to dye, Al things shal change to shapes most strange, before that I disloyall proue, Or any way my loue decay, though &c. If you lines doe come before her, or doe deigne to touch her hand, Tell her that I doe adore her, aboue all Maidens in the land, Remaining still at her good will, and alwayes to her loyall proue, Tell death with dart doe strike my heart, though &c. And tell my mistresse that a Louer, that loues perfect image beares, As true as loue it selfe doe loue her, witnesse his farre fetcht sighes and feares, Which forth he groanes with bitter moas, and from his troubled breast he moues▪ And day nor night takes no delight, because &c. So with my duty to her commended, her loyall seruant Ile be still, Desiring I may be befriended, with loue againe for my good will, And wish that she as true may be, as I to her will constant proue, And night and day I still will pray, and wish I may liue where I loue P. L. FINIS. London Printed for Henry Gosson.
