20311 99892189 182930
The Batchelors feast, OR, The difference betwixt, a single life and a double: being the Batchelors pleasure, and the married Mans trouble, To a pleasant new tune called, With a hie dildo, dill. AS I walkt forth of late, where grasse and flowers spring, I heard a Batchelor, within an Harbour sing, The tennor of his song, contain'd much melodie, It is a gallant thing, to live at liberty, With hie dill do dill, hie ho dildurlie: It is a delightfull thing, to live at liberty. Wée Batchelors can flaunt, in Country and in Towne, And in good company, may meryly spend a crowne: Wée may doe as wée list, our lives from cares are frée, O 'tis a gallant thing, to live at liberty, With hie dill &c. No Cradle have wée to rocke, nor Children that doe cry, No land-Lords rent to pay, no Nurses to supply: No Wife to scould and brawle, now wée still kéepe good company With them that take delight, to live at liberty, With hie dill, &c. While married men doe lie, with worldly cares opprest, Wée Batchelors can sléepe, and swéetly take our rest, O married men must séeke, for Gossips and a Nurse, Which heavie makes the heart, but light it makes the purse, With hie dill, &c. For Candell and for Soape, and many knacks besids, For Clouts and swadling bands, hée likewise must provide, To pay for sops and wine, hée must also agrée, O 'tis a delightfull thing, to live at liberty, With hie dill, &c. A man that doth intend, to lead a quiet life, Must practise day and night, to please his longing wife, New fashions must bee had, as oft as shée them sée, O 'tis a pleasant thing to live at liberty: With hie dill, dill, hie, hoe, dildurly, It is a delightfull thing: to live at liberty.
The second part, To the same tune. THe Surgeon thriues by fencing schooles, Some for strong liquor pawne their tooles For one wise man ther's twenty fooles, oh when shall we be married? In time of youth when I was wilde, Who toucheth Pitch, must be defild, Moll is afraid that shée's with childe, peace Peter. The poore still hope for better daies, I doe not loue these long delayes, All loue and charity decayes, in the daies of old: I'me very loth to pawne my cloake. Méere pouerty doth me prouoke, They say a scald head is soone broke, poore trading. The Dutchmen thriue by Sea and Land, Women are ships and must be mand, Lets brauely to our Colours stand, Courage my hearts of gold: I read in moderne Histories, The King of Swedens Victories, At Islington ther's Pudding pies, hot Custards. The Tapiter is vndone by chalke. Tush tis in vaine to prate and talke, The Parrat pratles, walke knaues, walke, Duke Humfry lies in Pauls, The Souldier hath but small regard, Ther's wéekely newes in Pauls Church∣yard The poore man cries the world growes hard, cold Winter. From Longlane cloathe and Turnestile boots O fie vpon these scabbed cootes, The cheapest meat is Reddish rootes, come, all these for a penny: Light my Tobacco quickly héere, There lies a pretty woman néere, This boy will come to naught I feare, proud Coxcombe. The World is full of odious sinnes, Tis ten to one but this horse winnes, Fooles set stooles to breake wise mens shinnes this man's more knaue than foole: Iane oft in priuate méets with Tom, Husband ya're kindly welcome home, Hast any money? lend me some, Ime broken. In ancient times all things were cheape, Tis good to looke before thou leape, When Corne is ripe, tis time to reape, once walking by the way. A iealous man the Cuckos loaths, The gallant complements with oathes, A wench will make you sell your cloaths. run Broker. The Courtier and the country man, Let's liue as honest as we can. When Arthur first in Court began, his men wore hanging sléeues. In May when Grasse and Flowers be gréen▪ The strangest sight that ere was séene. God blesse our gracious King and Quéene, from danger. M. P. men. FINIS. Printed at London for H. G.
