22655 99891527 183110
The wofull lamentation of Edward Smith, a poore penitent prisoner in the Iayle of Bedford, which he wrote a short time before his death. To the tune of, Daintie come thou to me. I Am a Prisoner poore Opprest with miserie: O Lord do thou restore, that faith which wants in me. In woe I waile and weep, In griping grief I cry, In dungeon darke and deep, In fetters fast I lie Sighing I sit and moane My foule offences all, My loathsome life is knowne, which makes me liue in thrall Ned mith I am, the wight In prison that remaines, Tormented day and night, with bands and iron chaines. My ioyes are turnd to nought, My hopes are worne away, My wickednesse hath wrought my downe-fall and decay. Those gifts that God gaue me, My wants for to supply, Abused much I haue. to please my fantasie. My name I did deny, In Baptisme giuen me, That Sacrament whereby regenerate I should be. No wit nor strength may serue The Law to satisfie: For death I do deserue, in right and equity. For I offended haue Nobles of hie degree, What fauour can I craue for life or liberty. But hope of life is past, My acts so hainous be. And liberty is lost, till death doe set me free. All men both old and young Which are at liberty, And heare my dolefull song. example take by me. Be true and trust in God, Fly theft and vice eschew, Lest Gods most heauie rod, correct your deeds untrue. Would I had nere bin borne To do such wicked déeds, Which makes me liue in scorne and shame that sore excéeds. But that which passed is, I cannot now recall: My sinnes and my amisse, O Lord forgiue them all. Woe worth ill company, Fie on that filthy crue: Accurst the day may be that euer I them knew. If life and death were set Before me for to chose, Though I might pardon get, my life first would I lose, Then runne that wicked race, And doe as I haue done, Sweet Iesus giue me grace, that life so lewd to shun. Farewell my louing wife Who sought to turn my minde, And make me mend my life, thy words full true I finde. Farewell my children all, My tender Babes adue: Let this your Fathers fall, be warning good for you. Deare wife and infants three, Serue God remember this, That you true subiects be, though I haue done amisse. Farewell my musick swéet, And Cittorn siluer sound, Mourning for me is méet my sinnes do so abound. O Lord on bended knees And hands lift vp on hie, Cast on me gracious eies with grace my wants supply Lay not unto my charge, The thinges that I haue done, Though I haue runne at large, and plaid the vnthrift sonne. Yet now I do repent, And humbly come to thee My sinnes I do lament, swéet Iesus comfort me. O Lord I do Lament, And onely ioy in thee, To praise thée day and night, for thou redeemedst me. Lord saue our royall King Whose prisoner poore am I, Prolong his daies on earth, with fame and victory. Against his Maiestie, I haue offended sore, Committing Felony, and now I die therefore. A dolefull death God knowes, Which once I did defie: Thus must I end my woes which I take patiently, By thee O Sauiour swéet, In heauen I hope to rest, In ioy where I shal méet, those foules whom thou hast blest Where we shall sing thy praise, O God, with voyce high, When I shall end my dayes, and liue eternally. FINIS. Printed by the Assignes of Thomas Symcock.
