5421 99891609 183197
The forlorne Traveller: Whose first beginning was pleasure and joy, But his riotous spending wrought his decay, Hee tooke delight to spend and rore, And at the last dy'd very poore. To a dainty new Court Tune. YOu Yong men that much pleasure have come lend an eare To me that once lived fine and brave, and voyd of all feare, For I had gold and silver plenty, With all things dainty, and then I did rore; But now alas I am growne poore, And not respected, but am rejected, woe is mee therefore. My Parents were of good estate, and did maintaine Me for to spend at any rate, which was but in vaine; They 'lowd me meanes to spend and revel, In courses evill; they such true love bore To me, but now, &c. No Towne nor City in England faire, but I have seene, And I doe meane for to declare, whereas I have beene; And in each place my meanes consumed, Thus I presumed for to spend and rore, But now alas I am, &c. From London I to Graves-end went, with coine great store, To Canterbury in famous Kent, and many Townes more, Where I did meet with roring Gallants, That spent their tallents, thus I company bore; But now alas, &c. Sussex, Surrey, and Southampton, and Barkeshire too, Wiltshire, Dorssetshire and so on, as many more doe, Till all is spent and they forsaken, Then are they taken. with sorrow full sore, So is't with me, for I, &c. Summersetshire and Devonshire, and Cornwall then, I travel'd, as you now may heare, and then backe agen, Then Gloster, Hereford, and Woster, Stafford and Chester, I ranged all ore, But now alas, &c. My Host and Hostesses where I came, bid me welcome still, Saying, kind sir your selfe may claime, even what you will, You may but aske and have your pleasure, In any measure, daunce, sing, drinke and rore, But now alas, &c. To Darby, Yorke and Lancashire, and to Comberland. Westmerland Durram, then I did prepare to Northumberland, My money now being much wasted, I backward hasted, for to fetch some more; But now alas I am growne poore, And not respected, but am rejected, woe is me therefore.
The second part. To the same tune. TO Lester and to Notingham, I backe returned, So to Warwicke and Lincolne came, whereas I soiourned, There did I wast away my treasure, Beyond all measure, yet still I did rore, But now alas I am growne poore. And nor respected, but am rejected, woe is me therefore. Norfolke, Suffolke, and Cambridge to, and through Huntington, Northampton and Rutland also, Oxford, Buckingham, So I to Bedford, Hartford, Essex, Then to Middlesex, where I lived before, My friends soone dyed, then I, &c. My friends being dead, my meanes I sold, and then did goe, With gallant Sparkes of courage bold, against Englands foe, The Neptunes foaming floods we passed, And thus we trased to the forraigne shore, But now alas, &c. Then in the exercise of Mars, wee soone were tride, Whereas our lucklesse fortune was, soone for to abide, Hunger and cold with bloody battell, The Drummes did rattell, and the Canons rore, From thence returned I, &c. When I for England came againe, I tryed my friends, To see what meanes I could obtaine, but their friendship ends, They say I might have beene more carefull My case is fearefull, which doth grieve me sore, For now alas, &c. Once where ere I did come or goe, I still found friends, But now I cannot finde it so, having no meanes, They will not now so much as know nice, But doe forgoe mee, now from doore to doore, I'm faine to beg, &c. Let this a warning be to all prodigall youth, Here you may now behold the fall, of him that shew'th His carelesse and riotous spending, But now his ending is like to Iane Shore, For he was, &c. Thus to conclude I will relate, of this poore man, He dy'd in a wofull estate, as I understand, For in the open fields he dyed, Being denyed, to come within doore, Nay at the Brick-kills he was burned, And his flesh turned, to ashes all o're. R. C. FINIS. P  London for F. Coules.
