7555 99892888 182340
A ballad intituled, Prepare ye to the Plowe, To the Tune, of Pepper is blacke. ¶ The Queene holdes the Plow, to continew good seede. Trustie Subiectes be readie to helpe if she neede. LOoke vp my Lordes, and marke my wordes, and heare what I shall sing ye: And Subiects all, both great and small, Now marke what word I bring ye. Parnaso Hill, nor all the skill, Of Nimphs or Muses fayned: Can bring about that I finde out, By Christ hin selfe ordayned. Let wisdom be, as it is I see, A gift most worth the telling: Which neuer was, so brought to passe, Where Pagans haue ben dwelling. Is now in fine, by power deuine, Among vs English planted: Which many a day, was kept away, And many a one it wanted. And by that wisdom, haue we had, Such proofe as yet was neuer: To Iudge and deeme, both good and bad To our great comfort euer. Which sithes we haue, now let vs hold This Tutchstone is the triall: To beate the baggage from the Gold, and truth from false deniall. And by this knowledge we do know, That euery thing is vaine: Beneath the Sonn, which heare below, We couet to attaine. Let not the spright, geue vs delight, To labour and attend vs: To seke to haue, before our Graue, The ioy that Christe may send vs. In seking that, then must we nat, Build on the Sandy Surges: Now sow our Seede, where euery Weede, His grace and bounty vrges. Nor put our hope, in Preeste or Pope, In Masse or other matters: Or by our Dole, to saue our Soule, With filling empty Platters. Or by a Pardon, to appease, The Surfits of our sinning: Although our fathers, had all thease, By wicked mens beginning Nor let vs make our stock and store, A burden to accuse vs: For doing so, so much the more, We tempt God to refuse vs. Neither let vs once presume so far, Of mercy or of meekenes: To counterfait, to make or mar, This Image or this likenesse. That our forefathers did beleue, Were Gods, to geue and guide them: Such follies did the Christians greeue, and Pagans now deride them. Remember once the latter law Left yet in Moyses Table: That Neighbourly to liue in awe, It is most commendable. Then shouldst thou not desire to craue, Thy Neigbours losse or lacke: Neither excesse desire to haue, That puts thy soule to wracke. Neither Vsery, nor vse at all, Of women, wealth, or Wine: Neither of aboundance, great or small, Ill gotten should be thine. Neither should contencion, craft increase, Nor swearing beare the sway: Nor God vnserued men as beasts Would break the Sabboth day. Then would the honour duly hit, To Parents Lord or King: Then would ther be no doubt a whit, To haue store of euery thing. All this the new Law, with the old Doth Nip vs to remember: Euen as the frost, that waxeth cold, Doth Nip vs in December. And as vpon, a sodain heat, We soone forget that freesing: When God doth of his mercy great, Spare vs for lack of leesing. So let vs think, as Sommer shows Grene Grasse to our deliting: We se that all the Grasse that growes, Goth down with litle smiting. And when the Mowyer coms to Mowe, Tis sone both Ripe and Rotten: This tale I trust, of hye and low, Will neuer be forgotten. On Gods good Booke, then let vs loke, For that which neuer faileth: Without which boke, by Hooke, or crooke, No worldly wit preuaileth. God saue her grace that holds the Plow, To sowe this trusty treasure: Though many a one be stubborn now, And Harrow it but at leasure. God graunt that he that Harrowed Hell, In guardon still may haue her: And send you grace, that thinke not well, Of God that so doth saue hir. VV. Elderton. ¶Imprinted at London, in Fléetestréete, by William How, for Richard Iohnes: and are to be solds at his Shop, ioyning to the Southwest doore of Paules Church. printer's device incorporating double-headed eagle
