B1943B 51784369 174795
The Case of the Printery at Finsbury, concerning Printing of the Bible, . WHereas the holy Bible, (being the revealed Word of God,) is the pure fountain of true Religion, so it hath been constantly defended by no other Pa¦tronage in England, than of the Supream Magistrates, and Authorities thereof, ever since the first Renunciation of the Popes Supremacy in H. 8 time, and the blessed Reformation of Religion by Ed. 6. and Q. Eliz. The primitive Translation whereof into English was made in H. 8. time▪ Which being revised afterwards in the Reign of E. 6. was appointed to be printed only cum privilegio Regali; being the Nationall and common Evidence of our Religion; and such a sacred Book, and of that Universall concernment, and honorable estimation, that it cannot properl and politically be printed or divulged under any other inferiour Title, than of the Royall and Supream Authority it self, in any Dominio whatsoever. In Q. Eliz. time (propter emendatiorem verborum proprietatem) another Review was made of the Bible, and the printing thereof (inter alia) granted b Patent 8. August. 31. Eliz. to Christopher Barker for his life: which was also renewed and confirmed to him, 10. Maii 1. Jac. After which, a ne Translation, (published in 1611.) was made by that Kings speciall command; The charges whereof (as it is probable) were solely defrayed by Christopher Barker. Fo a full compensation whereof the King 11. Febr. 14. of his reign, did royally grant also to Robert Barker (after Christopher's death,) the sole Liberty to print Bibles (int alia) for his life; and to his Assigns for 30. years in reversion, the same being a most noble and Prince-like Concession, and Remuneration. All which Patents and the benefit thereof were afterwards, in consideration of a valuable summe of money, assigned by Barker to Bonham Norton, and John Bill; wh with their Assigns enjoyed the priviledge thereof, till the Grants and Limitations of the Patents, were either forfeited to the State by default of the Patentees, or expire in time about the year 1643. And so the Authority of printing Bibles reverted to the State, as their absolute, and originall Right to order and direct the same for t future. However, not onely the Orthography of that last Translation, but also the propriety of many Texts, being impeached by severall learned men, to be different from t Original Tongues, a Revise was made at Cambridge, in 1628. Mandato regio, and upon solemn debate at the Council-table, and an Edition thereof in Folio, published a printed in 1629. by the University Printers, with very much correction and amendment; But the most exact and authentick Edition printed there, was set forth in Fo in 1638. being various from the London Bibles in many Thousand places of the Text, besides the Addition of above 500. Parallel-places of the Old and New Testament  the Margin, with generall approbation of our Orthodox Divines. In honour whereof the Bibles and Testaments printed since at London, or Cambridge have been chiefly  not altogether, corrected and revised thereby. In 1643. Bible-printing ceasing at London by the absence of the late Kings Printers, and the prices of the Books being advanced to very dear rates, to the great discommo¦dity of the Common-wealth, the Dutch thereupon printed in, and imported from Holland great numbers of English Bibles, selling them for cheaper prices; but so cor¦ruptly and blasphemously printed, that upon report of three faults therein only, made to the Parliament by the Assembly of Divines, the Books were then seized, and pub¦lickly burnt; and the future Importation of English Bibles, (for due encouragement of our own native Printers,) prohibited with greater severity, than by any form Statutes or Provisions, by Order of the Lords and Commons 14. Jun. 1643. For remedy of which Inconvenience, and better supply of the Common-wealth, the said Assembly by direction of the Parliament, treated with divers of the m eminent Stationers of London, to undertake the future printing of Bibles and Psalmes at moderate rates; who alledging they could not vend them under 4s. 6d. per b in quires, declined that honourable work: Whereupon they engaged William Bentley Printer, and his Partners to erect their Printery at Finsbury for that service; wh they printed five considerable Impressions of Bibles (corrected by the Cambridge-Bible only) in 1646.48, &c. affording them with Psalms at farre cheaper rates than forme they were sold, and furnishing the Army, by speciall Order of the State, as appears by the Title-pages, upon their Advances to Ireland and Scotland in 1649. and 50. w 9000. Bibles (with References) and Psalmes in 8o. (part bound in leather, and part in quires,) for lesse than 2s. per book. In the Act of 20. Sept. 1649. for the better regulating of Printing in generall, and encouragement of Bentley and his Partners, there is an expresse and explicite Prov made by way of exception of the Printing-presse in Finsbury, then and now used for printing of Bibles and Psalms, from all the restrictions and clauses of that Act, a it had never been had or made; Which being but temporary, was revived and continues in force by the Act of 7. Jan. 1652. Before the passing whereof, Robert Barker  younger put in a speciall Proviso for the sole printing of the Bible, upon pretence of having the translated Copy thereof (made in 1611.) in his hands; which was t read and debated, and being put to the Question, was (after the reading of Bentley's Petition to preserve his priviledge) cast out with a Negative vote; the Parliament ¦terly rejecting the design of such a Monopoly. Barker being thus disappointed in his Project, procured afterwards a pretended, superannuated Licencers hand, to warrant and authorize that Copy, as if it were a p¦vate Copy of some particular mans works, and thereupon attempted to enter it under that qualification in the Register-book of the Company of Stationers, according  a formall usage amongst them for other books, and by pretence of a Clause for due Entries of such common books in the Act of 20. Sept. 1649. But his late Highnesse  Warrant, signed by Mr. Secretary Thurloe, 22. Martii 1654. inhibited the Master and Wardens of that Company from admitting thereof, upon just ground of securing  Right of the Common-wealth, claimed by his Highnesse in the Bible. Then Barker, by the mediation of Mr. Marchamont Needham, sold the severall Tomes of K. James's translation to Henry Hills and John Field Printers, by supposition  an absolute and private title and Interest therein; (when as in truth they were but concredited to his father in K. James's time, in order to the first composing and print thereof by the King's priviledge, and never afterwards regarded other then as loose sheets, blurred and defaced, till they were pasted and collected together by Mr. R Norton, and by some casualty hapned into Barkers possession out of his hands:) And then in Febr. 1655. Hills and Field insinuated to make an Entrance also in that Reg thereof, as their private Copy; but were denyed upon admission of severall Caveats of Bentley, and others put in against them, upon just and legall grounds. Where on (notwithstanding the former proceedings of Parliament, the Interdiction of his Highnesse, the said Caveats never decided, and the common Custome of the Stat¦ners Company to the contrary,) a Warrant dated 4. Martii 1655. signed in his Highness's name by Mr. Secretary Thurloe, was directed to the said Master and Warden  taking off the said Restraint, and commanding them duly to enter for Hills and Field that Copy, being in their actual possession, as the lawfull owners thereof: Upon wh they demurred, and drew up reasons for prevention thereof. But being threatned with Imprisonment, and upon receipt of another Warrant, dated 6. Martii follow (procured under his Highnesses Privy Signet) to the same effect, an Entry was positively made accordingly; Whereby the Bible hath been ever since, and still is, n irrationally and by usurpation, claimed by Hills and Field, as their private and peculiar Copy; which to none of the Barkers was ever permitted, nor any of them da singularly to challenge in the late Kings reigns. From whence it may be well inferred, that his Highnesse and the Secretary were surprized, and abused in the substances  circumstance of the businesse; but however the Common-wealth in generall, and Bentley, and many others in particular have been notoriously injured, and oppressed  since; as shall plainly be demonstrated. For that Hills and Field 7. Martii 1655. by pretext of Deputations from Sir John Barkstead and Mr. Foxcroft, giving them power onely to search for scandalous and u∣censed newes-Books and Pamphlets against the State, did not onely suppresse all others then commonly engaged in printing Bibles and Testaments; but contrary to  expresse purport of their Deputations and Judgements of those Commissioners, (which they have since 28. Martii 1657. declared under hand and Seal, in pursuan the said Acts of Parliament, and revoked and annulled those Deputations,) violently then, and 28. August, and severall other times in 1656. with Souldiers armed,  without any civil Officer, break open and enter Bentley's Printery, and disseize him of severall Instruments and materialls imployed in work upon Bible-printing on carrying them to Stationers Hall, and falsely and scandalously reporting, they were at work upon the Parliament of Ladies: And since the death of the late Protector  9. Sept. last, by pretext of a Warrant under the Privy Signet to search for scandalous and unlicensed News-Books and Pamphlets onely, dated 1. Julii also last past (in it  then absolutely void and ineffectuall by his Highness's death,) Hills and Field (with 8. or 10. Souldiers armed and swords drawn, no resistance being made,) entred again to Bentley's Printery, and forcibly carried away other like Materialls used in Bible-printing onely. Which Actions are not onely contrary to the ancient and fundame Laws and Liberties of the people, but an expresse Judgement in Parliament 27. Octob. 1641. (in the Case of William Aston Printer, against the Company of Station and the said Acts for regulating of printing; and yet do they not surcease their menacing threats, out of their confidence in their great friends and purse, (as is cred reported,) as if they were lawlesse, and above the correction of all Authority. This being the Case in fact, and the Common-wealth so much damnified and abused by Hills and Field's monopolizing, and inhansing the prices of their Bibles (tho falsely and blasphemously printed,) to excessive rates, suppressing and obstructing Bentley under pretext of his printing their private Copy. It is humbly proposed for redresse, I. That the future printing of Bibles may no longer be tollerated to reside in the hands of Hills and Field onely, as sole Proprietors thereof, since that it intends so much to the disho and dammage of the Common-wealth. II. Nor let loose to the extravagant liberty of all, or any of the Stationers Company (being Booksellers or Binders, and no Printers,) as of late yeares it was, and is again by  of them designed, and attempted; It being profit in exchange or sale, and not the well-printing of a book, that they familiarly respect. III. But that Bentley and his Partners, and such other honest, able and careful Master-Printers, as merit the favour of his Highnesse and the Parliament, (not exceeding some com number) may be hereafter delegated, and permitted, under their priviledge onely, to print the Bible, as in their grave wisdomes (for good correction, workmanship, and price,)  be requisitely held meet. Which as is humbly conceived, will be the best method for the future ordering and accomplishing that honourable and considerable work notwithstanding a specious pretences of any persons to the contrary.
