c7611 99887086 181811
CUPIDS revenge. The Captive Lover once got free Didtriumph in his liberty, But storming Cupids mighty power, He did his freedom soon devour. Tune, Now, now the Fight's done. NOw, now you blind boy I you clearly deny With your Arts & your Darts that you often let fly, For my Heart is mine own, and so shall be sure, Since your wounds (Lovers say) will admit of no cure; But a fig for your Bow, I your tricks now despise, And I mind not the charms of the Fair Ladies eyes. Those Doaters I hate, who are won with a smile, While the Heart nothing means but such Fools to beguile And when a hand kiss can such influence have. Then the Lady she thinks Cupids power is brave; Thus men e're they think on't are caught in a snare, But of these idle follyes i'le still have a care. But in time that is past I was subject to love, And a smile from my dear like a heaven did prove, While the pains of a frown to me known too well, Did seem like the torments of bottomless Hell; But since from those dangees i'me happy and free, I think there's no man can be more bless'd than me. When in Bed I lay for want of my dear, My Heart was oppressed with sorrow and fear Least another should lock my dear Love in his Arms, Whose eyes did appear like continual charms: But now I disdain what I once did admire, For my reason hath quenched the blinking boyes fire. And now in my freedom so happy I am That I pitty the man that is touch'd with the flame, For whilest I was under his Fetters and Chains I ne'r could be free from the worst of all paines; But the more I did fawn she the more did me slight Till at last I did bid my fair Lady good-night. And at peace I was long till a great sudden change Possessed my mind, which to me seemed strange, And I fell in a great and a sudden Relaps, Which was worser by half than the twenty first Claps; For twenty fair Ladies I courted before Ne'r made me so much for to cringe and adore. BUt see how the Boy did perpler me full sore, For saying I would not his power adore, Again I was catch't by the glance of an eye And punish't, because I did Cupid defie: So all in a moment my joyes they did fly, And I doteing wretch left in Captivity. My Fetters are stronger then I can endure, And too late oh! too late I do wish for a cure, 'Tis but just with the Boy me thus to afflict, Since his power and Laws I did once contradict; And now become subject unto him again Which adds to my sorrow, entreaseth my pain. Then never despise or contemn that great power Who can in a moment your freedom devour, And wrap you in Chains never more to be free, But left in the confines of Captivity, For now to my sorrow I find and do know There is strength in his Quiver and power in his Bow. Now had I ten Millions of Guinies to give, I'de part with them all at my freedom to live, But I find 'tis in vain such things for to wish. Since his traps do appear like a Net to a Fish, Who once being taken shall never get free, And so I poor wretch find a will be with me. Oh! Cupid forhear me for whilst I do live. I will to thy power great attributes give. And after this time will account them unwise, Who are too fool hardy, and Cupid despise: No mortal is able my paines to endure, But either must dye or soon look for a cure. And now 'tis too late I would feign thee implore, Who once never thought tree again to adore, But too soon I was caught; and too late I lament, Disowning thy power, for which I Repent: But in these dying words as I stretch forth my Arms, I nothing acknowledge like Cupids strong charms. Printed for F. Cole. T. Vere. J. Wright, J. Clark. W. Thackery: T. Passenger,
