E3832B 47012434 174403
An Excellent new SONG; OR, A true Touch of the TIMES, Giving you a full and true Account of the Transactions, from King James the First, to the pre∣sent Reign of our Soveraign Lord King James the second. To the Tune of, The Loyal Health. Or, Why are my eyes still flowing, &c. This may be Printed, R. P. KIng James the first was a Gallant King, No Edward, no Richard, nor Henry like him; He preserv'd his Kingdoms in Peace all his days, He was pious, religious and vertuous always: He had love to his Subjects, and they love to him, And in all things he was fit for a King, When as he went to Heaven, he left Peace and Wealth, And he left Posterity like to himself. Charles his Son, which was murdered by harms, Despis'd by some Subjects, who soon took up Arms, And then in the Rebellion a great many rose, And would take upon them their King to oppose: Some malignant humours would needs fight the Crown And Murdered King Charls to keep Monarchy down, The Subjects Persecution in this it was shown, For what i cost England it's very well known, If I his Transactions to you should repeat, It would be a Volume too large and too great, What dismal distractions this Prince waded through By Rebellious actions was more than a now, Yet he for his Foes most hartily pray'd, And told them to dye that he was not afraid: His Blood cys like Abels from the ground to this day, Against all those Rebels that took it away. Then Charles the second was King in his place, But they took Crown in possession, and thought him too base, They a new Power would needs have set up, They stil'd Oliver Cromwel, but he lasted not: The Crown then lay useless, which was worn so long, Some would fain have a worn it, but durst not put it on; The King then was absent though here he did Reign, And the Crown it lay lurking till Charles came again. Young Charles brought the Banner of Peace in his arms, His fight caus'd a whole Army to lay down their Arms. He brought joy and freedom to each true Cavaleer, Brought that i'th front which had long been i'th reer This Nation distracted again he did cure, The Laws bravely acted and rul'd by his power, His griefs was our trouble though we durst not complain▪ But our joys they did double when Charles came again. For passing of wrongs he a David might be, For meekness a Moses at all times was he, Like Job for his Patience was he all along, For Wit and for Wisdom a King Solomon; But he's gone to Heaven, with Saints for to Reign, And there to be Crown'd with a new Diadem, His o&liging Presence I cannot forget, There's thousands in the Nation that mourn for him yet. And now James the second Rule thou in his place, Since thou art to the Crown and the Kingdom a grace, Thou art one of the Line and I greatly conceit, Thou wilt never decline nor dgenerate: Thou art garnisht with faculties fit for a Prince, With wit, learning, valour, the same to advance; God bless thee from foes, and increase thee in wealth, And let Anges attend and bless thee in health. Now lets our Allegiance show to James our King, Then we shall have friendship and favour from him, When the Head and the Body unites it is brave, I hope that great mercy amongst us wee'l have: I hope that bave England will flourish again, For the King has granted Liberty our peace to maintain, And we will serve him as long as we can, To wait on our Prince wee'l be free e'ry man. But when Subjects like Absalom would be in Rule, And are so audacios their King to controul; Divisions break Vnity, and spoyls it quite, A Kingdom that's Divided to stand is not like: Then let e'ry man be content with his place. For that's the best way for a man to keep safe, But when Servants turn Masters, I like no such thing We should soon have no Subjects, but all would be King. FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball in Pye-Corner,
