F1358 53299091 179857
GOOD TYDINGS TO THE Sick and Lame: OR, The Sick-Man's Library. Teaching both High and Low, Rich and Poor, next under God, how to prescribe to, or procure ease for the pained, strength for the weak, health for the Sick, and cure for Sores. BEING A true and candid RELATION of the Vertue and uses of four Excellent Medicines, VIZ. ARCANƲM VEGETABILIƲM, PILƲLÆ VEGETANTES, BALSAMƲM VITÆ, ƲNGƲENTƲM REFRIGERANS, Whereunto is added, A few of the many TESTIMONIES and CƲRES performed by the same, their Names, Diseases, and Places of Abode; being sufficient to confirm the Truth. Published for the good of all Who labour under PAIN and MISERY. By RICH. FLETCHER Professors of Chymical Physick in LONDON. By NATH. MERRY Professors of Chymical Physick in LONDON. LONDON, Printed for the Authors 1674.
GOOD TYDINGS TO THE Sick & Lame. COƲRTEOƲS READER, ARCANƲM VEGETABILI∣ƲM, Is that Phylosophick, Cor∣dial, Purging Vegetable Spirit, which hath got so great Reputati∣on in LONDON and many o∣ther parts of this Nation, for the Curing and Rooting out of Disea∣ses incident to the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children, Expelling Noxious Humours, Sweetning the Mass of Blood, Opening Obstructions, by which it hath cured Agues, Feavers, Dropsies, Scurvies, Worms, Madness, Phrensies, Pains of the Head, Common and Inveterate Dulness, Sleepiness, Loss of Sense and Motion, Convulsions, Falling Sick∣ness, Tremblings, and Weakness of the Sinews, Stoppage of the Stomack, Imposthumations, Ul∣cers, Pains or Weakness of the Stomach, Spitting of Blood or Matter, Green Sickness, Stoppage of
Womens Terms, Rickets, Gouts, Jaundice. In short, I have found it to answer the whole end of of Purging and Cordial Physick; being gentle, safe, and pleasant, yet powerful in operation for the Rooting out of Diseases and Assisting Nature to withstand the same, by Adding Strength to Vital, Animal, and Natural Spirits; Resisting Putrefaction, Expelling Poyson, by which it prevents Infectious Diseases, as Measles, Small Pox, Pestilential Fea∣vers, Plagne, &c. 2 PILƲLÆ VEGETANTES, This Pill hath been largely experienced, and highly com∣mended by many that have taken it, for the speedy Easing of Pains; as the Collick, Stone, Gravel in the Reins or Bladder, Gripings of the Guts, Curing of Fluxes, Easing of the Gout, and other Pains of the Limbs: Also for the speedy easing of Coughs, Curing Consumptions, Stoppages of the Stomach, Shortness of Breath, Staying and Preventing Distillations of Rheums, falling from the Head into the Throat or Wind-pipe, which causes a Tickling, sometime a Wheesing or Hooping Cough; commonly called a Distillation upon the Lungs: It is effectual for al∣laying or appeasing Violent Fits, whether Madness, Frenzies, Agues or Feavers, and is a great Provoker of Sweat and Ʋrine. 3 BALSAMƲM VITÆ, This Balsome cures Green Wounds, Ulcers, Fistula's, Cankers, Kings-Evil, Gangrens, to a wonder it dissolves Hard Tumors, Excrescences, Coagulated or Spongeous Flesh into Matter, and cures the same. It easeth old and cold Pains, Bruises, or Strains: Also seth and
strengtheneth pained, nummed, lamed, and weak Limbs; and is rare in Cold Gouts. 4 ƲNGƲENTƲM REFRIGERANS, This Oyntment cures Burns, Scalds, Scabs, Sores, Tet∣ters, Itch, Ring-worms, Pimples, Pushes, and easeth External Pains, and Asswageth Swellings, Proceed∣ing of Heat, Cures Piles and Hemorrhoids. This is a short and candid Relation of those four fore-going Medicines of which Twenty years experience in practice, hath afforded me many large Tryals in this City and many other parts of the World, for ma∣ny have been and daily are Remarkable Cures perfor∣med by the same. And to the end that all others who have the like occasion may receive the same benefit as to Ease and Cure, Carefully heed these following Di∣rections, which is plain to every ordinary capacity; teaching the true use of the same. DIRECTIONS For the Uses of our Spirit, Pills, Balsome, and Oyntment. FOr Stoppage of the Stomach, Difficulty of Breathing, Inflammations and Ulcers in the Stomach, Spitting of Blood or Matter, Con∣sumptions, Coughs, Distillations of Rheums, Weak∣ness of the Stomach or Want of Appetite, Collick or Stone in the Reins or Bladder, Stoppage of Urine
or Ulcers in the Reins or Bladder, Fluxes of the Bel∣ly or Griping of the Guts; take these following Directions, Let the Patient first purge with the Spirit, the Dosse being two, three, or four large Spoonfuls, ac∣cording to the Age and Strength of the Patient; that is, for a Child or very Weak Body, two Spoonfuls may be sufficient; but if for a Stronger Body, three or four Spoonfuls; but for a very Strong Body five or six Spoonfuls; for there is no danger in taking a large Dosse, it being a Streng∣thener as well as a Cleanser; nor in taking too lit∣tle, if it work not by Stool; being Cordial as well as Purging. Let the Dosse be taken in the Morn∣ing fasting: Them that are able, may walk abroad and eat their ordinary Diet as formerly; its opera∣tion being safe and easie: The same Night, going to Bed, take one, two, or three of our Pills, accord∣ing to the Age and Strength, as before directed, in the use of our Spirit. Thus continue taking both Spirit and Pills every other day; alwayes observing to take the Spirit in the Morning, and the Pills the same Night; and by this means you may expect to find speedy ease, and the Cure to hasten to a won∣der. Probatum est by many. Now those which are troubled with any of the fore-named Diseases violently, such may take the Pills for three or four Nights, one after another, af∣ter their Bodies have been purged with the Spirit; and then leave off taking the Pills for one Night, the next Morning take a large Dosse of the Spirit, and the same Night begin again to take the Pills, as before; so continue taking the Pills more or less
Nights together, as you see cause: Alwayes obser∣ving, That when you would take the Spirit, the Night before leave off the Pills; for in what Disea∣ses soever the Pills are proper to, they must be ta∣ken at Night; alwayes observing to take the Spirit in the Morning: and so after little acquaintance with their operation, you will be able to direct your selves and others. For Madness, Inflammations of the Brain, Swim∣mings in the Head, Frensies and Pains in the Head, Purge every other Morning with a large Dosse of our Spirit, and the same Night take two or three of our Pills, and every Night annoint the Temples and Fore-head with our Oyntment. For Convulsions, Falling-Sickness, Tremblings, Pal∣sies, and Weakness of the Sinews, Let the Sick take a little Dosse of our Spirit every Morning fasting, and every Night annoint the Nape of the Neck and Joynts with our Balsome warm. For the Seurvy, that Epidemical Disease. In the Cure of this Disease, our Spirit must be taken in a large Dosse for two or three dayes, then leave off taking the Spirit for two dayes; then take one Dosse of our Pills, the Night following; the last day of Purging, endeavour to sweat upon them that Night, and rise not too early the next Morning. When these two intermitting dayes are past, take the Spirit as before, and the Pills the following Night, as be∣fore. Also this Method must be observed all along in the Cure, and you may in a short time find the Subtile Enemy rooted out. Now if there be any breakings out or pains in the Limbs in this Disease, as often it happens, annoint the parts grieved or pained with our Balsome warm every Night and Morning.
For the Gout, Take a large Dosse of our Spirit, every other Morning, and the same Night take two or three of our Pills, and every Night and Morning annoint the parts pained with our Balsome and Oynt∣ment mixed together warmed. For the Green Sickness, Dropsies and Worms, Take a small Dosse of our Spirit every Morning fasting. For Agues, Feavers, Iaundice Black and Yellow, every other Morning take a large Dosse of our Spirit; the same Night take one or two of our Pills: so con∣tinue as long as you see cause. For the Rickets in Children, give them every other Morning a large Spoonful of our Spirit, and every Night annoint their Stomachs and Joynts with the Balsome warm. For the French Disease Alamode, take our Spirit every other day in a large Dosse, and the same Night take a large Dose of our Pills, two, three or four, and sweat upon them. If there be any Swellings, Scabs, breakings out, Ʋlcers, or violent pains in the Limbs, anoynt the parts with our Balsom every night. For the Runing of the Reins, take our Spirit and Pills, as is besore directed in the French Pox. For the Curing of Sores; as Cancers and Cankers, Gangreens and Ʋlcers, Fistula's, Kings-evil, or any other old Sores: Dress them twice a day with our Balsom, as you use to do other Wounds or Sores with other Oyntments. If there be any deep Wounds, as in Fistula's, make Roles or Tents with Lint or Flax, dip them in the Balsom melted, and tent the Wound every Dressing, and, lay a Playster upon the Wound of the said Bal∣som: Dress all such Sores twice a day: 'twill be
convenient, for such Patient, to purge once in three days with a Dose of our Spirit, and the same night to take a Dose of our Pills, for they do wonderful∣ly dispose Wounds to healing. In the cure of other Sores, as Wounds, Stabs, Bruses, apply a Plaster of the same Balsom, and dress them once a day. In all old or cold Swellings, Strains, Numb, Lame or Weak Limbs, anoynt the apart affected night and morning with our Balsom warm; and every third or fourth morning take a large Dose of our Spirit. For Burns, Scalds, Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Ring-worms, Shingles, Inflamations, Hot-swellings, Piles or Hem∣morrhoid, anoynt the parts affected every night and morning with our Oyntment: take a Dose of our Spirit every second or third morning, and at night take a dose of our Pills. Lastly, those that are troubled with any other Diseases than those aforementioned, either Internal or Externial, within the reach of Medicine, of what nature or kind soever, may safely make use of these our Medicines; for they have been found so power∣ful, safe and effectual, in resisting Putrefaction, easing Pains, strengthening Nature, that being timely taken, many dangerons Diseases may in a short time be cured by using these Medicines, as need shall require, the foresaid Directions is sufficient to inform you: And let me advise all who love their Healths, to take a dose of our Spirti often, to correct the evil effects the precedent, unseasonable weather, and unsound Dyet; and 1 or 2 of our Pills the same night. These Medicines being-friendly to Nature, preventing Dis∣eases, rooting out the Scurvie, which secretly lodges in the mass of Bloud, in most seeming healthy Persons, from which Root most other Diseases arise, being but Branches
of the same, stired up by every little accident Hetrogenious to Nature. This Medicine being rightly adapted for the de∣stroying of Diseases in Semene, by altering Ferments, doth prevent the Plague, Small Pox, Mezles, and ma∣ny Diseases, and is of that renovating property, that it may well be called, as indeed it is, a rare preserver of health and vigor, consequently prolonger of life also. For the confirmation of which, see the History of Life and Death by Francis Lord Bacon, pag. 25. who complains of the want of such Medicines in the Vul∣gar Art of Physick in his time. The Art of Physick, saith he, which we now have, looks no farther commonly than the conservation of health and cure of Diseases: As for those things which tend properly to long life, there is but slight mention, and by the way only; notwithstanding we will propound those Medicines which are notable in this kind, I mean, those which are Cordials: For it is consonant to Rea∣son, that those things which being taken in Cures, do defend and fortifie the Heart, or more truly the Spirit against Poysons and Diseases, being tranferred with judgement, and choice into Diet, should have a good ef∣fect, in sort towards the prolonging of life: And pag. 51. We do considenly affirm (neither let any man reckon us amongst those Hereticks, which were called Cathari that often purges and made even Familier to the body, are more a vailable to long life, than Exercises and Sweats. Thus far we have digress'd. For Sea-men that go long voyages, these Medi∣cines are of great use and vertue, and may be a means to save life, when the Doctors Chest may fail; for in Calenture, Fevers and Fluxes, many Sea∣men are lost for want of proper Medicines, power∣fully
to withstand the same. Now for the Cure of these Diseases, let the Sick take a large dose of our Spirit, and when the Spirit hath done working, then take two or three of our Pills, and sweat upon them; and by this Experiment alone, you will find that a Master of a Ship, or any of his Company, may by these four Medicines perform more noble Cures, though ignorant in Physick and Chyrurgery, than the knowing Artest with a Chest full of Gallenical Medicines. And he or she that is furnished with these Medicines, and useth them according to our directi∣ons aforesaid, may cure themselves, with great ease, safety, secresie and cheapness, and that there is good∣ness and worth in those fore-named Medicines, and that many have been cured by them, who have been past all probable hope of recovery: In confirmati∣on of which take, these few of many Testimonies, the whole being too tedious to relate. TESTIMONIES. In the twelfth Month 1672, came to my House one M. Broomhale, which a little before had some of my Spirit, Pills and Balsom, for the use of one Manwaring, a woman of seventy years of Age, and she had been lame many years, her Legs ulcerated, swelled, and afflicted with general pains, and short∣ness of Breath, insomuch that recovery was not ex∣pected; yet for the expence of twenty shillings was cured, to the wonder of her acquaintance: This is well known to the great ones of this Nation: This is part of the Relation brought me by her Friend; she lodged at the time of her curing, at one M. Clarks, Midwife in the old Ambury at Westminster.
Henry Churcher in Garden-alley in Bishopsgate∣street, troubled with spetting of Blood and Matter, with an Impostume in his Stomach, cured in a few days with these Medicines. Lidia Witcomb of Gloster, cured of the Worms with two doses of the Spirit. The Widdow Willians in new Kings-street, Wapping, cured of a violent head-ach of twelve years, with less than two Boxes of Pills. Henry Nock, Sadler, in Ashford in Kent, cured of the Stone in a few days. Anne Marsh, the Wife of John Marsh of Hendun, five Miles from London, after she had spent many pounds, and finding no ease, began to dispair of help; being troubled with violent Scorbutick Pains, short∣ness of Breath, want of Appetite, was in a short time cured with my Spirit and Pills, for less than twenty shillings charge. Thomas Bromfield Shoo-maker near the Turn-stile, Holbron, violently afflicted with the Stone, and stopage of Urine, having not made any water but by drops for five weeks, and that with great pain: was perfectly cured in six hours with one dose of Spirit and Pills. Marget Edmonds in Jerman-street, near James Market, cured of a violent Canker in her throat, oc∣casioned by the Scurvy. Mary Dyet of Barnaby-street, troubled with vi∣olent Fits of the Mother, and pains of the Spleen, cured for little charge. A Child of Mat. Broads in Thomas Southwarke, was cured of a bloudy Urine in two days time, to the amazement of its Parents. A Cornish Navigater given off as past cure, not being able to move hand or foot, was brought to
London, and in a few days was able to come to my Chamber: He lodged in New-gravel-Lane, Wapping, near Henry Wyards, who was an eye witness of him, and many others that was wonderfully recover'd. Dorathy, the Wife of John Tupper, Bricklayler, in Eagle-street near Pickakilly, cured of a violent stop∣page in her Stomach, and Head-ach. Bernard Ienkes near the Pelican in East-Smithfield, cured of a violent pain in his Side and Back, short∣ness of Breath: his Wife of a Cancerous humour in her Brest. Sarah Barrow of Dirty walton near Tuexbury, cured of a violent Cancerous Tumor, which caused the loss of the use of one Arm. Adam Bennet of Hyneham, twelve Miles from Glo∣ster, troubled with a tedious quartin Ague, Con∣sumption, Cough, shortness of Breath; cured with a quarter glass of our Spirit, and half a Box of Pills. John Relph, Ship-wright at the Fale on near the Banks-side, Southwark, cured of a violent Con∣sumptive Cough, after so weak that he could not sit up right in his Bed, and given over as past help: Also a Child of his cured of a violent stoppage in his Sto∣mach and Hecktick Fever. One Every-Tharpe, Water-man on the Bank-side, cured of a tedious quartin Ague, when near dearhs∣door: the same man some years after cured of a vio∣lent pain in his Side; also others of his Family cured. One Abbet Fisherman on the same Bank-side, cured of a violent Fever, stopage of the Stomack, and pains in his Head and Limbs, when past all proble hope of recovery, with many others of the Neigh∣bour-hood about Masson stares, and other parts of
the Bank-side, cured to a wonder the names and Diseases, of which are too tedious to relate. Mary Carrol, now the Widdow Bryon of Chate∣ham in Kent, cured of an old cancerated Brest so dangerous, that it was feared it must have been cut off, is now reduced to its perfect shape as formerly, and hath remained well this six years. Anne Cuny of Poyk, cured of Madness, after she had been many Months in Chains, and remained well seven years. A Servant of Thomas Harris, at the two Tobacco Roles in East-smithfield, cured of Madness in a short time. Thomas Sadler, a lodger at one Godwrads in Kings∣street, Giles in the Fields, cured of Madness in a short time. Another lodger of his cured of violent Gripings of the Guts, and shortness of Breath. For farther confirmation of this, inquire of the said God∣wards at the Bear Ordinary in Burchin-Lane. A Sister of Sarah Knights in Cow-lane, cured of a Phrenzie. Captain Watkins of Mile-end, cured of the Gout in his hands and feet. The Lady Griffin near Leitchfield, by taking of our Spirit and Pills voided Sand, Gravel, and small Stones without pain in a great quantity. John Woolger of Bredhemstone in Sussex, Fisherman, was cured of a Woolf in his head, by waring a Cap made of our Balsom mixt with Cotten, Wool, and quilted between to linning Cloaths, and by taking inwardly our Spirits and Pills, notwithstanding his head had been twice opened by advice of Eminent Physicians and Chyrurgions, by reason of the length and tediousness of his pain, being of some years con∣tinuance,
and past all probable hope of recovery, yet well in a short time, and hath remained well this twelve years. The Wife of Richard Collings of Clare-street, New∣market, cured of a violent Scorbutick Leprosie, no part being free from pains and botches. Willam Iordan at the Maremaid in Carter-lane, cured of a violent Fever, shortness of Breath, and pains in his Limbs. Two blind Children cured to admiration, one at Farneham in Surry, the other at Tamworth in Stafford∣shire. Alexander Pope, Water-man of Shad. Thames, cured of a violent quartin Ague and Dropsie in a weaks time, when he had try'd many Physicians of common note. One Stringer, Journey-man at the Blew-last in Rus∣sel-street, cured of violent pains in his Loyns. The Wife of John Collet of East-smithfield, violently affected with the Sone, cured. John Brown, Butcher in Ashsord in Kent, who had a violent hard Tumor on his Arm-pit, the pain of which caused the loss of the use of his Arm, cured in thirty days. Another of the like Dis∣ease, cured near Dearham in Norfolk. A Daughter of John Edmonds near Bramsgrove, who was so violenly afflicted with Convultion Fits, that sometimes she was drawn neck and heels together backward, and at other times up on a heap side ways, was cured in a short time. Another of the like Disease, cured in Ambersly in Worstershire. Thomas Snell of Gloster, cured of a hard swelling on his face with a quarter glass of Spirit, and a pot of Oyntment. Cures performed by John Fenny of Wimslow in Chestire with my Spirit and Pills, one of a violent Canker in her Throat, cured when left off as past cure. Mary Baly of the same place, cured of extreme Stitches and Vomitings.
Eliner Potter, cured of pains in her head, and spotted, pim∣pled face. Another of violent pains in her Jaws and Teeth. Another of a Quinsie, his tongue so swelled, that his Mouth was not able to contain it, and was speechless, cured in 24 hours. Another of the Jaundice, and violent Head-ach: A Child of his cured of the Chin Cough. These Cures, with many more, he gave me an account of at large in his Letter. A Maid near Coventry, cured of a Gangerine on her face with my Balsom. A Kinswoman of Robert Rotheram of Bestford near Notingham, had above forty Stones brought away from her without pain in a little time. Many more might be added enough to fill a large Volume, for I could instance a cloud of witnesses more, but let this suffice for brevities sake: I assure thee my aim is the publick good, and that the poor might have cure is my end; If any do misconster me to their own hurt; I cannot help that, but for my part, I can heartily and truly say in the presence of him that is the searcher of all hearts, I durst not have published these things to the world, had I not found that God the giver of every good and perfect Gift, had blessed the means afforded thereby, and am fully satisfied, if thou canst but make use of it with a thankful heart, you will find the truth of what I say, for which glory to God only. Arcanum vigetabilum, that Cordial purging Spirit is 4 s. the Glass, 2 s. the half Class. Pilulae vegetantes is 4 s. the Box, 2 s. the half Box. Balfauum Vitae is one 1 s. the Box. Ʋnguentum Refrigerans is 1 s. the Box. WHereas this Cordial purging Spirit, Pills, Balsom and Oyntment was formerly sold in some other places in and about London. These are to give notice, that the said Spirit, Pills, Balsom and Oyntment are not to be had or sold in any other place in London, but at the house of William Rayman, at the up∣per end of Bred-street near Cheapside, between the Angel and Bell. FINIS.
