J388 53981668 180259
His Majesties SPEECH, With the Journal of the House of Commons. May 30th. 1685. My Lords and Gentlemen, I THANK you very Heartily for the Bill you have this Day presented Me, and I assure you the Rea∣diness and Chearfulness with which it was Dis∣patched, is as acceptable to Me, as the Bill it self, after so happy a Beginning; You may believe I would not Call upon you unnecessarily for an ex∣traordinary Supply; But when I tell you that the Stores of the Na∣vy and Ordnance are extreamly exhausted; That the Anticipations upon several Branches of the Revenue are great and Burthensome; That the Debts of the King my Brother to His Servants and Fami∣ly, are such as deserve Compassion; And the Rebellion in Scotland, without putting more Weight upon it than it really deserves, must oblige Me to a considerable Expence extraordinary; I am sure such Considerations will move you to give Me an Aid to provide for those Things wherein the Security, the Ease, and the Happiness of My Government are so much Concerned. But above all, I must Re∣commend to you the Care of the Navy, the Strength and Glory of the Nation, that you will put it into such a Condition, as may make Us Considered and Respected Abroad; I cannot Express My Concern upon this Occasion more suitable to My own Thoughts of it, than by assuring you, I have a True English Heart, as Jealous of the Honour of the Nation, as you can be; And I Please My Self with the Hopes that by Gods Blessing, and your Assistance, I may carry the Reputation of it yet higher in the World, than ever it has been in the time of any of My Ancestors. And as I
will not Call upon you for Supplies, but when they are of Publick Use and Advantage: So I Promise you, that what you give Me upon such Occasions, shall be Managed with Good Husbandry, and I will take Care it shall be Imployed to the Uses for which I ask them. Saturday, May 30th. SEveral Petitions concerning undue Elections, refer∣red to a Committee of Elections. Leave given for a Bill, for Reviving the Act of the Coynage. Sir Thomas Player and Collonel Whitley, attend∣ed and produced an Abstract of their Accompts. Ordered that they attend the House on Monday. The Speaker to Write to Sir Gilbert Gerard and Collonel Birch, to bring in their Accompts. A Bill for the continuance of an Act for the Re-building of North-hampton Road. The House attended His Majesty. A Motion being made for the supply upon His Majesties Speech. The House went into a Grand Committee. Resolved Nemine Contradicente. That a Supply be given to His Majesty for the Repairing of the Navy and Ordnance, and the Stores for the same, and for those other Occasions mentioned in His Majesties Speech. That towards the said Supply, an Imposition be laid upon all Wines and Vinegar. Resolved that the Imposition to be laid upon Wines and Vine∣gar, be the same that was laid thereon by an Act of Parliament, made in the twenty first Year of His late Majesties Reign, Entituled, An Act for Granting to His Majesty an Imposition upon all Wines and Vinegar, imported between June 24.1670. and June 24.1678. Res. That the Huse do on Monday go into a Grand Com∣mittee to Consider further of a Supply for His Majesty. Ordered, That a Bill be brought in by Mr. Sollicitor, for the granting of the said Supply on Monday next. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.
