L2253 669.f.25[23] 99883924 182788
LILLY Lash't vvith his ovvn ROD. OR, AN EPIGRAM On the Quaint Skill of that Arch Temporizing ASTROLOGER MR. WILLIAM LILLY. Collected out of his ALMANACKS, from 647, to this present year, 1660. SOund forth A Trumpet, that the world may hear, The Great skill of this Fam'd Astrologer. He that foresees all things in Church and State, By help oth' Chrystal, And his Book of Fate. He that makes use of Direful Negromancie, To terrifie the tim'rous yielding Phancie, He that doth use whole Nations to Trepan, With the bare Names of Angel-Guardian, The Sybils Oracles, and Theurgie, With's Little knowledge had of Ptolome! All forts attend! whilst briefly I relate, The Dirty jugling of this Son of Fate. The Cunning used, by this Albumazer, That of your common Cheats surpasseth far. They Contra-Legem, th' Country quack about, And deal their dirty-skill, at small rate out, To Gull the Sillyer sort; this Artizan, Proclaims himself a sixed conjuring man; And Pride in him so monstrously prevails, To be the States Belwether he Assails. And then so furiously to work he goes, He forfeits ail the honest Art he knowes, For the base Lucre of two hundred pound A Year. Lilly had such a Sallary from White-Hall by the means of one Frost a Secrita∣ry to the Council of State, as I have heard him ac∣know∣ledge.(But changes still, as th' wheel turns round) And that all Pesons to him may repaire Two Dyals Point us forth this Blazing Star: That if the Lord of Gypsies men would see, In th' Strand there dwels, the May-pole, Stocks, and Hee! Take some Specimina of his rare skill; (And chide me for't, if I report him ill) In forty seaven, the Scots most Prudent were (Or he a filthy lyar did appear!) Nay he Confided in their Nobles; And Their Ministry Procla'm the worth oth' Land. And in his forty eight years fine Epistle, In their behalf, did confidently Bristle! Pronouncing them most honest; And men Guided By a Good Covenant. [From which they backslided.] They did return, delivered our Towns, [For which they Jugled from us, many pounds!] Eut yet in forty nine, he Rails aloud Calling them Pil-fing Scots; Peevish and Proud; Traytors, and Enemies; A Graceless crew, Of Villaines; worse then any Turk or Jew. And in his Merlin fifty one they are Egyptian Scots; Pseud-Presbyters that dare Do any thing, against this Power, for which (Deservedly) they were Rid of their Itch. And is there any Deliars Wizzard can, In Temporising, match this cunning-man? At this Rate with the Parliament he deals. Telling the world, that they our Breaches heal; That they're by God appointed for to scourge The Norman Race: and all that else dare urge But ought against them. Tells them their power shall stand, Maugre the Acts of all by Sea and Land, But when (in Fifty-two) he plainly saw, Unto what side, the Army gan to draw, Oh! now (says he) Great Parliament your Power Is but short-liv'd; And I expect (each hour) Your timely Dissolution! In Fifty-three, Basely abuses them; Threatning, that he (With others) each Member thereof will call to Account; And so, (in wrath) Devines their wo. In Fifty-four he them unthankful styles: Most terrible; [Forgetting's former Wyles.] A Private ended crew; Intemperate; Not fitting for to sway so great a State. They'r Drowsie, Slothful, But yet are become, As cunning Taylers! [His PROFESSION!]Lilly was a Tayler before pretended Astro∣logie and Apprent∣ice to Pawlin in the Strand. And thus you see, A Parliaments no more With this Cretensis, then each Country Boare. Further! Let's note the Signal flattery He Publish'd in his senselesse Monarchy; Swearing no King in England, more shall Reign. Yet when th' Proaector gan to Rule; Amain He Pipes—That Happy Monarchy's so good A Government; (If truely understood) None better was: Vowing't a Gallant thing To England, if th' Protector were a King. I might here note this Quacks abusing Spain; And's currying favor with that Prince again. Of's Ambedextrous dealing with the State Of Sweden, (Denmark,) at his flattering Rate. How with the wheel of time, he turns about And powres his spurious piosn'ous Oracles out, Unto Astrologies, and Artists shame! But Quaks are Quaks though pras'd ith' mouth of Fame. Hence, Baser Gypses! here is one that can Out do ye all, in flattering any man, Hence, with the dull stock of your footstool Cares; Heer's one out-cheats-ye, by the height oth' Stars Hence with your common small Beer single Fee, Heer's one pulls Kingdoms for the Golden Fleece. Be gone you Rosie-Crucians, that pretend, All things to know; Heer's one your skill can Mend. Fly, Fly, you Fairy Elves, that use to Prye Into the Closets of Men's secresie, Your skill is stale; Heer's one that may compare With Lucifer's great self, [both head and hair!] Avant Great Faustus, Bacon, Lamb; and Let Th' Imposters Bayes on Lillyes head be set That Lawrell (surely) will befit him best, Because he bears AMERLIN for his Crest. Let all the Muses joyn, LILLY, to sing Of Parasites the onely lawful King. For hee's most fit to be a Prince of slaves, That in himself contains ten thousand KNAVES. Printed in the year, 1660.
