M3095B 47012539 174509
THE Murtherer Justly Condemned, OR, An Account of George Feast, a Butcher of Shoreditch, being found Guil  Sessions House in the Old Baily, for the Barbarous bloody Murther of his  her in the Belly, in Laen-Hall Market, on the 5th. of May, 1697. Of which Wound she immediately Dyed, also some Account of his Penitent Behaviour in Newgate. To the Tune of, Packingtons Pound. With Allowance. COme listen a while and a Story you'll hear, That will strike you with dead & amazement & fear 'Tis of a vile Butcher which with bloody Knife, Without all compassion did murther his wife, In Leaden-Hall Market, who came to reclaim, Him from  Debauchrys and life of ill fame: Then let all be warn'd how they rashly proceed, Least trouble and anguish for them be decreed. He had been long absent which made her suspect, Both her and his business he did much neglect, Which put her in passion, that streight way she went, To know by this usuage what to her he meant, In Leaden-Hall Market she found him, and there The cause of her grief she did freely declare: Then let all be warn'd how they rashly proceed, Lest trouble and anguish for them be decreed. Though justly reproved, yet so Angry he grew, That at her with violence his Knife he then threw; But that little Harming, I Tremble to tell ye, He took it and Struck it full Deep in her Belly, At which she Shrick'd and Cry'd out, Oh! I'am Dead: But he sought not to Fly, o're-come with the Dread: Then let all be warn'd how they rashly proceed, Least trouble and anguish for them be decreed. Being seiz'd for this Crime he's Committed to Goal, As for Murder we know dmits of no Bail; And coming to Tryal, Not Guilty did plead, But plain 'twas prov'd that he did the sad deed, could not deny that he gave her the Wound, And therefore of Murder he Guilty was found: Then let all be warn'd how they rashly proceed, Least trouble and anguish for them be decreed. This startled him sore, for though unconcern'd he, Could kill his dear wife, yet now death he did see, Was so near approaching him as his sad doom, He trembled for fear of the judgment to come: To Newgate he then was in Irons convey'd, Where piteous sighs and laments he then made: Then let all be warn'd how they rashly proceed, least trouble and anguish for them be decreed. He fancys her blood loud for vengeance doth cry, Whom he caus'd on so slight an occasion to dye; Or that all pale her sad Ghost does appear, Which fills him with horrour, amazement, and fear, Laments and sad Groans now him company keep, And Dreams affrighting disorder his sleep, Then let all be warn'd, &c. Blood guiltiness heavy now on him doth lye, And makes him to sigh, and to sob, and to cry, O that his dear wife he had never thus us'd, Whom often, tis plain, he before had abus'd, Because she would tell of his wicked life, And give him good Counsel like a loving wife: Then let all be warn'd, &c. His Drunken Debauchries now swarm in his mind, And how he to her and himself was unkind, By spending his money so idley on those, That Lewdly had brought him to trouble and woes, And though for Repentance it is not too late, Yet death now looks terrible on lifes short date, Then let all be warn'd, &c. And Conscience crys loudly still urging the guilt, Of the Innocent blood that he causelessy spilt, He owns his Rash folly and grieves for to find, Himself could be cruel to her that was kind, But no sparring mercy in reason can crave Who with bloody Knife sent his Wife to her Grave, Then let all be warn'd, &c. Thus let all Rash men well consider his fall, Now innocence loudly for Vengeance do's call, And govern their passions that bring them to shame, For which when too late they themselves do much blan Consider how Rashness brings troubles d fears, Shame, Ruin, and death, it oft for them prepares, Then let all be warn'd how they rashly proceed, Least trouble and anguish for them be decreed. Printed for Iohn Foster, at the Grey-Hound, near the Noah's Ark Tavern, over-against Vine-street. St. Giles's in the Fields.
