S1324a R184011 51617456 175360
PROCLAMATION FOR INFORMATION Of the Leiges Anent the securing the Peace of the Kingdom. Edinburgh, the tenth day of February, 1649. THE Estates of Parliament now presently conveened in this second Session of the second Trienniall Parliament, by vertue of ane Act of the Committee of Estates, who had Power and Authority from the last Parliament for conveening the Parliament, Taking to their seri∣ous consideration, how cunning some are to coyn, and others bold  ¦vent; and a third sort weak and simple to believe lies and calumnies against their proceedings, even whilst they are doing their best for the good of Religion, the Honour and Happinesse of the King, the preservation of the welfare and peace of this Kingdome, and of all the bonds of Union betwixt the Kingdomes. And being informed that some false rumours are spread as if they had intended to sease upon the persons of those that had been active in the late unlawfull engagement, which hath been but invented and vented by malignant spirits, to make men out of such apprehensions to quit their houses and families, and to draw together with other discontented persons to cast the peace of the country loose, and to weaken the hands of the Parliament, n the prosecution of the ends of the Covenant, and of their duties for Religion, King, and Kingdomes. And considering the late Act of Parliament of the date the twenty sixt of January last, containing the band for securing of the peace of the Kingdome, and ane other Act of the date the fift day of February instant, Proclaiming CHARLES the Second King of Great Brittain, France and Ireland, &c. They doe Inact, Ordain, and De∣clare for the satisfaction and security of all the Leiges, That they have no such intention or resolution to prejudge the Freedome of any mans person, who offers himselfe, or doth when required, subscrive, and find surety for the peace of the Kingdome, according to the foresaid Band: And doth testifie his allowance of the foresaid Proclamation concerning the King His Majesty who now is; and to the effect it may be known who are willing to doe the same, and who refuses, The Estates of Parliament ordaineth that the new Committees of Warre in the severall Shires, and Magistrates in Burghs, To cll before them all such persons as were active in the late ingagement, and any other disaffected persons known to them, To subscrive and finde surety according to the said Band, And to testifie their allowance of the said Procla∣mation, with certification contained in the Act anent the Band▪ And that these on this side of Tay give an account of their exact diligence hereof to the Parliament or Committee of Estates betwixt and the fifteenth day of March, And these on the other side of Tay, be∣twixt and the first day of Aprill. And Ordains this to be Proclaimed at the Mercat Crosse of Edinburgh, and thereafter to be Printed. William Scot, Cler. Parl. Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings▪ most Excellent MAJESTIE, 1649.
