S1576 52529246 178972
PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament to the 21 Day of May instant 1700. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith: To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Purse∣vants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, not∣withstanding we were positively Resolved Our Parliament should Meet on the Fourteenth Day of May instant, yet We Understanding that a short Adjourn∣ment is necessary, to the effect that all Members Concerned may be in readiness. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have Resolved to Continue the Adjournment of Our said Parliament, from the said Fourteenth to the Twenty First Day of the foresaid Month of May, at which Day We are firmly Resolved Our said Parliament shall Meet; and that the Members of Our said Parliament be not put to unncessary Trouble and Charges before that time, We do hereby with Advice foresaid, Continue the Adjournment of Our said Parliament, from the said Fourteenth to the said Twenty First Day of May cur∣rent, Ordaining and Requiring all the Members of Our said Parliament to At∣tend precisely the said Day at Edinburgh, in the usual Way, and under the Cer∣tifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that in∣continent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of this Our antient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the Premisses, that none pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Seventh Day of May, and of Our Reign the Twelfth Year 1700. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD SAVE THE KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1700.
