S1568 R183309 52529240 178966
PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament from the Eigh∣teenth Day of August, to the Fifteenth Day of December, 1697. WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, We, by Our Proclamation, of the Date, the Fifteenth day of March last by past, did Ad∣journ Our present current Parliament to the Eighteenth day of August next to come; And whereas, the present State of Our Affairs doth not require the Meeting of Our said Parliament, so soon as the said Day to which it is Adjour∣ned: Therefore, We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do continue the Adjournment of Our said current Parliament, from the said Eigh∣teenth Day of August, to the Fifteenth Day of December next to come; And that the Members of Parliament may not be put to un-necessary Charges, and Expenses by Attending the said Eighteenth Day of August next; We do here∣by Adjourn Our said current Parliament, until the said Fifteenth Day of December next, Requiring all the Members of Our said Parliament, to Attend that Day in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the seve∣ral Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Let∣ters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to Mercat-Crosses of the remament Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of this Our Antient Kingdom; And there by open Proclamation, make Intimati∣on, that Our said Parliament is Adjourned to the said Fifteenth Day of De∣cember next to come; And Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty Ninth Day of July, and of Our Reign the Ninth Year, 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1697.
