s1529 52529212 178942
ORDER anent the Rebels of the Bass. April 13. 1693. THE Lords of their Majesties Privy Council being informed, that there are several Persons gone into the Bass, since the Rebels therein were Charged to Deliver up the same for their Ma∣jesties Service, and themselves to their Majesties Mercy; There∣fore the saids Lords Do hereby give Order and warrand to an He∣rauld, with his Coat Disolayed, and a Trumpeter to go to the Bass, or as near as he can safely, and in their Majesties Names and Authority, Command and Charge the Persons presently with∣in the said Island, to Deliver up themselves and the Island in manner foresaid, within the space of six Days, next after they are Charg∣ed, under the pain of high Treason; And appoints Sir James Ogilvy, their Majesties Sollicit or to dispatch the Herauld and Trumpeter, with famous Persons to be Witnesses, and cause furnish a Boat to them; and in case they obey not, then to Denunce them, and there∣after that Letters of Intercommuning be direct against them as effeirs: And in the mean time the saids Lords Do hereby promise a Reward of Fifty Pounds Sterling, to any Person or Persons who shall seise upon, and deliver to any of their Majesties Iudges, Ma∣gistrats, or Officers of their Majesties Forces, the persons of Lieu∣tenant Collonel Grahame, or Michael Middleton Governour of the Bass, two of the Rebels in the said Island; and the sum of Twenty Pounds Sterling, to any person or persons, who shall seise upon, and deliver in manner foresaid, any of the persons after-named, Rebels in the said Island, viz. James, John and William Middletons, the Go∣vernours Brothers, Duncan Mcqueen, Thomas Hepburn, John Turine, Mr.  Hentison, John Mcclean,  Morine the Chyrurgeon, an En∣glishman,  Nicolson, John Gladestones, Gawin Johnston, Lieutenant John Hacket, John Hacket Sea-man, two Irish Sea-men, another Irish Sea-man, two Hoyboyes that belonged to the Earl of Leven, Collonel Grahames Servant, three or four more Servants, and John Manderson, Charles Maitland Servant, detained against his will. And Appoints thir Present to be Printed, and Published at the Mercat. Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful. God save King William and Queen Mary. Ediburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most Excellent Majesties, 1693.
