S1827 R183494 52529296 179064
PROCLAMATION For Adjourning the Parliament to the Twenty Second day of October 1700. VVILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France & Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, con∣junctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as We by Our Proclamation of the date the first day of July last bypast, did Adjourn this current Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland to the Thirteenth day of August then next to come now instant: And where∣as the circumstances of Our Affairs do still continue such as will not allow of the sitting of Our Parliament on the said. Thirteenth Day of August instant, unto which it was last Adjourned; And We judging that it may be necessary We should return to Britain before the Meeting thereof. Therefore, and that the Members of Our said Parliament may not be put to unnecessary Trouble, Charges and Attendance. We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Have Adjourned, and hereby Adjourns this Our said current Parliament, from the said thir∣teenth day of August instant, to the two and Twenty day of October next to come. And We being firmly resolved Our Parliament shall then meet, We do hereby Order and Require all the Members of Our said Parlia∣ment to attend at Edinburgh the said twenty two day of October next to come, in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the rema∣nent Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and thereat in Our Name and Authority, make publick Intimation that Our said Parliament is Adjourned from the said thirteenth day of August instant to the said twenty two day of October next to come. And ordains these presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixth day of August, and of Our Reign the twelfth year 1700. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti Concilii. GOD save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1700.
