S955 99887403 182112
The Scotch Lasses Choice, OR, Jennys Love for Jockey's Kindnes: An Excellent New Song, much in Request. To a pleasant New Scotch Tune. I. LOng Cold Nights, when Winter-Frozen, Jockyes head lay on my Bosom; Now each wanton Lass pursues him, Ah-wa's-me, that I must loose him: Sawney and Jemmy came often to try me, Philly and Willy would fain ligg by me; But, alas! they do but Teaze me, Jockey he alone can please me. II. When he Writes his Love in Meeter, When he Sings to make it sweeter, To the Clouds my Soul was driven, Then I thought my self in Heaven; Fether and Mether that knew little of it, Woo'd me, and su'd me, to Wed for profit; But had Fate been bad or luckey, Ise wou'd ne'r forsake poor Jockey. III. Wot ye weel why I adore him, Wou'd you know why Ise dye for him? He was young, and blith, and bonny, And cou'd love the best of any: When Ise was lying in dying condition, Jockey wou'd still be my best Physician; Though the Doctor ne'r cou'd please me, He had still a Doze wou'd ease me. IV. In his Arms he wou'd infold me, And he there so fast would hold me, That Ise hardly cou'd get from him, May geud Fortune light upon him. With Kisses and blisses my heart reviving, Philly and Willy they fain wou'd deprive him Of my Love, to him so mickle, But geud faith, Ise not so fickle. V. Sawney fine as any Leard too, With a blew Bonnet and Sweard too; Woo'd me, and wou'd fain have led me To the Kirk, there for to Wed me: Gin Fether and Mether they both consented, But Ise fear'd Ise should after repent it; To Marry wou'd be Unlucky Any but my neane sweet Jockey. VI. But ah-wa's-me, Ise am fearful, And cannot be glad and Chearful; The Lasses make sike a doing, And my Jockey from me Wooing; They wou'd if they cou'd, by their kindness move him Molly and Dolly too, vow they do love him; If Jockey is from me flying, Ah-wa's-me, then Jenny's dying. VII. But Jockey vow'd by his Bonnet, He'd Wed me what e're came on it; Without the consent of either, My Old Fether or my Mether: For be they willing or no, Ise ne'r tarry, But as soon as I can, my Jockey Marry: Then wee's both will ligg together, And ne'r matter the Cold Weather. FINIS. This may be Printed, R. P. Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Guiltspur-street, without Newgate.
