W700 99887938 183594
THE wandring PRINCE and PRINCESS Or, Musidorus and Amadine, both of Royal Prognty, who being unfortunately seperated by means of their Parents disagreeing; as fortunately met in a Desert, while they both resolved rever to cease from searching, till they had found out each other. In shady Deserts where was none but Beasts to hear these Lovers moan, There these faithful Lovers met, There Marriage day was quickly set. Tune, Young Phaon. VVHen Musidorus fell in love with Amadine most fair, Her Father cross to him did prove, which caus'd him to dispair, And for to ease his troubled mind he wandred in disguise, Hoping he might soon comfort find, yet tears drop't from his eyes. Alas (quoth he) what shall I do, I am unfortunate, And though my Love is firm and true I meet with Rigid fate, For she who is my hearts delight, her Father is my foe, Which causes me to take my flight, now to the woods I go. In woods and deserts i'le reside, since my poor Amadine Whom once I thought to make my bride she must not now be mine, My fathers Court I quite forsake never again to see, For love my heart will surely break my dear i'le dye for thee,
Thus went this wandring Prince to seek throughout the deserts wide, Some secret place where he might keep and secretly abide, At last he did a Shepherd turn still minding his flocks, Which caus'd his Amadine to mourn and tear her golden Locks, Alas, alas this Princess cry'd has he forsaken me, When I did think could ne'r abide where I should absent he, Some sudden change possest his brest that makes him prove unkind, VVhilst Amadine can take no rest to ease her love sick heart. Thus Amadine whose troubled mind was sorely fill'd with grief, For want of Musidorus pin'd, and could find no Relief; Then she a Resolution took what e're did her betide, Her Prince so dear she would go look throughout the world so wide. And privately away she went, to all her friends unknown To give her troubled mind content she wandred all alone▪ Vntil she came into a place where Savage beasts alone Were known in numbers to increase, and thus she made her moan. Ah! hapless wretch quoth she I am of Lovers, yea, the worst, VVhile some delight to feel loves flame I think my self accurst; Yet will I never rest till I find out this Prince of mine, VVho strangely and so privately forsook his Amadine. A shower of tears then trickled down from her bright shining eyes, Whose beauty did the deserts crown, whose sighs then fill'd Skies; And Musidorus being near, did chance to hear her voice, Though first he was possest with fear, at last he did rejoyce. Certain it is quoth he the Tongue of my poor Amadine, To whom I have done too much wrong, which grieves this soul of mine; To her sad heart I will give ease since she is in distress, For love is such a strange disease no Tongue can well express: To Amadine he then appear'd, who startled was to see, She was by any over heard and in a sound fell she: But her dear Prince with kisses sweet brought her again to life, That meeting was to them most sweet he made her soon his wife.
