14778 S109223 99844873 173152
THE MASQVE OF QVEENES Celebrated From the House of Fame: By the most absolute in all State, And Titles. ANNE Queene of Great Britaine, &c. With her Honourable Ladies. At VVhite Hall, Febr. 2. 1609. Written by BEN: IONSON. Et memorem famam, quae bene gessit, habet. LONDON, Printed by N. ORES. for R. Bonan and H. VVally, and are to be sold at the Spred Eagle in Poules Church-yard. 1609.
To her sacred Maiestie. Most excellent of Queenes, The same zeale, that studied to make this Invention worthy of yor Maiestyes Name, hath since bene carefull to give it life, and authority: that, what could then be obiected to sight but of a few, might not be defrauded of the applause due to it from all. And, because Princes (out of a religious respect to theyr modesty) may wiselye refuse to be the publique patrons of theyr owne actions; I chose him, that is the next yor sacred Person, and might the worthiest of Mankind give it proper, and naturall defence. The rather since it was his Highnesse command, to haue mee adde this second labor of annotation to my first of Invention: and both to the honor of yor Maiesty. Wherein a hearty desire to please deserues not to offend. By the most loyall, and zealous, to yor Maties seruice, Ben Jonson
To the Glory of our owne, and griefe of other Nations. My Lord HENRY Prince of great Brittaine, &c. SIR, WHEN it hath beene my happinesse (as would it were more frequent) but to see your face, and, as passing by, to consider you; I haue with as much ioy, as I am now farre from flattery in professing it, cal'd to mind that doctrine of some great In∣quisitors in Nature, who hold euery royall & heroique forme to partake and draw much to it of the heauenly vertue. For, whether it be that a diuine soule, being to come into a body, first chooseth a palace for it selfe; or, being come, doth make it so; or that Nature be ambitious to haue her worke equal; I know not: But what is lawful for me to vnderstand, & speak, that I dare; which is, that both your Vertue & your For me did deserue your Fortune. The one claim'd that you should bee borne a Prince, the other makes that you do become it. And when Necessity (excellent Lord) the mother of the Fates, hath so prouided, that your Forme should not more insinuate you to the eies of men, then your Vertue to their mindes: it comes neere a wonder to thinke how sweetly that habite flowes in you, and with so hourely testimonies, which to all posterity might hold the dignity of examples. Amongst the rest, your fauour to letters, and these gentler studies, that goe vnder the title of Humanitie, is not the least honor of your wreath. For, if once the worthy Prosessors of these learnings shall come (as heretofore they were) to be the care of Princes, the Crownes, their Soueraignes weare, will not more adorne their temples;
nor their stamps liue longer in their Medals, then in such subiects labours. Poetry, my Lord, is not borne with euery man; nor euery day: And in her generall right, it is now my minute to thanke your Highnesse, who not only do honor her with your eare, but are curious to examine her with your eye, and inquire into her beauties, and strengthes. Where though it hath prou'd a worke of some difficulty to me, to re∣trine the particular Authorities (according to your gracious command, and a desire borne out of iudgement) to those things, which I writ out of fulnesse, and memory of my for∣mer readings: yet, now I haue ouercome it, the reward, that meetes me, is double to one act: which is, that thereby your excellent vnderstanding will not onely iustifie me to your owne knowledge, but decline the stiffenesse of others origi∣nall ignorance, already arm'd to censure. For, which singular bounty, if my Fate (most excellent Prince, and onely Delicacy of Man-kind) shall reserue me to the Age of your Actions, whether in the Campe, or the Councell-chamber, that I may write, at nights, the deedes of your dayes: I will then labour to bring forth some worke as worthy of your fame, as my ambition therein is of your pardon. By the most true admirer of your Highnesse vertues, And most hearty Celebrater of them, BEN: IONSON.
THE MASQVE OF QVEENES. IT increasing, now, to the third time of my being vs'd in these seruices to her Maiesties personall presentations, with the Ladyes whom she pleaseth to ho∣nor; it was my first & speciall regard, to see that the Nobility of the inuention should bee answerable to the dignity of their persons, For which reason I chose the argument, to be, A celebra∣tion of honorable, and true Fame, bred out of Vertue: obser∣uing that rule of the Hor. in Art. Poetic. best Artist, to suffer no obiect of delight to passe without his mixture of profit & exam∣ple. And because her Maiestie (best knowing, that a prin∣cipall part of life, in these Spectacles, lay in their variety) had cōmanded me to think on some Dance or shew, that might praecede hers, & haue the place of a foile or false Masque; I was carefull to decline, not only from others, but mine owne steps in that kind, since the In the Masqu at my L. Hadding. wedding. last yeare, I had an Anti-masque of Boyes: and therfore now, deuis'd, that twelue Women, in the habit of Hags, or Witches, sus∣taining the persons of Ignorance, Suspition, Credulity. &c. the opposits to good Fame, should fill that part; not as a Masque, but a Spectacle of strangenes, producing multi∣plicitie of gesture, and not vnaptly sorting with the cur∣rent, and whole fall of the deuise. His Maiestie, then, being set, and the whole com∣pany in full expectation, the part of the Scene which first presented it selfe was an ougly Hell: which
flaming beneath, smoaked vnto the top of the Roofe. And in respect all Euils are, morally, said to come from Hell; as also from that obseruation of Torrentius vpon Horace his Canidia, Ʋid. Laeuin. Tor. Comment. in Hor. Epod. lib. Oae. 5. quae tot instruct a venenis, ex Orci faucibus profecta videri possit: These Witches, with a kinde of hollow and infernall musique, came forth from thence. First one, then two, and three, and more, till their number increased to eleuen; all diffe∣rently attir'd: some with Rats on their heads; some on their shoulders; others with ointment pots at their gir∣dles; All with spindles, timbrels, rattles, or other venefi∣cal instrumēts, making a confused noise, with strange ge∣stures. The deuise of their attire was Mr. Iones his, with the inuention, & Architecture of the whole Scene, & Ma∣chine. Onely, I prescrib'd them their Properties of Vipers, Snakes, Bones, Hearbs, Rootes, and other Ensignes of their Magick, out of the authority of auncient and late VVriters, wherein the faults are mine, if there bee any found; and for that cause I confesse them. These eleuen Witches beginning to dance (which is an vsual See the Kings Maiestes booke, (our Soueraigne) of Damonologie. Bo∣din. Remig. Delro. Mal: Maleft. And a world of others, in the generall: But let vs follow particulars. Ceremony at their Conuents, or meetings, where sometimes also they are vizarded, and masqu'd) on the sodaine, one of them missed their Chiefe, and interrupted the rest, with this speech. SIsters, stay, we want our Amongst our vulgar Witches, the honor of Dame (for so I translate it) is gi∣uen with a kind of preheminence to some speciall one at their meetings: which Delrio insinuates, Disquis. Mag. Lib. 2. Qu. 9. quoting that of Apuleius. Lib. de Asin. anreo. de quadam taupena, Regina Sagarum. And addes, vt scias etiam tum quasdam ab ijs hoc tiulo honorata. Which title M. Philippe Ludvvigus Elich. Damonomagia. Quest. 10. doth also remember. Dame; Call vpon her by her name, And the Charme we vse to say, That she quickly When they are to bee transported from place to place, they vse to annoint themselues, and some∣times, the things they ride on. Beside Apule. testimony, See these later. Remig, Demonolatria. lib. 1. Cap. 14. Delrio. Disquis. Mag. lib. 2. Quest. 16. Bdin. Damonoman, lib. 2. Cap. 4. Barthol. de spina. quest. de Strigib, Philiope Ludovigus Elich. Quest. 10. Paracelsus in magn. & cul Philosophia, teacheth the confection. Vn∣guantum  carne recent natorum infantium, in prelmenti forma coctum, & cum herbit semniseri, qules sunt Pa∣pauer, Solanmn, Cicuta, &c. And Ioa. Bapti. Porta. lib. 2. Mag. Natur. Cap. 26. annoint, and come away.
1 CHARME. DAme, Dame, the Watch is set: Quickly come, we all are met. These pla∣ces in their owne nature dire, and disinall, are rec∣kon'd vp, as the sittest frō whence such persons should come: and were notably ob∣serued by that ex∣cellent Lucan, in the description of his Ericth; lib. 6. To which wee may adde this corollary out of Agrip. de ocult. philosop. lib. . cap. 48, Saturne cōrrespendent loca quanis f∣tida, tenebrosa, subterranea, religiosa & fanesta, vt eamiteria, busta, & hominibus deserta habitacula, & veteslate aduca, loca obscura, & horrenda, & sol tarta antrae, cauerna, putei; Praeterea piscina, stagna, paludes, & eius∣modi. And in lib. 3. cap. 42. speaking of the like and in lib. 4. about the end, Aptisma sunt loca pluri∣mum expirtentia visionum, nocturnarumque in cursionum & constimilium phantasmaetm, vt camiteria, & in quibus fieri solent executio & criminalis iudicij, in quibut recentibus annis publicae strages factae sunt, vel vbi occisorm  dauera, necedum expiata, nec ritè sepulta recentioribus annis subnumata sunt. From the lakes, and from the fennes, From the recks, and from the dennes, From the woods, and from the caues, From the church-yeards, from the graues, From the dungeon, from the tree That they dye on, here are we. Comes she not yet? Strike another heate. 2 CHARME. THe weather is faire, the winde is good, Vp Dame, o'your Delrio. Disq. Mag. lib. 2. Quest. 6. has a stoy out of Triezius of this horse of wood: but that which out Witches call so, is sometimes a broome-staffe, sometime à reede sometime a di∣staffe. See Romg. Daemonol. lib.  cap. 14. Bodin liv. 2. cap. 4. &c. horse of wood: Or else, tucke vp your gray frock, And saddle your The Goat is the diuel himself vpō whom they ide often to their so∣lemities, as ap peaes by their confessions in Rem. and Bodin. ibid. His Maiestie also remembers the storie of the Diuels appearance to those of Clicut, in that forme. Damenol. lib. 2. cap. 3. Goat, or your greene Of the greene Cock, we haue no other ground (to confesse ingenuously) than a vulgar fable of a Witch, that with a Cock of that colour, and a bottome of blew thred, would transport her selfe through aire; and so escaped (at the time of her being brought to execution) from the hand of Iustice. It was a tale when I went to schoole, And somewhat there is like it, in Mar. Delr. Disqu. Mag. lib. 2. Quast 6. of one Zijto, a Bohemian, that, among other his dexterities, aliquoties equis rhedarijs vectum, gallis gallinaceis ad pnkedium sisum alligatis, subsequebatur. Cock, And make his bridle a bottome of thrid, To rowle vp how many miles you haue rid.
Quickly come away; For we, all, stay. Nor yet? Nay, then, VVee'll try her agen. 3. CHARME. THe Owle is abroad, the Bat, and the Toad, And so is the Cat-a-mountaine; The Ant, and the Mole sit both in a hole, And Frogge peepes out o'the fountaine; The Dogges, they do bay, and the Timbrels play, The All this is but a Perphrasis of the might, in their charme, and their applying themselues to it with their i stru∣ments, whereof the Spindle in An tiquitie, was the cheife; and beside the testimonie of Theocritus, in Phar∣maceutria, (vvho onely vs'd it in a∣morous affaires) vvas of speciall act to the trou∣bling of the Moone. To which Martiall alludes, lib. 9 ept. 30. Qa∣nunc Thesslo lu∣nā deducere rhom∣bo, &c. And lib. 12. Epig. 57. Cum secta Colcke Luna vapa∣lat rhom. Spindle is now a turning; The Moone it is red, and the Starres are fled, But all the Sky is a burning: The This rate also of making a dtch with their nailes, is frequent with our witches whereof see Bodin. Remig. Delrio. Mal∣leus Mal. Godelmā lib. 2. de lamijs, as also the antiquitie of it most viuely exprest by Horac. Satir. 8. lib. 1. where he mentions the pictures, and the blood of a black Lamb; All vvhich are yet in vse vvith our moderne witchcraft. Scalpe∣re terram (speaking of Canidia, & Sagana) Vnguibus, & pullam duellere mordicus agnam Coeperunt: Cruor in fos∣sam confusus, vt inde Maneis elicerent animas responsa daturas. Lanea & effiges erat, altera cerea; &c. And then, by and by, Serpentesat{que} videres Infernas errare caneis, Lunam{que} rubentem, Ne foret his testis, post magna lerere se pulchra. Of this ditch Homer makes mentiō in Circes speech to Vlysses: Odiss K. about the end. . &c.  And Ouid, Metam. lib. 7 in Medeas Magick Hond procul egestâ scrobibus tellure duabus Sacra facit, cultros{que} in gut ture velleris atri Conijcit, & patulas perfundit sanguine fessas. And of the vvaxen Images, in Hypsipyles epistle to Iason, vvhere he expresseth that mischiefe also of the needles Deuouet absentes, simulocra{que} cerea fingit, Et mise rum tenues in iecur vrget acus. Bodin. Daemon. lib. 2. cap. 8. hath (beside the knowne story of King Duffe ou of Hector Boetius) much of the witches later practise in that kind, and reports a relation of a Frent Ambassadours, out of England, of certaine pictures of wax found in a dunghll, neere Islngton, of our lat Queenes, which rumor I my selfe (being then very young) can yet remember to haue bene trent. Ditch is made, and our nayles the spade, VVith pictures full, of waxe, and of wooll; Their liuers I sticke, with needles quicke; There lackes but the bloud, to make vp the flood. Quickly Dame, then, bring your part in, Spurre. spurre, vpon little Their litle Martin is be that calls them to their Conuenticles, which is done in a humane voyce bu comming forth, they find him in the shape of a great Backgoat, vpon whom they e to their meetings Delrto. Disquis. Mag. Quast, 16. lib. 2. And Bod. Demonom. lib. 2 cap. 4. haue both the same relation from Paulus Grillandus, of a VVitch. Adueniente nocte, & horà euocabatur voe quadam velut humana abipso Do mone, quem non vocant Daemonem, sed Magisterulum, alia Magistrum Martinettum siue Martinellis. Quae sic euocata mox sumebat pyxidem vnctionis, & liniebat corpus suum in quusdam partibus & membris, que limto exibet ex dom & inuenrebat Magisterulum suū in forma hircr illam expectantem apnd ostium, super quo mulier equiabat, & appl care solebat fortiter manus ad arineis, & station hircus ille adscendebat per aërem, & breuissimo tempore defereb at ip sam, &c. Martin, Merely, merely, make him saile, A worme in his mouth, and a thorne in's taile, Fire aboue, and fire below, VVith a whip i'your hand, to make him go.
O, Now shee's come! Let all be dumbe. AT this, the This Dame make to beare t person of Are, Mischiefe (for I interpret it) o of Homers descri∣tion of her Ilia I. where h makes her svv to hurt Mankin strong, and sou of her feete, a Iliad. T. vvalki vpon mens hea in both places vsing one, and the same phrase to sig∣nifie her povver, Ladens home∣es. I present her are footed, and he frk ruck'd, to make her seeme more expedite, by Horace his antho∣tity. Set. 8. lib. 1. Succinctm vadere palla Canidiam pe∣dibs nudis, psso{que} capillo. But for her haire, I rather respect another place of his, Epod. lib. Ode. 5, vvhere she appeares Canidia breuibus imp'icata viperis Cri∣neis, et incomptum caput. And that of Lucan. lib. 6. Speaking of Erictho's attire. Discolor, & vario Furialis cultas amictu Induitur, vultus què aperitur crine remoto, Et coma vipereu substringitur horrida sertis. For her Torch, See Remig. lib. 2, cap. 3. Dame enter'd to them, naked-arm'd, bare-footed, her frock tuck'd, her haire knotted, and folded with Vipers; In her hand a Torch made of a dead mans arme, lighted; girded with a Snake. To whom they all did reuerence, and she spake, vtte∣ring, by way of question, the end wherefore they came: which if it had beene done either before, or other∣wise, had not beene so naturall. For, to haue made
themselues, their owne decipherers, and each one to haue told, vpon their entrance, what they were, and whe∣ther they would, had bin a most pitious hearing, and vt∣terly vnworthy any quality of a Poeme: wherein a Wri∣ter should alwayes trust somewhat to the capacity of the Spectator, especially, at these Spectacles; where men, beside inquiring eyes, are vnderstood to bring quicke eares, and not those sluggish ones of Porters, and Mechanicks, that must be bor'd through, at eue∣ry act, with narrations. DAME. HAGGES. VVEll done, my Hagges. And, come we fraught with spight, To ouerthrow the glory of this night? Holds our great purpose? HAG. Yes. DAM But wants there none Of our iust number? HAG. Call vs one, by one, And then our Dame shall see. DAM. In the chayn∣g of these vices make, as if one ke produc'd a∣other, and the ame vvere born ut of them all; , as they might y to her, Sola to  scelerum, quic∣d possedmus om∣. Nor vvill it peare much vi∣ac'd, if their Series be considered, vvhen the opposition to all vertue begins out of Ignorance. That Ignorance beget  Suspition (for knowledge is e∣uer open, and charitable) That Suspition Credli∣ty, as it is a vice∣tor being a ver¦tue, and free, it is opposite to it: but such as are iealous of then selues doe easily credit any thinge of others whom they hate. Out of this Cre∣dulity springs Falshood, which begets Murmure; and that Murmure presently growes Malice, which bgets Impudence; and that Impudence Slander; that Slander Execration: Execration Bitternesse; Bitternesse Fury; and Fury Mischiefe. Now, for the personall presentation of them, the Authority in Poetry is vniuersall. But in the absolute Claudian, there is a particular and eminent place, where the Poet not onely produceth such per∣sons but almost to a like purpose. in Ruf. Lib. 1, where Alecto, enuious of the times, infernas ad liina to∣tra sorores, Concilium deforme vocat, glomerantur in vnum I numeraepstes Erebi, quascun{que} s stro Nex genu f u: nutrix Discordia belli, Imperiosa Fames, leto vicina Senectus, Impatiens{que} sui Merbus, L{que} secundu Aum & scisso moerens velamine Luctus, Et Timor, & caeco praecept Aadacia vultu; with many others, fit to disturb the world, as ours the night. First, then, aduance My drousie seruant, stupide Ignorance, Knowne by thy scaly vesture; and bring on Thy fearefull Sister, wild Suspition, Whose eyes do neuer sleepe; Let her knit hands VVith quick Credulity, that next her stands, Who hath but one eare, and that alwayes ope, Two-faced Falshood, follow, in the rope;
And lead on Murmure, with the cheekes deepe hung; She Malice, whetting of her forked tongue; And Malice Impudence, whose forhead's lost; Let Impudence lead Slander on, to boast Her oblique looke; and to her subtle side Thou, black-mouth'd Execration, stand apply'd; Draw to thee Bitternesse, whose pores sweat gall; She flame-eyd Rage, Rage Mischief. HAG. Here we, are all. DAM. Here againe, by vvay of irritation I make the Dame pursue the purpose of their comming, and discouer their natures more larg∣ly: vvhich had bin nothing, if not done as doing a∣nother thing, but Moratio circa vil∣en patluque rborn. Then vvhich the Peet cannot know a greater vice; he being that kind of Artific, to whose worke is required so much exactnesse, as Indifferency is not tollerable. Ioyne now our hearts, we faithfull Opposite To Fame, and Glory. Let not these bright nights Of Honour blaze, thus, to offend our eyes. Shew our selues truely enuious, and let rise Our wonted rages. Do what may be seeme Such names, and Natures. Vertue, else, will deeme Our powers decreast, and thinke vs banish'd earth, No lesse then heauen. All her antique birth, As Iustice, Faith, she will restore; and bold Vpon our sloth, retriue her Age of Gold. VVe must not let our natiue manners, thus, Corrupt with ease. Ill liues not, but in vs.
I Hate to see these fruites of a soft Peace, And curse the pietie giues it such increase. Let vs disturbe it then, These powers of troubling Na∣ture, are frequent∣ly ascrib'd to Wit∣ches, & chaleng'd by themselues, where euer they are induc'd, by Homer, Ouid, Tibullus, Pet: Arbiter, Seneca, Lucan, Claudian. to whose authorities I shall referre more anone. For the present, heare Socrat. in Apul. de Asin. au∣res. lib. 1. describing Meroe the VVitch. Saga, & Diuinipotens coelim deponere, terram suspendere, fontes dura∣re, monteis diluere, Manes sublimare, Deos infimare, Sydera extinguere, Tartarum ipsum illuminare. And lib. 2. Byr∣rhena to Lurius, of Pamphile. Maga primi nominis, & omnis carminis sepulcral Magistra creditur, quae surcul & lapillu, & id genus friuolis inhalatis omnem istam lucem mundi syderalis, imis Tartari, & in vetustum Chaos mergit. As also this latter of Remigiut, in his most elegant Arguments, before his Damonolatria▪ Qu possint euertere funditt orbem, Et Maneis superis miscere, has vnica cura est. And Lucan. Quarum, quicquid non creditur, a of. and blast the light; Mixe Hell with Heauen, and make Nature fight Within her selfe; loose the whole henge of Things; And cause the Ends runne backe, into their Springs. HAG. VVhat our Dame bids vs doo VVe are ready for. DAM. Then fall too. This is also so∣lemne in their witchcraft, to be examined, either by the Diuell or their Dame, at their meetings, of what mischiefe they haue done; and what they can conferre to a future hurt. See M. Philippo-Ludvvigus Elich. Damonoma∣gia lib. Quast. 10. But Remigius, in the very forme. Lib. 1. Demonolat. Cap, 22. Quemadmodum solent Heri in lli. is procuratoribus, cum corum rationes expendunt, segnitiem negligentiam{que} durius castgare; Ita Daemon, in suis coijs, quod tempus examinandis cius{que} rebus at{que} actiontbus ipse constituit, eos pessimè habere consuent, qui nihil af∣ferunt, quo se nequiores ac flagitijs cumulatiores doceant. Nec cuiquam adeo impune est, si à superiore conuentu nullo se scelere nouo obstrernt; sed semper oprtet, qui gratus esse volet, in alium, nouum aliquod fainus fecisse. And this doth exceedingly solicue them all, at such times, lest they should come vnprepared. But wee apply this examination of ours to the particular vse; whereby, also, we take occasion, not alone to expresse the Things (as Vapors, Liquors, Hearbs, Bones, Flesh, Blood, Fat, and such like, which are cal'd Media magica) but the Rites of gathering them, and from what places, reconciling (as neere as we can) the practise of An∣tiquity, to the Neotericke, and making it familiar with our popular VVitchcraft. But first relate me, what you haue sought, VVhere you haue beene, and what you haue brought.
HAGGES. 1. 1 For the gathe∣ring peeces of dead flesh. Cor. A∣grip. deoccul. Phi∣losop. lib. 3. Cap. 42. and Lib. 4. Cap. vlt. obserues that the vse was to call vp Ghost and Spirits, with a sumigation made of that (& bones of carcasses) which I make my VVitch, here, not to cut her selfe, but to watch the Rauen, as Lucan's Erichthe. Lib. 6. Et quodcun∣qué iapet nuda tellure cad auer, Ante feras volucres{que} sedet: nec carpere membra Vult ferro manibus{que} suis, morsus{que} luporum Expectat siccis raptura à sauibus artus. As if that peece were sweeter which the VVolfe had bitten, or the Rauen had pick'd, and more effectuous: And to do it, at her turning to the South, as with the praediction of a storme. VVhich, though they be but minutes in Ceremony, being obseru'd, make the act more darke and full of horror. I Haue bene, all day, looking after A Rauen, feeding vpon a quarter; And, soone as she turn'd her beake to the South, Isnatch'd this morsell out of her mouth. 2. 2 Spuma Canum Lupi crines, nodus Hyena, ocult Draconum, Serpen tis membrana, As∣pidis aures are a mention'd by th Antients, in witc craft. And Luc particularly  li 6. Huc quicqui foetu genuit Natu finistro Miscetur, non spuma canum, quibus vnda timoriest, Viscera non Lyncis; non durae nodus Hyenae Defuit: &c. A Ouid. Metamorphos. lib. 7. reckons vp others. But for the spurging of the eies, let vs returne to Lucan, in th same booke, which peice (as all the rest) is written with an admirable height. Ast vbi seruantur saxu, quib intimus humor Ducitur, & tracta durescunt tabe medullae Corpora, tunc omneis auide desanit in artus, Immersit{que} m nus oculis, gaudet que gelats Effodisse orbeis, & sicca pallida rodit Excrementa man. I Haue bene gathering Wolues haires, The mad Dogges foame, and the Adderseares; The spurging of a dead Mans eyes, And all since the Euening starre did rise.
3. 3 Plinle writing of the Mandrake, Nat. Hist. lib. 25. cap. 13. and of the digging it vp, hath this ceremony, Cauent effossur contrarium ventum, & tribus cirulis antè glad rcumscribunt, postea fodiunt ad occasum spectantes. But we haue later tradition, that the forcing of it vp is so fatally dangerous, as the grone kils, and therefore they do it vvith Dogs, which I thinke but borrowed from Iosephus his report of the root Baaras. lib. 7. de Bel. Iudaic. Howseuer, it being so principall an in∣gredient in their Magick, it was fit she should boast to be the plucker vp of it her selfe. And, that the Cook did crovv, asludes to a prime circumstance in their worke: For they all confesse that nothing is so crosse, or balefull to them, in their nights, as that the Cock should crow before they haue done. VVhich makes that their little Masters, or Martinets, of whom I haue mention'd before, vse this forme in dismissing their conuentions. Eia, facessite proper hinc omnes, nam iam galli canere incipust. VVhich I interpret to be, because that Bird is the messenger of light, and so, contrary to their acts of darknesse. See Remig. Demonolat. lib. 1. cap. 4. where he quotes that of Appollonius. de vmbra Achillu, Philostr. lib. 4. cap. 5. And Eus. Casariens.  confutat. contra Hierecl. 4. de Gallicinio. I, Last night, lay all alone O the ground, to heare the Mandrake grone; And pluckt him vp, though he grew full low, And, as I had done, the Cocke did crow. 4. 4 I haue touch'd at this before, in my none vpon the first, of the vse of gathering Flesh, Bone, and Sculs: to which I now bring that piece of Apuleius. lib. 3. de Asino aurto. of Pamphile. Prius{que} apparatu solito instruxit feralem officinam, omne ge r omatis. & ignorab iter laminis literat, & infoelicium ntuium durantibus clauis defletorum, sepultorum etiam, cadauerum expositis ltis adodum membru, me nares, & digiti, illic carnsi claut pendentium, alibi trucidatorum seruatus cror, & ex∣orta dentibus serarum trunca caluarta. And, for such places, Lucan makes his VVitch to inhabit them. Lib. 6. Deserta que busta Incolit, & tumls expulsis obtines brts. ANd, I ha'beene choosing out this scull, From Charnell houses, that were full; From priuate Grots, and publique Pits, And frighted a Sexten, out of his wits.
5. 5 For this rite, see Barthel. de spina. Quaest. de Strigibus. cap. 8. Mall. Mal∣lesica. Tom. 2. vvhere hee dis∣putes at large the transformation of Witches to cattes, and their sucking both their spirits, and the bloud, calling them Striget: which Goldelman: lib. de Lamijs. would haue á stridore, & auibus fadissimis eiusdem nominis, vvhich I the rather incline to out of Ouid's authority. Fast. lib. 6. where the Peet ascribes, to those birds, the same almost that these doe to the Witches. Nocte volant, pucrosque po∣tunt nutricis egenteis, Et vitiant cunis corpora rapta suis: Carpere dicuntur lactentia viscera rostris, Et plenum pote sanguine guttur habent. VNder a cradle I did creepe, By day; and, when the child was asleepe, At night, I suckd the breath: and rose, And pluckd the nodding Nurse by the nose. 6. 6. Their killing of infants is com∣mon, both for confection of their oyntment (vvhereto one In∣gredient is the fat boylde, as I haue shevv'd before out of Paracelsus, & Porta) as also out of a lust to doe murder. Sprenger in Mall. Malesic. re∣ports that a Witch, a Mid∣vvife in the Diocoese of Basil, confessed to haue killd aboue forty infants (euer as they vvere nevv borne, vvith pricking them in the braine vvith a needle) vvhich she had offered to the Deuill. See the story of the three Witches in Rem. Daemonola lib. cap. 3. about the end of the chapter. And M. Philippo-Ludvvigus Elich. Quaestio. 8. And, that it is no nevv rite, reade the practise of Candia. Epod. Horat. lib. Ode 5. and Eucan. lib. 6. vvhose admirable verses I can neuer bee vveary to transcribe. Noc cessant à cade manus, si sanguine viu Est opus, erumpat inguloqui primus aperto. Nec refugitcades, vinum ssaer croem Exta{que} funerea poscunt trepidan∣tia mensa. Vulnere si ventris, non qua Natura vocabat Extrahitur part calides ponelus in aris; Et qutiet sai opus est  Ipsafanit Man.  omis in vsu est. I Had a dagger: VVhat did I with that? Kill'd an infant, to haue his fat. A Piper it got at a Church-ale, I bad him, againe blow wind i'the tayle. 7. 7. The abuse o dead bodies in their vvitch-craf, both Porphyrie, and Psllus are graue Authors of. The one Lib. de sacrif ca de vere cultu. The other hde dm. which Apuleius touch∣eth too, lib. 2. de Asin. areo. But Remigius, who deales with later persons, and out of their ovvne mouthes Damonola. lib. 2. Cap. 3. affirmes. Hec & nostra aatismaleficis hominibus moris est facere, prasertim si cuius suppli∣cio affecti cadauer exemple dtumest, et in crucem sublatum. Nam non solum inde sortilegijs suis materiam mutu∣antur: Sed et ab ipsis carnisocinae instrumentit, reste, vinclis, palo, ferramentis. Siqwdem ijs vulgs etiam opinione inesse ad icantationes magias vim quandam at potestatem. And, to this place, I dare t, out of Religion to the di∣nine Lucan, but bring his verses from the same booke. Laqueum, nodosque nocenteit Ore suo rupir, pendentia corpora carpsit, Abrasit que cruies, percussaque viscera nmbis Ʋulsit, et incoctas admisso sole medullas. Insertum manibus chalibe nigramque per artus Stillantis tabs sani, virusque coatum Sustit, & nero morsut retine perpent. A Murderer, yonder, was hung in chaines,
The Sunne, and the wind had shrunke his vaine; I bit of a sinew, I clipp'd his haire, I brought of his ragges, that danc'd i'the ayre. 8. 8 These are Cani∣as furniture in Hora. Epoa. lib. Ode. 5. Etvncta turpis a rana sanguine, Plu∣mamque nocturnae strigis And part of Medeas confection in Ouid. Metamorp. lib. 7. Strigis infamet, ipsis cum carnibus, alas. That of the skin (to make a purse for her Fly) vvas meant ridi∣los, to mock the keeping of their Familiars. THe Scrich-owles egges, and the fethers black, The bloud of the Frogge, and the bone in his back I haue beene getting; and made of his skin A purset, to keepe Sir Cranion in. 9. 9. , Hyosy us, Ophi∣glossn, Solum, Martagon, Dorni∣cum, Aconitum are the common ve∣eficall ingredi∣nts, remembred by Parclsus, Pert, Agrippa, & others; vvhich I make her to hae gather'd, as about a Costle, Church, or some rast building (kept by Dogges) among ruines, and vvild heapes. ANd Iha' beene plucking (plants among) Hemlock, Henbane, Adders-tongue, Night-shade, Moonewort, Libbards-hane, And twise, by the Dogges, was like to be tane.
10. 10. Ossa abere rapta ieiuna canis Horace giues Cani∣dia, in the place before quoted. which ieiuna I ra∣ther change to Gard'nets, as imagining such persons, to keepe Mastifes for the defence of their grounds, whether this Hagge might goe also for simple: where meeting with the bones, and, not content with them, shee would yet do a domesticke hurt, in getting the Catt's braices; vvhich is another speciall In∣gredient, and of so much more efficacy, by how much blacker the Catte is. If you will credit Agrip. cap. de suffitibus. I, From the iawes of a Gardiners Bitch, Did snatch these bones, and then leap'd the ditch, Yet went I back to the house againe, Kill'd the black Cat, and here's the brayne. 11. 11. These also, both by the con∣fessions of Wit∣ches, and testimo∣ny of vvriters, are of principall vse in their Witch∣craft. The Toad mention'd in Virg. Geo. lib. 1. In neutusque cai Bufo. Which by Plinie is call'd Rubeta. Natu. Histo. lib. 32. cap. 5. and there celebrated for the force in Magick. Iuuenal touch th at it twise, within my memory. Satir. 1. & 6. And of the Owles eyes, see Cor. Agrip. de occult. Philos. lib. 1. Cap. 15. As of the Bats bloud, and wings, there: and in the 25. chapter. with Bapt. Porta. lib. 2. cap. 26. I VVent to the Toad breedes vnder the wall, Icharm'd him out, and he came at my call; I scratchd out the eyes of the Owle, before, I tore the Battes wing; what would you haue more? 12. 12. After all their boasted la∣bors, and plenty of Materialls (as they imagine) I make the Dame not only to adde more, but stran∣ger, and out of their meanes to get, (except the st Papauer cor∣nutum, vvhich I haue touch'd at in the cousection) as Sepulchris caprificos erutas, & cupressos funebreis, as Horace cals them, vvhere he armes Ca∣nidia. Epod. lib. Ode. 5. Then Aguricum Laruis of vvhich, see Porta. lib. 2. de Nat. Magi. against Plinie. And Bsilist, quem & Saturni sangui em vocant venefii, tantas{que} vires habere ferunt. Cor. Agrip. de occult. Philos. lib. 1 Cap. 42. VVith the viper, remembred by Lucan. lib. 6. and the skim of Serpents. Innata{que} rúbris Aequori∣ custos pretiosae viperae conchae. Aut viuentis adhuc Lybicae membrana cerasta. And Ouid. lib. 7. Nec defuit illis Squamea Cimphei tenuis membrana chelidri. YEs, I haue brought (to helpe our vowes) Horned Poppy, Cipresse boughes, The Fig-tree wild, that growes on tombes,
And Iuice, that from the Larch-tree comes, The Basiliskes blood, and the Vipers skin: And, now, our Orgies let's begin. DAME. HEre, the Dame put her selfe in the midst of them, and began her following Inuocation; wherein she tooke occasion to boast all the power attributed to Witches, by the Antients: of which euery Poet (or the most) do giue some. Homer to Circe, in the Odyss. Theo∣critus to Simatha, in Pharmaceutria. Virgil to Alphesiboeus, in his. Ouid to Dipsas, in Amor. to Medea, and Circe, in Metamorph. Tibullus to Saga. Horace to Canidia, Sagana, Veta, Folia. Seneca to Medea, and the Nurse, in Herc. O Ete. Petr. Arbiter to his Saga, in Frag. and Claudian to Megaera. Lib. 1. in Rufinum; who takes the habite of a Witch, as these do, and supplies that historicall part in the Poeme, beside her morall person of a Fury: Confir∣ming the same drift, in ours. These Inuocati∣ons are solemne vvith them, wher∣of we may see the formes, in Ouid. Meta. lib. 7. in Sen. Trag. Med. in Luc. lib. 6. which of all is the bol∣dest & most hor∣rid: beginning Eumemdes, Stigi∣um{que} nefas, paenae{que} nocentum, &c. YOu Feinds, and Furies (if yet any bee VVorse then our selues) you, that haue quak'd to see These The vntying of their knots is, when they are go∣ing to some fatall businesse, as Saga∣na is presented by Horace. Expdi∣ta, per totam domum Spargent Auerna∣leis aquas, Hrre capillis, vt marinus asperis, Echinus, a curren Aper. knots vntied; & shrunk when we haue charm'd. You, that (to arme vs) haue your selues disarm'd,
And to our powers, resign'd your whips and brands, VVhen we went forth the scourge of Men, and Lands. You, that haue seene me ride, when Hecate Durst not take chariot; when the boistrous sea, VVithout a breath of wind, hath knock'd the sky; And that hath thundred, Ioue not knowing why: VVhen we haue set the Elements at warres, Made Midnight see the Sunne, and Day the Starres; VVhen the wing'd Lightning, in the course, hath staid; And swiftest Riuers haue run backe, afraid, To see the Corne remoue, the Groues to range, VVhole Places alter, and the Seasons change. VVhen the pale Moone, at the first voice, downe fell Poison'd, and durst not stay the second Spell. You, that haue oft, beene conscious of these sights; And thou Hecate, who is called Triuia, & Triformis, of whom Ʋirgil. Aeneid. lib. 4. Tergeminam{que} Hecaten. tria vergi nis ora Diana. She was beleeu'd to gouerne in witch∣craft; and is remembred in  their inuocations See Theoc. in Phar∣maceut. & Medea in Sene Meis voata sacr∣noctium sidus veni. Pessimos induta vultus: Front no∣vna minax. And,  richt. in Luc. Pers¦phone, nostra{que} He catis part vltima &c. three-formed Starre, that, on these nights Art onely powerfull, to whose triple Name Thus we incline; Once, twice, and thrice the same; If now with rites prophane, and foule inough, VVe do inuoke thee; darken all this roofe, VVith present fogges: Exhale earths rott'nest vapors, And strike a blindnesse through these blazing tapers. Come, let a murmuring Charme resound, The whilest we This Rite, o burying their Materials, is ofte confest in Remig and describ'd am∣ply in Hor. Sat 8 lib. 1. Ʋt{que} Lupibar bam vara cun¦dente colubrae Ab¦diderint furtim ter∣ris &c, bury all, i'the ground. But first, see euery The Ceremony also, of baring their feete, is expressed by Ouid. Metamorph. lib. 7. as of their haire. Egro ditur tectis vestes induta recinctas, Nuda pedem, nudos humeris infusa capillos. And Horac. ibidem. Pedibus nud passo{que} capillo. And Senec, in Tragad. Med. Tibi more Gentis, vinculo soluens comam Secrota nud nemora straped. foote be bare; And euery knee. HAG. yes, Dame, they are.
4. CHARME. DEepe, Heere they sreake as if they were creating some new feature, which the Diuell perswades them to bee able to do, often, by the pronouncing of Words, and pow∣ring out of Li∣quors, on the Earth. Heare what Agrip. saies, De oceul. Phil. lib. 4 neere the end. In tation: bus vm∣brarum furnigam cum senguine recen∣ti, cum ossibus more tuorum, & carne, cum onis, lacte, welle, olee, & simito lius, quae aptun inedi tribnunt a∣nimabus, ad secunda corpora; and a little before, Nam{que} anima cognitis medijs, per quae quondam corporthus su coniungebantur, per similes vapores, liquores, nidere,  facile alliciuntur. which doctrine he had from Apuleius, without all doubt, or question, who in lib. 3. de Asin, aure. publisheth the same. Tune decantatis spirantibus fibris at vario latice, nunc rore fontane, nunc laecte vaccine, nunc melle montano, libat & mulsâ Sicilles capillos in ntuo nexue obditor, atque nodatos, cum multis doribus das viuis carbonribus adolendos. Tunc protinus inexpugna∣bili Magica Disciplmas potestate, & caca numinum coactorum violentia, illa corpora quorum fumabant-stridentes ca∣pills spiritum mutuentor humanum, & sentiunt, & audiunt, & ambulant. Et qui nidor suarum ducebat exuuiarum venins. All which are meere arts of Sathan, when either himselfe will delude them with a false forme, or troubling a dead body makes them imagine these vanities the meanes: as in the ridiculous circumstances that follow, he doth dayly. O deepe, we lay thee to sleepe; VVe leaue thee drinke by, if thou chance to be dry; Both Milke, and Bloud, the Dew, and the Floud. VVe breath in thy bed, at the foote, and the head; We couer thee warme, that thou take no harme: And when thou dost wake, Dame Earth shall quake, And the houses shake, And her belly shall ake, As her backe were brake, Such a birth to make, As is the blew Drake: VVhose forme thou shalt take. DAME. NEuer a Starre yet shot? Where be the Ashes? HAG. Here's the pot.
DAM. This throw∣ing vp of ashes, und sand, with the fline stone, crosse sticks, and bury∣ing of sage &c. are al vs'd (and bele'd by them) to the rayling of storme. and tem∣post. See Remig. lib. r. daemon cap. 25. Nider. Frmaen ri. cap. 4. Bodin. Da∣mon. lib 2 cap. 8. And heare Godch∣manilib. 2. cap. 6. Nam quando da∣moni grandines ci∣ends potestatem fa∣cit Deus, tum Ma∣loficas inst, uit, vt quandeque filices post tergum in oc∣cidentem versme proijciant, a liquande vt arenam aqua terrent is in acrem concijcoant. plerum∣que scopas in aqu intingant, calm{que} versús spargant, vel fossulâ factâ & lotie infuso, vel aqu digi moneant: subndà in ella percorum pelos bulliant, nonūnquam trabes vel ligna in ritâ transnerse collocent, & alia id ges delmamenta effi. And when they see the succesie, they are more confirm'd, as if the enent followed their working. The like il∣lusion is of their phantasie, in sayling in Egg. shels, creeping through Augur. holes, and such like, so valg or in their confessions. Cast them vp; and the Flint stone Ouer the left shoulder bone: Into the west. HAG. It will bee best. 5. CHARME. THE Sticks are a crosse, there can be no losse, The Sage is rotten, the Sulphur is gotten Vp to the sky, that was t'the ground. Follow it then, with our rattles, round; Vnder the bramble, ouer the brier, A litle more heat will set it on fire: Put it in minde, to do it kind, Flow water, and blow wind. Rouncy is ouer, Robble is vnder, A flash of light, and a clap of thunder, A storme of raine, another of hayle. VVe all must home, i'the Egg-shell sayle; The mast is made of a great pin, The tackle of cbweb, the sayle as thin, And if we go through and not fall in — DAME. Ths stoppe, or interruption shew'd the better, by can∣sing that gene∣ral silence, vvhich made al the follo∣vving Noyses en∣forced in the next Charme, more direfull, first imi¦tating that of Lu∣can. Maratur Erich∣tho Hayfain licuisse meras; irataque morti Verberat im∣motum viuo serpen∣te cadauer, and then their bar∣king, hovvling, hissing, and con∣fusion of noyse expressed by the same Author, in the same person. Tune vox Lethaeos cunctis pollentior herbis Excantare deos, confodit murmura primm Disson a  human a multum discordia lingua. Latratus habet illa camim, gemitusque luporum, Quod repidus bubo, quod strin nocturna queruntur, Quod strident vlulantque ferae, quod sibilat anguis Exprimit, et planctus illisae cautibus vnda, Sil∣narum{que} sonum, frasta{que} tonitrua nubis, Tot rerum vox vnafuit, See Renig. too, Damonlat. lib. 1. cap. 19. Stay. All our Charmes do nothing winne
Vpon the night; Our labour dies! Our Magick-feature will not rise; Nor yet the storme! VVe must repeate More direfull voyces farre, and beate The ground with Vipers, till it sweate. 6. CHARME. BArke Dogges, Wolues howle, Seas rore, Woods rowle, Cloudes crack, all be black, But the light our Charmes do make. DAME. NOt yet? My rage beginnes to swell; Darkenesse, Diuells, Night, and Hell, Do not thus delay my Spell. I call you once, and I call you twise; I beat you againe, if you stay my thrise: Thorough these cranyes, where I peepe, This is one of their common menaces, vvhen tho Magick re∣coiues the least stppe. Heare Erichtho againe, thiddibi pessime mundi Arbiter im∣mittam rupt's Tita∣na cauernis Etsubi∣to feriere die. And a little before to Proserpina, Elo∣quar immenso terta sub pordere qua t Coutmeant, Enuaea dapet, &c. I'le let in the light to see your sleep. And all the secrets of your sway Shall lie as open to the day, As vnto me. Still are you deafe?
Reach me a Bough, That wither'd streight, as it sho out, which is cal∣led Ramus feralu, by some, and ni∣stu, by Senec. Trag Med. that nere bare leafe, To strike the aire; and A deadly poisonous heat be fain'd by Ouid. Me∣tamo, lib. 7. to spring out of Cor∣berus hi foame. Plinie giues it a∣nother beginning of name. Nat. Hst. lib. 27. cap. 3. Nascitur in nudis cautibus, quas aconas vocant, & inde aconitum dixere, uno iuxtâ ne puluere quidem nutriente. Howsoeuer the iuice of it is like that liquor which the Diuell giues Witches to sprinkle abroad & do hurt, in the opinion of all the Magick-masters. Aconite, To hurle vpon this glaring light; A rusty knife I rather giue her, then any other, as firtest for such a diuelish Ceremony, which Seneca might meane by sacre cultro in the Tragedy, where he armes Medea, to the like rite, (for any thing I know) Tibi nudatopectere Mnas, sacro ferians Brachia cultro: Manet noster sangu ad aras. A rustie knife, to wound mine arme; And, as it drops, I'le speake a Charme, Shall cleaue the ground, as low as lies Old Shrunk-vp Chaos, and let rise, once more, his darke, and reeking head, To strike the World, and Nature dead, Vntill my Magick birth be bred. 7. CHARME. BLacke goe in, and blacker come out; At thy going downe, we giue thee a shout. These shouts and clamors, as al∣so the voice Har, Har, are very par∣ticular with them by the testimony of Bodin. Remig. Delrio and M Phil. Ludvvig us. Elich, who out of them reports it, thus. Toru turbā conui∣es{que}ue pessimo-fesea∣nnines in homerm Damenw cautat absaniss mes: Hao∣casit Has. Har. Illa. Diabole, Diclo le, salta huc, salta illue; Aliera, lude hic, bade illic; Alie, Sabaath, Sabaath. &c. , si∣bilo, vlulations, po∣pysmis, furit, ac debec hatur: pul∣uer , el veaenis accepto qu homi∣nil as, peoudibusque spargart. Hoo! At thy rising againe, thou shalt haue two, And if thou dost what, we would haue thee doe, Thou shalt haue three, thou shalt haue foure, Thou shalt haue ten, thou shalt haue a score. Hoo. Har. Har. Hoo! 8 CHARME. ACloud of pitch, a Spurre, and a Switch,
To hast him away, and a whirle wind play, Before, and after, with thander for laughter, And stormes for ioy, of the roaring Boy; His head of a Drake, his tayle of a nake. 9. CHARME. About, about, and about, Till the mist arise, and the lightes fly out, The Images neither be seene, nor felt; The wollen burne, and the waxen melt; Sprinkle your liquors vpon the ground, And into the ayre; around, around. Around, around, Around, around, Nor do they want Musiqu, & in strange manner giuen them by the Diuel, if we credit their confessions in Rovig. Daem. lib. 1. cap. 19. Such as the Sybenan Quires were, which Athenaeus remembers out of Clearchus, Deipnos. lib. 15. where euery one sung what he would, without hearkeing to his fellow; like the noise of diuerse Oares, falling in the water. But be patient of Remigius relation. Mi∣ris modu illie miscentur, acurbanture omnia, nec vlla oratione satis expri queat, quam strepant sonis inconditu, absur∣dis, as discrepaniobus. Canit hic Damon ad tibiam, vel verties ad contuns, out baculam aliqu, quod fertè humire pertum bucca ceu tibiam admouct. Ille pro lyra equi caluariam pussat, ac digitis conerepat. Alius fuste vel clauâgra miore quercum undat, vnde exauditur sonus, ac boaties veluts tympntrum vehementius pulsatorum. Intercinunt ran∣de, & composite ad litui morem clangore Daemones; ipsumque coelnm fragosa aridaque voes ferin. Till a Musique sound, And the pase be found, To which we may daunce, And our Charmes aduance. AT which, with a strange, & sodayne Musique they fell into a The manner also of their Dan∣cing is confest in m. lib. 2. cap. 4. And Remig. lib. 1. cap. 17. and 18. The Sum of which M. Philippo. Lud. Elich relates thus, in his Damonom. Quast. 10. Tripis∣dijs interdum inter satit sacie liborâ & apertâ, interdum obducta laru. i, lin∣teo, ortice, reticulo, poplo vel alio vela∣mine, ant fanari excermculo inuolieta. And a little after. Omnta fiunt ritu absurdissino, & ab mni consisetudine hominum alienissimo, dosis inus cem abuersis, & in orbem iunctis nanibus, saitando circumeant, perinde sua iactantes capita, vt qui oestro agitantur. Remigiu addes out of the confession of Sibilla Morelia, Gyrum semper in laeuam progreds. which Plinte obsernes in the Priests of Cybele, Nas. Hist. lib. 28. cap. 2. and to be done with great religion. Bodm addes, that they vse broomes in their hands, with which we arm'd our Witches; and here we leaue them. Magical Daunce, full of praeposterous change, and gesticulation, but most applying
to their property: who at their meetings, do all things contrary to the custome of Men, dauncing back to back, and hip to hip, their hands ioin'd, and making their circles backward, to the left hand, with strange phantastique motions of their heads, and bodyes. All which were excellently imitated by the maker of the Daunce, M. Hierome Herne, whose right it is here to be named. IN the heat of their Daunce, on the sodaine, was heard a sound of loud Musique, as if many instruments had made one blast; with which, not onely the Haggs themselues, but the Hell, into which they ranne, quite vanished, and the whole face of the Scene altred, scarse suffering the memory of such a thing: But in the place of it, appeared a glorious, and magnificent Building, figuring the House of Fame, in the top of which, were discouered the twelue Masquers, sitting vpon a Throne triumphall, erected in forme of a Pyramide, and circled with all store of light. From whom a Person, by this time descended, in the furniture of Perseus, and, expres∣sing herotque, and masculine Vertue, began to speake.
HEROIQVE VERTVE. SO should, at FAMES loud sound, and VERTVES sight, All darke, and enuious Witcheraft fly the light. The An∣ient, expressed a raue and mas∣tuline Ʋertus in three figures (Of ercules, Perseus, & Beilerophon,) Of which wee choose hat of Perseus, arm'd as wee haue describd him, out of Hestod. Soute. Here See Appol. dor, the Gramma. an. lib. 2. de Per∣see. I did not borrow Hermes wings, nor aske His crooked sword, nor put on Pluto's caske, Nor on mine arme, aduanc'd wise Pallas shield, (By which, my face auers'd, in open field I slew the Gorgon) for an empty name: VVhen Vertue cut off Terror, he gat Fame. And, if when Fame was gotten, Terror dy'de, VVhat black Erynnis, or more Hellish pride, Durst arme these Hags, now she is grown, and great, To thinke they could her glories once defeat? I was her Parent, and I am her Strength. Heroique Vertue sinkes not vnder length Of Yeares, or Ages; but is still the same, VVhile he preserues, as when he got good Fame. My Daughter, then, whose glorious House you see Built all of sounding brasse, whose Columnes bee Men-making Poets, and those well made Men, VVhose strife it was, to haue the happiest pen Renowne them to an after-life, and not VVith pride, to seorne the Muse, and dye forgot; She, that inqureth into all the world, And leath, about her vaulted Palace, hoorld All rumors and reports, or true, or vaine, VVhat vtmost Lands, or deepest Seas containe; (But onely hangs great actions on her file) She, to this lesser world, and greatest Ile, To night sounds Honor which she would haue seene In yond' bright Beuie, each of them a Queene.
Eleuen of them are of times, long gone. Penthesilea, the braue Amazon, Swift-foote Camilla, Queene of Volscia, Victorious Thomyris of Scythia, Chast Artemifia the Carian Dame, And faire-hayr'd Beronice, Aegypts fame. Hypsicratea, glory of Asia, Candace, pride of Aethiopia. The Brittanne honor, Voadicea, The vertuous Palmyrene, Zenobia, The wise, and warlike Goth, Amalafunta, And bold Valasca, of Bohemia. These, in their liues, as fortunes, crown'd the Choyce Of VVoman-kind, and gainst all opposite voyce Made good to Time, had after death, the clame To liue aeternis'd in the House of Fame. VVhere hourely hearing (as, what there is old?) The glories of BEL-ANNA so well told, Queene of the Ocean; How, that she alone Possest all vertues, for which One by One They were so fam'd; And, wanting then a head To forme that sweet, and gracious Pyramede Wherein they sit, it being the sou'raigne place Of all that Palace, and reseru'd to grace The worthtest Queene: These, without enuy', on her, In life, desir'd that honor to conferre, Which, with their death, no other should enioy. She this embracing with a vertuous ioy, Farre from selfe-loue, as humbling all her worth, To him that gaue it, hath againe brought forth Their Names to memory; and meanes, this night, To make them once more visible to light:
And to that light, from whence her truth of Spirit Confesseth all the lustre of her merit. To you, most royall, and most happy King, Of whome, Fames house, in euery part, doth ring For euery Vertue; But can giue no' increase: Not, though her loudest Trumpet blaze your Peace. To you, that cherish euery great Example Contracted in your selfe; and being so ample A Feild of Henor, cannot but embrace A Spectacle, so full of loue, and grace Vnto your Court: where euery Princely Dame Contends to be as bounteous of her Fame To others, as her Life was good to her. For, by their Liues, they onely did confer Good on themselues; but, by their Fame, to yours, And euery Age, the benefit endures. HEre, the Throne wherein they sate, being Machi∣na versatilis, sodainly chang'd; and in the place of it appear'd Fama Bona, as she is describ'd (in Iconolog. di Cesare Ripa) attir'd in white, with white wings, hauing a collar of gold about her neck, and a heart hanging at it: which Orus Apollo, in his Hierogl. interprets the note of a good Fame. In her right hand, she bore a Trompet, in her left an Oliue branch: And for her State, it was, as Aeneid. 4. Virgil describes her, at the full, her feet on the ground, and her head in the cloudes. She, after the Musique had done, which wayted on the turning of the Machine, cal'd from thence, to Vertue, and spake this following speech.
FAME. VIrtue, my Father, and my Honor; Thou That mad'st mee good, as great; And dar'st auow No Fame, for thine, but what is perfect: Ayde, To night, the triumphes of thy white-wing'd Mayde. Do those renowned Queenes all vimost rites Their States can aske. This is a Night of nightes. In mine owne Chariots let them, crowned, ride; And mine owne Birds, and Beastes in geeres appli de To draw them forth. Vnto the first Carre tye Farre-sighted Eagles, to note Fames sharpe eye. Vnto the second; Griffons, that designe Swiftnesse and Strength, two other gifts of mine. Vnto the last, our Lyons, that implye The top of graces, State, and Maiesty. And let those Haggs be led as captiues, bound Before their wheeles, whilst I my trumpet sound. AT which, the loud Musique sounded, as before; to giue the Masquers time of descending. And here, wee cannot but take the opportunity, to make some more particular description of their Scene, as also of the Persons they presented; which, though they were dis∣posed rather by chance, then election, yet is it my part to iustifie them all: And then, the Lady that will owne her Presentation may. To follow, therefore the, rule of Chronologie, which I haue obseru'd in my verse, the most vpward
in time was PENTHESILEA. She was Queene of the Amazons, & succeeded Otrera, or (as some wil) Orithya; she liu'd, and was present, at the warre of Troy on their part, against the Greekes, and (ass Iustine giues her te∣stimony) Inter fortissimos viros, magna eius virtutis do∣cumenta extitere. She is no where nam'd, but with the preface of honor, and vertue; and is alwaies aduanced in the head of the worthiest Women. Hist. lib. 2. Dodorus Sculus makes her the Daughter of Mars. She was ho∣nord in her death to haue it the act of Achilles. Of which Lib. 3. Eleg. 10. Propertius sings this Triumph to her beauty. Aureacui postquam nudauit cassida frontem, Vicit victorem candida forma virum. Next, followes CAMILLA, Queene of the Volscians, celebrated by Aend. Lib. 7. Virgil, then whose verses nothing can bee imagin'd more exquisite, or more honouring the person they describe. They are these, where hee reckons vp those, that came on Turnus his part, a∣gainst Aeneas. Hos super aduenit Volsca de gente Camilla, Agmen agens equitum, & florenteis aere cateruas, Bellatrix. Non illa colo, calathisue Mineruae Femineas assueta manus, sed praelia virgo Dura pati, cursuque pedum praeuertere ventos. Illa vel intactae segetis per summa volaret Gramina, nec teneras cursu laesisset aristas: Vel mare per medium. fluctu suspensa tumenti, Ferretiter, celereis nec tingeret aequore plantas. And afterward tels her attire. and Armes, with the ad∣miration, that the Spectators had of her. All which if the Poet created out of himselfe, without Nature, he
hee did but shewe, how much so diuine a Soule could exceed her. The third liu'd in the age of Cyrus, the great Persian Mo∣narch; and made him leaue to liue. THOMYRIS, Queene of the Scythians, or Massagets. A Herone of a most in∣uincible, & vnbroken fortitude. Who, when Cyrus had inuaded her, and, taking her onely sonne (rather by trechery, then warre, as shee obiected) had slaine him; not touch'd with the griefe of so great a losse, in the iuster comfort shee tooke of a greater reuenge, pursued not onely the occasion, and honour of conquering so potent an Enemy, with whom fell two hundred thou∣sand Souldiers: but (what was right memorable in her victory) left not a Messenger suruiuing, of his side to report the massacre. She is remembred both by In Cho. He∣rodotus and Epit. lib. 1. Iustine, to the great renowne, and glory of her kinde: with this Elogie. Quod potentissimo Per∣forum Monarchae bello congressa est, ipsamque & vita & eastris spoliuit, ad iustè vlciscendam filij eius indignissi∣mam mortem. The fourth was honer'd to life in the time of Xerxes, and present at his great expedition into Greece; ARTR∣MISIA, the Queene of Caria: whose vertue In Poly. Herodotus, not without some wonder, records. That, a Woman, a Queene, without a husband, her sonne a ward, and shee administring the gouernement, occasion'd by no necessity, but a meere excellence of spirit, should em∣baique herselfe for such a Warre; and there, so to be∣haue her, as Xerxes beholding her fight, should say: Herod. is Vrania. Viri quidem extiterunt  feminae, feminae autem vtri.
She is no lesse renowned for her chastity, and loue to her Husband, Mausolus, Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 6. and A G.l. b. 10. cap. 18. whose bones (after hee was dead) shee preseru'd in ashes, and drunke in wine making herselfe his Tombe: and, yet, built to his me∣mory a Monument, deseruing a place among the seuen wonders of the World, which could not be done by lesse then a wonder of Women. The fifth was the faire-hair'd daughter of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, by the elder Arsinoe; who, maried to her brother Ptolmaeus, surnamed Euergetes, was after Queene of Egypt. I find her written both BERONICE, & BERENICE. This Lady, vpon an expedition of her new wedded Lord into Assyria, vowed to Venus, if hee re∣turn'd safe, and conquerer, the offering of her haire; which vow of hers (exacted by the successe) she after∣ward perform'd: But, her Father missing it, and there∣with displeas'd, Conon, a Mathematician, who was then in household with Ptolomaee, and knew well to flatter him, perswaded the king that it was ta'ne vp to heauen, and made a Constellation; shewing him those seuen Starres, ad caudam Leonis, which are since called Coma Beronices. Which story, then presently celebrated by Callimachus, in a most elegant Poeme, Catullus more elegantly cōuer∣ted; wherin they cal her the Magnanimous, euen from a Vir∣gin: alluding (as Astrono. lib. 2. in Leo. Hyginus sayes) to a rescue she made of her Father in his flight, and restoring the courage and honour of his army, euen to a victory. Their words are Catul. de Coma Berni. Cognoram à parua virgine magnanimam. The sixth, that famous wife of Mithridates, and Queene of Pontus, HYPSICRATEA, no lesse an exam∣ple of vertue then the rest; who so loued her husband,
as shee was assistant to him in all labors, and hazards of the warre, in a Masculine habite. For which cause (as Lib 4. cap. 6. de Amor. conug. Valerius Maximus obserues) shee departed with a chiefe ornament of her beauty. Tonsis enim capillis, e∣quo se et armis assuefecit, quo facilius laboribus & periculis eius interesset. And, afterward, in his flight from Pom∣pey, accompanied his misfortune, with a minde, and bo∣dy equally vnwearied. She is solemnely registred, by that graue Author, as a notable president of Mariage∣loyaltie, and loue: vertues, that might raise a meane person to equality with a Queene; but a Queene to the state, and honour of a Deity. The seuenth, that renowne of Aethiopia, CANDA∣CE: from whose excellencie, the succeeding Queenes of that Nation were ambitious to be called so. A woman, of a most haughty spirit against Enemies, and a singu∣lar affection to her Subiects. I finde her celebrated by Hist. Rom. lib. 54. Dion, and Nat. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 29. Plinie, inuading Egypt in the time of Augu∣stus; who, though she were enforc'd to a peace by his Lieutenant Petronius, doth not the lesse worthily hold her place here; when, euery where, this Elogie remaines of her Fame: That she was Maximi animi multer, tanti∣que in suos meriti, vt omnes deinceps Aethiopum reginae eius nomine fuerint appellatae. She gouern'd in Meroe. The eight, our owne honor, VOADICEA, or BOO∣DICEA; By some BVNDVICA, and BVNDVCA: Queene of the Iceni. Apople, that inhabited that part of our Iland which was called East-anglia, and compre∣hended, Suffolke, Norfolke, Cambridge, and Huntington Shires. Since she was borne here at home, we will first
honor her with a home borne testemony; from the graue and diligent Reuno of Time. Spenser. — Bundoca Britonesse, Bunduca, that victorius Conqueresse, That, lifting vp her braue Heroique thought Boue womans weaknesse, with the Romans sought; Fought, and in field against them thrice preuaild: &c. To which, see her Orations in story, made by Annal. lib 14. Ta∣citus, and Ey lo. Xiph . in Nor. Dion: wherin is expressed all magnitude of a spirit, breathing to the libertie and redemption of her Country. The later of whom, doth honest her beside, with a particular description. Bunduica, Britanica fe∣mina, or ta stirpe regia, quae non solum eis cum magna dig∣nitate praefuit, sed etiam bellum omne administrauit; cuius aninius virilis, potius quā muliebris crat. And afterwards, Femina, forma honestissima, vuliu seuero, &c. All which doth waigh the more to her true praise, in comming from the mouthes of Romanes, and Enemies. Shee liu'd in the time of Nero. The ninth, in time, but equall in same, and (the cause of it) vertue, was the chast ZENOEIA, Queene of the Palmyrenes, who, after the death of her husband O∣denatus, had the name to be reckoned among the xxx. that vsurped the Romane Empire, from Galienus. She con∣tinued along and braue warre, against seuerall Chiefes; and was at length triumphed on by Aurelian: but, easpe∣cie, vt nihil pompabilius. P. Rom. videretur. Her Chasity was such, Vt ne virum suum quidem sciret, nisi tentatis con∣ceptionibus She liu'd in a most royall manner, and was ador'd to the custome of the Persians. When she made Orations to her souldiers, she had alwayes her caske
on A woman of a most diuine spirit, and incredible beautie. In In trigin, Ty∣rann. Trebellius Pollio, reade the most noble de∣scription of a Queene, and her; that can be vtter'd, with the dignity of an Historian. The renth, succeeding, was that learned, and Heri∣que AMALASVNTA, Queene of the Ostrogothes, Daugh∣ter to Theodorick, that obtained the principallity of Ra∣uenna and almost all Italy. She draue the Burgundians, and Almaines out of Liguria, and appear'd in her go∣uernement rather an Example, then a Second. She was the most eloquent of her Age, and cunning in all Lan∣guages, of any Nation that had cōmerce with the Ro∣mane Emptre. M. Amon. Coo Sabel. (out of Ca sied) Enmad, 7.  . It is recorded of her, that, sine venerati∣one eam viderit nemo, pro miraculo fuerit ipsam audire be∣quentem. Tantaque ill in decernendo grauitas, vt rim∣nis conuicti, cum plecterentur, nihil sibi acerbum pati vide∣rentur. The eleuenth was that braue Bohemian Queene, VA∣LASCA, who for her courage, had the surname of bold: That to redeeme her selfe and her Sexe, from the tyranny o men, which they liu'd in, vnder Primislans, on a night, & at an houre appointed, led on the womē to the slaugh∣ter of their barbarous Husbands, and Lords. And, posses∣sing themselues of their Horses, Armes, Treasure, and places of Strength, not onely ruled the rest, but liued many yeares after, with the libertie, and fortitude of A∣mazons. Celebrate a by In Geograp. lib. 7. Raphael Volaterranus, and in an elegant tract of an Italians Forcia. Qua in Latine, (who names himselfe Philalethe, Polytopiensis ciuis) inter prastantissimas faminas.
The twelu'th, and worthy Soueraigne of all I make BEL-ANNA, Royall Queene of the Ocean; of whose dig∣nity, and person the whole Scope of the Inuention doth speake throughout: which, to offer you againe here, might but proue offence to that sacred Modesty, which heares any testimony of others iterated, with more delight, then her owne praise. She being plac'd aboue the need of such ceremony, & safe in her Prince∣ly vertue, against the good, or ill, of any witnesse. The Name of BEL-ANNA I deuis'd, to honor hers proper by; as adding to it, the attribute of Fatre: And is kept by me, in all my Poemes, wherein I mention her Maiesty with any shadow, or figure. Of which, some may come forth with a longer desteny, then this Age, commonly, giues to the best Births, if but help'd to light by her gratious, and ripening fauour. But, here, I discerne a possible obiection, arising a∣gainst me; to which I must turne: As, How I can bring Persons of so different Ages, to appeare properly toge∣thers or, why (which is more vnnaturall) with Virgil's Mezentius, I ioyne the liuing with the dead? I answere to both these, at once. Nothing is more proper; No∣thing more naturall. For these all liue; and together, in their Fame: & so I present them. Besides, if I would fly to the all-daring power of Poetry, where could I not take Sanctuary? or in whose Poeme? For other obie∣ctions, let the lookes and noses of Iudges houer thick; so they bring the braines: or if they do not, I care not. When I suffer'd it to goe abroad, I departed with my right: And now, so secure an Interpreter I am of my chance, that neither praise, nor dispraise shal affect me.
There rests, only, that we giue the description (we promis'd) of the Scene, which was the House of Fame. The Structure, and Ornament of which (as is profest before) was entirely Mr. Iones his inuention, and de∣signe. First, for the lower Columnes, he chose the Sta∣tues of the most excellent Poets, as Homer, Virgil, Lucan, &c. as being the substantiall supporters of Fame. For the vpper, Achilles, Aeneas, Caesar, and those great He∣roes, which these Poets had celebrated. All which stood, as in massy gold. Betweene the Pillars, vnder∣neath, were figur'd Land-battayles, Sea-fights, Triumphs, Loues, Sacrifices, and all magnificent subiects of honor: in brasse, and heighten'd with siluer. In which, he pro∣fest to follow that noble description, made by Chaucer, of the place. Aboue were sited the Masquers, ouer whose heads he deuis'd two eminēt Figures of Honor, & Vertue, for the Arch. The Freezes, both below, & aboue, were filld with seueral-color'd lights, like Emeralds, Ru∣bies, Saphyres, Carbuncles, &c. the reflexe of which, with other lights, placed in the Concaue, vpon the Masquers habits, was full of glory. These habits had in them the excellency of all deuice, and riches; and were worthi∣ly varied by his inuention, to the Nations, whereof they were Queenes. Nor are these, alone, his due; but diuers other accessions to the strangenesse, and beauty of the Spectacle: as the Hell, the going about of the Chariots, the binding the Witches, the turning Machine, with the presentation of Fame. All which I willingly acknow∣ledge for him: since it is a vertue, planted in good na∣tures, that what respects they wish to obtaine fruitful∣ly from others, they will giue ingenuously themselues. By this time, imagine the Masquers descended; and
againe mounted into three triumphant Chariots, ready to come forth. The first foure were drawne with Ea∣gles, (whereof I gaue the reason, as of the rest, in Fames speech) their foure Torchbearers, attending on the Cha∣riot sides, and foure of the Hagges, bound before them. Then followed the second, drawne by Griffons, with their Torch-bearers, and foure other Hagges. Then the last, which was drawne by Lyons, and more eminent; (wherein her Maiesty was) and had sixe Torch-bearers more, (peculiar to her) with the like number of Haggs. After which, a full triumphant Musique, singing this Song, while they rode, in State, about the stage. SONG. Hlpe, helpe all tongues, to celebrate this wonder: The voice of FAME should be as ld as thonder. Her House is all of echo made, Where neuer dyes the sound; And, as her browes the cloudes inuade, Her feete do strike the ground. Sing then good Fame, that's out of Vertue borne: For, who doth Fame neglect, doth Vertue scone. Here they lighted from their Charits, and daunc'd forth their first Daunce; then a second, immediatly follo∣wing it: both right curious, and full of subtile and ex∣cellent changes, and seem'd perform'd with no lesse spirits, then of those they personated. The first was to the Cornets, the second to the Vyolenes. After which,
they tooke out the men, and daunc'd the Measures; en∣tertaining the time, almost to the space of an houre, with singular variety: when, to giue them rest, from the Musique which attended the Chariots, by that most ex∣cellent tenor voyce, and exact singer (her Maiesties ser∣uant, M. Io. Allin) this Ditty was song. SONG. VVHen all the Ages of the earth Were crown'd, but in this famous Birth; And that, when they would boast their store Of worthy Queenes, they knew no more: How happier is that Age, can giue A Queene, in whom all they do liue! After it, succeeded their third Daunce; then which, a more numerous composition could not be seene: Gra∣phically disposed into Letters, & honouring the Name of the most sweete and ingenious Prince, Charles, Duke of Yorke. Wherein, beside that principall grace of per∣spicuity, the Motions were so euen and apt, and their expression so iust; as if Mathematicians had lost Proporti∣on, they might there haue found it. The Author was M. Tho. Giles. After this, they daunc'd Galliards, and Cor∣rantos. And then their last Daunce, no lesse elegant (in the place) then the rest. with which they tooke their Chariots againe, and triumphing about the Stage, had their returne to the House of Fame celebrated with this last Song; whose Notes (as the former) were the worke, and honor of my excellent friend, Alfonso errabosco.
SONG. WHo, Virtue, can thy power forget, That sees these liue, and triumph yet? Th' Assyrian pompe, the Persian pride, Greekes glory, and the Romans dy'de: And who yet imitate Their noyses, tary the same fate. Force Greatnesse ad the glorious wayes You can, it soone decayes; But so good Fame shall neuer: Her Triumphs, as their causes, are for euer. To conclude which, I know no worthier way of Epi∣logue, then the celebration of who were the Celebra∣ters. The QVEENES MAIESTY. The Co. of ARVNDELL. The Co. of DERBY. The Co. of HVNTINGTON. The Co. of BEDFORD. The Co. of ESSEX. The Co. of MONTGOMERY. The Vico. CRANBORNE. The La. EL. GVILFORD. The La. ANNE WINTER. The La. WINDSORE. The La. ANNE CLIFFORD. The end.
