18422.5 S103524 99839276 176889
The blessed state of England. DECLARING THE SVNDRIE DAN∣GERS VVHICH BY GODS assistance, the QVEENES most excellent Maiestie hath escaped in the whole course of her life. With her singular vertues and peaceable gouernment. VVherein is also shewed how greatly foraine Nations doe admire and wonder thereat, to∣gether with the rare titles of Commendation which the great Emperor of the Turkes lately sent in his Letters to her Highnesse. printer's or publisher's device Printed for VVilliam VVright. 1591.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAIOR OF THE CITIE of London, and to the right worshipfull his bre∣thren, the Aldermen of the same Citie, Thomas Nelson wisheth happines in this life with increase of honour. CAlling to minde (right Honora∣ble and VVorshipfull) the mani∣fold blessings which it hath plea∣sed almightie God to bestowe v∣pon this realme of Englande, wherein he hath not only placed his most sacred & ho∣ly worde, but also giuen vs a most gracious, vertuous and peerelesse princes, the queens most excellent Maiestie, to be the defender and supporter of the same: who by hir sin∣gular wisedom together with hir godly care and Christian gouernment, this land is bles∣sed with an vnspeakeable peace and plenty. VVhich great & vnspeakable blessings, whē I had thorowly considered and plainly per∣ceaued that this lande onely inioyeth them for hir highnes sake, whom he hath wonder∣fully
defended from the wicked practises and intentes of sundrie her enemies. I tooke vpon me to publish this short and pi∣thie Discourse, partly to make knowne to all hir maiesties well disposed subiectes, the louing kindnes of almightie God towards hir, the loue and affection which forreine princes beare hir, and how much the verie heathen do admire at hir proceedings, and therewithall, giuing hir such honorable and due titles of commendatiōs as neuer prince nor potentate hath had the like. This Dis∣course, right Honorable and VVorshipfull, although I haue not handled it so rhetori∣cally as many more learneder than my selfe, might haue performed it, yet I humbly be∣seech your Lordship and VVorships to ac∣cept it in good sort at my hands as it is, yel∣ding my selfe wholy to your graue censures, who I trust will wey my well meaning in the ballance of your accustomed curtesies. For whom I hartely pray vnto God to send you a happie and prosperous newe yeare & ma∣ny to his good pleasure.
A rare and due Commendation of the singular vertues and gouernment of the Queenes most excellent Maiestie: with the blessed estate of England. And how God hath blessed her Highnes from time to time. WHO so considereth the state of this lande from the birth daie of the Quéenes most excellent Maiestie e∣uen to this present time, may easilie perceiue the great and vnspeakable goodnes of almightie God towardes this small Iland, how he hath in the same time brought many wonderfull things to passe, yea it appeareth, that his intent was then to perform in her (as he hath since done) a most rare worke and full of im∣possibilitie. And that his mightinesse, his loue, his care, his wonders, and his mercifull prouidence, might cléere∣ly shew forth, and bee euidently séene in her, notwith∣standing all the practises, force and mightines of her e∣nemies. Who were like many times since to haue pre∣uailed against her, had not God of his gracious goodnes and power, mightilie and miraculously defended her. And here if wee consider the ground worke of Gods blessinges prefigured in her Highnes, it appeareth verie euident, that first he did in her insancie adorne her with
all maner of vertues, such as none might compare with all. And thereunto gaue her the spirit of true knowledge and vnderstanding of his truth, with a zealous desire to search the Scriptures, and to haue a full intelligence in the knowledge and difference of tongues, that she might the better defend and maintaine the truth, if euer shee might come to that dignitie whereunto she was succes∣siuely borne. Thus in her young and tender yéeres it pleased God to call awaie King Henrie the eight of most famous me∣mory, and after his death gaue vnto vs the most Christi∣an king Edward the sixt, who lawfully succéeded in the roome of his deceased father, but such was the vnthank∣fulnes of the people at that time, that the most parte of them desired to follow strange Gods, & to worship them with superstition and idolatrie, and vtterly reiected the sincere and true religion of Iesus Christ, maintained and publikely administred, and allowed by that most Christian and godly king. But in respect of this their vnthankefulnesse, it plea∣sed God sodainly to withdrawe the light of his truth from the generall multitude of them, by taking awaie the saide Christian king: and in stead of his truth and Christian religion (then sodainly abolished) he sent them blinde guides to maintaine and nusle them in Popish and superstitions idolatrie, giuing them a Prince that allowed thereof, and stirred vp many tyrants and tor∣mentors to slaie, persecute and slaunder the true profes∣sors of Gods truth. Then were the true professours of his worde tried lyke siluer in the furnace, and the dayes of bloudshed of Christians dailie séene. Then were the blessed Saints of God constrained to liue in caues, dens, desarts, déepe dungeons, and vnwholesome places, yea, then what Gaile or prison in this lande was not filled with the true professours of Gods truth, and dailie con∣demned and burned with fire and faggots? Then blou∣die
Bonner, Gardner, and Iohn a Vailes, and a number of tyrants tormented and persecuted sundrie godlie per∣sons, as Cranmer, Ridley, Lattimer, Bradford, Philpot, Rogers, and a number of learned and godly preachers, and neuer lefte them vntill they had consumed their bo∣dies to ashes. Then began the troubles of the Quéenes most excellent Maiestie that now is, who bearing the ti∣tle and name of Ladie Elizabeth, was vehemently su∣spected to be a fauourer of true religion, so that Stephen Gardener then Bishop of Winchester, and Bishop Bon∣ner then Bishop of London, did together complot and practise meanes to procure the death of her Maiestie. And thereupon in time hoping they should find meanes to cause the losse of her head, got her to bee sent to the to∣wer of London in a Barge like a traitor, and there loc∣ked vp close prisoner, where she was straightly watched, subtilly examined, and déeply charged with heresie and blasphemie. Then were her seruants put from her, and the cruellest persons thought most méetest for the straite kéeping of her person, where though continuall teares issued forth in abundance from her princely eies, and she found innocent in things wherwith she was dayly char∣ged, yet could shee not haue anie fauour for her release∣ment. In all which time of her troubles, shee endured a number of crosses, being somtime taken forth of her bed when she was in great daunger of death, and suffered a number of such like iniuries, and although it were grie∣uous to her being a Prince, yet did her Highnes endure them with so great patience, that euen in her deepest so∣row, shee would rather sigh and desire the libertie of the Gospell, than in anie sorte to wish or desire her owne re∣leasement or fréedome. But from the tower of London, after many examinations before her enemies, and cruel threatninges by her sharpe and tyrnnous kéepers, shee was closely connaied to Woodstocke, where she continu∣ed in great griefe, calling vpon God, & did onely put her trust in him, and perswaded her selfe, that hee knowing
her innocencie in those things wherewith she was dailie yet wrongfully charged, would doubtles in time deliuer her from the snares and wicked intents of her mightie aduersaries. Thus after three yeeres imprisoment, in which time she was had in greate disgrace, it pleased God to looke vpon her with his mercifull eies, and caused queene Marie her sister to send for her foorth of prison, for which great signe of loue and fauour at Gods hand, she gaue humble thankes to God in deliuering her from the handes of her mightie and capitall aduersaries, who during her imprisonment, would verie subtilly examine her, where her inferiors would triumph ouer her, wher her foes would threaten her, and her disembling friends would dailie vndermine her. Thus Almightie God ha∣uing deliuered her in pittie, did also take compassion v∣pon this distressed land, and as well to shew his merci∣full comfort to his afflicted Church and members of the same, as also to make his louing power and kindnes to shine forth vpon her maiestie, did by death call awaie quéene Marie, and immediatly appointed our most gra∣cious Ladie Elizabeth to the inheritance of the crowne and diadem of England. Thus was her most princelie maiestie called from a prisoner to be a prince, from the possession of a castle, to the inheritance of a crowne, and from feare of loosing her head, to bee entituled the su∣preame head. Thus was her Highnes proclaimed the lawful quéene of England, afterward crowned to the greate ioye of all her louing subieets and well willers, who shewed great signes of loue and obedience to her maiestie, adorning the stréetes in the Citie of London in her iourney to∣wards Westminster, with pageants, shewes and tri∣umphs of great cost, yea they caused the Conduits in the Citie to runne with pure wine, and nothing was omit∣ted that might be done to shew their ioyfull hearts. Great was her Highnes clemencie when shee was
come to the crowne, she preterred pitty and peace before rigor & reuenge, by séeking to spare their bloud, which before sought to spill hers. Since the time of whose most prosperous and happie raigne, the kingdome of England hath ben blessed of the Lord: it hath abounded with wealth, plentie and peace, Popish idolatrie is now banished, and the true & sincers word of God is freely preached among vs to our euerla∣sting comfort. By her and through her wee are all bles∣sed: her procéedings are godly, and her administration of iustice most commendable: her lawes are snaffles vnto the wicked, and guides to the godly: wisedome, pollicie and good gouernment brideleth all manner of broiles which follie would daily bréede and bring in for the con∣fusion and ouer throw of her Maiestie and this lande, a∣gainst whom neither foraine force nor ciuill fraude, nei∣ther discorde at home nor conspiracies abroade could at anie time auaile. O blessed peace, O happie Prince and fortunate peo∣ple, the God of Abraham is Englands God, in the midst of whom he hath placed peace which bringeth all plen∣tie for the sake of a virgin quéene, who with a wand ru∣leth her owne subiects, and with her worthines winneth the good will of all straungers, she that is no lesse graci∣ous among her owne nation, than glorious to others, nor anie lesse beloued of her subiectes then meruailed at in other kingdomes: the fame of whose happines, peace and tranquilitie runneth into all partes of the world, in to euerie foraine nation and heathen kingdome, yea, e∣uen to the court and pallaces of the mightie and great Emperour of the Turkes: among whom generallie her Highnes is wonderfully seared and greatly loued. For proofe wherof that her Highnes is wondered at, spoken of, and highly reuerenced in the Court of the great Turke and else where, let the rare titles which that hea∣then Emperour hath adorned her Maiestie withall in his late letters sent into England beare witnes hereof.
The most Honorable and rare titles which the Emperiall Musulmanlike great Em∣perour of the Turkes, named Zuldan Murad Chan, lately sent in his Letters to the queenes most excellent maiestie. To the most sacred and regall Maiestie of Eliza∣beth Queene of England. Most glorious, and in brightnes most splendant wo∣man, and of women the choisest, prince of the migh∣tie followers of Iesus, quéene of the famous king∣dome of Englande, most excellent Ladie, most sapi∣ent gouernesse of all the causes and affaires of the peo∣ple and family of the Nazarites, the most honourable quéene of Christendome, the most pleasant spring of cléerenes and glorie, the most acceptable cloude of sweete showers, the Ladie and heire of the perpetuall blessednes and happines of the flourishing kingdome of Englande, to whome all distressed suters doe flocke for succour and releefe. We wishing from God the creatour a most fortunate increase and successe to your maiesties causes and affaires, and offering eternall praises and vowes, worthie of mutuall and perpetuall familiaritie and league, &c. And vnderneath, the ende of the same letter, containing matters onely appertaining vnto princes: and therefore omitted. It is thus sub∣scribed. Euen in our Royall palace of Constantinople, the twelfth day of Iune in the yeare of Iesus one thou∣sande siue hundred foure score and tenne. And of our great prophet Mahomet nine hundred foure score and eightéene, in the ende of the moneth Saban. These titles of great honour plainely sheweth, that her maiestie is more spoken of in the Courtes both
of Christian and Heathen princes, and more seared and beloued than euer prince that liued in this lande. What Christian prince, hath at any time had Ambas∣sage from the great Turke but onely hir highnes, or hath had so many Ambassadours together as her ma∣iestie hath receaued, and at one time intertained with great honour in her owne Courtes? I am of that mind that there hath not bene anie. And although England be but an Iland of small compasse, yet such is the bles∣sing of God vpon the same, that happie is that region and commonwealth, that nation, that king, that kin∣dome, that prouince or countrie, that is in league v∣nitie, friendship, loue and amitie with the quéenes ma∣iestie of England. If the mightie Emperour of the Turkes, doe him∣selfe in this sort loue and honour her highnes, and all o∣ther Christian princes, desire mutuall agréement with her (except such whome God hath blinded with selfe loue) howe muche then are naturall borne subiectes bounde in dutie to reuerence her, yea and to pray for her long life by whome onely they liue in such happie and peaceable estate. This peace the Lord of his good∣nesse hath continued with great and vnspeakeable mer∣cie among vs his chosen people of Englande since the time of hir maiesties reigne, whereby we are greatly bound to praise God for such a prince by whom we en∣ioy al the benefits of peace, hauing our barnes ful while other famish, our coffers stuft while others are emptie and our houses furnished when others are fired. This peace God hath giuen vs only for her vertues: & which we ought hartely to pray that it will please God still to continue the same among vs for his mercies same. O fortunate England that hast so famous a quene, we are vngratefull if we pray not for her, we are wicked if we loue not her, & most miserable whensoeuer we loose her.
Her Maiestie is a stranger and altogether vnknown vnto the great Turke, & yet Fame which telleth truth al the world ouer, hath made her name, her vertues, her wisedome, her iudgement and iustice verie sufficientlie knowen vnto him. In respect whereof hee hath offered that to aide, assist, and pleasure her maiestie, all neces∣sarie things ordered and prepared in his porte, shall bee spéedily dispatched and in readines at her Highnesse pleasure, to defende her agaynst anie enemie what∣soeuer. With promise of assurance not to doubte thereof. It is a rare thing to sée a heathen Prince professe and vowe to perfourme matter of so greate a moment vnto a Christian Prince. A thing neuer read of in auncient Chronicles, nor heard of vntill this time, and were it not that it is the wonderfull and vndoubted wil and prouidence of almightie God, it coulde neuer haue come to passe, neither is it to bée thought other wise, but that the secrete worke of God by her maiestie may bee such as may be some occasion heereafter of the Turkes conuersion, which the Lord graunt may spéedilie come to passe. What greater meruaile hath euer happened since the worlde beganne, then to see a maiden queene go∣uerne in peace so valiant and strong a people, yea, and to make all nations and people in the worlde to ad∣mire, honour and loue her, and her selfe to liue in the fa∣uour of almightie God (in despight of them that wishe her spoile) with her swoord in her sheath, her armour in the tower, with hir souldiers in their houses, and her coine in her coffers: readie to defende the inuading ene∣mie whensoeuer he shall finde himselfe readie to offend the weakest parte of her dominions, which at this daie in all foraine partes is called the most happiest king∣dome.
England is the iuell and flower of bountie, peace, plentie and welth, yea it is the principallest place for a∣nie man to liue in throughout the whole worlde. What else maketh the strangers to flacke so fast to Englande? thinke you it is only for religion? no I warrāt you, there is of them as there is of our owne nation, manie godly professors, true Protestantes, some Papistes, some A∣theists, some Iacke a both sides, some Anabaptists and what not? So that in truth it is the ease, the welth, the peace, the safetie and security of England, both for their liues and gods that brings them hither in such aboun∣dance. Is not England, thinke you, most happie and blessed that féeles no parte of the afflictions which other king∣doms, princes, & nations do daily endure? We liue at li∣bertie voide of feare, so as we obserue hir Maiesties lawes: we liue with fréedome of conscience, which thou∣sands of thousands wants, we haue the truth daily prea∣ched among vs, we safely reape the corne from the ground, which is yearely sowne. Here mercie and mild∣nes reignes euerie day together, & euerie man possesseth his owne withquiet. Here no taxes are imposed vpon the people as in other countries, where they can not haue a pot of English béere, but they are taxed for it to∣wards the maintenance of warres. Here the great bles∣sings of God appeares, vpon our ground in our hearbs, our fruites, our selues, our children, our cattell, and in all other things appertaining to vs whatsoeuer. Contrariwise, other countries round about vs, espe∣cially France and the seauentéene Prouinces, are grée∣uously distressed and oppressed with ciuill warres, mu∣tinies, tumults, rowts, riots and all manner of things that may stirre vp mischiefs, which end with bloud and death, this worketh the ouerthrow of euery well gouer∣ned estate, and wil be the vtter coonfusion of those coun∣tries and kingdoms, if God do not in his mercie spéedely
bring so passe some wayes and meanes for the repres∣sing thereof. Their fieldes are filled with Campes, whilest ours are quietly bringing foorth corne, they are mustering their men in harnesse, whilest that we in quiet are reaping our haruest. Englande vseth their peeces to fowle for pleasure, when in other countries they vse them for feare of perill. Who so euer he be that con∣sidereth the troubles which they daily tast of, their con∣tinuall dangers and daily vnquietnesse, which they from time to abide, will say no lesse but that their case is most miserable. Howe wonderfully hath the Lorde blessed this lande with aboundance and plentie of all manner of things, as no nation in Christendome may compare with vs, we haue first the blessings of almightie God, we haue golde and siluer, mynes of tinne and lead, iron, stéele, copper, brasse, and for wooll and cloth, what coun∣trie may compare with Englande, we haue quarries of stone, quicke siluer, sulpher, blacke lead, allome, ortment, vermillion, copperas, salt peeter, sea coale, chare coale and great store of all manner of woode and fuell, trées, fruites, saffron, fowle, fishe, deare, shéepe, rabbits, béefes, bullocke. Of lether, butter, chéese and corne, the Lorde hath sent vs aboundance, and in so great aboundance as no nation hath greater plentie or may equally compare with vs. Besides all these, the Royall Nauie and generall shipping of this lande, are such as fame her selfe ma∣keth Englandes enemies to quake at the same: and this Nauie suffiseth for three seuerall purposes: the first and principallest that they are founde of sufficient strength for defense in time of warre: the seconde sorte are for burthen, and the thirde sorte for fishing: the least of all which, one for one and of equall burthen, shall bare to match any two or thrée that anie enemie
hath heretofore sent against vs. And all this were nothing, nor we in neuer the more safetie, if God who is the ouerthrower of all strength, were not the principallest proppe and piller of our safetie: but of this we are sure, that all these benefites and blessings come from God, who is the author of all goodnesse, and from whome all blessings doth procéede, and that he dai∣ly increaseth and multiplieth his blessings vppon vs onely for her maiesties sake, whome he daily defendeth and protecteth, and for whome he continually fighteth against the subtill and craftie deuises and attemptes of the enemies of God and his church, and of her highnes and this land. The gouernement of Englande is most honorable and the procéedings as honourable, yea it is vsed and ordered in suche sorte as no treasons can so secretly bee pretended, but they are soone spied out, and the prac∣tisers of them seuerely punished: resistaunce is soone had if forren power by inuasion doe pretende our hurt, the people of Englande are soone vp in armes, as was séene at Tilberie, at Harwitch, and in euerie shire in this realme of Englande at such time as the Spanishe power attempted to haue made a full conquest of this whole lande, but God gaue strength, courage and wil∣lingnes to euerie man to withstand them, yea the great goodnes and mercie of almightie God was shewed in o∣uerthrowing our enemies and deliuering vs from the vngodly intents of those bloodthirstie persecutours, here néedlesse to be recited, the same being yet fresh in euerie mans memorie. Englande is the place where all things are cheape & easily had: and in all forren nations people woonder and holde vp their handes to beholde the happie state of Englande and as well the frée as the forren doe all ad∣mire our peace and plenty. This argueth doubtlesse that God hath blessed the land, the prince, the seat & the people and
where his blessings is there wants no ioy, no blisse or hope of heauens happines, nor doubt of the long con∣tinnance thereof. England is a swéete nut incompassed in a shel which is hard to cracke, it séemeth that it crackt the teeth of the Spaniards when they came in their ships on the west of England like great rastels intending to haue deuoured the swéete nut of Gods bounties and blessings, which is the quéenes maiestie, and the states of England. England (God be thanked) is frée from such yoke, the bodie is sound and the armes are strong, I meane both the prince and the people, young and old haue sufficient courage to dant the foe and able ioints to trie our right in the field: so that England néede not doubt the power and strength of the enemy so long as we doe maintaine Gods truth, who is the grounde of Englands trust, and so long as we are carefull to please God, and to do as he hath commanded vs in his worde: we may assure our selues that he will kéepe vs from being conquered, or by our enemies to be troden vnder féete. To conclude, séeing we finde our selues so bountifully blessed, as is aforesaid, and that we liue in a more hap∣pier estate than our neighbours in forren nations, only for hir sake who is the root, branch & flower therof, foras∣much as by hir the same is like to be cōtinued, we ought earnestly to pray for hir to almighty God to continue his blessings towardes hir. The God of heauen blesse hir highnesse from all daungers, preserue and blesse hir maiesties most honorable Councell, and continue his blessings towards England for euermore. Amen. FINIS.
