24786.5 S119210 [ocm]21475284 178512
THE SECOND PART OF THE DEMO∣NIACKE VVORLDE, or worlde possessed with Diuels, contei∣ning three Dia∣logues: 1. Of Familiar Diuels. 2. Of Lunaticke Diuels. 3. Of the coniuring of Diuels. Translated out of French into En∣glish by T. S. Gentleman. ❧ Imprinted at Lon∣don for Iohn Perin, and are to bee solde in Paules Church∣yard, at the signe of the Angel. 1583.
¶ To the right worship∣ful Sir Iohn Higham, Knight, increase of al heauenly and Spirituall giftes, to the aduauncing of the glorie of God, and the benefiting of his Church: together, in∣crease of true worldly Worship here in this life, and in the world to come, perfect blisse and felicitie for euer. HAuing once purposed with my selfe (Right Worshipfull) to haue put into our Englishe tongue, certeine French Dialogues of M. Peter Viret his set∣ting forth, a man known to the world, to haue bin in his time singulerly wel learned, & very godly, and such a one, as hath published many other books, to the glory of God and benefit of his Church to all posterity to come: and being preuented of three of them, by
reason they were gotten into their En∣glish liuery, before such time as I tooke them in hād: I was therfore eftsoones driuen to bee contented, with the fini∣shing of these last three: the Dialogues are sixe in number, & by mine author intituled by a generall name, called The Demoniacke worlde: Or the world, possessed with Diuels: giuing besides, to eche Dialougue, his seuerall title al∣so, as by the reading ouer of thē, maye well appeare. The Arguments are ve∣ry pretie, and the handling of them (in my poore opinion) well worthy the reading, and both pleasant, and profi∣ble. Insomuch (Sir) as that when I hadde made an ende of these three, minding to make choyse of some sufficient Patrone whiche were of good worship, and of power able, in knowledge both in diuinity and hu∣manitie wise, and in zeale and affecti∣on, willing and forwarde about the aduancing of the glory of God, espe∣cially
in the cause of true and sounde religion, for the shielding of this my simple trauell: called to remembrance (amōgst the rest of such Gentlemen as I was acquainted withall) your wor∣ship, to whom I might addresse the same: hauing therwith this confidēce, that you will moste willingly patro∣nize and defend it. And heereuppon, humbly crauing pardon for this my boldnesse, I cease to trouble you with ouer many wordes, committing you and al yours to the tuition of the most high. Your VV. most hum∣ble in the Lord. Tho. Stocker. London the 25. of March. 1583.
The Title and Summe of the fourth Dialogue. THis fourth Dialogue is intituled, Familiar Diuels, because it maketh menti∣on of the subtleties wher∣by Sathan persecuteth the Gospel, vnder shewe of friendship and familiarity to the seruants of God. These Diuels are of the kind of those which before I called White Diuels, and therefore they may very well bee placed alike. And as for the matters here trea∣ted of in this Dialogue, there is mention made of the contradiction, that is in the Diuel, and the wicked: Of the commendation which they giue to the good to an euil end. And contrari∣wise, how they discommend and dishonour al such as praise and honour Christ, his seruants, and Gospel. The manner howe the Papistes honour the Gospel, and of the true honour, or dishonour that may be done to the same. The honour that the enimies of Christian discipline doe to the Gospel, whiche they pro∣fesse
only in the lippes. The Sorceresses diuel of Philippi. The praise and commendation which the Diuel giueth to the ministery and ministers of the Gospel. The meanes wherewith the Diuel vseth to fight against the Gospel. The Diuel transfigured into an Angell of light. Of the troth which the Diuel may speake, and how we ought to iudge of the troth. Of the feigned friendship that certeine shorne hypocritical Balamites shewe vnto the go∣spel, that they might thereby hinder the course thereof. What fauourable accusations the enemies of the Gospel are woonted to vse against the true seruants of God. Of the diuers and sundry false shewes whi∣che the Diuel maketh. What good affection the wicked beare vn∣to God and good men. Of the charitie of Iudas. With what colour the mainteiners of Anti∣christ vse to colour their false religion. What iolly shiftes they haue, that glory of the profession of the Gospel, and yet followe
the old manner of Poperie. How they condemne the Gospel, before they know any cause why. The fayned friendship which the enemies of the truth vse towards Princes. What fauour the wicked find among magi∣strates. What regard Magistrates ought to haue to Backbiters & slaunderers. What greate mischiefe is ordinarily done vnto the seruantes of God. What the causes are why men cannot abide nor away with the seruantes of God. The iudgement of God for our vnthankful∣nes of despising & hating of the troth: & of the power and force of illusion and errour. What the causes are, why we rather follow lyes then trueth. The lets that hinder vs from the knowledge of the truth. What kind of men they bee, vnto whom, Iesus Christ is a teacher and a Schoolemaister. The Preseruatiues against error and false doctrine.
❧ The fourth Dialogue of the Demoniacke world, na∣med Familiar Diuels. Theophrast, Tobie, Ierome, Eustace. Theophrast. ACcording to our former talke, of those which are contēted with ye shew of ye gospel only, methinks yt if we sōwhat narrow∣ly look into their behaui¦our, we shal find thē not much vnlike to yt Demoniack, of whom S. Marke and S. Luke both make mention. Tob. How behaued he himselfe? Theo. In his behauiour, he shewed him¦selfe cleane contrary to himselfe. Tob. It is no greate maruayle if the Diuell be contrary to him selfe, but it were rather to be maruayled at, if hee The Diuel con¦trary to him∣selfe. should not be so: for that he is both a lyar, & also a deceiuer. But wherin doth he grayn∣say himselfe?
Theo. Hee called our Sauiour Christ arke 3. ike 4. the holy one of God, if he be the holy one of God, than is he come to hallow vs: & if hee become to hallow vs, he must of necessitie sus Christ  holy one of od. driue the Diuel from vs. For the Diuell is an vncleane and filthy spirite, and cleane contrary to all holinesse, and to the spirite of God, which is called holy, because it hal∣loweth, ath. 12. yet the Diuel feareth nothing so much, as to be driuen from vs, for feare we should be sanctified of Iesus Christ, whiche is the holy one of the most holy. Tob. The wicked spyrits did manifest∣ly shewe that, by the petition whiche they made to Iesus Christ, that he woulde not dryue them out of the countrey. Theo. We need to seeke for no further proofe hereof. For the Diuel desireth no∣thing so much as to entertayne vs in al fil∣thinesse and vncleannesse, to the ende that God might not be sanctified nor glorified in vs, but be more and more dishonoured and blasphemed: And therefore doeth this wicked spirite flatter Christ, giuing hym the tytle that belongeth to him. Doubtlesse hee did this for two principall causes: The first, to bring Christ in suspition, and
to diminish his glory in seeming to prayse him. The second to escape his hands by flat∣tery, that he might thereby be accompted of him, as his friend. Tob. Me thinkes this Deuill gainsay∣eth himselfe: for he desireth still to play his part, that is, to hynder vs, and yet acknow∣ledgeth Iesus Christ to be the same, which shal let him, and is purposely come into the world to the same end. Theo. Yea he flattereth Christ, there∣by to let him from executing his office, whilest hee in the meane time might playe his prankes. There are alwayes manye suche Diuels among vs. For there are ma∣ny that prayse the true ministers of GOD and good men before their faces, whō they knowe well enough to be enemyes to their vices: which they doe not, for any loue that they haue eyther to them or their vertues, (for they hate nothing more) but to get the more in fauour, and that good men should not punishe them as they deserue. Tob. They call them honest mē, because they would hinder them, from doing ye duty of honest men, & praise their vertues, to the end they should not vse them.
Theo. Indeed, thou hast hit the nayle on the head. And therfore least the seruants of God and vertuous men, should make them lyars, which so prayse them, they cannot do better then faithfully execute their charge, and shewe the duety of good men, as well towardes them, as towardes all other: euen as Iesus Christ did towardes these Diuelles, which praysed him so much. For in casting out these Diueis, he shewed in effect, both to the Diuelles and to all o∣ther, that hee was verily the holy one of GOD, and the sonne of the moste high God. Tob. Tush man, that is not it that the di∣uels and wicked ones would haue. Theo. Why, we knowe this for cer∣tayne, f those kindes mē who giue  Iesus Christ  the Gospel, ch titles as elōg vnto thē, cause they ould haue thē acke their du∣ie. that they are contented to giue Iesus Christ and his faithfull seruants the titles that belōg to them, whyle they see no remedy to gaynsay or resist. But they had rather that Iesus Christ & his, wold be con∣tent with the bare name alone (as many o∣ther be) & not execute the office which belō∣geth therto, & for which cause such names & titles are giuen them. For howe many are there in the world now a dayes: but chiefly
in the Popish Churche, whiche are conten∣ted with the titles, and rentes whiche they possesse vnder colour of the sayd tytles: not caring for executing the office whiche they are bounde to, and whereof they beare the name? Tob. There are enow such of al sorts. Theo. The Diuell was contented that Christ should be called the holy one of God, if he would not shew the office of the holye one of God against him. So are there many in these dayes, which are content to prayse the Gospell, and to honour it with their mouthes, and outward ceremonies: so that it be not looked on, & the doctrine ther∣in contayned bee not published & practized. We haue euidēt proof therof in the Popish masse: for it is maruelous to see what honor the masse giueth to the book of the Gospell, when it is song, & specially in high masses. Whē ye gospel is sōg, there is sēsing, torch∣light, Of the honour which the Pa∣pists giue to the Gospel. kissing of ye book, stāding vp: Alwaies prouided, that the Gospel be song or said to the people in an vnknowen tongue, and not in suche sorte to bee vttered, as that the vertue and efficacie thereof bee manife∣sted vnto the heartes of the people. Is not
this a great subtletie of Sathan, to shewe such honour to the Gospel, to the ende it might bee the more dishonoured? For the  the honour, ich the ene∣es of the dis∣line of the spel giue to  Gospel. greatest honour that the Gospel can haue, is to be printed in the heart: & contrariwyse the greatest dishonour that may be done vn∣to it, is, not to receiue it with true faith, and to be carelesse of the vnderstanding, and ef∣fecting thereof. Tob. This then I perceiue to be thy drift to proue, that we honour the Gospel in hat the true iour, and dis∣our of the spel is. our Masse, as the Diuell honoured Iesus Christ, when he called him the holy one of God, meaning thereby to put him from do∣yng of that his duety which God his father had commaunded him to doe. Theo. I wil not giue a poynt to choose. For, is not that which you doe, a very moc∣kery vnto Iesus Christ and his Gospel? Tob. Thou commest very fast stil vp∣pon vs. But I pray thee tell me, is there none amongst you that playeth the like di∣uels part? Theo. Yes I warrant thee, too too manie: But they playe it after an other sorte: For there are some, who are con∣tented to suffer the minister of the Go∣spel
preach the pure word of God, yea, and to haue ministers also, and to mainteyne them: so they enforce them not to the prac∣tise of the Gospell. Wee spake before of those that withstood the discipline of the Gospel. Of whiche there are two sortes: The first of them, are they, that cannot a∣byde, that any shoulde speake, preache, or write thereof: The seconde sort of them are they which are contented to heare with all that, so there bee no talke of the execution thereof. But the worst is, that among these, there are some, that do not only withstande the execution therof on themselues, but also hinder those that would be contented to re∣ceiue it, and wil not suffer them so to doe. Tob. Why doe they so? Me thinketh it inough, & in deed too much for thēselues to be rebels against God & his word, although they hindred not the obedience of others. Theo. I thinke they doe it, because they feare, least, after ye others were brought to yt discipline, they also might bee enforced thereunto. For there are many that would not greatly care though other men lyued neuer so vprightly, so that they themselues might be at liberty to do what them listed.
Tob. I wonder at those men. For if they think the doctrine good, yt is preached vnto thē, why suffer they it not to be practized & put in execution: if they thinke it not good, why suffer they it to be preached, and speci∣ally, seeing they haue authority and power to stoppe the same? Theo. No doubt of it, there are too too many (as we haue before said) that woulde gladly stop it, if they durst: were it not for feare they shold be accompted tyrantes & o∣pē enemies to God. But because they see, yt they cannot do it but to their great reproch & shame, they are like the diuel, who is con∣tented to take Iesus Christ for the holy one of God, so he may be stil a diuel, & continue in the selfe same state, wherin Iesus Christ foūd him. And therfore whē they are infor∣ced, as Christe inforced this diuel, they crye out as he cried, & shew their secret hatred to the truth of God, & fal a threatning & perse∣cuting of his true seruāts, whē as they per∣ceiue yt they can neither by fayre speeches, nor yet hypocrisy, obteine their desire. Tob. And therefore it is naught euerye way, & waxeth stil worse & worse. You make a iest at vs, & say, yt we on our side honor the
gospel outwardly, but that we neither care for ye vnderstāding therof, nor lyuing there∣after. And I beseech you, wherein is your side any whit better? For they are conten∣ted the Gospel should be preached, and the sence thereof expounded, so they heare it not, or if they heare it, so they follow it not, no more thā we. Thus we are both wel ple∣sed with the name of Christian, and gospel, but we neither care either for the dutie of christianitie, or yet for the fruite that wee should receiue by the Gospell. Theo. So say I to: For we are all contented that Iesus Christ should bee the holy one of GOD, so hee hallowe vs not. To. Hereby we may easily perceiue, that the Diuell, which gaue this title to Christe, is not yet out of the world. Theo. As much may be sayde of that other Diuel in the Sorceresse of Philip∣pi, Acts. 16. The Deuill of Philippi. The commenda¦tion, whiche the deuill giueth to the mynisteri of the Gospell. of whome we spake before. For GOD knoweth howe little pleasure the Diuell which possessed her tooke, in the ministerie of Paule and Sylas, and yet hee praysed them and their ministerie, and extolled thē to the people of Philippi to the vttermost.
To. Surely, it is to be meruailed at, that the father of lyes woulde prayse and extoll before men, the trueth, which hee ha∣teth aboue all other thinges. Theo. Yea, but here is a further matter then all this. For, thou seest, that be doeth not onely forbeare to withstand, and openlye resist the seruauntes of God, but beeing also enemy to mans saluation, en∣courageth the people to hear the doctrine of saluatiō at ye mouths of those, whō god hath appoynted to be ye ouerthrow of his king∣dome. To. Truely, herein e meruailoussy changeth and altereth his nature: for where before time, he was woont with might and maine, to withdraw men from the worde of God: here he stirreth and prouoketh them thereunto. Theo. And yet that is not, his mea∣ning was cleane contrary, how glorious & The meanes which the De∣ull vseth to fight against the Go∣spell. glittering a shew soeuer he made. And ther∣fore hereby thou maist perceiue, that com∣monly, the Deuill hath two stringes to his bowe to resist the trueth. To. Which be they? Theo. The one is, in that, yt he is a ty∣rant and murtherer, he will, if it be possible
resist the trueth by force: and so vse y• string, beecause it agreeth iumpe with his nature: but if that string will not serue, hee putteth on the other. To. What māer a one is that? Theo. It is lying: for, he wil by ye, if he cā, practise to come in credit: for yt is as natural to him, as ye first. But when hee mindes to worke by lying, hee vseth not alwayes one way. To. How doth he than? Theo. First, if he haue to doe with igno∣raunt men, in the word of God, and grosse headed people, he thē bestirreth him to ouer∣throw the trueth by false doctrine, supersti∣tion, and idolatry, wherwith he disguiseth. ye true religiō. But, if that way wil not serue his turne, he seemeth by & by to allow of the doctrine of the trueth, and to be friend ther∣vnto, to the end that vnder this colour, he maye the more subtillye and secretly bring his enterprise to passe. And, although this enemy is alwayes greatly to be feared, yet is he neuer so much to be feared, as when 2. Cor. 11. The deuil trans∣figureth him self into an Angel of light. he vseth thus to faigne and glose. For hee neuer hurteth so sore, as when he transfigu∣reth himselfe into an Angell of light, which he can right well doe. To. I thinke that was the cause,
whie S. Paule put the Diuell of Philip∣pi to silence, as also why Iesus Christe put those to silence, which praysed him. The. That is out of all doubt. For although, that these Diuels spak ye truth, in testifying that that was true, which both Iesus Christe and his Seruauntes hadde spoken and doone: yet is it not to be said properlye, that they spake the trueth, by reason of their intent, and the ende which they pretended. For, where they That trueth it  that the deuil  able to speak, nd to what end  speaketh it. outwardly seemed to induce the people to followe Iesus Christe, by reason of the gloryous woordes, which they gaue out of him, they had a cleane contrary pur∣pose, to withdrawe them from him. Toby. How is that possible? Theo. Euen by this meane. For, whē the Diuelles vse these kinds of woordes, they whiche heare them, eyther beleeue them, or not beleeue them. And if they beleeue them, they beleeue them not as if they were the Enemies of Iesus Christ, and of his Seruauntes: But doe rather thinke, that there is great friendship, and a friendlye agreement betwixt them.
And therfore, if they thought Saint Paule and Sylas to bee the Seruaunts of God, they might likewise thinke, that this Sor¦ceresse was neyther against them, nor yet they against her, but that they agreed all very well together. But if they beleeued them not, but tooke the wicked spyrites, to bee wicked spyrites in deede, that myght haue brought a great slaunder vppon Ie∣sus Christe and his Seruauntes, and vppon their doctrine also: and so haue made them all to bee very greatlye sus∣pected, by reason they had the testimonie of such witnesses. Toby. Then I perceyue that the Deuill is alwayes readye to serue his own turne at a pynch. Theo. Assure thyselfe of that. For, if hee and his Testimonie were reiected, they whom hee hadde commended, should also for the same cause, bee reiected with him for company: and yet hee him self in, the meane whyle, not bee reiected at all. For hee woulde still keepe his possession in those, who had forsaken Iesus Christe and his, vnder another colour. And ther∣fore if they were entertayned, the Deuill
would also be entertayned with them: and so by that meanes, hee should be in truth, and in deede, entertayned: and Iesus christ, his doctrine, and seruauntes, but in shewe, and for fashions sake. For, Iesus Christ and his aduersarye, are not to bee enter∣tayned both at once, neyther hath hee any familyaritie and common abode and dwel∣ling with him. Toby. Heere is a meruailous subtill pollycie, and crooked nature of the Deuil, being therin so compounded with leasing and vntrueth, as that hee turneth the truth it selfe into lying, and maketh the trueth to bee no more trueth, when it once com∣meth out of his mouth. The trueth, not trueth. Theo. You saye verye trulye. For, Trueth, to speake properly, consisteth not in the bare woordes spoken, but in the meaning, for which cause they are vttered. And therefore hee speaketh not the trueth, which sayeth not the trueth, but onely to lye, and deceyue. And beesides, wee are not to take for trueth, the trueth that is myxed with lying.
For, in this case, the trueth is nowe no more trueth, but onelye a false colour of trueth, and without any substance therof, for the colouring of a lye. And therfore, How wee oug to iudge of th trueth. when we are to iudge of the trueth, wee must not iudge only according to ye woords which wee heare, nor yet take them by halfes, but receyue all the partes toge∣ther, and so looke to what end and purpose they were spoken. Toby. If this, that thou speakest off were well looked vnto, wee shoulde neuer haue so manye men seduced and leadde a∣waye from the trueth, as daylye wee see. Theo. Why, I will tell thee, we neede The honour which the Pa∣pists do to Ie∣sus Christ, is t dishonour him. not seeke any further for examples, concer∣ning this matter, thē to the Romish church. For, the Pope and his false Prophets haue vsed the selfe same cunning, which the De∣uilles vsed at Philippi: besides others also, who haue made as glorious a confession of Iesus Christ. For the holy scripture attri∣buteth nothing to Iesus Christ, and to his church, which they do not also attribute vn∣to him, in plain & bare words. For, ther is no praise
nor commendation, which the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyres euer gaue vnto him, that they likewise giue not vnto him: And yet Iesus Christ and his church haue not more cruel enemies, that more villanously blaspheme, nor more cruelly persecute them, then these men, whiche fayne themselues to bee their greatest and deerest friendes. They will giue al the prayse that a man woulde wishe them, both to Iesus Christ, to his Church, and to his Gospell, and yet in all the rest of their dealinges, they make no reckning of them: but onelye in faigning themselues to be their friends and defendours, and so by that meanes they deceyue the worlde, and aduaunce them selues farre aboue Iesus Christ, and his Church. And in so dooing, they make warre with Iesus Christe, at his owne proper coaste and charge. And this course also tooke Mahomet, Mahomet, and the Pope, the Deuille ollye countereitors. when he first began to deliuer his law. For if he had not spoken wel of Iesus Christ, of his Prophetes, and Apostles, he had ne∣uer
had such a traine following him as hee hath had. But he aduanced, and set foorth the prayses of Iesus Christe & of his, therby to ouerthrowe Christian religion, and say a foundation, whereon to builde his false re∣ligion with some apparance of truth. Tob. What? thinkest thou that there are not moe then those which thou hast spo∣ken of, who haue put this matter in prac∣tise? Theo. Why? a man shall hardly see any other thing practised at this day in the Shorne mon¦sticall hypocri feigne thēselu to be friends  the gospell, th they might the by hinder the course thereof. worlde. For, to answere to the first poynt, we see that euer sithence that God hath cau¦sed at this day, the light of his holy Gospell to shine amongst vs, that there haue an ex∣ceeding pestilent number of Monkes and Fryers, and others of that rabble entred, who haue, and dayly doe, Iustily play theyr partes. For so soone as they sawe, that their beggerly wallet brought them not home, so notable a reuenue as in tunes past it did, and that they were not in such honor and reputation as before indeed they were, by preaching of their fables and lyes, they then baganne to counterfeite to bee
Christian, and Gospellike Preachers. For, some of them, forsooke their cloysters, and became to serue in Churches, where they vnderstood they might liue with greater li∣bertie, and so cleane cast off their cowle and weede when they were gotten out. And some of them continued amōgst those peo∣ple, who as yet had not the sincere ministe∣rie of the gospel free amongest them. These men ware some part of their monasticall weedes, and cast some outward part of thē cleane off. And so by this their hypocriti∣cal dealing, they had recourse vnto many good houses and Churches, whereinto they had not been as yet receiued, if they had not made some shew to haue been friendes, and not enemies, and persecutors, as commōly they are, who vowe thēselues to these dam∣nable sects. Howbeit they had no sooner set in footing, but that they shewed a cast of their office, & what loue they bare to Iesus Christ and his gospel. For, then they shew∣ed themselues whether they were shorne monasticals or not, and with what spirite they were guided. And there are at this day anexceeding shameles nūber, who both on ye one side & the other, play their parts in this
pageant, & such in deed, as trouble more the churches, then all the rest of the enemies, which they cā possibly haue. Howbeit, I meane not here, to find fault with such good mē, as with good tokēs haue forsaken these damnable sects, & behaued themselues as ye good seruants of God, of which, god be thā∣ked for thē, there are a great number. And therefore, it is very needefull for all men to take good heed of these transfigured shorne monasticals, who haue thrust themselues into the church as Apostles & ministers of the gospel, to the end men by them bee not lightly deceiued. Tob. I know not after what maner thou handelest these shorne monasticals, of whom thou speakest, & many others suche like, who dayly ioyne with you: but this I right wel know, that there are an exceeding shameles number of thē, who haue no great good liking of you, nor yet of your Chur∣ches, and namely of the most famous, ver∣tuous, and learned among you. The. Why man, they must needs make an end of playing out their whole pageant, which they haue begunne, & that the end of theyr sport iump with the beginning.
For, seeing they haue begunne to play the iolly Diuels, and haue so entred by hypo∣crisie and dissimulation, it must necessarily followe, that they must in the ende discouer the iollitie therof, as the Diuel of Philippi did. For, when he sawe himselfe discoue∣red, and laid wide open, and that all his flat∣terie and dissimulation woulde doe hym no good, and that Saint Paule and Silas had no will to tarry with them, nor yet come The false shewe f the diuell, is irned into fury neere them, hee turned all his flatterie into furie, and so manifested himselfe to be euen such a one as in deed he was. For, so soone as he was come out of the chāber maide, he ran vpon the masters, and entred so far in∣to them, as that hee made them starke mad. And in so doing, he played another maner of part then the first was. Now, there are a great many which play the like parts. For so long as a man will let them alone to bee as they are, or not discouer them, they wyll be very milde and gentle: but if the pastime be for a good round summe of money, and that they see any man goe about to take it from them in good earnest, then lay they o∣pen the Diuel whom before they kept close vnder so goodly a shewe & countenaunce.
There is also another sort of them, & they will neuer tarry vntill such time as they be driuen to that extremitie: But so soone as they may once vnderstand, where they may get into a warmer kitchin, and bee better fed, away they pack thence, and shake hands with the gospel, which they made shew they meant to haue followed. Toby. In very deede, I haue right well vnderstood, that there haue beene too too many of such, who after they had once made so iolly a shewe, haue well enough raked vp diuers Benefices, when as they might well rake them, and then haue quyte and cleane leat the Gospell, and kept them¦selues altogether occupied about them. Theo. There is no doubt of it, but that suche hypocrites finde Benefices enough, to rake vp before such time as they woulde be founde. But heere is the worst matter of al the rest: that for as much as they are reuolted from the Gospel, they proue the greatest enemies that the gospel can possibly haue. Tob. But to returne to this Diuell whereof thou earst spakest, that was at Phi∣lippi, hee was not yet carried away with
such a furie, but yt he right well coulde tell how to play the pageāt, which he had enter∣prised to play. For he couered himself with a right fauourable colour towards al men. For, whereas before he had so greatly com∣mended S. Paule & Sylas, together theyr doctrine & ministerie, he soone after accused them to be mutinous & seditious fellowes, who went about to ouerthrowe all politike and publike order & gouernment, & abolish  fauourable ac∣sation against e seruants of od. the lawes and state of life of the countrie, which had from time to time been receiued and allowed of all men, & besides, that they troubled the publike peace, & all the whole world. The. Thou mayest thē perceiue by that with what affection he so greatly commen∣ded them before. For this is alwayes one and the selfe same diuel. For, he did but on∣ly The diuell hath iuers vizers. change his vizer, to play another part, in the person of the masters of that maide the orceresse, as he had before plaied in the per¦son of ye said maid. For, he had mastred both the one and the other. And because he feared that that should not com to passe, whi∣che came to passe, he transfigured him selfe as thou hast heard. But when hee sawe,
that he was put beside his hope, he stroue a∣nother way, against the seruants of God. And herein we see yt, which before was spo∣kē of ye possessed, who are possessed wt the di∣uel, by reasō of theyr sins, althogh they seem nothing lesse, then to be possessed with Di∣uels. For, wee euidently see in this place, how the Diuel made these Philippians be∣come men possessed with wicked spirites, by whom, he raysed vp all the whole Citie, but chiefly the magistrates, against the ser∣uants of God. And in this dealing, hee had The wicked  the euill which they themselue do to the charg of the godly. recourse vnto his auncient practises, wher∣of we haue heretofore spoken. For, he ac∣cuseth these holy men, of the self same thing which he himselfe did, by those wicked men whom he had possessed with Diuels. For, he accused the Apostles of sedition and mu∣tente, and rayled on them, as though they had been the publique enemies of peace, and of all good order. For, (quoth he) who haue The notable af∣fection, where∣with the wicked are mo∣uth. beene the cause of this hurly burly in the ci∣tie, but these seditious fellowes? And who hath stirred vp the people hereunto, but their couetousnesse? Tob. In very deed, hee that had heard
them speak, would haue said, yt they greatly loued the Romanes, who were their Lords and heads, and generally al the whole coun∣trie, and that they mightily feared, that sone hurt might come vnto it, by the meane of Paule and Sylas. Theo. As you say in deede, for when Iudas found fault with the losse which the The great cha∣tie of Iuds. Math. 20. Marke. 14. poore had, by reason of the oyntment that was spent vpon Iesus Christ, who woulde not haue greatly allowed and lyked of his reasons, if hee had but onely regarded his wordes? Howbeit, Saint Iohn rightly ohn. 12. discouereth his hypocrisie, when as he saith, That Iudas spake not those words for any compassion that he had on the poore, neither yet of any desire that he had that the money which might haue been had for the ointmēt, shoulde haue been bestowed vpon them: but hee spake those wordes, because he himself was a theefe. And therefore, desired that this money might come thorow his hands, to the end he might purloyne some part of it to his owne vse. And euen so fared it with these Philippians, of whom we now spake. For, they cloaked themselues with a certaine care which they had of the full
and whole preseruing and maintenance of the good lawes and policie of the Country: But Saint Luke setteth foorth the secresie Act. 16. of their disease, saying: That they did it, be∣cause they were angrie for the losse of so great a gaine which they receiued thereby. Tob. By this may easily be perceiued what their affectiō was that they bare vn∣to the countrie. The. In deed here was ye loue which they had vnto ye countrie, forsooth, it greeued thē that they could no longer abuse thē of the countrie, by robbing & spoiling it, by meane of the sorceres, & her familiar diuel, as here∣tofore they had done. Now, if I shold say vn∣to thee, I pray thee cōsider, whether ye Pope & his supposts do not the like, I know thou wouldest answere me, & say, as heretofore thou hast oftētimes answered mee, I pray thee also consider, if your mē who so great∣ly glory in the reformation of the Church, do not as much. Tob. Thou sayest truly, and so I would in deede. The colour which the sup∣postes of Anti∣christ vse, for the defence of their religion. Theo. And yet thou canst not possibly denie it, but that the Pope & his, doe cloake their tyrannie, ambition, and couetousnesse,
with such colours. It is well enough kno∣wen, that the more part of thē, care no more for God, nor yet for any religion whatsoe∣uer, then the very Epicures: And yet whē a man shal heare thē speake, a man woulde say that they were so feruent and zealous a∣bout the maintenance of the church, ancient lawes, coūcels, & canons of ye anciēt fathers, as it is possible for men to be. And yet there are none, who dare more boldly and shame∣lesly infringe & breake thē, then they which cal thēselues the preseruers of the same. It seemeth, that they tremble with feare, for ye destruction of Christendome, and yet there are none yt go about to ouerthrow it sooner thē they, no, & if all the enemies of Christē∣dome besides were gathered together, they could not all (I say) do more for the ouer∣throwing thereof. Tob. In very deede, I cannot gaine say that, which thou hast said: But yet I pray thee, say something also of your owne sort. Theo. True it is, that this diuell who dealeth in this maner, amongest the fauou∣rers & abbettors of the Romish Antichriste, transfigureth himselfe after another maner
of sort amongest vs. For, it is out of all que∣stion, that the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, priestes, friers, & al the rest of that rabble, do what they can, to make kings, princes, and potentates vnderstand and beleeue, that yf they take not some good order for the roo∣ting out of those whom they condemne for heretiks, they are in great hazard of losing their kingdomes and dominions. Howbeit they fetch most of their colours from religi∣on, and from the ancient councels & canōs, and the desolation and destruction of the The Imitation that is betweene the papiste, and those which bra of the gospel. church of Christ. But our people, who are led with the same spirite, dare not arme thē¦selues with the name of the church, against the true ministers, but come armed with ye lawes and ordināces of princes and gouer∣nors, to make war against God. For, if a man lay the worde of God before, they will in no wise meddle with that. For, they dare not openly, once quetch against that, as before we haue said, but by and by alleadge theyr reformation, and disputations and or∣denances. And so, vnder the shadowe thereof, they condemne the true Ministers of the Lorde, not for that they haue done any thyng agaynst God: But because
they will not agree to the statutes & tradi∣ons of mē, but would haue them to be tryed & ouer ruled by the word of God. Tob. Why, thē they do euen as I heard thee once finde fault withal. For, there are some countries, wherein princes haue for∣bidden any mā once to speake of this newe law, & yt no man should bring in any new re∣ligiō, vpō paine of loosing his life. Then soone after yt these lawes were made, if it had so fallen out y• any man had beene char∣ged to haue byn hearde once speake of the word of God, as thou now speakest, and had done any thing, otherwise thē according to ye old religiō, the question was neuer asked, whether this mā had either spoken or done wel or amisse. But it was enough if any mā could haue said, he hath done against y• law of the prince of the countrie. Theo. In deed, Daniel was cast into ye Lions den vpon suche a complaint, because he chose rather to obey God, then the wic∣ked edict of the king. Tob. Me thinketh, yt they do the like a∣mōgest you in some places. Theo. If we here wel cōsider the words of the mutinous Philippiās, we shal almost
find ye like in these our dayes, aswel amōgst the papistes, as also amongest those which The Go condēned th¦row preiudi wtout know of the cause. Act. 16. make warre against the gospel, and yet doe brag of the reformation thereof. For these mutinous people, namely said: These men goe about to ouerthrowe & abolishe, those lawes & ordināces, which are not lawful for vs to alter, because we are Romanes. They deale here marueilous maliciously. For they here goe about, through their own pre∣iudice, to make the cause of the seruants of God to be so hateful & so suspected, as that it cannot be heard in iudgemēt, nor yet be tal∣ked of. And euen so, deale the papists alto∣gether with vs. For, they send vs to old cus∣tomes, old councels, and to the cōsent of the whole church, a great number of yeres past, to the end our cause should neither be reaso∣ned of, nor yet heard, but to be condēned be∣fore ye cause e known. And they amōgst vs which will bend thēselues against the ser∣uants of god, & oppose thēselues against the true discipline of the church, make euen as great warres. But if there be a matter in questiō but of y• value of 10. or 12. s. I war∣rāt you there is neither partie, but shall be heard at large, either in their propositions,
oppositions, replies, & triplies, and in what¦soeuer they can, or are able to alleage. But if it be a matter which concerneth the mini∣ster of the Gospell, the worde of God, the church, & consciences of all men, it falleth out many times, that iudgement is giuen, & the partie neuer heard. For, in such a case, they need bring in no better matter, then a false report, or some euill suspition, for the condemning of a good cause, without being either hard or yet wel knowē. It is enough if it be slaunderously reported, that it is a∣gainst the reformation or lawes of princes, & yet it shalbe taken out of the sincere word of God. And so by that meane they will not leaue so much as any one place, either on ye one side, or yet on the other, for the word of God, or for ye truth therof, but must alwaies become subiect to the traditions of men, if any man will so proceede therein. To. Sth the case so stādeth, me thinketh ye one of vs should not so soone war against another as we do. For, if we do ill, you doe euē as ill. And therfore, if thou wil say, that the philippiā diuelis amōgst vs, we may al¦so as boldly say, that he carrieth not so long with vs, but that he cōmeth nowe & then to you, and taketh his pleasure amōngst you,
yt he might catch you with his cūning baits. Theo. I must needs agree with thee in parte, but not in all, for there are som of vs, who in deed, are very like the Iewes, yt pur∣sued Iesus Christ to death. For, euery man There is b coūterfet fren¦ship most whe amongst princ knoweth, howe well the Iewes loued the Romanes, considering y• they held them as cruell tyrants, & enemies to God, to their religiō & to all their whole nation. To. I suppose they loued thē so well, as that they wished them all hanged. Theo. No doubt of that. And yet the Iewes so mortally hated Christ, and had so great a desire to be rid of him, and put hym to some cruel death, as that it made them speake, as though they had beene the best subiectes that the Romanes had in any part of the worlde. And yet scarcely had the Romanes greater rebels then they were. Neuerthelesse, they stoutly and constantly maintained the lawes of the Romane Em∣pyre, saying: that they had none other king but Caesar. For, they accused Iesus Christe, Iohn. 19. as one that meant to inuade Caesars king∣dome, crying out and saying: That who∣soeuer he was yt spake against Caesar, was worthie of death.
Tob. Wherefore speakest thou these wordes? Theo. I speake them for this purpose. because we see there are some such in these our dayes, yt loue not their princes & Lordes one iote, & much lesse the true religion whi∣che their princes & Lords say, yt they defend & maintaine, & and yet for all this, these mē will be the first that shal arm thēselues with the lawes & statuts of princes, against their pastors & ministers. And to the ende yt that which I say, might, by woefull experience, be the better perceiued, we shall not need to consider of any other thing better, then of those who make themselues so zealous to∣wards the lawes of their Lords, & see howe heretofore they haue obserued them, and yet doe, & especially those lawes which agree best with the word of the Lord. And if there be any rebels in all ye coūtries, both against the word of God, & against all the good or∣denances of their princes & Lords, they are ye only men. For, all their talke, their liues, and conuersations, do to too euidently wit∣nes the same. Tob. But by your leaue, they make the greatest shew to be ye best obseruers of th,
as ye Philippians did, who accused Paule & his companion. Theo. It is euen all one. Howbeit, Magistrates ouer greatlye fauouring wi¦ked men. the greatest mischiefe that ensueth hereon, is this: that such wicked men finde often∣times as vniust and vndiscret Magistrates, as the Magistrates of Philippi. For, after yt these Magistrates of Philippi had heard the false accusation that was made against S. Paule and Sylas, they caused these two holy men to be whipped, without hea∣ring of them what they could say for their defence: and yet were they not contented herewith, but caused them soone after to be sent to a most cruell prison, and there set them in the stockes. Toby. They vsed but an ill order in yt obseruing of the lawes and customs of the Romaines in this poynt. For I am very well assured, that it was not the custome a∣mongst the Romaines, to condemne and punish men, how wicked soeuer they were, but that they woulde firste heare at large A most barba∣rous crueltie, to condemne a man, without hering his cause. what their cause was, and what they could say for them selues. For, that it is so rea∣sonable a thing, as that there is not so bar∣barous and inhumaine a nation, vnto whō
the law of nature hath not taught this rule of right, equitie, and Justice. Now, if the moste blockishe and vnciuile Nations of the woorlde vnderstoode and knew this, no doubt of it, the Romains, who had beene so greatly commended for their Iustice and other vertues, would not in this case, haue dealt more barbarously and vniustelye, then any other nation. Theo. Indeede S. Paule, soone after Acts. 16. made the Magistrates of Philippi vnder∣stand this matter so well, as that he put thē in great feare: and had made them through∣lye felt their fault, if hee would haue com∣plained on them vnto the Romains, as they well deserued it, and as he was verye well able to haue done? For they, who had so The lawes in∣fringed by such as named them selues the chie∣fest obseruers thereof. bragged, yt they were the great obseruers of the lawes of the Romains, and had puni∣shed such as were charged with the breache of them, should haue beene well aduised, be∣fore they had done any thing, not to haue broken those lawes, wherewith they meant to arme them selues. And so, by the lyke reason, all Princes and Magistrates had neede bee very cha∣rye, that if they will haue their lawes and
ordinaunces kept, not to be them selues the first breakers of them. For, although they haue no Superiours to correct them for it, or if their Superiours wink at them, yet will not. God suffer them goe scotfree for all that. Indeede the Philippians had Supe∣riours: But there was no bodye that told thē of it, because there was none which complayned vnto them of the matter, & yet God would not let them goe vnpunyshed. To. And me thinketh it also very re∣quisite, that Princes and Magistrates doe Magistrats ought to haue great regard t such as are re∣porters and ac¦cusers. not ouer lightly beeleeue all reports which are brought vnto them, neither yet gyue o∣uer easie credit to such, as make shewe to be their great friendes, and to be very care∣ful of their honour and benefite. For, there are an exceeding number of such, who doe it for none other purpose, but to flatter thē, that they might be the greater with them, & therby discredit such men as they like not of, and of whom they seeke to be auenged, by the meanes of such Princes and Magi∣strates. For, such then are not the best, nor the faythfullest kynde of men, but the moste slauyshe, disloyall, and moste tray∣terous
of all others: And therefore these villaynes would be the first that shoulde beetraye them, and soonest forsake them, when as they thought to finde others els where, that they myght better serue theyr turnes. Theo. In very deede wee haue a ma∣nifest example of that which thou speakest, in these mutinous and seditious Philippi∣ans: For, how daungerously hazarded they their Magistrates, and their whole ci∣tie, to be aduenged of S. Paule and of his companyon. And who loued better the Magistrates, the Citie, and all the whole Countrey,and that were more carefull of their honour and profit, eyther these muty∣neus and wicked vacabondes, who accused S. Paule and Sylas, or S. Paule & Sy∣las, who were accused? Toby. That is easilye to bee iudged. For, these deceitfull Iackes and theeues deceiued and robbed al the whole country, and cared for nothing els, but the fillyng of their purses. Where contrariwise, S. Paule and Sylas hazarded their own lyues, for the saluation of the Philippians, which was dearer to them then their owne Acts. 16.
lyues. Theo. And as discreet as the Magi∣strate was, after hee had greatly wronged The common iniquitie of m towards these ¦uants of God. these good seruantes of God, and knewe it well ynough: yet for all that, in steede of amending the offence which hee had com∣mitted, hee procured these holy men to be bannished the Citie and Countrey, whome he ought rather to haue entertayned, then any other. And kept in still the roges, that had wrongfully informed him agaynst them, and had put in daunger both theyr wealth and offyces, and the whole losse of their dominion. And where he shoulde haue expulsed them as vacabondes and roges, and so haue whipped them, he still retayned them, as good Citizens. Thus wee see how the seruants of God are continually delt withal here in this world, and that equitie and right, that euery man ought to haue, is not for them to be had: yea, and although they be founde innocent and guiltlesse, yet shall they haue much to doe, to get iustice administred vnto them. Againe, although the wicked be founde guiltie, yet is it out of all doubt, that some shifte or other will be made, continually to
support them, and shall be sooner and bet∣ter entertained and entreated, then the true or whatcauses e seruaunts of od are so mi∣ked of world∣ges. seruaunts of God: for euery man is gladde to be ridde of them. For, the world thinketh it to be ouer harde and yrkesome a thinge to liue amongst them, and that there neuer commeth any goodnesse, where they are. Toby. Certes, the world maketh that reckning of them, as thou hast sayde, and yet, if they did wel, they should iudge other∣wise of them. Theo. Thou sayst truely indeede, but because the worldlinges naturally loue vi∣ces, more then vertues, and lying, more then trueth, they deserue rather to haue se∣ducers, vacabondes, theeues, and traytors, to seduce, robbe, and betray them, then the true seruauntes of God and good men, who would be faithful vnto them, and faithfully procure their honour and benefit. And The iudgment of God against the vnthankful∣nesse of men. The force of the illusion of error for the punish∣ment o world∣linges. therefore, if God meant not thus to punish worldlings by his iust iudgement, he would not laye the brydle in Satans and the wic∣kedes neckes as he doth, nor yet suffer thē to be so caryed away with strong illusions and errours. For, from whence com∣meth it, that this Deuill, which so possessed
this Philippian Sorceresse, could foretell and declare hidden and secrete thinges? he could not haue done this but by the permis∣sion of God, and without God, had, in his iust iudgement, giuen him this power and strength. For, it is written, that he gaue a lying spirite into the mouthes of Aachabs false Prophets, yt Achab might be deceiued 1. Kings. 22. by thē. Now, when the Lord gaue the De∣uill this lycence, knew not he right well, that the Deuill therupon might by yt meane feduce? And did he not also know in what daunger he put men, in so doing? Toby. Why then gaue he suchlicence vnto the Deuill? Theo. Forsooth, because he would by his iust iudgemēt, punish the vnthankfulnes of men, as he himself witnesseth by Moses, & Deut. 13. Rom. 1. 2. Thes. 2. S. Paule, and namely in the Epistle to the Romains, and in the second to the Thessa∣lonians. Toby. That is the very cause, why ma∣ny take occasion to finde fault thereat, and therby reiect all religions as vncertaine: and this is the reason, as they say, that there is such a confusion in them, as that a man cannot descerne trueth from falshood.
Theo. But God hath well prouided for that, to preserue his chosen from these he elect of god e preserued om being se∣ced. daungers. And therefore, although false Christes and false Prophetes, doe great thinges thorow the power of the Deuil, by which they may easily seduce al the whole worlde, yet Iesus Christ openly declareth, that his chosen cannot be so seduced by thē, lath. 24. but will continue in the trueth euen to the ende. For, when hee saieth, that if it were possible, the very electe should be deceiued by such men: hee doeth vs to witte, in what ohn. 17. saftie his were, whome his heauenly father had giuen vnto him. But, to the end thou mightest the better vnderstand the iudgmēt The cause why en rather fol∣ow falshod then rueth. of God in this case, thou must consider and note, that if they which are seduced by these seducers had the true feare of God before their eyes, and such a loue in their heartes, to serue and honour him as they ought, they shoulde neuer fall into these errours, whereinto they fall. And therefore Ie∣sus Christe rightly toucheth their disease, who reiecting the doctrine of the trueth, followe after leasinges: when as hee saieth, The doctrine is not mine, but his, who sent Iohn. 7. me. And therefore, if any man will doe his
will, he shall know whether the doctrine be of God, or whether. I speake it of my selfe. His meaning in effect is this, that they which are desirous, rightly to vnderstande the will of God to obey him, shall easily al∣so acknowledge the doctrine, by whiche God declareth to men his will, that they might thereby accordingly bee instructed. But contrariwise, they that haue not this affection, are alwayes finding of excuses, resting them selues alwayes vppon some false & vnsound proppes, because they haue no good desire to come to the right & true stay, how glorious so euer their wordes be, and howe goodlie a shewe soeuer they Hipocrisse tak for Wisedme. make. Tob. Yet by your leaue Sir, there are a great many of ignorant people, and suche indeed as persecute ye truth, who neuer the∣lesse in all other things make a gllant shew of honestie, and to be zealous and feruent in Gods cause. Theo. I graunt thee as much as thou sayest, that they are good people in shewe: But yet it is out of all doubt, that, all that their wisedome, and whatsoeuer zeale they haue in shew, is meere hypocrisie and dissi∣muled
deuotion. For, to aunsweare the first poynt, if they were of that sound hart, ride and pre∣mption, doe nder the owledge of e truth. and in suche sorte feared GOD, as they ought, they woulde be humble and modest. For, if they were humble and modest, they woulde not so proudlye and arrogauntly, contemie and reect the good Seruauntes of God, who bring vnto them the trueth, as they do: but wold patiently heare, & receiue them as the Angels or messengers of God. For, what a mighty number doe wee day∣lye see, that so presume of them selues, of their skil, wisdome and vertue, as that they think no man in the world to bee so able for their skil, to shew any better matter thē that which they the selues haue already brought and deliuered. And what a number also is there of suche people, as are not contented alone with the despising of the seruauntes of GOD, but likewise persecute and con∣demne them to death, without once hearing of thē speake? What religion thinkest thou these men to be of? Surely surely, there is no religion at alan them, but in shewe only, howsoeuer they dissemble theyr zeale towards the Church, & Christian religion. I promise thee for mine own part, I think
that the greatest number of them, haue not What feare Pilate had  God. so great feare of God before their eyes, as Pylate had. Tob. Why shouldest thou say so? Theo. I wil tel thee, because that after the Iewes had let Pilate vnderstande, that Iohn 19. Iesus Christe hadde called him selfe the Sonne of GOD, and accused him ther∣fore, as a Blasphemer, and woorthye of death: It was so farre off from him, that hee was thereby the more mooued to con∣demne Iesus Christe, as that hee was the more afearde therof, and was then more nise in the condemning of him, then he was at any time before. Tob. What meant he by that? Theo. Marke it well and thou shalte see, for although in all thinges els, Pylate was a cursed and wicked Heathen manne, yet was hee not altogether so irreligy∣ous, but that so soone as hee hearde him speake of the name of GOD, hee was therewith mooued, and did reuerence him. And therefore, before hee woulde Iohn 19. Christians, not so religious as Pilate. goe anye further, hee agayne, farre nar∣rowlier examyned Iesus Christ. And after
he had heard him more at large, hee was a greate deale the rather desirous to deliuer him, then euer he was before. To. If he had continued stil in that mind, it had byn much better for him. Theo. That is true indeede. But be∣cause there was no true feare of GOD in him, neither yet had taken deep & good roo∣ting in his hart, it forth with vanished cleane away, when he was pressed to the contrary, and neuer straue to withstand the crueltye of the Iewes. And yet hee shewed him∣self to beare more reuerence vnto the name of GOD, then a great many of those, who would at this daye, be taken not on∣ly for Christians, but also for the very staies and pillers of the fayth. For, although they know well inough, that the causes which come before them, concerne the glo∣ry of GOD, and his Churche; yet haue they lesse care to giue iudgement and con∣demne them, without further enquiring, what were the best way for thē to take, ma∣king lighter account of giuing iudgement on them, then of the least cause in ye worlde, whether it were of a money matter, or of a∣ny other worldly thing whatsoeuer.
Tob. If there were in them but that feare which they ought to haue, in condem∣ning the cause of God, vnder the name and tytle of heresie, mee thinketh they shoulde therein, bee more circumspect and discreete. And for mine owne part, as igno∣raunt & vnlearned as I am, yet I euer ab∣horred these fire tormentors, who so little esteemed of the liues of men, especially in such a cause. Theo. Truely, if thy firste reason which thou hast alleadged would not serue them, mee thinketh that the second which thou euen nowe diddest touche, might right well suffyce, for them to cast, I will not say, a little water into their Wyne, but into their fires. For to take away the liues of menne, is no small matter in the sight of the Lorde. But the offence is a great deale more haynous, when as menne for Gods cause, shall take life away from suche, as shoulde rather bee preserued, and suche also as shoulde bee in moste estimation, with Princes and Magi∣strates. Thus then thou seest what an inconue∣uience pryde bringeth with it to those that are
proude and arrogant: For, seeing they pre∣sume so muche of them selues as that they will not once vouchsafe to entertayne the seruauntes of God, and to bee taught by them, as they had neede, it is impossible for them to vnderstande the trueth, because they will at no hande vnderstande it. And contrariwise, as Iesus Christe shew∣ed him selfe to bee the Teacher and May∣ster esus Christ is hoolemaister  the humble, nd not to the oude. of the humble and meeke, euen so reiecteth he out of his Schoole, all highe inynded, proude, and presumptuous per∣sons. And therefore hee gaue thankes to God his Father, in that he had reuealed his will and trueth vnto the poore in spirite, ath. 11. saiah. 66. and hidde it from the mighty and great men of the worlde. For, there are none but the poore and meeke in spirite which are capa∣ble thereof. And therefore, the Lorde sayeth by the Prophete Isaiah, Whom will I regarde, but onelie the afflicted, and contrie in hearte and mynde, and him, who trem∣bleth at my woordes? Saynt Paule also 1. Cor. 5. telleth the Corinthians, That the Lorde hath not called manye wise, stronge, riche, and honourable menne of the
worlde: But the moste feeble, moste vyle, and moste contemptible. It is also written, That GOD resisteth the 1. Pet, 5. proude, and giueth grace to the hum∣ble. And therefore Saynt Paule; dili∣gentlye admonisheth all Christians not to esteeme, nor presume ouer muche of them¦selues. Rom. 12. Philip. 2. Tob. True it is indeede, that humility and honour, seldome or neuer agree quietly together. Theo. That is most true. For, wher∣as humilitte is not, there cannot be a tea∣cheable, and well disposed hearte to re∣ceiue doctrine and discipline: Which thing Saynt Augustine confesseth to haue found in him selfe by experience, saying in this S. Aug. in his . Booke 5. Chap. of Con∣fess. manner. I then determined to applye my mynde to the study of the holy Scriptures, that I might see what they were. And beholde, I saw a thinge that was neuer The confession of S. Aug. s concerning the pride, whiche hindred him frō profiting in the holy scriptures. knowne to the proude, nor opened to chil∣dren, but was lowly in his goyng, and ve∣rie high in his arryning, & whiche brought greate profite, and hidden secretes. And as for my selfe, I was euen suche a one,
as that I was not able to make anye en∣traunce into it, or yet stoupe so lowe, as once to be able to put my head into ye intree therof. For I was not then of the opynion whereof I now speake, when I looked vp∣pon this peece of Scripture, but thought it vnworthy to be compared to Tullies dig∣nitie. For, my greate pryde coulde not away with the basenesse thereof, and ther∣fore it fled from mee: Neyther was my wytte so sharpe, as that it was once able to pearse into it, and yet it was suche, as grewe vp amongest the basest and mea∣nest. Howebeeit, I might haue vouchsa∣fed to haue beene lowlie. And because I was highe mynded, I thought my selfe to be a great Clearke. Heere wee see howe Saynte Augustine confesseth, that whiles be flattered himselfe, and esteemed so much of his owne knowledge, and of the pride of his mynde, as that he continually disdayned and contemned the holy Scriptures. And although hee had a mynde oftentimes to giue him selfe to the studie of them, it was so farre of that he found any taste or sauour in them, as that hee founde lesse sauour in them at that time, then he did at the firste.
For, hee thought them to bee nothing in respecte of the eloquence, and knowledge which hee founde in the Bookes of Tullie and of the rest of the heathen Philosophers. But, after that this his pryde was come downe and abased, and the opinion whiche he had of him selfe and of his knowledge, hee was of an opinion, cleane contrarye to his first: And then, hee right well per∣ceyued, all humane eloquence, and Phy∣losophie, to be no better then bladders stuft full of wind, and of no substance in respect of the holye Scriptures: although to the outwarde apparaunce they made a farre gallanter muster and shewe. And therfore, whiles the eyes of Saynt Augustines vn∣derstanding were blyndfolded with ye false opinion which he had of him selfe, he had the more hoodwinked them with this pompe & false apparaunce. Tob. There are at this day, a greate many in the worlde, who are in the selfe There are ma∣nye, that will counterfeit S. Augustines pride, but they will not follow his humilitie. and same predicament, that Saynt Augu∣stine was in, at that time. But I know not, whether GOD will giue them that grace, which he gaue vnto him, to let them
vnderstande their pride, that thereby they might be humbled, and for the false opinion which they haue of their eloquence, know∣ledge and wisedome, to acknowledge them selues to be suche fooles, and blockeheaded beastes as indeede they are, to the end they might bee made apte and Teacheable Schollers in the Schoole of the woorde of God. For, there are such a number of Po∣eticall braynes, & so learned in the tongues and in humayne Philosophy: that they doe not onely make smal accompt of the books of the holy Scriptures, in comparison of their Heathenishe volumes: as that, which is of all other the moste vyle, they esteeme of them no better, then of the Dreames of olde doatyng fooles, and of doating olde wyues tales. And as fomine own part, let them haue as great knowledge as they will, vntill they burst withall, I wil esteem of th no whit ye more, if they be not honest men, and haue the feare of God before their eyes. Theo. Thou touchest now a disease, which at this day raygneth more then euer it did, yea, and that amongst such as beare
the name of Christians, which is the cause that we haue so many Libertine Atheistes, Libertine A∣theists. who scorne and laughe at all Religions. And although they are not in trueth, setled in any Religion, yet forsooth they woulde not bee thought to be vtterly voyde of Re∣ligion. And therefore, because they are of no religion, they are neuerthelesse of all Religions, in what Countries soeuer they come vnto. For, they shoote at none other marke, but temporizing, or seruing of times, with euery man, a Papist amongst Papistes, an Epicure with Epicures, an Atheist, with Atheistes, and to be shorte, a Diuel amongst Diuels, for they wil not be disquieted eyther in body or mynd neyther yet hazarde eyther bodye or goodes. And therefore, they will not greatly frame them¦selues neyther after Iesus Christe, nor af∣ter the Pope, neyther after the Gospell, nor after the Masse, nor yet after any con∣trouersie that is at this day for Religion a∣mōgst Christians, without perhaps some of them sustaine some particular losse therby. For, if eyther gayne, or losse fall ut vnto them on eyther side, they will counterfayte zeale in that Religion whiche they thinke
will bee moste for their profite, and whiche they suppose will beste agree with that, which they desire to haue heere in this life, as wee haue a manifest example, chiefly, in the Prelates and Beneficed men of the Popishe Churche. For, if they did be∣leeue that there were a GOD in heauen, and anye true religion, whereby their life and conuersation ought to bee gouerned, and that they shoulde render an accounte thereof in the day of Iudgement, they woulde surely, be other maner of men, then in deede they are. Howebeit, they right well shew, as wel by their doctrine, as also by their life and conuersation, that they haue as much mynde of God, as haue bruite beastes, and doe as muche esteeme of the immortality of their soules, as of the soules of their horses and moyles. And therfore, all the zeale which they haue to their Reli∣gion, proceedeth not from any loue whiche they beare thereunto, but onlye to the ho∣nours, and greate wealth whiche commeth vnto them thereby. And therefore, when they see them selues in danger to loose thē, they eyther become manifest blacke diuels, and beginne openlye to persecute, or if
they haue anye knowledge and eloquence, they straight way, playe the iollye Balaa∣mites. Libertine Ba∣laamites. For they commend themselues vn∣to Antichrist to resist the trueth of God, and mainteyne his false doctrine, against their owne consciences: For, they them∣selues laugh him to scorne in their heartes, and doe no more beleeue him, then those a∣gainst whom they oppose them selues. But I feare mee, I haue doone them greate wrong to compare them vnto Balaam, be∣cause they haue not so muche fayth vnto the true Religion, as Balaam hadde vn∣to the Religion of the auncient Churche of GOD, neyther haue they so greate a regarde to God, as he had. But they are as like him in all other poyntes, as like may bee, as in desire of honours, and worldly possessions. And therfore although they are in part, black Diuels, yet are they in nature, more like vnto white and Famili∣ar Diuels, where, the rest shew them selues to bee altogether blacke Diuelles. Howebeit, whatsoeuer vizers they put on, they are alwayes in trueth, very Liber∣tine Atheistes, notwithstandyng, that they seeme outwardely the Followers of Po∣pishe
Religion. And there are others al∣so, who are almost like them, euen of those which follow the Gospel, if they knew they might any way gayne thereby. But the most of that sort, serue in Kings and Prin∣ces Courtes. For, if Kinges and Princes fauour the Gospell, then they know, that ibertine Courtiers. if they fauour it as he doeth, that they shal come to greater dignity, or at least, be the better and more firmely establyshed in that degree and honour wherein they stand, for, as they can court it well, so will they also be the first that shall make court to the Go∣spell, and will bee come fayre whyte, and familiar Diuels, amongst the very angels. But if a man shoulde iudge them by theyr woorkes, fruites, and life, what Gospell it is that they professe, it woulde be soone iudged that they are very Libertine Athe∣istes. For, a man shall neuer finde any re∣formation of life in them, which is the chief cause of the preaching of the Gospell, and the principal marke to be marked and kno∣wen by, in those who haue receiued the true faith, in the true feare of GOD, and in a good conscience. And so by that meane, all their Gospel wilbe come a thing where
with to scorne the Pope, his Priests, Fri∣ars, and the rest of his shorne Balaa∣mites, and all the abuses of the Popishe Churche, and to make sporte and plea∣sauntly talke of them, especially in the com∣panies of Ladies and Gentlewomen. And if the Gospel wil giue them any such liber∣tye, whereby they may abuse it, into carnal lybertie, they will be sure to laye fast holde thereon: and not sticke to saye, that they are not like vnto those superstitious hypo∣criticall Papistes, whom they laugh to scorne. Howbeyt, further they will not, but as for the rest of their life, it shalbe as dissolute, as the most dissolute Papistes, from whom they differ in nothing but in this, that they haue put on a vizar of the Gospel, that they might therewith the better couer theyr Atheisme. Tob. Thou hast hitherto spoken of Libertine Atheistes, who dissemble their Atheisme, vnder the colour of hauinge some Religion in them, so farre foorth as it tendeth either to their commodity or discō∣modity. But there are some others, who be¦cause they cānot find any such occasiō, becō
as it were newters, beeing of neyther side, as thou hast oftentimes sayde. And the bertine new∣rs. chiefe men whiche marche vnder this En∣signe, and that are of this Bande, are they which are puffed vp with eloquence, & knowledge, and are dronken in their own wit and vnderstanding: As Saynt Augu∣stine confessed him selfe to bee, before suche tyme as GOD had touched his heart with his holye spirite, whiche is the spy∣rite of humilitie. But, although Saynt Augustine presumed thus of him selfe, by reason he was of so fine and quicke witted a spirite, and of so verie a sharpe vnderstan∣ding, and excellent knowledge in humani∣tie, as anye man that euer liued in his time and age: yet was there alwayes in him, some good seed of religiō. But because hee was an heathen man borne, and there∣fore had not from his youth beene brought vp in the woorde of God: but onely in hu∣manitie and Paganisme, and in the Reli∣gion wherein he was borne, hee could not rightly iudge of the true Religion, whiche he knewe not. And the opinion whiche hee had of himselfe, did so hinder him, as that he could not search after it, as he ought to haue
done. And after that diuers, but especiallye his mother Monica, who was a widdowe, and became a Christian before him, a very good woman, and one that feared GOD, had exhorted and solycited him, to search af∣ter the holy Scriptures: those their exhor∣tations stirred him vp to the reading of the Bible. Howbeit hee read it not so reue∣rently as he should haue done, but rather for fashions sake, by reason he came not ap∣poynted with that humilytie and modestie, which afterward hee knew was meete for the disciples of the holy Ghost to come. But when God had rebated this his pride, with the spirite of modestie and humilitie, then found he that in it, which before hee knew not how to finde in it: And by that meane, he was so much the more humbled. Howbeit, these glorious arrogant men, of whome we now speake, who thus glory of their knowledge, and skill, are euen the ve∣rye scorners and contemners of God: for they neuer shew, that euer they had the true feare of God before their eyes, nor yet any good seede of religion in them. For, there is a great many of them, who haue manife∣sted them selues greater Atheists, after they
had once gotten some knowledge of the go∣spell, then euer they had before, and since yt time, haue euer lesse reuerenced the worde of God. For, the knowledge which they re∣ceyued by the entertayning of the Gospell, serued them to none other vse, but to disco∣uer the Idolatries, superstitions, and abu∣ses, which are in the popish Church, that they might laugh at them. And euer sithence that time, they are growen euen vnto this, that they are almost at the like poynt with the doctrine of Chri∣stian religion. For, as S. Paul said, They iudge thereof, as the Grecians and wise . Cor. 1. men of the world, iudged of Iesus Christe, & of his Gospel: who thought the preaching thereof to be foolishnesse, because they were carnall men, and puffed vp with an opiny∣on of their owne wisdomes. And because the Grecians, were alwaies more accounted of then any of the reste of the Nations, by reason of their sharpenesse of witte, and of the knowledge which they had in the artes, in Philosophy, and in all o∣ther Letters of humanitie, S. Paule na∣meth them specially, although hee compre∣hendeth vnder this name, all the rest of the
heathen, as well appeareth by that, that he opposeth them to the Iewes, and sepera∣teth them also from the Christians, vnto whome, as hee him selfe witnesseth, Iesus Christ is the true wisdome, vertue, and po∣wer of God. Nowe, if these Libertine Epieures and Atheistes, had beene heathen borne, as S. Augustine was, or, if they had as much re∣ligion in them, being Christians borne, as hee had in his Paganisme, they shoulde neuer haue shewed them selues, to haue beene so monstrous beastes, as in deed they are. But although in name, they are Christians born, they are to be accounted of, as if they had beene borne and bredde a∣mongst Infidelles and Paganes, yea euen amongst the Epicures, out of whose books they haue sucked and droonke, this prophan spirite of Athiesme, who thus caryeth thē away. For, they haue yet lesse Religion in them, then euer had any of the heathen, who not onely did not approue their doctrine, but which is more, manifestly, both by word and wrytinge condemned it, yea, and often∣times executed thē by publick iustice name∣ly at
Athens. For, when God giueth vs ouer so farre, hee then by his iust iudgement bru∣tisheth vs in the cause of religion. And at it is to ēne prayer. therefore, that we shall not neede any more to pray vnto him, to beseech him, enlighten vs with his holy spirite, in the knowledge of his holy word. But, ouer and besides, that Dauid, and S. Peter, calleth the holy Ghost, the word il. 19. 119.  Pet. 1. hn. 16. al. 16. sal. 50. lat. 7. 18. of the Lorde, a candle and lanterne which lightneth a darke place, and doth enlighten the simple, yet there is onething more in it, which the Lord hath promised, that he will heare as manye as shall call vppon him in trueth, be neere them, and graunt them his holy spirit. Toby. This then is the effect of thy conclusion, that proud men, and such as call not vpon the Lord as they ought, for their instruction in the knowledge of his holye The iugdmet of God against the ontempt and hating of his word. will, haue no great good lyking to serue him accordingly. And because they haue no such loue and lyking: but contrariwise will liue as pleaseth them, God, in his iust iudgement giueth them ouer into a repro∣bate sence, and leaueth them as a spoyle vn∣to seducers, and false teachers. Wherefore,
they alwayes receyue and allowe rather falshood and errour, then the trueth of the Lord. Theo. Indeede, because they had no loue nor liking of the trueth, but rather of leasinges, the Lord by his iust vengeaunce, hath giuen a mighty power of errour vnto such maisters as they haue a lyking of, and such as they are best worthy of. And ther∣fore when Moses admonished the people Deut. 13. of Israel, that they shoulde bewre of false Prophetes, who might deceyue them, hee namely sayde, that the Lorde would tempt his people by false Prophetes, who shoulde make great shewes of trueth: and he would doe it to this end, to proue whether his peo∣ple feared and loued him with al their hart, or not. Wherein he manifestly declareth, that they which had the true feare of God before them, and loued him indecde, would neuer receiue the false Prophetes, and cast off the A preseruatiue against errors. law, & word of God, but alwayes continue in the doctrine, which the Lord God had reuealed vnto them from heauen. Toby. I thank thee, I now very wel
vnderstand this poynt, and the cause also, why the deuill euery manner of way, hath so great power ouer vs, as he hath. More∣ouer, although we haue already spoken of many that are haunted with Deuilles, yet Lunatique, if, dumb, and nd Demoni∣ques. at. 12. 17. ark. 9. uk. 11. haue wee not all this while spoken anye whit of the Lunatique, deafe, dumb, and blynde Demoniacques. Theo. It is no great matter: For we will treate of them, when thou shalt thinke it best.
The Tytle and effect of the fift Dialogue, of the world posses∣sed with Deuils. THis fifte Dialogue is called, the dialogue of Lunatique Deuilles: because the chiefe matter contained therein, treateth of a Luna∣tique Demoniacque, of whom the Euangelists make mention, and of such as may be compa∣red to the same. And beecause there were many accidentes, which fell out vnto this De∣moniacque, somewhat is also sayde, of deafe, dumbe, and blinde Demoniacques, and howe Iesus Christ healed them. What grace God graunteth to men, by the preaching of the Gospell. In what a dangerous estate they are, which are depriued of the Gospell. Of the Prophecies, of the hardening and blynding of their hearts, which contemne the word of God. What power the Deuill hath ouer younge children, and what be the causes therof, and of Originall sinne. What occasions the Deuil taketh at the infir∣mities
of men, thereby to hurt them. Of those meanes, by which wee giue the Deuill libertie to haue accesse vnto vs. Howe the Aungelles were conuerted into Deuils. Of Lunatique fooles. Of the wicked Spirite which tormented Saule. Of the vengeaunce of God, vpon the migh∣tie men of the world. Of such as follow Saules ill conditions, and which sinne against their owne consciences. Of such as the Deuill casteth into the fier, and into the water. Of the woman possessed of a Spirite, which stale money, by supping vp of it. Of the reigne of God Mammon heere in this world.
¶ The fift Dialogue of the Demoniacke world, intituled Lunatike Diuels. Theophrast. Toby. Ierome. Eustace. Theophraste. THere is no man liuing, but that would be great∣ly afeard, when as hee considereth of the estate wherein these poore and miserable demoniackes stoode, who were posses∣sed with a Legion of Diuels. But if they were very miserable, no doubt of it, the estate of ye lunatike, deafe, dumb, & blind altogether, seemeth vnto me to bee most vn∣gracious. Tob. I warrant thee, the least of all these mischiefes is great enough to make the estate of a poore man miserable. For, although we bee neuer wholy blind, deafe, nor dumb, yet see how we take on, when as
our sight alone, beginneth to faile vs, and that wee must bee faine to vse spectacles: Or, if wee heare not so well as wee were wonted to do? or that we stammer, or haue any other impediment in our tongue, and speake not so plainely as wee woulde. And if we be thus at this point, wee may easily iudge, what a miserie it is to bee altogether blinde, deafe, and dumbe. But, if we haue al these at once, besides a number of other strange diseases, ioyned together with thē, then is there a notable sort of mischiefes pi∣led vp in vs all at once. Theo. That is out of al doubt, and by how much both the sight, the hearing, & the speech are the excellent giftes of God, by so much are those mē most miserable, who are depriued of them. Tob. For mine owne part, I verily sup∣pose that there is no man liuing but had ra∣ther die tenne times, then he would be only blinde, deafe, and dumbe, although hee were no demoniacke. Theo. Surely, hee that should be in that estate, shoulde be more miserable, as a man would say, then the very bruite beast. Now imagine that this might be, when as the di∣uell
should be amiddest all his mischieuous turnes, whereof he is the cause & instrumēt. And if wee must iudge these Demoniacks to be miserable, what shall we say by them, who haue all these inconueniences in their soules? To. If we could aswel discerne these mis∣chiefes in our soules, as we cā whē we haue thē in our bodies, I doe not dout but yt wee would be in greater fear of thē, then we are. Theo. And yet for all this, they whome Satan the god of this world, haue blindfol∣ded 2. Cor. 4. their eies, to the end they should not see the light of the gospell, and whose eares he hath stopped, that they should not heare the worde of God, and whose tongues he hath tyed, yt they should not call vpon, and praise the Lorde, and such as whose hearts he pos∣sesseth and hardeneth, to the end they should not beleeue the gospel, are without al doubt a great deale more miserable and accursed, then these dumb, deafe, and blinde demoni∣ackes, whereof wee speake. Tob. And yet a man shall finde a great number of these demoniackes in the world. The. Why mā, there is almost nothing els in it. For we our selues, haue somtimes been all in this estate. And that which is
more, al men are such by their owne nature, vntill such time as Iesus Christ commeth vnto them, to driue out the diuel, who ma∣keth them so deafe, dumbe, and blinde. And therefore, so often as we see any man con∣uerted Deafe, dumbe, & blinde Demoni∣acks, healed by the gospell. to the Gospell, wee must thinke it to bee such a worke, euen a most excellente work of god: neither ought we lesse maruel at the matter, then if wee sawe him healing the deafe, dumbe, & blynde demoniacks be∣fore our eyes. And by this we may iudge, what grace God sheweth to those kindes of people, out of whō Iesus Christe driueth the Diuell, by the preaching of the gospel, that they might see the light of God, whiche without al cōparison, is a great deale more to bee desired, then the light of the Sunne, and make them heare the voyce of theyr shephearde Iesus Christe, and open theyr mouthes to preach & declare his prayse and The grace, whi∣che god shew∣rth to men, by the preaching of the gospel. glory. For, there is no harmonie of the mouth, nor yet of musicall instrument, so pleasant to ye bodily eare, as ye voyce of god is pleasant to the eares of the soules, of the children of God. And as this greatly de∣lighteth them, to heare this so sweete and pleasant a voyce, euen so likewise is it as
great a delight to thē, to haue their mouths open, to magnifie and sanctifie the name of God, and to call vpon him incessantly. And What a cursed estate they are in, which are de∣priued of the gospel. coutrariwise, we may iudge in what a cur∣sed estate they are, who bee depriued of this benefite of the Lord. For, it is euen as muche as if wee sawe the Diuell visibly raigne amongst the deafe, dumbe, & blinde, neuer ceasing tormenting of them, both in soule and body, more cruelly, then the moste tormentrous hangman in the world is able to deuise to torment the most wicked man that might possibly be committed into his handes. Tob. Assuredly, I doe tremble when I thinke of that whiche thou speakest, and when I heare thee speake. Theo. What wouldest thou then say, if thou shouldest see with thine owne eyes, the thing as it is in deed? For, if the Infidels, and enemies of God could perceiue and be∣leeue, that they were in this estate, no doubt of it, they would bee more afeard of it then they are. Tob. For mine owne part, I verily thinke, that they would fully and wholy bee contented to die, so that they might but only
vnderstand and lay hold of it Theo. Why then, if the estate of all such as remaine in the darknesse of error and ignorance, be so accursed, horrible, and fear∣ful, yet for all this, there are none of all those which are in such estate, who are more accursed, then those whome God reiecteth, by reason they haue cōtēned his holy word, and to whom he sendeth his prophetes and seruants, to doe that duetie which the Lorde committed to Isaiah, when as he said vnto him, Goe thy way, and tell this people, Isaiah. 6. A prophesse of the hardening of their heartes, which contemne the gospel. that in hearing they shall not vnderstand, and in seeing, they shall not perceiue. Blockishe the hearte of this people, stoppe their eares, and close vp their eyes, to the ende, they may not see with their eyes, nor heare with their eares, nor yet vn∣derstande with their heartes, that they may not bee conuerted, and so bee hea∣led. Toby. Surely, surely, this is a feare∣full prophesie. Theo. By this we may euidently see, that euen as God by his iust iudgement a∣bandoneth the Demoniackes vnto the Di∣uell,
ouer whom he gaue them power, euē so he abandoneth him, and dischargeth his handes of all such as contemne his giftes & graces, to the end the diuell might close vp Exod. 4. 7. 8. 9. 10. theyr eyes and eares, and so harden their heartes as he did Pharaos, that they might perish accursedly, as they deserued and wi∣shed. For, seeing they toke pleasure to blind themselues, because they would not see the light of the worde of God, and stopped their eares, that they might not heare his voice, and hardened their heartes, that they might not beleeue the gospel, they well deserued, that God should forsake them. Toby. Verily, these men might well bee placed, amongest the blinde, deafe, and dumbe Demoniackes, saue that I thinke they are not dumbe to blaspheme the name of God. Theo. If euer there were blinde, deafe, and dumb Demoniacks in the world, these are they. And the greatest number of those, are they who so greatly glory of the knowledge of the gospel, & to be the people of God.
And therefore this prophesie of Isayah, is alleadged and rehearsed sixe times at the least in the newe testament, as well by the foure Euangelists, as also by Saint Paule. For, euen as the preaching of Isaiah did blind and harden the heartes of those hypo∣crites, Mat. 13. Mark. 4. Luke. 8. Iohn. 12. Actes. 28. Rom. 11. and rebels that were amongest the Iewes, not through the Prophetes faulte, but through their owne: euen so was the preaching of Iesus Christe, and of his A∣postles, amongest them who in their dayes were like vnto these, against whom Isaiah prophesied. And we see that this prophesie is dayly accomplished, not onely in Christi∣an Papistes, but also in suche as greatly boast of the reformation of the Gospel: and more in them, then in any other besides, be∣cause they most villanously abuse the gra∣ces which God hath bestowed vpon them. And therefore, because their vnthankeful∣nesse is meruellous great, it is good reason their punishment should bee the greater. Wherefore, it is not without iuste cause that this prophesie is so oftenrepeated in the newe Testament, more then any other that is in all the Bookes of the Prophetes. Tob. I beseech the Lord keepe vs by his
grace, yt we fal not into any such inconueni∣ences, to the end we become not such despe∣rate Demoniakes. But what saiest thou now of Lunatike Diuels? For thou hast Lunatick De∣niackes. Mat. 17. Mark. 9. Luke. 9. The power wh∣che the Diuel hath ouer young children, & wha the causes there∣of, are. not as yet, set downe thine opinion of thē. The. Although Saint Matthew cal∣leth this Demoniacke, only Lunatike, yet Saint Mark sayth, that he was deafe also, and Saint Luke, that he was dumbe, and they all agree together, that he was euen so from his infancie. Tob. This is very strange, that the Diuel should haue such power ouer young children. The. This is an example admonitato∣rie to vs of many things, if we can wel con∣sider of them. Tob. I pray thee tell me what things they are. Theo. First of all, wee are hereby to iudge of the state & condition of our nature, and how corrupt and accursed it is, by rea∣son of sinne, seeing, that euen from our in∣fancie, the Diuel hath such power ouer vs. For, if young childrē were without sin, the Diuel should haue no power ouer them, no Originall sinne. Rom. 5. more then death which the diuel hath begot
through sinne. And therefore, Saint Paule proueth, that because children dye, that they are subiect to originall sinne, and that they ead against ul. haue alreadie deserued punishmente for the same in this their infancie. And so, some of the auncient doctors of the Churche, take this example of the Lunatike infant, to proue the same, against all suche as denie o∣riginall sinne, affirming, that young chil∣dren are innocent, and without sinne. Tob. Surely, the reason of these an∣cient doctors is built vpon a sound founda∣tion. Theo. If children then of this age de∣serue now such iudgement at the handes of God, if God will iudge them in rigour, wee may soone haue an estimate, what venge∣ance we dayly deserue at the hands of God, considering, that wee haue not this natural corruption onely in vs, which we call Ori∣ginall sinne, and is in young children, but that whiche is more, wee continually carry about with vs the cursed and damnable fruites, by which, we incessantly prouoke the heauie wrath and displeasure of God against vs. Tob. This example ought to teach vs,
to humble our selues vnto the Lorde our God, and incessantly pray vnto him. That Mat. 6. Luke. 11 hee woulde not leade vs into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill. And therefore we ought to bee very watchfull, and stande vpon our guard, to the end he ouertake vs not vpon the sodaine. For, if this be so cruel an enemie vnto young children, be sure, hee will vse no great curtesie vnto vs. And if GOD giueth him suche libertie to hurt young children, out of doubte, hee wyll ne∣uer spare vs, seeing that we haue a great deale more deserued his furie and indigna∣tion, then young children? Theo. Euerye man may vnderstande this, if hee will. But yet consider som∣what more in another point, of the malice of Satan. I appeareth by the wordes of Saint Luke, speaking of this miserable Lunatike, that the Diuel, tormented him Luke. 9. Of the disese which this luna∣tike demoniacke had. not continually, but that hee gaue him some respyte, although but a little. For, hee setteth it downe in these plaine termes, that this Diuell, would hardly depart from this wretched childe. Whereupon, it must followe, that hee departed sometimes from him.
Tob. Is this the cause, why the Euā∣gelists called him Lunatike. Theo. I doe not thinke, that hee was he falling sick∣s. called Lunatike, because he had the falling sicknesse, which commeth by fittes, as the Moone increaseth and decreaseth. For, be∣cause that this disease commeth of the in∣firmitte of the brayne, it therfore followeth the course of the moone. And again, because the brayne is very colde and moyst, it agree∣eth mightily with the nature of ye Moone, which God hath created to be of such a na∣ture, as that it might preserue colde and moyst things, as hee hath created the Sun to bee of a hoate and drye nature, that it might preserue the rest of the same conditi∣on, to the ende, that all the creatures of God, might be kept in order, which God in his Almightie prouidence hath disposed. Tob. Is this the cause, why wee also commonly call this disease, the hie euil, and The hie euill. that we terme them which are subiect there to, to fall into the hie euill? Theo. That may bee one cause there∣of. For it cannot take a man hier, then by the head, or brain, when it taketh him in the
head and braine, as that he falleth to the grounde, as a Butcher knocketh an oxe in the head. It is also said of this Lunaticke infant, that the Diuell cast him, and made him sometimes fall into the fire, and some∣times into the water, in such sort, as that it was maruaile that hee had not beene kild a thousand times. It is likewise written, that he fomed at the mouth, and tare himself hor∣ribly. Tob. All these accidents, do greatly folow the falling sicknes. But it is namely set downe, that the diuel did all these things and not the disease. Theo. The one of them is no let to the other. For although the Diuell is the Go∣uernour The Diuell ta∣keth occasion to cause men hurt themselues, eue by their own in∣firmities. and ruler of this doing, yet hee ta∣keth it from the infirmitie and disease, wher¦vnto he knoweth this infant to be subiecte, and occasioneth him to doe that euill to him selfe which he doth, and so serueth his turne there with, for the exercising of his crueltie and malice towards him. And therefore, hee watched and pryed out the tymes and sea∣sons, when this disease came agayne to this childe, and hee himselfe also hastened and furthered it as much as was possible. And
therefore the Diuell surpresed this childe, when hee knew that hee should fall into the disease, to make him fall either into the fier or into the water, and so by that meane de∣stroy him if hee coulde. And therefore S. Luke saith, that the Diuell, with much a doe, departed from this childe. uke. 9. Tob. I haue alreadie considered of two thinges which thou hast spoken. The First, is of that which hath heretofore been hande∣led, as concerning the desire which the Di∣uell hath to hurt the creatures of God, but especially men, as for example wee haue seene in the Legion of Diuels, who entred into the Gergesites swine, after they had beene driuen out of the Demoniacks. The. What is that other point, whiche thou wouldest speake of? Tob. It is euen this, That I see the horrible iudgement of God, and his greate mercy together, in one and the selfe same person. For, although God had left this poore and miserable childe vnto the diuell, yet hee so brideled vp the diuel, as that hee coulde not hurte the childe as hee woulde: but in good sorte, in despite of all that the Diuell coulde doe. And God preserued this childe, that Iesus might heale him, as
such time as hee had appointed, to the end that his sonne Iesus Christe might be glo∣rified by hym, and that the worlde might know what power hee had, ouer the most wicked and terrible diuels. Theo. Nowe in very deede, this was very well considered, and spoken of thee, but yet there is somthing more to be noted, ouer & besides all this, and ye is this, that see∣ing the diuel taketh occasion to rush in vpon men, through their infirmities, and corporal The meane by which we suffer the diuel to haue accesse vnto vs. diseases, and so cruelly deale with them, we may very well consider, what occasion hee might take, by the infirmities, diseases, and greeuous sinnes whiche are in our soules, for the destroyng of vs eternally. And therefore we had need, very carefully looke to our selues, how by such means, we inuite and bid him come to vs. Tob. Surely, me thinketh ye we haue a very manifest example of that which thou speakest, in Iudas. Because, ye diuel, seeing The example of Iudas. him inclined to couetousnes, tooke occasion to enter into him, ye redie & open way. For, as I take it, some of the Euangelistes say, that Satan entred into him. Theo. In deede, Saint Luke and Luke. 22.
S. Iohn haue so set it down. And althogh hn. 13. the Diuell entered not into him to torment his body, as his custome is, to torment De∣moniackes, yet he so tormented his soule, as that he droue him to that issue that he made him hang himselfe. And because hee udas a very iuell. Mat. 27. Acts. 1. ohn. 6. Mala. 1. was so disloy all a Traitour, where he shold haue been an angel of God, vnto the which estate Iesus Christ had called him, our Sa∣uiour of very right and iustly, did not onely cal him Demoniack, but euen plaine diuel. For, seeing the true ministers of the Lorde be called in ye holy scriptures, the angels of Apoc. 2. 3. god, thē may they iustly be holdē for diuels, which abuse their office, and band thē selues against God, where they shoulde thereby honour him. For, heerein they do the office The conuersion of Angels into diuels. of Diuels, because they abuse their office, and the excellent giftes which God hath be∣stowed vpon them. To. Me thinketh, that this exāple shold terrifie all couetousmen, but especially, all the wicked ministers of the Churche who make they ministerie serue their coueto∣ousues. For, the diuel hath a iolly entrance Coutiousnes. into them. Theo. Forsooth, it is very true. But
thiefly into those, which sell and betray Ie∣sus Christe and his Church, through their couetousnesse. Wee might say as much of other vices, notwithstanding that this vice of couetons∣nesse, is one of the chiefest, by which the Deuil hath Lordship ouer vs, & maketh vs his slaues. To. I may thee, shew me some other examples of Lunatique Deuilles, tending to this purpose, and of the occasions, yt the Deuill taketh by our infirmyties & sinnes to hurt vs withall. Theo. Contented, It is written in the Booke called Ecclesiastes: That the talk Eccle. 27. of a man whiche feareth GOD, is al∣wayes wise: But a foole chaungeth as the Moone. To. Why, then I perceyue, we may very wel place fooles, amongst Lunatique Lunatique fool men. And so by that reason, the number of Lunatiques shoulde bee great, seeing that there is a great and infinite number of fooles. Theo. Howbeit, if they be both Luna∣tique and demoniacques: yea, deafe, dumbe, and blinde, they are the more daungerous
fooles. And yet we see almost nothing els before our eyes. For wee shall see some of them, at one time or an other, seeme to haue a good lyking of God, his worde, and of vertue, and honesty. They haue their momentes, and fittes, wherein they deale wonderfully, so that a man would thinke them to be become the honestest men in the world. And in the turning of an hand, they are so suddainlye chaunged from better to worse, as that thou wouldest saye, that the Deuill was entred into their bodyes, and so became Demoniacques. These men are such Demoniacques, as aule is left to e wicked spirit Sam. 16. king Saule was. For, it is written of him, that after Samuel had annoynted Da∣uid, to be king ouer the people of God, in Saules steede, the good spirit of the Lorde departed from Saule, and the euill spirite of the Lord tormented him. And shortly af∣ter, Saules seruants, called this Spirit, the euil spirit of the Lord. Toby. I take it, that the holy Scrip∣ture, so saith, vnderstanding therby, that the lord sent this wicked spirit, in his iust iudg∣ment, to punish him by him, as he had of lōg deserued.
Theo. There is no doubt of it. Whereupon thou art to note first of all, that the Hebrew word, which the holy scrip∣ture vseth in this place, may be diuerslye interpreted. For, it may also be interpre∣ted, that this wicked spirite, terrified, or choked, or puffed vp, or els astonished Saul, and made him become blockish. To. But, before we talke any further How the Deu hath dayly gre aduantage ou vs. of this wicked spirite, which came vppon Saul, after that the good spirit of the Lord was departed from him. It hath heretofore beene declared, that Saule was a great hy∣pocrite, and a most glorious man, and an enuious Rebel to God, and had so prouoked God vnto anger, as that he caused Samuel 1. Sam. 15. 1 1. Sam. 31. 2. Sam. 11. to tell him, that he should be hereaued of the kingdome, which he had giuen him, as in deede it was. And the cause why GOD gaue him ouer vnto the wicked sprite, came by reason therof. How, Saule was not so wicked and cur∣sed, before such time as the wicked spyrite had taken possession in him, neyther was he any right Demontacque, without he kept it more close before, then afterward he did.
And therefore, how are wee to vnderstand this, that the good spirite of the Lorde de∣parted from Saule, and that the wicked spirit came vpon him, in the steede of the good? Theo. The example of Iudas, of whome wee haue so often spoke, may serue vs to great purpose, for the resoluing of vs in this question. For, when Iesus Christe sayd, that Iu∣das was a Deuill, there is no doubt, but that ohn. 6. the Deuill reigned in the heart of Iudas before. But because that Iudas continu∣ally more and more abused the giftes and graces of God, and grew worse & worse, wher he should haue waxed better & better, hee made the waye more open and plaine, for the Deuill to enter into him. Wherefore S. Iohn setteth it down, that the Deuill put it in Iudas heart, to beetray Iesus Christe: and afterward hee saieth, as S. Luke sayde, that Satan entred into ohn. 13. uke. 22. him. It was not meant by the Euange listes, but that the Deuill was in him before, and namely, when hee beganne to murmure a∣gainst the woman, who had spent her pre∣cious
oyntment vpon Iesus Christ. But Math. 26. Mark. 14. Iohn. 12. their meaning is, that we should vnderstād, that the Deuill at that time, had taken lar∣ger possession in the heart of Iudas, and had greater power ouer him, insomuch that he was maister of all, as experience after∣warde manifestly declared. Toby. Thy meaning then is, that it fared euen so with Saule. Theo. True in deede, for the thing is most apparaunt. For, euen as Iudas did a great deale worse, after such time as S. Luke and S. Iohn spake, that the Diuell was entred in∣to his hart, so that Iudas was thē come euē vnto the fulnesse of all iniquitie & wicked∣nesse: Euen so fell it also out with Saule, after that the good spirite of the Lorde was gone from him, and he left vnto the wicked spirit. For, before that, the good spirit of the Lorde, caused him to doe manye good things, although Saule had not a true and sound heart. Howbeit, although he did him selfe no good, yet did he good to others, con∣sidering the estate wherein he was. But, after that the good spirit of the Lord, had wholy giuen him ouer to Satan, a manne
might haue seene him grow worse, daylye and hourely, so that hee neuer rested, vntill such time as he had filled the measure of al wickednesse, and for a man of his degree & qualitie, made euen as shamefull an end, as Iudas did. For, after that Saule had com∣mitted the very worst deedes that he could possibly deuise, against God, and against his seruant Dauid, the Deuil at last egged him so far forth, as that hee destroyed him selfe with his owne handes. Toby. This is a fearfull example of Gods heauy vengeance, especially vpon so . Sam. 31. od plagueth he most mighty inges for their ransgressions. noble a personage. For, if God spare not kings and Princes, we are not to look that he will spare any others whatsoeuer. Theo. It is so farre off, that hee spa∣reth great kinges, and mightie potentates, because they are of great magnificēce, as ye he punisheth them with more greeuous, no∣table and fearefull tortures, then any of all the rest of his people. For, by how much the more he hath made them great and ex∣cellent, by so much the more are they vn∣thankefull vnto his maiestie, when as they abuse his graces. And againe, there are no enemies of God, which more dishonor
him, & do greater hurt vnto al mē, by their euill examples, and lesse punished by men, then they which are in the greatest autho∣ritie. And therfore it cannot be chosen, but that God him selfe must arise to execute iu∣stice vpon them, seeing that none els will, or can doe it: And hee must needes cause them make a publick amends, for all the horrible and grieuous offences, which they haue heretofore committed, and stil dayly doe. Toby. To saye truely, hee handleth thē very roughly, when he once beginneth to lay his hand on them. Theo. But amongst all the rest, whō the example of Saul ought most to terrifie, The Imitator of Saule. are all glorious, proude, enuious, and hypo∣critical men, and all tyrants, but especially, those kindes of men, whoe fight against What a grie∣nous thing it i for a man to sin against his own conscience. their owne consciences, and persecute such as they know to be most innocent. For, Saule, was subiect to all these vices. But, he most manifestly shewed, what great po∣wer the Deuil had ouer him, when as he so openly fought against his own conscience, which oftentimes enforced him to accuse & condemne his own self, for the iniuries and wronges which he had done vnto Dauid.
For, how often was he enforced to say, that he was a vile and wicked man, and had done great iniurie to Dauid, and that Dauid was innocent, and a far honester man then . Sam. 24. 26. him selfe? And who enforced him this to doe, but the very power of the trueth, and his owne conscience, which draue him to it, as if he had beene racked to doe it? he right well knew, that he did wickedly, and that he manifestly fought against God, and yet for all this, he no whit amended him selfe: but stil became more trayterous, fierce & cruel, without any regarde, either to GOD, iustice or equitie, then any brute and furious beast. But when he made such a iolly confessi∣on of his sinnes, a man would haue thought, that he had beene very penitent, and altoge∣ther conuerted. A man would haue thought that he had beene come againe to his right wittes, and that he had beene verye well di∣sposed to haue don much better, then before time hee had. But hee was immediately after, quite and clean altered, and did worse, then before he had done. Insomuch, that at the very same instant, wherein hee vsed these speeches, declaring the innocencye of
Dauid, he tooke his Iaueling, & thought if he had coulde, to haue run Dauid through 1. Sam. 18. 2 26. with it, with his owne handes, and after∣ward caused him to be sought for al ouer, to haue put him to death. Tob. Surely, herein he right wel she∣wed, that he was a very Demontacke, and most Lunaticke. Theo. We see a great number of such. For, there are an exceeding mighty num∣ber of those, who, after they haue long time fought against their own consciences, haue some remorse thereof. But forsomuche as GOD forsaketh them, because they haue forsaken him, the Deuill their mai∣ster, who hath so great power and dominiō ouer them, hath no more stay of them, then of senslesse and mad men. And therfore they alter their mynds euery houre. And if it so fall out, as that they sometimes light on the right side, theyby & by tumble ouer againe vnto ye other side, so yt, the moone changeth not so oftē as they do. But this is the nature of al such as are subiect to the diuel. For, af∣ter any furious & mad spirit hath once got possession of them, they are neuer long in one mind. Tob. Thou hast already spo∣ken
of many greate vices which greately haunt vs, that make vs subiect vnto him. The. It is said, that the diuel many times cast the Lunaticks one while into the fire, & Who they are, om the diuel ouerthroweth and maketh them fall into he fire. another while into the water. Now, whē ye diuel eggeth vs forward, so that he causeth vs to fall into the sinne of couetousnesse, he casteth vs into a farre more dangerous fire, then if he did cast vs into a materiall fire. For, couetousnes, is such a fire, as is impos∣sible The fire of Co∣uetousnes. to be quenched, by reason of that which is cast into it, but burneth stil more & more. Wherefore the couetous men burne conti∣nualy in this fire, and consume therin much of that that is cast in, with them. Tob. If they were cast in into a ma∣teriall fire, they shoulde bee discharged for being burnt any more. Howbeit, these men, of whom thou speakest, are in a farre worse estate, then if they were burnt but in a smal fire. Theo. Wee might likewise saye as much of Whoremongers. For Lechery is The fire of whoredome and Lecherie. a fire also, and as hard to be quenched, as ye fire of couetousnesse. And how many do we daylie see cast into this infernall fire by the diuel, who are there cruelly roasted both
body & soule. But there are a maruellous great number, especially, of these Luna∣ticke Demoniackes, whom the diuell very often casteth into this fire of whoredome and lechery, amongest the suppostes of the popish Church, who had rather burne in it, contrary to the counsell of Saint Paule, and the expresse commaundement of God, The contempt of marriage pu¦nished. 1. Cor. 7 then marry, and finde water in holy marri¦age to remedy it, wherby they might quēch this fire, and so be ridde of it. But they had rather haue the diuel keep them there, Gen. 1. 2. Math. 19. then they woulde serue God in that estate which he hath ordeyned frō the beginning. Tob. But, what are they, whom ye diuel maketh thus fall into the water? Theo. Why man, there are an ex∣ceeding number of them. We may place in this ranke, all voluptuous and lycenti∣ous persons, who suffer thēselues to ouer∣flow Who they are whom the diuel causeth to fall into the water. as it were water, in their pleasures & delightes. And therfore they make this en∣tree for the Diuell to enter into thē, to the end he might plunge and drown them ouer head and eares, so that they shoulde neuer be able to come out agayne. To be short, if wee woulde discourse of this matter
more at large, we should find, that the most parte of vs, are thus dayly dealt withall by the Diuell, who handeleth vs not onely as hee handled the miserable Lunaticke, but a great deale more curelly. For there is no comparison betweene the harmes whiche the Diuell is able to doe to the bodies, and those whom he incessantly hurteth in their soules. Tob. Seing we haue talked so long, of so many sortes of Demoniackes, I wold gladly now know of Ierome, what he were able to say to this matter, considering hee hath so long heard vs, & neuer spake worde which I maruel of. And me thinketh also yt he is about to leaue his silence, and to say somewhat. Ier. Surely, thou and Theo. haue said so much, as that you haue lefte me no great matter to talke of. But I will tell you a A storse of a wo∣man Demoni∣acke that was neuer satisfied with money. Tale which once I hard done by a woman Demoniacke, who differeth farre frō those sortes of Demoniackes, of whom thou hast before spoken. Tob. Thou wouldest fayne tel vs here some fable and old wiues tale, to make vs forget all the doctrine whereout we might
gather some good matter, of the talk which we heretofore haue had. Ier. I wil tel thee, they that told me this hystorie, tolde it not vnto me for a fable, but for a true hystorie. And for myne own part, I verily beleeue, that they counterfayted not the matter. And put the case it were a counterfayte thing, yet shal it turne to good purpose, as cōcerning those matters, wher∣of you haue talked. Tob. Thou shouldest haue gone on with thine history, whiles we haue entertai∣ned thee with these great promises. And therfore let vs now heare it. Ier. First of al, it was told me that this history happened in Almayne, and that this Demoniacke was so lycorous of money, as neuer Iacke Dawe had greater delight in it. For she woulde no sooner come neere any man, but that her hand was sodainly v∣pon his purse or money bagge if he had a∣ny, that she could find. And if she had once fingred it, she woulde haue so lustely be∣stirred her, and so suddaynely haue put the Gold or siluer which she had fingered vnto her mouth, as that a man coulde not haue beene so wary of her, but that shee woulde
haue more suddainelye haue licked it in. Tob. I promise thee, this was a mar∣uellous straunge Diuell. Why, those whi∣che we commonly call Sarasins, or Egip∣tians, or els Bohemians, are nothing sail∣full in respecte of this Diuell, no nor yet the Iacke Dawes, who are the notablest theeues for money that may bee, and will sometimes as quickely dispatche it. But what became of this Demoniacke in the ende? Iero. I vnderstoode by them who tolde me the tale, that Luther was asked his opinion of her. For hee was then a∣liue, when as this matter fell so out. And the place wherein this thing happened, is not farre frō ye place where Luther dwelt: but I doe not well remember the name which was told me. Tob. It is no matter for the name of the place. But tel vs if thou canst, what Lu∣thers aunsweare was, as touching this de∣moniacke, to those which asked his counsell herein. Ier. I vnderstood, that he told them, that it was an aduertisement of God to the
Almaynes, and to all the world besides, that the diuell Mammon was vnchayned & let God Mam∣raigning in  world. loose, and raigned in the worlde, and was now more vnsatiable then euer he had byn before, and therefore leaft neither purse nor bagge vnryfled. And that although he had drawen drye all purses and bagges, and lic∣ked vp all the gold and siluer within them, yet coulde hee not be through full: For it is an vnsatiable gulfe whiche neuer cryeth hoe. Tob. What meanest thou by this di∣uell Mammon? Ier. That couetousnes, wherof the diuel himselfe is both God and father. Tob. Indeed, me thinketh that Luther hitte it rightlye. And if so bee there had been no such thing, but a fayned matter, for sporte, yet it carrieth a good sence with it, for we daylye see before our eyes, the prac∣tise whereof Luther spake, both in al coun∣tries, and also in all estates, and therefore the Almaynes are not to bee onelye char∣ged therwith. For, we are able to say with∣out counterfetting, that there is a diuellish couetousnes al the world throughout. And if a man should consider well of the matter,
we should see couetousnesse, to be a verye right shee Diuel, and maketh men become hee Diuels, & maketh such a nūber of De∣moniacks as the woman was, of whō thou erst spakest, and begetteth suche a number of great & litle Diuels, to play this pageāt, as that the whole worlde is nothing ls but a Diuelrie, altogether diuelished. Ierome. This was that she diuel which chiefly made Iudas such a Diuel, as thou hast saide he was, and so, neuer sithence that euer she ceassed hatching and bringing forth of such like as her self, who are the greatest inderers of the course of the gospel, which any way might come vnto it. Tob. We are then in a iolly countrey, when as we be in suche an hel, and haue to doe with so many sortes of Demoniackes and Diuels. Ier. The danger is not so great to haue to doe with them, as it is to be one of the number. Tob. I right wel know thy meaning. And therefore the hardest matter for vs re∣steth herein, to find ye meanes how to auoyd al these inconueniences, to wit, howe wee may first keepe our selues, from falling in∣to
these mischiefes. The second is, as tou∣ching the meane, whereby we may eschewe the hurt which these diuels and Demoni∣ackes might doe vs. Ier. That, which thou hast spoken of, is the very best and chiefest: For, to what pur∣pose were it for a man to vnderstand the dis∣ease, without a man did thinke to get neces∣sary remedyes for the healing thereof, and it were to smal purpose to thinke of them without a man were sure to find them. Tob. In very deede it would serue to none other end, but the more to torment the party grieued, and make him become more desperate. Ier. And therefore the verye best way will be, that at our first meeting together, we trauel and goe about this matter.
The Title and effect of the sixt Dialogue, of the Demo∣acke world. THis sixt Dialogue is intituled, The coniuration of Diuelles, because in it, is set forth, whi∣che way to driue out Diuels whiche rule and torment the world. Wheruppon, those re∣medies are spoken of, which Saul sought after, that hee might bee ridde of that wicked spirite whiche tormented him, and of the remedies which Infidels, and wicked men hunt after, for such diseases as come vnto them, and how men haue recourse vnto creatures, wheras in truth they should run vnto God. Of the cause of Saul his madnes, and of the right remedy that was vsed for the same. Of the blockish and witching spirit which God sendeth vnto vs in his iust iudgement. For what cause, fasting and prayer are auay∣leable, for the driuing out of diuels. How very necessary a thing the increase of faith is. Of the true vse of fasting, and of the abuse
thereof. Of gluttonie & drunkennesse, cloked vnder the title of the libertie of the Gospell, and namely in the person of the Magistrates, and ministers of the church. Of the Diuels force, whē he is to be put out of his lodging. Of the victory which Iesus Christ hath a∣gainst him. Of the principall and most necessary know∣ledge that is wāting in man, & of his vnthank∣fulnesse, as well towardes God, as also vnto to those to whom of duety he is bound.
The sixte Dialogue of the Demoniacke worlde, intituled, The Coniuration of Diuels. Ierome, Tobie, Eustace, Theophrast. Ierome. THou desiredst (Tobie) to vnderstand what reme∣dies there were to keep vs, not onely from be∣comming to be Demo∣niacks, but also to be de∣fēded from taking anye hurt either by the diuels, or by the demoni∣acks whom the diuels possesse and rule. Tob. Very true. And therefore I am here now ready to heare what fit remedies thou haste brought mee for the purpose: For I right well knowe, that all the Priestes, Friers, and Charmers Coniu∣rations, and all the Coniurers that be in the worlde, will litle or nothing auaple, without there be some other helping haud then theirs.
Ier. Why man, thou must not looke that the diuels and Demoniackes coniure one another. Tob. Why speakest thou that: Ier. Because, if there be any men in the whole world, ouer whom the diuels raigne and haue power, they are the people, of whom thou erst speakest. And therefore if there bee any who of right are to bee taken for Demoniackes, euen those kindes of men, of whom we heretofore spake, are to bee looked for amonges the men of that Courte. For they are suche demoniackes, as that they make all men els very demo∣niackes also, what with their false doctrine, traditions, and by meane of that wicked spyrite which guideth and gouerneth them. For, seeing they are the guyders and Go∣uernours of others, it cannot bee chosen, but that they whiche are guyded and go∣uerned by them, must needs bee led by that spirit, which guideth & gouerneth their lea∣ders and Gouernours. Tob. I doubt that Eustace, wil not yeeld vnto that thy opinion. Ier. I care not whether he will yeelde to it or not, yet I am sure it is true that I
haue sayde. Eust, If thou wilt needes haue it so, I shall but loose tune to speake against thee. And therefore I shalbe contented to heare, what Coniuerers they are that thou canst bring foorth for thy parte, and see what greater vertue they haue more, then those whom thou hast disciphered, and so greatly blamed. Ier. Mee thinketh Tobie, that Theo. hath shewed vnto vs a most excellent reme∣die against this mischiefe, whiche is so greatly to be feared: so that in my opinion, if we take it, we shall neuer neede ae o∣ther. Tob. I vnderstand right wel, yt he hath sent vs backe to Iesus Christ, to seeke this meane and remedy at his hand. And surely for myne owne parte I would neuer goe a∣ny further. Theo. Saul very diligently sought after it, but because he went not to God, to whō he ought to haue gone, he neuer found that comfort and remedy against his disease, that he looked for. Tob. What remedy was that: 1. Sam. 16. Theo. His seruants made him beleeue
that it was best for him to haue some cun∣ning The counsell which Saules seruants gaue him. Musition, which could play excellent∣ly vpon an harpe. And he thought this, to be very good counsel. Wherupō, he forth with sent to haue such an one gotten him: and at last, Dauid was brought to him to play this parte, for hee had therein, moste excellent skill. Tob. What reason had they to dot thus: Theo. There was great like lihoode, that the seruantes which gaue Saule this counsel, as the historie witnesseth, were his Phisitions, who had met together to con∣sult of his disease. For, when anye sicke∣nesse, or other inconuenience falleth vpon What reme∣dies the wicked hunt after, whē they are dise∣sed. the wicked, they neuer cōsider, that it is the hande and rodde of the Lorde that is layde vppon them, without they bee enfor∣sed thereto, with the greate blowes of a mawle, as was layde vppon Pharaob and the Egyptians. And therefore, where they Exod. 12. should looke vp vnto heauen, they stil looke groueling downe to the earth, and runne rather vnto creatures, then vnto the Cre∣ator. And agayne, they that are about them, &
like them, neuer giue them other direction. Wherefore, when Saul was not well at ease, hee must needes sende for remedy for his disease. And his moste excellent re∣medy had beene, to haue sent for some sound Prophete or Preacher, to haue told Saul of the grieuous and great sinnes which he had committed, whereby the wicked spy∣rit had so great power ouer him, to tormēt him as he did: For, by these and suche lyke speeches, he must needes haue been brought to repentance, and so haue fled to the mer∣cies of God, whereby he might haue obtai∣ned his fauour, and remission of his sinnes: for, if he had growne to an attonemēt with God, through true and faithful repentance, he shoulde haue founde at Gods handes, that remedye that was moste necessary for him. For, that God, who had striken him in his iust iudgement, could, and also woulde, haue healed him in mercy. But because that Saul, had so lōg dallied wt God, & perfeue∣red so long in his wicked doing, cōtrary to his own cōscience, as yt god would not once vouchsafe to giue him that grace to haue re∣course vnto him, nor suffer him haue animā in his Court, & about him, to giue him that counsel.
Toby. I doe not thinke this counsell, to be the best counsel that might haue been Wee runne to creatures for aide, rather t vnto God. giuen him: howbeit, this is the verye ordi∣nary course, which we almost all take, to runne rather vnto Phisitions, and secke re∣medie at the handes of Creatures, then vnto God, the most excellent Phisition of all. Theo. I doe not thinke it amisse, to vse Phisitions, and all other meanes what∣soeuer that men are able to helpe withall, so that they be ordeyned of God. But herein resteth the faulte, that wee forsake GOD, and runne vnto Creatures: But if wee runne vnto GOD, yet haue we more confidence in men, & in the crea∣tures, and in the meanes and instrumentes, which he hath ordained, then in God ye fra∣mer and worker of all, without whome, all the instrumentes are able to doe nothing. And therefore it is written of king Aza, that GOD tooke away his life from him, 1. Chron. 16. because that in his sicknesse, he trusted more vnto his Phisitions, then hee did vnto GOD. Nowe, if God punyshed those, whoe vsed such remedies as hee had orday∣ned, when as they put their confidence
in that, which they should haue done in him, we ought not to meruayle, although hee seuerely dealeth with many, who are not contented to abuse the meanes which hee hath ordayned, but seek after other meanes, which he hath forbydden, & put therin their whole trust. To. They which haue recourse to the Deuill, and vnto Charmers, and Sorce, rers, who are his Ministers, directe them selues to other Phisitions and meanes then GOD hath ordayned. Theo. Neyther doe these men escape the heauy hande of GOD, although hee be flow in comming, nor yet they which runne vnto Idolles, and to straunge Gods. Toby. But I pray thee tell me, whe∣ther Musicke hath any power against such Musick, a reme dy against mad∣nesse. kinde of madnesse as Saules was, or not: For, it is to be presumed, that they which gaue Saule counsell, to send for a cunning Musition, where of this opinion. Theo. There are many Melancho∣like, and franticke people, whom Musicke serueth as a medicine, because it reioyseth and tempereth mens affections, and there∣by
draweth awaye their imaginations els whether, if it be vsed as it should be. But Saules madnesse proceeded not onelye of a sadde and melancholicke humour, eyther yet vppon anger and wrath. But the principall cause was supernaturall: And therefore, although hee founde him selfe somewhat comforted and eased, when Da∣uid played vppon the Harpe, yet continued hee still in his madnesse, yea insomuch that he still enforced him selfe to thrust through Dauid, his Musition. And therefore hee was to looke for re∣medie some where els. For, Saules madnesse proceeded from the cursse of god, The cause of Sauls madnes. Deut. 28. wherewith hee threatneth all such as will not obey his lawe, that hee will strike them with blindnesse, furye, and madnesse: in such a sorte, as that hee will make them sencelesse, that they shall be no more able to guyde and gouerne them selues, The spirite of fry and bloc∣kishnes. then those blind men, that grope by ye wals at noone dayes. Toby. Surely, this is an horrible and very fearefull threat. Theo. All the rest of the Prophetes, which liued after Moses, threatned the like
curse and vengeance, namely to tyrauntes, their Counsellors and Offycers, when as saiah. 19. Oseah. 4. 5. Iohn. 6. 12 they threatned them, that God would sende amongst them, a blockish, sleepy, & drunken spirite. To. I thinke, that foolish and wicked Counselles, which greatly hurt Princes, their courtes, and principalities, proceede from such a spirite. Theo. That is questionlesse. For, seeing they make no account of the counsel of God, which he delyuereth vnto them by his worde, and seruauntes, they are worthy of such counsellors as are ledde with such a 1. Kings. 22. spirite: As the false Prophetes of Achab: who were, by ye iust iudgement of God, sent vnto him, to deceiue him, as he had well de∣serued. To. Thou wouldest thē thus conclude, that there is no suffycient Phisi∣tion, to deliuer or ridde men of such incon∣ueniences, saue the most excellent Phisi∣tion of al. Theo. Our sauiour Iesus Christ, yeel∣ding a reason, why his Disciples were not Mat. 17. able to heale the Lunaticque, tolde them, that that sort of Deuilles could not bee cast Fasting & praic requisite for the casting out of Deuils. out, but by fasting and prayer.
Toby. Why sayd he so? Theo. He him self declared that suffi∣ciently enough, when as he as wel rebuked his Disciples, as also the father of the Lu∣naticque, for their incredulitie, giuing them therby to vnderstand, that, yt was the cause, why his Disciples were not able to cast out yt Deuil, albeit they had vsed al the skil and cunning they had. Wherefore, seeing it was for want of fayth, it was requisite, that Encrease of fayth necessary. their faith should be encreased. And this could not be had, but by the grace of God. For, fayth is the gift of GOD: And ther∣fore, as we cannot haue it without him, no more also can it bee encreased but by him a∣lone. And therefore, Iesus Christ exhorted his Disciples, to pray that it might bee en∣creased in them. Wherfore, sith it is so, we Ephe. 2. Iohn. 6. must addresse vs vnto GOD, by hearty and faythfull prayer. And prayer can in no wise please him, without it come from the soule and heart. And because that abstinence or fasting, The right vse of fasting. greatlye auayleth the soule or minde, forso∣much as being lesse pressed by the body, it is better disposed towardes God: therfore the seruauntes of GOD, haue commonly
ioyned abstynence and fasting with their prayers, when as they would addresse them selues vnto his Maiestie, for any things of great importaunce, and be more feruent in prayer, according as the necessitie of the cause requyred. And therefore, Iesus Christe meaning to let his Disciples vn∣derstande, that they had great neede to pray vnto GOD, for the encrease of their faith, and that fasting, greatly auayled vnto prai∣er, because it was of great effycacie: he ioy∣ned fasting with prayer, when as he spake of fayth that was to be required, for the ca∣sting out of this kinde of wicked, and most cruell Deuils. Toby. I doe not much meruaile, that there are this day so few Coniurers, which are able to cast out of the worlde those De∣uilles, of whome wee haue heretofore so much spoken. For, there are but a few men, very earnest in prayer. And as for fastinge, the number is lesse, especially amongeste you, who so greatly glory of the Reforma∣tion of the Gospell: For, you are not con∣tented your selues not to fast: but, which is worse, you scorne them that fast, and con∣demne The abuse offa∣sting condēned. them for superstitious people, and
hypocrites. Theo. I know right well, that thou takest great pleasure to be mery with vs, or els thou speakest of our doctrine accor∣ding as thou haste hearde our aduersaryes talke, who can neuer speake well of it, and yet neuer eyther heard or yet vnderstood it: or, if euer they heard it and vnderstoode it, they speake ill of it against their own con∣sciences. For, who euer heard vs more con∣demn fasting and abstynence, then true prai∣er, and all other good workes, which God alloweth and lyketh of. Toby. Wherefore then fast you not in Lent, the foure Ember dayes, the Vigi∣les, and other fasting dayes, commanded by ye Church. Theo. If we condemne yt super∣stitious and importable abuses, which the What true are. Papistes vse in their fastes, wee doe not for all that comdemne the true fastes, that are according to the worde of GOD, and ac∣cording to the right rule of the auncient Fathers and true seruauntes of God: But contrariwise, weegreatly desire, to haue the right vse of those fastes, to bee broughe into the Church. For, there is great dif∣ferēce between correcting the abuses, & the
abolyshing of good things which men haue abused. And as for the common fastes, there are no preachers which more commēd thē, nor who more grieuously reproue and con∣demne gluttony, drunkennesse, and al dis∣solutenesse, or losenesse of life, as well for eating and drinking, as also for all other thinges, then the true Ministers of the Gospell, reproue and condemne them. Toby. I doe verely thinke, that that which thou sayest is true, but I finde fewe which follow that doctrine. For, I see manye of your side, whoe are no better re∣formed, without, where peraduenture they ttonny and ukennes, clo∣ vnder the ti∣ of the liberty he Gospell. might at the least haue fasted sometimes, so long as they held our lawe: who nowe, not onely neuer fast, but commonly surfet both in eating and drinking, as if they had receyued the Gospell for none other pur∣pose, but to surfette at pleasure, and make a scorne at all abstynence and so∣brietie. Theo. I must needes confesse, that there are ouer many such. And I will con∣fesse more vnto thee then that. For, if this mischiefe, whereof thou speakest, were but in some of the meaner sorte, it were
lesse to bee lamented. But the greatest mischiefe of all the rest is this, that there are a great number of ministers and magi∣strates, who are more licentiously giuen to this kinde of vice of trowling and bowling, then those men, whom they ought to correct for such offences. For these are the spe∣ciall men, whome a man shall ordinarily finde in the Tauernes and Tipling houses, as if their chiefest occupation were to trowle and bowle, & prouoke others to all loosenes. Tob. I haue hearde it oftentimes spoken, yt there are many of the chiefest of your officers amongst you, who take great Of the Glutto∣nie and drunken¦nes of magi∣strates and ministers. pleasure to giue the ministers, which will play the good fellowes alittle, theyr lading (as wee say). And these officers thinke, that they haue made a great conquest, when as they haue a minister drunke, as it too too often falleth out. And I doubt not, but that Ierome hath hearde as great newes of this as I. Theo. I knowe more of this, then I gladly would, & I cānot heare it spoken of, but to their great shame which doe, and continue such villanies. But it is easily
to bee seene, what maner of men these mi∣nisters and officers are, who thus honestly behaue them selues, thou maist right well say, That Rowland and Oliuer are well met. For, because these officers, are men of wicked life and conuersation, and feare that the Ministers woulde reproue them of their sinnes: They are the gladdest men in the worlde, when they can get in their Mi∣nisters to bolle with them, to the end there∣by to brydle them, that they shoulde not bee ouer greeuous in accusing and reprehen∣ding of them. For, when these Ministers or rather minstrels, haue well wet theyr whystle, they, ouer whom they are Pastors, doe assure themselues then, that they wyll not be too eager vpon them. And againe, these cup whisteling minstrels, haue no re∣gard, to much crying out, because they fear that some man woulde accuse them, if they should displease those who were witnesses of their trolling and bolling, & the rest of their vices whereunto they are subiect. Tob. If the case thus standeth, I dare assure thee, that you haue very venerable Apepostles, to cast out all the Diuels by fasting and prayer, which at this present so
greatly trouble the worlde. And if there were no Diuels at all in the whole worlde, these good fellowes, in steede of casting of them out, woulde bring them in. Wherfore, I doe not much maruel, although the Di∣uels haue so great power of these drūkards and gluttons of all sortes and estates, and namely, ouer those ministers & magistrates who ryse early in the morning, not to go to a Sermon, but to the Tauerne and there drink a dutant, what saiest thou to it Theo∣phraste? Theo. This I say vnto it, that ye land, and common weale is accursed, which hath gluttonous & drunkē magistrates & pastors, & rise vp in the morning to folow drunken∣nesse Eccle. 10. Isaiah. 5. vntyll they are hoat with wine. And therefore, seeing that all vices reigne in the world, & more amongst them, which should correct and punish thē, then amongst any of the rest, it is no maruell, though there be so many diuels & Demoniacks euery where, as are. But such as feare ye Lord, haue a ve∣ry good recourse. In very deed, it will bee What deuis and meanes  Diuel hath  he is to be dis¦ted. a hard matter to make those diuels departe frō thē, but yet they shal, wil they, nil they, be displaced, because Christ laieth his hand on them,
as hee did vpon the miserable Lunatike. For, when Iesus Christe was in place, it . 17. k. 6. e. 9. was so farre of that the wicked spirite woulde departe from this poore childe, as that hee became more madde in him. And so likewise, when these Diuels, and demo∣niackes that they possesse which are nowe in the worlde, feele the Gospel came neare them, and beginne to heare the voyce there∣of, they are euen as madde, as if a man shoulde sounde out the Trumpet, to assault them, and giue them the alarme. And, as the Diuell went not out of the Lunatike, vntil suche time as he had first tryed all his forces against Iesus Christ: No more wyll hee be displaced of these Roomes, which he hath gotten possession of, without stronge and mightie combates. And al the while that the Diuell so furiously resisted Iesus Christ, the diuel a great deale more tormen∣ted the poore Lunatike, then euer hee dyd before, Insomuche, that hee lay before Ie∣sus Christe, as if hee had been dead. Tob. Hee dyd that, to vexe the poore father, of that so very a miserable childe, and because hee had so little faith, his increduli∣tie was the reason, why this childe was no
sooner healed. For it seemed, that the presence of Iesus Christ, did him more hurt then good. Theo. It might seeme that Iesus Christe came thyther, to giue the Diuell Victorie ag the diuell, he had been ¦uen, to his shifts. greater power, to the end hee might finish that worke which hee so long before trauel∣led about, which was, to kill this poore mi∣serable childe. For, euery man thought the childe to bee dead, when the Diuell leaft him. Howbeit, it fell out cleane contrary. For, when it was thought, that hee was starke dead, hee was quite and cleane deli∣uered of the Diuell, and made through whole. Nowe, wee see that the like of this fal∣leth out dayly, we see how the Diuel trou∣bleth and tormenteth the worlde, especially in those places, out of which hee knoweth he shall be caste. For, he then falleth into such a rage, as that a man woulde thinke that the Gospell, by which meane Iesus Christe will cast him out, had set open all the gates of hell, to let out all the Legions of Diuels that were in it. For, then hee fretteth and sumeth, and maketh as manie as he hath power ouer, to fret and fume.
To be short, he so terrifieth ye whole world, yea, the valiantest and most constant, as that a man would think it should be vtterly con∣sumed and come to naught. But euen then, when we thinke it shoulde bee cleane wasted and destroyed, our Sauiour Iesus Christe, sheweth himselfe to be farre stron∣ger then he. And therefore, wee must not stande in a maze when we see the troubles and persecutions, which the Diuell and his retinue styrre vp in the world, when as they feele Iesus Christe come neere them, to cast them out through the power of his gos∣pell. We haue none other thing to doe but to remaine stedfast and constant, and do that duetie that appertaineth vnto euery of vs: and so leaue the charge of all the rest of ye things vnto our Lord Iesus Christe, who will neuer forsake vs, nor yet suffer the di∣uell to reigne amongst vs. Tob. I tell you, it is most necessarie that hee shoulde put to his helping hande. For there is none els to withstand the Di∣uels power, nor yet stay and tame suche an enemie, whome, neuer man was able to vanquish, but he alone. For, so far foorth
as I am able to vnderstand by the talk that wee haue had together, we are not only in worse estate, and more intractable and ra∣gyng then bruite beastes, but also then the very Demoniackes. Whereupon, I can not sufficiently enough maruaile at our na∣ture. For, we are of that nature and condi∣tion, that wee can skill to do any thing, but that which should be for our benefite, & most necessary for vs. For, there is neither Art, Man can doe ¦nie thing, sau that which he ought chiefl to doe. Science, practise, nor yet occupation what∣soeuer, which we haue not deuised, and can doe it, and teach others also, sauing the art to liue well, which wee bragge to teache to euery one, and yet are not able to teache our selues, but muche lesse able to practise it. For, there is almost, no beast so sa∣uage, cruell, furious, or villanous howeso∣euer, but that men by Arte, is able to vanquishe, tame, and master, and make familiar and gentle: But it is a won∣der to see that hee is not able to fynde out any Arte, Science, Practise, nor Man a conq¦tor of thin but of himsel weapons, to vanquishe, tame, and master hym selfe, and to ouercome and subdue his owne affections.
Horses and Moyles are with much a doe brought to it: But yet hath man founde the meane to handle them, and make them doe him seruice, in a short time. Bulles and Dren are mightie and strong: and yet man teacheth them to beare the yooke, and draw in the Cart. The Elephants likewise are most terrible: and yet man maketh them beare as great a burden as he Iusteth. Wol∣ues and Beares, are very cruell: and yet man maketh them tractable. Lions are very fierce, proude, cruell, and terrible: and yet man maketh them humble themselues, and obey him. Contrariwise, I see too often that the husbande is not able to maister his here is disa∣erment be∣eeue the hus∣and and the ife. en. 2, 3. phe. 5. ien. 1. 2. wife, nor the wife, her husband, that they might liue quietly together: although shee be fleshe of his flesh, and bone of his bones, and litte long time togeather, both in one house, and eate their meate together, both at one Table, and lye both in one bed, and which is more, are one body, and one blood. If man then cannot liue with himself, with his owne fleshe, and his owne blood, with whome will hee liue: If hee cannot loue his wife, whom God hath made of his owne substance, and hath giuen her vnto him, for
his aide and comfort, whom will hee loue: Likewise, if the wife cannot humble herself and fit her selfe, to agree with her husband, Ephe. 5. who me God hath giuen her, to be her head, and framed her out of his body, with whom will shee agree, and who shall bee able to a∣bide her: There is great contrarietie be∣twixt dogges and Cats, yea such a naturall hatred, as is not almost to bee reconciled. And so likewise, betweene Woiues and Sheepe: Lions and Dren: And yet if they had been brought vp together from their youth, their bringing vp and company kee∣ping, which they had had together, woulde worke some power and efficacie to dispoile them something of their nature, & so ioyne themselues in vnitie together: Although they bee beastes of sundrie kindes, and mer∣uellously differing, and contrary one to another. What sayest thou to this Ierome: Ierom. Mee thinketh, it fareth with men, as it fareth with flyes and swallowes, who are alwayes lodged amongst men, and A similitude o vnthankful men. lye in theyr houses, and yet for all that, a man is not able to master them: for, the
swallowe buildeth her neast in his house, and layeth her egges there, and hatcheth vp her young ones. Man, bestoweth house roome on her, & they both sleepe vnder one roufe, and yet there is no familiaritie be∣twene them, neither yet liue they one with another. And in the end the Swallowe leaueth nothing els to the good man of the house for his house rente, but her filthie dounge, after shee hath continued there a great while, and broken him of manie a sleepe with her chattering and chirping. And therfore Tully rightly compared swal∣lowes my in his 4. coke to tren. to false and vnfaithful friendes, For, as the Swallowes make them readie to come in the Spring, and then depart when cold weather commeth in: Euen so wyll false friendes stande by vs so long as the weather is faire and cleare, but when they see the winter of mishap come vppon vs, they flie away from vs euery chone. And therefore it was not amisse said of Pitha∣goras, to forbid men of receiuing the swal∣lowe Pithagoras Creede. vnder their roufe. Tob. What meant Pythagoras by that. Theo. His meaning was, that it is not Piutath.
good to be familiarly acquainted wt ang∣lers, staunderers, and vnthankfull persons, Dueit.  8. who are rightly represented by the Swal∣lowe. For, a man shall neuer get any good by them, but sorrowe, griefe, hurt, and dishonour. And is not the flie likewise I pray you, alwayes in the kitchin: The first at the Table, the first in the dishe, and ta∣steth all the meates wee eate of. Yea, they will doe it, although we were Emperours and Kinges, and more then this to: They take assaye oftentimes before the cooke. Ier. But what fauour find we by them for all the benefites which they dayly haue at our hands, in our houses. What wage & reward haue we of them? Tob. This wee haue, they greue and be∣ray with their dirt, whatsoeuer faire and beautifull thing that is within the house. Ier. And more then that, for they en∣gender vermin and corruption, neuer cea∣sing to importune, sting, and bite vs, euē til the blood follow withal, and are neuer con∣tented with all the benefits yt we bestow on thē, wout they also suck & drinke our blood. Tob. These Flyes are farre more dangerous then man, and a great deale
more vnthankefull. I see fathers and mothers also dayly, that cannot agree with their children, but after, that those fathers and mothers haue wasted the odours, and fumes of the odours, which are continually about their children, and dandeled them, and haue been greeued and dered, and had many a foule hand with them in the bringing of  great vn∣sefulnesse of e children, ardes their ents. them vp: so soone as these children haue bin growne vp to rype yeeres, they would not once acknowledge either father or mother: They would neither see them, nor beare with them: but driue them oftentimes, out of the house: or els. theyr parents were in∣forced to driue them out, by reason of their rebellion and wicked dealing. I neuer saw any such vnthankfulnesse, nor crueltie betweene Dogs and Cats, Wolues and Lymmers, Lions and Lions whelpes. I haue seene these Landleapers, who haue lead all the countries ouer, Lions, Beares, andleapers. Apes, Asses, Horses, and many other sortes of beasts, and ruled them as they listed. For, they would make them do whatsoeuer they pleased, and commanded them. They haue made them daunce, leape, lye styll, stand vp, touch on the ground, make curtesie, march
march with a pyke, and winde a flate. To bee shorte, I am not able to tell you in a longtime, howe many sundrie thinges they haue taught them, and made them doe. For, they taught them to doe all things. What is the cause then, why man is so well able to instruct the most vnteachable bruite beasts, and doe learne of him, and yet hee himselfe, not able to teach himselfe, nor yet learne of himselfe that, that is necessary for hym to learne, and without the which, he is in deed no man: Ierom. No, not the wife of her hus∣bande, nor the childe of the father. Toby. What is the cause then, why doe these Landleapers take so great paine, to teach beastes, after this sort? Ierom. It is to none other eude, but to make men sporte, and thereby, get mo∣ney of them, that they myght liue the ease∣lier. Tob. Now, what greater pleasure can any man haue, then to see his children well instructed: Is there any Ape more plea∣sant: with whom may they haue any better pastime: And what greater commodity can any Landleaper draw out of beastes, which
he so teacheth, then the father frō his sonne, the husband, from his wife, or the brother, from his brother, or one neighbour from an other, if they could as wel learne of them, as the beasts learne of the Landleapers. Ierom. This is most certaine, a man ☞ shall finde a great many moe children, like the Hippopotame, then the Storke. he Hippopo∣me. Toby. What manner of beast is that Hippopotame? Ierom. It is a beast that is bred chiefly in Egypt, in the riuer of Nile, & yt one half of him is like an horse, and the other halfe like a fish. And therefore, he beareth this name, that is to say, a riuer horse. Tob. What is thy meaning by naming of this beast: Ierom. I will tell thee, They that haue written the histories of the natures of beastes, haue set downe the nature of this lutar. Booke. hether the eastes bred on eland, be wisser en they which re bred in the eater. beast, to bee so peruerse and cruell, as that so soone as hee is come to any type yeeres, being therto brought by yt endeuour of his parents, that hee will kill his father, and afterwarde haue to doe with his mother. And howe many children, thynkest thou shall wee finde at this day, who are
not grieued, that Fathers & mothers liue so long, and thinke of nothing els, but to see the end of them: Toby. And how many thinkest thou there are of such childrē, who bring their pa∣rentes to the graue, with very sorowe and pensiuenes, to see their vnto wardnes. Ierom. Alas, if man sheweth him selfe to be such a one, to those who haue be gotten him, and brought him vp, what good shall other men hope for at his handes. Toby. But tell mee also, I beseech thee, what thou meanest by speaking of the Storkes: Ierom. I put in them, beecause they are of a cleane contrary nature. For, if wee The Storke Plin. in his Booke. cha. Antipelar∣gosis. shal giue credit vnto natural Philosophers, both Greeks and Latines, & to their Pro∣uerbs, they bring vp & comfort their dams in their old age, & by that meanes, shew thē selues thankful vnto them, for their bring∣ing vp of thē, when they were young. How sayest thou Theophrast, is it not so: Theo. In very deede the Hebrewes, giue this Fowle, which here, in our lāguage, we call a stork, & giueth her in ye Hebrew tōgue a name, which signifieth, mercy & curtesie. And
right well say, that he were the most myse∣rable of all the creatures in the world. And yet he dareth him selfe alone, boldly resiste al order of nature, and refuse to doe his due∣tie, wherunto al the rest of the creaturs are most obedient. He boldly dareth lift vp him selfe, against the Authour, and Gouernour of all things, who made him of the flyme of the earth, and in a moment is able again to dissolue him. I cannot inough meruayle, when as I consider of this great pryde and arrogancy of may, how he alone dareth re∣siste his God, whome, all the rest of his cre∣atures, the heauens, the earth, the sea, the starres and planets, al the elements, beasts, Angels, and Deuils obey. Toby. Surely, for mine owne parte, I woonder at it, euen as much as thou doest. Theo. But thou wouldest a great deale more woonder, if thou diddest more nar∣rowly consider, of the infirmitie and myse∣rie of man, wherewith hee is continuallye enuyroned, and as it were almoste quite and cleane swallowed vp, sithence the time of his conception, and what his nature and frame is. And therefore, seeing we are
entred into this talke, me thinketh, that this cōsideration, and contemplation wil not be amisse, for vs to debate on. For the which cause, I am of the opinion, that wee might handle this poynt some what more at large, if you will agree vnto me herein. Howbeit, I feare nothing but that we should be ouer long, because there are in this behalfe ma∣ny good thinges, and worthy dilygent con∣sideration. Ierom. I beleeue there is none here, but would be right gladde of it. For, it is a matter worth the handling. But to the ende we might all profit the more. I take it, that our best way were, for the present, to talk of some other matter between, & recre¦ate our selues a little in this faire Garden. For, when, our mindes are alwayes occu∣pyed about one thing, it groweth yrkesome vnto vs at last, although it were neuer so pleasaunt or profitable. Againe, we cannot so well carry away all, when our mindes are surcharged with ouer great a multitude of matters, and besides, when wee haue no delight in that that we heare. Eust. Without doubt, there is nothing more certaine.
To. I know not my maysters, whe∣ther you be weary or no: But for mine own part, I am weary of hearing of good talke, when I shall tarry all day and all night a∣bout it. Theo. And, I doe thinke, that there is none of vs weary in this good cōpany: But because we may be the fresher, and followe the matter more cheerely, I am contented to agree to Ierome. And therefore, I thinke it moste expedient, that we walke a little here in this garden, and looke vppon the goodly flowers, which God hath crea∣ted for our vse: to the end, that in beholding of them, we may the better alwayes learn, to acknowledge his great power, wisdom, bountie, and that therby, we may haue the better occasion to prayse him, and yeelde him our humble and hearly thankes: And then wee maye after enter againe into our matter. And where wee haue heretofore spoken in generall, of the disorder and con∣fuseduesse of the world, and of the daunger wherein it standeth, wee will also speake some what more, in perticular of man, who is the cause of all the disorder, and great mischiefes, that at present reigne in the world.
Tob. Seeing you are all of this opi∣uion, I promise you, I for my parte, wyll not be against it. Let vs rise therefore, and get vs hence. FINIS. Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Tho∣mas Dawson, for Iohn Perin in Paules Church yard at the signe of the Angel. 1583.
