E1229 [ocm]12281486 197715
ARTICLES AND Acts of Parliament: Taken out of the Records of the Tower, shewing how Traytors have sedu∣ced the King by wicked Counsell to take him from his Parliament, and to raise warre against them. ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that these Articles and Acts be forthwith Printed and Published. H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. With the Earle of Warwickes taking of great store of Armes and Ammunition, with Money and Plate in foure Coale-shipps which came from the west coun∣tries towards Newcastle to ayde his Majesty against the Parliament. And also a great Fight betweene the Earle of Warwicke and a great Fleet of Spanyards at Sea, which were comming against England, and how they were taken and dispersed by the said Earle. And likewise of a French man of Warre taking of a Shippe with Powder and Match, that was comming out of Holland to relieve the Protestants in Ireland. LONDON, Printed for Theophilus Bourne, 1642.
Articles and Acts of Parliament, taken out of the Records of the Tower. ITEM by the said encroachment, the aforesaid Alexande Arch-bishop of Yorke, Robert de Vere Duke of Iroland, Michael de la Poole Earle of Suffolke Robert Tres∣slean false Justice and Nicholas Brembre false Knight of London, have done that, whereas a the last Parlia∣ment, all the Lords and other wise men and Commons there assembled, seeing the lesse of the King & his Kingdome imminent, as well for the perils and mischiefes aforesaid, as that the King was de∣parted from the Counsell of the Kingdome, and harkened wholly to the Counsell of the aforesaid malefactors and Traytors as also becasue the French King with his Royall power was nipt upon the Sea ready to have cme into England to destroy the Kingdome, and the English tongue, and that no ordinance nor governement was then established for the safe∣ty of e King nor of the Kingdome, they knew no other remedy, there∣upon, but remonstrated unto the King at full, how that he was ill govrerned counselled, & carred away by the aforesaid Traytors & Malefactos decla∣ring unto him their wicked condiions, and required him most humbly as his loyall subjects for the safety of him, and of his whole Kingdome, and for the avoyding of the perills aforesaid to let go and put from him the aforesaid malefactors and Traytors out of his presence and company, and that he would not doe hereafter according to their wicked Counsells but that he would follow the wise, loyall and discreet men of this Kingbome and thereupon the said Traytors and Malefactors, seeing this good and honorable opinion of the Parliament, and to disturbe their good purposes therein, by their false Counsell caused our Lord the King to command the Major of London to cause a great power of the people of London to bee
suddenly levied, for to kill and put to death all the said Lords and Com∣mons except only such as were of their party, at the doing of which wick∣ed act, the said great Malefactors, & Traytors should have been parties & present to the destruction of the King and all the Realme. Article 29. Item, For to accomplish this high treason aforesaid by their counsell, the aforsaid Alexander Arch-bishop of Yorke. Robert Veer Duke of Ireland and Michael de la pole Earle of Suffolke, caused the King to send his Letrers of Credence to his adversary, the French King: some by one Nicolas Solthwell, Groome of his Chamber, and some by other persons of meane fortune, as well Aliens as Denizenes, requiring and praying the said French King, that with his power and Councell he would be aiding and assisting to our Lord the King to destroy and to put to death the said Lords▪ and other English, which the King then held his enemies and traitors, as before, to the great disquiet and trouble of his whole kingdom. Article 30. Item, The aforesaid Alexander Arch-bishop of York, Ro∣bert de Veere Duke of Ireland Michael de la poole Earle of Suffolke, enctoaching unto themselves Royall Power caused the, King to pro∣mise unto the French King, and his power, for to accomplish that high treason, prodition, and murder, to give and surender unto the said French King, the Towne and Castle of Calis, and all other Castles and Forts in the March of Picardy and Artoys, the Castles and Townes of Chirlurge and of Brerte to the great dishonour, trouble and damage of the King and of his Kingdome. Article 37. Item, the aforesaid Alexander Arch-B. of Yorke Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, Michaell de la poole Earle of Suffolke. Robert Trelsillian false Iustice, and Nicolas Brembre, false Knight of London, malefactors and Trators, during the time of the said protection, to the overthrowing of the said appeale, falsely Counselled, and caused the King to commend by his letters, divers Knights, Esquires his sheriffs, and other his officers of bivers Counties, to raise & assemble all the power that they could to come with the said Duk of Ireland, against the aforesaid, other. Lords Appellants, suddenly to make war against them & distroy them. Article 38. Item, During the time of the said Protection, the afore∣said Robert de veere Duke of Ireland▪ Michael de la poole, Earle of Suf∣folke, Alexander Archbishop of Yorke, Nicholas Brembre false Knight of London, caused the King by his Letters to signifie to the said Duke of Ireland, how that he and others were appealed of Treason by the said
Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Constable of England, Richard Earle of Arundell and Surrey, and Thomas Earle of VVarwicke, and how that the King had thereupon given day to the said Parties, with their Men, Goods, and Chattells, into his speciall Protection, and besides, it was contained in the said Letters of the King, that if the said Duke had suffi∣cient power, he should not faile to come on with all his aforesaid Power; and to come to the King, and soone after they procured the King, to write unto the said Duke of Ireland, that he should take the field, with all his power which he could gather together, & that the King would meete him with all his power, and that the King would with him put in hazard his Royall person; and the King was in great danger himselfe and his whole Kingdome, if he were not helped and succoured by the said Duke of Ire∣land, and that the Duke of Ireland should make knowne this unto all the men that were assembled unto him; and that the King would pay all the wages, and charges of the said Duke of Ireland, and of all the men assem∣bled by him, by vertue of which Letters, and the malicious and trayterous excitations aswell of the said Duke, as of his Adherents and all the other malefactors and traytors, the said Duke of Ireland assembled a great num∣ber of men at armes and Archers, as well the Counties of Lancaster, Che∣ster, and Wales, as of other places of the Kingdome, to destroy, and to put to death the aforesaid Lords, and all others which were assenting to the making of the said Ordinance, Statute & Commission, unto the destructi∣on of the King and his Kingdome. Article 30. Item the said Robert de veere Duke of Ireland, false trayor to the King and Kingdom, assembled a great power of men at Armes, and Archers of the Counties of Lancaster, Chester, and Wales; and of divers other places, to the intent to have traiterously destroyed so far as in him lay, the Lord Thomas Duke of Glocester Constable of England, Henry Earle of Darby, Richard Earle of Arundell and Surrey, Thomas Earle of Warwicke, and Thomas Earle Marshall, and other Loyall Sub∣jects of our Lord the King, as well to the destruction and anniation of our Lord the King, and of his whole kingdome; and so heride with great power and force of men at Armes, and Archers from the County of Chester through the Kingdome, till he came neere to a certaine place, which place is called Rotcotbriege, neere to Cotswold, encroaching to himselfe Royall Power, caused the banner of the King to be displayed in his company, contrary to the dignity of the King and of his Crowne, at which time the said Duke of Ireland and his Company, were by the grace of God, disappointed of their wicked purpose.
Memorandum. That the same Roll containing the petition of the afore∣said appeal distinguished by Articles as above by quotation is marked, was delivered in the present Parliament, by the aforesaid Duke, and Earle appelants; and Memorand. that afterwards in the same Parliament, the 1. 2. 11. 15. 17. Articles aforesaid are declared, and adiudged trea∣son, and every one one of them is declared and adjudged treason, And that which is contained in the 22. Article of the aforesaid Articles con∣cerning the levying of men, to make war and destroy the Lords & Lieges of the King is likewise declared and adiudged treason. And that the 28. 29. 30. 31. 22. 37. 38. 39. Articles aforesaid are also declared and adiudged Treason, and every one of them is declared and adjudged treason▪ as is sett downe in the Record and the precesse annexed and ffixed to this Roll on the back side of the said Roll by these words qulle petition in presence du Roynre dit Sr. &c. This judgment was confirmed by Act of Parliament, 11. R 2 ca 3. 1 H 4. ca 3. and 4. of the old printed statutes and the said statute 1 H 4. repeales and makes void the Parliament of 21. R. 2. and all the proceed∣ings thereof, in which forced and tumultuary Parliament, the Acts of the Parliament of 11. R. 2. had been reversed. Of the Earle of VVarwicks ta∣king of great store of Armes and Ammunition. THe Earle of Worwicke having received letters from the Parliament, informing him that they have received certaine information that there are preparations made, both in France and Spains for warre, and that great forces are raised in those Countries, which as it is conceived upon just cause are intended either to releive the Rebels in Ire∣land, or to assist the King in His War against the Parliament. The said Earle repaired towards Callis where it is reported that a great Army are raised, and lye in a readinesse for some great designe intended by the French King, which the said Earle hopes to discover, that thereby the better meanes might be used to deseate their wicked purposes: And al∣though▪
we have not heard the certainty of that discovery, yet this we are sure of, that his Lordship hath done very lately speciall service for the King and Parliament, for on Saterday the 17. of September, foure shippes like unto Cole shippes were discerned by the Earle of Warwicke, sayling towards Newcastle whereupon his Lodship sent out two good shippes to discover whence they were, and meeting with them they strooke sayle and pretended that they were going to Newcastle for Coales which they intended to bring to the Cittie of London, but in re∣gard they were farre from the coasts and had much varied from the usu∣all compasse, which our Marryners use to passe in upon that service, the said Earles shippes rested not satified with their pretended answers, but boar∣ded the said ships knowing that it was both a safe and sure way to search what was therein, and certainely to know what they were, upon which sech they found in the said shipps great store of Armes and Amu∣nition, with about foure hundred Lasts of powder, and a great quantity of Plate and money, but very few passengers, none being in the shippes but the Officers and Saylors, which refused to shew their Commission or to make knowne from whence they came; whereupon they were stayed and brought to the Earle of Warwick o be further examined and there to remaine untill he shal receive furnhr directions from the Parliament how to dispse of them, for it is supposed that it was such prouision as have beene raised by the Papists and other of the maligna at party in the West Countrey, and were going to Newcsle to ayde the King against the Par∣liament. It appeares that the Earle of VVarwicke is very vigilant and watch∣full to keepe out all forraine enemies, from invading this Kingdome, for about the same time that the before mentioned foure shipps were taken by his Lordshippe, there was discovered uppon the Coast of England nere unto Plymouth a great Navy upon the Sea, but it could not be dis∣erned what they were, and the next day being Thursday in the evening a great battell was heard to be fought upon the Sea, and therefore we conceive that it was the Spanish fleete that lay at Dunkirke▪ or the French which were comeing either to aide his Majestie against the Parliament, or to assist the Rebells in Ireland, but is most probable that they came a gainst Eagland because it is reported that they have sent store of powder and Ammunition to Ireland already which the Protestants there want by reason of the taking of a shipp. ltly laden with pouder and match by a
French man of warr that was comeing out of Holland into Ireland to supply the want of those things amongst the Protestants there, but I shall say noe more of that for I doubt not but the Parliament will cause the French King to make restitution thereof, and it is conceived that the Earle f Warrwicke hath either sunke and taken a great part of this fleete and ent the rest home againe with such an overthrow that they will be glad to stay in harbour all this winter, for the fight continued about 3. or 4. houres, but the successe thereof is not as yet certainly knowne yet we doubt not but the event will every way answere our expectations. FINIS.
