E1514 [ocm]12231759 197307
A DECLARATION OR ORDINANCE Of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, Concerning the seizing of Horses for his Excellency the Earl of Essex: With a Provision that this Ordinance shall not ex∣tend to the seizing or taking of any Horses, Mares or Geldings of any the Members of both Houss of Par∣liament, or any of the Assistants of the House of PEERS. Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration be forthwith Printed and published. Jo: Brown Cler. Parl. Hen: Elsynge Cler. Parl D. Com. Also, An ORDER of the Commons House in Parliament concerning Coals, That they shall be sold at 20. shillings the Chaldron, or 23. S. at the most: And that the sayd Coals be not sold to any Woodmon∣ger, Chandler, or others, who sell the same again; but unto the poor, and unto House-keepers, and those of the meaner sort, not sparing to any one person above the quantity of one Chaldron. Ordered by the Commons House Assembled in Parliament, That this Order be forthwith Printed and published. Henry Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husbands June 10. 1643.
Die Mercurii, 7. Junii; 1643. WHereas there is an Ordinance of Parliament passed, bearing date the Tenth day of this instant May, con∣cerning the taking of horses for the ser∣vice of the Parliament▪ It is further Or∣dered, and Declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, aswell in pursuance of the said Ordi∣nance, as by way of addition, That his Excellencies occasions may be served, and yet with the greatest ease to the Counties as may be; That the Deputy-Lieutenants, or the Committees for the Propositions, or any two of them, with∣in the severall Counties, when the Lord Generall shall require so many Horses out of any County, shall immediately leavie such a number upon every Di∣vision and Hundred, as in a proportion the severall parts will afford; And shall
cause the Horses so proportioned, to be delivered accordingly. And in case the said Deputy-Lieu∣tenants, or Committees, shall not exe∣cute according to the said Ordinance, and deliver such Horses as are fit for service, nor in such time as the Lord Generall shall direct; Or that the Lord Generall shall finde, by reason of some great exigencie, that the said circum∣stances cannot be observed without danger to the Army, and insert the same in his VVarrant, Then such Offi∣cers as his Excellencie shall appoint, shall raise and take such number of Horses as are required by his Excel∣lencie, within the places appointed, ren∣dring an accompt to his Excellencie for the same, having regard alwaies of those persons that having expressed their good Affections by contributing
upon the Propositions, and submitting to the Orders and Ordinances of Par∣liament; And in case that upon any exigencie the Horses of such persons as have expressed their Affections to the Parliament as aforesaid, shall be ta∣ken, That their Horses shall be valued by the Constables, and certified to the Commissary in London, for valuing of Horses, Arms, &c. And the parties re∣paid for them upon the Publike Faith. Provided alwaies, That this Ordinance shall not extend to the feizing or taking any Horses, Mares, or Geldings of any the Members of either of the Houses of Parliament, or of any Peer, or of any of the Assistants of the House of Peers. Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliament. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Die Jovis, 8. Junii, 1643. WHereas by an Ordinance of both Hou∣ses of Parliament, dated the 14. day of Ianuary, 1642. All persons are prohibited to fetch Coals at Newcastle, Sunderland, and Blith, upon pain of the forfeiture of their Ships and Coales, notwithstanding which Ordinance, some pretending ignorance, others that in their voyage for Scotland they were forced in by foule weather, have presumed to Lade Coales at the aforesaid places; The conside∣ration of whose severall cases, the Commons house of Parliament having referred to this Committee of the Navy, whose want of time to examine the truth of the said Allegations have in favor to the severall persons offending in this kind taken bond of the Masters and owners of the Ships and Coales, with con∣dition that they should be responsall to the Parliament, for the true value of their Ships and Coales, when they should be thereunto required, and not to sell their Coales above the rate appointed by the said Ordinance, not∣withstanding
which care of the said Com∣mittee: It is informed that the said Masters and owners taking advantage of the times, and coveting excessive gaines have sold their Coales at farre greater prises; For avoyding which abuse in time to come. It is Ordered that the Lord Major of London for the time being, be desired to appoint Officers of ust who be commanded to attend on board the Ships, and take care that the said severall Ma∣sters & owners, who shall upon Bond given to this Committee, have leave to sell off their Coals, receiving for a chaldron of Coals the sum of 20 s. and not above 23 s. And that the said Coals be not sold to any Woodmonger, Chandler, or others who sell the same again, but unto the poor, and unto House-keepers, and those of the meaner sort, not sparing to a∣ny one person above the quantity of one chal∣dron. And it is further Ordered, that Mr. Sa∣lomon Smith, Marshall of the Admiralty, do not permit any Master or owner to sell their said Coals, but in the presence of some persons de∣puted by the Lord Major of London, under his Lordships hand in writing, to see the due ex∣ecution of this Order.
Provided that it shall be lawfull for the Overseers of the Poor of any Parish within the Cities of London and Suburbs thereof, to make provisions of Coal for the use of the Poor of such Parishes against the Winter, in some such indifferent proportion as shall be thought fit by the Lord Major of the said Ci∣tie for the time being, signified under his hand in writing. The same Order and rule to be observed in all other Ports where Newcastle Coals are imported to be sold to the Poor, by the direction and oversight of the chief Offi∣cers of the said Ports. This Order being this day presented from the Committee of the Navie to the House of Commons, it was approved of, and assented unto, and Ordered to be printed, and sent un∣to the Lord Major. Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, that this Order concerning Coals be forthwith printed and published: Henry Elsynge. Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
