E1616 [ocm]12013673 196626
Die Martis 12 Martii. 1643. IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parlia∣ment, That the Lord Maior of London and Court of Aldermen, do presently seize and sequester into their hands the Houses, Rents, Re∣venues, Books, Deeds, Evidences, and all Writings belonging to the Deane, Deane and Chapter, or other Prebendaries, Officers, or Ministers belonging to the Cathedrall Church of Pauls London in right of the said Church; As likewise all Moneys, Goods, and Materials, bought, or given, and brought into any place or person, for Repayring or furnishing of the said Church, or otherwise appertaining there∣unto, in whose hands soever the same remaineth. And that out of the said Revenues, they pay unto Dr. Bur∣ges one hundred pounds at the end of every quarter of the yeare, The first Paiment to begin at the next Lady day, and thence to continue, according to the true intention of a former Order of both Houses of
Parliament. And moreover, That they set out and deliver unto him a good and convenient house for his dwelling, well repayred and fitted for his use. And for better execution of this Order, They are to constitute and appoint such Assistants, Deputies, and Officers as they shall finde requisite. And to send for, and examine all persons concerned in the premises as Parties or Witnesses: All which shall be done, and the charge thereof allowed out of the said sequestred Estates; any Order, or Ordinance to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Joh. Brown Cler. Parl.
Die Mercurii, 23 April. 1645. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the setling of Mr. Philip Goodwyn in the Vicaridge of Watford, and of Dr. Burges, in the publique Lecture of the Church of Pauls LONDON. WHereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, did by an Ordet of the sixteenth of December 1643. appoint and constitute Dr. Cornelius Burges Vicar of Watford in the Coun∣ty of Hertford, to be publike Lecturer in the Church of Pauls London; and for his incouragement therein did further Order, That four hundred pounds per an∣num should be paid unto him quarterly out of the sequestred Estates of the Deane, and Deane and Chap∣ter of the said Church. And whereas by another Or∣der of both Houses of Parliament of the twelfth of
March 1643. the Lord Major of London, and Court of Aldermen there, are appointed and Authorized to seize and Sequester into their hands, the Houses, Rents and Revenues of the said Deane, Deane and Chapter, and other Prebendaries, Officers, and Ministers, belonging to the said Cathedrall Church in right of the said Church. And that out of the said Revenues, they should pay to the said Doctor Burges one hundred pounds at the end of every quarter of the yeare, the first Payment to begin at the then next Lady day, and thence to continue. And moreover that they should set out and deliver unto him, a good and convenient house for his dwelling, well Repayred and fitted for his use, which is done accordingly (as by the said Orders among other things appeareth) It is now Ordered, and Ordained, and be it Ordered and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the said Church of Watford shall be void, and quit of the said Doctor Burges; And that Philip Goodwyn shall be from henceforth Vicar of Watford, and offi∣ciate the said Cure as Vicar thereof; and shall have, and receive to himselfe, all Tythes, Oblations, Pensi∣ons, Annuities, Houses, Duties, Profits, and Commodi∣ties whatsoever thereto belonging, from the 25. day of December, one thousand six hundred fortie three, (he discharging the Cure, and paying all payments and duties issuing thence from the time aforesaid) for and during his naturall life, in as ample manner, to all intents and purposes as the said Doctor Burges, or any other Vicar heretofore enjoyed the same, without any further Presentation, Admission, or In∣duction.
And it is also Ordained, and be it Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the said yearely allowance of foure hundred pounds, shall be well and constantly paid out of the said Reve∣nues of the said Church, to the said Doctor Burges quarterly as aforesaid, by the said Lord Major and Court of Aldermen, for, and during his naturall life, he performing the Lectures in the said Church, as by the said Lords and Commons he is Ordered to doe. And it is likewise Ordained, That the said Doctor Burges, shall have and enioy the House set out by the said Lord Major and Court of Aldermen for his dwelling, Scituate and being in, or neere Pauls-Church yard, and late in the possession and use of Do∣ctor Steward Deane of Pauls; Together with all Out∣lets, Easements, Commodities, Gardens, and Appur∣tenances thereto belonging, in as ample manner as the said Doctor Steward, or any other before him enjoy∣ed the same, for and during the naturall life of him the said Dr. Burges. And for the more certaine payment of the said Annuall summe of foure hun∣dred pounds, to the said Doctor Burges as aforesaid, Be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament, and by the Authoritie of the same, That all and everie Farmer, Tenant, Leasee, and everie other person and persons, within the King∣dome of England, and Dominion of Wales, who doe, or shall owe, or ought to pay any Rents, Issues, Fines, Heriots, Profits, summe, or summes of Money, or ought else reserved upon any Lease, Covenant, or A∣greement to the said Deane, Deane and Chapter, or
other Prebendaries, Officers, or Ministers of the said Cathedrall Church, in right thereof (except for the House and premises granted to the said Doctor Bur∣ges as aforesaid) shall from time to time pay the same, and all Arrerages thereof unto the said Lord Major and Aldermen, or to their Sub-Committee, Assi∣stants, or other person or persons by them Authori∣zed to receive the same, as it is or shall grow due, and to no other person or persons whatsoever; And that the Acquittance of such Receiver thereof under his hand, shall be a sufficient discharge to everie person so paying the same against all other persons whatsoever, any Reservation, Covenant, Proviso, or other thing to the contrarie notwithstanding: And that the said Lord Major and Court of Aldermen, their Sub-Com∣mittee, or Assistants, or any foure or more of them, shall hereby have, and use the same and the like pow∣er, authoritie, and assistance, for, and in the discove∣rie, seizing, and getting into their hands, all and eve∣rie the premises (except before excepted) as they are and shall become due, And all Arrearages thereof, as is granted by any Ordinance of Parliament, or Ex∣planation thereof, to any other Sequestrators or Committee for Sequestrations, of the Estates of Pa∣pists and other Delinquents, as if the said Lord Ma∣jor, Aldermen, their Assistants, Sub-Committees, and Receivers, and everie of them, had beene particular∣ly named in such Ordinance, or Explanation: And that out of the said Rents, Issues, Revenues, and Pro∣fits, so from time to time received, the Receiver or Treasurer thereof for the time being, shall at the end
of everie quarter of the yeare, pay the full summe of one hundred pounds lawfull Money, to the said Doctor Burges constantly, during his naturall life, without further, or other Order or warrant from any person or persons whatsoever, before the said Trea∣surer Issue or pay out any other summe or summes of Money out of the premised Rents or Revenues, to a∣ny other person or persons for any other matter, cause, or thing whatsoever; And that all and everie person and persons, that hath done, or shall doe any thing in pursuance of, or obedience to the said for∣mer Order of the twelfth of March, 1643. (Which Order is hereby Ordained, also to be still in force, and to be fully obeyed by all whom it may concerne) or that shall doe any thing in pursuance and obedience of this present Ordinance, shall therein be esteemed to doe an acceptable Service to the Kingdome, and have the protection of both Houses of Parliament for their Indempnitie. And if the said Sequestred Estates and Revenues, or any part thereof, shall here∣after be put into any other hands then now they be, or otherwise Aliened, Sold, or disposed of, It is yet further Ordained, by the Authoritie afore∣said, That good and sufficient Provision shall be made in the passing and disposall thereof, whereby the said Doctor Burges may, and shall by all the time afore∣said, well and truely, by quarterly payments, receive the aforesaid yearely allowance of foure hundred pounds out of the said Sequestred Estates and Reve∣nues, and enjoy the House abovesaid, and all other the premises according to the true Intention of this pre∣sent
Ordinance, any Order, Act, or Ordinance made, or to be made to the contrarie hereof, in any wise notwithstanding. And to the end this Ordinance may be better knowne and obeyed, It is Ordered, that this Ordinance be Printed and Published. Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentor. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
