E3734B 99827977 207647
Exceeding Good and Joyfull NEVVES FROM HULL. BEING, The faithfull and deserving Service of Sir Iohn Hotham; Who by reasom of some mutinous Outrages committed by some Cavaleers, and for the avoiding of future mischiefs, burnt up the border∣ing and adjacent Towns about HULL. Also, the desire of Sir Iohn Hotham, concerning the reparation of some losses, which He and some other Captains in Hull sustained, by the insolent carriage of some Cavaleers. With the Parliaments Answer to the said Desires. Together with the Project of the Earle of Lindsey, to raise Forces in Lin in Norfolk; And the prohibition of the House of Parliament to the said County, for∣bidding them to obey the said Summons, and raising of Forces. Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON: Printed for Iohn Cave. August 12. 1642.
Exceeding Good and Joyfull Newes from HULL. THe divisions, distractions, and distempers of these times, are many, mischie∣vous, and dangerous; and every day, nay, almost eve∣ry hour, doth make us experienced in new practises against the peace and quiet of this Nation. Neither hath the oppo∣sition against this Kingdom, against the sedulous and vigilant endeavours of the Parliament, been hatched and fomented by the meaner sort, but even from many from whose counsels the distracted estate of this Nation ought to expect her secu∣rity and preservation from ruine and de∣struction. Yet, as yet their endeavours have been stifled in their infancie, and
although they shape their mischiefs with fair and specious pretences, yet hath the malignity of their actions been discove∣red, and we hope that the same Almigh∣ty providence which hath brought to light their dark actions, will for ever as∣sist the Parliament in their endeavours, tending to the Reformation of Church and Common-wealth. There came lately Letters from Sir John Hotham from Hull, to the Houses of Parliiment, wherein the said Sir John de∣sired some choice Officers and men; and likewise monies forthwith to be sent, for the defence of the Town of Hull, because the Souldiers thereof had been somewhat mutinous. Since that time, Sir John considering the manifold dangers that may be raised by reason of the harbour which the ma∣lignant party might attain unto in the neighbouring Towns and Villages there adjacent, whether suspecting their fide∣lity, or whether he was induced to that action by some reall danger then present,
which might spring from the Inhabi∣tants, or others who might be harboured within those Towns, did burn up and utterly destroy all the adjacent Villages, and by that means hath endeavoured to stay and prevent all ensuing mischiefs which may be by those means set on foot or nursed up, to the danger and hazard of those parts of the Kingdome, and so by consequence to the perill of this Nation. On Wednesday the 3. of August in the Evening, Sir John sent forth certain men to a small Town within 2. miles of him called Analby, where was divers Cavaleers who after a small skirmish, defeated the aforesaid Cavaleers, seized on their Maga∣zine, took certain of them Prisoners, two onely being kild, who would not yeeld their Arma. The whole County of York were warned against the Thursday fol∣lowing to bring in their strength both of Horse and Foot, where they should understand His Maj. pleasure therein. Sir Iohns dwelling house, a little with∣out Hull, and the dwelling houses of
some other Captains, who were imployed in the same trust and service with him in Hull, have been lately plundered and pillaged by the Cavaleers, and their goods and Cattle taken, driven, and carried away; he therfore desired the Commons that they would be pleased to take these things into their consideration, that they may have some allowance and satis∣faction for their losses. As also, desiring that there might be some more moneys presently sent to him, by reason that the charge of his forces (with some exhibi∣tionall allowance that he giveth to the poor of the Town, that by reason of these present troubles are destitute and void of means and trading) commeth and amounteth to sixe hundred pounds weekly, he having but two hundred pound in stock. And also in the said Letters he desired that by reason of the former mutinous and outragious behaviour committed there, he might have a warrant to use Martiall Law amongst the Souldiers in
case if any disorders; But the Commons thought it not expedient, and therefore would not consent unto that, for that they had formerly declared it to be ille∣gall to use Martiall Law, but they orde∣red that in case the Souldiers should be any way mutinous or disorderly, or re∣fuse to obey his Commands, they should receive such punishment as by the Com∣mon Lawes of this Kingdome are pro∣vided. The Earl of Lindsey being appointed by His Majestie, Generall of the Kings forces for this present intention and pur∣pose, did send a Captain to Lin in Nor∣folk to beat up Drums for the speedy rai∣sing of Voluntiers, with a pretence that they are raised for the safety and security of His Majesties Person, and both Houses of Parliament; whereupon it was Orde∣red by the said House of Parliament, that the said Captain should be sent for as a Delinquent, and that the County should receive information from the House, not to raise any men under the aforesaid pre∣tence,
nor to obey any of the like sum∣mons whatsoever. Also there was a report made to the High Court of Parliament that Sir Paul Harris and other Cavaleers in the Coun∣ty of Shropshire, hath withstood their Ordinance concerning the Militia, and committed many outrages, to the great grief and impoverishment of many of His Majesties loving and well-affected Subjects; Which the Lords taking into their Consideration, Ordered that the said Sir Paul should be sent for as a De∣linquent, and some forces should be speedily convayed into those parts, for the suppression of the insolent behaviour of those (or the like) malignant spirits. Ordered that this be printed and published. Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
