F663 190.g.13[204] R232569 99888952 194006
To the Supreme Authority the Parliament of the Common-wealth of ENGLAND. The humble Proposals of Edmund Felton Gent. That which he humbly offers is, HOW Ireland and all other English Plantations may multiply and increase much more trading then now is, or hath been for many years; and all the Souldiers in Ireland paid, and other just debts, and yet not any mony for so doing disbursed by the States, but to their great advantage; yea many hundred thousand pounds hereby to be brought into their Treasury: And for which so doing, in 1601. is a Precedent upon record: by which course the late Queen Elizabeth then carryed on the War in Ireland, with small taxes to the Subjects, and as the state of Ireland now stands, by the prescribed course following, Ireland in few years may be fully planted with English-men and women, all which may be accomplished as followeth. 1. If it shall please the States to cause 200000 l. or more forthwith to be coyned in Occamy money, as they do in Holland, and the late Queen Elizabeth did for Ireland in 1601. and to passe there for currant coyne; every hundred pound thus coyned, to be in half-crowns, shillings, sixpences, and smaller pieces. The mettle, stamping and silvering of 100 l. of the said coyne, will not stand the State in above five pound; three hundred pound of which coyne any of the Inhabitants in Ireland to have for 100 l. in Gold or Silver, which there, is as good to them as gold or silver, there passing currant by Act of Parliament. The States hereby gets clear for every three hundred pound thus coyned to passe in Ireland, eighty five pounds. By this course not any man there living can be prejudiced, but much bettered in his estate; for any man whose stock in mony there (or here if he goe for Ireland) be but 10 l. he shall have for it 30 l. in the new coyne, for 20 l. to have 60 l. for 100 l. in gold or silver, 300 l. and so proportionably. Thus every dealer herein trebles his stocke, and by this meanes when they are in Ireland it will keep them there; and the Souldiers there who hath land given them for their Arrears, will by this course be enabled to keep their Land and to stocke it, if 100 l. or 50 l. of the said coyne be lent to such Souldiers as have wife and children, for one year gratis, and for the years following they shall keep the said mony, to pay to the State 5l. or 6 l. for 100 l. within two years will pay the States what they disbursed; and as long after as the said 100 l. or 50 l. shall by any be detained, to pay the rate of as aforesaid to the States use, which will come clearly unto them. The said coyne likewise to passe currant in all other English Plantations and no where else, and upon the same termes as in Ireland; by this course both the gold and silver in English Plantations will also be brought into this Nation, to the great in riching of the States, and the Inhabitants both in Ireland and the said Plantations. And for that this is not a coyne to be horded up, it will cause the more Trading, Planting, tilling and stocking of ground, and so consequently the more imployment for the poor. If objected, How shall any come for England, and here travell and follow their occasions? It's answered, That whoso hath just cause so to do a what Port-town soever he shall land, where the chiefest of able and honest men to be Treasurers, there to have 20 l. 10 l. or lesse, bringing treble the coyne as they had when went for Ireland (and they to have sixpence in the pound) but not any man to have above 20 l. in silver (nor that if ten pound may serve for his occasions) to travell and returne back. Spain and other Nations who are farre more richer in gold and silver then England, have much of Copper and Occamy mony which goeth currantly amongst them in their dominions. 2 Also a great revenue for some years may as thus come unto the States, if they please to lend 100 l. or more of the said coyne to Families that will go for Ireland, having a stock of Corne and Cattle, who wants mony, and willing to farme Lands in Ireland of the States, which so doing will cause much people to go to inhabit there. And as for strangers that shall trade in Ireland, or any of the English Plantations, to trade with Commodities for Commodities, or to give gold or silver for what they shall buy there, but not to buy any Commodity with this States new coyne, but for their expences for meat, drink and lodging whilest they are in Ireland, or the English Plantations, if they give gold or silver, to have treble the summe of the Treasurers there, which will be a means to prevent bringing in of the like coyne. 3 If objected, that if there were such a coyne the Dutch and other Nations would bring in aboundance of the like, and carry away Commodities of great value for it; which may be prevented as aforesaid and followeth. First, Strangers to barter Commodity for commodity, unlesse they bring silver. Secondly, if there be as strict a Law for counterfeiting or making any of the said coyne as the Act of Parliamnt is for stealing away any Maide under 21 years of age, not any will dare to venture (to be as a slave all his life) to make any of the said coyne. Secondly, Whatsoever goods shall be brought into Ireland or any of the English Plantations to have the Governours seal set thereon as soon as landed, and what goods soever are to be opened for sale in that City or Town, the said Governour or chief Officer to appoint some honest men to be at the opening thereof, to see if any coyne be conveyed therein, and if any Lead should be brought to Ireland or any of the said Plantations, then the Governour or chief Officer in view of the people where it shall be landed, to set a stampe on each sow of Lead, which is not to be melted in the said City or Town till the Governour or chief Officer, shall send some honest men to view the stampe and to be at the melting thereof, and there∣with an Iron ladle to see if there be any coyne therein conveyed. Thirdly, That there be the like course of searching of any caske wherein shall be wine, oil, or any other Commodity whatsoever, and that at their first landing if any liquid Commodity, and before it be housed. And if any of the said Commodities by whole sale be carried to other Cities or Townes, the chief Magistrate there to set his marke or seal on the said Pack, in the presence of some honest Townsmen, to the end (if not opened presently) that it shall not be opened till the said Magistrate shall send some honest men to be at the opening thereof. And to prevent favour or affecting any, if it may be thought fitting, the said Overseers to take this Oath following, (either voluntarily or given by the Magistrate) I A.B. desire of God I may not prosper in this life nor any thing I take in hand, if I prove deceitfull in this my undertaking for the Common-wealths good. Reasons conduceing hereunto, considering how this Nation is much impoverished in gold and silver, since these troubles; As First, by sending many hundred thousands of pounds out of England into Holland and other Countries. Secondly, the treasure cannot but be great that hath been hid this time of warre, and to be beleeved, most of the hiders have lost their lives before they could discover where they hid it. Thirdly, many who now have much treasure, will not be known of it for fear of Taxes. Fourthly, it cannot but be a great prejudice to this Nation, if those that go for Ireland, shall carry what gold or silver they can thither in this impo∣verishing time. To prevent which, the Proposer humbly conceives this way of a new coyne for Ireland and all other English Plantations, will wonderfully inrich that land, and make the people better able to pay their Taxes in England and Wales. Ireland hath now been this twleve years very chargeable to England by reason of the late troubles, and not any thing profitable by way of Trading to this Nation, (since which troubles, hundreds of thousands of pounds have been sent thither) all which time, the English inhabitants hath conten∣tedly endured under great sufferings. If now for the like time men would with as much patience content themselves to have this prescribed new coyne if but for 12 years, it would be the cause that Ireland would almost be fully inhabited, and have plenty of Corne, Cattle, Sheep, and all other necessary food, which as the Apostle saith is sufficient, exhorting the people of God to learn to be content therewith. But if not but by covetousnesse men will be rich in gold and silver, he plainly tels them it is an enterance into strife, and many foolish and and noy some lusts which drown men in perdition and destruction; as for those covetous ones who think gain godlinesse, the Apostle tels them no, it is not so, requiring all that fear God to withdraw themselves from such, saying, godlinesse with content is great gain, 1 Tim. 6. ch. and for men so to be, it would be the New birth, and much rejoyce them to see their Brothers and Neighbours to thrive by them. But the covetous man thinks all too little for himself, which Solomon confirmes (saying Prov. 1. 19.) He that is greedy of gain taketh away the life of the owners thereof. It is content, not wealth, is mans happinesse in this life. In all which the Proposer humbly submits unto your Honours most grave wisdome, Edmund Felton. London, Printed by E. C. for M. S. 1653.
