F1474 99827055 207482
A TESTIMONY CONCERNING George Russel, Who Dyed a Prisoner upon Truth's account for bearing his Testimony against TYTHES. Together with a Few Lines once more (af∣ter many) by way of Information, Caution and Warning unto all Persecutors, from the Example of the Jews, To beware what they do, how they persist and go on in such Practices, lest the Judg∣ments of the Just God take hold on them, and there be none to deliver out of his Hand. For cer∣tainly he will arise ere long in his Anger, and plead his own Cause in the Earth; and then he will ease himself of his Adversaries, and be avenged upon his Enemies. These to all People may inform; THat George Russel, of the Parish of Burliscombe in the County of Devon, being Aged about Eighty Three Years (whose Body is now Rescued by the God of
Heaven and Earth, from the Envy and Rage of his Cruel Per∣secutors; and as concerning him, that Testimony is now finished, his Soul being gathered unto God, and to the Spirits of Just Men who formerly suffered, he now sleepeth and is at Rest with them, where the Wicked cease from troubling, and where the Weary be at Rest, where the Prisoners Rest together, they hear not the Voice of the Oppressor.) He for Conscience sake in Obedience to the Commands of Christ, refusing to pay Tythes to one William Chamberline, alias Luckly, of the same Parish, Tythemenger, for about one Acre and — of Wheat (the Tythe of which is valued to be worth about 7 s.) was sub∣paened into the Exchequer, and for not Appearing, a Writ was taken out against him to attach and imprison his Body, in the Name of one Anne Jones Widow of Greencham in the Parish of Ashbritle and County of Somerset, Impropriator of the Tythe of Burliscombe aforesaid. And about the 17th day of the 4th moneth, 1679. his Body was attached, and committed unto Prison in Thomas Parish in Exon, where he remained a Prisoner about seven or eight Weeks; in which time of his being there, some Friend of his considering his Age, and perceiving the Weakness of his Body, in tender Love and Respect to him, he being several Miles distant from his Children, who should take Care of him as Age and Weakness doth require, thought good to seek his Releasment, which was accordingly obtained: But the Adversary not regarding his Age, Weakness, nor the Ground of his detaining Tythe (which was only for Conscience sake) nor the Smalness of the Sum demanded to be due (which if G. R. had paid, he must make Shipwrack of a Good Consci∣ence and Peace with God) in much Hardness of Heart by this Adversary the Action was again revived, and another Attach∣ment came forth, and his Body was apprehended and carryed unto Prison upon the 11th of the 12th moneth, 1679. and there he remained Prisoner about eleaven Weeks (having some Li∣berty from the Keeper to be without the Keys) until the Se∣cond day of the 3d Moneth, 1680. and then (it being the First day of the Week) in the Morning Weakness coming on much upon him, so that before any could send for his Children to come unto him he gave up the Ghost, and Peaceably Dyed (as many
Hearts are perswaded) in the Love and Favour of God, yield∣ing up his Spirit unto him that gave it, there being present with him at that time, another Friend, by Name Robert Welch, who hath been also in the Sheriff, Custody, a Prisoner several Years, and still remaineth there upon the Account of Tythes. And now his Body being removed from off the Earth, and his Bed made in the Dust, his Life shall Reign in Dominion over the Hearts of his Adversaries: And by Death he having Overcome and gotten Vi∣ctory over them all, through Christ, who hath strengthened him; and having thus Suffered for him, shall undoubtedly Reign with him in that Glory at the Right Hand of God, where with the Son was Glorified with the Father from the Beginning, where the Destroying, Persecuting Spirit shall never come. And his Testimony to the Truth against Tythes, he having thus suffered in Prison till Death for it, hath as it were in some sence sealed it with his Blood, and it shall stand as a Memorial, and standing Testimony recorded to Ages and Generations to come, against and over all the Heads of such Persecuting Priests, Im∣propriators and Tythemongers whatsoever, who endeavour to make void the Law of Christ, and the Gospel of Christ; and who walk contrary to him, and are not found treading in his Foot-steps, nor in the Foot-steps of the Flock, viz. his Dis∣ciples and the Primitive Christians, who received not Tythes, neither Sued any man at the Law, nor cast any in Prison for the not Payment thereof: But otherwise their Lord and Master Christ commanded them, saying, As ye go, Preach, saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, &c. Mat. 3.2. Freely ye have received, freely give; freely minister of the Ability God hath given to you, whether things Spiritual or Temporal as also saith the A∣postle.—And further saith Christ, Into whatsoever City, Town or House ye come, inquire who is Worthy, and if they receive you well, let your Peace then rest upon it, and in the same House remain eating and drinking such things as they give; for the La∣bourer is worthy of his Hire: Go not from House to House. But if they receive you not; What then? Shake off the Dust of your Shoes that cleaveth to your Feet as a Testimony against them; and it shall be (saith Christ) more tolerable for Sodom and Gomor∣rah
in the Day of Judgment than for that City, Luke 10.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. as more largely in the Scriptures may be read. So all may see how contrary such are, in Life and Conversa∣tion, in Work and Practice to the Doctrine of Christ, and to the practice of the Primitive Christians (though they pretend them∣selves to be Christians) who take and plunder away by a Law the Goods of innocent sober People, and who cast in Prison their Bodies, and many times detain them there till Death. But cer∣tainly this will not serve their turn in the Day of Account, when God shall Judge the secrets of all Hearts; their Law then will not stand them by in any stead to appease or pacify the Anger and Wrath of God that will break forth upon such, if they Repent not; neither will it excuse them for their Cruelty in the sight of God, no more than did that Law which the wicked Jews made use of to crucifie Christ by, who thought they did well in put∣ting him to Death, cryed out and said, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye: Crucifie him, Crucifie him; let his Blood be upon us and upon our Children. But some may say, What Law had they? A Law given by Moses the Servant of God, Lev. 24.16. And he that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord shall surely be put to Death. Now the chief Priests and Elders falsly accusing Christ, said he was a Blasphemer: Why? Because, said they, he hath made himself the Son of God. Then said the High Priest, He hath spoken Blasphemy; what further need have we of Witnesses? Behold now ye have heard his Blasphemy: What think ye? They Answered and said, He is guilty of Death. So in some sense it is with many in this Nation, who cry out, and say, Tythes (that unjust Oppression, under which the Na∣tion groans) are our Due, we have a Law for it; and though there is a People that for Conscience sake refuse to pay it, and say, its not our Due by the Law of God and Christ (though you claim it by the Law of Man) yet say we (Priests and Impropriators) by our Law they ought to Pay, if not, they shall surely Suffer, we will prosecute the Law; And as for the Judgments of God that
may ensue therefore, either here or hereafter, wee'l venture it, let them fall on us: And as to the Curse that may follow for our Cru∣elty; if any be, let that rest upon our Posterity. Well, if of such a mind, who ever thou art, mind a little further, and consider the sad state afterwards of those Persecuting, Mudering Jews, (of whom Christ said, It was almost impossible for a Prophet or a man of God to Perish but amongst them) of whom once Tythes under the Law were required, and freely without any Carnal Compulsion was it then to be brought into the place appointed; and it was for such uses and purposes as God by his Servant Moses had ordained it in that Day: which Tythes and Offerings under that Levitical Dispensation. Priesthood and Ministry, when thus brought into the Store-Houses, were allotted for the Tribe of Levi, who had no Inheritance or share of Land among their Brethren, and who served the Tabernacle, and who wait∣ed on the Altar, and also for the Relief of the Poor, the Stran∣gers, the Fatherless, and the Widows that were within their Gates. So then not only for the Priests to enrich themselves thereby, nor to Feed and Cloath themselves only with the Profits thereof; Nay, nay: Nor yet for greedy Impropriators, who through Covetousness, and for the Love of Money, which is the Root of all Evil, that they might build their Nests high, and be greater in the Earth, by joyning House to House, and by ad∣ding Field to Field, purchased to themselves (meeting with a cheap Bargain) as their Inheritance, that which was other mens Rights; and now such live upon, as may be said, the Labour and and Sweat of other mens Brows, which Purchase they never had from God, Truth and Equity any just Right unto, nor by the Law of Moses can demand or recover it; for at that time these things were accounted Holy things, and as Offerings were to be dedicated to the Lord; not to be Bought, not to be Sold, not to be Set or Let after such a manner, unto Impropriators, Tythe∣mongers or Farmers, there was no such Doings then—neither did Moses ordain a Prison to cast mens Bodies in if they brought not in their Tythes according to appointment, nor did he or the Magistrates then issue forth Writs, Warrants and Ex∣ecutions (as the men of our Nation have done) that Wicked Pro∣phane Bailiffs, and such like, should take mens Goods away by
force, who are, many of them, of the vilest of men, who mat∣ter not to make what Havock and Spoil they can, of what men have Honestly and Industriously Laboured for, and many times they will take three times more than what they can demand: See, see, O People! see how far short of the Jewish Religion o these men come; and on the other hand (may it not be said) how ar Wose and more Cruel than the Jews do the Practices of these pretended Christians herein exceed! And yet all this is done and suffered to be done in this Nation under a Profession of the Gospel, and of Christianity, and under pretence of Laws made by Christian-Magistrates, who think to uphold their Christian-Ministers (as they suppose) thereby; and so hereby they have much strengthened the hands of all cruel persecuting Priests and Impropriators, who are ready enough to take the utmost Advantage that the Law will give them herein against such Honest Sober People: all which Doings are very contrary unto the Mind of God, who hateth Oppression, and to the Command of Christ Jesus, who came to set Free from the Yoke of Bondage; and to the Scriptures of Truth, which do not at all justifie them; & also to that very Law and Dispensation that came by Moses, which never did allow of such Practices as these, who in that very Day, as on this account, annexed no corporal Penalty thereunto, but left the People under the sense of the Severity of that Judgment, Curse or Punishment, that God himself might inflict upon them, i they were Disobedient herein, and did not answer to do what God thu required of them in the time of that Dispensation, which if they did, then on the other hand, the Blessing of the Lord God of Heavn and Earth was to come upon them. As its written, Deut. 8. And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the Voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his Commands, which I command thee this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee on High, above all the Nations of the Earth; and all these Blessings shall come upon the, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the Voice of the Lord thy God; Blessed shalt thou be in the City, and blessed shalt thou be in the Field, in the Fruit of thy Body, and in the Fruit of thy Ground, &c. Blessed shall be thy Basket and thy
Store; Blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out, and when thou co∣mest in, &c. But a little further consider, as hath been hinted o, the sad State of that People and Nation the Jews, in and soon after the dayes of Christ, who came to Fulfil the Law, and to put an End to Tythes, Oblations and Offerings, and to abolish that Levitical Priest-hood and Worship, and to set up and establish a better, to bring People to Worship and Serve God in Spirit and in Truth, for such Worship and Worshippers the Father seeketh, and is well-pleased with, concerning which, much might be written: Oh! that all sorts of Persecutors whatsoever would but consider what Judgments and Calamities soon after came upon them for their Evil Works, in that they Despised, Resisted, Opposed and Rejected Christ; Haled before Magistrates, Abu∣sed, Imprisoned and put to Death them that were his Disciples; and as the Scriptures testifie, Crucified him their Lord and Ma∣ster, the Prince of Life and Peace, whom the World knew not, nor the Princes of it; for if they had (as its written) they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory, and that after the most Vilest manner, delivering him up to be Buffetted, and his Person to be Abused; they cloathed him in Purple, and crowned him with Thorns, Mocked at him with a Salutation, Hale King of the Jews, Spit in his Face, and Bowing their Knees, Revilingly Worship∣ped him; and some smote him with the Palms of their Hands, saying, Prophecy now whom it is that smiteth thee: gave him Vineger to drink mingled with Gall; and thus Scoffing at him, and wagging their Heads, said, He saved others, let him now save himself: If he be the Son of God, let him now come down from the Cross; who was Crucified between two Thieves: And all this was done unto him, that they might to the uttermost, as much as in them lay, Trample under, Contemn and Despise his Glory: So that the Saying of the Prophet was fulfilled, as its written, He was Oppressed, and he was Afflicted, yet he opened not this Mouth: He is brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before her Shearers is Dumb, so he openeth not his Mouth.—He hath poured out his Soul unto Death, and was numbered with the Transgressors, as many of the Innocent Servants of Christ in some respect have been, and are now in this Age and
Generation, accounted as Evil-doers, numbered with Trans∣gressors of the Law, Seditious, Stubborn, Rebellious People, Plotters and Contrivers of Insurrections, and such like; brought before the Magistrates of the Nation, and as such, by some of them, they have been Fined, and their Goods Spoiled, their Bodies Imprisoned, and cast into stinking Goals with Thieves, Murderers and other Malefactors, and many of them have there lain and suffered Imprisonment till Death, for Truth's-sake and good Conscience-sake, both towards God and Man. And of all which slanderous Accusations, that they have thus falsly charged them with, the God of Heaven beareth them Record, and his Light in all Consciences doth testifie, that they are a Harmless Innocent People, clear from all such things: Oh! that the Ma∣gistrates and People of this Nation would but consider! Oh! that they would but lay it to heart a little, what happened soon afterward unto that People and Nation, the Jews, who in that day Abused the Servants and Messengers of Truth (concerning whom Christ said, It shall be better for such that a Mill-stone were hanged about their Necks, and that they were cast into the Sea and drowned, than that they should offend one of thse little Ones) and also who Crucified Christ the Prince of Life and Glory, despising him, said, We will not have this Man to Rule over us he shall not be our King; away with him, Crucifie him; Release unto us Bar∣rabas; as much as to say, Let Thieves, Murderers and other Malefactors have their Liberty, and be set Free before him; se∣cure him, let him not go, Punish him severely by the Law, take his Life from him; he is a Blasphemer, he ought to dye; who indeed was the Son of God, and an Innocent man, Holy, Harm∣less, Separate from Sn, whose Life and Conversation among the Jews in Righteousness, did shine, and was without Spot, Pure and Clean, in whose Heart there was found no Deceit, and in whose Mouth there was found no Guile; and yet all this was done unto that Just One, who in the Sence and Fore-sight of his Enemies Misery, and that Calamity which was coming upon them, ha∣ving Bowels of Pity and Compassion, tenderly Weeped and La∣mented over them, as its written; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that Killest the Prophets, Abusest and Stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy Children together,
even as a Hen gathereth her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not! behold, your House is left unto you Desolate: Oh! if thou hadst known, even thou, at least, in this thy day, the things which belong to thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes; now thy Day is over, now the time of thy Visitation is past, now thy Judgment is at hand: Oh! thou Foolish People and Nation, who didst Reject, Despise and Wonder, now thou art nigh to Perishing. And may it not be said concerning some, in the same Spirit of Lamentation, which he hath poured forth in these Latter-dayes upon his Sons and Daughters; and he being ascended up on High, and leading Captivity Captive, hath made them Par∣takers of, in and by which it may be said, Oh foolish People of this Nation, Perverse and Unwise, ye who have been Fighters a∣gainst God, and Opposers of his Truth; ye who have Rejected his Light, and Resisted his Grace that bringeth Salvation, which to all men hath appeared; ye who have despised the Truth, and wondered at the Appearance of it; ye who have Slighted, Revi∣led, Imprisoned and Abused the Servants and Professors of it; May you not fear that ye are nigh unto Perishing, that your Cala∣mity is at hand? May you not dread that the Day of your Visitation is over, and that Distress and Trouble as a Whirle∣wind is coming upon you? May you not fear that your Habita∣tions and goodly Scituations, may be laid Waste, your Houses may be left unto you Desolate, and that your End may be Ever∣lasting Misery? Oh ye foolish People! not desiring the Truth, not willing to be gathered; for accordingly the thing came to pass upon the Jews, as it was said by Christ in the dayes of his Flesh, unto whom all Judgment is committed and given, both in Heaven and in Earth, who shall judge both Quick and Dead, as its written, and who changeth not, but is the same still, yester∣day, to day, and for evermore, who will come speedily, and his Reward is with him, to recompence every man according to his Deeds, and according to his Works; Mercy to whom Mer∣cy belongs, and Judgment to whom Judgment is due; Fury to his Enemies, and Vengeance upon the Heads of his Adversaries; as its written, Judgment is mine, I will Recompence; and Vengeance is mine, I will Repay, saith the Lord.
This is written in Love to Truth, and the Souls of Men, by one who desireth, that Truth and Righteousness may enter, and that Justice and Equity may take place more and more in the Hearts of many People in this Nation, and else-where, who am known to some by the Name of Written about the 8th of the 3d Moneth, 1680. Robert Ford. The Testimony of Jasper Batt for GEORGE RƲSSEL. I Have well known the said George Russel for more than twenty years past, and since my Knowledge of him I have this Te∣stimony for him, That in the general he was a man of an Ho∣nest Harmless Conversation towards all men, loving his Neigh∣bour as himself, and willing to do to all men as he would they should do unto him; he received Truth in the Love of it; he was a man of a very Tender Spirit, being often melted into Tears in the sense of the Lord's Presence, and Love of God towards him; and made it his Concern in his Capacity to gather & bring others to the Knowledge & Enjoyment of the same Love, often visiting his Neighbours and Acquaintance, inviting and perswading them to accept of, and not to neglect the Day of their Visitation, putting them in mind of their Latter-end and Day of Ac∣count; inviting and calling upon his Neighbours and Friends, as Opportunity might be had, to come and hear the Declaration of Truth, freely giving up himself and all that he had for its Service, it being the Joy of his Heart to obtain an Opportunity to be serviceable to the Lord and his People, and to Receive and
Entertain the Lord's Servants, especially such whom the Lord sent forth as Labourers in his Vineyard; and the Lord's Blessing in all was with him; for he saw Truth's Prosperity, and many of his Acquaintance brought to the Knowledge of it. He was faithful in his Testimony against the False Worships and Vain Cu∣stoms of the World, and in particular against that great Op∣pression of TYTHES, wherein his Concern was but small, ha∣ving but a small Estate as to the outward; and though the Matter was but small on that account required of him, yet he chose rather to lay down his Life a Prisoner, than to make shipwrack of a good Conscience. And I cannot well omit the taking notice of the Sottish Cruel∣ty and Desperate Hardness of his Adversary (not often to be parallell'd) who not regarding his Age of Eighty Three Years, his Weakness (which usually attends such Old Age) the Small∣ness of the Sum required, or that by their Law might be due, (viz.) Seven or Eight Shillings, nor the Ground or Cause of his Refusal to pay it, which was only for Good Conscience sake, of which he could not make Shipwrack for all the Riches of this World; however (it seems) such was the Hard-hearted Cru∣elty of this Adversary (as being of that Generation whose Ten∣der Mercies are Cruel) he resolved to have his Tythes or his Life. But honest G. R. chose rather to lay down this Mortal Life than hazard the Loss of Everlasting Life. He was a man greatly sa∣tisfied in the Love of God towards him, and in the Prosperity of the Lord's Work, and of a very Contented and Chearful Life and Conversation, even living above Visible Things. I was with him in the time of his late Imprisonment, where though he was weak and feeble of Body, lying on the Bed, yet he manifested great Joy and Gladness of Spirit, rejoycing in the Goodness and Love of God towards him, saying, It was never better with him. And so having sealed his Testimony with his Life, his Memori∣al is blessed, and his innocent harmless Life, his tender melting Spirit, and the often appearance of the Springs of Life in him, and the precious Fellowship which therein we enjoyed with him, still yields a good Savour to many of the Lord's Faithful Ones which are left behind, and is fresh in our Remembrance, and
though dead, herein he yet lives amongst us, and we refresht in the sense and feeling thereof. And so, let his Name stand recorded amongst the Noble Army of the Lamb's Followers, as one of them who loved not his Life to the Death, and hath overcome through Sufferings, by the Blood of the Lamb and the Word of his Testimony, and is now with the Lord's Redeemed Ones on Mount Sion, where there is an End of Sorrow and Suffering, and all Tears are wip't away; and where everlasting Praises and Halelujah, Honour, Dominion and Thanksgiving are sounded forth and returned to the Lord, and to the Lamb, who was dead and is alive, who sits upon the Throne, and lives and raigns over all forever and for evermore, Amen. The 22th of the 4th Moneth, 1680. Jasper Batt. THE END.
