G1102 190.g.12[15] R229309 99888309 201719
To the Supreme Authority, the right Honora∣ble the Commons of England assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of Godfrey Goodman, late Bishop of Gloucester. Sheweth, THat your Petitioner hath suffered in these times, as much proportionably, and in as hard a manner as any other man hath done (as verily he beleeveth.) Though no man can produce better Certificates, or give greater assurance of his innocency, than your Petitioner can doe; That his Pockets have been twice searched, all his Letters perused, and much enquiry made to finde out accusations against him: Yet he humbly thanks God that he hath ever been found innocent; That he hath not only lost in effect, all his owne Monies, But very much what belongs to others, insomuch that for Orphants alone he hath past over a Lease which in former times would have yealded fouteene or fifteene hundred pounds, besides great Arreares which are behind and unpaid, and for which he should make satisfaction to a great value; though he used all possible meanes to preserve them, sending moneys beyond Seas to Hamborow by Bill of Exchange, yet were they called back againe, and paid to the use of the Parliament, as may appeare by the Acquittance, the like whereof he conceives hath not befallen any other man though the greatest delinquent. That notwithstanding all his former sufferings, yet he still cannot be freed. Lately there came an Officer to demand Ninty six pound, pretending it to be a debt due to your Pet. and that he was to receive it for the use of the Parliament. With∣in this moneth two of his neighbours were brought up to London living above 40 miles distant, onely to be examined what debts were due to your Pet. that others might receive them. Your Pet. holding one Personage in Commendam, one Mr. Newbery now for some yeares hath enjoyed the whole benefit, upon pretence that your Pet. is Sequestered, and his serving the Cure there. Whereas your Petitioner is freed from Sequestrati∣on by the Articles of Anglesey; neither hath he discharged the Cure, for that he hath not administred the Communion all his time, nor Baptized their children: The Parishioners have generally made their Certificates in the behalfe of your Pet. who in his wants desiring to have some relife out of his Parsonage, it beeing well worth 180 l. per annum. Mr Newbery gave him him this answer, that he ought to have none, because he had neither wife nor children, though indeed your Pet. had very well deserved of him. That while he enjoyed his preferments, he takes God to witnesse, that he never thought it lawfull for him to inrich himselfe by any Church meanes, but did ever desire God to direct him, that he might spend his Church meanes in a Church-like manner, and to the best uses: Insomuch that being of himselfe meanely provided, and having lived seven yeares without Rents, upon his owne stock; which being now wholy exhausted, he wants meanes to subsist, and doth humbly begg some maintenance for his Reliefe, and that he may be freed from Sequestrations or any Delinquency, protesting that wittingly and willingly he never did, nor ever shall offend the Parliament. August 31. 1649. And your Petitioner shall daily pray God to reward you. Godfrey Goodman. Quarto Aprilis 1649. WE whose names are hereunto subscribed do hereby certifie; That Godfrey Goodman late Bishop of Gloucester, hath lived in this Countrey and County, now for the space of sixe yeares or thereabouts, in effect during the whole time of the Warre, in which time there have beene here diverse and severall Armies, some for the King, some for the Parliament: Yet we neither know, nor ever heard that the said God∣frey Goodman, did ever enterpose or intermeddle in any matters of Warre; but hath ever lived quietly & privately. And this we can do no lesse than testifie at his request, now at his departure out of this Country. Tho: Madrin. Vic. Car. Tho: Williams Iohn Owen. Io. Parry. WE also whose names are hereunto subscribed, doe hereby testifie that the above mentioned Godfrey Goodman, for the space of a yeare last past since our residence in Carnarvon, hath not intermedled with any businesse concerning Warlike affaires; but hath demeaned himselfe as is above specified by the Gentlemen of that Countrey. Tho: Mason. Marke Mould. To the Honourable William Lenthall, Speaker of the Parliament of England and Recorder of the City of Gloucester, and to the Knights Citizens and Burgesses of the said City and County of Gloucester. attending in PARLIAMENT. Honourable, AT the earnest request of our late Bishop Doctor Goodman, who by his owne relation hath suffered in these times as much proportiona∣bly as any man hath done; Yet hath Certificates from the high Sheriffe, Justices, Committees, Governours of Castles where hee lived, that he never inteposed in any matter of Warr. Having lost in effect all his meanes, and not onely his owne, but very much what belonged to others, by whom he was intrusted, and for which he must make satisfaction, to a very great value. Though we write no∣thing in commendations of him (which he in his Modesty desires may be forborne) Yet surely we can doe no lesse than give him this Testimony, that he hath lived very quietly and lovingly amongst us for these twenty yeares. And considering the course of his expence, we con∣ceive he could not inrich himselfe by his Bishopprick. And having now lived for the space of Seven yeares wholy upon his owne stock, and that now utterly exhausted. Our humble desire is, that ye move the Honorable House of Commons, that he may have some meanes wherewith to sub∣sist, and that ye would be pleased to further him in his Petition, which we hope will be done, the rather upon our recommendations whom you represent in Parliament; And this we earnestly desire, ever resting Your humble and faithfull Servants, Gentlemen of Glou∣cester-shire. William Shepheard William Stafford Edward Kingscot Richard Yate Iohn Brayne Iohn Giffard John Corwell Anthony Gifford William Selvyn Thomas Hylwey Arthur Fonler William Leigh William Mewe Thomas Estcourt Citizens of Gloucester. Henry Cugly Major. William Singleton Iohn Hanbury Thomas Hill Edward Nourse Laurence Singleton De: Wise Iohn Madocke Ias. Clutterbooke Iames Stephens Iohn Dorney William Clarke, Richard Tayler Richard Harware Nathaniell Hodges Edward Collett John Wood Robert Tyther Robert Pewin Thomas Peirce Iam. Commelin Thomas Cooke. Burgesses of Tukesbury. Iohn Man Chr: Atkinson Baylifes. William Wilson Richard Mince Thomas Hale Edward Ienings Thomas Hales, Senior. William Whitledge Iohn Orrell Iohn Schiter Iohn Millington Phillip Hilly Iohn Carver Henry Robins William Fowler Iohn Browne William Scudamore Burgesses of Cirencester Andrew Solace Giles Handcox Amos Dansey Iohn Broade Thomas Roberts Iohn Woodball Thomas Deacon Edmond Freeman Iohn Kenible Thomas Gibbs Richard Massinger Iohn Shingleton Thomas Witcombe Thomas Trippett Iohn Maddockes Iohn Screven William Starr Iohn Tomes William Russell Ieffery Beale Windsor and some other Gentlemen of Bark-shire have written to the same effect, but because they writ some thing in commendation, &c. there∣fore they are not published. In regard of my age beeing neere 70. and a great infirmity, I cannot solicite my owne businesse, but do desire that what favour shall be shewed me, may be ascribed under Gods mercy and providence, to your owne goodnesse and compassion, and not to my importunity.
