P3562A [ocm]10599499 204737
The Proceedings at the SESSIONS FOR London & Middlesex, Holden at the OLD BAILEY: Beginning on Wednesday the Sixteenth of July, 1679. Being the Condemnation of the notorious COYNERS, And many other too common Malefactors. WITH The Number of the persons Condemned to Die, and their respective Facts. As also of those that were Burnt in the Hand, or otherwise to be Punished. And likewise the Tryals of Sir GEORGE WAKEMAN, Mr. Corker, Provincial of the Benedictine Monks, Mr. Rumly, and Mr. Marshal. THE most considerable Tryal this Wednesday fore-noon, was of a Woman for Murthering her Bastard Child; a Crime in it self so horrid and unnatural, as one would think no person, especially of that Sex, which is counted the most tender-hearted and merciful, could be guilty of such an inhumane Impiety, and yet there is nothing more frequent; notwithstanding the daily examples of punishment by death inflicted up∣on them; for I do not remember any Sessions for these half dozen years last past, wherein there hath not been, at least one, if not more Tryed for this Bloody Crime. The present Prisoner was Servant to a Gentle∣woman of good worth, and had behaved her self with that diligence and modesty, that she had gained much upon the Affections and good opinion of the Family, so that they had no mistrust of her; though when she had been privately Delivered, and disposed of her Child, she was taken notice of to be ill, and some Feminine symptomes appeared. But the same at last increasing, a Midwife was sent for; who examining and enquiring into Circumstances, concluded her to have been delive∣red of a Child, and charging her with it, she ingeniously confest it, and that it was in a void Garret, near the room she lay in, where they found it buried under certain Tiles and Rubbish. She then and now al∣leadged that it was still both; but confessing that she was never Married,
and the Statute making it Death for a Woman to be delivered of a Bastard-Child, without witness or discovering it; and the Midwife, though she could not positively affirm that she had gone her full time, yet acknowledging the Infant had both Hair and Nails, she was Con∣victed, and received Sentence of death. A person that had been an old Offender, though but a young man, was Tryed on two Indictments, for stealing of several Watches, both pickt out of the Prosecutors Pockets; and to aggravate his Crime, one of them was stoln in the Savoy Church: being taken upon suspition, and his Lodgings searcht, there were found a great number of Watches, about eighteen, and amongst them these two, which were now owned: though the Witnesses could not directly Swear he was the man that robb'd them, yet being taken from their persons, and found in his custo∣dy, who was not able to give any good account how he came by them, but onely a frivolous allegation, that he bought one of them of a fel∣low that appeared to be hang'd last Sessions, and the other of he knew not whom; he was found guilty on both Indictments. A very little Girl was Arraigned for stealing a Money-Box, and there∣in three pound and odd money, out of a Chandlers shop, whilst they were at Dinner: she had often frequented the place for Alms, and the good man had several times relieved her; and once before she had taken away a Box and Farthings, as since she confest, though then not sus∣pected; but now they very quickly missing their Money, pursued, found her out not far off, and charging her very sharply, made her confess the Theft, and acquaint them that she had thrown the Box over a wall, and hid the money in a piece of Leather under a stone by a Pump, where they found it: but she being a Child, and, as she said, not above eight years old, and, by her allegations, there being some reason to suspect that she did it by the wicked instigation of her Parents, in pitty to her tender age, as not having any Felonious intent, she was favoured so far, as not to be found guilty of the Indictment. So likewise two Boys, that by stealing a Gentlemans key from a Bed∣maker with whom they went to School, got into his Chamber in an Inn of Chancery, and breaking his study, stole thence six pound and odd money, and two Rings, and so run two or three miles out of Town, where after some time they were taken, and one of the Rings, and forty shillings of the Money, the rest thereof being spent, and one Ring as they said lost: It appearing that onely one of them did the Fact, though the other had share in spending the Money, the first was found guilty, and the other acquitted. It being a most sad object, to see Children so young, so vitiously inclined, as to attempt such wickedness. A bold Girl was accused for breaking open a Trunk, and stealing a dozen of Napkins in the House of one that was remotely related to her; but the Jury did not think the Evidence plain enough to Convict her. So likewise they acquitted two Shop-lifts, charged with stealing of for∣ty yards of Bone lace; for though there were violent presumptions of their guilt, there was no direct proof. In the afternoon a Carman took a Trial for killing a Boy in Newgate∣street; driving his Cart along very moderately, and meeting with some
Gentlemens Coaches, he going to give way, the Child being on the other side, unseen by him, hapned to be beat down, and run over by the farther wheel: All which Circumstances being proved by persons of credit that saw the Action, and declared that they verily believed it was purely an involuntary Accident, and not by any default of the Pri∣soner, he was cleared. Next was a Young man, by Trade an Instrument-maker, Tryed for firing of New-Prison, lately burnt down: To which Prison he had been Committed for a Recusant, but got out upon Bayl. There was a Witness which occasioned the Suspicion, that testified, That the day before the fire, the Prisoner ask'd him if he had a minde to earn 50 s. To which he consenting, if in an honest way, the Prisoner refused to tell him for what service, unless he would promise him absolutely to do it, and so they parted; but first the Prisoner told him, If he would earn it, he should see fine sport in New-prison before the next day 7 a Clock; before which time the said Prison was burnt. There were some other Witnesses, but not direct to the purpose; and the Prisoner proving, that the same Night he was out of Town; upon a full disquisition of the whole matter, he was found not Guilty. After this was a notable Tryal of two persons for Coyning; they were by trade Watch-makers, and one of them lately dwelt in the Old-Bayly; but together with another of their Gang not yet taken, they had hired Rooms at a House by Bun-hill-fields, where they drove their mischievous Trade. Having paid their Landlady some of their counterfeit Money, she sent out a Boy with a new-mill'd Half-crown, to buy some Nutmegs. The Grocer's Apprentice by the lightness suspected it to be naught, and took advice on it, who concurr'd in the same opinion; and seeing it so very fresh and newly done, cut it, and found it to be Brass, but exquisitely plated over, allowing not above three pennyworth of Silver to a piece. Hereupon they took the name of the person from whom the Boy said he came, and gave notice: But the Artists understanding there was some noise abroad of it, fled with the greatest part of their Tools, before the House came to be searcht. However, notice being given in the Gazette, one was soon after taken in Bristol, and the other in London. Their Landlord and Landlady both swore they had seen them at work, and several of their Mill'd-pieces were produced in Court, most artificially contrived, having their Mills to do it exactly. They made some slight defence; but upon such plain Evidence of the Fact, were found Guilty of the Treason. A Young man was likewise Convicted for stealing a Nag out of the Grounds near Nottingham, and coming riding up towards London, in Middlesex his Horse wanted shoeing; where the Smith observing that he came a different Way from the Road which he pretended, and other circumstances, mistrusted that he had stoln the Gelding; and questioning him, he at first endeavoured to make an escape; but be∣ing taken, confess'd that he took him up near the place aforesaid; Whither notice being sent, the Owners Son came now and gave Evi∣dence against him, on which he was found guilty.
One French, Indicted for breaking open an House in the day time, and stealing some Linnn; refusing to plead, was put in the Press, the weight whereof in little time, made him willing to submit to his Tryal, being scarce able to go or stand when he came out; but on Tryal, though found guilty, he obtained the favour of Transporta∣tion. A poor Popish Tailor was charged with being a Priest, but no Evidence coming against him, he was acquitted. Clark, the Boy for firing the House in the Mi∣nories, after various and contrary Tales, being now again brought to the Bar, was or∣dered to stand in the Pillory, with an Inscription to this purpose,—I am the Rogue that would have Fired my Mistresses House and all the City. These were of Common Offenders, Nine in all Condemned, whereof two for Trea∣sn, for Coyning of Money, Nine burnt in the Hand, Five to be Transported, and Six whpt. But ordinary Criminals are now scarce worth the notice of any but the Hang∣man, when we have so many Rogues of Note, and Villanies of Quality— On Friday came on Sir George Wakeman, Mr. Corker, Provincial of the Benedictine Monks, Mr. Rumley, and Mr. Marshal. They were all Arraigned in one Indictment, For Conspiring the Death of the KING, &c. The Evidence against them seem'd to be somewhat plain, That Sir George was to have Fifteen Thousand pounds for the Poysoning the KING. Against the others, there were other things proved: but as to Circumstances, I must refer to the Consciences of those concerned, the Prisoners were Acquitted. Fiat Justitia ruat Mundus. FINIS.
