P3850 [ocm]10599523 204738
The Protestants Ioy, OR THE RELATION OF HIS GRACE THE Duke of Monmouth, His Reception and Congratulation IN THE CITY OF LONDON ON the 29th of October, 1680. With an Account of his high entertainment, and the general satisfaction that all the loyal Citizens conceived at his Honouring them with his Company. As also how he was attended by many hundreds of people, with loud Shouts and Acclamations, with many other passages, that happened, during the splendid entertainment. ALthough Popish-Malice to the highest Design that Hell could infuse into the hearts of Romes Darling Emisa∣ries did endeavour to Rase or overwhelm the Glories of this Noble and Loyal Peer, yet have all their Contrivances and Designs, fallen short of their intended Am▪ for as the
Palm still flourish beneath oppressing Weights, and waves her Branches aloft, so a noble mind Conquers the greatest diffi∣culties, and in Adversity shines brightest, for prosperity that bane of Virtue, like an Evening Mist overcasts the Sun of Ho∣nour, and renders it a Beamless Globe divested of all his golden Rays, and oftentimes like Poyson swells that Soul to such a height of Ambition, that it bursts into a thousand Vices by ac∣knowledging of no Equality or Limitary bound, but adversity like silent falling showers spread through each Demean: For as the Philosopher affirms, Mans cheifest knowledg as to Earthly things consists in knowing of himself. But to let these and such like Emblems rest, and to proceed to our intended Narrative of his Grace the Duke of Monmouth's reception into Englands great Metropolis, on the 29 of Ostober last, it being the day of its Tryumph, for the happy Enjoyment of its new Majestrate or Lieutenant under his most sacred Maje∣sty (whom Heaven long preserve) The right Honourable the Lord Mayor, his Grace as it is reported by the Cities kind Invi∣tation Accompanyed with several of the Nobility, between one and two of the Clock of the aforesaid day, came in his Coach (being saluted by most if not all that he passed by) into Cheap∣side the principle Street of this famous City, where a lighting he went up into a Ballconey near to Bow-Church to take a Prospect of the splendid Magnificence; where no sooner he appeared, but some thousands flocked as near to the place as it was possible for them to get, some standing with their Hats off, whilst others gave loud Shouts, as Signals of Joy, crying, God bless his Ma∣jesty and the Duke of Monmouth, tossing up their Hats and Caps, giving such loud Shouts as made the Vaults send back their Ec∣choes in Rebounds of Joy. In this may the Papists plainly di∣scerne how generally the People conceive a dislike and detesta∣tion of their false Absurditie and unjust practises. About two of the Clock several of the Companies Landed, and took their places according to the usual custom. About three his Lordship, ac∣companied with the Right Worshiplul Sir Rebert Clayton late Lord Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen, with the Sheriffs, and others of the Magistracy of this renowned City, Land∣ed at Black-Friers-Stairs, being there saluted with three Vollies of Shot, by the Noble Company of Artillary; who waited up∣on his Lordship in Arms, besides several Broad-sides from the
Pleasure-Boats that attended on the River of Thames, and ta∣king Horse, as the usual manner is, passed on to Guild Hall. Ma∣ny learned Speeches being made to his Lordship as he passed, from the Pageants, and most especially from that of the Merchant-Tay∣lors, of which Company his Lordship is Free. After they were passed by, his Grace descended, and accompanied with many of the Nobility, went to Guild-Hall, being followed by a great multitude, with loud shouts and acclamations, where being arrived, he was reccived with that Respect that became his Qua∣lity. In the great Ball the sumptious Table being spread, besides his Grace, the Judges were present. The entertainment was mag∣nificent, according to the Grandure and Greatness of the City, and personages to participate the same; there being no Cost spared to make it splendid for the Entertainment of such noble Guest. After Dinner a Health went round to his Majesty, with all due Respect and awful Reverence, the Musick playing most melodiously the while; afterwards to several Peers, and to the good success of this Assembled Parliament. Long time continued the Glorions Banquet and Congratula∣tory satisfaction received on all hands, about ten of the Clock at night his Grace took his Leave, and accompanied with several persons of Quality, returned home, but although it was so late, several people having noticc of his Return, gave the Allarm that the Duke was coming, whereupon a multitude ft their Habitations to take a view of him; that the streets were throng∣ed with Spectators, the Crowd still gathering greater, surrounded his Coach, till at last there were a great number of Links Flam∣beaus and Torches lighted and about a thovsand People hollow∣ing and Shouting so loud that they made the Streets Ring. Thus they Guarded him through the City, and would not return, though his Grace in modesty desired them. At Temple-Bar the greatest part lest him, but many were so desirous of his Compa∣ny as to follow him to his own Lodging. Thus may the Romanists behold how Heaven blasts their ut∣most Rage, and that it is time for them to leave off their Ploting since all true and Loyal Subjects of which the greatest part of the Nation are such Antipodes to their Designs.
And though perhaps their Reports might cause his sacred Majesties displeascre to be kindled a∣gainst him for a season, yet his submission and fil∣lial obedience may in time move his Royal Father to pity and compassion; nor can we doubt it, see∣ing he is all inclinable to Mercy and forgiveness; those Sacred Virtues which the Almighty him∣self prefers before the Attributes of his unbound∣ed Power. That it may so happen, and that he may be still a Terrour (as he heretofore has been) to his King and Countries Foes, let all true Loyal Subjects pray, to him that is the Disposer of all hearts to grant. London, Printed by D. Mallet 1680.
