R478a l.r.305.a.7.[13] R227750 99887491 190461
Reasons and Considerations humbly proposed, why no Act of At∣tainder should extend to make a Forfeiture of that part of the Estate of Sir John Danvers deceased, which is come to his one∣ly Son Mr. John Danvers an Infant. 1. FIrst, Mr. John Danvers is onely Heir of that Antient and Noble Family of the Danvers's, and Heir to the late Earl of Dauby his Uncle, and hath, with all that was left nim by his Father (Sir John Danvers) but a moderate Fortune, to support the Dignity and Memory of his Family. 2. His Father, Sir John Danvers, though in his life-time owner of a very great Estate, was so wrought upon by some about him, as to settle his Estate in such manner, as that his then ldest son, Mr. Henry Danvers, since deceased, had power to dispose of, and did dispose of all of it by Will, (saving about twelve hundred Pounds per Annum) from his said Father, and from his onely Brother, and from the name of Danvers, to his Sisters; and that during his minority, and in the life-time of his Father; and then dyed under age, and unmarried. By this means, Mr. Villers, (sometimes called Viscount Pur∣beck, who married one of the Daughters) and the children of the other Daughter (the Lady Lee) go away with far the greatest part of Sir John Danver's Estate, and about 1200 l. per Annum and no more, is with much ado rescued from that settlement, to de∣scend and come to Mr. John Danvers, the Heir of the Family, out of which his Mother hath a Joynture of about 500 l. per Annum, and 340 l. per Annum is paid out of it for Annuities and Rent-charges. 3. The small Estate that belongs to this young Gentleman was not first acquired by Sir John Danvers, (his Father) but was formerly part of the Earl of Dauby's Estate, and belonging to the Family of the Danvers's. 4. Mr. John Danvers is but of the age of Nine or Ten years, or thereabouts, and by this means in some incapacity to make friends, and unable to defend his small Estate, (his near kindred being such as have gained the Estate from him, and been engaged in Sutes with him about the Estate) are therefore likely to prove enemies rather than assi∣stants to him. 5. The Lady Danvers (Mother of the said Infant) is very well known to be of a dif∣ferent Inclination and Judgment from her late Husband; and in the Education of her Son (her onely child) hath instructed him in better Principles. 6. And in the promoting of that Designe for his Majestie, for which Doctor Hewet was so bloodily murthered, she testified her good Affection to his Majestie's Cause, and her Loyalty towards his Majestie, by sending him 200 l. to advance his Majestie's ser∣vice. 7. And his Majestie's Enemies then in power, conceived her to be no friend to their unrighteous Cause, insomuch that about the time of Sir George Booth's late appearing in Arms, she the said Lady Danvers, amongst others, was suspected, her house searched by Souldiers, and she her self carried before the then Councell of State; And a Kinsman of hers, who for divers years hath lived with her in her House, who is a person that hath ever been very active in his faithful service and loyalty to his Majestie, whom his Majesty, since his happy Return, hath frequently owned to be a preserver of his Majestie's life, when his Majestie was in greatest danger. 8. And the said Lady hath, for divers years, intrusted the education of her onely Child, and the direction of her whole Family in matters of Religion, to Doctor Mere∣dith, a person eminent in his Sufferings for his Majestie's Father, who hath for all that time lived in the house with the said Lady Danvers,
