R512 99832208 198928
REASONS For taking off the DUTY upon the Glass and Earthen Manufactures. IF Manufacturing any Commodities in this Kingdom, which were former∣ly brought from Foreign Parts, ought to be Encouraged. If such Manufactures that are produced chiefly by the Labour of the Poor (who are always Exempted in our Taxations) ought to be che∣rished. If our Woollen Manufacture, tho' supported with our English Wool (which no Nation can equal) has notwithstanding all the Assistance and Encourage∣ment that can be given: and if Manufactures that are as easily made in Fo∣reign Parts as in this Nation, ought by parity of Reason to be more Encou∣raged. If the Lustring Manufacture be deservedly kept among us by all possible ways and means to Support and Encourage it, rather than forced home again to France, by Burthening it with Duties. And if it be the Wisdom and Practice of all Nations to Assist and En∣courage the Manufactures of useful Commodities among them. Then there is all the reason in the World to set the Glass and Earthen Ma∣nufactures free from the present Duty that is upon it, which has already almost and will (if not quickly taken off) quite destroy it. And then the Hollanders, Venetians, &c. may have cause to Rejoice at the return of their Trade, but we shall certainly have reason to repent the Loss of so useful a Manufacture. If several work Houses were forced to give over soon after the Duty was laid, not being able to bear the Burthen of it: If others have been since Ruined by it, if those that remain are not without great Difficulties Sup∣ported, and that they do not Manufacture near the Quantities as formerly; if many of our Manufacturers, are gone out of the Nation, if setting up work Houses in Scotland and Ireland since this Duty; and if many of the Poor that were Employ'd in these Manufactures are forced to the Parish for Maintenance, which are all matters of Fact, be Arguments sufficient to Con∣vince us, that if this Duty be not quickly taken off, these Manufactures will be Extinguished; it then behooves us, no longer to hearken to the plau∣sible, but fallacious Pretences of those that gain by the Collection of the Duty, who therefore argue for the Continuance of it; but that we immediate∣ly apply the most proper means for Reviving and Supporting it. T'is very strange, That all our other Manufactures (properly so call'd) should be under a Noli me tangere; and this of Glass and Earthen Ware (which as much merits our Regard as any other) should be singled out to be crushed to Ruine. The Duty arising from it is so inconsiderable, that it can be no Argu∣ment for its Continuance; and should it produce as great a Sum as the mista∣ken Proposers pretended, yet the Premises considered, 'twould be the Interest of the Nation, to take it off, and raise an Equivolent any other way; which may be done, by laying a Duty upon Commodities of more necessary and gene∣ral Use among us, and that will not be attended with such ill Consequences, as this upon Glass and Earthen Wares.
