11047 99851225 16493
¶ A MEMORIALL of the famous monuments and charitable almesdeedes of the Right worshipfull Maister William Lambe Esquire, somtime Gentleman of the Chappell, in the reigne of the most renow∣med King Henrie the eight, &c. And late Ci∣tizen of London, and free of the Right worshipfull companie of Cloth∣workers: deceased the 21. of April. An. 1580. Recorded in print, according to the tenour and trueth of his last will and Testa∣ment by Abraham Fleming. SACRIFIZIO AGNELLO SALVAZIONE MVNDO Tobit. 4, 1▪ G of thy bread to the hungrie, and of thy garments to them that are naed: and of all thine abundance giue .
VIRTVTE {inverted ⁂} DVCE. W L COMITE {inverted ⁂} FORTVNA.
A memoriall of the fa∣mous monumentes, and charitable almesdeedes of the Right worshipfull Mai∣ster William Lambe Esquire, &c. GIue me leaue (good Christians) to com∣mend to memorie the notable actes and fa∣mous monuments of a right Gentleman, loued in his life, and lamented at his death: whose praises to suppresse with silence, si∣thence they are deserued and not sought, it were a wrong, as I iudge in conscience, which the verie Monuments of memorie were vsuall a∣mong the Heathen. Hea∣then would not once conceiue, much lesse commit, if they had béene (as we are) eie and eare witnesses of his me∣ritorious déedes. Giue me leaue (I say) for the glorie of God, and the memorie of the Gentleman, to re∣port
vnto the world, or at least to the people of this land, not the visions of a vaine head, not the sudden deuises of an vnstaied braine, not the rashe rimes of a running penne, not the bolde babling of an imagined lie, not the cunning conueiance of a wanton toy, &c. but The Argu∣ment of this small pam∣phlet. the determinations of a deuout minde, the precise purposes of a settled heart, the commendable workes of a liberall hand, the verie certeintie of an vndoubted trueth, which is worthie, not to be printed in white and blacke, but to be grauen in Marble with letters of golde, in the memoriall of him after death, whose déedes did sufficiently aduaunce him in his life. A great matter, & of more impor∣tance than the cōmon sort of people can conceiue, to vndertake the blaso∣ning of so The memo∣rie of whome shall neuer die. vertuous a mans mani∣fold benefits▪ wherin as I want wit to write as he is worthie, so I lacke skill to dispose and order the sundrie circumstances, which offer them∣selues to my barren inuention, tou∣ching
his last will and testament. There are missing in me the méetest meanes in this matter, quickenesse of capacitie, smoothnesse of spéeche, ripenesse of iudgement: I Presuppo∣sed impedi∣ments con∣cerning the writer. am a stranger, or rather a nouesse in af∣faires of the worlde, vnacquainted with the trades of men, as called to a more solitarie life: which (besides other vnremembred) are impedi∣ments, wherby I shal séeme so much the more insufficient to accomplishe this enterprise, by how much I am to complaine of the want of know∣ledge and experience. Againe, my methode will be more marked, for his sake concerning whom it is pur∣posely penned: and in some thing wherein I thinke my selfe not to haue offended, I may do amisse, and so incurre controlment. For where manie eies are fixed, manie faultes may be found: and manie mindes may soone iudge where a thing may be amended. But I, though not cunning, yet carefull to deliuer in due order According to the tenour of the Testators owne last will & testament. the
trueth of this Gentlemans almes∣déedes: beséech all such as shall per∣vse this pamphlet, not so much to descant vpon the writers rude and vnpolished report, as looking for some deintie deuise to tickle their it∣ching eares: but to behold with ear∣nest eies the Testatours bountifull bequests, which as they cannot, be∣ing so charitable, but smell swéete in the Lords sight, euen so they deserue Two necessa∣rie things wished. a pithie commemoration, which I woulde to God I were able to com∣passe: and (if it could be) an effectu∣all imitation, which the Lord God worke in the hearts of all them that are wealthie. To come therfore to our purpose, a custome it hath béene both ancient and famous, not onely among Pa∣gans, with whome in déedes of de∣uotion I intende not to deale, but al∣so among people fearing God, and addicted to the extolling of his name, that the notable actes of such persons as were singular, shoulde not sléepe in obliuion, but by one monument
or other made immortall. Herevpon some by one Prophane writers verifie this matter. solemne ceremonie, some by another, had that honour and renowme done vnto them after death, by some notable deuise of man, were it either workmanship of the hande, or inuention of the heade, which did as it were reuiue, & restore them againe to life. Among all the rest, passing ouer a multitude, we shall sée, euen in the sacred Scrip∣tures, that the holie Ghost hath vouchsafed some such speciall and so∣uereigne dignitie, as to haue The memo∣rie of whome is euerlasting. their names registred euen in the Bible, their vertues extolled, their déedes aduaunced: partly that the remem∣brance of them should neuer die, and partly to be prouocations vnto vs to walke worthie of our calling. This to be a truth, the verie touch∣stone of trueth doeth testifie. For, there is none so ignorant, but can quickly call to memorie, where men∣tion is made of Eight tripli∣cities of no∣table and fa∣mous men. Enoch, Noe, and Abraham: Isaach, Iacob, and Ioseph: Moses, Aaron, and Phinees: Iosue,
Caleb, and Samuel: Nathan, Dauid, and Salomon: Elias, Elizeus, and E∣zekias: Ieremie, Ezechiel, Zoroba∣bel: Neemias, Sem, and Seth, &c. ho∣lie and approued men in the eies of the highest: & commended in Scrip∣ture, some for their faithfulnesse, some for their méekenesse, some for their wisedome, some for their inno∣cencie, some for their valiantnesse, some for their riches, some for their glorie, some for one blessing of God, and some for another. Wherein Obseruati∣ons to be noted. is to be obserued, first the loue of God towardes his elect, in that he vouchsafeth his seruants so notable a register: Secondly the rare vertues wherewith they were indued, deseruing immortall memo∣rie: Thirdly that the wicked are not recorded, but for the reuiuing of their reproch: And fourthly that the remembrance of both, might bréede in vs a desire to doe well, that good may growe thereby: and a detesting of the contrarie, which commonly bringeth shame.
The The offence of Cain made his name o∣dious. name of Cain, or the report of his déedes, are they written to his commendation? Nothing lesse. For as the offence which he committed was heinous, so is his name odious. As well then are the wicked recor∣ded, as the righteous: that by a view of eithers life, our election might be the better grounded. Few fathers that loue their children, will baptise them by the name of Absalon, of A∣chitophel, of Hamman, of Iudas? And why? Because the course of these mens conuersation was so accurssed, that they became abhomi∣nable whiles they liued: and though their bodies in tract of time putrified & waxed rotten, yet the holie Ghost by committing their actes to memo∣rie, hath doubled their infamie. So then the sequele of all is this, that Both good and bad regi∣stred in the Bible. as well the wicked as the righ∣teous haue their remembraunce in Gods booke: but in contrarie re∣spects, the one to become more fa∣mous, the other more infamous: the one more beloued, the other more
hated: the one more honoured, the o∣ther more abhorred: the one more followed as commendable, the other more eschewed as condemnable. What praise hath the proud Phari∣sie by his memoriall in the Gospell? His hypocrisie turneth his glorie in∣to shame. What renowme the riche glutton, what fame the thriftles ser∣uant, what aduancement the vnre∣pentant théefe? The Not without the grace of God. Publicane was iustified, poore Lazarus glorifi∣ed, the trustie seruant rewarded, the sorowfull théefe receiued, and all this appeareth manifest in the volume of the Bible, as monuments which no age, no time, no season shal consume. Doe you not remember, that the holie Ghost speaketh of a couetous miser, a wretch, a worldling, one that very buisily occupied his head about inlarging his barnes, that his soule might be more merrie in the middest of his abundance: not mindfull in the meane space of the This night they shall fetch thy soule from thee. shortnes of his iournie? Beléeue me, this is written no more to his commendation, than
the pretended innocencie of Pilate in condemning Christe, is noted to his honour. And now to riche men I must direct the summe of all my spéech: for hauing to deale with the distribution of riches, how can I o∣mit such a néedefull common place? It is a sore saieng of S. Iames, which he vseth to the wealthie of the world, A hard rec∣koning for rich men.Go to now ye rich men, weepe and howle for your miseries that shall come vpon you. Your riches are cor∣rupt, and your garments are moth-eaten. Your gold & siluer is cankred, and the rust of them shalbe a witnes against you, and shall eate your flesh as it were fire, &c. The place is knowne. They are bitter wordes of S. Paule, touching the same matter, that Such as wil be rich fall into ten∣tation and snares, & into many foo∣lish & noisome lustes, which drowne men in perdition and destruction. For the desire of monie is the roote of all euill, which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and For they are neuer at quiet in themselues, neither in soule nor bodie. pearced themselues through with
many sorrowes. But a sharpe sen∣tence against such is that of our Sa∣uiour Christ, vttered not with a na∣ked and bare pronuntiation, but con∣firmed with an oth: Verely I say vn∣to you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdome of heauen. This is made more manifest by a comparison of impossibilitie, in the wordes following, It is easier for a camel, (or a cable rope) to goe tho∣rough the eie of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the king∣dome of God. And therfore the good counsell of our Sauiour is to be ta∣ken in due and acceptable time, To lay vp treasures for our selues in hea∣uen, where neither moth nor canker corrupteth, and where theeues nei∣ther digge through nor steale. And the example of the yong Gen∣tleman mentioned in the Gospell, being a rich heire, and in possession of much land, is no lesse to be mar∣ked, Riches an e∣nimie to the saluation of the soule. who after he had béene instruc∣ted what to doe toward the attaine∣ment of eternall life, was likewise
exhorted, if he would be perfect, to sell all that he had, & to giue it to the poore. But the hearing of this vnsa∣uorie doctrine stoong him at the hart as loth to buy the ioies of heauen with the losse of his temporall trea∣sures: wherevpon he went away sor∣rowfull, as vnwilling to make so harde a reckoning. This is a thing not onely worthie rehersall, but also remembrance: and not only remembrance, but also con∣sideration. And though they are but wordes, yet they haue their As procee∣ding from christ and his Apostles. weight, they haue their trueth, they haue their certeintie. For heauen and earth shall passe, but one worde of the Sonne of man shall not passe, as our Sauiour testifieth of himselfe. And therefore, will rich men liue in Gods loue, and die in his fauour? Then let them be mercifull, as their heauenly Father is mercifull. Will rich men be at peace with God, and his sonne Christ? Then let them fol∣low him, who said, that Except they forsake wife, children, kinred, house,
landes and life, they are not worthie to be his disciples. Will riche men so die, that they may liue in the Lorde? Then Good coun∣sell for the rich. let them be charitable and pitifull, libe∣rall and bountifull: for the riches wherewith they are blessed, though theirs in possession for the time of their life, yet let them know that the Lorde will one day looke ouer his ac∣counts, & call them to a reckoning. God forbid that rich men should des∣paire of their saluation, because they are rich. Abraham was rich, yet was he faithfull: Lot rich, yet righteous: Tobie rich, yet mercifull: Iob rich, yet innocent: Zacheus rich, yet boun∣tifull. And therefore, as in former ages, it hath pleased God, with his blessings temporall to knit assured hope of life eternall in the hearts of his chosen: so there is no cause of mis∣trust, but that the Lord Some riche men Gods seruants. hath reser∣ued vnto himselfe a remnant of rich men, in these latter daies, though daungerous, whose light shining to the worlde, and their good workes
plentifully emploied to the benefite of the comfortlesse, prouoketh euerie godly disposed person to glorifie our Father which is in Heauen. A rare testimonie hereof may be séene in this famous Citie, euen at this instant, in Maister Wil∣liam Lambe Esquier. a notable Gentle∣man, whose good déedes bare witnes of his Christianitie in his life, and shall continue the memorie of his charitie after death. Of whome, because it is a trauell purposely vn∣dertaken, I must speake that to his commendation, which he deserueth. And though I cannot applie my pen sufficiently to expresse his praise: yet by the commemoration or recitall of his benefites, euerie indifferent rea∣der will soone gather what is due to such a singular Gentleman. And first, to touch the Learning a readie way to honour. instru∣ment of his aduancement, learning I meane, I will say no more than I haue laide before me in writing, and maie boldely exemplifie: that the knowledge & vnderstanding where∣with the Lorde vouchsafed to reple∣nish
him, remoued him from a mean estate, to a worshipfull calling: from the Countrie, to the Court: where being placed euen in the Chappell, to serue his souereigne Lord Master Lamb in fauor with King Henrie the eight. King Henrie the eight of immortall me∣morie, of whome he was well liked, and béeloued, he spent his time ap∣pointed in such séemelinesse as might be thought requisite for his degrée and person. And remembring that learning bringeth preferment, yea euen to them which are but basely borne, as it pleased God to moue him by his good and gratious spirite, he proued himselfe by testimonials of his do∣ings, a louer of learning, and a fa∣uourer of euerie honest profession. For in the towne of Sutton Valens in Kent, this worshipfull Gentleman at his owne costs and proper expences erected a The erection of a Grammar schoole and necessarie al∣lowance to the Maister and Vsher. Grammar schoole for the education of youth in the feare of God, in good maners, in knowledge and vnderstanding. He also weieng with himselfe, that
The labourer ought of right to haue his hire: And that, No man goeth to warre of his owne proper charge, besides other commodities which he thought méete & necessarie, hath al∣lowed the Maister twentie pounds, and the Vsher tenne pounds, from time to time, as either place shall be supplied by succession, for their yeare∣ly stipends and perpetuall pensions. To continue the rehersall of his good déedes in Sutton aforesaide, note his tender and pitifull heart toward the poore, for whose sustentation, main∣tenance, and reliefe, he hath Almes hou∣ses built for the poore. builded sixe almes houses for the impotent▪ and hath giuen sixe poundes to be yearely paied vnto them for their ne∣cessarie prouision. Moreouer, be∣sides this charitable déede, to kéepe still within the compasse of Kent, marke the singular loue which this Gentleman did beare vnto learning, for the furtherance whereof, and the more encouragement of poore scho∣lers, he hath giuen to the schoole of Maidstone, Allowance for poore mens children to be kept at schoole. ten pounds a yeare for
euer, with this caueat or prouiso, that néede mens children should be pre∣ferred to the enioieng of this singu∣lar benefite. Here you sée, in the Countie of Kent, the monumentes which this woorthie Gentleman hath left be∣hinde him: and nowe be you iudges, whether these so godly and charita∣ble workes of Christianitie, deserue not a more permanent memoriall than penne and inke can performe. There remaineth behind a remem∣brance of other his notable actes, which as they are not to be omitted, so it is to be wished they were accor∣dingly followed. That this Gentleman had not onely a regarde for the séede-plots of learning, to haue them watered with the springs of his bountie: but also a prouident eie, and The Cōmon∣welth remem∣bred. a carefull heart for the profit of the Common-welth, the particulars following substanti∣ally do proue. For, séeing in his life time, the decay of sundrie trades, the ruine of diuerse occupations, and o∣ther
inconueniences, which are like to growe to the vndoing of a multi∣tude, except by policie they be pre∣uented: of a méere affection (if I said fatherlie I were not controllable) he hath fréely giuen to A reliefe to poore Clo∣thiers in di∣uerse place: the poore Clo∣thiers in Suffolke: to the poore Clo∣thiers of Bridgenorth in Shropshire, & to the poore Clothiers at Ludlow in the saide Countie, thrée hundred pounds, to be paid by euen portions, to each seuerall towne of the saide Counties, one hundred poundes a péece, for their supportation & main∣tenance at their worke and occu∣pation. Furthermore, the well of his wel-doing not yet waxing drie, but yéel∣ding liquor of reliefe verie largely, hath watered other places. For, as the Countrie, so likewise the Citie, (this Citie London the better by Master Lamb. I meane of London) hath cause, yea iust cause with open month to magnifie the goodnesse of God, so mightily working in this praise worthie Esquire. The memo∣rable monuments, which shall liue
when he is dead, and shall flourishe when he is rotten, are witnesses of the loue, which he being a Citizen bare vnto this Citie. For, let vs begin with the A remem∣brance of Holborne Conduit foun¦ded and fini∣shed in Anno 1577. Con∣duite which he of his owne costs, not requiring either collection or contri∣bution, founded of late in Holborne, not sparing expences so it might bée substantiall, not pinching for char∣ges so it might be durable and plen∣tifull, as they can testifie which sawe the séeking of the springs, the maner of making the trenches, the ordering of the pipes, lieng in length from the head, to the saide Conduite, more than two thousande yardes: and fi∣nally, the framing of euerie necessa∣rie appurtenance therevnto belong∣ing. Besides this, The wast wa∣ter at the bridge runing at the Stan∣dart. meanes is made, by a Standart with one cocke at Holborne bridge to conueie the wast, which doeth such seruice, the water thereof being both swéete, pleasant, and holsome, as neither riche nor poore can well misse. Which great worke as he aduisedly attempted, so
he commendably finished, hauing disbursed thereabouts, of his owne costes and charges to the summe of fiftéene hundred poundes. And yet further note the wisedome and prouidence of this Gentleman, who considering that the right vse of a good thing might cut off Prouident considera∣tions. many occasions of vnthriftines & idlenesse, and knowing that we are placed in this worlde to followe the vocation wherevnto wée are called: besides that, séeing the hardnes of this age wherein we liue, that many would worke if they had means, many neg∣lect and care not for worke though they haue meanes, some would wil∣lingly withstand pouertie if they might, some had rather begge and doe worsse than giue themselues to labour, hath béene thus beneficiall to Poore wo∣men benefited by the Con∣duit. poore women that are glad to take paine, as to bestow vpon them a hun∣dred and twentie pales, wherwith to carrie and serue water: an honest shift of liuing, though somewhat toil∣some.
Note also with this charitable disposition for the establishing of the right vse of his Conduit, his Christi∣an heart wholy He was very deuout and religious. giuen to contem∣plation. For he was not onely care∣full that it should goe well with the bodie, but also mindfull of the safetie of the soule. Which to be true, I fetch my confirmation from his own person, whose daily custome it was to meditate vpon a Praier booke, cal∣led A praier booke, called Lambs Con∣duit of Com∣fort. The Conduit of Comfort, pub∣lished vnder his name: that with the water thereof his soule, as with the other his bodie, might be refreshed. The benefite of which booke, being bought for a litle monie; he was wil∣ling should be generall, euen as the Conduit which he founded not seue∣rall but common. To descende and come downe to other his almesdéedes, you shall vn∣derstand, that he being a member of the Right worshipfull corporation & societie of Clothworkers, The Right worshipfull Clothwor∣kers remem∣bred. was not forgetfull of that Companie, vnto whome he hath giuen his dwelling
house in London, with other landes, and tenements, to the value of thir∣tie pounds, or thereaboutes, by them to be thus bestowed: to wit, for the hiring of a Minister to reade diuine seruice thrise a wéeke, that is, euery Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday throughout the yeare, in the Chap∣pell or Churche belonging to his house, called by the name of S. Iames in the wall by Criplegate: and for foure sermons there yearely to be made Allowance for foure yearely ser∣mons. and preached, a competent allowance. Out of which summe also of thir∣thie pounds, it is prouided that a de∣duction be made by the said Cloth∣workers, for apparelling of twelue men, and as many women, in forme as followeth: that is to say, to euery one of the Euerie poore man & poore woman a shirt a smocke, a gowne, and a paire of shooes, &c. twelue men one fréeze gowne, one locorum shirte, & a good strong paire of winter shooes: to the twelue women likewise one fréeze gowne, one locorum smocke, & a good strong paire of winter shooes, all rea∣die made for their wearing: remem∣bred
alwaies that they must be per∣sons both poore & honest, vnto whom this charitable déede ought to be ex∣tended. Prouided also, that the execution hereof be done the first day of Octo∣ber, orderly from yeare to yeare, for euer, whiles the worlde doth last. Moreouer, he hath giuen to those of his Companie foure poundes fréely, not for a time, but perpetually: and thus doeth his bountifulnes many waies appeare. To S. Giles with∣out Criple∣gate benefi∣ted. the parish of S. Giles without Criplegate, he hath giuen fiftéene pounds to the belles and Chime, ha∣uing meant (as it séemeth if they had taken time) to be more liberall in that behalfe. And surely I commend his déede, for it is as véete a thing for a stéeple to lacke a bell, as for a bell to want a clapper: and yet for so saieng I pray you thinke me not su∣perstitious: I would be loth to de∣serue that suspicion. The Reliefe for the poore people. pre of the parish aforsaid, by their reliefe in his life time, secretly ministred,
haue iust cause to lament the losse of this right bountifull almoner. For by his meanes their succour was the more: now it is to be feared it will be so much the lesse, by how much it may be supposed he increased their reliefe. This Gentlemans distributions are so diuerse, and so many, that the rehearsall of them requireth a large discourse. It is well knowne, & that canne the worshipfull companie of the M. Lambes loue to the worshipfull Stationers. Stationers witnesse, that this Gentleman, for the space of these fourtéene or fiftéene yeares, whiles he liued, was pitifull to the poore of the parish of Saint Faiths, and o∣ther parishes: in which said parish Church, euery Friday ordinarily throughout the yeare, distribution was made of their allowance by the hands of the said worshipfull Statio∣ners, to whome that charge was & is committed: namely, to twelue poore people twelue pence in monie, and twelue pence in bread. Neither is this charitable déede laid a sléepe,
but Perpetuall prouision for the poore. continued euen to the worldes end, for the perpetuall succour of the poore and impotent, a legacie of sixe poundes, thirtéene shillings & foure pence, allowed to that end, the be∣stowing whereof is in the handes of the said worshipfull societie of Sta∣tioners. As for Reliefe for Christes Hospi∣tall. Christes Hospitall, vnto the which he hath prooued himselfe a fatherlie benefactour, towardes the bringing vp of the poore children, he hath giuen sixe poundes, which they shall enioy for the terme of fiue hun∣dred yeares. Moreouer, (marke the rare liberalitie of this vertuous Gentleman) he hath giuen to the said Hospitall one hundred poundes in readie monie, A purchase for the said Hospitall. wherwith to purchase lands, that their reliefe, by the reue∣nues of the same, might be perpetu∣all. A notable déede, and an vndoub∣ted worke of perfect Christianitie. As for S. Thomas Spitle in South∣warke, towarde the succour of the sicke & diseased, he hath Reliefe for S. Thomas Sptle. giuen foure poundes yearelie, and for euer: so
that we may sée in all his procée∣dings with what mercie he was mo∣ued, with what pitie pricked: & final∣ly, in all respects how godlie giuen. And here by the way it is to bée noted, that whereas it is recorded in the summarie of English Chroni∣cles, that he gaue to the hospitall, commonly called The Sauoy, foun∣ded by K. Henrie the seuenth, to pur∣chase lands for the behoofe of the said hospitall, one hundred pounds in mo∣nie: The Chroni∣cler notwith∣standing is excuseable by reason. it is nothing so. For his bene∣ficence towards that hospitall was staid, not through any default in him, but because such agréements could not be concluded vpon, as he reaso∣nably required. Wherefore his con∣tribution that way ceased, sore (I dare say) against his godlie will. Thus much I was desired to speake touching that matter, to the intent that nothing but plaine truth might be reported, with the contrarie whereof he was not a litle offended. And although offenders deserue rather to be punished than fauoured,
whervpon by politike gouernement it is prouided, that their bodies ap∣prehended, be committed to Prisons for offenders. ap∣pointed places of emprisonment: yet this good Gentleman remem∣bring that the holie Ghost willeth vs not to withdraw our hand from any of our brethren in distresse, conside∣ring that charitie should not be par∣ciall but indifferent, hath for the Reliefe for poore priso∣ners. re∣lief of the poore prisoners of the Two Counters, of Newgate, of Ludgate, of the Marshall seas, of the Kings bench, & of the white Lion, dealt very boun∣tifully, and discréetely: giuing vnto the Two Counters, sixe pounds to be paid vnto them both by twentie shil∣lings a moneth: and to the other pri∣sons aboue mentioned, sixe mat∣tresses a péece, the whole number being two dozen and a halfe. In con∣sideration of which A charitable worke in deede. charitable déed, how déepely they are bound, if they haue any sparkle of grace, to thanke God for his goodnes shewed vnto them by the ministerie of this Gen∣tleman, all the world may perceiue.
It were iniurie offered, to let slip vnremembred his mindfulnesse of poore maides marriages: & how wil∣ling he was to helpe them, it appée∣reth by his good gifte of twentie pounds to be equally diuided among Marriage monie for poore maides. fourtie suche in number by e∣quall portions of tenne shillings a péece: with this caueat, that these poore maides so to be married, should be of good name and fame: wherein marke how in all his bequests, wise∣dome is ioined as a yokfellowe with his bountie. Lastly, and for conclusion, this discréete Gentleman, caried away with the His loue to∣wardes his seruants. zeale of a good conscience, tendering the state of his seruantes, left them also at a reasonable good stay. For besides their halfe yeares bourd fréely giuen & granted, he hath bene beneficiall to them in diuerse other respectes, which I passe ouer vnremembred. But alas! these sor∣rowfull seruants doe not a little la∣ment the losse of so louing a Maister. I omit the hundred and eight fréeze
gownes readie made, which he be∣queathed at his funerall to poore peo∣ple, both men and women: with the dispersing of the remnant of all his goodes after his buriall, where néede and reason require. And thus you sée what monu∣ments this Gentleman hath left be∣hinde him, to beare witnesse to the worlde of His faith was fruitfull. the fruitfulnesse of his faith: which if (as Saint Iames saith) it may be iudged by workes, and that it is a dead and a barren faith which declareth not it selfe by déedes: then the sequele may be this, that the faith wherewith he (of whome we haue written) was indued, sheweth it selfe to be the same faith which is wished, and I woulde to God were in the heart of euerie Christian. Notwithstanding An Apologie or defence of Master Lamb his religion. which works of compassion procéeding from this notable Gentleman, some in relie∣uing desolate widowes, some in suc∣couring fatherlesse children, some in comforting impotent people, some in prouiding for poore prisoners, some
in supporting decaied occupiers, some in amending honest maides marriages, some in susteining his housholde seruants, &c. plentifully de∣clared in the time of his life, and a∣boundantly expressed after his death: a number there are, that wanting discretion, beare small good will to deuotion, which in their priuie whis∣perings and open méetings, call this Christian Gentlemans religion in question. Touching which suspicion, as not grounded vpon anie probable cause, that it may be vtterly suppressed, and no longer vndeseruedly conceiued: I will render good reasons, and so discharge him of that Papisticall o∣pinion, whereof manie lacking the light of iudgement, and indéede scarse Christianly affected, partlie supposed, and partly reported he was a fauourer. Reasons tou∣ching the sin∣ceritie of his profession. First, the rule of Saint Paule is right, and cannot breake square, that Faith commeth by hea∣ring, and hearing by the worde of God. Both which meanes this Gen∣tleman
vsing, it is not to be doubted that he wanted the principall. That Master Lamb a hearer of Gods word read and preached. he was a hearer of the worde preached, it is apparant by ex∣perience. For he hath bene séene and marked at Powles crosse, to haue continued from eight of the clocke, vntill eleuen, attentiuely listening to the Preachers voice, and to haue en∣dured the ende, being weake and a∣ged, when others both strong and lustie went away. As for the time that was to spare before the Ser∣mon began, he spent the same in rea∣ding some part of the holie Bible. And séene Master Lamb giuen to de∣uout praier. at little Saint Bar∣tholomewes deuoutly following that godly exercise, he hath not had his eies occupied in gazing about the Church: but his minde meditating vpon heauenlie mysteries, he hath béene noted zealous and earnest in praier. Againe, if the quiet and peace∣able departing of a man out of this life, be a blessing of God, and an ar∣gument of his loue: and that the course of a mans cōuersation be tried
by the day of his death: if a quiet con∣science, if desire to forsake this world, if stedfast beliefe in Christ Iesus, and other fruites of Christianitie may be taken for the testimonials of a mans religion: then, not mine, but the re∣port of Master No∣well Deane of Powles, & Master Fox visited him in his sicknesse. reuerend, learned, graue, and wife▪ Preachers, shall be suffici∣ent confirmations in this behalfe: and to their iudgement and know∣ledge I appeale. Touching his A Lamb he liued, a Lamb he died. departure out of this worlde, it was godlie: euen as his conuersation was honest: and as he fell to the Lorde, so no doubt hée shall rise to the Lord at the last day, and receiue his rewarde with the faithfull and trustie seruant in the Gospell, to whom it was said, Come and enter into thy Maisters ioy, &c. He made no reckoning of his me∣rits, he harped not vppon the good déedes which he had done, he pleaded not his owne iustification by works: but by Faith the ladder to life. faith in the bloud of Christ he excluded all such extraordinarie meanes to come vnto God, and
dieng in hope to inherite heauen and heauenly ioyes, nay assured in spirit that his portion was there reposed, he surrendred his soule to the Lord that gaue it, and so ended the daies of his pilgrimage here on earth, in the yere of his age M. Lambs age, and the Executors of his last will. fourescore and fiue. Of whose last will and Testament, Sir William Cordell, Maister of the Rolles: and Sir Rowland Hayward, Iustice of Peace and Quorum, two verie wise, wealthie, ight worship∣full, & in all respectes sufficient Gen∣tlemen, are Executours. Hauing thus runne his race, and fought a good fight to his no small commendation, his soule I hope re∣posed in Abrahams bosome, a place of peace, rest, quietnes & tranquilli∣tie: his bodie intumbed & laid asléepe in a faire large vawte in S. Faithes vnder Powles, I will drawe to an ende of this discourse: recording ne∣uerthelesse vnto you, an I exemplifi∣ed the same my self: so did I also the o∣ther memo∣riall. Epitaph which I finde grauen in Brasse or Copper vpon the stone of his Se∣pulchre, which bearing no date, I
cannot directly set downe how long it hath continued: but by probable coniectures it may be thought, that it hath béene there any day this four∣téene or fiftéene yeares: for so long at least his almes hath béene giuen in that parish Church, in maner and forme aforesaide. But first you shall heare a remem∣brance of his person, grauen also in metall, and fastened in the wall, the tenour whereof followeth in thrée seuens. William Lambe, so sometime was my name, Whiles I aliue did runne my mortall race, Seruing Master Lamb aduanced to worship. a Prince of most immortall fame, The eight Henrie, who of his princelie grace, In his Chappell allowed me a place, By whose fauour, from Gentleman t' Esquire, I was preferd with worship for mine hire. With wiues He was thrise maried as may appeare by the record. three I ioyned wedlocke bande, Which all aliue true louers were to mee, Ione, Alce, and Ione, for so they came to hande, What needeth praise, regarding their degree? In wielie truth none stedfast more could bee, Who though in earth deaths force did once disseuer, Heauen yet I trust shall ioyne vs all for euer.
O Lamb of God, which sinne didst take away, And as a Lamb wast offered vp for sinne, Where I (poore Lamb) went from thy flocke astray, Yet thou (good Lord) vouchsafe thy Lamb to winne, Home to thy fold: and hold thy Lamb therein, That at the day when Lambs and Goates shal seuer, Of thy choice Lambs, Lamb may be one for euer. Vnder He woulde haue the poore praise God for his prouision. which remembrance I find two verses more added, contei∣ning a petition with an iniunction of dutie to the poore, who wéekely recei∣ued their allowance at the handes of the worshipful Stationers, to whom he bearing great affection, and ha∣uing also no small affiance, made them his disposers or stewardes in that behalfe. The verses are these. I pray you all that receiue breade and pence, To say the Lordes praier before ye go hence. The Epitaph enigmaticall, which I find grauen vpon the stone of his Tumbe, are short, swéete, pithie, and worthie to be considered. For they conteine a lesson which the wisest may learne, and a meaning for most men to marke. It is a spéech Proso∣popoicall,
as if he personally spake vnto vs aliue, to put vs in mind by his example, of our transitorie state. The verses are these. As I was, so are ye: As I am, you shall be: The verses vpon his Tumb-stone are not so well in my thin∣king: That I haue, that I gaue, That I spent, that I had. It may be they were disordered: for there is no rime, though there be reason. That I had, that I gaue: That I gaue, that I haue: Thus I end, all my cost: That I left, that I lost. And thus hauing said what I can, but not so much as I might, I leaue this right worshipfull Gentleman as I found him, a Lambe of the Lords fold, his soule féeding (I doubt not) vpon the Manna of immortali∣tie, wherof our good shepherd Christ make vs all partakers: and send vs more such louing Lambes, not in name, but in qualitie: and lessen the number of rauening wolues, for with such the world doth swarme. To knit all vp therfore in a The conclu∣sion commen∣datorie. short conclusion, I commend to the rich of this world, this Gentlemans me∣moriall,
as a mirror or looking glasse of a right bountifull almoner. Hée made not his monie his God, but some part thereof in his life, some after his death he appointed to be di∣stributed, in such sort as you haue heard reported, for the maintenance of learning, for the profite of trades and occupations, for the benefite of the Commonwealth, for the reléefe of the distressed, for the comfort of poore prisoners, &c. which almesdéeds of his are put vp together in a pursse, and shalbe repaid him with millians of increase. To For he onlie is to be glo∣rified. God therfore let vs giue glo∣ry, who of his goodnes hath wrought so many good works by the hands of his seruant: and we beséech him, of his mercie, to reforme the hearts of the wealthie, that they séeing a pat∣terne before their eies, may endeuor to doe as he hath done, An admoni∣tion to the rich. knowing that they haue not in this life a con∣tinuing citie, but that there is an houre set and limitted, they knowe not how soone, when they shalbe sent
for vpon a souden, and so of necessi∣tie, carieng nothing away with them must leaue all that they are worth to the possession of others. Godlines is great riches, if a man can be content with that he hath. I say no more, but the Lord make vs A Christian wish or de∣sire. poore in spirit, so shall we be sure to die rich at our departure, and to rise rich at our resurrection: which hée grant for his sonnes sake the price of our redemption, Iesus Christ the righteous, to whome, with the Father, and holie Ghost, be all honour & glorie euerlasting. Amen. FINIS. ¶ Imprinted by Henrie Denham, for Thomas Turner, and are to be sold at his shop at Guild-Hall gate.
1583 THursday the 23 day of Iun▪  the yeare of our Lord 1583, vp the euen of the glorious S. Iohn Baptist, the Marques Santa-cruz▪ departed out of the riuer of the Citie of Lis∣burne, with fyue great shippes called Gal∣lions, and two Galiazes, twelue Gallyes, 30 bigge ships, 12 Pataxes, and 15 Zabras, 14 Caruels of Portugall, and seuen flat bot∣tomed barkes to land people: and in all these shippes were 8976 souldiers, Spaniardes, Almaynes, and Italions of the companye of the maysters of the field, Dō Lope de Figue∣roa, Don Françisco de Bobadilla, & Don Iuan de Sandouall: And hee that was Coronell of the Almaynes, was the Earle Geronimo de Lodron: And the Italions vpon the charge of Lusio Pinatelo: & ouer a company of Por∣tugals, was Captaine Don Felix de Aragon And there were of Mariners 3823: so tha there was in all 12799, and 50 particule Gentlemen, and 86 others retayned amongst them, and they had sixe monthes vittayles. And at such time as this armie did set sayle, and was going foorth to the Sea, the shippe called Santa Maria del Socorro, did strike vp∣on the catchippes against cast Calles: in the which shippe was the companye of Don
de Cordona, & were constrayned there∣ to returne agayne into their Port. And Sonday being the 26, for that the tyme and weather did seeme to be pleasant and cal, the Marques was fully resolued, and did de∣termine to send the twelue Galies before, in the charge and gouernment of the Captayne Diego de Mediano. And Monday being the 27 daye, the Vdder of the shippe called Santa Maria de Acosta, did fall from her, for that it was not well set: and straighte waye they tooke out of her all the people she had, & put them into the Pataxes & caried them ashore: and so all the army did follow their vyage, with very scase windes, all vpon the Bow∣lyne, till it was Wednesday the 17 of Iuly, that they did discouer the Iland of S. Mighel. And vppon the Thurseday Don Iorge Man∣que, he that was generall ouerseer of al the st and armye, went before in a small Pyn∣se for to view the company of the Mayster of the field Augustin Inigues, and to ordayne his imbarking in the twelue Gallies which ariued there the fift day of the same moneth, at the citie of Punta Delgada. And to ordain all the Artillery and Moiles for to draw and cary them, with munitions and other neces∣saries belonging: and likewise to make in a
readinesse the barkes and other thinges fitte for the vyage. All the whole Nauie was tur∣ning at sea with calmes & windes that came of the Ilande, and could not by anye meanes come to an anker, in which time the Visead∣mirall did gather togeather al the rest of the Nauie, till the thirteenth of the month, at whithe time they came to an Anker at the towne of Ʋillafranca, and citie of Punta Del∣gada, in sight and distaunce the one from the other foure leagues. And from thence the Marques did passe in one of the Gallies vn∣to Punta delgada, to vnderstande the state of the Ilande, as well as the imbarking of the 2300 Souldiers, whiche they founde in the muster of the companye of Augustin Iniguez. And because that the winde was contrarye, he stayde his going till it was thurseday the 22 of Iulye, and came thither with all the whole Nauy together on the Saturday, be∣ing the 24 of the sayd moneth, at nine a clock of the day: and came to an anker in the play of the Towne of Sansebastian of the Ilande of Tercera, nigh vnto the Artilery of the Forts, who did shoote many Canons at the Galyon wherein the Marques was, and likewise at the rest of the Nauye as they entred in, for that the Ilande was fortifyed rounde aboute
with Fortes and Trenches, and very much people to defend them. And straighte waye the Marques did sende a particuler souldier with a Trumpet, to offer vnto the Frenche∣men & Naturalles the pardon and grace that he would giue them of their liues and goods as captayne generall: And to giue vnto the strangers shipping and leaue for to departe with their Ensigns, Armour, Drumme, and Flute: and he caryed with him the pattents and pardons in writing, the tenour & fourme whereof is as followeth. DOn Albaro de Baçan, Marques of Santa∣cruz, Commendador, Mayor of Leon, Captayne generall of the Nauy and armye for the King Don Philip our Lord, To al thē that be dwellers, inhabitants, and abiders in the Iland of Tercera, and in all other places thereto adioyning, as well strangers as na∣turalles: It is well knowne to all, that his catholick Maiestie, that being, and as he is, naturall successor of the Kingdomes of Por∣tugall, the Jndies, Orientalles, and of all the I∣lands and other partes comprehended in the Crowne: and so he ought to be acknowled∣ged and obeyed, for to be Soueraigne King and Lorde, of all the naturals of these king∣domes:
but forgetting their duetye herein, and farre from this acknowledging, there be some of these sayd Ilandes that hath admit∣ted into their company, people whiche doeth not only differ from them in nature, but also in customes and religion, and hath conspyred agaynst his royall Maiestie, and hath fallen into the daunger of Crimen laesae maiestatis, di∣uine and humayne, worthy of exemplar pu∣nishment: yet for all this, is catholick Ma∣iestie being moued with a christian zeale, and vsing his accustomed clemēcy in the seruice of God our Lord, and in all that in him lyeth to auoyde effusion of blood, considering that dayly increaseth obstinacie and disorder, be∣sides the offence that they doe vnto God, by the greate insolence of the Rebels, and diso∣bedience vnto his Maiestie, & vnto his highe name. And for that it is a thing whiche tou∣cheth the ryall conscience, the breuitie to put remedy herein, and to take awaye before our eyes this liuely example of disobedience, for that he hath procured by all meanes possible to put remedye therein: and nowe last of all vsing all benignitie▪ his Maiestie doeth giue and graunt grace vnto all the dwellers and inhabitants in the sayd Iland of Tercera, and vnto all the rest hee doeth giue generall par∣don,
and ioyntly graunteth with their liues, securitie of all their goods and Cattels, and assuring more besides this, that they shall not bee sacked nor spoyled in no kinde of ma∣ner, but rather shall be defended in all their doinges with great quietnesse, vpon conditi∣on that without making any resistance, they will reduce themselues, and be subiecte and obedient vnto him, as vnto their naturall Lord and King, suffering and permitting to disimbarke  all the people that doeth come in this  Nauy, or so many of them as I shal thinke best. And moreouer and be∣sides all this, in the name of his Maiestye▪ I doe offer vnto all Frenchmen, and vnto all other strangers, of what state and condition soeuer he be, that will depart out of this I∣lande, and goe to his owne countrey, or whe∣ther soeuer his pleasure is, I wil let him de∣part liberally and clerely with al his goods and armour and apparell, and likewise I wil giue them shipping if that of their own pro∣proer will, they wil yield and surrender vp al the fortes that is in their power & charge, wholy disaparing the said Iland▪ And I the sayd Captayne generall, in the name of his Maiestie, and by his ryall word, doe pro∣mise no perfourme and keepe this publique
pardon, in all, and for all, for that it is the de∣termined will of the king our Lorde that it should be so obserued and kept. And here I do make protestatiō, that if you do not keepe fulfill, and obey all that is herein contained, but doe perseuer in your obstinacie, and for∣cing to go forwards with your desperate in∣tents, your fault will be the greater, for that it doth proceede of his owne good will, and not by any force or constraining done herein, neyher by feare or anye other thing that might disturbe him, but your ill purpose a∣gaynst your naturall king. And I vsing the power which his Maiestie in this case hath graunted vnto me, from this time I doe pro∣nounce thē to be enemies and rebels against their king, and Traytors subiecte vnto the payne whiche they shall suffer: and here I doe protest, that all publique harmes, chastis∣mentes of blood▪ fyres, deaths, destructions, and deuastaciones yt shall be done vpon all thē that doeth not come to acknowledge their o∣bedience vnto his Maiestie, but perseuer in their obstinacie, that it bee not imputed vnto his ryall Maiestie nor vnto my charge, but imputed vnto the default of those that be the rebels: And for the iustifying hereof, and confusion of their euill and perpetuall disho∣nour,
I do make them this commandement, for that they may remayne and liue with the time to see a great demonstration of mercye and Iustice. Made in the Gallion the Admirall of this Nauie, called San Martin, being at the Ter∣cera the 23 of Iuly 1583. Don Albaro de Baçan, At the commaunde∣ment of his Lordship. Andres de Morales. The which pardon they would not admit, but answered them with very much shotte of Cannons and harcabuziers. And the better for to iustifie them in this case, they sent vn∣to them two Portugals, which they had ta∣ken in the Iland of San Mighel, of thē which was sent to spye out the Fleete, by Manuel de Silua in a small barke, by these they sente the securitie, and neuer hearde anye more of them. In this tyme the Marques in person did go and view all the Ilande, and had with him other particuler persons suche as were ingenious: and in the meane time the Mai∣sters of the field, captaynes, and Ensign bea∣rers, did in diuers partes sound to armour in the night, with the Galies and other vessels that went with owers procuring for to dis∣quiet them. In the end after that they had
taken the iudgementes of those whiche had seene the view, and being fully resolued, they entered into counsell, and concluded to giue the assault and enterprise in a narrow gut or creeke which was eaten with water like vn∣to a hauen, and was called of the Milles, al∣most a league from the place where we were at an anker, and two leagues from the citye of Angra, and a league from the village of the Playe: so that on tuesday the 26 of Iuly at 3 of the clocke in the morning, the Mar∣ques did depart with the Galies, carying forwardes as well as hee coulde, the greate barkes, Crares and Pynises, who by reason that they had so much people in them, they could not profit thēselues of their owers, for they caried at their first disimbarking 4500 souldiors, of the company of Don Lope de fi∣gueroa, and of these captaynes, Augustin de Herrera, Lazaro de Isla, Pedro Rosado, who was wounded with a Harquebuz shot, and dyed in the Citie of Angra, Miguel Ferrer, Diego Coloma, Don Iuan de cordoua, Miguel de Benesa, Don Bernardino de çunniga, San∣cho de solis, Don Iuan de Viuero and his En∣signe bearer, Alonso de Xeres, (whiche was one of the two Standard bearers, that did place the Ensignes vppon their Fortes and
Trenches) and Pedro de Santisteuan, who had a Harquebuz shot in his legge, in whose company went these particuler Gentlemen: Don Hugo de monçada, Don Godofre de Mendoça, Don Pedro Henriquez, Don Luyz Venegas, Don Aluaro de Beneuides Baçan, Don Iuan de Granada, Mercelo Caracheolo, Don Geronimo çapata, Don Bernardino de Mendoça, Don Diego de baça: and the Mai∣ster of the field, Don Francisco de Bobadilla: with the Capaynes Don Antonio de Pasos, who was the first that went vpon the Tren∣ches and Fortes: Captayne Castellani, Iuan de Texeda, who did vse the office of the high Sergeante in all the companies: Diego de Cardinas, Soto Maior, Bustamante de Herrera, Iuan Fernandis de Luna, Diego de Ouiedo: And with them went these Gentlemē, Don Philip de Cordona, with the mayster of the field Don Francisco de Bobadilla, with them that went first: and Don Alonso de Rosas, Dō Gonsalo de Gueuara, Don Frācisco de Bena∣uides, Don Antonio de Solis, Don Fernando de Toledo, Don Francisco de Guzman, Don Geronimo de Virues, Dō Iuan de Butrō, Don Iuan de Pisa, Don Francisco de Aronda, Don Pedro Enriquez, the Captayne Melchior de Esparça, and the Maister of the field Augu∣stin
Inigues de çerate: with the Captaynes Diego Xuarez de salazar, Don Christoual de Açunna, Don Iuan de Castillio, Don Fernan∣do de Viuanco, Antonio Flores, Pedro Xime∣nez de Eredia, Christoual de Paz, Francisco Calderon, Hernando Pacho, Pedro de Angu∣lo, and the Ensigne bearer Xaramillo, who was one of the first that put vp their Ensign in their Trenches: And Gentlemen, Don Garcia de Cotes, and Don Iuan de Sandoual, vnder whose charge are the sixteene compa∣nies of Portugalles with their Captaynes, Geronimo Françes, Manuel de Vega, who re∣ceyued an Harquebuz shot in the Trenches, Antonio Serrano, who also had a harquebuz shot & a pricke in his thigh, Diego Valiente, Don Iuan de Mendoça, Don Iuan de Medra∣no, Sancho de Bullon, Don Iuan de Lanuça, Don Sancho de Escobar, Don Esteuan del A∣guila, Iuan de la rea, Francisco de la Rocha, Martin de Herrera, and with them these Gen∣tlemen: Don Pedro Ponce de Leon, Dō Iuan de castelui, Don Francisco de Borja, Nofre de Bernegal, (who was the first that was slayn) Don Bartolome de Maya, and the Earle Ge∣ronimo de Lodron, with these Captaynes: The Earle Nicolo de Lodron, the captayne Carlos, the captayne and cheefe Sergeante
Curcio: and aduenturers, Don Francisco Pe∣renot, comēdador de Sparragosa, of the order of Alcantara, Mos de la Mota: And Lucio Pi∣natelo, with the Italions, and the Captayne Fray Vicencio of Afflicto, both of them were wounded with Harquebuziers: and aduen∣turers, Miguel Caxa, a Gentleman of Na∣ples, who being in a barke, hee was wounded with a Harquebuz shot vpō one of his armes, and Don Felix de Aragon with the company of Portugals, who was wounded with two Harquebuz shot, one on his shoulder, and an other on his thigh, and they slew his Ensign bearer, and woūded his Sergeant, and Don Cristoual Nieto, who was wounded likewise with two Harquebuz shot, And at foure a clock in the morning at the breake of the day the Marques did enter with his Gallye and had with him Don Pedro de Tolledo, Mar∣ques of Villa Franca, and Duke of Fernandi∣na, Don Lope de Figueroa, Don Pedro de Pa∣dilla, Don Iorge Maurique general ouerseer: Don Cristobal de Erasso, Dō Iuan Manrique, Don Luys de Sandoual, Don Alonso de idia∣quez, Don Luys de Boria, Don Pedro Ponce de Leon Brothers sonne vnto the sayd Mar∣ques, Don Antonio Enriques, Diego de mirā∣da, Iuan de Vrbina, Iuan Martines de Recalde,
Don Antonio de Portugal in the same, in th sight of the Mill to giue assault against the forts and trenches, and put themselues with the whole bodie of the Galley, where as they did receiue much shotte both of cannons and muskets which they did shoote from the bul∣warks, then straightway the Galley began to batter and ouerthrowe the Artillerie of the enemie, and all the rest of the Gallies as they did draw nigh did giue the batterie, so that with the batterie of the Admrial Gally, & of al the rest, the other Barks went a shore and did lande people vppon the sides of the fortes, and ouerthwart the trenches, al∣though it was done with great difficultnes and labour, and the soudiours did get vp in partes and places that was very aspar and receiued great repulse of hargabusses and muskets: but in the end they did get both the fortes and trenches which the french Soul∣diers had vpon their charge, with their cap∣tayne Borgonion, a person of whome they had a great opinion amongest thē. And straighte waye the Marques wente foorth in a small barke, and in an other smal barke went forth the Gentlemen that were with him in his Gallye, and making an ende of the firste dis∣imbarking a Land, they tooke the moūtains
and hilles of all partes, and did ordaine Don Lope de Figuereo general maister of the field that he should frame the campes with their wings, with Hargubuziers and Muskets, so that our people of the maine ward did get vp∣on the enemie. And those which were in the formost winges, was Don Pedro de Toledo, & Don Pedro de Padilla wtth other Gentlemen and Captains that were of the company of ye first disimbarking, so that betwixt them they began to charge many skirmeges till suche time as they put themselues three quarters of a leage from the Sea side, wheras was the whole force and strength of their Armie, al∣waies skirmeshing very valiantly, charging and receyuing, so that our people did winne and lose a place whiche they had for their se∣curitie, in such sort, that it was needeful that the Marques, who was in the face of his ar∣mye, to put himselfe forward two times for to courage & animate the harquebuziers. And at this time the second disimbarking did ioin with the first, at the which Don Iorge Manri∣que ouerseer generall, returned & made them to come forewardes, with sixe Peeces of or∣dinance with the which they shot at their e∣enimies, likewise al the rest of munitions vit∣tals & water for to refresh al the people that was skirmishing, for that in those parts there
was none to be had but must bring it from the shippes, by which disimbarking they were strenghthened with these Captaines, Rodrigo de Vargas, Miguel de Oquendo, Ma∣rolin and Carlos, So that they were conti∣nually fighting in the face of the Armies, and the enemie had eyght peeces of Artille∣ry with the which they did shoote at our peo∣ple, making there assault in strange maner, with much shrikes and showtes as though they would ioyne togeather: So in the eue∣ning they did gather togeather to the num∣ber of a thousand kine or cattell wherewith they did procure to breake our araye and or∣der, and the Marques did commaunde the sargentes Mayors to giue order vnto the winges of ye Hargubussers that they shoulde not shoote of a peece at the cattell, but that they should make them way without putting them selues out of order, and after that they were passed by they should trim them selues againe as before. There was hurt of our parte in this skirmish to the number of three hundred, and slaine threescoore and ten, and by one Portugall on horsebacke which did passe into our Campe, they did vnderstande that amongst their enemies there were very many slaine and hurte, amongst whom was
the Liefetenaunt of Manuel de Silua, his bro∣thers sonne, and certayne frenche captaynes, so that they as well as the Portugals, were with a gallante resolution for to fighte one power to an other, and would not harken vn∣to the pardon and grace which the Marques did graunt vnto them, and was presented vn∣to Manuel de Silua, by the two men which the Marques did sende vnto them, as before is sayd, so that it went euill with them in these skyrmeges and other attemptes, although there was entred to succour them a thousand fyue hundred frenchmen, and was generall ouer them the Commendador Mounsieur de Chattres, cousine vnto the duke of Joyosa, and brother in law vnto the moste christian king of Fraunce, besides more thē a thousand that were there before, so that with them, and the Naturall of the countrey, they were nyne thousande fighting men, and they were all very well incamped, and in good order lyke souldiers. And that night our armye was in good aray, and had well fortifyed the wings of our Harquebuziers and muskets, and did founde to armoure: so in the morning at the breake of the day, they retourned vnto their skyrmishing, and our enemies did discharge their artilerie, and our armye did still gette
more and more, and the winges were still skyrmishing, in such sorte that they did take away the water from the enemies, & straight wayes they did win their Artilerie, and the village of San Sebastian, whiche was mayn∣tayned and kept by their armie, and they fled away vnto the mountaynes, and when our hoste had broken their cāpe, they tooke their way to the citie of Angra▪ And the Marques did send the galies, that they should assaulte the Nauie of Frenchmen and Portugalles that was within the Porte: and so the whole campe did enter into the sayd citie withoute any resistaunce, and he did graunte them the spoyle for three dayes, and they did open the Prisons, and tooke oute of them all suche as were there for bearing fauour vnto his Ma∣iestie, and are these that followeth. All such Spanyardes as were Pri∣soners. JVan Augustin de Auila was taken Priso∣ner a yere past, comming for Factor to S. Mighell. Domingo de insauraga, which came a yere paste from the fyrme lande in the Shippe of aduise.
Iuan de iada, one that came in the same ship. Diego Garcia whome they tooke comming in aduise to Don Pedro de Valdes. The En∣signe bearer Carrion. The captayne Iuan de Aguirre, the sergeant Gutierrez, Iuan Lopez. Catalina & Eluira Gutierrez, her Daughter with three sonnes, that came from Florida in the ship of insauraga, and to the number of thirty Spaniards which they made to work in the Fortes. Portugals that were in prison. The captayne Antonio Rebelo, Pedro Yā∣nez Curado, Antonio Mendez, Domingo Ra∣lon, Iuan Aluarez, Antonio Gonçalez, Luyz Gonçalez, Francisco de Roche, Benito Mula∣to, Pedro de Las Vinnias, Iuan Domingues, Constantino Machado, Bras Noguera, Gaspar Delos Reyes, Diego Perez, Antonio Correa Pisanso, Diego Aluarez, El Licenciado Iuan Luys homo, Iuan Yannez, and Frutuoso, san∣chez of S. George. So likewise the Galies entered into the Port of the Citie of Angra, and did take all these shippes following.
Relation of the Ships and other Vesselles whiche they tooke of the French army which brought succour to thē of the iland of Tercera, who was Captaine generall ouer them all the Commendado Monsieur de Chattes: and also of the Nauy that Don Antonio had, who was captaine generall ouer them, Manel Serradas a Portugall and natural of the Yland of Ma∣dera: and was the same that did sack Cabo Ʋerde and Arguin. THere were in the port of the Citie of An∣gra, 12 french ships great and small of al sorts. 2 English ships & 1 Hulk. Ther were of Don Antonio his ships to the nūber of 16 small and great, Caruels and others, which were at Cabo Verde: captayne generall ouer them, Manuell Serradas, Portugall, all these shippes doeth amount to the number of 31, and had amongest them 91 peeces of Artile∣rye, of cast yron and brasse. This being done they sent vnto the castell of the citie, and vn∣to their houses of munition, and vnto all the Fortes round about the Iland, & they found in them all this ordinaunce and munition as followeth.
In the Castell called Sansebastian. One Cannot of batterye, of brasse: one Culuerin of brasse of 21 palmes or spannes: two demy Culuerins of brasse: two Sacars of brasse with their Chambers: one demye Cannon of brasse: fiue Peeces of yron, & one little peece: one Cannon of brasse broken in the breeche. All these sayde Peeces were in the cariage, and ad al things in a readinesse belonging vnto them. Three hosheads of cannon poulder: 18 bals of wild fire: 270 shot of yron: foure and thir∣tie pellet of stone. One yron barre: 5 Pikes: a cariage with his wheeles without a peece: more, 15 stone balles: seuenteene charge of stones. ¶ Relation of the Fortes which were from the citie of Angra vnto the Forte called the poynt of San Mateo, and of al the Ordinance that were in them. THere was found in the Fort adioining to the citie, in the skirte of Braill called San Benito, one great murderer of brasse to shoote stones, in his cariage, and had the Armes of Portugal on it: one peece of cast yron, which
wayed 12 kyntals, in his caringe: one other peece of cast yron of the same bignesse with∣out cariage: one base of brasse with ye armes of Portugall, of seuen kyntals, with cham∣bers: one demye Cannon of brasse for stones, with the Portugall armes: one peece of cast yron, of 11 kynt. in his cariage: two & twen∣tie balles of stone for the Cannons, and twen∣tie of yron. ¶What was found in a trenche adioyning vn∣to the same Forte. A peece of cast yron of 7 kynt. and 24 pound in his cariage. ¶In the Fort called San Antonio, which is vp∣on the poynt of the Brasill. One demye Culuering of brasse, with the armes of Fraunce, full of flower Delyses, of 36 kintals, and 22 pound: one peece of brasse to shoote stone, with the armes of Portugall in his cariage: one Sacar eyght square with the armes of Fraunce of 19 kyntals: one de∣mye Sacar of brasse of 10 kyntals 64 poūd, in his cariage: one demye Sacar of brasse of 10 kint. 20 li. in his cariage: 1 peece of cast yron of 15 kintals in his cariage: two other peeces of cast yron of 13 kint. a peece in their cariages: two Bases of brasse verye bigge, with their chambers: threescore shot of yron:
twenty clouen shot of lead, ten chains, twen∣ty great balles of stone, two halfe terses of pouder, other six horse load of sacks of pouder. In an other fort called the çimbrero. One Sacar of 15 kintals 48 pound, full of flower deluses, three peeces of cast yron of the same bignesse with their carriages, one falconet of bras in his cariage with two chā∣bers, one hundreth and threescore balles of yron and sixe charges. In an other fort called the Fanaes. One peece of caste yron of fiue kintals in his carriage, an other peece of cast yron of 7 kintals 20 pounde in his carriage, one other peece of cast yron of 13 kintals. In an other fort called O alcaide. One Sacar of bras eyght square full of flower deluses of 18 kintall with a newe ca∣riage: two peeces of cast yron ye one of 18 kin∣tals & the other of 17 kint. with new cariage and their chargers: eight & thirty shot in all. In an other fort called the Ladera de Pero gonçalez. Two peeces of cast yron of 10 kintals a peece with their newe cariages. In a smal fort called La huerta del Bachiler Rubio. Two peeces of cast yron of 7 kintal a peece
in their cariage: one base of cast yron with his Chambers: certaine balles, with their chargers and skowrers. In a trenche called Pmbado. One peece of cast yron of 10 kintals in his cariage. In an other for called the Prayna. Three peeces of cast yron of 10 kintals & 30 pound a peece in their cariages: two dou∣ble bases with their chambers: fiftie balles of cast yron, and 10 clouen shotte. In a trenche which is harde by the other forte. One peece of cast yron of ten kintals with ten balles, with his chargers. In an other fort called the Azogu. Two peeces of cast yron of 10 kint. 30 l. a peece in their cariage: one other peece of cast yron of 9 kint. 20 l, in his cariage▪ two bases of brasse of 149 li. a peece, with crownes and halfe moones vpon them: 115. shot of cast y∣ron: 100 leade shot for the bases: 10 clouen shot: 12 balles of wilde fire. In the last fort that was visited called San Matheo. Two Falcons of brasse with their cham∣bers: three peeces of cast yron in their ca∣riages: two peeces of caste yron broken:
two hundreth shot little more or lesse. In the Trenches about this forte. One Peece of cast yron of a 11 kintals in his cariage: one other Peece of 7 kintals in his cariage: one base of brasse, with the arms of Portugall: one other Peece of cast yron of a 11 kint. in his cariage: twenty yron shot. Relation of the fortes that is betwixt the Citie of Angra, vnto the point of the Vil∣lage of the Plaie and all the Artillerie founde in them. In a Trench that is right against the Ylandes. TWo Peeces of cast yron in the cariages, and with their chargers. In a fort called San Antonio de Prto Judio, Two Peeces of brasse, the one of 25 kint. 43 ll. with the armes of the Turke and of Fraunce and the other eight square with the same armes in their cariages: one Peece of cast yron of 10 kintals in his carriage: one o∣ther Peece of cast yron of 8 kintals 75 ll: one other Peece of cast yron of 11 kintals in his cariage: one hundreth shotte. In the fort called El Pico de Saluador Coello. One Peece of cast yron of 18 kintals: one
other Peece of cast yron of a 11 kintalles in his cariage without powder or chargers. In the fort called, El Porto de Casa Salga where as Don Pedro de Valdes was lost. One Peece of brasse eyght square with ye Armes of Fraunce of 18 kintalles 83 ll. in his cariage: one Falcon with the Armes of Portugall of 7 kintals: two Peeces of cast yron of 15 kintals a Peece in their carriage: other two Peeces of cast yon of 13 kintals a peece in the carriages: one other Peece of cast yron of 10 kintalles in his cariage: two hundreth and thirtie shot for them all: a cari∣age without any thing. In the fort of the Muelas. One Peece of cast yron in his cariage with twelue shotte: two great Faulcones with the Portugall Armes of 6 kintalles a peece: three Peeces▪ of cast yron in the cariages▪ fiftie shot without chargers. In the forte right ouer against San Seba∣stian, there was no Artillerie for that they had caried it away vnto the mountains, that day the people came a shore. In the greate and olde forte of San Se∣bastian and nowe called Porto Nouo. Six Peeces of cast yron of 20 kint. a peece:
fiue other peeces of cast yron of 8 kint. a peece in their cariages. Two hundred shot for thē all: three Bases: three cariages, and verye much wood, but no chargers nor poulder. In an other Fort which is at the poynt of the Ribera Seca. One Peece of cast yron, of 11 kynt. 75 li. One other Peece of cast yron, of 7 kyntals. In the Fort of the Perezosas. One demye Culuerin with the armes of Portugall: one great turkish Falcon of 14 kyntals: two Peeces of cast yron, the one of 11 kyntals, and the other of 7 kyntals, in their cariages. In the Forte of Porto Martin. One Peece of cast yron of 20 kyntals in his Cariage: one other Peece of cast yron of 18 kyntals: three peeces of yron, of 12 kyntals a peece in their cariages: two bases of brasse with the armes of Portugall. Two hundred and fiftie shot, and three barrels of poulder, with their chargers. ¶In certaine trenches which were against the Forte. Two Falcons for stones, with the armes of Portugall, and their chambers: three peeces of cast yron in their cariages: 42 shot. In the Fort of Santa Catalina.
One demye Culuerin with the armes of Fraunce of 35 kyntals in his cariage: One Falcon of brasse of 6 kintals with the armes of Portugall: One Base of brasse with the same armes: Foure peeces of cast yron of 12 kyntals a peece, in their cariages. 300 shot for all these peeces, and their chargers. In the Castle called Dopao. One demy Culuering with the armes of Portugall in his cariage. Two greate Pot gunnes, with all that belongeth vnto them. In the Fort of Meio Faul whiche is before this. Foure peeces of cast yron, in their cariages: foure score shotte, and their chargers. In the Fort called San Anton. Two demye Culuerings of brasse in their cariages: one Base of brasse: three Bases of brasse: fiue peeces of cast yron. Three hun∣dred shot with their chargers. ¶In a Bulwarke which is nigh vnto the Play. One peece of cast yron in his cariage: two bases of cast yron. Sixe and twentie shotte with their chargers. In the Forte called the Chagas. One demye Culuerin, eyght square, with the armes of Fraunce, of 18 kynt. 95 pound in his cariage: foure peeces of cast yron of 12
kintals a peece, in their cariages: two great pot gunnes of yron: 100 shot for them all, & their chambers. In a Fort that is in the Playe called San Francisco. One peece of cast yron of 15 kynt. in his cariage: one other Peece of cast yron of 14 kint. one other peece of caste yron of 8 kint. one other peece of cast yron of 12 kintals: one other of cast yron of 8 kint. all these in their cariages. One barrell of poulder. One hun∣dred shot and chargers for them all. In the Fort called Nuestra sennora de la Luz. One demy Culuering with the armes of Portugall, of 28 kyntals in his cariage: one Base of brasse with the same armes, and his chambers: three peeces of cast yron, of six∣teene kintalles a peece, in their cariages: 90 balles for all, and their chargers. In the Fort called San Pedro. One demye Cannon for stones, with the armes of Portugall, of 13 kintals in his ca∣riage: one Faulcon of brasse, with the same armes, and three of Yron: Two Bases of brasse, with their Chambers: two peeces of cast yron of fiue kintals a peece in their cari∣ages, fiftie and foure shotte, with all their
chargers. In the Forte called Santa cruz. One cannon of battery of 35 kyntals, 64 l. with the Turkes armes, and three flower de∣luses, in his Cariage: one other Cannon for stones with the armes of Portugall: one demy cannō for stones, with the same arms: three peeces of cast yron of 11 kynt. a peece: two bases of brasse with their chābers: two barrels of poulder. One hundred and eyghte shotte for them all, and all in their cariages, and with chargers and scourers. In the Fort called the Conception. Two Cannons of Batterye with the Por∣tugall armes, in his Carriage: one Base of brasse in his cariage: two peeces of cast yron of 10 kint. a peece in their cariages. Three skore and foure shot for them all, with their chargers. In a trenche which is betwixt the two fortes. Three Bases of brasse, and one peece of cast yron in his cariage. In a Platforme which is vppon the Poynt, and thereto they haue visited. One Culuering of brasse in his Cariage: One peece of cast yron in his cariage.
In a house whiche is in the Village of the Play, of munition there was more then 600 shot of yron, small and great. Somewhat afore that there is another fort called Porto de casa as alga, which hath foure peeces, two of brasse and two of yron. There is an other Fort before this, called Porto de cruz. which hath foure Peeces, two of brasse▪ and two of cast yron. And from one Fort vnto an other, of al these aforesaid that haue their Trenches with their trauerses that doth de∣fend and keepe them. ¶Relation of the munition that they found in the high church of the Citie of Angra, and in the College of the Teatinos. THre and twentye hogsheads, the greatest full, fast, and well conditioned, which see∣med to be of poulder, nineteene of them were great, and foure small. In the house of the Fathers of the compa∣ny of Iesus (which Don Antonio had taken, and some of them he had banished and sente into England, for that they were in parte of his Maiestie) was founde: two and twentye hogsheds little and great, full of poulder, 12 of them were fast shut, and al the rest were o∣pen
and some of them bego here was  sacke full: foure and thirty alles of wil fire artificially couered with matches hanging at them: A chest full of braunches of yron for to ke clouen shot: Ceraine clouen shot of leade of foure and 5 ll. waighte: a small chist of chargers made of whie place: fourescore & ten horse mens speares with their heads, and sode: ten pickes of yron: manie peeces of corsele very euill intreaed, and some olde hargabuziers: certain  of hempen cords and other bottomes of cottn and of eache a little: foure  of brasse, one greate, and 3 little ones in the cariages: two greate chambers of yron: a close wagon for to car∣rye poulder: a carriage for a Falcon. Certain balles of lead for harabuziers, muskets, and Bases. Relation of that which was founde in the cu∣stome house of the Citie of Angra. Foure greate hogsheads full of poulder: Foure hogsheads full of salt peer, for cate∣ thall, and they saye that it is of the I∣land Graciosa▪ three hogsheads full of match for Harabuziers: certayne balles of yron, and chaynes, and old ropes endes of hempe: seue arels of tarre: sixe chestes full of ro∣sin: two grapels: sixe kyntals of small tar∣red
ropes newe:  and twentye Oares for barkes: sayles for ships great and small, as it seemed for ten ships: tarred ropes olde and other necessaries for the sayd sayles▪ a great beame of timber with chaynes, & their  whiche belonged vnto the custome house  little Bell of brasse broken: an other  whole and sounde of a meane bigness  cheastes of wood full of  to the quā∣titie of fortie , that was no∣thing worth: two  for to heate tarre in▪  with Coppe∣ras: one hogshead of  hogsheade of Ra bane. In a Warehouse ouer agaynste the Cu∣stome house. A great heape of Cannon shot of cast yron of 1000 shot: an other heape of demy  shot, and other lesser shotte to the numbe of more then foure thousand: one hundred shot of stone and Cannon: one hundred  of yron with their helues  fyue and  Oares for a Gallie: one hundred and  wicke baskets with their gyrts. In an other Ware-house was founde as followeth. Two Bases of yron: old Ropes with pul∣lyes, and other necessaries for shippes.
At the gate towardes the Sea on the left hande. One demye Cannon of brasse for stones in his Cariage: one Demye Cannon of y∣ron in his Cariage: one Demye Sacar of Fraunce, of brasse, eyght square in his cari∣age. So that there was taken and founde in all the shippes, Forts, and in other places as is sayd 301 peeces of Artilerie. And after that they had taken the citie, Ca∣stles, Fortes, artilerie, and munitions, and giuen to the souldiers the spoyle for 3 dayes, as it is said. The Marques did ordain that al the dwellers & naturals of the Ilande should returne vnto their houses, & that they should vnderstand in the labour of the field, & tilling of the ▪ who straight way began to come together, although but  fewe, and the gene∣rall Auditor did proceede agaynste those that were culpable, and did apprehend manye, as hereafter shall hee made mention. In this time the frenchmen were three leagues from the citie of Angra, in a strong cituation, the which they had trenched, & made strōg; where the had water & other commodities & were treating with Don Pedro de Padilla, that he wold let thē depart in their ensigns & armor, and to carrye with them such Portugals as
they thought best, and all the artilirie which they broughte out of Fraunce, whiche was more then one hūdred peeces, and their ships and bastements, saying: that they woulde show pattents of the king of Fraunce, and of his mother. To which the Marques woulde not giue any eare, nor to any thing that was asked, but went forth with his ampe for to destroy them, but yet after great holde and keepe, the Marques did resolue himselfe at the instance and request of Don Pedro de To∣ledo, Don Lope de Figuereo, and of the earle Geronimo de Lodron, Don Pedro de Padilla, Don Iorge Manrique, Don Francisco de Bo∣badilla, Don Iuan de Sandouall, Don Crito∣ball de Erasso, Iuan de Vibina, who  re∣mayne for Gouernoure and May of the fielde of all the Iand, and of Iuan Martines de Recalde, that the Frenchmen surrendring and yielding their Ensignes, and Armoure, and to let remayne still in the Gals for to bee punished, the two hundred whiche before they had taken, and all the rest to be ayed to the coast of Spayne ioyntly without , and from thēce to be caried to their own countrey, in those shippes that the Marques shal think best. And so wednesday the thyrde of August, Don Pedro de Padilla, & Dō Iorge
Manrique, with the Marques order, wente vnto their campe, a league from ours, where when they were come, they brought them vn∣to a Fort which was at the waters side, nigh vnto the citie of Angra, whereas they did sur∣render and yield vp eyghteene Ensignes, the most parte of them of the most auntientste of Fraunce, and many drums and Flutes, and they were vnarmed one by one of their Har∣quebuziers & muskets, alberds and Pikes, and being disarmed they did passe by our ar∣mies, and withoute the Citie they did lodge them, and gaue them all that was necessary: and the Commendador Monsieur de Chattes, with the Maysters of the field, captains, and cheefe Sargeants as shalbe expressed, wente and kissed the handes of the Marques. Monsieur de Chattes, Generall: Linguadoça Commendador of San Iuan: Monsieur de ca∣rauaques a Gascoyne, mayster of the fielde. Baptista Serichi, an Italion and chiefe Ser∣geant. Captayne Vasito a Gascoyne. Cap∣tayne Hernan, of the Prouince. Captayne Luys an Italyon. Captain Laaral a gascoin. Captaine Campani, an Italion. Captain Li∣nerola a Norman. Capt. Brebito of the Pro∣uince. Capt. Lasta a Frenchman. Capt. Com∣panion a frenchman. Capt. Caipit a french¦man.
Capt. Labarra, a Frenchman. Captayn Perminet a Frenchman. Captayn Iabino, a frenchman. Captayn Lagraua a Frenchman. In these are not counted the captayns that were slayn, nor the Ensigne bearers, for that there was slayne threescore & tenne, & woun∣ded & Prisoners more then 400, besides the Portugals, who likewise did yeelde and sur∣render their Ensignes and armes: and it is a thing neuer the lyke seene, so great an ar∣mye agaynste ours, fighting with so muche brauery in their owne countrie & houses, & with so manye Fores, & in them more then 300 Peeces of Ordinaunce to come to yeeld themselues, certaynly it was a great specta∣kle to behold. In this time the Marques was very vigilant & carefull to apprehend Manu∣el de Silua, who did titulate himselfe Earle of Torres Vedras, Gouernoure & Captayne Ge∣nerall of this Ilande, and the principall and Originall of all these Rebellions amongste them, and of many robberies and insolencies whiche was done with the shippes that they had in the Porte, and Frenchmen & Englishe men whiche came vnto them, and they did accept and retayne them. So they sente cap∣taynes & other souldiers vnto diuers parts to run ouer the hilles and mountaynes, and it
happened thurseday the fourth of Auguste, a captayne of the Fielde of the Mayster of the fielde, Don Francisco de Bobadilla, did appre∣hend him, & did deliuer him vnto the captayn Lazaro de , who went also to seeke him, and he brought him vnto the citie of Angra, wheras Don Pedro de Padilla did carry him aboord the Admirall, and did deliuer him to Iuan Ruyz de Velasco Captayne of the sayde Galiaza, whereas he had likewise other cap∣taynes Prisoners liefetenants, and suche as were culpable of the rebellion, as shalbe de∣clared vnto you in the punishment done vpon them▪ And likewise certayne Fryers which went in vndecent habits, amongst them was Fryer Simon, of the profession of the order of Saynte Dominicko, Sacerdote, and Prea∣cher, who did declare that whiche hereafter followeth. How that he went for Fraunce, & did aske y & succour of the Queene Mother for this Iland, and how she did graunt it vnto them▪ by the intercession of the Duke of Joosa, and of Mos de Rochileu, the Abbot of Guadanni, the Duke of Prenon, the Earle of Brisac, Mos de Serlebus, Gouernour of Abre de gra∣cia, all the which doth ayde, helpe, and streng∣then the causes of Dō Antonio. So ye Queene
mother did sende a thousande fiue hundreth frenchmen besides those that were before in the Iland with Monsiur de chattres a knight of the order of Saint Iohn and gouernour of Deepe, and cosin vnto the Duke of Joyosa, & brother lawe vnto the king of Fraunce. And for maister of the fielde, Monsiur de Garab∣ques, and Monsiur de Campes, and other prin∣cipall men, all which did ariue at this Iland the two and twenty day of Iune, in this yere of 1583 with pattents of ye king of Fraunce, for that the intention of the king and paricu∣lerly of his mother was to haue these Ilande in their powers, and to strengthen them with men and ships, for to disturbe and take away the trafficke and commercio of the Indies, and how that the principals which doth ayde & helpe Don Antonio are in great hope that by this meanes they shall reape great profite and interest, and nowe seeing the distruction and losse of victory of the french men, he shall not find any other that will helpe him. So likewise he was in England, and An∣tonio de Vega dwelling in Lishboorne, who hath his wife in Caparica, and the Queene woulde not giue nor graunte vnto them anie aide or succour, but all onely did consent that for his mony he might buy Artilery and mu∣nitions
paying for them. Also he sayde that the twentye of Maye Don Antonio was in Deepe, and that hee was woonte to goe vnto Parris in disembling wise with two or three seruants, and did lodge in the house of the ab∣bot of Guadani who is priuat with ye Queene mother, and for the vittailes for himselfe and others which trauails in his seruice, they are merueilous indebted in their lodginges and Innes, and how that al there remedie did de∣pende vppon these Ilandes, although as it is saide the Queene mother would haue had the power thereof, and that in substaunce it was the voyce of Iacob, and the hands of Esau, al such as are in the seruice of Don antonio, are these persons following, and how that in por∣tugall there are fewe that are corespondente vnto them, for that all in general did abide to see the end & the succession herein, in ye which did depend the quietnes of al christendome. Don Antonio de menes, of Lishborne: Ci∣prian de figueredo, of Trascoso: Iuan Corea de Sosa, of Lishborne: Iuan Rodrigez de vejae, of Ebora: Thomas Cachero, of Lishborne: Diego Rodriguez, of Setuba: Rodrigo de santaren, of Santaren: Diego Botello, of Lishborn: Manuel Fernandiz, of Lishborn: Gaspar Diaz, chanon of Ebora: Baltazar Limpo, Deane of Braga:
dwelling in Guimarans: Simon Alfonso de caruallo of Guimarans: Manuel de brito, of lish¦borne: Constantino de brito, of Ebora: Gero∣nimo de Silua of Viana: Antonio di brio Pimē∣tel of Golagan. AT such time as they were entred into the Citie of Angra, wednesdaye the 7 and 20 of Iuly, as aforesaide, the Marques of Santa Cruz did send Don Pedro de Toledo, Mar∣ques of Villa franca, Duke of Fernandina, vn∣to the Ilande of Fayall, whiche was thirtie leagues from this, wheras was fiue hundred Frenchmen in garison, with twelue Gallies foure Pataxes sixteene Pinises, and certaine small Barkes, and in them two thousand and fiue hundred soldiers of different companies with the maister of the fielde, Augustin Ini∣quez de çarate, and Captaines, Iuan de sala∣zar, Miguel ferrer, Don Christoval de Açuna, Don Esteuan del Aguila, Bustamante de Her∣rera, Miguel de bnsa, Sancho de solis, Don Iu∣an de lanuza, Sancho de bullon, Luys de gue∣uara, Pedro pardo de aguiar, Martin de herera and the Captaine Carlos with one hundred & fiftie Almains and gentlemen suche as were venturers, Don Vgo de monçada, Don Iuan manrique, Don phillippe de cordoua, Don ber¦nardido de mēdoça, Don pedro Enriques, Dō
Gonsalo de Gueuara, Don Hieronimo çapata Don Pedro Ponza de Leon, Don Iuan de A∣çunna, Don Antonio Enriques, Don Gonzalo Ronquillo, who broughte the newes that the sayd Fayal was taken, & Iuan Fernandez Gal∣indo, Diego de Miranda. And for that was re¦quisite at the Sea, these captaynes, Miguell de Oquendo, Rodrigo de Vargas Y Marolin, Don Antonio de Mēdoça, who in this vyage had the charge of the pataxes & pynises. And passing by the Iland of S George, & the Picke, reducing them to the seruice of his Maiestie, they ariued at the sayd Iland of Fayal, Son∣day being the last of the sayd Moneth, & sent them word by a Portugall that they shoulde surrender & yeeld themselues, whō they slue. Vpon the monday they went and viewed the place where they should disimbark thēselues. So tuesday the 2 of Aug. they put the soul∣diers aland, & the frenchmē & Portugals did resist thē, til such time as Don Pedro de To∣ledo did strengthē thē that did skirmish with 200 muskets, and 100 Pykes, they gaue thē the repulse with losse of one hundred french∣men, and the reste did retyre and putte them∣selues into the Castell, whereas they had 17 great peeces of Ordinaunce, and great store of poulder and munition, besides other fortie
Peeces that were in other Fortes there a∣bout them, all the whiche the frenchmen did surrēder and yield vp to saue their liues, and loste all this, and foure shippes that was in the port, and did yield vp their Ensignes and arme, And did put into the galies all suche Portugalles as didde enter into the Castell with them, and did hang vp Antonio de Gui∣des, a portugall, and gouernour of the sayde Ilande, a man prodigall and cruell, and lefte for gouernour thereof for his Maiestie, Don Antonio de Portugall, with two hundred sol∣diers, and vittayles for foure monthes. And when they had conquered the Ilands of S. George, and the Picke, and Fayal, Don Pedro de Toledo did retourne with the Galies, shippes, and such people as he caried with him. Mondaye the eyght of August 1583.
¶ The Commission giuen vnto the Licentiado Mosquera, Generall Auditor of the Nauie and Armie for to pu∣nish the Rebels. FOr so much as by the commaun∣demente of his Maiestie, I am come hether with this Nauy and armye vpon the Iland of Tercera, and that here they did withstande mee, and made resistaunce whereas I should come vn∣to an aner with very much artilerie, and not acknowledging their dutie, but with great disobedience and insolence. I did sende and require them with protestation for to surren∣der and yielde vnto me the ylande, and to suf∣fer me to lande in the Ilande, and to pardon them ll the disobedience pa, and vnto the naturals their liues and goods, and likewise vnto the straungers that were  & hether in their ayde and succour to giue them ship∣ping that they might depart, as doth appeare by the processes and other writinges whiche I do cōmaund to bee put adioining vnto this commission▪ And for that neyther the one nor the other would harken vnto this grace and
mercye whiche was offered vnto them, but rather at suche time as I woulde disimbarke my army being tewesday the six and twentie of this present being saint Annes day, they did make defence against me, and did resist me with muche artillery and force of men, and al that were in the said Iland as well naturals as straungers did put themselues in the field and with their armies in good order, did giue ye atempt against those of his maiestie which I had vppon my charge, maintaining them∣selues one whole daye with skirmishing and representing of battaile till such time as the next daye following, being ouercome by the force of our soldiours▪ they ranne a waye and put themselues into the Mountaines. And for that suche lyke disobedience, rebellion & tyranny, which vnto this day they haue v∣sed with & vnto them whiche hath bene in de∣uosion vnto his Maiestie, and many other in∣solensies and roberies which they haue com∣mitted and doone▪ shall not remaine without liuely ensample of chastisement▪ By this presente I doe giue power and facultye, as Captaine generall of his Maiestie in this Nauie and Armie vnto Lecenciado Mosque∣ra de Figueroa, generall auditor of this hap∣pie
Armie and Nauie, for that hauing taken information of the aforesaide in generall and in particuler, of all suche persones as bee founde culpable in the same, and the partyes to be called and heard, and according vnto the right, to doe Iustice vppon their persons goodes and Cattelles, for all, and in all, of defaultes paste and nowe presente de∣pending. I doe giue vnto you power and facultie in as ample manner as I haue it of his Maiestye. And the better to performe and accomplish and execute the same, I doe ordayne the heee Mayster of the fielde and Coronel of the▪ Almaynes, and all the reste of the Maisters of the fielde: Captaynes & soldiours,  of the Galles▪ that they doe giue & deliuer vnto you the prisoners which they haue, and from this daye forewardes shal haue▪ & all the ayd and fauoure that you shall demaunde of them▪ And so likewise  you the sayde power and fa∣cultie  proceede againste▪ what so euer per∣sone  persones that shall withstande or disturbe anye parte or parsell of all that is aforesayde, n the whiche GGD and his Maiestye shall bee serued. Made and written in the Ylande of Terçera,
in the citie of Angra, the eyght and twenty of Iulye, in the yeare of our Lord, 1583. Albaro de Baçan. At the commaundement of his Lordship. Bartolome de Aguilar. ANd by vertue of this Commission, the Licenciado Mosquera de Figueroa, did proceede agaynst the sayd Ilands, and parti∣culers of the same, pronounsing these senten∣ces following. In the plyte which in the office of Iustice hath ben followed in the absence of rebellion, agaynst the Iland of Tercera, Fayal, the Pck▪ and S. George, the Graciosa, and the Cueruo, and agaynst all the dwellers and abiders in the Iland of the Açores. The proces of the cause being seene, and how that the sayde I∣landes hath denyed their obedience to their King Don Philip our Lorde, being their le∣gitime and natural King, and in prosecuting hereof, haue admitted into their companye, people of diuers Nations, Robbers and Py∣rats, and haue conspyred agaynst his Maie∣stie
Ryall, and made resistaunce agaynst his mightye power, and hath defended with ar∣mour and blood, the entrie into these Ilands which is of his crowne of Portugall. The proses and case, and all thinges requisite be∣ing seene: I do finde, and I ought to declare, and do declare and pronoūce the sayd Ilands, and euery one of them for Rebels, and parta∣kers of this delyte, in consequence or coni∣deration of the which, I oughte to condemne and doe condemne them in losse of all their li∣berties which hath bene giuen and graunted by the kinges predecessors, of his maiestie, of the kingdome of Portugall, likewise of their proper landes and goods: and other priuile∣ges of the which they mighte aduaunce and profite themselues, if they had not committed this offence of Rebellion and disobedience. And these the sayd Antonio Xuares who was Faccor for the king Don Sebastian, & at this presen was Iudge of the Mony house, Bal∣tazar Aluarez, Ramires, disimbargar, and Do∣mingos Pinnero, and Iuan Gonçales Cottea, disimbargar: and all the rest that bee founde culpable in this sayd offence. I do condemne them, and whēsoeuer and in what place they shal be taken, to be prisoners, and broughte vnto the common prison of this citie of An∣gra,
whereas I doe commaunde that they bee brought forth with ropes about their necks, with the voyce of a cryer, for to make mani∣fest the faulte, and so to bee caryed into the publique and open place of this citie, where∣as they shall be hanged til such time as they doe naturally die, and straighte waye to bee quartered, and their quarters to be put in the high wayes toward this citie. Also I do con∣demne the aforesayde in the losse of all their goods▪ applying them as confiscate vnto the chamber of his Maiestie, and that their sons nor Neuewes shall not enioy anye Ryall of∣fice. And I doe commaund that all suche mo∣ney that hath the name of Don Antonio Pri∣or of Ocrato, with the armes ryall, as false e∣uill and vsurped, to be burned in the publick place of this citie, and not to bee currante in these Ilandes, and that no person doe vse the same vpon payne of death. (And in the per∣formaunce of the same, they did burne the sayd mony publique) And by this my last sē∣tence difinitiue▪ I do pronounce & commaund with costes. El Liçenciado Mosquera, de Figueroa.
