12480 99854271 19681
THE VMBLE ADDRESSE Both of Church and Poore, To the Sacred Maiestie of Great BRITANES Monarch. or a just redresse of the Vniting of Churches, and the Ruine of Hospitalls. By WILLIAM GUILD, Minister of ABERDENE. PSAL. xx.9. Saue, LORD, and let the King heare vs in the day that wee call. Imprinted in ABERDENE, by Edward Raban, 1633.
To the most Reverend Fathers in GOD▪ IOHN, By the Mercie of GOD, L. Arch-bishop of Sainct-Andrewes, Primate, and Metro∣politane of SCOTLAND: And PATRICK, By the same Mercie of GOD, L. Arch-Bishop of Glasgow, &c. the maine opponer to these Vnions. D. D. A.
THE VMBLE ADDRESSE both of Church, and Poore, to the Sacred Majestie of their dread Soveraigne, CHARLES, Great Britannes Monarch, &c. For a just redresse of the Vniting of Churches, and the Ruine of Hospitalls. WHen olde Israel (most Sacred Soveraigne) Prophetical∣lie pronounced this Doome concerning his sonne Is∣sachr,Genes. 49.14. that hee should coch downe betweene two burdens, he likened him to a strōg Asses needing much strength to beare so great a burden. And it was thought of old, that the burden of the Ministerie, Vni praeesse Ecclesiae,  haue the charge of one Church, & was dbus subesse Ecclesus, and not  be over-charged with vnder-going two, was such, that in the bal∣nce of the Sanctuarie, weigh the burden with the strength, the one rpassed the other,  and who is of suffi∣encie for discharge of that Calling? But now-a-dayes the cure of Soules,Daniel, 5. Iudg. 16. is either weighed in Belshaz∣rs ballance, and found too light: or mens backes are thought like mpsons sholders, strong anough to beare two Churches at once, as he rried the two Postes of the gates of Azzab, to the top of the Mount hich is before Hebron. A strange thing, that mens policie should so meete a Princes pietie,  where he intended the bettering of the Churches impoverished ate, by some competent provision, at least, to each one: If Patrons can  evite the necessitie of obedience to that law of his Royall Parlia∣ent, and Decreet of his honourable Commission, they shall finde out ch a politicke course, as in effect the same shall be but frustrate, how∣-ever: for where two Churches are to be provided severallie, getting  charges vnited, and making one sing dumb, they haue made the oore pettie portions, vnited together likewise, to equall that measu∣ed meane competencie of provision appointed in the Act: as if bette∣ng of provisions for severall Churches had not beene meant; but that  the Kingdome the impairing of the few number, both of Churches  Pastors, had beene intended. And making thereby some Mini∣sters
that it may be saide of them, as of Hercules Pillars, Nil ultra, beei lyfe-renters onlie to weare off, and none there-after in those places and more to succeede them. Because (forsooth) men are so loath to parte with the Churches Patrimonie, should therefore be made such an illicite matrimonie & con∣junction, as is much lesse tollerable than with the Iewes vnder the Law,Deut. 22.10. Nehem. 13 to haue plowed with an Oxe and an Asse together? or a-like vnlawfull, as when they coupled themselues with the Women of Ammon and Ashdod? Or should such a monstrous metamorphosis bee made, that so manie Churches, and Congregations, which before were Substantiues, & stood by themselues, shall be now so wofull and variable Adjectiues, as a sound agreement and happie consolidation is never to be expected, and as their ruinate Cases shall here-after declare? Wee detested before Idoles in Churches, but wee are making now Idole-Churches, hence-foorth not to be ob solatia vivorum, but to be ca∣teria mortuorum, the sound of Gods Word no more to bee heard in their Pulpits, but of the dead tolling of the Bell at Burials in their Steeples. Gen. 26.18As the Philistims filled vp Isaaks Welles of springing water, which his father Abraham had digged in his time: so hereby closing vp the Cisternes and Conduits of that still and living water which gaue refreshment to the Lordes flocke:Psalm. 23. and incroaching vpon the limits of that greene Pasture wherein the Lords Sheepe were duelie made to feede. As if there were no meanes how the Churches of this Kingdome here, could bee other-wise to such a meane competencie of mayntenance provided, out of their large and sacrilegiouslie detayned Patrimonies, that by making the Israelite and Aegyptian,Exod. 2.11 who in Moses tyme stroue together of them, killing one of them, to preserue another. Iudg. 12.Or as the Ephraemites, who could not so grosselie pronounce Shibboleth▪ but Siboleth, with a smaller voyce, were all slaine by the Gileadites, at the pas∣sages of Iordane: Evē so, that al such Churches that are not excessiue in bur∣den and bounds, and of the grossest and greatest in the Land; but of  meaner and lesser sorte or syze, should be so extinguished, swallowed vp▪ and devoured,Num. 16.31. Gen. 41.17 Math. 13.1. 2. Sam. 7. as with Korabs punishment, or Pharaohs dreame, they should symbolize, men miss-construing herein (as seemeth) the wordes of our Saviour, That to him that hath, more shall bee given: and from him who hath  even that which hee hath shall bee taken from him. David, when he sate in his house, and had rest given him round about from all his enemies, did advise to build Gods House: So his peace  him pietie; and his rest, religion. But it is contrarie with vs: our peace
such policie, and the fruit of our rest, is the robberie first, and next, the uine of GODS House,Genes. 25. counting Kirkes to bee like Esau to us, not to bee Planters, but Supplanters there-of: Contracters, and not In-largers of the Kingdome of CHRIST.Micah. 7.3 And thus (as the Prophet Micah sayeth) the great man spake out of the corruption of his soule, and so they wrapt it up. But assuredlie, such Appendices as they have made manie Kirkes of, will bee seene at length, never to have proceeded of a good Tesis: neither will ever such a perilous Copulative Conjunction, doe what they lift, ad∣mit of, nor take places in a good Construction. Before Pastors were impoverished,Pastors made fe∣wer. and nowe shall their number thus ee diminished? The Kirke first stript (like Ioseph) of her Coate, which should warme her:Genes. 37. and next, of her Watch-men, which should arme and defende her: under pretense of some Restitution of meanes, to make her woefullie destitute of Men: Is not this the vilest sorte of Sacriledge? Or how farre is it from the practise of Iulian in likenesse, qui extinxit non solum Praesbyteros, sed Praesbyterium.Advan∣tage to se∣ducers. And how agreeable this Syncope, or Contraction, is now to Pietie, or Reason, may bee clearlie discerned, that when not onelie the Sheepe of the LORDES Pasture are increased,2. Sam. 24. and the People (as in David's time) are multiplied exceedinglie; but the number also of the Wolves, who assault the LORDES Flocke, daylie like-wise groweth: and the Foxes, who de∣stroy the Vines,Cant. 2.15. even the Vines which have small Grapes: (to wit, simple and unlearned Christians.) Should then the number of the carefull and watchfull Shepheardes, bee diminished, and made fewer? It was the Precept of our Saviour,Matth. 9.37. because the Harvest was great, and the Labourers were few, That wee should pray the Lord of the Harvest, to thrust out manie faythfull Labourers in-to His Harvest. But to this Pre∣cept of His our practise now-a-dayes is flat contrarie, and contradictour: yea, absurd, and against common Reason, where much worke is, there fe∣wer Worke-men to bee. It was Pharaoh's working-wiselie (in-deede) to augment the Israelites Taske,Exod. 1.10 and to impaire their strength, and meanes to performe the same. But such policie, being voyde of pietie, did procure plagues onelie, and drew on miserie. And as the Kirke, to the great advantage of her enemies, receiveth (as is sayde) heere-by a notable injurie, what wrong is like-wise done to Lear∣ning and Vniversities, anie one may easilie perceive. Colledges and Schooles,Colledges hurt. the Seminaries of Sciences, and Nurseries of Religion, (like Goshen in Aegypt, where the light of the Land is) they shall carefullie trayne up, and yearlie sende foorth, a more and more numerous Off-spring,Gen. 49.7. at Parentes large expences, like Levi to bee divided in Iaacob, to
teach the LORDES judgementes, and to bee scattered in Israel, to teach the people His Law; and yet the places which they should fill, and live by, by a new practise of Annexation of Kirks, next unto Kirke-Rents, shall be occupied Titulo oneroso onelie, for the most parte, and taken up by others. Parents discouraged.If this then bee a way, eyther to encourage Parentes, and hearten Youth; or a practise to replenish the Schooles of the Prophets heere-after: and so consequentlie bee profitable eyther to Kirke or Policie: or rather be not a meane to effectuate the contrarie, and make Bethel a Babel, let anie in∣different or pious mynde judge. The Countrey harmed.The Countrey in like-manner, howe with Kirke and Schooles it may manie wayes crye out, the apparent scarres of her deepe in-flicted woundes shall heere-after offer them-selves conspicuous, & make the trueth here-of more than cleare and manifest. At the time of that Reformation of our Countrey, where rather a De∣formation was in many parts, through populare and unruelie confusion, (Greede, and not Godlinesse, possessing the mindes of many) it was not anough then, to the griefe of the godlie, to levell with the ground, deface, and cast downe Kirks thorow the Land, and other Religious places, which might have served (beside the Ornament of the Countrey) for other better uses crying onlie in the language of Edom,Psal. 137.7. Levit. 14.41. Raze them, raze them, even to the foundation: as if (against the Law) the House, having the Leprosie, could not be purged, but by pulling downe: so that as yet in many places there remaineth but the monuments of headlesse Furie, & se∣ges ubi Troia fuit: But also men now-a-dayes, and goodlie Professors (for∣sooth) thinking that there are too manie Religious places as yet in the Land, and Houses of GODS Worship, have redacted two till one: and made there-by a second Defalcation, to abridge the summe. Cic. de di∣vi. Lib. 1.It is reported of Hannibal, a Captaine of subtile policie, that hee saw in a dreame, being in Italie, which hee intended to subdue to him-selfe, a mon∣strous Image appearing before him: at the sight where-of being amazed, asked what it was that so ghastlie appeared? The Image aunswered, Va∣stitas Italiae. But this Image deceived Hannibal: for after the sight of his Brothers head, sent unto him by the Romanes, hee was forced to flee from Italie to Carthage: and so frustrate of his expectation. It shall proove lyke-wyse but an unluckie prodigie to them, the deva∣station of their Countrey: who by laying waste so many Kirkes of goodlie and godlie Ornamentes, shall make the same, in short time, to become like Achan or Absolons Burials:Ioshua, 7. 2. Sam. 18. heapes of Stones, heere and there through the whole Kingdome. Our Saviour was much mooved, and as a great motive it was also used by the Elders of the Iewes, to perswade and induce CHRIST to grant
the Centurions petition,Luke, 7. and heale his Servaunt, Because he loved their Na∣tion (sayde they) and had built to them a Synagogue. Where they make there this outward action a sure testimonie of his sincere and in-ward affe∣ction towardes their Religion. Then what can bee the affection or zeale that manie Professors nowe beare to the Woship of GOD which they professe, when in place of buil∣ding Synagogues, or Temples, and multiplying their number, where-of this Kingdome standeth so much in neede; they rather by such Vniting have impaired the number, & exposed the edifices to ruine and contempt? Thus (as the Prophet sayeth) while everie one of them runneth to builde up his owne house,Agg. 2. and prepare Galleries syled with Cedar to him-selfe, the House of GOD is not onelie left, but made forsaken and desolate. Civilitie hath ever also beene seene to have beene the Daughter of Re∣ligion:Civilitie hindred. which as shee pointed out, Quae DEI sunt, so lyke-wyse Quae Caesa∣ris: teaching to bee holie towardes GOD, and righteous towardes Man: and so to give each one their due, and observe both Tables. And Experience hath taught, where Pietie hath bid Fare-well, there Civilitie and comelie Policie hath,Ruth, 1.16. 1. Pet. 2.17. lyke Ruth, inseparablie followed Naomi, and godlesse Barba∣ritie taken up their rowme. And where GOD is not feared, the King can not bee rightlie honoured: for these two, lyke Gemini, both goe together: and the strongest In-forcer is knowne to be the Conscience: which, where it is not informed, no marvell that deformitie of manners, and breach of duetie bee both to GOD and Man. Now, where it was requisite then, moe Kirkes for this effect in sundry partes of our Countrey to have bene erected, should such a concise abridge∣ment of the number of these beene made, which were auncientlie for seve∣rall Service appointed, and had severall maintenance for that cause allot∣ted, as now-a-dayes, (necessitie flat contrarie requiring) two to bee reda∣cted to one, especiallie their boundes being become more habitable, and moe people now in-dwelling also the same? Poore people in like-manner in many places,Poore people and Subjectes, both misea∣sed, & scan∣dalized. how they are heere-by wronged, their grieved hearts furnishing matter of regrate to their plain & pleaning tongues, and their sad querimonies powred foorth in-to the eares of every man, indifferentlie give sufficient proofe: when by the toylesome labour of the sixe dayes commanded, their bodies beeing worne and wea∣ried, they shall be made, up-on the Lords Sabbath, with grieved hearts, and grudging speaches, to passe by, and desert their owne commodious and kindly Parish Kirks, where-in so frequentlie they had received the comfort of the Word and Sacraments; and to trudge further to these new made Mother (I had almost said Step-mother) Kirks: where, in discontenting amazement, after they have heard a Stranger-seeming voyce, returning
home-ward, and backe-treading their tedious and uncouth way, after tuall regrating, they may justlie say, That they have gotten both Preaching and Pennance together. And what scandal and offence it is to those simple ones, when they shal see Religion thus so little regarded by goodliest Professors, and great men of the Land, the exercises of the Worship of GOD in so many places ex∣tinguished, so many Lamps of the Candle-sticke of the Sanctuarie plainlie put out, Mammon to have subjected mens hearts so to her slaverie, that she hath made their hands to pull downe the Lords Houses, and Manour-places of His Divine Worship, the publishing of His Gospell so to be con∣fyned, the number of His Ministers so to be impared, the Kirks Patrimonie, still to be retained, and now eternized, as it were, to the Posteritie, and i place of Restitution,Gen. 9.22. 2. Sam. 16. nothing to be eyther had, or heard, but mockage, or railing, as if Cham were revived, or Shimei set on foote againe. If this bee not matter to scandalize weake ones: (and woe bee un-to him, who giveth offence to such:) or if this bee an examplare perswa∣sion to such, who are given moste to followe the example of their Supe∣riours, to respect Religion, to reverence the Worship there-of, to regarde Pastor or Place, or to bee un-fallen away, eyther in Errour, or in meere Atheisme, let anie one of judgement discerne. Yea, I dare boldlie and confidentlie, with conspicuousnesse of trueth and equitie, avouch, Where two Parishes are made one, that it had beene more urginglie necessarie, of such Parishes that are but one, and where-of there is a great number in the Land, a division there of to have bene made, each one in two or three competent & sufficient ample parishes at least: the most of such great parishes, rather lyke pettie Shyres,  Countreyes, in their severall Circuites, beeing in the Inne-Countrey, and most populous, and best in-habited partes of the Land. In which hudge parishes of so manie thousandes of Communicantes, and of such farre and large extended boundes, those that dwell in the utmost and remotest parts there-of,1. Sam. 1.21. Luk. 2.41. are lyke the Iewes, who once in the yeare onelie came up from their Borders and Coastes, to the Temple of Hierusalem, to worship. Such is their anniversarie visiting of their parish Kirkes onelie: it beeing not  Sabbath-dayes, but a Weeke-dayes journey, to goe thither, tho not the same day to returne. Ioshua, 23.And as Reuben and Gad, and the halfe Trybe of Manasseh, when they were dissmised by Ioshua, and had returned to Gilead, the Land of thei possession, were forced for the longinquitie, and farre distance of plac from Shiloh, where the LORDES Tabernacle was, to build an Altar, fo a memoriall, to them-selves: even to testifie, That they had parte in th
GOD of Iaakob, and were not aliens from the Common-wealth of Israel. So, I say, manie one, and much people, in such parishes a-fore-sayde, and in manie partes of the Land, have more than great necessitie, in re∣spect of their farre and remote habitations from their parish Kirkes, to have erected amongst them-selves Temples of GODS Worship, and exercise of Religion: Seeing that in moste of these parishes, the poore people, other-wyse remain, through want thereof, lyke blind Idiots, nusled up in Ignorance, and Atheisme: vvhose reuthful condition, lyke that Vision of the man of Macedonia,Acts, 16. to the Apostle Paul in the Actes, doeth pleade for lyke ayde, and in-vocateth lyke pittie. And amongst whome, if our blessed SAVIOVR vvere corporallie, as Hee was amongst the Iewes, Hee should bee seene with lyke pittie,Matth. 9.36. and sighes to complaine, and be∣wayle them: because Hee saw them lyke Sheepe wanting a Shephearde: it passing the power of anie one man, tho never so diligent, to discharge a Pastorall duetie; no, not to the halfe. Hence it is, that not onelie, as by the Prophet the LORD complai∣neth, That for want of knowledge His people perish, and pittifull igno∣rance is seene in their myndes: but also, that such Barbaritie and vitious∣nesse is seene in their manners. Hence it is, that moe are often-tymes seene in their Kirke-yardes gazing, than with-in their thronged Kirkes ga∣thering. Hence it is, that poore Infantes, especiallie in Winter season, have died with-out Baptisme, before that eyther the Pastor could bee ad∣vertised, in such a long and lingring way, up-on necessitie to come; or the Infant by anie meanes, quarter way, could bee brought. And hence it is, that manie a poore Soule, with-out Pastorall praesence, or notice, hath died with-out comfort: beside the manie fayntinges of poore and sillie ones, by a wearisome way, vvhich made CHRIST to bee compas∣sionate towardes the Multitude,Mark. 8.2. and there-fore would not sende them away emptie: For some of them came from a-farre (sayeth the EVAN∣GELIST.) Where other-wyse, through putting up, and not pulling downe of Kirkes: Raysing, and not razing Christian Synagogues: Pastorall duetie in in-forming Ignorantes: Reforming the vitious: Comforting the distressed: and vvatching over all, should this vvay bee better dis∣charged, Subjectes and poore people more should bee eased, the Coun∣trey and Kingdome more should bee decored, the fewer starting Holes eft to the subsidiarie Seminaries of the envious Adversaries, Popple and Tares in the LORDES Fielde, and the glorious GOSPELL of IESVS CHRIST, more plenteouslie should abound, and shyne in the Land.
But what shall I say? Too dolefull experience of this clayie Age, hath too well taught the facilitie of pulling downe: but the too great difficul∣tie in their places of putting up of Kirkes, and the Ablative, hath ever beene in farre easier use with us, than anie wayes the Dative: Practizing so the first parte of Zaccheus lyfe, but not acting the last parte of his restitution: and to impede heere-after anie expectation of the same; converting nowe, by a Retrograde, the plurall number of Kirkes, in-to a simple singular. Yea, to speake to such men, of building of Kirkes, where in such po∣pulous a-fore-sayde places there is more than neede: or, as Salomons Pre∣cept is,Prov. 3.9. of honouring the LORD so with their Riches; a man shall seeme to them, to bee a Barbarian, whose Language they know not: or like Ioseph with his Brethren,Genes. 42. as needing an Interpreter: yea, they shall thinke, as is sayde of Peter, That hee wist not what hee sayde, when on Mount Tabor hee would have builded one Tabernacle to Moyses,Luk. 9.33. and one to Elias, and one to CHRIST: or as Festus objected to Paul, That too much Learning had made him madde:Acts, 26. So that they who mynde such thinges, too much Zeale hath made them franticke. But speake of casting downe two Kirkes, to make up one: or annexing one unto its neighbour Parish, hence-foorth ever to bee but one Cure, and in sundrie places: as it were alluding to Trinitie and Vnitie, to cast three in one, they will straight wayes applaude, with that of the Poët, Vnio divina est, &c. Polion. Lib. 1. strat.It is reported of Pericles, that being asked by Alcibiades, Why so often hee seemed so sadde and pensive? Who aunswered, Because (sayde hee) I remember up-on that Account which I have to make for that which I have received to build a Portch to Minervas Temple in Athens. But howe few are now lyke to Pericles, who mynde how much they are addebted to GOD, to builde His Kirke, or maintaine His Service: or what Account they have to make before GOD, and His Angels, for the Meanes which they with-holde, and where-on the same should bee done? But on the contrarie, make no conscience, zeale-less-lie, through Greede, to ruinate those which zealouslie, through Godlinesse, were formerlie by others al∣readie erected. Goe to the Yles of Chittim, and beholde: sende unto Kedar, and inquire of the Nations round about,Ier. 2.9. If anie such thing bee done: let bee by Chri∣stians, but by verie Turkes and Paganes, to their Gods, as to the true GOD, whome in CHRIST wee worship a-right. What Temples, or Reli∣gious places of theirs, once dedicate, deface or expose they, to contempt, ruine, and daylie decay, as named Christians now-a-dayes, who will not
onelie first robbe the Rentes from them;Dan. 8.1. but next (lyke , who made the daylie Sacrifice of the Temple to cease) will abrogate and exile the Exercise of GODS Worship, in Worde and Sacra∣mentes, out of them; and set vp the Abomination of Desolation in the places where it ought not? An ill Positive (for-soothe) ad∣mitting no where a Comparatiue. Let this clayie Age looke backe also to their Fore-fathers zeale, and bee ashamed: with their Chappels without their Houses, and Oratories within: with their Churches piouslie respected, and their Hospitals plenteouslie then doted: the swarms of Church-man with∣in Townes,1. King. 18 Genes. 47▪ lyke Baals Prophets, sitting at plentifull Tables: and those without, lyke Aegyptes Priestes, aboundantlie provyded for: Erecting also daylie, and not, as now, dejecting, Religious Temples: and, lyke Nebuchadnezar,2. Chron. 36. first spoyling the Vessels, and Treasurie of the Temple; and then razing the Edifices thereof: first to be Church-robbers, and then, ere they restore, to be Church ruinaters. Consider also in that flowrishing and Reverende Neighbour Church of ours, where farre lesse Parishes are in sundrie partes and search as narrowlie as Labau searched the Stuffe of Iaakob,Genes. 31. if this bee their practise: or anie-where else, where GOD in mercie hath resto∣red His Gospel, to burie the memorie of so manie auncient Churches, as Iackob buried the strange gods of his House-holde vnder the Oak which is beside Sechem.Genes. 35. Not that anie way I speake against such Vniting as is permitted▪ and clearlie mentionate in that Statute of Parliament: to wit, vsing the verie words of the Act it selfe, Where the Fruites of anie one alone will not suffice to entertaine a Minister: and that the Reutes and whole Patrimonie thereof are no wayes aunswearable to the portion or qua∣titie of fie Chaulders Victuall, or fiue hundreth Markes of Silver in yearlie commoditie, and value: and where for distance of place, and other lawfull causes, they are not also found incommedious so to bee vnited (Of which sorte there are few, if anie, within the whole Kingdome) But where beside distance of place, and other lawfull causes, why they are im∣commodious, fayre Parishes and famous Benefices are vnited toge∣ther, the value of the Rentes, Fruites, and Patrimonie of anie one whereof, will exceede farre the meanest fore-sayde proportion: to wit, of fiue Chaulders Victuall, or fiue hundreth Markes Silver: yea, equall, and surmount the highest quantitie: to wit, of ten Chaulders Victuall, or a thousand Markes Silver▪ and double, if not triple, the same.
Where such as these then are coupled together, lyke Ratches for a Game of Hunting, what importeth such a smoothering Vnion, but the fore-sayde sadde Sequeles? Or what better Fruite can such a bitter Tree produce, but sowre Grapes, to set the Teeth on edge? Exod. 2.19As Moyses then (SIR) commiserating the estate of the wronged Daughters of the Priest of Midian, who were driven away from the Troghs of Water, which they had filled to water their Fathers Flockes: As hee, I say, defended, and brought them backe agayne to those places, and gaue their Sheepe refreshment: So (SIR) pittie the wronged estate in lyke manner of the Church in your Land: de∣fende it lyke-wyse, and make patent againe the Doores of so manie Christian Temples,Ioshua▪ 10 shut vp lyke the Caues of the Canaanite Kinges: that comfort againe may bee within them ministred to the LORDS people▪Micah, 4.14. that the Flocke of His Heritage (as the Prophet speaketh) may bee fed with the Rod of His owne Mouth, as in the midst of Carmel: and that they may pasture in Bafhan, and Gilead, as in olde tyme. Luke. 1.And as Zacharias, the Baptists Father, tho for a short tyme bee was stricken dumbe, yet as at last his mouth was againe opened, by sen∣sible and cleare speaches to prophesie, and proclayme that Horne of Salvation, that was raysed out of the House of David; and Dy∣spring, which from on high had visited his people Israel: So (SIR) restore in lyke manner, to speach and prophesie againe these dumbe, yea, dead-stricken places of GODS Sacred Worship: that the same Gospell may bee as yet published, and that the same tender mercie in them may still bee manifested through all the corners of your Land; to giue light to them that sit in darknesse, and in the shaddow of Death, and to guide their feete into the way of peace. Ionas, 8.Or as the Whale, how-so-ever shee swallowed vp Ionas, disg∣ged him againe vpon the drye land: Even so (SIR) how-so-ever this Vniting of Churches, throgh the moyen & greed of mē, hath past the true Cases of manie wherof were never (I am perswaded) clearlie knowne to your Honourable Commission: I yke a wyse Solomon, then, pronounce the Sentence of Division: and that as the two Wo∣men which pleaded before him, were each one restored to her owne Chylde; so that everie Church may bee restored with a competent mayntenance, to its owne former and primitiue condition: Else, it had beene better both for Church and Kingdome, that, poore as they were, still as yet they had remayned severall. Gen. 13.5.And let not (SIR) Abrahams Altar bee as it were
that GOD should bee left to pleade for Himselfe:Iudg. 6.30  that Scepter of Royall power, which, one after another, for the defence of His Cause, Hee hath put into your hand. Let not Christian Temples goe downe into your Kingdome, which were as the Tents of the Shepheardes,Ca. 1.7. where the LORDS Well beloved went foorth by the steps of the Flocke, and there fed her weake and tender Kids, with the Spirituall Food of the Bread of Lyfe. Especiallie where greater neede is to put vp moe. Neyther let the Watch-men, which goe about the Citie, of whom the Spouse in the Canticles seeketh hr direction,Ca. 3.3. where shee may finde him whom her Soule loveth, bee diminished in number, where there is more necessitie they should bee augmented. Let not Naash his enter-pryse come also now-a-dayes in pra∣ctise:1. Sam. 11. where two eyes are to pull out the one: and bring a shame so vpon the LORDS Israel. Neyther let the barking Dogs bee remoo∣ved from the LORDS Flockes: except thereby wee would please the devouring Wolues. But let the Walles of HIERUSALEM still bee going vp, maugre all opposition: Repare the ruines of your Church restore the rapines thereof:Nehem. 8.8. and in the well ordered House of GOD, let the Levites, beeing restored to their Portions, bee reponed also, and set in their places: who may reade in the Booke of the Law of GOD distinctlie, and giue the sense, and make the people to vnderstand the same:Nehem. 13.14. that so your GOD may remember you still in Goodnesse, and not wype out your kyndnesse, which you haue showne vpon His House, & vpon the Offi∣cers thereof. AMEN. FINIS.
The Poores Complaynt, For a just Redresse of the ruine of Hospitalls. NO sooner (Dread Soveraygne) was the voyce of the Turtle heard in our Land (as the Spouse speaketh in the Canticles) or did the Gospell of Grace make a Goshen;Cant. 2.12 but as soone was that speach, Vp, Moab, to the spoyle, put in speedie practise; and (as the name of the Pro∣phets sonne was) lie speedie Robbers, they were swift to the Prey: So that the zeale of God's House (with David) did not eate them vp; but their zeale did eate vp the Lord's House, while as they hungered, not for the Good, but the Goods of the Church, and made the Lords Patrimonie to bee lyke the Baptist, who said of himselfe, Me aportet inni. Neyther were they content to doe so to the Lords Embassa∣dours, as Hanun did in curtayling the Garments of Davids ser∣vants, and making the Church (as the Prophet speaketh) lyke a Widow left to the spoyle; but the verie Hospitall Oratories, where the poore members of Christ were placed and planted, comforted and relieved, haue not escaped their supplanting, and apacious devouring: so that what former Pittie and Pietie did in Endowing such Places, latter impietie hath done cleane contrarie, in Vndoing thereof. Not remembring that speach of holie Augustine, Si sterilitas in ignem mittitur, rapacitas quid meretur? & si qui sua non dedit semper ardebit, quid recipiet ille qui aliena abstulit? Yea, not onlie haue they robbed Christ Iesus more cruellie of his Coat than those Roman Souldiours who did cast lots there∣on, but also for extinguishing the memorie of such mortifica∣tions, vpon these verie Houses to which they did belong. They haue practised that speach of Edom, Raze them, raze them, even to the foundation, making cursed Iericho of such blessed places, which was sacked, and sowne with Salt, and which is so evident in the trueth thereof thorow the Land, that in place of Proofe, it needes rather Reproofe, and forceth this humble Addresse to Your Majestie at this tyme for a speedie Redresse. Consider then (Sacred SIR) how horrible a Sinne this is, which cryes so in GODS Eares for revenge, and in Yours for re∣paration,
what ingratitude is it to GOD, what stayne to the Gos∣pel, how ignominious to this Nation, injurious to the Poore, hurtfull to themselues, scandalous to others, prejudiciall to po∣steritie, and in a word, everie way damnable. And as David when hee came to his Kingdome for the kynd∣nesse that hee found at the hands of Ionathan, kythed his thank∣full affection to his sonne whom hee left behinde him, poore lame Mephibosheth: Even so (SIR) seeing the LORD hath ad∣vanced your Royall Majestie, and brought you safelie to your natiue Kingdome, for this kyndnesse of His to you, show your thankfull affection to the Poore, Leane and Lame Members of CHRIST IESVS, whom hee hath left behinde him in his stead to his second comming: and remember that the cry of their robberie and oppression cryes to your Sacred Majestie, as the sa∣ved Thiefe did to CHRIST on the Crosse, saying, LORD remember mee when Thou commest o Thy Kingdome. And at worthie and wyse Salomon, at his entrie of sweying the Scepter of royall authoritie, redressed both prudentlie and powerfullie the wrong that was done to the true Mother of the living Chylde, which was theftuouslie interchanged and stollen away from her, and a dead Chylde left in its rowme: Even so (SIR) let this distressed Mother that pleanes and pleades now before you finde the lyke comfort, even those Nurseries of the Poore, piouslie founded, but impiouslie subverted and confoun∣ded, which cry now and craue to bee restored to that which thef∣tuouslie in lyke manner hath beene taken from them, and no∣thing at all left, in the towme thereof, no, not so much as the emptie walles of their habitations. Neyther let such a Guilt (SIR) lye on your Land, nor Stayne on the Gospell, that the Church should not onlie be seene Sacrilegiouslie robbed of her due Patrimonie; but also beside the Vintage of Abiezer, that the verie Gleanings of Boaz, or Ephraim, should not bee left; & not onlie the Childrens Bread taken away; but, not so much left as the verie Crumbes of the Poores Almes vnsnatched vp greedilie. Indeede, the LORD, these manie yeares bygone, hath conti∣nued with vs the Gospel of Peace; and, with it, an happie Peace and Plentie; the Comfort of the one, and Commoditie of the other: and shall Hee be so requyted for all that hee hath done to his Vineyard; that in place of the sweete Fruit of the Workes
of Charitie, Hee shall finde the sowre Grapes of the workes of Crueltie? And lyke the sinne of the sons of Eli, shall the LORDS. Offering, by such rapacitie, bee abhorred, to cause fearfull wrath at last seaze on your Land? and shall this not bee showne to our Zealous Soveraigne? Hath not ths caused the taunting obloquie of the Adversarie, that or Profession is not onlie a solitidian Religion, but that our Fayth (lyke Pharaos leane Kye) hath devoured the fat of the Fruites of the Charitie of others, which should haue beene ador∣ned and perfected by our owne, to others? Hence is it that our goodest Profe ours are sayde to be (and are too well seene) most powerfull onlie lyke the Load-stone in the attractiue facul∣tie; skilfull in the Ablattue, but ignorant in the Datiue Case; Arith∣meticians onlie in straction from GOD, to make vp an addi∣tion to themselue, whose heartes are as Nabals, or Dives, destitute of Pittie, and whose hands are as Hopbies flesh-hooks, nimble in rapacitie: but as Ieroboame arme, dryed vp, and destitute of charitie. It was the former glorie (SIR) of your natiue Kingdome, that no Nation did over-match it (according, yea beyond the power thereof) in statelie Erections, and rich endowments of religio is Places: But now her glorie is turned to her shame; while as the eye of the most curious survey shall not in anie Countrey or Kingdome, round about, beholde so manie religious Places and Hospitalls promiscoslie demolished; as in this our Nation▪ and not onlie CHRISTS Patrimonie devoured, appoin∣ted for His Worship; but the Poores also, ordained for their com∣fort: whereby those who should bee in these places supported, and relieved (like Ano, looking leaner from day to day) are now forced in their feeble Strayings, and bedfast Starvings, to poste vp such Groanes, & Grievances, to the Throne of Iustice, as may be fittest Pleaders of their Cause, & playners on their Wrong. This is the Cause (SIR) of such Desolation in the Land, and that it staggereth and reeleth to and froe, lyke a drunken man. This is the Cause why so manie auncient and noble Houses draw neare the period of vtter Exterminion: and that the lyne of Desolation is spread over them, and the stones of emptinesse are to bee found in them. This is the cause that such a visible Curse is seene to follow vpon the eating of the Fruit of this for∣bidden Tree. For assuredlie the LORDS Portion will bee vnto them, and their estates, as that Worme which was at the roote of
Ionas Gourd, which caused a speedie fading, and finall decay, like Achans excrable thing, which was his ruine, and his whole Fami∣lies: or as the Arke to the Philistines which never ceased to plague them, till it was sent backe to the right owners. And as Iacob sup∣planted Esau, the holie thing will be ever the supplanter of the vn∣holie Vurper: the bread of deceit will turne into gravell in the mouth: and tho stollen waters be sweet, yet like the accursed water to the guiltie partie, although they cause swelling of their Rents at first, yet they shall bring vpon them a consumption at last. But fearfuller shall be their dittie hereafter, when Christs words not onely of, Non pavistis, but pabulm abstulistis, shall bee prononced against them: and most fearfull shall be their doome of eenall damnation, which like that threatning against the House of Eli, shall make their eares to tingle; and make them more dreadfullie astonished, than ever was Balthassar. The im∣precation whereof is set downe as the sententiall and vsuall clause and clausule of such Mortifications▪ saving thus▪ and as from Eball thundring, If any shall take away, or apply to any other vse, that which I haue mortified and bequeathed to the indigent, (as I hope none will dare ever to attempt) let him be ANATHEMA, and let his count be without Mercie at the dreadfull day of Iudgement, when hee shall compeare and receiue his doome at the hand of the Iudge both of Heaven and Earth, to whom I dedicate the same. This (Sir) is the Cause likewise why so few new Erections of such Places are in the Countrey, or charitable Dotations, out of mens devotion, while as they see how the liberall donations of others, and pious erected Hospitals are so grosselie devoured and ruinated remedilesse: and thereby vehementlie suspect, yea, as∣suredlie expect, that it would no otherwise fare with that which they would in like manner out of pittie and pietie rogate and consecrate to God. Neither haue Laicks onely had their hands in this cursed Crime, but Levi hath also joyned with Simeon, to be Brethren in evill▪ and both haue linked together, as Sampsons Foxes, to waste the Lords Field: so that Iudas, quid mihi dabitis, et ego tradam em? hath not died with him: but without Sense, or Shame, hath bene the manner of latter bargaining by his Soule-lesse successors; their conscience being more leper than the bodie of Gbzi: & a more dreadfull judgement abyding such, no that for the receiving of the gift from Nama: for as Lamech sayd to his wiues, so may I, if
this horrible Crime in Laicks be avenged seavenfolde, doubtless in such who should be Trumpets, to cry aloude against the same, and should be preservers of such places, it will bee avenged sea∣ventie folde. And be he of what degree soever, who for Bribe,  favour, like Iudas, or Pilat, hath betrayed or delivered Christ i his poore members, and their Rights, to the barbarous and crue hands of those who haue Canniball-like devoured them, with Iudas and Pilat, such should be justlie repute to haue no Place in so holy, a ministration, and may with them feare the like woe and judge∣ment. Let not then (Sir) your land herein be an Aceldama, or the blood of the poore (like that of Abels) cry still against the same for ven∣geance. Deliver your subjects from such a fearfull curse: & cause their mawes (like the belly of Ionas Whale) to disgorge the poores portion, who haue swallowed vp the same, that (as Iob sayes of himselfe) the blessing of him who was readie to perish, may come vpon you,Iob 19.13 14, &c. and yee may cause the hearts of the poo to sing for joy. Put on Righteousnesse then, and let it cloathe you, Iudgement, & let it be a Robe & a Diademe vnto you: be Eyes to the Blind, & Feet to the Lame: and the cause of the poore, which yee know not, search it out. For it is your part (Sir) to purge th land of such blood-guiltinesse, and to make a straite inquisition with Ioshua, concerning the execrable thing: to break the jaw of the wicked, and to plucke the spoyle out of their teeth, and to the poore at this time to leaue a blessed memoriall behinde you  So may yee promise to your selfe, that yee shall die in your  & multiplie your dayes as the sand: your Root also shall spread out by the Waters, and the Dew shall lye all night vpon you Branch: Your Glorie, in like manner, shall bee fresh in you, and your Bow shall bee renewed in your Hand: and amongst all the Titles of Honour & Dignitie, which the Lord hath multiplied▪ & heaped vpon your sacred Majestie, this shall not bee the leas wherewith your Royal Grandsire, of blessed memorie, was styled▪ to bee called, THE POORE MANS KING. FINIS.
