17695 99848398 13488
A NEW INSTVCTION OF PLOWING AND SET∣TING OF CORNE, HANDLED IN MANNER OF A DIALOGVE betweene a Ploughman and a Scholler. Wherein is proued plainely that Plowing and Setting, is much more profitable and lesse chargeable, than Plowing and Sowing. By EDVVARD MAXEY. Gent. He that withdraweth the Corne, the people will curse him: but blessing shall be vpon the head of him that selleth Corne. Prou. 11.26. men ploughing with horses and setting a field Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngston, dwelling in Pater noster Rowe, ouer against the signe of the Checker. 1601.
TO THE RIGHT WOR∣SHIPFVL SIR RICHARD MARTEN KNIGHT, MASTER OF HER MAIESTIES MYNT, ALDERMAN, and twise Lord Maior of the Citie of London. IT is well knowne (right Wor∣shipfull) how great a benefac∣tor and furtherer you haue been to many good workes and profitable to the Com∣mon-wealth: for by your im∣ployments, the inhabitants of sundrie parts of England and Wales, haue gained for many yeeres, many thousand pounds yeerely. How much then those poore are bound to praise God for you, and such as further the like good works, all wise men acquainted with your great charge and trauell can testifie, which I thought worthy to be published, and left in memorie for other ages yet to come, to your great commendation and incouragement of others, to follow your good example. And now (right Worshipfull) calling to minde my former time spent in Hus∣bandrie;
the most sweete and comfortable kind of life to all vertuous minds (that Adams poste∣ritie can enioy) if it were not for the wickednes of seruants, who discourage many industrious minds; and seeing an vnskilfull Pamphlet (cal∣led God speede the Plough) to be so long vnan∣swered, set foorth by some Nouice in Husban∣drie, as should appeare as well by his writing, as that he saith in the same, it is none of his profes∣sion; which hath and may doe much hurt by disswading men from so profitable an imploy∣ment as the setting of Corne; which when I considered, and remembring that I had spent the most part of thirtie yeeres in Husbandrie: I aduentured to publish this little Treatise, for the instruction of those that will be perswaded to practise this kind of excellent and profitable worke: which with my selfe I desire to be protected by your accustomed lo∣uing fauour towards me. Yours to be commaunded, EDVV. MAXEY. TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. WHereas there are two bookes written con∣cerning the setting of Corne: the first commending it, the second disgracing it; both of them discoursing so Schol∣lerlike, that the plaine Countrie Hus∣band man, cannot iudge which of them hath most skill for instruction in this kinde of Husbandrie; and perceiuing that the second treatise (called God speede the Plough) hath disswaded great numbers from the practise of setting of Corne: I was aduised and resolued to aduenture the publike censuring of this Instruction. Wherein I desire to proue how much more casie and profitable, Plowing and Setting will be in all places, and that with lesse charge, then either Plowing and Sowing, or digging and Setting, desiring to be freed from all suspition, to contend for art or learning with any of the former writers. And like a plaine Ploughman to shew my opinion, what I thinke of the former con∣tention, betweene the Plowe and the spade: in a word, I iudge both these profitable instruments may right well be vsed in their proper places, that the Plowe may keepe his place in the fields,A little good counsel would haue saued all your labour in writing, and mine in an∣swering: but I: hope it will doe good. to the great increase of Corne, and the Spade in the Gardens for rootes, hearbs, and flowers, necessarie for household prouision. And I could haue wished you the Gentleman and author of the booke (called God speede the Plowe) had taken better coun∣sell of some skilfull Husbandman, before you had published a
booke, wherein you indeuour to correct and teach an Arte, which you acknowledge is none of your profession, & to haue considered how easelie for the most part our English Nation are disswaded from good causes, neither for the glorie of God, or the honour and profit of their Prince and Countrie: for though it be true, that very fewe innouations in the Church, or nouelties in a state, are not alwaies and generallie good, and profitable for all places, and for all people: yet these profitable inuentions, speciallie in Hus∣bandrie, should rather be commended then disgraced, vntill a manifest error in them be discouered, and that by experience and proofe. Againe, you ought rather to haue remembred and well considered the lamentable case of the poore that liued in distresse in the late yeeres of dearth, who notwithstanding the charitable orders taken by her Maiestie, her honorable Counsell and other officers of the kingdome, to the glorie of God, and their high commendation: yet was it well seene with the eyes of the trulie charitable, that except the King of heauen and earth had relie∣ued the poore people of this Land, with Corne out of his storehou∣ses in other Countries; the poore and the rich also had been in hazard to haue perished by famine, that might haue fallen vpon this sinfull people, or by some wofull calamities, inseparable com∣panions of penurie and want. And let euery indifferent man consider what huge quantities of Corne may yeerely be saued, that now is cast away by Plowing and Sowing: yet giue me leaue plainelie to giue you a proiect what this would come vnto. Some writers of our time account but nine thousand sixe hundred and two and fiftie Parishes, or thereabouts, in England, and suppose sixe hundred and two and fiftie of them to be in Cities and Townes vsing no Tyllage: and so account but nine thousand Countrie Parishes, and because the author of the booke (called God speede the Plough) writeth, that if a Parish haue three thousand Acres of erable land, which is about thirtie or fortie Ploughlands in a Parish, therefore mistrusting his iudgement,
we will admit but ten Plowelands, one Parish with another; so nine thousand Parishes hath foure score and ten thousand Plow∣lands, and that if in euery Ploweland there may easely be saued yeerely ten or twelue quarters of Seede Corne, that now is cast a∣way, which shall be directly proued, it will amount to some nine or ten hundred thousand quarters of Graine that might euery yeere be saued in her Maiesties dominions: I dare affirme so much (be it more or lesse) as would fetch hither the Indies Trea∣sure out of Spaine and other Countries farre distant; to the great honour and riches of our Prince and Countrie, and especiallie the maintenance of our English Nauie, with plentifull prouision also of victuals for Souldiers both by Sea and Land, to their ex∣ceeding comfort, and the terror of all forraine enemies. And to conclude, I wish that they whose hearts the Lord hath endewed with true wisedome, and charitie, to remember and consider well of this danger, from which the Lord hath so lately deliuered vs: and let vs all serue that God in the moderate vse of his creatures, and not consume in riotous gluttonie and drun∣kennes, such great quantities of his blessings, to the hurt of our bodies and soules, the poore being readie to famish before our eyes. So I commend thee good Christian Reader, to Gods protection, and this worke to the blessing of the Almightie. The particular proofes of this good Husbandrie, shall be seene in a dialogue, betweene a Ploughman and a Scholler, for the bet∣ter instruction of plaine Countrie people. E. M.
A NEW INSTRVCTION OF PLOWING AND SETTING OF CORNE, HANDLED IN manner of a Dialogue betweene a Ploughman and a Scholler. Ploughman. SEeing I am appoynted to defend the profitable arte of setting of Corne, though in respect of lear∣ning very vnfit, yet because I haue professed and practized Husban∣drie for the most part of thirtie yeeres, and that you, the author of the booke (called God speede the Plough) say that husbandrie is no part of your profession, I may hope to maintaine against you by way of argu∣ment in plaine Husbandrie, that Plowing and Setting is much better and more profitable, than either Plowing and Sowing, or Digging and Setting. Scholler. I maruell that my booke doth so much of∣fend you, I thought to haue pleased you and all Plough∣men, for so commending the olde fashion of Plowing and Sowing. Ploughman. Surely sir you haue no otherwise offen∣ded me, than all other men that desire the good of their Countrie, and be sorie to see the simple abused and dis∣couraged by your meanes, and how you please an other
sort of wilfull men, that will neither know what may be profitable for themselues, nor haue any such heartie loue to their Countrie and poore neighbours, as they ought to haue. As for your booke, howsoeuer you meant, it serues to so little good purpose (in my conceite) that it was the chiefe cause that moued me to take this worke in hand, to correct (if it were possible) the euill humors and preiudicate opinions against Corne-Setting, that it hath planted in mens heads and hearts. Scholler. I am sorie that my booke should breede any euill humors in mens heads or hearts, and I pray you what faults doe you finde in my booke? Ploughman. Sir there be faults too many, which being the fruites of your idle houres (as you say) be not much to be marueiled at, for seldome doth idlenes bring forth any profite in husbandrie. And it is not my purpose to expostulate with you vpon all particular faults; they are too many to trouble the reader with: but you shall heare mine opinion, like a man of my plaine profession, & I will tell you my minde what I doe thinke in this argument, as well as I can. To passe ouer other matters, I will begin to defend our old fashion of Ploughes, against your strange Plough, that you say might be so made and handled, that it may goe deeper by a foote more than ordinarie, proportioning the strength of the Teeme and Plough together. Note that the question be∣tweene the olde fashion Ploughes and this strange Plough, is but to proue the Plough apt to set Corne.Sir, if you can deuise a Plough that will goe deeper in all grounds (for you make no difference) a foote more than ordinarie, it were good you brought it forth; for surely it is likely to proue an implement of great force to our English Hus∣bandrie: for with it you must be compelled to plowe land twentie inches deepe or thereabouts, and yet I must confesse to my remembrance, I neuer saw any Plough, though drawne with ten oxen, to goe aboue eight or ten
inches ordinarilie, and that with much a doe; and I pray you, how many Oxen or Horse will your Plough require to be drawne with? for in some places if you make it goe, we plaine countrie men will suspect you will Coniure: and in many places the qualitie of the mould will not permit our ten inches, much lesse your two and twentie. Againe, what vse I pray you shall the Common-wealth haue of such an implement, where either it cannot goe vnles the diūell draw it, or may not goe for the euill mould it will turne vp? and so your Plough in that place doth more harme, than your booke can doe good any where else. Scholler. Not so sir, I will haue my Teeme and my Plough so made, that it shall goe well of that depth in such grounds, as I will chuse to set my Corne in. Ploughman. It may be possible (if it please God to worke such wonders by your inuention) but we the poorer sort of Husbandmen, cannot make Ploughs, and prouide Teemes of that value and qualitie; neither haue we such change of Land, as to make choyse of apt grounds to beare the weight of such Plowes & Teemes; but I doubt not by Gods helpe, to plowe and dresse ten Acres of Land, as well as you shall doe with your strange Plough, or any man shal do with a spade, except he digge it two spit deepe, & so burie the first spit with the second, which wil be both extreme chargeable and impossible in most grounds; and yet where he may digge but one spit, there will remaine needes vnburied specially the Cooch, which I neuer saw destroyed, but with a sommer fallow, or burning the land, as the Deuonshire men doe: the which killing of weedes, howsoeuer it can be done, is the chiefe cause, that vpon extreame barren Land, those countrie people haue good Corne, which otherwise
The destroy∣ing of weedes, a chiefe poynt in Husbandry.should haue little or none: and I desire all good Hus∣bands to consider how necessarie it is for them to destroy the weedes, before they sowe or set their Corne, that (if possiblie they can) they suffer not the weeds to sucke out the sappe of their grounds in the spring time, and all som∣mer, before they commit their seede to the ground, in∣dangering it with such enemies, which they may doe (in my opinion) by one or two plowings more in their som∣mer fallow aboue ordinarie, if the weedie condition of the Land, or the season of the yeere doe require it. Scholler. Well sir, admit you doe plowe your Land as well as the Spade can doe it, as deepe as your Plough will goe, yet as I say, you cannot plowe it deepe enough, nor lay it leuell and plaine for the setters to worke vpon. Ploughman. The Corne sowed aboue furrow, often lieth not one inch deepe.To this I answere, first that I will plow it deepe enough, for what should set my Corne to grow as well, and much better (being set in due proportion & or∣der) when it hath as much hollow & loose ground vnder him, to spread roote and lie pleasantly in, as your booke or the former appoynts, or as our sowne Corne euer had, since sowing was first vsed, and that is but three or foure inches deepe: and as farre as I know, our english Corne rooteth not past two or three inches directly downwards. So then, if it roote downewards, and spring vpwards but fiue or sixe inches at the most; meruaile why you should thinke I should not plowe it deepe enough, when your selfe faith you will plowe it yet deeper by a foote more if neede be, and I pray you so do, but take heede you meete not with those furious beasts you speake of in your book,This Plough will serue to make ditches, but for the danger of those beasts. that will deuoure the Corne when it lieth so deepe and light, for if they catch you and your Plough (in most grounds of England) they would surely deuoure your Plough, and put your person in great hazard, without
speedie helpe: and therefore we will not plow so deepe, it is good sleeping in a whole skin. But if you had been contented with halfe a foote more then ordinarie, there had been some possibilitie in some places, yet with much adoe: therfore I pray you giue some men leaue, that haue or may haue good Teemes & Ploughs, though not made after your fashion, to goe but two or three inches more than ordinary, & then they may plow some ten or twelue inches with much adoe where the land will permit, so if our Corne haue fiue or sixe inches to spring vpward, (euen from the lower most part of his roote) and as much downward, it shall be sufficient to content vs with the increase of eyght or sixe quarters vpon an Acre:Note well. doe you plowe it deeper for thirtie or twentie quarters vpon an Acre (God send it you that venter so deepe for it.) And as for laying our ground leuell and plaine, we will not follow your counsell in your booke, nor feare your woodden dagger, your huswife-like instructions are to rake away the grasse that the light Harrow leaueth, till it be as leuell as a Garden, and then to set it; as though any good husband would haue his Land so out of tilth, and ouergrowne with weedes, that at sowing or setting time, the Land should neede the raking of the grasse, af∣ter a good sommer fallowe. It is time for such a Plough∣man to throwe his Plough in the hedge, and take the Spade in hand, and become one of your threescore labo∣rers: and then in the fame place you tell vs of laying it as leuell as a Garden. And I pray you sir, then what shall be∣come of the Corne of the best and most grounds of Eng∣land, speciallie for Wheate and Rie?Winter Corne cannot lie too hie in most grounds. For if you leuell it so like a Garden, without all question, it will be drowned for the most part, & come to little or no good at all, for all men I thinke that euer saw Husbandrie, or vnderstoode
naturall reason, know that such Land; nay, most Land must be laide high and round with furrowes, according to the qualitie of the soile, or else the seede will be drow∣ned. And to breake the clods, we may vse the Rowler, as we doe for our Barlie if neede be, and so much shall serue for instruction, or rather perswasion of such as you haue inueigled with so many idle doubts, in a matter that may be perceiued by those that are not wilfullie blinde, or not skilfull at all in Husbandrie. Scholler. Not so sir, these are not altogether so idle as you make them, but I pray you how will you make this barren Land rich enough, to haue such increase as will answere the charge of setting? Ploughman. Indeede that is not altogether so idle as the other, but yet very easie to be answered, and very likelie to be compassed, euen in the barrenest Countries and places farre remoued from all meanes to enrich their Land. Here then I would aduise all good Husband-men that intend setting, to lay all their soile and foule doung that they vsed to scatter ouer thirtyAcres or there abouts, (being their ordinarie season) I say, lay it vpon ten Acres. And by reason they leaue twentie Acres to rest, they shall keepe more store of Sheepe either of their own, or take to folde of other mens, and so keep them better, and by that meanes their folde will be much bigger, and their Land will be folded much better: and if there be any Marle of Chalke, or of other sort of good molde neere to be had by any meanes, they shall now haue leasure to fetch it, by reason they haue so little tillage to doe: or else doe this, follow the example of a Gentleman that made a great quantitie of soile, by the fodering of all his Cattell vpon a peece of exceeding ranke ground about an Acre, which being very good and restie Land neere his house,
he plowed vp in the end of Aprill, when his Cattell went to grasse, and with two or three plowings so mixed the restie ranke ground with the doung and so fodder of his cattell, that he had ten loade for one of very good soile, (to the fatting of other grounds) then otherwise he should haue had; and also there is much dounge to be made with Ferne in places where it is neere: many good Husbands do prouide great store in summer, that in win∣ter will serue for cattell to sit drie vpon, and make great store of soile, with little cost, hauing now so much leisure in this small Tillage. By these and diuers other good meanes very common and easie, when men haue little plowing, they may so inrich their land, that they shall not neede to doubt of a better increase (by Gods helpe) suffi∣cient to pay the charge of setting liberally, with three∣fold increase at Haruest. Scholler. Then you may fall into another inconueni∣ence, that I warned you of in my booke, that is, to make your land too ranke, and then your Corne will ledge, and euery stalke will be slender and long, euery eare will be heauier and longer than ordinarie, and so the Corne will fall downe and ledge, and cometo little good. Ploughman. This inconuenience will easilie be hel∣ped. Wee had first neede to helpe our barren land, and make it hartie, and then for falling and ledging I will set it thin enough, as the qualitie of the ground requireth: for it is the thicke sowing of ranke land vpon euill tillage that causeth Corne to ledge.Note. If the land be rich and the yeere wet, the Corne ranke, and the weedes many; then (as you say) it is like to ledge: few poore men in England complaine their land is too rich, or desire their Corne more thin, for then their purses would be more emptie. I could easilie teach them such tricks as well as you with all
Reason and experience teacheth and proueth, that the straw will be bigger and much stron∣ger.your cunning: and as for the length and slendernes of the straw, I doubt not but it will be fit to beare the heauie eares, which God send me, and take you the light if you like them better. Scholler. Your reasons may proue good for sowing, but for setting, you will be set a ground presentlie. For where will you get people enow to set a Season fit for a Teeme to be kept on? All the labourers in the Coun∣trie will scant serue you, and fiue or sixe such as you would be. Ploughman. Sir, I wonder what you meane to talke still so idlie, as though it were fit for me or any man, to set our whole seasons, when we haue laide all our soile, and bestowed all our labour, tillage, and cost, vpon the third part onely, to the intent to make that so hartie and rich, that by all reason, common experience, and Gods blessing, it may yeeld as much and more increase than the whole would haue done. Neither am I tied by any necessitie (that I know of) to set all my third part, vn∣sesse I may doe it conuenientlie in all respects: Note well.for when I haue thus plowed my land and made it readie to set, I may sowe thereof what I will if I lacke setters, and it is likelie to beare three times as much, being thus well handled; as other poore barren land so misused for lacke of such good Husbandrie. But now for setting of ten Acres of Wheate or Rie, or other graine, being the third part of most mens Season, why should I not finde people enow to set them, seeing you confesse that threescore la∣borers, and twentie women and children, will digge and set thirtie Acres in seuen weekes? Why good sir, if I be at the charge, and can dresse my land with my Plough my selfe, what haue I to doe with your threescore labourers that should haue been imployed in your digging: I will
spare them all for you, seeing you will needes haue so many Acres digged, for you might as well haue vnder∣stoode Master Plat, the author of the first booke, that he meant not to haue the whole number of euery mans sea∣son to be digged, when he proposed that three Acres might beare as much as thirtie: And although I am of your opinion, this will seldome proue true in action, yet cannot you nor the best Scholler in England disproue the principles that he grounds his proportion vpon, for he addes diuers approued examples in practise to proue his arguments. And for your twentie women and chil∣dren, poore people, I am sorrie; for the most of them may still want worke, and liue a staruing kinde of mise∣rable life, for by your perswasions they should earne iust nothing; and so none of the poore by this meanes set to worke in your Husbandrie. Well, yet I will propose lesse worke by the third part in my Husbandrie, and so will haue but the third part of your women and chil∣dren;Note. which being but seuen, will set my ten Acres in se∣uen weekes, whilest your threescore diggers and twentie women and children be digging and setting your thirtie Acres in the same time by your owne account: and by Gods helpe, if this third part of the land be imployed, we shall haue worke sufficient for all our poore people, and poore people enow for all our worke. I will therefore spare you foure or fiue of those seuen poore people for a supplie to your companie, least any should happen to faile in some hot skirmish, and then I shall onely be troubled with some two or three of your poore people, or some lame Souldier; Prouision for lame and mai∣med Souldiershe will serue my turne though he want a legge or an arme: and so let vs recken the charge of three poore women and children, which will be hired for eighteene pence a day at most, which is but nine shil∣lings
Charges of setting.a weeke, and for seuen weekes is three poundes three shillings for the wages of those poore people, vnto whom I will ioyne our two plow-folkes; for away goe our Teemes to rest and gather flesh against winter, our Wiues will spare one of their maides, and many of vs haue two or three children, and our selues for ouer-seers of the worke, all these are aboue nine persons for your se∣uen, and all their charges is but three poundes three shil∣lings more than ordinarie;Ten Acres as soone plowed and set with seuen people, as thirtie dig∣ged and set with soure score. and so you see that two or three poore people at most with our owne familie, shall be as well able to set our ten Acres in seuen weekes, as your fourescore men, women and children shall digge and set thirtie Acres in the very same time. But if you thinke that Wheate or Rie will be set in the beginning of March in rich land, as you say in your booke (and truly I am of your opinion) and the rather, because you affirme that the best croppe of Corne that euer you saw, was a sommer croppe of Wheate vpon a rich ground: now it will be a great commoditie if we may stay to set our richest land vntill after Christide: for by some meanes or other, we may by that time make some of our land better than other, and the nature of some land of it selfe is much better than other; then will we set our poorest land first, and begin about the middle of September, or neere thereupon, euery Countrie and place, as the con∣dition of the land requireth, and so continue setting in the fairest weather, vntill the middle of December or there abouts; so then we shall haue some thirteene weeks at least before Christide, and some seuen weekes after, before March.It is most cer∣taine that this late setting or sowing being in very good ground, is the best to auoide the Mildew and the smut. Thus a poore Farmer may well set ten Acres in twentie weekes with his owne familie, hauing wife and children as most haue, and doe it all by leasure. Scholler. I must needes confesse, that your experience
Your mislike or writing, will not hinder, if it proue profi∣table.hath taught you to say more in this matter than I concei∣ued of it before. But yet seeing you looke for no more increase than sixe or eight quarters vpon an Acre, it is not the admirable arte the first booke speakes of (which made me mislike and write as I did) for many men in di∣uers places haue had the like increase; neither doe I yet perceiue how the charges of setting will be answered, nor any matter worthie so great account as you make of it. Ploughman. What you see I know not, or what the cause should be I cannot tell, that so many men should be so blinde or so vnwilling to see how to doe themselues and their neighbours so much good: but I feare me it is the iust punishment of God vpon vs the sinfull people of this good Land, that we hauing so great plentie of all good things, do consume with gluttonie and with drun∣kennesse so great blessings of God alreadie bestowed vp∣on vs:A caueat for gluttons and drunkards. and if we should by this meanes or any other, ex∣pect a greater aboundance than yet we haue receiued, it is to be feared that the Lord that seeth how wickedlie we would consume it, will not permit such an vnthankfull people to receiue so exceeding great a benefit, but euen by our owne frowardnes will quite ouerthrow it.Take heede of murmuring and vnthank∣fulnes, ioyned with froward∣nes. But yet let vs see if we can possiblie be brought to discerne any thing worthie account in this noueltie, as you tearme it: And for example, say that thirtie Acres by Rodde, will require three bushels of seede Winchester measure to eue∣rie Acre,In some part of Essex their land requireth lesse seede, well obserued by some good Husbands. (for so you say it will) and so in most land it doth, which is eleuen quarters and two bushels of seede to thirtie Acres: What is the vsuall increase vpon an Acre in the common fields barren land? Scholler. The increase of an Acre of such barren land, commonly is not aboue two quarters one yeere with an∣other,
and one Acre with another, and when they so doe, there neede be no dearth in England; for where one hath aboue, three hath not so much: and therefore you will hardlie approue that your setting will be to any great purpose in those common fields, barren Land. Ploughman. The best set∣ting of Corne is in the com∣mon fields, barren land, when by these instructions it is so amended.Verie well sir, I am glad you haue decla∣red your conceite in this poynt, and euen for those bar∣ren Countries and barren common fields, doe I auowe this Husbandrie to be most profitable, and for their sakes onlie and altogether doe I take all this paines, and vse so manie perswasions against so many fond obiections, as you and most men vse against this good Husbandrie of Corne setting, and not for those that are occupiers of rich land, either by nature or so made by soile. Their in∣crease is plentifull alreadie, and therefore I thinke it no great worke of charitie to bestow much labour vpon such rich men, as commonlie with good Husbandrie vse such rich land: but I speake and write for poore men, and desire to make their poore land and them the richer by this good Husbandrie, which I will maintaine vpon e∣quall tearmes or by practise, with any Husbandman in England, of what countrie or shire so euer he be or dwell in. Note well.And now to our purpose again, and I pray you marke well what I say, you confesse (as the truth is) that an Acre by the Rodde will beare but two quarters commonlie one yeere with another, which is but threescore quarters for thirtie Acres, and that such an Acre will require three bushels to sowe it, which is for thirtie Acres eleuen quar∣ters and two bushels of seede, as aforesaide; so then take your eleuen quarters two bushels of seede sowed at seede time, out of threescore quarters reaped at haruest, there will remaine fortie eight quarters and sixe bushels in∣crease by this computation: then come to our ten Acres
of like measure, which will be set with fiue bushels, what may we looke for euerie yeere vpon an Acre set with halfe a bushell? by Gods blessing we are as likelie to haue sixe or seuen quarters vpon an Acre that is well dunged, tilled, the seede choiselie picked, and the land orderlie set, as other haue had vpon an Acre sowne, which is vpon ten Acres threescore and ten quarters: And what is then our increase of these ten Acres, if you take fiue bushels of seede set at seede time, out of threescore and ten quar∣ters reaped at haruest, there will remaine some threescore and nine quarters and three bushels increase; so it is mani∣fest, that our increase by setting of ten Acres with fiue bushels, is more then by sowing of thirtie Acres with e∣leuen quarters and two bushels, by some twenty quarters and fiue bushels. Scholler. Say that all this doe follow, as you would haue it, and truly I cannot deny but it may; yet the charge of setting and the trouble will be so great, that it will not be worth the practise. Ploughman. Well, it is manifestlie proued, that two or three poore people with the ordinarie familie of all men that sowe thirtie Acres to a season, may set ten Acres, and that the wages of those poore people for setting time, was but three poundes three shillings at sixe pence a day: and for that charge, you do saue twentie Acres of land at fiue shillings an Acre, fiue poundes; and the Plowing of that land three plowings to euery Acre before you sowe it, which is threescore plowings at two shillings euerie time, is sixe poundes: then you saue some twentie quar∣ters and fiue bushels of Corne as aforesaid, worth in most yeeres twenty shillings a quarter, comes to twen∣tie poundes twelue shillings sixe pence. So by this recke∣ning, which in truth and substance cannot be denied,
you will saue some one and thirtie poundes twelue shil∣lings sixe pence. And although I doe prise the twentie Acres so spared as aforesaid, at fiue shillings an Acre (as it were to be let out for rent) yet I rather thinke that any good Husband that so spareth twentie Acres to rest from his principall seasons or Wheate, Rie, or Barlie, will sowe (after the olde fashion if it please him) some sixe, eight, or ten Acres with Pease, Beanes, Bucke, otherwise called french Wheate, or with Oates vpon one earth or Plow∣ing, whereby he may haue great store of strawe for his Cattell, meate for his wiues Hens, and prouender for his Horse, ouer and besides so much increase and profite of those sixe, eight or ten Acres, as shall defraie all the extra∣ordinarie charge of setting with aduantage. And because I haue heard this kinde of complaint often; and many men doubt their neighbours and their own seruants will not meddle with such a pidling troublesome worke, whose frowardnes no doubt will doe much hurt: I wish any such that dwell amongst such neighbours, or haue such seruants (as indeed I thinke many haue) to sell some three or foure quarters of their seede corne, that before was spared, and allow double their wages to straungers, and I will assure them workmen plentie to doe so easie and cleane a worke. And yet then the charge will be but sixe pound sixe shillings: which taken out of the former profits, there will remaine some twentie fiue pound sixe shillings sixe pence, which will helpe a poore Farmer to∣wards the payment of his rent. Scholler. This obiection is none of your owne Master Scholler, you had helpe of a Lawyer.Your comparison betweene tenne acres pas∣sing well husbanded and made rich, and then set, and thirtie acres of barren land sowed, no doubt will bee a matter of great difference, and therefore I wish to be fol∣lowed of all men. But what say you to good land, either
by nature or helpe of soyle, that will vsually beare fiue or sixe quarters vpon an acre? and if your setting will a∣mount to no more increase, then after a man hath laid all his cost vpon so small quantitie of land, and made it so good, he will sow it, and saue the charge of setting. Ploughman. If this booke do but perswade our coun∣trimen, that occupie much barren land, to sow but the third part or halfe their land, which they were wont to worke out of heart, with their poore cattell and them∣selues, I shall not onely thinke my labour happely besto∣wed in writing, but all the poore people may thank God as much for the printing of it, as for any booke set foorth in our time, (for a matter of this qualitie) and which is of no small importance for the common-wealth of this land. But yet I must not yeeld that plowing and sowing will be of like profit for the common-wealth, as plowing and setting, seeing the same will be done yet with much lesse charge, comparing tenne acres of the best land set, with other tenne as good sowed, which I will prooue by example and tried experience: and first it is wel knowne by often triall, that lesse then halfe a bushel of very choise seede wheate, will set as much land as three bushels will sowe. So that whereas ten or twelue great Acres of land will require some three or foure quarters to sowe them; the same land may be set with sixe or seuen bushels at the most, for there will be faued some three quarters of the best seede Corne euery yeere, which is now worth fortie shillings a quarter, and commeth to sixe poundes, and exceedeth the extraordinarie charge of setting aforesaid by much,Fiue or sixe thousand quarters of Graine saued euery yeare by Corne setting, all obiections answered. and will amount to the sauing of some three hundred thousand quarters of the best Wheate and Rie growing in this Land: and much more in Barlie, Pease, and Beanes, and so of all sorts of graine: I thinke it would
saue aboue fiue or sixe hundred thousand quarters euery yeere in her Maiesties Dominions. And yet giue mee leaue to tell you Gentleman, that I dare confidently a∣uow (seeing both reason doth teach and experience doth proue) that an Acre orderly set, will yeeld more increase by some three quarters, than an Acre sowne: which in∣crease at Haruest being added to the other three quarters saued at seede time, commeth to some sixe quarters of Corne at fortie shillings a quarter, twelue pound, as it is now worth, in many Countries, which will defray the charges of setting double, though your Plowmen follow their Teemes & giue vs no help. And yet this I must con∣fesse, that in time of great plentie, when Corne is at a low price, and where chargeable seruants or labourers dwell,Chargeable seruants and ill workemen, a great hinde∣rance to all good Hus∣bandire. that will not serue or worke vnder fiue pound and a fusti∣an doublet; or in such places where their land and them∣selues are so rich: with such times, places and persons, this poore booke, or rather booke for the poore, hath yet little to say, vntil such time as they be brought to con∣sider; that after great plentie may follow as great scarsitie, the wealthiest Corne-master and stoutest labourer or seruant, may in time become like one of their poorest neighbours. Great men in this and all ages haue been subiect to their fall.Lasie vsurie, a capitall ene∣mie to all in∣dustrious hus∣bandrie, lewes onely did vse it in England, about the raigne of King Richard the first, anno 1189. Iob. 1.1. 1. Pet. 4.7. Iob was accounted as rich in his time, as the greatest Corne-master or the wealthiest Vsurer that liues in our time: yet the Lord made an example of his seruant Iob to all posteritie, albeit hee was an vpright and iust man, one that feared God and eschued euil. If vengeance begin at the house of God, where shall the wicked and vngodly appeare. I write not this against good minded men, whom it hath pleased God to blesse with plentie of Corne, and yet loue their brethren and poore neighbours: some such good men no doubt haue been and yet are in Eng∣land,
who may be accounted patterns for others to fol∣lowe, or patrons, that is, fathers to their Countrie, by sto∣ring vp Corne in the time of plentie, with purpose to bring it forth in scarcitie, to sell it at a lower rate for the good of the poore. Such good men no doubt are to be praised with gracious Ioseph,The murmu∣ring of the people prouo∣keth Gods wrath. who by laying vp of Corne in the time of plenty, preserued not only the whole king∣dome of Aegypt, but also the whole Church of God, then visible on earth, for which cause his industrie is re∣corded and commended for the instruction of all poste∣ritie. And by the way, I wish all murmuring people to consider what it is to grudge and repine against Gods works, and to be more aduised how they speake against good Magistrates and such good men, as carefullie re∣spect the publike weale of the Land. Exod. 16.2. Numb. 11.13.Furthermore, that it may yet appeare more manifestly, that plowing and setting of Corne is euery way much more profitable and lesse chargeable than plowing and sowing, and that eue∣rie Farmer may easilie set the third part of his land with his owne familie, and two or three of the poorest people only at setting time (whereby he may yet haue more lea∣sure to practise and performe euerie complement that shall be likelie to further his increase) let him Tyll but the third part of his land, as of thirtie Acres ten, and so whereas he was wont to giue his thirtie Acres vpon a sommer fallow, some foure or fiue plowings (as some grounds will require) and as most good Husbands doe: for thereby they doe kill the weedes, which of all things I would all men should most speciallie regard: So then thirtie Acres hauing at least foure plowings, amounteth to an hundred and twentie daies worke at the least; and ten Acres hauing fiue plowings euerie Acre, which is but fiftie daies worke at the most: so here is threescore and
ten daies worke spared in your winter season for Wheate or Rie, and as much for Barlie, which being in all one hundred and twentie daies worke or there about, is very neere the third part of the whole yeere spared for your Plowes and Teemes,The third part of the yeere spared from plowing, by setting of corne, there∣fore forget not therein to forue God. which I wish should be otherwise imployed to some good worke, as no doubt but euerie good Husband will finde worke enough for them to do. But yet let them bestowe some part of this time so well gained, a little to serue God in prayer morning and eue∣ning, either in their priuat families, or with a diligent Mi∣nister (they that dwel neere the Church) one halfe houre in a morning or euening, or both: if they haue any thing to doe at Church with God, or with their neighbours, it will be a good meeting place if it be done to good pur∣poses. It is a small portion of so many daies spared, and no doubt but God will the rather blesse the increase of such as will serue him, according as he hath promised; and as the Scripture saith, Paul planteth, Apollo watereth, but it is the Lord, no doubt, that giueth the increase, as well in temporall as in spirituall blessings.Beware of A∣theisme. Thus we all must beleeue, and so I hope we doe, vnlesse there be any of so desperate and cursed opinion, that thinks there is no God to blesse and helpe their increase, which God for∣bid that her Maiesties dominions should beare any such detestable and cursed imps and lims of Sathan to rest on this earth, that should so much as giue any cause of suspi∣tion of any such abomination: so as many as doe so well begin the day with the seruice of God, may cheerefullie expect from the Almightie a blessing vpon their labours: who promiseth to blesse the worke of our hands if we feare him. And to proceede in this argument yet a little further in our Husbandrie, which no doubt may be yet exceeding lie furthered diuers waies in this time so well
gained: as first to make great choise of our Seede corne: for as Master Plat well saith, euerie corne that is within the eare is not apt to grow, for God hath created some of them for the food of liuing creatures, and some for seed. The choise of the seede, the killing of the weede, and re∣sting of the land, and time so well gained, to doe all this and serue God too, is like to bring a good increase.There be in euerie eare certaine abortiue or bastardlie cornes small and whinderlings, which will hardlie grow, and are vnprofitable for any good increase: but there are other cornes which are bigger and fairer then the rest, which (no doubt) God by nature hath ordained for good and great increase: and therefore seeing you haue so much leisure, you may spend more time in picking your Seede, corne after corne, if you thinke good. The best way to make choise of your seede.But indeed the best way and most speedie is to put the corne into a tub of water, and so the most heauie corne will soo∣nest sinke to the bottome, and the lightest (with other seedes which were wont to be sowen) you may take pre∣sentlie away: for els in a small time the lighter will also sinke, by taking water to make it heauie also. But you must doe this but a little before you intend to sow it, and in doing whereof you may helpe your Seed corne verie much, as it were with a dunging, as I my selfe haue done my Seede barlie. When the yeere hath prooued drie at Barlie seed time, I haue caused certaine wotting fattes or tubs, vsed for Malting, to be filled with water, and caused Cow dung and Pigeon dung to be put into the same wa∣ter, stirring it together, and it hath stood a day or two, but the longer the better, with often stirring it. Then haue I let or powred out the same water from the dung, and put it into other cleane vessels: and then I put in my Seede all day and all night, and the next day tooke it out and laid it vpon a floore to dry it fit to handle, and cast abroad by sowing. And trulie that Barlie hath shot an eare as soone as other that was sowen some fourteene daies be∣fore
it. Whereof (in my opinion) one great commoditie dooth follow, in that the corne (speciallie Barlie) at that time of the yeere commeth away so speedelie, that it out groweth all the weedes, who are the chiefe and deadlie enemies to all corne. Thus the corne may flourish and be master of the field, like a braue Captaine: for so no doubt hee getteth better roote to begin the world with, and more heart to continue and bring foorth increase more aboundantlie, when it hath at first gotten the start and vpper hand of his mortall enemies. One hundred and twentie daies yet spa∣red for good Husbands, to inrich their land and themselues.This picking and watring worke is fittest to be performed by the good wife, and her maides, and children at home, and our hun∣dred and twentie daies that wee spared from plowing, as aforesaid, yet giueth more time to the good man and his Ploughmen with their Teemes to fetch Marle of Chalk, or of any other kind of soile, fit for the condition of their land, if it be possible to be had, as no doubt it is in most places, though in some they may happen to goe farre for it: but in sixe or seuen weekes (part of the foresaid time) a Teeme will carrie much, though it be farre to fetch. Fur∣ther also those that haue sower barren colde grounds, may in this time all by leisure, follow the example of the Cornish and Deuonshire men, that beate and burne their land, which no doubt is an excellent peece of good Husbandrie, and now vsed by good Husbands in manie places of England and Wales. A commenda∣tion of Corne∣wall and De∣uonshire.And whereof Cornewall and Deuon hath so tasted the benefit, that whereas of late time Cornewall was wont to haue most of their bread-corne by sea from other countries, now by this meanes they haue great plentie to spare, and send o∣uer much by sea into other countries. There will be ma∣nie other profitable workes found out by manie good Husbands to keepe their people and Teemes at worke,
The Plow and the Spade ve∣ry good frīeds, & allow each others worke for setting, as the place re∣quireth.if it please them, and such as haue a better minde to vse the Spade to set their Corne: and so by experience shall finde much better increase, which I will not de∣nie, but it may be so; nor discommend the industri∣ous inuention and practise of the Spade, and speci∣allie for setting of poore people to worke, which in∣deede is a matter of great regard, which by no meanes I would hinder: for as in this action by setting of Corne, the chiefe and principall respect is the sauing of such a goodlie deale of Seede Corne yeerelie so fondlie cast away, as before is shewed; so speciallie by setting of Corne the poorest and most miserable people, that can otherwise earne little or nothing, shall now be set to worke, because they are best cheape to be hired, and are as well able to performe this worke as the lustie labourers, that sometime in some countries no reaso∣nable wages will intertaine them:Middlesex, Kent, and pla∣ces neere the mightie citie of London. these are fit for rich men, and to be imployed in rich land, where the owners may haue rich crops to pay such great wages to such proud labourers and seruants, that will serue and worke where they list, and haue what wages they list, and then doe what they list, make what lawes and statutes her Ma∣iestie, her Councell and the Parliament can deuise: I meane such seruants as intend not to serue their masters faithfullie for their masters profit, but for their owne, a∣mongst whom there are manie theeues, which some Gentlemen, Farmers and other, with their wiues and children haue dearely paid for, to their great and impor∣table losse and hindrance. This proud kinde of slouens and sluts, which some masters haue and doe keepe from the halter, haue no need to be pitied, but rather to be pu∣nished. A reward for faithfull and good seruants.And such masters whom it pleaseth God to blesse with a good seruant, let him be accompted as a precious
iewell, and vsed with due respect, pay him his wages tru∣lie, and leaue him not a poore man: It is the Lord the great Master his commaundement by the wise Salomon, as you may reade in his Prouerbes. As touching the In∣struments to bee employed about setting of Corne, al∣though I might leaue euerie man to his owne inuention, or referre them to Master Plats booke, whose instructions in many things I doe commend: yet because it may be that all men haue not that booke, and desire some instru∣ction, therefore I will recite an example of his, which he best commendeth, which is a boord of three foote in length, or thereabouts, and twelue or tenne inches in breadth, hauing diuers holes bored therein, according to such distance as euerie particular man dooth best fansie, through each of which holes a woodden dipper or pin to be thrust into the ground, being of the bignes of ones finger, and of three or foure inches in length, hauing a shoulder or crosse-pin to keepe one selfe same certaintie in the depth of each hole. Now my inuention is to haue two boords of some two foote broad euerie where, and in the middle a staffe or handle set fast to remoue them: or if any doe like better to haue them one foote broad, and two or three foot long, and in euerie of those boords one or two staues or handles, of some two foote high set fast to remooue them, and also to leaue vpon for their worships ease: but for this matter of making of holes, I must say with you master Scholler, I professe to presse this argument no further, being no part of my profession, but leaue it to them that shall vse and practise this inuention. Only this I doe aduise that euerie man doe well consider the qualitie of his owne ground, if it bee exceeding ranke, foure or fiue inches distance; but most commonly three or foure inches is likely to be most fit, and two or three
inches deepe, as the ground is heauie or light. And perad∣uenture the clods may sometime hinder: for which pur∣pose this boorde and this handle or two be verie fit to thrust downe the clods. These boords are to be directed by a line, to keepe a streight course in setting, hauing al∣waies a Rake with thicke teeth and a broad head, which at one pull will sufficiently fill all the holes. And for ex∣ample, to such as are verie simple, it is thought good to set downe the order of making of the holes in euerie boord, as the same holes shall be of distance more or lesse: as if your boord be tenne inches broad and three foote long, and your holes fiue inches distance, there must bee two rowes of holes and feuen holes in a row, and at euery end and fide there must be two inches and more left, and for euery scantling or distance, whether it be three, foure, or fiue inches, leaue alwaies the outside and the ends halfe the distance or lesse in euerie boord, and so it will make a true continuance of one scantling throughout all the worke. But if this labour by writing and printing be lost in the behalfe of plowing and setting, and that men shuld continue so wilfullie blind to despise Gods blessings vp∣on themselues, their poore neighbours, and the whole Common-wealth: yet it is to be wished that where men are so obstinatelie addicted to old custome, they would yet follow the olde prouerbe, which saith, A little land well tild, a little house well fild, and a little wife well wild, no doubt but his little land would be as profitable for his purse, as his little good wife comfortable to his minde. Thus I draw to an end, desiring the reader to take some view of such great benefits as this action of plowing and setting may (by Gods mercie) bring to this our Coun∣trie. And I leaue the successe to Gods good blessing. And first (here I say) the plowing taketh away the laborious
and chargeable worke of the Spade, which made setting of corne seeme vnprofitable, and vnpossible to haue la∣borers and people sufficient to dresse and set fiftie Acres, of three thousand in a Parish, as the aduerse booke suppo∣seth. This now by plowing and setting is prooued that euerie third Acre may be set in all places throughout her Maiesties Dominions. Secondly, it prooueth plowing and setting to be lesse chargeable then plowing and sow∣ing: Prouision for lame souldiers and poore children. This benefit is not lightly to be respected.Thirdly, wee haue prooued that this may be done by the ordinarie familie of most men, with some helpe of two or three of his poorest neighbours, old men and wo∣men, poore children, lame and distressed souldiers, that now can haue no worke for their liuing. Fourthly, I say this, these poore people (that indeede ought to bee kept from a staruing kinde of life in so plentifull a Countrie as England is, by the wealthie inhabitants of euerie Pa∣rish, to whom now they are both chargeable and grie∣uous) by this good meanes they may be kept from hun∣ger, cold, nakednes, and idlenes, breeding monstrous vi∣ces against God, her Maiestie, and this present happie State; deseruing whipping and hanging, to the spoile of their bodies, & perill of their soules. Fiftly, it saueth great abundance of the best corne, growing within her Maie∣sties Dominions, which now is yeerly cast away and lost by sowing, or rather burying it too deepe vnder furrow, or lying too shallow aboue furrow, for Crowes and Mice and other vermine to deuoure from the poore people. Sixtly, it spareth two parts of the land, that is, of thirtie Acres twentie may be spared to lie and rest to gather hart for a while, and after when it is plowed againe it will bring forth increase of corne abundantly, as all m̄e know. Seuenthly, it will increase great store of pasture in the common fields, to the reliefe of all cattell, and whereby
Two hundred pasture sheepe well fed, will dung a fould better then three hundred poore sheepe hungerly keptthere may be kept both greater number and better sheep both for growth, wooll and soundnes, that by these meanes, being plentifullie fed, will inlarge the poore mans fould, and also they wil dung his land much better, to the like increase of corne in greater abundance. Eight∣ly, it will saue great quantities of Hey and Corne for horsemeate, which now is spent vpon poore working cattell tired to death, with great store of worke vpon much tillage of barren land: so that when by this meanes great quantities of grasse and hey is saued from working cattell, then greater store maybe reserued to the fatting of cattell; so that Gentlemen, Farmers, and other house∣holders may feede many of their owne Oxen, Cowes and Sheepe fat, and need not go so often to the Butchers, and then their Kine will giue much more milke to make Butter and Cheese, when they are much better fed with grasse and hey plentifullie: and of these it will come to passe that their bacon Hogges shall be fed fat with their whey of their Kine, and with the corne that the working cattell were wont to eate vp, and then shall those house∣holders haue lesse neede of the Markets for their house∣hold prouision, which will be a meanes to bring downe the price of all flesh (fit to be eaten) and of white meate, that the poore Artificers and labourers may eate their vi∣ctuals better cheape. Ninthly, it wil be a notable meanes to ouerthrow the wicked depopulation of the Lordes people, her Maiesties louing subiects, who haue bin most lamentably driuen out of their habitations, and diuers townes and villages, ouerthrowne by inclosures, which yet continue, and rather will increase, notwithstanding the great care and order taken by her Maiestie, and the great officers of her Kingdomes in the high Court of Parliament, as appeareth by an act made of purpose a∣gainst
Setting of Corne good for Seafaring men, let them praise God al∣so.the same. Tenthly, it will breede and saue such plentie of corne in England, by Gods helpe, that we may spare great quantities to be transported without any pre∣iudice, but rather great good to all our English nation of all sorts, as well poore as rich, to the great increase of the treasurie of this Realme, the maintenance of our English Nauie, Shipping and Marriners, with prouision of vi∣ctuals for her Maiesties souldiers and Armies, by Sea and by Land, to the feare and terror of all forreine enemies. These and many other excellent benefits (no doubt) would follow this good kinde of Husbandrie, which de∣serueth a more learned handling then I can say, or doe professe to be in me. If any man doe thinke this worke to be needlesse, for that there is alreadie sufficiently written in former bookes: I answere, that to my knowledge there is none that hath hitherto written of the plowing and setting of Corne; neither doe I perceiue the people so instructed, but rather most ignorant, and great numbers doe vtterly protest against the practise, as an idle noueltie, being lately discouraged by this Pamphlet, called God speede the Plough. Now the Almightie blesse all good husbands in Husbandrie, and graunt a blessing to this mine endeuour, to his glorie, the honour of our Prince, the comfort of the poore, and the generall good of all the Land.
A COMPARISON BE∣TWEENE PLOWING AND SOWING OF THREE ACRES of land, after the old fashion, and plowing and setting of one Acre after the man∣ner declared in this Booke. And first for the Charge. A Computa∣tion for poore Farmers that pay great rents.THE rent of three Acres in most places is worth some fiue shillings an Acre. The land, according to the vse of the common fields, doth lie sommer fallow the first yeere, and beareth Corne the other, and so the Farmer payeth two yeeres rent before hee hath his crop, which rent com∣meth to thirtie shillings. The plowing of these, if it bee well done, and as most grounds require, euery Acre foure times, which is twelue plowings, at two shillings euery time commeth to foure and twentie shillings. The dunging of these three Acres with some twelue or fourteene loade vpon euery Acre, and is for three A∣cres some fortie loade, at sixe pence a loade, spread vpon the land, amounteth to twentie shillings. The seede that will sow it is vsually two bushels and a halfe of Wheate or Rye for euery Acre, which is seuen bushels and a halfe, at foure shillings the bushel, commeth to thirtie shillings.
The weeding, reaping, and other charges in two yeers, though vncertaine, yet for example ten shillings. Thus two yeeres rent and charges commeth to fiue pound fourteene shillings. The vsuall increase in the common fields barren land, hauing so little help with dung, is but two quarters vpon an Acre: but allow twentie bushels to stop a wranglers mouth, which is for three Acres seuen quarters and a halfe, rated at foure shillings a bushell, thirtie two shil∣lings the quarter, commeth to twelue poundes. Out of which if you take the charge aforesaid, there remaineth to the Farmer for his stock, sixe pound sixe shillings. And so for euery one of those Acres, allowing so good increase and so great a price, the profit is two and fortie shillings. Then let vs see what profit one Acre, being well plow∣ed, well dunged, and orderly set, will yeeld, and so for the charge of one Acre. The rent of one Acre, at the price a∣foresaid, which was fiue shillings an Acre, for two yeeres ten shillings. The plowing fiue times for this one Acre, if neede be, ten shillings. The dunging with fortie loade vpon this Acre at sixe pence a loade, twentie shillings. The seede to set this one Acre, halfe a bushell, two shil∣lings. The setting of this Acre, one man at eight pence a day, and some foure poore people at foure pence a day, will set this Acre in some sixe daies, and all their wages is twelue shillings. The weeding, reaping, and other char∣ges, three shillings foure pence. The summe of the char∣ges commeth to seuen and fiftie shillings foure pence. This Acre so wel tilled, with three times as much dung as any one of the other, with excellent seede and orderly set, although we cannot promise thirtie or twentie quar∣ters, yet we may haue seuen or eight quarters vpon an A∣cre, which is vsuall vpon very good land, which being ra∣ted at foure shillings, as the other, commeth to twelue pound sixteene shillings. Out of which also if you take the charge, which is fiftie seuen shillings foure pence, there will remaine nine pound eighteene shillings eight pence. And so this one Acre exceedeth the other three in profits, with halfe the stock, the summe of three pound twelue shillings eight pence. But suppose the foresaid wrangler will not allow eight quarters vpon an Acre, yet set downe some fiue quarters, which commeth to fiue pound two shillings eight pence, the charges deducted, yet doth it exceede any one of the other by some three pound and eight pence. Some part of this great profits I would haue bestowed vpon the poore to weede this one Acre, in March or A∣prill, or sometime before the Corne be too high, to pull vp the weedes by the rootes, and then you shall see the Corne flourish: keepe downe the weedes, and haue no more neede of weeding in this season. Worke and prouision for olde poore weake men, their wiues and children.Now a word or two to incourage a poore man that hath a wife and three or foure children, that often wan∣teth worke in some countries, yea though he be weake, sickly or lame, yet he may set Corne with his familie, and haue sufficient to serue his house: therefore let them fall to work cheerefully this next season, and praise the Lord, for his mercie endureth for euer. FINIS.
