17857 99848412 13504
EPITAPHS Vpon the vntymelie death of that hope∣full, Learned, and Religious Youth, Mr VVILLIAM MICHEL, (Sonne to a Reverend Pastor, Mr THOMAS MICHEL, Parson of TURREFF, and Minister of the Gospel there) who departed this lyfe the 6 of Ianuarie, 1634. in the 24 yeare of his age. Together with a Consolatorie Epistle, to the Mother of the sayd young Man; wherein his Vertues and good carriage are mentioned. ABERDONIAE, Imprimebat Edwardus Rabanus, 1634.
DE GVLIELMO MICHELIO, Theologiae Candidato, Qui obiit Abredoniae Anno 1634. Ian. 6. LUx sacra Michelium, sacrae decus ante palestrae Nunc desiderium sustulit ante diem. Hac aurū, vt perhibent, & myrrhea munera reges Blanda{que} lactenti thura tulere DEO. Obtulit hac animam Christo novus incola coeli Michelius, fusus Numinis ante pedes. Munera jam confer: quae tellus protulit illi, Hic quod siderea traxit ab arce dedit. Gonfer opus: reges CHRISTO fugere relicto, Illius hic claudet tempus in omne laetus. Englished by the Author. MICHEL of the most Sacred Race, Now the Regrate before the Grace, Hath of his lyfe abridg'd the Lace, Upon a Sacred Day.
This Day, as wee heare of Divines, Three Easterne Kings, with rich Propynes, Myrrhe, Incense, and their golden Mynes, Before CHRIST'S Cradle lay. MICHEL now clad with Light, is gone To CHRIST, for whom hee still did groane, And hath his Soule layd at the Throne Of His Divinitie. Compare their Gifts: They did bestow Propynes which of the earth doe grow: His Gift did from the Heavens flow, And Sacred Trinitie. Compare their Deeds: The Easterne Kings Having presented those great things, Tooke leaue of CHRIST, and with swift Wings Left Him where Hee did lye. MICHEL of earth taking Good-night, And dressing to the Starres his flight, Shall without ende enjoye the sight Of CHRIST aboue the Skye. ALIUD IN EUNDEM. FEsta dies, Iani sequitur quae proxima Nonas Obtulit infanti regia dona DEO. Michelio haec eadem cingit diademate crines, Nubiferas supra sidereas{que} domos. Tunc DEUS accepit, nunc donat munera, mult Sanctior & nunc est quàm fuit ante dies.
Englished by the Author. THe day next after Ianus Nones, GOD in His infancie Got Gifts for the highest Thrones, And His Divinitie. To MICHEL now aboue the Frame Of the Empyrean Spheare, This day hath given a Diademe, Most precious, and rare. Then GOD receav'd, now Hee giues foorth, Most Royall Gifts: Therefore This Day shall bee of greater worth And worship, than before. ARTH. IOHNSTONUS, M. D. UPON THE DEATH OF THE MOST HOPEFUL AND RELIGIOVS YOVTH, Mr WILLIAM MICHEL, Student in Divinitie, at ABERDENE. INclosed in this Coffin lyes A matchlesse Youth, in all his wayes: The Stampe of Grace who so exprest, That now in Glorie hee doeth rest, Triumphant, in coelestiall Places, As hee was here inricht with Graces;
And vnto all example leaving, Of Modestie, and pious cleaving, Unto his GOD, in humble sort; Both gayning Loue, and good Report. So, Death, to him, hath beene great Gayne, With CHRIST which makes him now remayne. D. W. GUILD. IOANNIS FORBESII, SS. THEOL. D. & ejusdem Professoris, super obitu duorum SS. Theologiae Studiosorum, viz. GUL. MICHAELIS, & IOANNIS MILLII, ad superstites SS. THEOL. STUDIOSOS. INgenio pollens, doctrinae laude coruscum Par juvenum, morum qui gravitate senes, Quorum corda sibi pietas regina sacravit, Alite virtutum concomitante choro. Pignora chara mihi, sophiae coelestis alumnos Angelicum in terris dum meditantur iter. Mors properata rapit, nobis hinc luctus acerbus: Loeta laboris enim proxima messis erat. Vestra, velut proprios quia dilexistis ocellos, Lumina fluminibus scamna libros{que} rigant. Parcite filioli lachrymis: nam mors nihil ausa, Nec potuit: DOMINI perficit ista manus, Qui maturatos coeli dum condit in arce, Hanc immaturis monstrat ad astra viam.
Griefe expressed, for the vntymelie, and much deplored death of Mr WILLIAM MICHEL, S. T. PAle visag'd Death, why hath thy dreadfull hand Spoyl'd vs, survivers, of so rare a Treasure? Could not his tender age, & gifts, with-stand, This thy vntymelie Stroake? Why tak'st thou pleasure For to insult, on all, without regard; As on this matchlesse MICHEL is de∣clar'd? If gracefull words, serenitie of Face, Zeale to GOD'S Honour, whom his Soule ador'd; And other Symptomes of infused Grace, Wherewith his lyfe was plentifullie stor'd; Might haue prevented this vntymelie Death, Then this rare Youth had drawne a longer Breath. The Defunct, to his mourning Friends. DEare Friehds, put limits to your Sighs and Groanes: Obstruct the source of your luxuriant Tears: Restrain the excesse of your Cryes & Moans: For I'm advanc'd aboue the starrie Sphears: And There install'd a Quirister of Heaven; Praysing my GOD, who hath such Honour given. DA. LYNDSAY.
IN OBITUM LECTISSIMI IUVENIS, Mri GVLIELMI MICHEL, Theologiae Candidati, EPITAPHIUM. OVid lachrymas Iuvenis fundunt in morte parētes? An solos feriunt invida fata senes? Quòd pariter rapiant pueros juvenes{que} senes{que}, Mortem nos coecam fingimus esse Deam. Sed bene qui vixit, si diu vixisse putemus, Qui male, quantumv saecula multa, brevi. Hic qui perpetuo CHRISTI vestigia pressit, Annorum numero Nestore major erat. W. IOHNSTON. D. M. On the death of that learned, wyse, and pious Youth, Master WILLIAM MICHEL, my verie loving Friend; Son to a Reverend Pastor, the Parson of Turreff. THE Flowrs most fragrant, as wee see, Doe soonest lose their smell, and die. The Rose, the choyse of Flora's Trea∣sures, At Night forsakes her Morning Plea∣sures.
Her posting age, as Poëts say, Doeth come, and passe, within the day. The Coccos, glorie of all Trees, Within some thirtie yeares so dies: But Centuries of measured Tyme, Doeth scarcelie make the Ash her Pryme. The reason's this: This fruitlesse growes; The other to our vse bestowes: This yeelds no Fruit, which makes her strong; The other much, so liues not long. Yet with the Ash her glorie dies: The Coccos gone, commends the Trees. This fertile Coccos, whylst hee lived, Did yeelde such Fruit, that all are grieved, To whom this Coccos did belong, And changed haue in Teares their Song. The Nymphs, whose brightnesse light doeth sho, In sable Robes all atrate goe. I meane, true Vertue, all her Spaces; And pure Religion, all her Graces: They vow that Death shall never intombe His Vertues, nor yet Vesta's Wombe. For onlie to their vses hee Did bud, and with his Bud did die. IO. LONDINE. In Cygneam Cantionem WILHELMI MICHELII, SS. Theol. Stud. VI. lanuar. denati, &c. LVce sua nati celebrans solennia CHRISTI Michelius, mortem sensit adesse suam. Sensit, & amplexus IOMINI cunabula, vitae Haec, ait, hac spes est praesidium{que} meae.
Nunc servum, Pater alme, tuum dimitte; salutem Scilicet adspiciunt lumina nostra tuam. Vt novus hic Simeon Cygneam concinit oden! Et vitae & mortis praescius ipse suae. GUL. LESLAEUS. Obitum cognati sui Charissimi Magistri GVLIELMI MICHELII, Iuvenis supra aetatem & plerosque coaevos docti, piique, hac Elegia deflevit. OVintum Michelius lustrum transegerat: haec est Prima sacris aetas apta ministeriis: Cum{que} annis animū dederat pater almus & artem: Coeperat & pulchras edere primitias. Heu! quantam tenerâ messem succidit in herba Subrepens coeco tetrica Parca pede! Huic quicunque oculos, quicunque adverterat aures, Iste suo, aiebat, tempore quantus erit? At verò ante alios, chari obstupuere parentes. Senserunt tacito gaudia tanta sinu. Heu matrum indulgens animus, vanissimus augur. Vt sese blandis decipit ominibus! Haec puero diadema, sacram cupit illa tiaram: Haec nato Attalicas sperat & optat opes. Anticipant aliae fasces, loetósque hymenaeos, Partáque victrici clara trophea manu.
Diversum interea fallax libitina triumphum Cogitat, & tristes apparat exequias. Laurea funereis mutantur serta cupressis: Vertitur inque atras pineae toeda faces. Irrita blandorum spes, omnia vota parentum Mors interveniens omnia destituit. At non ille tamen; quem nos lugemus ademptum Non votis, non spe fallitur ille sua. Sublimi in superis solio, cathedráque potitur: Et capitolina victor in arce sedet. Quodque sibi optarit, quisquis sapit; obtigit illi Grata quies, merces magna, brevísque via. Vulgus iners vacuis aevum male computat annis, Et frontis rugis, & capitis nivibus. Quid transacta juvant Pylii tria saecula vatis, Si periere, simul praeteriere dies? Non annis, canísve venit censenda, sed vsu Vita, nec aetatem tempus inane facit. Cui brevis vtilibus lux est exercita curis, Huic longa in parvâ vita peracta mora est. DAVID MICHELIUS, Ecclesiae Edinburgenae Presbyter. To the Pious Rememberance of a vvell-disposed and hopefull Youth, M. WILLIAM MICHEL. THis little corner'd Caue, this quadrate Stone, Contaynes, and covers heere, a Youth expir'd:
Whose Gifts and growing Graces, everie one, For multitude, and magnitude, admir'd. Entring to act, but on the Stage presented, By Death's envye, and violence, prevented. All you that Litrate Youths, and Learning loue; And you that Vertue cherish and effect: You that pure Zeale, and Pietie, approue, And hopefull partes in springing yeares respect: Spende Spaits of Teares, for his vntymelie Fall, Who had, in grosse, these Gifts and Graces all. And you, his Fellow-Students, and his Phieres, Put to your helping-Handes, to grace his Graue; Whose Knowledge ritch, farre over-reacht his yeares, And manie Groundes of its great Greatnesse gaue, Perspicuous Proofs, of his most precious partes, And in sight in the Tongues, and Liberall Artes. AL. GARDEN. GULIELMO MICHEL, EGREGIAE SPEI ADO∣LESCENTI PRAEPROPERA MORTE SVBLATO. TVne etiam Gulielme jaces, nec flectere Parcas Es potis: aut fati vincere duritiem. Nil tibi profuerant primae robusta juventae Tempora: nil surgens ignea vis animi. Palladiis teneros annos colis artibus, auctus Ingenio, celsi mystica sacra Poli.
Sed veluti flores subitos (nova gaudia veris) Intempestivae decutiunt Hyemes; Sic inopina furens Lachesis te perculit aevì Vere novo, vernam depopulata rosam. ROBERTUS GORDONUS. Sub obitum lectissimi Iuvenis, M. GUL. MICHAELIS CARMEN FUNEBRE. DVm nimio Michael juvenis contendere cursu Gaudet, anhelanti pectore summa petens, His potitur, Pindi{que} supra juga celsa; Sionis, Difficili Sophiae tramite, culmen adit. Sic festinanti Mors obvia, Siste citatos Siste gradus, inquit; lectacorona tibi est. Quisquis amas Musas lentè properato: feraci Ingenium firmat robore longa dies. D. W. In Obitum Optimae Spei Adolescentis, M. GVL. MICHEL, Discipuli sui quondam Charissimi, EPITAPHIUM. SEmentis tibi cur tantae mers dura Michelle Invidit messem, prima{que} spica prit? Consultò hoc factum, nempe ut potioribus arvis Proventum stabilem divite falce metas.
IDEM GRAECE. ; . GUL. WEDDERBURNUS, Ecclesiae Bethelniensis Presbyter. IN OBITUM SANCTISSIMI, DOCTISSIMI, ET ORNATISSIMI ADOLESCENTIS, MAGISTRI GVL. MICHEL, SS. Thelog. in Academia Abredonensi studiosi, CARMEN FUNEBRE. DVm lachrymas moerens (justum, sed triste tributum) Pendebam tumulo clare Michelle tuo. Ecce triennalem (de quo spes optima) natum Eripuit gremio mors inopina meo. Funera funeribus luctum superaddita nostrum Ingeminant, animus deficit at{que} manus. Obstupui; ingenti deerant sua verba dolori, Et gemitus medios impediere sonos. Occurrit{que} tui, tum sors miseranda parentis, Et trahit invitas ad tua pensa manus. Tum tacitus mecum. Puerum tam plangis ademptum Cujus sola bonam spem tibi forma dedit? Quid linquis fratri faciendum quaeso Michelle, Cui tantus perijt filius ante diem.
Filius, octonos ter habens, non amplius annos, Deliciae matris, gloria summa patris. Ille omnes Sophiâ socios superaverat: olli Cingebant niveas laurea serta comas. Ille sacris quatuor studijs feliciter annos Complerat: studijs consona vita fuit. Hunc pietas, morum probitas, miseris{que} benigna Dextera, & innumeris mens cumulata bonis. Ornarunt: olli laudem haec peperere perennem: Parva licet cineres continet urna sacros. Hunc vivi coluere omnes, properata{que} lugent Funera, queis solo nomine notus erat. Talia sed parcas nequierunt flectere, vitae Addere vel minimas nec valuere moras. Haec ego dum meditor, levior fit cura dolor{que}, Cum nostra alterius comparo damna malis. PROSOPOPOEIA DEFVNCTI AD PATREM. DEformare genas nimium jam flendo seniles Parce pater: luctus non decet iste pios. Ex praeco, nondum pereo: sanctis{que} parata Regna peto, angelico concomitante choro. Tempus ad exiguum tristes divellimur, ast mox Tempus quo laeti conveniemus erit. Tempus erit regno cum nos jungemur in vno, At{que} alacres capiet regia celsa poli.
Ejusdem ad Lectorem PROSOPOPOEIA. QVod curtata meae sint vitae stamina, non est Quod doleas nostram, Lector amice, vicem: Certavi egregie, prostrato{que} hosle triumphum Loetus ago, capiti pulchra corona nitet. Sat vixit, bene qui vixit, qui morte lucratur: Sic tibi contingat vivere, sic{que} mori. Posuit ANDREAS MASSAEUS, Ecclesiae Drumbletensis Presbyter. A Friendlie Sigh, for the tymous vn∣tymelie death of Master VVILLIAM MICHEL, the Theologi{que} expectans Coriphei. DEath-rype's all Flesh, hath gaynd the ende, All beeing Man, at anie age: By Grace, not Dayes, true Lyfe is kende; Who best, not longest, keepes the Stage. This Spring-pluckt Rose, Florefull shak't Fruit, A Pupill pregnanter then guydes: So's tymelie falne. Cease, moaning bruit: Perfection no dyets bydes. Anonymus.
Apostrophe ad Defunctum. VIve, Michelle, vale, superas subvectus in oras, Cum{que} DEO, Coeli regna beata cole Interea hoc nostri monumentum & pignus amoris, Quo te prosequimur, clare sodalis, habe. Dum silvis inerunt volucres, dum mōtibus vrsae, Dum segetes tellus, dum feret astra polus: Ingenii monumenta tui, pietas{que} virebunt, Virtutis{que} tuae fama, perennis erit. Gualt. Hempseidus. Prosopopoeia ad defunctum. HEu Michaele scholae decus, ac spes vnica sacrae, Huccine te rerum mors inopina vocat? Huccine jam fubito labor omnis & omnia tendūt Nec nostram de te spem sinis esse ratam? Nuper olorina cantabas voce falutis Ortum, nunc fatum plangimus ecce tuum Sic hominum rerum{que} vices voluuntur in horas, Nil stabile aethereo jam{que} sub axe vides. At te nunc terris polus invidet, omnia cernens In pejus labi, téque videre vetat. GUL. BLACKHAL, Logices Professor, in Acad. Mareschallana.
WILLIELMI MICHEL, Egregiae Spei Adolescentis, SS. Theol. Studiosi Vigil anti simi, Praelaris Animi dotibus & virtutibus eximiis, Summatibus atque infi∣matibus juxta chari; qi praematura morte solutus, mortales reliquias dum (CHRISTO juvante) resur∣gant immortales, deposuit, 6. Ian. 1634. TUMULUS. HEic situs, octonos qui ter non vixerat annos, Quum mens sublimis loetâ reliquit hum. Nam veluti Fremium nimia levitate caducum Excutitur citiùs, marcet & ante nivem. Hac subito Lychnis mox sic defloruit, astris Vs{que} tamen vivet, nec peritura solo. Alius. HVne propere, superos, & quae natura negavit Sedulò dum caperet, en rapit ipse polus. Noenia. TErrea terrenis redeunt, pars ardua vicit; Manibus, at potior, indigitata piis. . IACOBUS GORDONIUS.
In pientissimi, & (ut illius aetas ferebat) doctissimi, optimae indolis, ac spei Iuvenis, MAGISTRI GULIELMI MICHELLI, Praematurum Obitum, EPITAPHIVM. QVàm citò Michelum rapuit fera parca? parentes In spem qui tantam sustulii ipse sui. Et merito; dicam verè (vel livor id audi) Hunc in comparibus non habuisse parem. Ille salutem animarum ardebat; ad illud anhelus, Illud erat porrò gnaviter orsus opus. Quum prim in cursu jussit mors dira silere, Hunc operì eripiens & rationi operis: Sic quae non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis: At Domino in magnis & voluisse sat est. ALIUD. DA, Pater Alme, Tuum (suesti Michele precari) Coetibus humanis nomen vt vsque canam. Orasti magnum, majus dedit, ante{que} tempus, Coetibus angelicis illud vt vsque canas. Amoris ergô ponebat, ROBERTUS DOWNAEUS, Bibliothecarius.
The sorrowfull Father of the Defunct, To the mourning Mother. WIth Teare-drown'd Eyes, why looke you out so sadlie, And Rachell-lyke, marres both our Myndes with mourning? Shall wee not render, what GOD gaue vs gladlie? Submitting all our will to His, but spurning. Cease you, sweet Heart since He who's just and holie, Hath strucke His Stroke; Him to offend, were follie. The Mother her Answere. OUr LORD of Loue, for Lazar fell in wee∣ping, Altho Hee knew, hee was not dead, but sleeping, And after raysd. How shall my Sorrow swadge? Who am bereaft by Death's vntymelie Rage, Of my deare Darling; whom myne Eyes shall never, Oh, once beholde, till Soule and Bodie sever. I had not bene so gall'd with Griefe and Teares, If I had lost him, in his younger yeares. Or had the Heaven decreed, that I had brooked Him, to enjoye the Harv'st, for which I looked. His Learning, others knew; his lyfe, I kend: Who even from Cradle, to his happie ende,
An Israelite was, without all knowen Cryme, Momus must say, vnspotted all his tyme. Till twentie foure yeares of his age was run, And hee to publicke Exercyse begun, In Schooles and Church, lov'd and admir'd, as one, For Grace, and Natures Gifts, a Paragone. A fervent Fever in fyue dayes, short space, Hath mee bereaft of my blest Bird, alace! Then blame mee not, howbeit both Even and Morrow, I sigh, and sob, and all my dayes I sorrow. The Defunct, To his mourning Friendes. NOw is my Soule set free, from earthlie Pri∣son strong: And I now see that sweetest Sight, for which I long'd so long. I am orejoyde with Ioye, but Griefe, but Care, but Toyle: My Heavenlie IOVA I enjoye, within this pleasant Soyle. My Glorie now begun, shall once accomplisht bee, But intermission, or exchange, for all aeternitie. My Corpse are clos'd, but payne, into this earthlie Urne. Leaue off, then, Friends, and Parents deare, so bitterlie to mourne. And you, my Mother mylde, lament no more, for mee: The Day shall dawne, when you & I shall each another see. I pray you, then, leaue off, and bee no longer sorie: But walke with GOD, and beg at Him, my fellowship in Glorie. Posuit moerens M. T. M. Pater.
To the Reader. THese few things following, being of the young Man (Master WILLIAM MICHELL) his owne making, and in my keeping, when these others came to my Presse, I tooke the boldnesse here also to insert Them: If, happilie, by His Example, other Youths might bee emboldened to treade the lyke Steppes of Religion, Pietie, and Vertue. E. Raban. S. M. ILLVSTRISSIMI DOMINI, ALEXANDRI IRVINI, Domini de Drum, Tribuni-Militum Abredonensis, Domini de Kelli, &c. DRummius astra tenet, modopossint astra mercri Doibus aucta animi stemmata, census, honor. Clarus at hoc vili pretio non venit Olympus: CHRISTI igitur meritis Drūmius astra tenet. Hoc monstrant sincera fides, spes pura, peractae Integritas vitae, Religionis amor:
Hoc larga imprimis pietatis symbola clamant, Digna datore, DEO grata, benigna bonis. ALIVD. SI reddant homines magnos, stirps, census, honores, Hic quo{que} magnus erat, teste vel invidia. Si generi virtus praelucens, census honori Ancilians, meritis partus & auctus honor, Heroas post fata ferant super aethera: jure Hic nunc sublimis despicit astra senex. Sed gradibus nequeunt istis haec culmina scandi, Foelix ille tamen culmen vtrum{que} tenet. Istud, honore, bonis & stirpe priora docento Relligio, pietat, mens{que} renata DEO. S. M. VENERABILIS ET HONORABILIS DOMINI, IOHANNIS VRCHARTI, DOMINI à CRAIGFINTRI, LETHNITI, CREICHI, &c. NAturae, virtutis opus, sortis{que} benignae Delicias stravit mortis iniqua manus. Egregij natura viri fund mina jecit, Stemma, animum, corpus, femine digna Iovis. Naturam excoluit virtus pulcherrima, tantum Sensernut cives, stirps & avita domus. aece etenim cives, natosre, moribus, auxit, Nativam rexit, sustinuit{que} domum.
Virtutem ornavit par sors; crescentibus annis Crevit & imperium, stirps, honor at{que} bona. Cum tamea haud saturent animum mortalia, terrae Illecibris spretis, astra petivit, io. Englished by the Author. HEere lyeth, at the PARCES Pleasure, Natures, Vertues, Fortunes, Treasure. Nature, to make an hopefull Man, Made choyse of him, of such a Clan: So galland Corpse, so prudent Mynde, As well becomes Heroicke Kynde. Then Vertue, as hee grew in age, Set Natures partes on publicke Stage: Where Wit and Valour did bewray His Worth, vnto his dying day: Whether hee setled private Iarres, Which often ende in open Warres; Or for his Children conquest Rentes, At highest Rate, with all Consentes: Or did vpholde, rule, and defende, That Olde House▪ whence hee did descende. In fine: That hee might seeme more blest, His Fortunes lustred all the rest. As hee grew olde, hee grew in Wealth, Honour, and all thinges, safe in Health. Yet holding all those thinges as vayne, His Soule hath fled them, in disdayne. The Anagram of his Name. Ornatus canîs, aere. Hic acet Urchartus canis ornatus & aere, O quàm conveniunt nomina sors{que} viri.
S. M. EGREGII MAXIMAE{que} SPEI VIRI, D. IOHAN. URCHARTI, Dicti IOHANNIS Filii natu maximi, summo cum omnium dolo∣re praecoce morte brevi post funus patris extincti. SI quod amant anima, possent animare; perennis Chare Urcharte, tibi vita fuisset humi. Cum quod amant animae, semper comitentur, ad astra Tecum animas nostras hinc fugiendorapis. REVERENDO IN CHRISTO PATRI, PATRICIO LYNDESIO, Episcopo Rossensi. MAgnifice Antistes me, qualia munera reddam Aequa tuis meritis hospitio{que}, latet. Solvere re grates sors obstat: splendida vestra est Nostra{que} sors tenuis: nil nisi vota manent. His quo{que} vix locus est, res, cani, semen, honores Sunt tibi vix votis inferiora meis. Haec igitur maneant & crescant, vsque precabor, Hoc tantum superest, accipe, quaeso, bene.
MAGISTRO ROBERTO BARONIO, cum redderem ei notas Logicas, EPIGRAMMA. MOs impostoris dare (Vir Doctissime) verba Est, tuus & pariter mos mihi verba dare. Ergo impostorem dicam te? scilicet ambo Pro donis homini nil nisi verba datis: Absit, nam incertis solet hic imponere verbis, At ne fallamur nos tua verba juvant: Quisquis enim verbis bene sit versatus in illis, Artis eum Logicae nulla profunda latent, Talia des igitur semper mihi verba, tibi{que} Acceptum referam quod fluet inde boni. IN HONORABILE ET RELIGIOSVM PAR CON∣IVGVM, D. IACOB. & LUCRETIAM IRVINOS, Una ferè extinctos, unaque sepultos, EPITAPHIVM. VNus avus nobis, torus vnicus, vna voluntas, Communis nobis sors soboles{que} fuit. Et quid non commune fuit? dum vita manebat, Vnus erat verae religionis amor. Par labor & studium, pariter speravimus ambo Vno posse frui patre, DEO, patria: Nec modò (quod magis est) fato divellimur: vnus Penèdies ambos, vnica fossa tulit.
Quae{que} petebamus vivi, potiemur in aevum Vna nos vno patre, DEO, patria. Ergo de nobis merito, qui conspicit vrnam Dicat, In hoc tumulo parjacet abs{que} pari. Englished by the Author. ONe Loue, one Wed-locks saved Knot; One Name, one Stemme, one Brute, one Lot; One Death, one Exequie, one Stone; One Fayth, one pure Religion; One Hope, one Studie, one Desyre; Of that one Countrey, GOD, and Syre; Wee now enjoye, made one of two; In Lyfe, in Death, in Glore also. EPITAPHIUM MAGISTRI IACOBI ROSSEI, Rectoris Abredonensis. SObrietas, morum gravitas, dilectio pacis, Et disciplinae sedula cura sacrae, Indictum bellum vivis, assertio veri Constans, Romani saepè furoris obex Rosseum laudant: quem canis, semine, sensu In terris dominus, se super astra beat.
EPITAPHIVM D. ROBERTI ARBUTHNOTI, De eodem Equitis. SCOTIA spectatum civem, tua Mernia Phoebum, Communem prolem Suada, Minerva, Themis. Praesidium miseris, gens Arbuthnota columnam Flet raptam, dum tu Magne Roberte cadis. EPITAPHIVM IN CHRISTIANM FORBES, Dominam de Streichin. QVid quod tam celeri cursu rapiare per auras? Numquid habes subiti fama referre novi? Heu habeo, at quorsum liquefient pectora luctu, Istud enim doleas quod revocare nefas. Mors spoliat miseros{que}, bonos, pueros{que}, virum{que}▪ Ara, arca, dulci conjuge, matre pia. Non igitur mirum, vos hanc si fletis ademptam, In quos cesserunt tanta, menente bonâ. Hoc natura petit pietatis munere fungi, Ast aliud pietas suadet & officium. Scilicet vt loetata fuit dum vita manebat, Vobis perpetuo commoda tanta dare, Sic vos post vitam debetis ferre libenter, Ipsa quod in Coelis nunc sua dona ferat.
EPITAPHIUM SUSANNAE INNESIAE, Uxoris quondam Magistri GVALTERI HAYI, Fratris Germani D. à DALGATIE, Viri dignissimi: Inde verò Magistri GEORGII HAYI, TURRAVIAE Rectoris Reverendi, Literatissimi, & Vigilantissimi. VIxi conjugio insignis, virtute sequenda, Felix progenie, re pietate, fide. Hayis nupta fui bis, quorum posthuma fama Laudes non patitur non moritura mori Virtutis testes sint quot monumenta reliqui, Sive inventa animo, seu fabricata manu. Curia progeniem cognoscit, vulgus honorat, Et vidi prolem prolis in aede sua, Rebus posteritas nunc floret: rebus egenos Nutrivi: rebus nunc super astra fruor. Fida steti pactis, mater{que} fidelis alumnos Te docui, fidei CHRISTE columnea meae. Sic vixi, vita tandem feliciter acta Annis plena, polum patre vocante peto. In Memorie of the right Vertuous and Religious Matron, SUSANNA INNES, Relique first to an honourable and worthie Gentle-man, Master WALTER HAY, Brother-german to the Laird of DALGATIE: next, to the Right Reverend and Learned Pastor, M. G. HAY, Parson of TURREF. TWyse married, a Widow twyse I lived: First bare the Yoake, and then the Yoake agayne,
It was my Glore, whereat I never grieved. But farre aboue those two, my greatest Gayne, The third I buire, that easie Yoake and light, Of CHRIST, my Lord, vp-holden by His Might. Still vnder Yoakes of sweete Captivitie, In middle sorte content, my tyme I spended: Under the third, I long haue learn'd to die; Till full of dayes, at last this lyfe is ended. With those who were my Yoake-fellowes before▪ I mynde to reygne in Freedome evermore. ANOTHER. IF Birth, if Bountie, Children, length of dayes, Might make a modest Matron happie here, Sho happie was: but shallow happes that stayes, On thinges below. Now farre aboue the Spheare, Shee tramps on Tyme; counts her Felicitie, Beyond all Tyme, to liue aeternallie. ANOTHER. IF Vertue mixt with Grace; if Grace, with Gravitie: If prudent Carriage be in pryce; if matchlesse Modestie. Her Birth amongst the Best, her course of lyfe was kende: Shee liv'd a modest Matron here, and made an happie ende. SUSANNA-lyke shee liv'd, vnspotted, loe, shee dies. None will, none can, the contrare say, but such as lies. MASTER WILLIAM MICHEL, Student in Divinitie, in Aberdene.
AN EPITAPH,Orations and Epistles of this na∣ture, were called EPI∣TAPHS, ma∣nie ages since; as any may per∣ceaue by Nazianzens Orations, and Hieroms Epistles, of the lyke subject. OR CONSOLATORIE EPISTLE, Vpon the death of the sayd Young Man: Written to his Mother, By M. R. B. Preacher of the Evangel. MISTRESSE, IT hath pleased GOD, in His most wyse and admirable providence, to make troubles and afflictions in this lyfe common to the godlie and the wicked; to let the world see, that the godlie doe wyselie seeke and expect happinesse in another place; and, that wicked men are fooles, to seeke for it here, where it is not to bee found. But these temporall calamities, as they haue diverse effects in the evill, and in the good; so they come not to them with one and the selfe∣same commission or direction from divine provi∣dence. For GOD, when Hee sendeth out great afflictions and calamities agaynst the wicked, such as povertie, disgrace, sicknesse, and death, Hee gi∣veth them a full commission, to hurt and destroy;
lyke that commission which Hee gaue to king Saul agaynst the Amalekites;1. Sam. 15. 18. Goe, and vtterlie destroy the sinners, the Amalekites, and fight agaynst them, vntill they bee consumed. But when Hee sendeth afflictions to His owne Children, Hee giveth them a limited commission; or rather a loving charge, lyke that which David gaue to Ioab, and the rest of his Captayns, concerning Absalom, agaynst whom they were to fight; Deale gentlie (sayd hee) for my sake, with the young man, even with Absalom.2. Sam. 18. 5 For Hee hath ordayned the afflictions of the godlie, how sharpe and grievous soever they bee, to hurt little, and for a moment; but to profit much, and to all aeternitie. And for this effect, as Hee giveth to His owne, in their troubles, that great Comfor∣ter, whose secret operation vpon their heartes, is most powerfull, and wonderfull; so also Hee hath appoynted others, who, for the tyme, are not alyke visited,Amos 6. 6. or afflicted, to bee grieved for their affli∣ction, to mourne with them,Rom. 12. 15. to speake wordes in season vnto them,Esay 50. 4 and to comfort them, by that comfort, wherewith themselues haue beene comforted of GOD.2. Cor. 1. 4. The performance of this duetie, as it is incumbent to all, so especiallie to those whom Hee hath cal∣led to preach that Word, which is the Store-house of Comfort. And therefore I, who although most vnworthie, am, by GODS singular Mercie, adjoyned to that number, hearing of your great heavinesse, and sorrow, for the departure of your sonne; and knowing you to be one of those, whom GOD hath ordayned to bee gentlie dealt with, and comforted in all their tribulations, I thought my selfe bound, to wryte something vnto you at this
tyme, for your comfort; especiallie, seeing I know more of that young Man his secret walking with GOD, than anie other: and consequentlie, am able to giue you most particular and credible assu∣rance, of the holinesse of his lyfe, where from you may easily collect the happines of his death. Of this he himselfe gaue some signification vpō his death∣bed, to those who were then present with him. For when that last houre (to him a moste happie houre) approached, hee, after the example of Heze∣kiah, comforting himselfe with this,2. Kings. 20. 3. that hee had walked before GOD in trueth, and with a perfect heart, did, for confirmation of that, which he sayd, take himselfe to two witnesses: to GOD, the onlie Eye-witnesse of the secret counsels of his heart; and to mee, then absent from him, as to the onelie Eare-witnesse on earth, vnto whom hee had revea∣led his most private carriage. Wherefore I thought my selfe oblieged, to declare to the world, but in speciall vnto you, in tyme of this your heavinesse, how earnest and effectuall a desire that young man had to encrease in grace, to overcome temptations, and to liue an Angelicall lyfe vpon earth: that you being informed thereof, may rejoyce for the grace hee had then, and for the glorie hee hath now. Then, for your comfort, consider, I pray you, with mee, onelie these two particulars: First, what hath beene GODS dealing towards you in this matter: Secondlie, what hath beene GODS dea∣ling towards him. For is His dealing bee towards you both in mercie, I can not see what reason you haue to entertayne such excessiue sorrow.
As for His dealing towards you, and others in the lyke case,Iob. 1. 21. Iob expresseth it in these two short sentences: The LORD gaue, and the Lord hath taken away; or, as others interpret the wordes, hath taken backe to Himselfe: which, at the first hearing, I confesse, seeme to afford small argument of com∣fort. For the first seemeth not to importe anie matter of joye, because it looketh to the tyme by∣past, and onelie signifieth, that once we were hap∣pie. The other seemeth to importe reall miserie, because it is meerlie privatiue, and signifieth, that the happinesse wee once had, is nowe removed. But if we shall duelie weygh these words, and con∣venientlie apply them to the present purpose, wee shall finde, that much matter of joye and comfort lyeth hidden in them. Wherefore marke, howe Iob beginneth at giving; The LORD (sayeth hee) gaue. If hee had not begun so, perhaps hee would not haue ended so as hee did; that is, with blessing GOD. MISTRESSE, here begin with Iob, and say, The LORD gaue. Remember the LORDS favour to∣wards you, in giving you such a sonne, and conti∣nuing him with you manie years; to the effect, that yee may joyfullie prayse and blesse His Name. David putteth these two well together;Psal. 103. 2. Blesse the LORD, O my soule, and forget not all His benefites. For if wee would blesseth LORD, wee must care∣fullie remember His benefites. Lest therefore your melancholie make you deficient in paying this tribute to GOD, remember, with a thankfull heart, howe GOD made you to rejoyce at his birth,Iohn 16. 21. when yee sawe, that, by you, a man-chylde
was borne into the worlde: and, that GOD had given you a sonne, (according to our Scottish phrase) world-lyke. But, shortlie thereafter, Hee gaue you a farre greater argument of joye, when Hee made him to bee borne agayne, of water, and the Spirit, into another World, which shall never haue an end. And wheras before he was onlie world-lyke, or lyke to men, He made him God-lyke, or lyke to Himselfe; drawing, by His own finger, that portra∣ture of Himselfe, according to the which, Man was first created. Yet this tyme of his infancie, was to him and you both, but as it were the seed-tyme; and that both in respect of Nature, and also of GRACE. For hee had then a reasonable Soule, which is the seede, and the originall of a humane or reasonable and morall conversation: But, du∣ring that tyme, hee could not come to the vse of it; neyther could anie then perceaue, whether hee would proue a wyse man, or a foole. Lykewyse, hee had then receaved Baptismall grace, which is the seede, and the originall, of a Christian, spiri∣tuall, and heavenlie conversation. But no vse, or exercyse, could hee then haue of it: neyther could anie man perceaue, whether hee would thereafter walke in the way of Pietie, and Christianitie, or not. But GOD, who is the sower of both these seedes, and maketh them to spring vp, where Hee pleaseth, and when Hee pleaseth, did make them verie soone to spring vp both together in him; yea, also to bring foorth aboundant fruit: so that even from his bairnlie age, hee had the wit of a Mā, the knowledge of a Scholler, & the carriage of a Christian: and, consequentlie, was to you, du∣ring▪
all these yeares, which interveaned betwixt his chyldhood, and his deatth, an argument, or ground, of great expectation, and a matter of con∣tinuall joye. Now, when GOD hath removed him, and taken him to Himselfe, shall all these Fa∣vours of GOD towardes you bee buried in obli∣vion, as his bones are buried in the earth? Or, if they remayne in the Register of your memorie, shall they bee remembred without thankfulnesse? Or,Luke 1. 46. 47. 49. if your soule magnifie the LORD for them, ought not also your spirit to rejoyce in GOD your Saviour; seeing Hee that is Mightie hath done great things to you, & Holie is His Name. It is a grosse and fond errour, that onelie such good thinges, as wee doe actuallie enjoye, or looke to enjoye, are the matter or cause of rejoycing. The verie Paganes sawe the absurditie of this errour: and therefore Seneca, comforting Polybius, agaynst the death of his brother, telleth him, that hee ought not to thinke himselfe injured, by losing such a brother;Consol. ad Polyb. c. 29. but ra∣ther much benefited, by vsing and enjoying his pietie so long. And hee addeth, that a man is vnjust, and vnreasonable, who is not content, that hee who is the bestower of a benefite, dispose of it according to his plea∣sure: That hee is too greedie, who thinketh it not gayne, that hee once receaved such a benefite; but rather losse, that hee hath restored it, or that hee now wanteth it: That hee is vngrate, who thinketh the ende of for∣mer delight, an injurie: And, that hee is a foole, who thinketh that hee hath no fruit of good thinges, except when they are present. And if an Ethnicke sayde so, wee, who are Christians, ought, much more, to say, and thinke so; seeing wee know, that all good
thinges, which doe befall vs, as well by-past, as present, and to come, doe flowe from one Foun∣tayne, even that Fountayne wich is the sourse of all our happinesse; that is, from the loue of GOD. Those who haue fared well at a Feast, are not grie∣ved when the dishes are removed; because they know that they were appoynted for the vse of the guests onelie for a tyme. And, if dishes bee remo∣ved before the Feast bee ended, farre lesse are men grieved, because they expect a newe service, and other moe dayntie dishes to bee presented in their rowme. So ought wee not to bee grieved, when temporall benefites are removed: First, because wee knowe, those thinges were onelie lent vs, for a tyme. Secondlie, because wee knowe, those are not the best thinges, which GOD hath appoynted for vs: but wee looke for better, even for such as eye hath not seene, and eare hath not heard, neyther haue entered into the heart of man.1. Cor. 2. 9. The other sentence, to wit, The LORD hath taken away, seemeth, as I sayde before, to importe reall miserie: for, the sweeter a benefite is, the more bitter & grievous is the removing therof: and it is accounted worse, to lose former happinesse, than never to haue beene happie at all. But first, I know, yee never placed your happinesse in anie worldlie thing; but in the light of GODS Coun∣tenance, who is onelie able to put singular joye in mens hearts, even then when al worldly things do fayle. GOD would never haue bidden vs re∣joyce evermore, if Hee had not given vs a permanent and vnchangeable cause of joye. And therefore Chrysostome marketh well, that whereas all men in
their particular Trades,Serm. 18. ad . Antioch and negotiations, ayme at solide and permanent joye; those onelie attayne to it, who feare GOD: because those onlie haue gay∣ned the true roote of pleasure, and the source, or Fountayne of joye. This Fountayne, hee telleth vs, is lyke the Ocean, from whence all waters haue their originall; and that because of the greatnesse thereof. For, sayeth hee, as a sparke of fyre, fal∣ling into the Sea, is easilie extinguished; so, what∣soever evill commeth vpon vs, it falling into a great Ocean of gladnesse, is soone extinguished, and evanisheth. Secondlie, that degree of temporall happinesse, which yee had by your sonne, stoode not so much in having a sonne, as in having a good, pious, and vertuous sonne. And this degree of happinesse is not removed, but much augmented: and so setled, and established, that nowe vnto all aeternitie yee shall haue such a sonne. For his knowledge is now perfected; Fayth beeing changed into Sight; and Hope, into Fruition: and it is fred from all doub∣ting, inquyring, searching, & from all that trouble and sorrow, which here is encreased, whyle know∣ledge is encreased.Eccles. 1. 18 Such lyke, his holinesse is now perfected: for all the defectes of charitie, or the loue of GOD, which were in him, yea, are in the best of GODS Sainctes, whyle they liue heere, are nowe removed, together with all his temptations, feares, sorrowes, blottes, and infirmi∣ties. So that, that crying for mercie, which whyle hee lived was in his mouth continuallie, is nowe chaunged into a perpetuall Hallelujah. And the Angels, who before were delighted with his poe∣nitentiall
teares, and groanes, are nowe rejoyced, to heare his Songes of Prayse and Thanks-giving, which with the rest of those Heavenlie Quiristers, hee singeth to the honour of his Maker. But perhaps ye will say, I know my son to be so as yee say; but how shall I thinke that I haue nowe such a sonne,Non amisi mus, sed pramisimus. seeing hee is separated from mee by Death? I aunswere; Your separation is but for a short tyme; and therefore sorrowe not as those, who when they are separated from their friendes,Non reliquit ille nos, sed antecessit. haue no hope of meeting. Paganes may heere make vs ashamed;Consol. ad Pol. cap. 28. for even they could say of their departed friends. We haue not lost them, but haue sent them before vs.Dimisimus illos imò con∣secuturs pr∣misimus. So Seneca, wryting to Poly∣bius concerning his brother's death, sayde, Hee hath not left vs, but gone before vs. And wryting to Marcia in the lyke argument,Consol. ad Marciam Cap. 19. Wee haue sent them away; yea, beeing shortlie to follow, wee haue sent them before vs. Indeede, it is true, they who are dead, shall never returne to vs. If wee knewe no more but this, wee might justlie giue way, even to the verie excesse of griefe: But blessed bee GOD, who hath given vs this comfort,2. Sam. 12. 23. that although they can not returne vnto vs, yet wee shall goe to them. Wherefore, as when men are a-flitting from one place of habitation, to another, some persons of the familie goe before the rest, to that newe dwelling place, and others stay behinde, intending shortlie to come thither also: and therefore, are not grieved for the separation from them, whom they sent before them. So wee, and our families, are vpon our flitting,Heb. 11. 10. to that Citie, having founda∣tions, whose builder and maker, is GOD. It is not
GODS will, that all should flit at once; but Hee will haue whyles the Husband to goe before the Wyfe, and whyles the Wyfe to goe before the Husband; whyles the Parentes to goe before the Children, and whyles the Children to prevent the Parentes. What cause of great sorrow is there here, if men and women would rightlie consider this, and firmlie belieue it? Thirdlie; seeing the happinesse of Parents con∣sisteth much in the happinesse of their Children, if death was to your sonne Advantage,Philip. 1. or Gayne, (as vndoubtedlie it is to all those who die in the LORD) howe can yee thinke it so great a losse to you? If hee hath gayned so much by the change, howe can yee thinke your selfe so much hurt by it? If an earthlie king had sent for your sonne, promising to adopt him, and make him his Heyre, the sorrow which you would haue had for wanting his company, would easily haue bene swal∣lowed vp of the joye which yee would haue had for his advancement, although yee had never loo∣ked to haue seene him agayne. The application is easie, and the comfort vnspeakeable; if yee con∣sider, that GOD, who hath sent His Messenger [Death.] for your sonne, hath given him that in∣corruptible Crowne; in comparison the glorie of earthlie Crownes, and Thrones, is but basenesse. Nowe, to come to GOD'S dealing towardes him; I hope it shall afford you great matter of joy, if yee consider it, as yee ought. I will not speake of GOD'S dealing towardes him, in bestowing
naturall and morall giftes vpon him; as desire of knowledge, paynfull diligence, in stryving to at∣tayne thervnto, sharpnesse of wit, soliditie of judge∣ment, and an happie progresse, farre aboue all his Condisciples, in humane literature, Philosophie, and Theologie. These were, indeede, great be∣nefites of GOD: But it was not the remembe∣rance of these thinges, which vphelde him at the tyme of his death: Nor yet can the considera∣tion of these thinges now afford you that joyfull assurance of the happinesse of his death, and of his estate nowe after death, which yee desire to haue. Wherefore, let vs consider GOD'S dea∣ling towardes him, in the worke of his Salvation: And let all those who are exercysed with such Tryalls, and Conflicts of Conscience, as hee was, learne at him, to wayte patientlie vpon GOD, vntill they get the victorie. It is well knowne vnto you who are his Parentes, howe carefullie hee remembered his Creator,Eccles. 18. 1 in the dayes of his youth: and howe, whyle hee was yet a Chylde, GOD, by His Spirit, possessed his heart, making him to finde heavenlie delight, in all spirituall ex∣ercyses, whereof hee was then capable: vvhich appeared by his ordinarie, and almost perpetuall frequenting of them, to the great admiration of all who knewe him, and to the great benefite of his Brethren and Sisters, whom, at all tymes, hee was carefull, partlie by his example, and partlie by his pious conference, to aedifie, & to draw with himselfe into the way of Godlinesse. Hee found nothing, then, but sweetnesse, and delight, and
heavenlie ravishmentes in serving of GOD; (for it pleaseth GOD, often tymes, so to allure young ones to His service) but, afterwardes, GOD having furnished him with greater strength of Grace, called him to harder, and more vnplea∣sant, but yet more glorious service; that is, to wrastle with manie temptations, doubtinges, and feares; and for overcomming of these, to seeke the LORD'S Face, with extraordinarie humi∣liations, prayers, and fastinges; which by fre∣quent exercyse became so ordinarie vnto him, that it was harder to him to desist from them, than to abstayne from his bodilie and naturall food. By these exercyses of devotion, hee made sin∣gular progresse in that strayt way, that leadeth to Lyfe: yea, I may boldlie say, that hee did out∣runne manie who had begun to runne therein long before him. Yet, so vnsatiable was his hunger af∣ter Righteousnesse, that whereas others thought hee did too much,1. Cor. 9. 27. especiallie in keeping his bodie vnder, that his Soule might the more and more bee lifted vp vnto GOD, hee himselfe thought hee did nothing: ever most humblie estee∣ming himselfe an vnprofitable servant; and, with PAVL,Phil. 3. 13. fortgeting the thinges that were behinde. And because hee intended, and moste vehement∣lie desired, to serue GOD, in the holie Ministe∣rie, GOD having fitted and furnished him with manie singular graces for that Calling; to his fre∣quent exercyses of devotion, Hee added extraor∣dinarie and invincible diligence in the studie of DIVINITIE; especiallie in meditating vpon the
holie SCRIPTVRES, and reading the best Com∣mentaries that he could get therevpon.Epist. 3. which hee calleth Ne∣potian's E∣pitaph. So that as Ierome sayd of his friend Nepotian, (who also died young) hee made his breast CHRIST'S Biblio∣thece. In a word, then, hee desired to know no∣thing, but CHRIST, and Him crucified:1. Cor. 2. 2. neyther laboured hee for anie thing earnestlie, but onelie to bee crucified with CHRIST,Galat. 2. 20 6. 14. and vnto the worlde. This his earnest and industrious care, to seeke GOD'S Face, as it was to mee, whom hee oft acquaynted with the secret estate of his con∣science, a matter of great joye; so, at last, it procu∣red to himselfe vnspeakeable contentment, and tranquillitie of mynde, together with a confident relying vpon the mercie of GOD, and the po∣werfull intercession of IESUS CHRIST. Happie, yea, thryse happie was his wrastling with GOD; for thereby hee obtayned and inherited the Blessing. Happie was his hungering and thir∣sting for Righteousnesse; for in due tyme hee was satisfied, and filled. Happie was his seeking of GOD;Psal. 34. 4. 5. 6. for the LORD heard him, and deli∣vered him from all his feares. And, therefore, let all those, who seeke the LORD with the lyke earnestnesse, and diligence, looke vnto him, and to their owne comfort and encowragement, saye, as DAVID willed others to saye of himselfe; This poore man cryed, and the LORD heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. To conclude, then, GOD'S dealing to∣wardes him, was as it vseth ordinarilie to bee to∣wardes His owne Elect. For, as GREGORIE the
great,Lib. 4. Mo∣ral. cap. 7. and ISIDORE following him, telleth vs, GOD, after Hee hath converted a man vnto Himselfe,Lib. 2. Sent. cap. 8. first maketh him to finde heavenlie de∣light and joye: or, as GREGORIE himselfe spea∣keth,Blandimen ta dulcedinis the allurementes of sweetnesse, in His service, to the effect hee may be the more enamoured with it, and that hee may the more easilie with-drawe his heart from those carnall pleasures, with which before his conversion, hee was bewitched. There∣after, when through continuance, and encrease of grace, hee is enabled, and fitted, to endure hardnesse, as the good Souldier of IESVS CHRIST,2. Tim. 2. 3. the LORD, partly to keepe him from presumptuous confidence in his owne strength, and partlie to exercyse his fayth, patience, and Christian fortitude, withdra∣weth from him often tymes the sense or feeling of His gracious presence; and so exposeth him to ma∣nie sorrowes, feares, and doubtinges: yea, often tymes Hee suffereth him to bee vexed with dange∣rous motions, and strong inclinations, to great and grievous sinnes, all which GREGORIE comprehen∣deth in one generall, calling them Conflictes, or Fightinges with Temptations. But, in the ende, that gracious and kynde LORD,Certamina tentationū. who will not suf∣fer vs to hee tempted aboue that wee are able;1. Cor. 10. 13. but with the temptation, also maketh a way to escape: He, I say, giveth to the man whom Hee hath so exercysed, inward rest, and refreshment; mitigating his temp∣tations, pacifying his troubled thoughts, and chea∣ring his heart with heavenlie & vnspeakeable con∣solations: Upon the which (sayeth GREGORIE) his Soule perceaveth joye,Mox{que}  immensam de spe coelest loeti∣tiam perci∣pit. passing all measure, through
the hope it hath of heavenlie Glorie. So then, to expresse this purpose to you in fewe wordes, (and I shall doe it in GREGORIE his owne wordes) those who are converted to GOD, doe meete,Prius ergo illos dulcia suscnt quae consolen∣tur, postmo∣dum amara quae exer∣ceant, & tunc demum suavia & sublimiae quae confirment. first, with pleasant or delightsome thinges, that they may bee comforted: thereafter, with bitter things, that they may bee exercysed: and, last of all, with sweet and sublime thinges; even with joyes vnspeakeable and glo∣rious, that they may bee confirmed, or corroborated, agaynst all difficulties, crosses, and temptations. Yee may see now, Mistresse, how gracious and mercifull GOD hath beene in His dealing both towardes you, and towardes your sonne: as also, how great cause yee haue to leaue off your mour∣ning for his departure, and to rejoyce for his ad∣vancement to that Kingdome,Iames 2. 5. which GOD hath pro∣mised to all those that loue Him. For if ye rejoyced at his birth, because a Man was borne into this world,Dolor mor∣tis velut ob∣stetrix homi∣nes ad meli∣orem vitam educit. haue yee not greater reason to rejoyce at his death, seeing a Man, who is the sonne of your wombe, is borne into a better Worlde? If your heart was glad to see him so lovinglie and heartilie welco∣med to this world, by the imbracinges, kisses,Greg. Nys∣sen. in Ora∣tione de mor∣tuis. and louelie speaches of those who were then present; should not your heart now daunce within you for joye, seeing yee haue good reason to thinke, that immediatelie after his departure, hee was moste kyndlie welcomed to that other, and better World, by GOD his Father, by CHRIST IESUS his Redeemer, by that innumerable companie of An∣gels,Hebr. 12 22 23. and by the spirits of just men, made perfect? For seeing there is such joye in Heaven,Luc. 15. at the con∣version
of a sinner;Luke 15. 7. 0. what joye, I praye you, is there at the coronation of a sinner? And, to con∣clude, if yee rejoyced so much with your friendes, at his Baptisme, because he then became a CHRI∣STIAN, and was admitted into the Church militant, should yee not now farre more rejoyce, seeing hee is, by death, translated into the Church triumphant? vvhere, as a crowned Christian, and as a glorious Saynct, hee beholdeth that moste amiable, and louelie, yea, moste Glorious Countenance of GOD;Psal. 16. 11. in whose presence there is fulness of joye, and at whose Right Hand there are Pleasures for evermore. FINIS.
