18662 99848523 13623
¶ The Description of Swedland, Gotland, and Finland, the aun∣cient estate of theyr Kynges, the moste horrible and in∣credible tiranny of the second Christiern, kyng of Den∣marke, agaynst the Swecians, the poleticke attay∣nyng to the Crowne of Gostaue, wyth hys prudent prouidyng for the same. Col∣lected and gathered out of sun∣dry laten Aucthors, but chief¦lye out of Sebastian Mounster. By George North. ¶ Set forth accordyng to the order in the Quenes Maiesties Iniunction. ¶ Imprinted at Lon∣don by Iohn Awdely, dwelling in litle Bri∣taine Streete, by great S. Bartelmewes. Anno .1561. The .28. of October.
¶ To the ryght woor∣shypfull, and hys synguler good Mayster, Mayster Thomas Steuckley Esquire, hys obedi∣dient seruaunt George North wysheth pros∣perous health, wyth encrease of muche worship. AL aūcient Historiographers (my singuler good Mayster) for theyr difficult trauayl, merite most hye laud, whose famous woorkes re∣ueleth to our memory the secrete doinges of tyme past: and also bewrayeth to tyme pre∣sent, the vnknowen actes of oure Elders. For although by ye course of Nature, their bodies are kylled: yet lyueth theyr good or euyll deedes, in the euerlastyng report of let¦ters. Amonge these none deserueth more praise, nor worthy of more veneracion, then the most noble writer Sebastian Moūster: whose large labour greatlye surmounteth the doynges of any other. Thys Mounster both compendiously & briefely (and yet elo∣quently and truly) entreateth, not onely of one, & hys own natural soyle: but generally
of al Nacions, the situacion of their Coun∣tries, the maners of theyr people, wyth the ryghtes and vsages of their Princes. In whose volume it was my fortune to reade the description of Swedlande, Gothland, & Finland. And findyng these Countries to be so large and fruitefull, theyr Kynges so noble and auncient, & theyr people so migh∣ty and valiaunt. Consideryng the vertue of Princes to be a myrrour to looke on, & their vices a terrour to thynke on, & also for that swyft Fame hath published the reporte of these people vnto vs: I thoughte meete to reduce the same hystorye into our vulgare tounge, thoughe not so copiouslye and elo∣quentlye as any learned myght haue done. The situacion and naturall lying of theyr great and large Countries, the rytches, fer¦tillitye and fruitfulnes of the same, wyth theyr noble & notable Cities, I haue brief∣ly ouerpassed. The old estate and auncient raygne of theyr Kinges, with theyr diuers and sundrye alteracions, sometyme by the Danes, sometyme by the Norwayes, and sometyme by deuision among them selues.
I haue in few words collected. But the hor¦rible and cruel tyranny of the second Chri∣stiern kyng of Denmarke, against the Swe¦cians, and hys iust reward for the same, the poleticke attaining of King Gostaue to the crowne, hys triumphant Coronacion, hys prudent gouernyng, with the vertuous pro¦uidyng for the education & learned instruc∣tion of the moste noble Eric nowe Kyng of Swecia, I haue most amply declared. Ga∣thering the report hereof out of sundry Aut¦thors, as Iohn Magnus, Archbishoppe of Vpsalen, Saxus Grammaticus, and Seba¦stian Mounster, whose authoritye I haue chieflye folowed. Proferynge the same (to your worshyp) as the fruites of my trauail in your absence: acknowledging herewith∣al the remembraunce of my seruiceable deu∣ty and good wil to your Mastership, whose large & ample benefites I haue not seldome tymes receyued, with your fauorable good∣nes, not onely to me, but also to euerye one, whose nede you knew to want your reliefe. More, what friend remaynes vnrecompen∣ce? any friendshyp towardes you? What
stayed hand hath wythdrawen any gyft of yours from him who desyred it, and whom you thought worthy to receiue it? Besydes these your liberalities, your own trauel in foreyne & straungenacions wyth the per∣fect vnderstandyng, & almost natural spea∣kyng of theyr languages: importeth you to be as trym a Courtier, as you are knowen to be a worthy Soldiour. I woulde dilate your seueral vertues, but I feare to incurre your displeasure thereby, whose eares enui∣eth the hearing of your own praise, & whose tounge thundreth oute the good fame of o∣thers. Also some sclaunderous Sicophāts would saye my pen dyd flowe rather wyth affection and flattery, then wyth troth and veritye. But to suche (as neuer learned to speake wel) I answer (that besides the part of a Seruaunt) I haue wayed more your inward natural inclinacion, then your out∣warde franke doynges, althoughe they are sufficient wytnesses wyth me of thys my reporte. Most humblye desiryng you to ac∣cept in good part thys my vnlearned labor, that I haue vnder the defence of your good¦nes
putin publycke prynt, whyche if it bee thankfully taken, may encourage me here∣after to attempt larger workes, whereby I truste as well to profyt my Countrye, as to content my selfe. Wyshinge the prosperous successe of Fortune to cal you to your harts desyre, wyth the fruitfull continuaunce of helth betwene you and my Mystres, whose goodnes both I and myne haue oftē tymes aboundauntly tasted, to whom I wysh lyke prosperitye. Whose mynde is frayted wyth a nomber of sober vertues. Your bounde Seruaunt, as I haue euer semed George North.
¶ The description of the most florishyng Countrye of Gothia, or Gotlande, wyth the auncient raygne of theyr noble Princes. THys woord Gotlande in the Ger∣maine toung doth interpretat a good groūd of good land. And amongst the Northeast Regions, thys Countrye of the Gothes is most fertylit. It is also to be prereed be∣fore the rest, for the aboundaunt yeldyng or all maner of fruites and honye, and chiefelye for that it hathe suche goodly pastures, whereby their cattel are fed both great and fat,The fruite∣fulnesse of Goth. full of large Forestes, with apt & plesaunt Ry∣uers. They haue great store of all maner of Merchaun∣dies, & in euery place is found such plenty of vsual neces∣saries, that their superfluities suffiseth to enterchaunge wyth others, aboundyng with precious turres and met∣tanes, but chiefely wyth Copper. The Gothes & the Swecians tyme out of mynde, & euen from the beginning or their beynge: haue vnsted & knyt themselues in leage & amitye,The thes  the Swe∣ns haue tyme out of nve, bene vnder one Kyng. both vnder one law and one King. And also they haue apointed the confines & boundes of both Countries to be as one kyngdome. Yet haue they often tymes occasion being offered (& as those chaunces are wount) sequestred & deuided them selues the one from the other, and eche nacion haue had their seueral king. Notwithstanding their deuision was neuer certayne, neyther dyd it longe remayne betwene them: but that they were ioyned agayne with contented subiection vnder the aucthority and gouernment of one
Prince. At home & neare hand agaynst their neighbours the Swecians haue euer preuayled:Nereh and against theyr neigh bours, the Swecians haue euer stoorished, but abroade the Goth. but abroade in far & straunge Countries, the glorye of the Gothes wyth their mighty and bloudy bartels by the report of Fame haue greatly exceded. They wrestled of long tyme with the Romaynes, & being ouercommed, they woulde for a while be quiet: but attempting againe the doubtfull ha∣sard of battel, they haue with great discomfiture and de¦struction of the Romaines, suppressed & ouerthrowen their mighty and almost inuincible armies. Also not sel∣dome times with equal victorye,The gothe sackt Rome they possen Italy, they occupyed Fraunce, & made sure four da in Spayne. or litle losse they haue departed. And at length treading downe & ouercōming their whole Empire: they past through Italy, where wt great wast & destruction they sacked Rome. They pos∣sessed Italy no smal tyme, they occupyed Fraunce, and they grounded them selues so in Spayne, that theyr chiefe Nobilitie dothe discende from them, as the Ro∣mayne histories doth mencion. Gothland boundeth wyth his Northe limites to the South of Swecia, & lyeth from the West to the moun∣taynes of Norway,The noble cities of  tlād, wy s Du omrs. which are frō the lymites of Swe∣cia, to the mouth of the Riuer Trolheta, frō the South and the East it ioyneth on the sea. The townes & cities of this Country, be many and great, Lodhusia a Porte towne, wher great trafike is vsed, Wald burgurbs hath a strong & fayre Castel, Halmstat, Elsinburg, Landskrō Calmaria with a goodly Castell. Stegholm, Suderco pia, Norcopia, Lidercopia a city that standes vpon the riuer of Vener, Vasten & Huetland .2. trymme townes. Vestrogothia a Dukedom, whose cities be Scaris and Varnem, where are the Sepulchres & graues of theyr auncient kyngs. Ostrogothia a Dukedom, whose cities
be Schemingt & Lincopia, where their byshops sea is: Halladia, Smalandia, Tnischia, Verindia, Blechingia, al Dukedomes. Visby a City of the Gothes, wher was wont to be their auncient & famous Mart, my a by the  tes. but now (by the often incursions & afflictions of the Denmarke and Mscouite Pirates) it is depopulated and left desarte. The ruined monuments do yet apeare, bearing wytnes of the florihing estate of the place. Here was the fyrste certaine abiding & building of the Gothes, the whyche the Meotides dyd occupy. There is at this present daye a goodly Castel & a Monestary, wherin is a brotherhod of the order of Saynt Benedic, ary  sun  hur hauynge a Librarye of 000. Anethors, & old auncient Histories. Out of thys Countrye, and other the Northeast Regions doth come the rytch furres of noble Beastes, & chiefelye the costlye Sabels, which are wonderfullye estemed. They neuer hunt them, but in the Wynter, for then Nature makes their furre thickest and surest. They haue an Ilande en∣uironed with the Sea, of  reported to be in length. 28. Ger∣mayne myles, it is greatlye adorned wyth fruitfulnes, for hys fertillitie and plentiful abounding of al thinges, it is called the Mother or norisher of Swecia. ¶ Of the auncient Kynges of the Gothes & Swecians, after the aucthority of Iohn Mag∣nus, Archbishop of Vpsalen. iet  f for .Agog nephew to Iaphet Noes sonne (as wit¦nesseth Ioseph in his firste booke of Antiqui∣ties, the. 11. chapter) was ye father & foūder of the Scithians, & was the firste that raygned kyng among the Scithians in that part of Europ, that
now is called Finland. This Magog had. 5. sonnes, the eldest called Swenus,Magogs. Sonns. from whom the Swecians re∣cefued fyrst their proper name. He succeded his father in the kyngdome. And after him his second brother named Gother & of som Gog, raigned king. After Gother Vbbo the third sonne of Magog was elected kyng whose ray∣gne was after the flud .246. yeres. Thys Vbbo long be∣fore the tyme of Abraham, dyd build the city of Vpsalen which now is their Metrapolitan seat,Vbo bylded Vpsalen, be for the tyme of Abraham he dyed and was buryed in the same City. After whose death Siggo at∣tayned to the kyngdome, and ruled wyth muche honour the terme of .65. yeres, geuyng place to nature the .402. yere after ye floud was buryed at Vpsalen. Whylst Sig¦go raygned in Swecia,The vertu∣ gouern¦ment of the fyrst Eric. Eric the fyrst was chosen Kyng in Gothia: he gouerned with so muche Iustice as anye prince thē myght do, he made lawes & decrees, such as ye world then best myght beare. Vertue did so gouern hys kyngly aucthority, that many histories report him to be,These na∣mes onelye remayne, Vddo, Alo, Othē, Char∣les, Born Gother, Siggo. not onely the chiefe & worthiest, but also the fyrst king of the Gothes, and the Swecians, he dyed after the floud 425. From hym to Berico, onelye the names of theyr kynges remayn, as Vddo, Alo, Othen, Charles, Biorno Gother, & Siggo. Berico by the common consent both of the Sweciās and Gothes dyd enter into the Monarchy of both kyng∣domes,Berico the 14. kynge, & ye fyrste that led thē out of their con∣trye. after the floud .836. he was the .14. kyng and the first that led them out of theyr Country. They departed out of Gothland & Swedland, from the creation of the world .2831. and after the floud .875. & before the cōming of Christ .1430. at what tyme Othoniel iudged Israell. This Berico left the crowne to hys sonne Humulfus, geuing him therwithal a fatherly charge for the wel go∣uerning
of his Country. After hym raygned Humelus, cousyn to Humulfus, vnder whom the Danes rebelled, which the Saxons seing, inuaded Denmarke, wherby they were compelled of necessity to yelde & submit them selues againe to Humelus. After whose death his sonne Gothilas succeded, he raygned with no lesse valiantes then did hys father, he dyed & lefte the crowue to Sich∣truge. Thus farre by the aucthority of Iohn Magnus, Archbishop of Vpsalēs with others: here∣after foloweth Sebastian Moun∣ster, whose aucthority I haue chiefely folowed.
¶ The antiquitie / the doynges, the encrease, and the rytches, wyth the naturall situacion of the most florishyng and lar∣gest Country of all the Northeast Regions, na∣med Sweonia or Swecia, & as it is com∣monly called Swedia. SWecia hath lying vpō his west par∣tes the Gothes, vpon the North the Wermi∣lanes, wyth the Scricfins, on the East, Fin∣land and Russia, and vpon the Southe, the sea Balthicke. Thys country doth yelde his greatest aboundaunce of al fruites towardes the North, where the earth bestoweth her norishing giftes of kinde plen∣tifully. And also there is gathered muche store of honye, very ritche of Syluer, Bras, Leade, Iron, and Cattell.Rytche of Syluer and other met∣tals. They haue lykewise all kinde of fyshe, which is not one∣ly receaued of the Sea, but also generallye of theyr Ri∣uers and Pooles. And for Beastes to hunt bothe wylde and tame, eyther for pleasure or profite, no countrye can haue more. Swedia dothe excell Norway.Swecia, as it is wel knowen in largenes, people, me∣tall, and al other thinges, doth twise excel the kingdome of Norway: yet there be in many places, hils so sharpe & hye, and Marasis so deepe and watry, that they are not passable, neyther wyth Norse nor Chariot. Stockholm their  City.Their Imperial City is named Stockholme, not so byg in quantity, as it is wel fenced and furnished, bothe by Nature and Arte. It standeth in a Marish grounde, much lyke the cituasiō of Venis, from whence he taketh his name. For although it be builded in water: yet is the
foundacion very strong & sure. The sea entreth into it by two great and large armes, that any shyp ful fraited, may sayle with her burden into eyther of them. After the incarnacion of Christ. 1307. this city was wonderfullye afflicted, rfull  not of  ard of and almost vtterly ruined, by a fyre that fell from heauen. For when the lyghtnyng had taken hold of the houses: it miserably burnt & broyled as well the people, as their goodes. There perished in this pitifull flame. xvi. hundred men. But moste part of the wemen, with an innumerable sort of maydes, conueyed them selues with their substaūce & children abourd such shyps as lay in their hauens, & with thē not a few men. Notwythstandyng,A thousand and syx hu¦ndred menne . before they could depart, the whole multitude (fleing from the peryl of present death) vio∣lently imbarked them selues with the rest, & hauing no regard to their common calamity, dyd ouer charge theyr shyps, in such sort that the waters deuoured them both. Such as wyth great hope & hasard,A wonder∣ful and a la¦ntable haunce. escaped the hatefull death of burning: here ended their lyues with the vnluc∣ky chaunce of drowning. (An example to the worlde, no les worthy to be noted, then it is of al men to be pitied.) Thys country of Swecia is ful of Marchandrise for straūgers, & for their own necessaries, they haue inough to make exchaunge with others. They haue also great store of precious furres & mettals. The hye Moūtaines of Norway & Denmarke, are playnly and perfecly sene of them.A greate Kynd of cur¦y. It is for a trothe reported, that the inhabitants of Swecia, haue a wonderful kinde of curtyse entertain¦ment wyth them: For they account hym an euyl & naugh¦tye man, that denyeth to the straunger lodgyng, so that contencion & strife doth often chaūce among them, who Wall first receaue the traueler into hys house. Where as
they pay neither for meate nor drinke. And besides this,In Swed∣land the tra¦ueler pieth not for ¦vytails, but in corporate townes. they wyll guyde their Gest to hys next bayght, lendyng hym horse and other necessaries, for the quicker dispatch of hys iourney. (What greater honour can one do to his country, then in vsyng a straunger friendly?) The people of Swecia are many, of strength & armes mighty, both on horsebacke & a foote. In battel bold and valiant, eyther on the land or the sea. The Dukedome of Angermani, conteineth the North partes, to the con∣fines of Laponie, whose country is full of great woods, and large Forestes, where their chiefe wylde beastes are hunted. The Dukedome of Midelpathus, occupieth the south of Angermani, after whom lyeth the Dukedomes of Helsingia, Gesritia, Firingia, & Vpsalia their Metra¦politane city, the Dukedome of Coperdalia, where ther is a valley that groweth ful of Copper,A valley yt groweth ful of Coppet. also Dalecarlia a people strong & mighty in armes. The Dukedome of Vplandia, which hath all hys Countrye with mynes of Siluer, Copper, & Steele.Vplandia rytche of al mettals. They haue a notable city cal¦led Nicopia, strongly fortified wyth hye walles, & great Bulwarkes. Kolinolnemus deuideth Swecia from Gothelande, by the Poole that stretcheth out a longe from Nicopia. ¶ Of the Kynges of Swecia. TO seeke the fyrst spryng and originall of the Sweciās, my labour should be no les ther∣in, thē an endles trauel, & I thinke it as vn possible for others to finde, as myselfe, both for others to finde, as my selfe, both for the antiquiti of their name, and also the auncient state & continuaunce of their raigne. Notwyth¦standing that whych passed tyme hath cōmitted, to the
report of letters (which of al auctorities is accounted ol best) I haue here briefly collected. were  lande  ich .Long time past and long before the natiuity of Christ, Sichtrug (as saithe Saxus Gramaticus) reigned kyng of Swecia, tyl such time as Gram kyng of Denmarke dyd ouercome and kyl Sichtrug in battel, whereby the Swecians were made for a whyle subiectes to the Danes. Then Swiddager kyng of Norway expulsed and draue fourthe Grame bothe out of Denmarke and Swecia,. by whyche meanes he brought all three kyng∣domes vnder one crowne. Suche alteracion and ouer∣throwes of Princes, as our Elders haue seene them, so we in our daies haue felt the profe of them. For when for tune is disposed to daly with Princes,The un∣us a∣  or . she maketh theyr seat so much the hygher, that theyr fall in the ende maye be the greater. After Swiddager succeeded hys sonne Hasmond, in the kyngdomes of Swecia & Norway. Vffo after Has∣mond, and Hindin after Vffo, Hynding succeded Hindin and after his death he left the crowne of Swecia to his sonne Hothrod. Who, whilst he striued to amplefy & en∣large hys kyngdome: lost both it & hys lyfe. Whereby a way was made for the Danes to the crowne of Swe∣cia. But Atisle & Nother, the sonnes of Hothrod, conside∣ryng the straight tribute of the Danes, recouered (& for a small tyme enioyed) the crowne after their Fathers death. For Rolfe, kyng of Denmarke inuaded Swecia, and slew Atisse in battel. He tooke the Regall name of a king from them, and would in no wise haue them beare any Princely dignitye, but to remayne subiectes onely to the crowne of Denmarke. Tyll such tyme as Hiartur (a noble man borne of Swecia) dyd so enter into the fa∣uour
and grace of Rolfe,Swecia is made a ∣butary ∣tenant sy. that he graunted them the title of a Lieftenant, appointing therwithal a yerely tribute to be payd. And because he wold be the more assured of hys fidelity, he gaue hym his syster in mariage. The iestes & doynges of Swecia remayned in thys state but a whyle: For Hiartur dyd cut of the heade of Rolfe, & he againe of the Danes was polde by the same Barber. Then Mother the brother of Atisse (whō Rolfe dyd kyll) seyng the Regall seate voyde of a kyng, dyd wyn the Nobilities fauour so muche, that they possest him wyth the same: and also they made it easye for hym to brynge in subiection the kyngdome of Denmarke,Denmarke subiect to ye crowne of Swecia. whych he dyd. But as wyth small trauel & lytle tyme he obtayned it: so wyth inconstancy, and lightnes of minde in les whyle he lost it. For Baldar dyd driue hym out of Denmarke. Not long after Mother was slayn in battel, where vpon the Nobility beyng weary, & loathyng the yoke of the Danes, dyd make Atisse (one of the bloude Royal) kyng. Thus passed their state for a tyme, wher in no notable thyng is founde to be done amonge the Swecians, wether the Danes to them, or they to Da∣nes were subiectes. But as by histories it is certaynlye knowen, that aboute the time of Augustus Cesar, Alric was kinge of Swecia, who was slayne by Eric, a man of wyt excellent, of toung eloquent, & of handes ready & valiaunt, who vanquished Alric, and raygned kynge af∣ter hym. Thys was the same tyme, that Christe descen∣ded from heauen, & tooke vpon hym our mortal nature.At  tyme Christ descended oute of hea¦uen. Haldan the sonne of Eric succeeded hys father in the kyndome of Swecia, who was slayne, and hys sonne Siward as heyre to his father, possest the crown. Then Eric the sonne of Siwardes doughter and the sonne of
Froto kyng of Denmarke dyd both step in for the kyng∣dome,Betwene. 2. stooles, the le goeth  ground but they ended theyr raygne by mutual battell, & Haldane the second did get into the Regall seate, a man onely geuen to the warres, regarding neither the mary∣age of wyfe, nor the gettyng of chyldren, esteming more the field conquest, then the bed victory, rather delighting in the bloudy dedes of Mars, then in the pleasaunt pa∣stimes of Venus, not wythstandyng he apoynted who should weare the crowne after hym, which was Vngul∣nus. He dyed & left both Swecia and Denmarke, vn∣der the gouernment of his sonne Siwald. After whom Reignold, and after Reignold Aluer, one of the noblest men in Swecia successiuely raygned kynges. Then In∣gus the eldest of Aluers three sonnes dyd lawfullye suc∣cede hys father.The kyng∣dome deui∣ded betwen thee bretbrē But he deuidyng the Realme wyth hys brethren Olaue and Ingellus, did onely reserue to him selfe the general decree of al lawes. He was slayne with his brother Olaue in the Denmarke warres, & Ingel∣lus by the victors consent enioyed the whole kingdome. Ringus beyng yet but a chylde, dyd raygne after hys fa∣ther Ingellus, and after hym Gotare, who was slayne in battell agaynste the Danes, whereby the crowne of Swecia came to Iarmeric kyng of Denmarke. Thys was aboute the yeare of Christe. 380. at what tyme the Gothes, that longe before were gone oute of Swecia and Gothia, made great spoyle, and wonder∣fully troubled the Romaynes both in Italye, Spayne, and Fraunce. The Gothes which continually remained in theyr countrye, dyd vnit and knyt them selues to the Swecians, bothe in lawes and maners, and euer synce haue bene subiectes to the Kynges of Swecia.
¶Who were Kynges of Swecia, after Charles the great. SInce the yearely histories and actes of Swe¦cia, from Iameric to Fro, is vnknowen to me: I am compelled to let slyp and ouer leape that tyme. Fro was kyng of Swecia when Lodowic the sonne of Charles the great,Fro kyngs of Swedia was slayns by the we∣men of Nor¦way. dyd syt in the Imperial seat of Rome. Thys fro was slayne by the wemen of Norway. And Herot chosen kyng in hys place which left the succession to Sorle, whom Regner kyng of Denmarke ouercame in battell, whereby the crowne came to Biorne the eldest sonne of Regner, who after the trauel of a few yeares in Swecia, gaue place to For¦tune. For Vnichsert the second sonne of Regner was cho¦sen kyng for hys brother. And after hym Eric the thirde sonne of Regner was apoynted to raygne in Swecia. But Often a man nobly borne of the bloud royall of Swecia, did oppres and ouerthrow Eric, and tooke the gouernement and rule of hys natiue countrye into hys own handes. Now the brethren of Eric, both to reuenge his death, and also to get their old regiment, did so trou∣ble and vexe the kyngdome of Osten, that they brought the crowne to Sturbiorne Kynge Biorns sonne, wyth whom Fortune dalyed but a whyle, for he was lykewise ouercōmed and driuen out of Swecia,Olaue the first kyng yt professed Christe i Swedia, was christ¦ned Iames, the yeare of Christ,  by Eric sonne to Olaue, & cousin to Regner. This man enioyed ye crown wythout any let, trouble, or daunger, who left the kyng∣dome to his sonne Olaue, which quietly possest the same and was the first among the Sweciā kyngs that open∣ly professed Christ. He receyued the holye sacrament of Baptisme, and was named Iames.
There were manye in Swecia that longe before hys time did secretly professe the faith, and tooke vpon them the holye order of Anscharius. Thys was the yeare of Christ. 1000 at such time as holy Hary was Emperour of Rome. After Iames his brother Emonde (borne of a harlot) & a Christian onely in name, dyd succede to the crowne, a man in marcial affaires nothing fortunate. He left the kyngdome to Stinkell, a very good Prince (better worthy of the place, then his predecessor) for the Christi∣an religion dyd greatlye increase in hys tyme. He pulde downe & banished the Idolatry, that the Vpsalieus did vse, whereby he much honoured his country. & wan him selfe a fame perpeiuallye. He also appointed the same place to be their Metrapolitane City. About the yeare of Christ. 1100. he yelded to nature her due,What two riueth for, the third en¦iyth. after whose deathe, twoo Erics not wythout great slaughter & effucion of noble bloude, contended for the crowne. But Halsten sonne of kyng Stinkell, vpon the vnlucky end of both these Erics (who perished in battel) as lawful heire possest the kyngdome, from whence he was by rebellion driuen out agayne, & Animander cho∣sen kyng in hys place. Who for hys crueltye to religion, wt in a lytle while after was compeld to treade the steps of hys predecessor, & Aquine elected kyng in hys roume. Then Magnus the sonne of Nicholas kyng of Den∣marke (by the helpe of the Gothes, whych were wearye wyth their often chaunge in Swecia) was made kyng.The Goth∣ deuided om the wedians. The Gothes deuiding them selues once more from the body of Swecia, and gaping for an alteracion, dyd trust that the Imperiall Crowne shoulde chaunce to hym, whom they would assigne it to. The Swecians (beyng
valiant of mynde) would not beare so great an iniurye, that their old & auncient custome of chosyng their prince should be by any astred. Wherfore they determined that their king should be elected and appointed at their plea∣sure. They aduaunsed to the crowne one of their owne countrey, and not onely not regarded, but also despired the kyng which the Gothes had made. The Gothes stubburnly and rebelliously resisting the decree and sentence of the Swecians, dyd make ciuyll warres agaynst their newe kyng, whom they dyd ouer∣come. And because they would haue Magnus to raigne (which was of the Gothes election) they made the Im∣periall seate voyde of a Ruler. The Swecians anoy∣ding domestical discencion, & internal hatred, did condis∣cend and agre wyth the Gothes (not by compulsion,The Swe∣dians sthe of ciuyll waris. but by request) that Magnus shoulde be kyng. After whose death, they generallye exalted Swercone to the kyng∣dome. Who left a sonne named Charles, that quietlye & peaceably succeded his father, al the tyme of Waldimar kyng of Denmarke, to whose doughter he was maried. After Charles reigned Eric, who quietlye passed hys lyfe with the Danes, & was about the tyme of Christe 1249. Whose fate & fortune beyng at an ende, they made great variaunce & discord with the kyng Birgerius. He left the kyngdome to Waldimare, who takyng his viage into the holy land, did leaue the protection of his realme to his brother Magnus, which with vnnatural rebelliō did vsurpe the same, & would neuer surrender it againe. The vncer∣tayne saie of a prin.Birgerius succeded Magnus and tragecally enioyed the crowne. For when he thought him selfe most assured and in the type of al hys glory: he was depriued by Eric his brother, & cast into the wretched bandes of imprison¦ment.
From whence at length, being by good fortune de¦liuered, he ioyned his sonne Magnus quopartner with him in his raigne. Birgerius now at libertie, & knitting amalicious reuenge with his auctoritie, did cal to remē∣braūce the spiteful wrongs he had suffred at the handes of his brethren. His vnquenchable colour kynled so fast for repaying the like euyll, that he would by no meanes be pacified, til that with their bloud he was satisfied. A vnnatu∣rall murder among bre∣thren.When hys brethren least feared hym, and when they thought the stinking mist of al malice to be voide, then did he with a tained coulour of frendshyp request them to a banquet, where in the myddest of their mirth, they were cruelly slaine. This horrible & detestable fact dyd so creepe into the eares of the Commons, that it moued euery mā to the iust reuengement of so murdrish a dede. Then he with his Quene fled, & left his sonne Mag∣nus behinde him: whose heade recōpensed the offence of his father. After whō they aduaunced Magnus the son of Eric (which was behedded at his brothers banquet) to the imperial crowne. His raigne was so prosperous, that with the help of vertue, and the fauour of good for∣tune,The kyng∣dom of Nor∣way knyt to the crown of weia. he ioyned the country of Norway to his kingdom of Swecia, & was crowned king of both countries. He yelded Nature her due the yeare of Christ. 1326. and left a sonne called Magnus, heire to bothe the kyngdomes. Magnus did promis the mariage of his sonne Aquine to the natural sister of the Earle of Holst, on this condi∣tion, that if Aquine receiued her not a Maide, al the no∣ble men and rulers of Swecia, shoulde be free of theyr othe and alegeaunce to the King. This Maide saylinge into Swecia, was taken vpon the sea of Waldimar, King of Denmarke, & Margaret, Waldimars doughter
was maried to Aquine: Which thyng the Gouernours of Swecia perceiuyng, denyed their duty & homage to their Prince (because he kept not promise with them) & forthwith they were sent of the Earle of Holst to Albert Duke of Magnopolis, father in law to the sayd Earle: who had maried Eufemia the kings sister, whose sonne named Albert, they would haue to their king, and so de∣priued Magnus from al his royall dignitie. But he seing him selfe deposed & forsaken, dyd ioyne with Aquine to make cruel war against Albert, whose force nought auailed, for Alberts power was more able to resist them, then theirs was to ouerthrow him.Magnus of diuexyle. Wher¦fore Magnus was compelled in the ende, to be conten∣ted with his banishment, wherein he dyed. Albert being now established, and with princely auc∣tority confirmed in his kingdome: did apoint hymselfe with al honourable furniture, syt for a King, & leauing the charge of the regall gouernement, in the handes of Dismarie, did sayle to his Countrey Magnopolus. The valyāt and haught mynde of a woman.In the meane season whilst these thinges were a do∣ing, Margaret the doughter of Waldimar king of Den∣marke & Norway, after the death of her husbande, pro∣tected the two kingdomes with her litle sonne Olaue. And hauing a desire to the regiment of Swecia, she be∣gan to quarel with Albert, king of the same. They both leuied two mighty armies, & committing the successe of their good or euyl fortune, to the bloudy lot of war, Al∣bert (who hadde finished the course of hys prosperous raygne) was wyth his yonge sonne Eric, of Margaret taken prisoners, with whom they were kept in misera∣ble captiuitye, the lyngring tyme of seuen yeares.Margar Queene of ye three kyng∣domes. By which ouerthrowe of Albert, the thre kyngdomes were
once more subiectes to one crowne, and haue alwayes remained so euer since. The Norwaise neuer chaūging nor disagreing: but the Swecians refusing to beare the troublesome yoke of a straunger, haue often tymes sha∣ken of the societie of the Danes. Now Albert vpon this condicion was deliuered oute of myson, that he should within three yeares folowyng, pay three score thousand marke, or els deliuer the town and Castel of Stockholme, otherwyse to be imprisoned againe, Albert would haue surrendred the City, but the Swecians would not by any meanes agree to it, he be∣ing therfore in dispaire, and voyde of all hope of recoue∣ring hys kyngdome, dyd geue vp al, and contented hym selfe wyth his old Magnopolus. The mightye Margaret triumphantlye raygnynge Quene of the three kingdomes, passed her youthe wyth great pompe among the Swecians, tyll suche tyme as crooked age, with creping pace ouertoke her (whose stal∣king steps none can ouer runne) and then by the cōmon counsel and consent of her rulers and gouernours, she a∣dopted Eric Captaine of Pomeranie to her sonne.The Capy∣taine of Po∣meranye is made kyng. ome say ye this Phillipp was ye kyngs dang∣ter of Eng¦land. Af∣ter whose death he was made Kyng of the three kyng∣domes, & quietly passed his tyme a great while amonge the Swecians. For Philippa the Quene his wife, and daughter to the kyng of Portugal, dyd most commonly lye in Swecia, where in the end she dyed. Now the kyng hauing continual warres, & wantyng money, dyd (contrary to his othe) spoile the Swecians, and sought al the meanes he myght to impouerishe the country, because it semed welthiar & much more rytcher then the rest. Which made the Nobilitie to declare their impacience with open enuy (for the Swecians, as they
are slow to conceiue a wrong: so are they quicke in the reuenge of iniurie) but when this was reported, and per¦fectly related to the Earles of Eric, he which for his euil estemed nothing, litle regarded it.The smal re¦gard of prin¦ces, is  tymes cause of their more struction. Tyll suche tyme as Engelbert (a noble man both by birth & condicion) dyd rayse rebellion against him. And where as he had torti∣fied the Castels and fortes of Swecia with captaines & officers of the Danes: Thys Engelbert remoued thē, and did constitute & apoint Swecians in their places. Then Eric at the first wyth great expedicion, sought to feare Engelbert wyth cruell threatnynges, whyche nought auailed, for his magnanimity was able to coun∣terpaise the others enuy. Wherefore he raysed a mighty army, thinkyng thereby to pacefy the Swecians furye. He saylinge with hys parnicious companye towardes Swecia, was preuented of his purpose by a terrible tempest, wherin most of them were drowned. And Eric him selfe compeld to land with a few, where he sawe by experience that fauour and not force, wold vanquish the Swecians. Althinges chauncing contrary to his expec∣tacion, he dyd wyth muche speede and lyttle gayne re∣turne into Denmarke. At length the Portes & townes adioyning to the sea, made this concord & agrement betwene Eric and Engel bert: Eric shuld be king on this cōdicion,A kyng vpō condicions. that no Danes but Swecians should beare office in their holdes, their Cities shoulde keepe their olde liberties, and their mar∣chauntes their accustomed fraunches. The kyng beyng resident in the country, should receiue hys whole reue∣newe, and beyng absent, but the one halfe. These thynges agreed vpon, he saild into Denmarke, where the Danes takynge example of the Swecians,
prescribed certayne rules and orders, which they would haue compelled their kyng to folow, wherby much trou∣ble happened in their country. He therwithall wonder∣fully offended, for∣soke hys kyngdome. did gather together as much treasure as he might. And swearing neuer more to medle wyth the troublesome state of a kyng, dyd sayle into Prussia. After whom Christopher Prince of Palatine, & Duke of Bauar, consin to Eries sister, was generallye chosen by the chiefe Rulers of the three kingdomes. Whereby they thought to haue prouided a great tranquilitie and quietnes to their Marchauntes. This man altered no∣thyng in Swecia, tyl such tyme as (not contented with his owne prosperitye) he began to enuy their countrye. And then he heaped vp al the treasure of the kingdome, as wel that which was gathered of many yeres before: as his own, and sent it away by the sea. After whose death the Swecians would ioyne their kingdome no more with the Danes,The Swe∣cians refuse to be knyt wyth the Danes. but with a muche better wyl dyd chuse to their kyng Charles Canutus, one of their owne, a worthy Ientleman, & nobly borne, of the old & auncient bloud of the kinges of Gothea and Swecia. He scant had finished .vii. yeares in his raigne, when he began to ware very greuous & couetous in all thinges,Peruers counsel bre¦de con∣temple to the Prince. altring his noble nature, from vpright Iustice, to seuere & cruel punishment, accounting his wyl in eche decree to be a law, which caused hys faythfull & louyng subiectes to reuolt and turne from hym. When he per∣ceiued that they sweld so agaynst hym, suche thinges as he had before his election, he gathered together, and pla¦cing the treasure of the crowne in a sure hold, imbarked him selfe and went to Gedamus. When the kyng was crosse saild, and wanting nothing for hys departure, but
onely waying of Ancker: one of his noble men demaun∣ded of hym it he had not left something a shore vndone,This is not sounde in Mounster, but ye shall rede in ye history of ye Bthes. whych he would haue executed. To whom the Kyng wt a great sygh answered: Yes verelye, I haue neglected longe tyme synce, the executyng of thee and thy lyke, which yf I had then done, I had nowe quietlye remay∣ned in the common wealth. Then Christiern (whom the Danes and Norwayse had elected for their Kyng) was called into the kingdom to be crowned, whereby the thre kyngly titles did ioyne agayne in one. Not long after, the Swecians did moue iust rebellion agaynst kyng Christiern, because he kepte not promise with them, nor did not wisely obserue those thinges he had taken in hand. The kyng therfore the .7. yeare of his raygne, & the yeare of Christ .1469. dyd enter with cruel battel into the coūtry of Swecia, wher as ye inhabitantes being knit together, did easely resist him. Notwithstanding thys repulse, he had .2. Castels in the Country, that wonderfully vexed & troubled the Swe∣cians. Afterwarde the Kyng entryng agayne wyth an army into Swecia: could doo no good for hym selfe, nor damage to his enemye, for the strayghte passage of the mountaynes. In the meane season Charles Canutus that was Kyng of Swecia, dyed: in whose place they chose Steno, one of theyr worthy Captaynes,The Sweci¦ans chuse Steno to be gouernour, to whō thef giue the auc¦toiye of a kynge, but not ye name. to whom they gaue the authority of a Kyng, but not the name. He myght call & commaund all the Swecian Princes and Rulers to anye affayres about the Realme: suche one whom the Germaynes name a Marshal, the Frenchmē a Constable, & the Romaynes a Mayster of the Horse. In great reuerence and estimacion was thy Steno, a∣mong the Swecians. For they accounted hym as well
worthy of the crowne, as any of his predecessors, which they not seldom tymes offered hym, wyth the name of a Kyng, but he continually refused it. Iohn the sonne of Christiern,ohn kyng of Dēmark  gape for the crowne  ecia. beyng placed successor in both ye kingdomes of Demnarke & Norway, dyd also gape for the crowne of Swecia. Whose expectacion they lykewise had satis∣fied, if he would haue bene bound (as the rest of his pre∣decessors were) to the obseruances of al their old lawes and customes, whych he refused, vnles he myght haue it wyth the franke auctority of a Prince. Many yeares passed whilst the affayres of Swecia, remayned in thys state, and chiefe lye because theyr pro∣tector was of such Iustice, that the people had no desyre to a Kyng. Now Iohn the sonne of Christiern, gathe∣ryng together an excedyng great and myghty army,ohn kyng of Dēmark dothe van∣quysh Swe¦cia. did lead them into Swecia: Where after many bloudy bat¦tels, he conquered the Country. Not long after, when the Kyng was busyed about the determinacions and a∣poyntmentes of hys doynges, ther rose a rumir among the people, how easely they myght recouer theyr liberty: The kyng beyng so busely occupyed aboute the estably∣shyng of his own estate. But he perceiuyng theyr mur∣muryng myndes, dyd leaue hys wyfe wyth a Garyson in the Castel of Stockholme, & priuely departed out of the Country. The Quene thus left, the Swecians did besiege the Castel,ng Thōs  is al∣st .. yere  Nnste. wherein she was, & at lengthe by the extremity of famyne & hungar she yelded, and went to the Monastery of saynt Brydget, from whence she was after the space almost of two yeares delyuered by Ray∣mond Legat of Rome. In the meane tyme kyng Iohn dyd leny a huge army, to cary into Swecia, where he hauyng many friendes whych sent hym word eyther to
bryng fifty thousand men, or els his trauel should be in vayne. Notwithstandinge he attempted thys warre,Fyfty thou¦sand Danes go into swe¦cia, and pre¦uayle not. wherein he litle preuayled, hauing his sonne Christiern a soldiour wyth hym. After the trauel of a smal tyme in these doutful doynges, he dyed, and lefte Christiern hys sonne in hys place. ¶ The tragicall hystorye, and tiranicall doynges of the second Christiern king of Denmarke. CHristiern the second, king of Dēmarke, & son to Iohn, dyd plainly demōstrate in his youth where vnto he would be chiefely addicted in his age. For beyng a soldiour vnder his Fa∣ther in the Swecian warres, he vsed hym selfe verye fierce and cruel, & in peace at home double & deceitfull. Christiern kyng of Dē¦marke doth enterprise to inuade Swedia.This Christiern ful fraighted with ambicion, & as it should seme naturally enclined to mischiefe, began im∣mediatly after hys fathers death wyth haught mynde to make ciuil warres, and first he enterprised to inuade Swecia. But when he perceiued them to be of suche great myght, that as long as there was no domesticall discencion nor vnnaturall hatred betwene them, they could wel defend their country nerehand, & also subdue their enemy abroade: He practised to get that by polecy, whych he could not get by force and therfore he went a∣bout to kyndle contencion, and to sowe sedicion amonge the Swedian confederates. Fyrst he procured to this treason, Gostaue the Me∣trapolitan Byshop of Vpsalien. Who by the instigacion of Christiern, did not onely condiscend & agree therunto
hym selfe, but also alured a great nomber more to ioyne wyth hym,Gostaue ye Byshop of Vpsalien, goth about to betray his country whych were fully determined, and certainly apoynted the yere of Christ .1517. to betray and delyuer theyr country to kyng Christiern. But as soone as thys treason was related, & perfectly knowen to the seconde Steno, generall Gouernour of Swecia: he presentlye perswaded and exhorted the Byshoppe to leaue of hys euyl begun enterprise, friendly chargeing hym to remē∣ber the end before the beginning, and not to take that in hand,Friendlye admoniciō. which should be the destruction of his natiue and natural country, & also purchase to hym selfe an euerla∣sting infamy. But the bishop cōtemning this fauorable admonicion, dyd with a stedfast mynde continue in hys trayterous entent, & now seing hys diuelish doinges to be bewrayed,The byshop besieged in the castel of Stech. he fled for refuge to the Castell of Stech, where in he was by Stenoes soldiours besieged. Christiern kyng of Denmarke hearyng of the daun∣ger that Gostaue was in, lyke a faythful confederat, did leuy an army for his deliuery, trusting by hys power to set the bishop at liberty, & also by his might to vanquish the country.Christiern ouercōmed and dryuen out of Swe¦. But he beyng driuen backe & ouerthrowen by the Swecians, was compelled to forsake the rescue of Gostaue, and to returne with the losse of a great nom¦ber of hys men into Denmarke. The Byshop vnderstā∣dyng of the vnfortunate successe of hys companion, be∣yng voyde of al hope, & vtterly in dispaye of al ayd: dyd fayne a repentaunce,Gostaue fai¦th a repē∣aun, and oth yelde. & was contented symplye to yelde hym selfe, onely the siege to be raised. It was agred vp∣on, & the Byshop thus deliuered (because he would seme to be perfect sory for hys offence) he left hys ecclesiasti∣cal dignity, & priuately lyued of hys own patrimony. Now Christiern seing the head & chiefe instrument of
hys confederacye to be vnarmed, whereby the rest that wer of no such auctority (as the Bishop) might ye easslyer be dismēbred: he began to execute his malicious enter∣prise wt open force,Christiern the seconde tyme bothe inuade swe∣cia. Stockholm desieged. & gathering together a huge & mygh∣ty army, dyd leade them into Swecia, fullye bent wyth his monstrous power to ouer ru the country, & to sub∣due the people with cruel seruitude. He incamped round about Stockholme, makyng hys fyrste attempt wyth theyr chiefe & principal Citye. But the Swecian soldi∣ours laced hym & his army in so straight, that they could get neyther victuel for thē selues,The extrem hunger of ye Danes. nor forage for theyr horse, whych caused hys hoste to peryshe wyth extreme hunger. In thys miserable estate they remayned almost two monethes, plaged wyth al euyls & discommodities that myght be, and returne into Denmarke they coulde not, the wyndes were so aduers agaynst them. Christiern practiseth his deliuery by craft.Fleyng therfore to hys old & priuy mischiefes, he prac∣tised the deliuery of hym & his (by craft) from those ex∣tremities, wherein they were wrapped. For beyng thus wyth the sharpe & gredy plague of famin ouecōmed: he desired truse, & an end of the wars. Steno (Gouernour of Swecia) wyth glad mynde condiscended & agreed to the peace.A treaty o peace. The noble dede of Ste¦no. He also considering the horryble penury of his aduersaries, did (vpon a valiant & pityful mynde) send in to the campe of the Danes a nomber of Biefes, wyth o∣ther victuel, wherby the paynful hunger of hys enemies was relieued. Christiern faining a great fauour to Ste∣no, & fraudulently semyng to be muche beholdyng vnto hym, for thys good turne of hys, dyd send into the City, requestyng hym friendly to come into hys tent, & speake with him.Steno was voyde of dis¦cyght. The which Steno (who ment all truth) had done, if the Senate of Stockholm had not stayed him.
For he was so noble of mynde, that he thoughte no dis∣ceite could lurke in a Princes brest. But the Auncientes of the City, consideryng their wealth & decay to remain in hys parson, would not suffer him, vpon so slender an entreaty to depart out of the towne. The Dane therfore perceiuyng this euyl to be spyed, or at the least frustrate:The Dane deniseth yet another mis¦hiefe. dyd yet denise a nother mischief, declaring how he would come into the City among thē, if he might haue pledges for his safe returne. Steno be¦ing therto throughlye perswaded, dyd appoynt certaine yong noble Gentlemen, to be his warrauntes. Among whom was the most valiant Gostaue Erichson, Father to the noble Eric,Gostaue E¦richson fa∣ther to Eric nowe kyng of Swedia, to sent for a pledge to Christiern, who caryed hym pryso∣uer into Dēmarke. now Kyng of Swecia. He wyth the rest, cōmitting them selues to the fidelity of the Danes, entred into theyr Campe, from whence they were caried to their shyps, and there (contrary to the expectacion of Steno) were bound in Irons. The king thus falselying his fayth, dyd not according to his princely promise come into ye city: but waying his anckers, & hoysing vp hys sayles, made speede with hys pray into Denmarke. The Swecians (not without iust cause) did greatly enuy the infidelitie of the Danes,Christiern returnes in¦to Dēmark and also deplored & lamented for the losse of these noble mē. Who were by the fraudulent dealynges of Christern, cleane against the lawe of armes, forceablye made, not pledges (as appointmēt was) but prisoners, as the Dane would: After this flight, Christiern the space of .iiii. yere was quiet: strengthning his power with men, & enryt∣ching his cofers with money, remaining still in this de∣stable purpose, & diuelish entent (at tyme conuenient) to scourge Swecia with some greater plage. Vnto which furious madnes Nature had borne hym, will had fra∣med
him, & Fortune had apointed him. Leuying there∣fore a great army, did once more inuade Swecia.Christiern doth ye third time inuade Swecia. Leuying there∣fore a great army, did once more inuade Swecia. Ste∣no remembring the Irregal part of Christiern, with an ireful minde of reuenge, did wyth great expediciō make haste to meete him, & fully bent to trye the might of his enemy: did ioyne battail with him. Where Steno play∣ing the part of a noble Captain,Steno play¦ing the part bothe of a Captayne & a Soldiour was slaynt. & also of a valiant Sol∣diour, manfully fighting in the face of his aduersaries, receuing many & greuous woundes (not without great losse to his country) with high laud was slaine. After whose euerthrow the Swecians for a while did fierce∣ly maintaine the fyght, their bloudye bodies possessing those places being dead, that thei were apointed to kepe by their captain being alyue. Notwithstanding the bold & haught courages of the Swecian soldiours could not long preuayle, the power of the enemy being so great, & not onely their field leader, but also their commō welth Gouernour being killed. Therfore they were compelled to commit the safegarde of their owne lyues to flyght, and like men without a Captaine left the field. Gostaue the counterfait bishop, vtterly drowned in al mischiefe, & naturallye enclined to disceight,Gostaue shaketh of his discemn¦led simpli∣citye. cloking his euil & naughty desire with poore repentaunce, couering his crafty entencion with the cloude & darknes of fained holynes, who semed to liue solitarely tyll this present. Whom no gladnes could reioyce, nor no pleasure could please: now seing his natural countrye men thus ouer∣commed and disperced, lyke an vnnaturall beast with a ioyful minde, did shake of his discemuled simplicity, and vnbrideling the raine of his hipocritical lust,Gostaue to turneth to hyn trayte∣rous vo creping out of his lurking Iuy tree, returned to his trayterous vo∣met: muche more glorying in the victorye of Christiern,
then bewayling the lamentable ouerthrow of hys coun∣trye men. The wynning of one fielde was to the kyng no con∣quest, nor the losse of one battell was to the Swecians no subiection. Wherfore he went about once againe to compasse with craft his pretensed purpose, & gylefullye determined (vnder the fauourable name of peace) to exe∣cute great cruel & incredible euils:The Senat of Stocke∣holme at so licited to peace. which he could not so perfectly bring to passe by the force of his army: therfore he solicited the Senat of Stockholme to an honest and perfect agrement. The treatye was broughte to thys ende, that they were contented with any honest condicions of peace: so that the vncertain and miserable broile of warre myght seace. They so muche regarded the quiet estate of tran∣quilitye, that they preferred thys disceitfull amitye, be∣fore the assuraunce of theyr owne safetye. The Aunci∣entes and chiefe Rulers of Stockholme dyd prescribe the Articles which were these:The condici¦on of peace. Christiern should keepe and mayntaine the lawes and customes of theyr Coun∣trye vnbroken, he shoulde not infringe nor take awaye the liberties of their Cities, he shoulde forgeue and for∣get all suche as had woren armour agaynst hym. The Dane (who neuer desyred quietnes, but to some mischeuous ende) had suttellye conceiued all these thin∣ges in his heade before,The wry∣tynges of peace at bra¦ & cōsr men wyth these seue∣ feales. knowing that this agreement was the path way to hys inhumane purpose. He swore a solempne othe, wrytynges were drawen, both of theyr peace and amitye. Whereunto they dyd seuerallye set their handes and seales. The Citizens throughly perswaded, or rather inno∣cently blinded, by this fraudulent discet: laid open their
gates to theyr enemies,The Danes enter into Stockholm & receiued their new reconciled friendes into the City, whereinto many of the Countrye dyd enter wyth them. Not treatyng them straungelye as late aduersaries, but curteslye wyth muche gentle∣nes, as auncient friendes, dyd vse them honourablye. Christiern dyd dwel in his mischeuous dissimulacion, tyll suche tyme as he and hys Soldiours were of their trauelous toyle well refreshed, and also had the Castell of Stockholme stronglye fortefied wyth his Garisons, wardes, and watches.Christiern doth cal the Danes o horrible co∣unsayle. Then longyng and lustyng for his horrible entencion, and boyling in hys diuelishe de∣syre, he called the Danes to a Councell, belchyng oute the rancour and poysoned deuise of hys murdrish mind, for the destruction both of the City and Citizens. He as∣keth their iudgement, howe and by what meanes he anyght best destroy them, eyther by force or polecye. O thrise vnhappy Citizens, and most vnfortunate Swecians, what ment you to laye open your gates for suche a Geast, whose Fame, Fortune, and hyghe feli∣citye, dyd enlarge hys libertye wyth spightfull affecti∣ons? Coulde not hys often double dealinges haue war∣ned you? Could not the ensample of his first breatche of promise teache you? Nor would not the suretye of your owne persons suffice you, but that you must open your bowels, and cut foorthe your entrailes to feede your e∣nemies wyth your bloude? Why dyd you not preuent thys dampnable counsell? Was there no Prophet a∣mong you? Was there no celestiall sygne shewed vnto you? Could no Swecian eare be so happye to harken to thys conspiracie?The blk o of  iue be∣wen. That whylst you walke vp and ded  the Citye, thynkyng your selues in moste securitye, the bloudy lottes of your lyues be drawne.
O cruell Christiern, coulde nothing remoue nor induce thy vicies, to dread the terrible punishment of murdrish mindes? What great and greuous tempestes of hatred lurked in thy brest, that thou must needes thus thunder out thy horrible and dampnable sentence, against those that reuerenced thee, regarded thee, and honoured thee? They were become thy subiectes, & thou shouldest haue bene their king. They tooke thee to defende them from forein force: and not to spoyl them with cruel slaughter. They tooke thee to rule with Iustice, and not to raigne with rigour.The Swedi¦ans tooke Christiern for a king, & not for a kil¦let. They chosed thee a king, and not a kyller. They tooke thee a Man, & not a Monster. How muche diddest thou digresse from humaine nature, when thou apointedest thy selfe for an instrument of murder? Whe was become thy sences? could no perill feare thee? could no reason rule thee? nor could no shame withdrawe thee from thy detestable entent? Did not thy conscience wa∣ren thee? Did not the horror of mynde trouble thee? nor did not the swift course of fame bashe thee,Fame flieth at & sw wyth Prin¦ces boige which trans∣porteth Princes doinges to the extreme confines of the world? Was there no good counseller in this assemble? Was there no Dane that durst disswade thee? Haddest thou no faithful & free friend in al thy company? not one that loued thee? not one that frankely would refourme thee?The Danes ēdrid more their kings fauour, thē his honour not one among them al that tendred more thy ho∣nour, then thy fauour? O pityful case. Were they all as thy selfe minded, and thou as they determined? A mete king for such coūselers, & apt subiectes for such a Prince. Now for this traiterous conspiracy against the Swe¦cians, whose counsel was most woorst, that was best a∣lowed, & whose tale tended to most tirannye, that was best lyked. For amonge all their diuelishe deuises thys
dampnable sentence chiefelye pleased: That Christiern should appoynt a general triumphe & feast for his Coro∣nacion,The dellys of their dy∣uclywe at∣tempt. whereunto al the Nobility & Gentlemē of Swe∣cia would repaire, with a great nomber of others. And hauing them once within the Citye, by the coulour of friendly chere & familiar countenaunce, he might the so∣ner & with lesse daunger, ouerthrow & confounde them. Then he might execute that which his beastly immode∣rate, & importunat nature did driue him to, when as no wisdome, no power, nor no polecy should redresse theyr woful cause, so suddein a mischief cōming vnlooked for. The are should lye on their neckes, before they shoulde thinke to dye. Their weapons warme in their bloude, before they coulde iudge any harme, and heapes should be murdred, before they should finde the peryl. This was thought by the whole consent & societye of thys facinorous assemblye, to be the chiefe and perfecte meane for the vtter decay of the whole countrye. The Kyng also greatly aloweth this practise,Christiern burneth for the sequell of hys ty∣ranny. & burning with an incredible desire, to accomplishe & bring to effect thys horrible deuice: he commaundeth the feast, he maketh great preparacion, he apointeth the order of the triūphe, he geueth honorable entertainment to al the Nobility, lodging most part of them in the Castel, he prouoketh a myrth, he semeth to reioyce, he vseth al men with a smi∣lyng countenaunce friendlye. The Danes set out them selues in althinges merely, and the Swecians doo the same, not knowing that their bloud should pay for their banquet. Three daies continued their good chere, wher¦in there wanted nothing that might force a gladnes.Three daies continued they: good chere. But now the doleful fate of the Sweciās aproching, and their miserable & murdrish tormentes at hande: no
one among them al could spy the imminent peril of their present destruction. No hart panted, no flesh trembled, nor no minde was moued with any mocion of their pre¦sent end.Christiern thirsteth for the attempt of his tiran¦nye. Christiern (whose cruell courage vehementlye thursted for the attempt of this tiranny) dyd sende hys Garde into the Castel with straight commaundement, violently to bynde & spoyle the Swecian Geastes (who wer in the middest of their banqueting myrth, pleasant∣ly passing the tyme,The Sweci¦ans in the myddest of their bāket. The begy∣ning of this diuely she myrth. more reioycing in long life, then pre∣paring for present death) & to cast them into Dungeons Now beginneth this fury to heape mischiefe vpon mis∣chiefe, nowe doth he repugne against humaine nature, & with an incredible audacitie surmounteth hys hellyshe purpose. The day folowing the gates of the towne we∣rammed vp, the Lieftenauntes were sent out to defend ciuyl force, & the Trumpets were cōmaunded earlye in the morning to sound their bloudy & dreadful noyses. Al the mighty soldiours wer apointed to be ready through the City in their armour, with terrible & cruell counte∣naunces, like wilde and horrible Monsters. That what with the roaring noyse of the enemy, & the feareful cla∣shing of harnis, euery one should more doubt hys owne death, then eyther the losse of the Citye, the resistyng of the aduersary, or the safegard of his owne familye. It was also apointed,It was ap∣poynted yt no place shoulde bee voyde of slaughter, that what with spillyng of bloude & slaughter of Citizens, no place, no streete, nor any waye should be voyde of most dampnable murther. And that from the Castel to the Market place al shoulde be ouer∣throwen, torne downe, and ruined wyth the warme bloud of the vnfortunate Swecians. Then was there brought from the palace two Byshops, Scarencis, and Strengenencis, which wer with pulling, halyng, & ter∣rible
thrusting amonge a sorte of tirannicall villaines, brought to the place of execution.Twoo By∣shops behed¦ded. There stoode an aul∣tare before the counsel house: where they being cruellye throwen agaynst the grounde, lost their heades. After them the Rulers, chiefe Officers, & Auncientes,The aunci∣entes, Se∣nate, & chief Officers, at tirannously murdred. wyth suche as were knowen to haue done any thing boldly in the defence of theyr Coūtry, & also the Senat of Stock∣holme, men graue, wytty, and wealthy: were al drawen from the Castell, & all together were most tirannouslye murdred. Then made they a prescript table,A Table made, wher¦in is wryttē the names of thē that shoulde be kylled. wherein was written the names of those whom they wold haue slayne. With this the Garde ran through the Citye, exe∣cutyng theyr detestable mischiefe vpon all those whom they had marked. From the which no man coulde flye, nor hyde him selfe, for all places of refuge was shut vp. The Danes augmented their monstrous doinges with alewd & vngracious actes, both of handes & body. For the Soldiours and common people beynge mingled to∣gether, was cause:A generall slaughter. that with vehement violence thei did not onely kyl such as wer apointed, but also others that wer but lookers on of so cruel a spectacle. They spared none, they pitied none, nor they regarded none: but en∣tring into their houses, did draw out their vnarmed na∣ked and yelding bodies to the slaughter. So muche did the diuelish desire of hellysh madnes conquer them, that they executed infinite, cursed, & wycked vengeaunce, as wel agaynst God as man.Some Citi∣zens bydde them selues When as in thys tumult & bloudy broyle, a great nomber of the Citizens had hyd∣den them selues in darke & secret places: and Christiern perceiuing a many that had not as yet tasted of his ty∣rany,A false pro∣clamacion. he caused to be proclaimed from the counsel house, that al such as liued, & had escaped his terrible tormēts,
should remayne vnpunnished, & be free with their lines. The good fame and report of this most horrible disceite and false lye, so crept into the eares of the vnhappy Ci∣tizens (whose hartes were wrapped in infinite mise∣ries) that wher as they lucked with some safety in ob∣scure & vnknowen coruers, they came abrod and opened them selues to their enemies, at whose hands they foūd neither fauour, grace, nor mercy, but present death. For the example of their former tirannies proceded likewise vpon these: The Garbe was cōmaunded to cōmit euery one to the sword, whose bloudy myndes voyde of al pity dyd murther as many as they could fynde, & so continu∣ed tyl such tyme as al were kylled. The loude clamour of the Danes,the vere cotenace of slaugh∣. & the pitiful noyse of the Matrons (play∣ning with shriking cries, for the death of their husbāds) myngled wyth the hydeous gronynge of the murdred Swecians, was horrible to heare. Al places was fylled wyth armour, carkases, bloud, and lamentation. Because Christiern would haue his tiranny the more to excel: most cru∣al & dete∣ Uranay. he dyd with great villany & spight take a certain noble man, whose name was Iohn, & cleaue against al lawes, both natural & humaine, he spoyled hym of hys apparel, and (in contempt) naked, nailed him on a crosse. Who long hangyng there in great payne & penurye, dyd commit the reuenge of his innocencie, to God: & with la∣mentable teares be wayled the miserable estate of the City.The Wane  in . The Dane ouercommed with furious wrath, and wrapped in odible mischiefe: dyd cause the natural & se∣cret members of the deade, to be cut of, & cast at the face of him that was on the crosse. Afterwarde they stroke him through the syde, th his . where they tooke out his hart, & slonge it in hys face. So great, so large, and so immode∣rate
was his irefull mynde, that he doubled hys tyran∣nye, wyth violent force. The family of Ribigu cruelly per∣secuted.They chiefely persecuted the whole house and family of Ribingus, towardes whom they vsed such & so much cruelty, that when there was no more lefte of sufficient age for slaughter: they tooke the yonge children,A pityfull murder of Chyldren. & tying their tender heare in knots, hanged them on cages. Com¦maunding his flagitious Tormentours to cut of theyr heades, and let the deade carkases to fall on the fylthye ground. This done, be willed that al their bodies, wyth the rest of those that wer murthered, should be brought into the Market place, where on with gasing & gapyng like a fury of hel, he fed his wrathful eyes, satisfied hys monstrous lust,A most hor∣tyble syght to loke vȳ. & fulfylled the desyre of his most horri∣ble mynde, with this his outtagious & fierce mischiefe. Three dayes dyd their dead bodies lye there in moste loth some wise, wrapped & defiled all ouer in their owne clottred and congeled bloud.Three daies dyd theyr dead bodies lie in ye mas ket place. Those that yet plunged in the panges of painful death, aspiring with panting and feable breath to their fatal end: did with trembling flesh (neither quicke nor dead) dequeth their wofull spirites to God. What eye so merciles could stay from teares, to behold such torne bodies dismembred of their lymmes, and to see such pale & wan visages (as dead carkases do represent) whose innocent ghosts (no doubt) the hoauens possest. No hart but Christierns woulde haue executed such detetable tirannies.Chri hatte wa sony. No men but Monsters could haue bene apt instrumentes for such a murther. As he was, such was his seruauntes: For what he commaun∣ded, that they fulfylled in most extreme wyse. After al this, Christiern (not yet fully satisfied, nor per∣fectly glutted in these facinorous factes) gaue strayght
commaundement, that their carkases should be cast in∣to stincking sinckes,k beab  are yed in yules. filthy pits & priuies, without the Ci¦ty. He drew the bodye of Steno out of his sepulture, so much did the rage of tiranny gouerne him:Stebi is en out of his graue that his de∣sire of deuouring, was like a gredy Hound. Who coulde be safe from his fury? or how was it possible for anye to be free from his malicious dedes: when as the close and secret graues could not hide nor kepe their dead frō him. When he had on this maner depopulated and wasted the City of men (leauing not one that the biting edge of weapon myght harme, nor sparing of any that the twy∣ned cord might strangle) he turned all to rapine & theft.The cruel countenāce of homici∣. The Wiues were spoyled of their Husbandes, the In∣fantes & tender Sucklinges of their Parentes, the Wi∣dowes of those thinges they best loued, namelye theyr Children, their Friendes, their Kinred, and of all their goodes. Virgins were destoured, Maydens were raui∣shed, their auncient Monuments wer rased, their Tem∣ples ruined, no prophane nor sacred thyng was spared. Whylest the Tiraunt was executing of these detestable mischiefes with in, he kept fast the gates of the Citye, least the horrible fame, & cruel cry of their euyls, shoulde haue fled into the eares of the Countrye, whereby iust warres myght partly haue reuenged theyr moste abho∣minable doinges. What studdes of teares shewrd down from euery mans eyes,The lamen Racid of the Country. with dolerous sobs? What plun¦ging sighes boiled out of euery mans brest, with mased myndes? What thundring noyse roared foorth of euerye mans hart? What desperat musis, what terror, & wyth what inward feare euery one was laden & clogged with al, through the whole Country (when the horror of thys incredible newes was perfectlye reported vnto them?)
there is none, but may iudge. Some Fathers lamented the losse of their Sonnes. Some Childrē bewayled the cruel end of their Fathers. Some Myues playned the woful death of their Husbandes, & some friendes soro∣wed for the terrible tormentes of their Familiars, but generallye euerye one pitied the miserable slaughter of their country men, and with great despight enuyed the hellysh doynges of the Danes. Christiern departeth from Stock holme.When Christiern had thus finished the end of all hys murdrish factes: he departed the City, and in his iorney went to an Abbey, called the New valley. Where of the Abbot and Monkes, he was honorably receiued, friend¦ly entertained, and gently vsed: hauing al thinges mini∣stred to him & his at their desire.Christiern commeth to an Abbey, called the New valley where he ex¦ecuteth a crucl tirany The Tiraunt did faine a great loue towardes them, taking verye thankfullye, their diligent curtesy. And beyng there on Candelmas day, he went to their Church, and heard seruice: neuer offering nor shewyng anye signe of mischiefe, tyll suche time as their ceremonies wer done. The vnquenchable flaine of his ripe euyls & pestilent doinges, woulde not be by any meanes repressed nor extincted:Tirani wa rooted in  hart of Chri∣stiern. for the bloudy seede of murther was so rooted in his tyranous harte, yt the hurle winde of mischief, & renting breath of vices, had ship wrackt in hym al princely vertues. For after he had receiued such honorable chere, wyth an adiniracion of the Abbots prouision:A cruell ac∣count. Immediately when theyr sa∣cred seruice was ended, he belched out his poysoned na∣ture, callyng the Monkes to account for his good enter∣tainment, rewarded them wyth bynding, beatyng, and drowning. The Abbot by fortune escaped their handes, and prouyng to saue his lyse by swymmyng, the cruell and most parnicious companye of the Saylers, dyd so
wounde hym, that loosyng hys strengthe, he was lyke∣wyse drowned. Thus thys Christiern full gorged wyth the bloude of the Swecians, wyth dy spll, urns in∣ Dēark and laden wyth rytches, slaughter, and spoyle, leauing a garyson of Danes in the Castel of Stockholme: saylde wyth his horrible praye into Den∣marke. He scourged Swecia with the plages of battell, theft, murder, & al other kinde of mischeuous euyls. The diue∣lysh sury of ostaue the ounterfayt Byshop.Gostaue the false and counterfaite Bishop, desyryng (contrary to his sacred profession) to excel in the bloudy fury of a soldiour, and delyghtynge in the daungerous broyles of battel, dyd thrust out irradical, and violently pull vp by the rootes al such as against his mynde pos∣sest any spiritual possessions, or enioyed anye ecclesiasti∣call dignities. ¶ How Prince Gostaue escaped out of cap∣tiuity, and after deliuered his Country. THe moste noble Prince Gostaue Erichson, sonne to Eric, nere of bloud to Charles Ca∣nutus, the last kyng of Swecia, & Nephew to Steno Sture the Elder: Go∣staue pryso∣ner in Den∣marke. beyng yet a ho∣stage (or rather a prisoner) in Denmarke, & hearing of so many euyls & calamities of his Countrye, going a hunting with other noble men of the Danes, he began to excogitate in his princely mynde, howe and by what meanes he might best escape & steale away. Occa∣sion offered,He  his ap∣parell wyth  ourer. & sequestring him selfe from the felowshyp of the Hunters: he declined his natural nobilitye, to the course countenaunce of a country man, & aparaled with the robes of a common laborour, he ioyned him self to a
Marchaunt, and fayned to be a Muleter or a keeper of Cattel, tyl suche tyme as he was escaped out of the coū∣try Lubee, and from thence was transported into Swe¦cia. Where he did openly boldly and frankly declare, that he would reuenge the iniuries & losses of his country, & restore them againe to their auncient libertye, an enter∣prite more then his youthfull yeres coulde compas, but that the stoutnes of his minde did answer to hys bold∣nes. Moreouer, he was decked with such temperaunce,The vertues of Gostaue. honesty, and manly prudence, as was rare to be founde in any of so grene and tender age. Therefore the fourth yere after the beginning of the bloudye warres of Chri∣stiern, Prince Gostaue chaunged his apparell, & hauyng on the rusty garmentes of a ragged country man: went about Swecia, declaring vnto them in how many ma∣nifold, cursed, and wicked euyls they were wrapped in, playnlye paynting foorthe the wretched estate of them al, leauing nor omitting any thing that might kyndle or encourage the Country & Citizens to battel.The persw¦cions of Go¦staue. He dyd not forgette to tell them, that they were not borne for them selues, but for their Countrye, to whose ayde & succour they wer bound of duty to forsake no peryl, no daunger, nor any trauel, beyng then at poynt to perishe wythout present helpe. He remembred them of all the facinorous factes that Christiern had committed, & also of the most great and greuous wickednes that hys flagitious com∣pany had executed, both against God & man without a∣ny renenge, which he to accomplish with them, woulde hasard his lyfe, no whyt regardyng it, in respecte of the earnest zeale he had to the cōmon vtility of his countrye men.The come∣e grace of Prince Go∣staue. Moreouer the comelynes of his parson dyd repre∣sent suche a Maiesty: that it declared his magnanimity
to be adorned with a singuler valiant & stout courage. The Dale∣karlions e y  wa∣yks people ll Swe∣.Wherefore he tooke vpon him by their election, bothe to reuenge their wronges, & also to set them at libertye. For the accomplishment wherof, he leuyed soldiours of Dalckarly, ye most warlyke people of al Swecia. They dwel about the mountaines that deuideth Swecia frō Norway, where there be mynes of Syluer & of Brasse. Which mettal places doth quickly moue them,ys e Syluer and rasse & chiefely styrre them aboue al things to be fierce in resisting their enemyes. Gostaue vsing the seruice of these men, went against the Danes, that laye in Garison in the Citye of Aorosie,The Danes lye in gary∣son at ye city of Aorosy. The sudayn  of Go¦staue the by∣op. where they dyd muche harme wyth violating, vexing, and troubling of the whole country. Now Go∣staue (the Byshop onely in name) & Traitour to his coū∣try, driuen into a great feare with thys soudeine & new daūger, sought al ye wayes he could how he might ouer∣throw this begun enterprise of reuenge. But the noble, valiant,The gentle nature of Prince Go¦staue. and princely younge Gostaue Erichson, percey∣uing his entent, dyd send a Messenger to the Byshoppe, friendlye exhorting hym to leaue of & returne from hys old errors and treasons. Considering that his countrye men (not long tyme past) had tasted the fruites of suffi∣cient, detestable, & abhominable mischiefes. The Bishop receiued this gentle admonicion with such arogancye,The arogan¦cy  dain full pride of the byshop. & pride: that reading his honorable & curteous letters did spitefully cast them down, and vnreuerently trode them vnder his feete. The magnificent Gostaue (hauyng in∣telligence thereof) beyng of the bloud royal, of ye bloud royal & Nephewe to them who had woren the crownes of Swecia: nowe demaunding his rightful inheritaunce of those that spoi¦led it: was the more greued with the despite of the By∣shop, which caused him to do that by ye force of his regal
auetority: that other wyse he woulde haue redressed by hys clemency. He led a band of trusty & chosen soldiours of the Dalekarlions agaynst him & his companye, who with smal power dyd ouercome him.The Bishop ourthrowe doth flye to Stockeholm The Bishop being thus subdued, with spedy flight went to Stockeholm, wher the rest of the Danes lay in Garison. But they cō∣sidering the might of the Swecians daylye to encrease: dyd determine with this Traitour,Gostaue the Bishop say∣leth into Denmarke. The vnstid¦ly discurtest of Christiern to sende for a newe army into the Country. With whiche promise he sayled to his tirannical companion into Denmarke. Where he was (as wel worthy) neither friendly receiued, nor gent¦ly entertayned, nor after yt was euer of any auctority or estimaciō wt Christiern. By what reason could he leaue, forsake, or shake of, the felowship & society of hym, who had cōmunicated their tyrannies, and ioyned their mys∣theuous myndes so often in one, being confederates to∣gether in al their dampnable deedes. The king of Den∣marke was nothing inseriour to him in al falsehed & vn∣troth, not onely to his enemies abroade, but also to hys subiectes at home. A busy troubler of his country, wher in he was accordingly regarded: for wythin a whyle af∣ter hys returne, he was deposed from his kyngdome.The Bishop wandreth lyke an ab∣iect, a iuste marke of trasen. The crowne thus taken from the kyng, and he beyng thrust out of the regal seat, Gostaue the Bishop without any glory or reuerence, lyke an abiect wandred through the country,Christiern  pye  lycke de  sa. & so continued in Denmarke tyll hys dying day. Christiern also poore & nedy, for certaine yeares had no place to abyde in, but destitute of al kingly furniture, was compelied to place hys feete vnder other mene ∣bles, & glad to banquet wyth other mens dainties, one∣ly necessity and want driuing hym there vnto. Leauyng Christiern thus a Stragle▪ the most uis∣saunt
Gostaue dyd leuy a mete and conuenient army of the Dalekariens,Pr Go¦au gthe h an ho the Swecians, and the Gothes, & fo∣lowed the rest of the Danes that were fled into Scon∣dia. He also besieged Stockholme, wherein there was no men left,Prince Go¦ue bes∣h Stok¦o. but onely the Garison of Christiern. The wynnyng of thys City was very daungerons to be at∣tempted by assault: the place, the situacion, & artificiall strength of the towne resistyng them. Notwithstanding the vertue, myght and polecy of the Captayn was such, that they forceably wan it, & by assault dyd enter into it. The City thus taken, the valiaunt Prince Gostaue dyd prudently consider that al thinges was at a good point, the warres in euery place ended, & the whole Realme (voyde of theyr enemyes) to be at quiet: therefore he did very honorably & worthely reward his soldiours,The wars ended, Go∣staue magni¦ficentlye re∣wardeth his Soldiours. euery one with ample & large gyftes according to his good ser∣uice. This done, he opened the seas agayne & made safe and sure nauigacion for all Saylers. ¶ The most noble / mag¦nificent, and vertuous Prince Gostaue, the onely deliuerer of his Country from al cruel bon∣dage, vyle seruitude and misery: is wor∣thely elected Kyng. FOr the great goodnes that the most valiant,By Prince Gostaues vertue, he li¦ected hys Country. victorious, & triumphaunt Gostaue Erichson dyd, by incredible trauayle (wyth great trouble of mynde, and paynfull labour of body) bryng to hys country: and because he valiantly had reuenged the cruel wronges and horrible iniuries,
where in his Country men were most miserably wrap∣ped: The Rulers of the kyngdome, that yet remayned, whose happy lyues had not tasted the terrible torments & vehement furies of Christiern:Gostaue is crowned Kynge of Swedland, Gothlande, & Fynland. He is kyng by successiō  election. By right he is horne to the crowne. and al the whole coun∣tries of Swecia & Gothland, with one voyce & one con¦sent, both by right & deserte, dyd crowne hym kyng. And generally wyth glad mindes & ioyfull hartes they gaue him the Imperial sword: as one whose noble actes had worthely merited (both by succession & election) the re∣gal place of his predecessors. By ryght he was lawfull kyng: no lesse nobly borne in birth, then valiaunt & mag∣nificent in dede. Of no baser bloud, then his haught at∣temptes witnessed. Of no meaner parentage, then hys honorable doinges declared, & of no lower race, then his princely vertues shewed.By desert be bought the crowne. By desert he dearelye bought the kyngdome: For he deliuered them from the most bit¦ter bondage, & vyle thraldome of theyr cruel enemyes, he assured their lyues from those that wold haue murdred them. He restored their auncient fame, from those that had disfamed them. He liberted their Cities,The pleasu¦res he did to his country from those that had disfraūched them. He garded their goods from those that would haue spoyled them, and finallye he sa∣ued them from domestical peril and also defended them from outward daunger. This prudent Prince by his wysdome, power & pole∣cy, with an inuincible mynde, for the reuenge & restoring of his Country,Nature made hym, his vertues cald hym▪ & fortune pl∣ed hym in e rgall estate. passed through a thousand perils (some¦tymes on the rough & ragged rockes of the Danes tiran¦ny, & sometimes almost swaloed vp with the deuouring sandes of enuy) before he could attayne to the royall typ of his apointed estate. For the which Nature at the first had made him, vertue had cald him, & fortune had in the
end brought him. Now al those that wylled wel to their Country, preferring honorable concord, before ciuill dis∣cencion, regarding publicke vtilitye more then common spoile,The descrip¦tion of hop losts & ouer¦throwers of Common wealthes. and, vnlesse it were suche that were enemyes to rest & quietnes, foes to the good, & friendes to the euyll, greedy catchers of other mens lyuinges, & prodigal wa∣sters of their own, sowers of sedicion, & reapers of discē∣cion, styrrers and mouers to al stryfe & mischiefe (as no common welth is cleare without some of them) excepte these hop lostes, not one but greatly dyd reioyce, & made their humble prayers to God:They pray for the con∣tinuance of hys raygne. That his Maiesty might long raygne among thē at home with euerlasting peace and tranquislity, & abroade against hys & their enemies with great conquest & victorye: & chiefly that his prince¦ly person myght be sure in both. Wyshing hys lyfe so to shyne in prudent vertue, that he myght be a myrrour & lyuely example to al mighty Kynges & rulers, whereby he should for euer be worthely saluted (& wyth the swift thundring trūpe of fame reported) for the best & happiest After this triumphant maner, the noble king Gostaue receiued the crowne of Swetheland, Gothland, & Fin∣land.With what pce Go∣stue ued his country Which Regimentes he did gouerne by such politik wisdome, and princelye prouidence, that ioyning wyth hys regal auctority great and laudable vertues, he euer mayntayned and norished aboue al thynges, peace, loue and concord.s sdiion ly p∣. Not withstanding the Sucalandes a few yeres past dyd a lytle trouble & vexe the country. Which sedicion was by his prudent wysedome so prouided for, and by hys diligent industry so pecified, that they flory∣shed wyth happy peace & desired trnquisity.The ioyneth godly, wyse  learned  to hym To the con¦firmyng and luculently estably Kyng whereof, was cho∣sen certayne men, both godly, wyse and worthye, whose
graue counsels the Kyng dyd cal to his kyngdome wyth great loue and fauour: Namely George Norman,George nor mā, Oliuer Holmens. and Oliuer Holmēs, both singulerly wel learned. The first for hys noble giftes of the mynde, wherein he dyd excel, and also for his godly knowledge in the scriptures: he was made Tutor and Scolemaister to the most prince∣ly and valiant Eric now Kyng of Swecia,George Nor man Tutor to pince E¦ric, owe king of swe¦dia, and to Duke Iohn his brethee. & to Duke Iohn hys Brother. And moreouer, for hys great experi∣ence and excellency of wyt was elected one of King Go∣staues priuy counsel. The other named Oliuer Holmēs, besyde lys sincere and perfecte vnderstandyng of the sa∣cred scriptures, and also his knowledge of other notable histories, was an expert and rethoricall Preacher. These two wyth others their lyke, dyd the King chose to be the principall members of hys kyngdome.Gostaue did prosper wt gloryos fame. Whose raigne could not by any meanes decay, but prosper with glorious fame, hauyng suche graue Counsellers to en∣struct hys doynges, and preparyng suche instrumentes for the maintenaunce of hys regal estate. What expecta∣cion was to be looked for in those tender and youthfull yeares of the most noble Eric (that yet were vnperfect) not onely hys princely and vertuous redynes (which as then by report began to bud out) but also the good educa¦tion and learned enstruction of his Tutor,Occasion why there was good & greet hope of the noble Prince E he beyng en∣dued and brought vp in lyke condicion and lyke inclina∣cion wyth hym, myght brynge thys doubt in question: Whether the Kyng or hys Country had most cause to re¦ioyce. The Father for that he had gotten such a Child to rule after hym: or the Country for that they should haue such a Prince, both learned & wyse to raygne ouer them, he declared beyng young, what fruites he would yeld in age. Notwythstanding, because Princes do often dege∣nerate
from perfect Nobilitye, and altering their noble nature from the beginning, do incurre into a thousande euyls in the end (though his vertuous doinges hitherto haue yet set forth no such lykelyhoode) I leaue hys pre∣sent praises to the good or euil desertes of his actes here after. Not douting or it be long, to see the valiaunt and prosperous raygne of his Father in publicke print, who ruled the Swedians, the Gothes and the Vandoles the space of .38. yeares. Yelding nature her due, the yeare of Christ .1560. and left the crowne to his Sonne Eric, the 14. kyng of that name. ¶ The descripcion of Finland, after the auc∣thoritie of Seba. Mounster. FInlande is called a fayre Countrye, because it is more plesaunter then Swecia. Plini seemeth to name it Finnonia, of the bowing arme or bosome of the sea Finnonicus. It is so large a Countrye, that it once was called a kyngdome, but now it hath onely the title of a Dukedome. The Sclauous in this passed age did inhabite there, whych nacion vsed the Grecian lan∣guage, so long as Moschus was Lorde ouer them. But now it is vnder the crown of Swecia, and doth vse the rites and ceremonies of the Western Churche. Muche wyne is transported thither, out of Spayne, by the sea Balthic, which the people of the Country much desy∣reth, onely to exhillerat their myndes. The inhabitants professed Christe after the Swecians, vnder Eric then king of Swecia. This Country doth excell Swedia, in corne and grain, both for plenty and goodnes, because it is for the most part playne, and not so fenny nor hylly as
Swecia is. There be trym townes in Finland, as Gu∣sta, a towne fortified for the warres, Abo their Byshops sea, Rasbing, Viburg, Karelia a Dukedome. Abo is not far distant from Vplandia, Viburg is situated at the ex¦treme borders and farthest boundes of all Fynlande, towards and against the Russes and Muschouites. It is the chiefe and principal place where theyr Soldiours and Garisous do lye, that defendes and kepes those peo¦ple from inuadyng the Countrye. It is also a Marte towne of great trafficke, whereunto the Ruthines doo often frequent. They saye that the Northe pole dothe ryse ouer this town, aboue the horisont .61. degrees and a halfe, and they nomber the length to be .78. They ac∣count the degrees of Stockeholme to be in breadth .61. and in length .64. The Finnons haue continual warres wyth the Muscouites in the arme or bosome of the sea Finnonicus: vsyng in Summer the ayde of Shyppes, and in Mynter they combat vpon the Ise. Howe popu∣lous was this Country and others lying aboute it, ma∣nye great and wyse men doo wytnes, as Methodius, Martir, Iordanus, Gothus, and Paulus Diaconus, the which Aucthors do wryte that this people dyd swarme out lyke Bees. And they call these Northe Regions the Store house or Garnar of Nacions, and chief∣lye of them are proce∣ded these names folowing.
The Gothes. The Ostrogothes The Vestrogoths The Gepides. The Samogets. The Massagets. The Hunes. The Amasons. The Cimbrians. The Parthians. The Swedians. The Lōgobardiās The Turcilingiās. The Auarians. The Herulians. The Winulians. The Sueuians. The Bulgarians. The Suicers. The Taliphaliās. The Danes. The Sclauons. The Rugians. The Alanians. The Burgundiās The Sembrians. The Liuonians. The Scirians. The Nortmaniās. The Pictians. The Carpians. The Caibians. The Cimerians. The Daciaus: The Inhabitantes of Fynland do speake twoo sun∣dry languages. From Viburg to Berga or Sibbna, they do for the most part speake the Sclauon tong, but nere the Sea coastes they vse at thys present the Swe∣cian language, and in the myddest of the Country, theyr proper speeche. And on the lymeth and borders, they oc∣cupy both. Wherefore in manye places their Preachers doo preache and interpretate the Scriptures in bothe tounges. The Swedian language, and the same that the Gothes, the Danes, & the Norwaies do vse, is one, but that they haue sundry pronouncinges, and propes
accentes in voyce. They do also agree muche wyth the Germaines, as for example suche as can speake or vn∣derstand the Germain tong, may here reade the Lordes prayer in the Swecian language, whereby they maye iudge the difference of their speeches. ¶ The Lordes prayerin the Swecian Language. FAder vuar som er i himulum, heiligat vuar de dit namen, tilkomen tit rike, sckedin vuillige som i himulum so opo iordene, vuar taglig brodh gif os itag verlath os vuaren schuld som vni verlatten vuare sckuldiger, och in∣ledhos icke i frestilse, vt an loss i froonda. Amen. ¶ Imprinted at Lon∣don by Iohn Awdely, dwelling in litle Bri∣taine Streete, by great S. Bartelmewes. Anno .1561. The .28. of October.
