18965 99849077 14209
THE MINDE OF THE FRONTISPEECE, And Argument of this WORKE. FIre, Aire, Earth, Water, all the Opposites That throue in , powrefull  vnites; And from their Discord drew this Harmonie That smiles in : who, with rauisht eye, Affects his owne-made eauties. But, our Will, , and owes raserble, the skill Of allas orders; who the Mind attires With all Hero Vertues  This aspires same and ; by her noble Guide Eternized, and well-nigh Deifi'd. But who forsake that faire Intelligence, To follow Passion, and voluptuous Sense; That shun the Path and oyles of Hercules: Such, charm'd by  luxurie, and case, deforme: 'twixt whom, so great an ods; That these are held for Beasts, and those for Gods. PHOBVS APOLLO (sred Poesie) Thus  for in the ancint Fables he The  all Plosophie. sme appeare teach vs how to beare loy, Griefe, Hope, and Feae. These  hose excite; These  those from Vice affright▪ All  with Delight. The  and those that , not by his Compasse, sale.
OVID'S METAMOR∣PHOSIS Englished by G S London Printed by Robert Young are to be sold by J. Grismond 1628 AD AHEA VIRTVS EXLIS OR DOCVITQVAE AMORE ONTUR CUNCTA AFFIGIT HVMO DIVINAE PARTVLAM AVE.
To the most High & Migh∣tie Prince CHARLES, King of Great Britaine, France, and IRELAND. SIR, YOur Gracious acceptance of the first fruites of my Trauels, when You were our Hope, as now our Happinesse; hath actu∣aea both Will and Power to the finishing of this Peece: being limn'd by that vnperfect light which was snatcht from the howers of night and re∣pose. For the day was not mine, but dedicated to the seruice of your Great Father, and you selfe: which, had it proued as fortunate as faithfull, in me, and others more worthy; we had hoped, ere many reares had turned about, to haue presented You with a rich and wel-peopled Kingdome; from whence now, with my selfe, I onely bring this Composure: Inter victrices Hederam tibi serpere Laurus. It needeth more than a single denization, being a double Stranger. Sprung from the stocke of the
ancient Romanes; but bred in the New-world, of the rudenesse whereof it cannot but participate; especi∣ally hauing Wares and Tumults to bring it to light in stead of the Muses. But how euer vnperfect, Your auour is able to supply; and to make it wor∣thy of life, if you iudge it not vnworthy of your Royall Patronage. Long may you liue to be, as you are, the Delight and Glorie of your People: and slowly, yet surely, exchange your mortall Diadem for an immortall. So wishes. Your Maiesties most humble Seruant, GEORGE SANDYS.
THE LIFE OF OVID. PVBLIVS OVIDIVS NA∣SO, descended of the ancient Family of the Nasones, who had preserued the dignitie of Roman Knights from the first originall of that Order, was borne at Sulmo, a Citie of the Peligni, on the 14. of the Calends of April, in the Consul-ships of Hirci∣us and Pansa, both slaine at the battell of Mutina against Marcus Antonius. While yet a boy, his quicke wit and ready apprehension gaue his parents an assurance of a future excellencie: in so much as his father Lucius sent him to Rome (together with his bro∣ther, a yeere elder than he, and borne on the same day) to bee instructed by Plotius Grippus, that Art might per∣fect the accomplishments of nature. In his first of youth he was much ad∣dicted vnto poetrie, wherein hee had
grace and naturall facili∣tie▪ But cotinually reproued by his father for following so vnprofitable a with an ill will he forsooke the pleasant walkes of the Muses to trauel in the rugged paths of the Law, vnder and Porcius Lairo; of whose quence and learning he was a great Admirer. Neither attained he the in to a vulgar commendation; be∣ing by Marcus Annaeus Sene∣a among the principall Orators of those times. His prose was no other than dissolued verse: his speech wit∣tie, briefe, and powerful in perswasion. Hauing past through diuers offices of Iudicature, and now readie to assume the habit of a Senator: his elder bro∣ther and father being dead, impatient of toyle, and the clamours of litigious Assemblies, hee retired himselfe from all publick affaires to affected vacan∣cie and his former abandoned studies. Yet such was the mutuall affection betweene him and Varro, that he ac∣cepted of Command, & serued vnder
him in the wars of Asia: from whence he returned by Athens, where he made his aboad, vntill hee had attained to the perfection of that language. Hee was of a meane stature, slender of bo∣dy, spare of diet; and, it not too amo∣rous, euery way temperate. He drunk no wine but what was much alayed with water: An Abhorrer of vnnatu∣rall Lusts, from which it should seem that age was not innocent: neat in apparell; of a free, affable, and courtly behauiour; whereby he acquired the friendship of many, such as were great in learning & nobilitie; among whom not a few of Consular dignitie: and so honoured by diuers, that they wore his picture in rings cut in preci∣ous stones. A great Admirer, and as much admired, of the excellent Poets of those times, with whom hee was most familiar and intimate. Being per∣swaded by some of them to leaue out three verses of those many which hee had written, hee gaue his consent, so that of all he might except three only:
whereupon they priuately writ those which they would haue him abolish, and he on the other side those which he excepted, when both their papers, being showne, presented the same verses, the first and second recorded by Pedo Albinovanus, who was one of the arbiters, Semi bouemque virum, semi irumque bouem. Sedg lidum Borean, egelidum{que} Notū. whereby it appeareth that his admira∣ble wit did not want an answerable iudgement in suppressing the libertie of his verse, had he not affected it. An ample patrimonie he had in the ter∣ritories of Sulmo; with a house and a temple in the citie, where now stands the Church of Sancta Maria de Tum∣ba; and where now stands the Church of Sancta Maria de Consolatione he had an other in Rome, not farre from the Capitoll; with pleasant Hort-yards betweene the wayes of Flaminia and Claudia, wherein hee was accustomed to recreate himselfe with his Muses. Hee had had three wiues: whereof
the first being giuen him in his youth, as neither worthie nor profitable, soone after (according to the custome of the Romans) he diuorced: nor liu'd he long with the second, although nobly borne, and of behauiour incul∣pable. The chastitie and beauty of the third he often extolleth; whom hee instructed in poetrie, and to his death entirely affected. Neither was her af∣fection inferior to his; liuing all the time of his banishment like a sorrow∣full widow; and continuing to the end exemplarie faithfull. But in this euery-way happy condition, when his age required ease, and now about to imploy his beloued vacancie in the re∣niew and polishing of his former la∣bours, he was banished, or rather con∣ined to Tomos (a citie of Sarmatia bordering on the Euxine Sea) by Au∣gustus Caesar, on the fourth of the Ides of December, and in the one and fifti∣eth yeere of his age, to the generall griefe of his friends & acquaintance; who sailed into Thrace in a ship of his
owne, and by land performed the rest of his voyage. The cause of this his so cruell and deplored exile is rather coniectured than certainely knowne. Most agree that it was for his too much familiaritie with Iulia the daughter of Augustus, masked vnder the name of Corinna. Others, that hee had vnfortunately seene the incest of Caesar: which may be insinuated, in, that he complaines of his error, and compares himself to Actaeon. But the pretended occasion was for his com∣posing of the Art of Loue, as intolera∣bly lasciuious, and corrupting good manners. A pretence I may cal it, since vnlikely it is that he should banish him in his age for what he writ whē hard∣ly a man, & after so long a conniuance. Yet Augustus, either to conceale his owne crime or his daughters, would haue it so thought: neither would Ov  reneale the true cause, lest hee should further exasperate his displea∣sure. After he had long in vaine solici∣ted his repeae by the mediation of
Germanicus Caesar, and others that were neere vnto the Emperour; or at least to bee remoued to a more tem∣perate Clime; his hopes (as he writes) forsaking the earth with Augustus, he dyed at Tomos in the fifth yeere of the raigne of Tiberius; hauing liued seuen yeeres in banishment. As Tibullus and hee were borne in one day, so he and Liuie dyed on an other; that his birth and death might bee nobly accompa∣nied. He had so wonne the barbarous Get's with his humanitie and gene∣rous actions (hauing also written a booke in their language) that they honoured him in his life with trium∣phant garlands, and celebrated his fu∣nerals with vniuersall sorrow; ere∣cting his tombe before the gates of their citie, hard by a lake which re∣taineth his name to this day. His se∣pulchre was found in the yeere, MDVIII. with a magnificent couer∣ture presenting this Epitaph.
FATYM NECESSITATIS LEX. Here es that iu ag Pot, by the rage Cgear Augustus banished from Rome: Who  his cou  sought t' intere b Age; But vaily, Fate hath lodg'd him in this tomb. Isabella Queene of Hungarie, in the yeere MDXL. shewed to Bargaeu a pen of siluer, found not long before vnder certaine ruines, with this inscription; OVIDII NASONIS CALA∣MVS: which she highly esteemed, and preserued as a sacred relique. Of the bookes which he writ, since most of them are extant among vs, I will onely recite these following verses of Anga'u Politianus. 1 From times first birth be chants the change of things 2 e stanies of  in legiacks sings, 3  lbis he insnares, 4  with ouers cares, 5  deplores his sad exile, 6  Roman Festiuals comth, 7  vnknown to Latin eares, 8  glide in heauëly spheres, 9  igran mickrmes, 10  climes, 11.  abuse the times,
Yet leaues he out the Remedie of Loue, a legitimate Poem (except he make it an appendix to the Art) and his Con∣solation to Liuia for the death of Dru∣sus: which Seneca hath excerped and sprinkled among his seuerall Consla∣tions. Among such a multiplicitie of arguments our gentle Poet did neuer write a virulent verse, but onely a∣gainst Cormficus; (maskt vnder the name of Ibis) who solicited his wie in his absence, and laboured against the repeale of his banishment. Con∣cerning his Metamorphosis, it should seeme that he therein imitated Par∣thenius of Chios, who writ on the same argument: as the Latin Poets euen ge∣nerally borrowed their inuentions from the Graecian Magazins. I will conclude with that himselfe hath written of this Poem, wherein I haue imployed my vacant howres: with what successe, I leaue to the censure of others, which perhaps may prou lesse rigid than my owne.
I thanke your loue:Trist lib. Elegia. 6. my verse farre liueber then My picture show me; wherefore those peruse: My verse, which sing the charged shapes of men Though lest vnpersect by my banisht Muse. Departing, these I sadly with my hand I to the fire, with other riches, threw. Her sone so Thestias burning in his brand, A better sister than a mother grew: So I, what should not perish with me, cast Those brokes, my issue; in the sunerall flame: In that I did my Muse and verse distast; Or that as yet vnpolished and lame. But since I could not so destroy them quite; I or sundrie copies it should scene there be: Now may they liue, nor lazily delight The generous header; put in mind of me. Yet they with patience can by none be read, That know not how they vncorrected stand: Snatcht from the forge, are throughly anuiled; Depriued of my last life-giuing hand. For praise I pardon craue: though highly grac'd If, Reader, they be not despisd by thee: Yet in the front be these sixe verses plac'd; if with thy liking it at least agree. Who mets this Orpl an-volume, poor in worth Within your  charlorage afford. In wine are fauor, et by him set sorth; sht from lie uncrell of his Iod. The  which presents it's wae defect, At pleaure with a friendly hand correct.
OVID DEFENDED. SInce diuers, onely wittie in reproouing, haue prophaned our Poet with their fastidious censures: wee, to vindicate his worth from detraction, and prouent preiu∣dicacie, haue here reuiued a few of those infinite testimonies, which the cleerest indgements of all Ages haue giuen him. I will begin with the censure of that accu∣rate Orator MARCVS ANNaeVS SENECA,Controu. 10. One of his frequent and admiring Auditors. NASO had a constant, becom∣ming, and amiable wit. His Prose appea∣red no other than dissolued Verses: And a little after. Of his words no Prodigall, except in his Verse: wherein, hee was not ignorant of the fault, but affected it: and often wou'd say, that a Molemisse-became not a beautifull face, but made it more louely. Amongst the excellent of his time, wee may esteeme VULEIVS PATERCVLVS,Hist. lib. 2. Who writeth thus in his history. It is al∣most
S. HIEROME;In Ose cap Semiramis, of whom they report many wonders, erected the walls of Babylon; as estisiss that renowned Poet in the fourth booke of his Metamorphosis. Nor is he forgot by S. AVGVSTINE.De Curs De And Naso, that excellent Poet. Now descend wee to those, whom later times haue preferred for learning and indgement. Thus sings the high prais'd ANGEIVS POLITIANVS.In Natricia. Tis do by all, watrer , whom Sulmo bore, The  Tyber honour'd more, Than has soule x le thee desam'd, O Rome! From Geuck  (alas!) but I alse in tombe. Perhaps  serve thy Augustus spyes To loike o Iuia  friendly eyes. ERASMVS crownes him with the perfection of Eloquence.. And the Censurer of all Poets, IVLIVS CaeSAR SCALIGER, thus writes, when hee comes to cen∣sure our Author. But now wee arriue where the height of wit, and sharpnesse of iudgement, are both to bee exerciz'd, For,
who can commend OVID sufficiently? much lesse, who dares reprehend him? Notwithstanding, I will say something; not in way of detraction, but that we also may be able to grow with his greatnesse. Then speaking of his Metamorphosis. Bookes deseruing a more fortunate Au∣thor; that from his last hand they might haue had their perfection: which hee him∣selfe bewaileth in luculent Verses. Yet are there, in these, well-nigh an infinite num∣ber, which the wit of an other, I beleeue, could neuer haue equall'd. And thus ex∣claimes against Caesar in the person of OVID. Tyrant,In Heroi∣bus with me I would thou badst begun: Nor thy black slaughters had my fate fore-run. If my licentious Youth incenst thee so; Thy owne condemnes thee: into exile goe. Thy Cabinets are stain'd with horrid deeds; And thy soule guilt all monstrous names exceeds. Diuine wit, innocence, nor yet my tongue, Next to Apollo's could preuent my wrong. I smoeth'd th'old Poets with my fluent vaine; And taught the New a far more numerous strain. When thee I prais'd then from the truth I sweru'd And banishment for that alone deseru'd.
can hee said to transcend him. What should I say of that singular, and well-nigh di∣uine contexture of Fable with Fable? so surpassing, that nothing can bee spoken or done, more artificially, more excellently; or, indeed, more gracefully. Who handling such diuersitie of matter, so cunningly weaues them together, that all appeare but one Series. Planudes, well knowing that Greece had not a Poem so abounding with delight and beautie, translated it into that language. What should I say more? All Arts, which Antiquitie knew, are here so fully delineated, that a number, expert in both tongues, of prime vnderstanding and iudgements, admire it beyond all expressi∣on. The first that writ a Commentarie on this booke (whereof fiftie thou∣sand were vented, and that in his life time) was RAPHAEL REGIVS:In praesar. Comment. Who thus in his Preface. There is no∣thing appertaining to the knowledge and glorie of warre, whereof wee haue not fa∣mous examples in the Metamorphosis of OVID; (not to speake of stratagems, nor
the Orations of Commanders) described with such efficacie and eloquence, that of∣ten, in reading, you will imagine your selfe imbroiled in their conflicts. Neither shall you finde any Author, from whom, a ciuill life may gather better instruction. IACOBVS MICYLLVS.In Princi∣pio Addi∣tionum. Hardly shall you find a Poem, which flowes with greater facilitie. For what should I speake of Learning? Herein, so great, so various, and abstruse; that many places haue neither beene explained, nor yet vn∣derstood; no, not by the most knowing: re∣quiring rather a resolution from the De∣lian Oracle, &c. Let the ingenuous, that affect not error, now rectifie their owne by the iudgements of these. But, incurable Criticks, who warre about words, and gail the sound to feed on their sores, as not desiring their sanitie, I forbeare to disswade, and deliuer them vp to the censure of Agrippa.
QVOD OLIM FA∣CIEBAT VOTVM GER∣MANIO OVIDIVS, IDEM AVGVSTISSMO CAROLO Interpretis sui nomine acunt OVIDIANI MANES. EXcipe pacato, Caesa Brittannice, vultu oc pus,  tim d dirige nauis ter. Officioqus, luem non au atu honorem, Hu  dexter ades. Hc e da placum dderis in carmine vires: Ingenium vnitu statque caditque tuo. Paga  docte subtur moetur Principis, vt Claro missa legenda De.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The first Booke. THE ARGVMENT. THe World, form'd out of Chaos. Man is made. The Ages change. The Giants Heauen inuade. Earth turnes their blou to men Ioue's flames confound Lcaon, now a Wolfe▪ The World is drown'd, Man-kind, cast stones restore. All quickning Earth Renews the rest, and giues new Monsters birth. Apollo, Python kills; hart-wounded, loues Lust-flying Daphé: She a Laurel proues. Ioue,  made a Cow, to maske foule deeds. Hermes, a Heards-man. Syrix, chang'd to Reeds. Dead Argus eyes adorn the Peacock's traine. The Cow, to I, loue transform's againe. OF formes, to other bodies chang'd, I sing. Assist, you Gods (from you these wonders spring.) And, from the Worlds first fabrick to these times▪ Deduce my neuer discontinued Rymes. The Sea, the Earth, al-couering Heauen vnfram'd, One face had nature, which they Chaos nam'd: An vndigested lump; a barren load, Where iarring seeds of things ill-ioyn'd aboad. No Titan yet the World with light adornes; Nor waxing Phoebe fill'd her waned hornes:
Nor hung the selfe-poiz'd Earth in thin Ayre plac't; Nor Amphitrite the vast shore imbrac't. With Earth, was Ayre and Sea: the Earth vnstable, The Ayre was darke, the Sea vn-nauigable: No certaine forme to any one assign'd: This that resists. For, in one body ioyn'd, The Cold and Hot, the Drie and Humid fight: The Soft and Hard, the Heauy with the Light. But God, the better Nature, this decides: Who Earth from Heauen, the Sea from earth diuides: And purer Heauen extracts from grosser Ayre. All which vnfolded by his prudent care From that blinde Masse; the happily dis-ioyn'd With strifelesse▪ peace he to their seats confin'd. Forth-with vp-sprung the quicke and waightlesse Fire, Whose flames vnto the highest Arch aspire: The next, in leuitie and place, is Ayre: Grosse Elements to thicker Earth repayre Selfe-clog'd with waight: the Waters, flowing round, Possesse the last, and solid Tellus bound. What God soeuer this diuision wrought, And euery part to due proportion brought; First, lest the Earth vnequall should appare, He turn'd it round, in figure of a Sphere; Then Seas diffus'd; commanding them to rore With ruffling Winds, and giue the Land a shore. To those h addeth Springs, Ponds, Lakes immense; And Riuers, whom their winding borders fence: Of these, not few Earth's thirstie iawes deuour; The rest, their streames into the Ocean pour; When, in that liquid Plaine, with freer waue, The fomy Cliffs, in stead of Banks, they laue:
Bids Trees increase to Woods, the Plaines extend, The rocky Mountaynes rise, and Vales descend. Two equall Zones, on either side, dispose The measur'd Heauens; a fifth, more hot than those. s many Lines th'included Globe diuide: th'midst vnsufferable beames reside; now clothes the other two: the temperate hold Twixt these their seats, the heat well mixt with cold. As Earth, as Water, vpper Ayre out-waighs; o much doth Ayre Fire's lighter balance raise. here, he commands the changing Clouds to stray; here, thundering terrors mortall mindes dismay; And with the Lightning, Winds ingendring Snow: Yet not permitted euery way to blow; Who hardly now to teare the World refraine So Brothers iarre!) though they diuided raigne. o Persis and Sabaea, Eurus flies; Whose fruits perfume the blushing Mornes vp-rise: ext to the Euening, and the Coast the glowes ith setting Phoebus, flowry Zeph'rus blowes: Scythia horrid Boreas holds his raigne, eneath Bootes and the frozen Waine: The Land to this oppos'd, doth Auster steep With fruitfull showrs, and clouds which euer weep. boue all these he plac't the liquid Skies; Which, void of earthly dregs, did highest rise. Scarce had he all thus orderly dispos'd; When-as the Starres their radiant heads disclos'd ( Long  in Night) and shone through all the skie. Then, that no place should vnpossessed lie, right Constellations, and fair-figured Gods, n heauenly Mansions fixt their blest abodes:
The glittering Fishes to the Flouds repayre; The Beasts to Earth, the Birds resort to Ayre. The nobler Creature, with a minde possest, Was wanting yet, that should command the rest. That Maker, the best World's originall, Either  framd of see Coelestiall; Or Earth, which late he did from Heauen diuide, Some sacred seeds retayn'd, to Heauen ally'd: Which with the liuing streame Prometheus mixt; And in that artificiall structure fixt The forme of all th' all-ruling Deities. And where as others see with downe-cast eyes, He with a loftie looke did Manindue, And bade him Heauens transcendent glories view. So, that rude Clay, which had no forme afore, Thus chang'd, of Man the vnknowne figure bore. The Golden Age was first; which vncompeld, And without rule, in Faith and Truth exceld. As then▪ there was nor punishment nor feare; Nor threatning Lawes in brasse prescribed were; Nor suppliant crouching prisners shooke to see Their grie Iudge: but, all was safe and free. To visit other Worlds, no wounded Pine Did yet from Hills to faithlesse Seas decline. Then, vnambitious Mortals knew no more, But their owne Countrie's Nature-bounded shore. Nor Swords, nor Armes were yet: no trenches round Besieged Iownes, nor striefull Trumpets sound: The Souldier, of no ve. In firme content And harmelesse ease, their happy dayes were spent. The yet-free  did of her owne accord (Vntoin wit vploughs) all sorts of fruit afford.
Content with Natures vn-enforced food, They gather Wildings, Strawb'ries of the Wood, owre Cornels, what vpon the Bramble growes, And Acorns, which Ioue's spreading Oke bestowes. Twas alwayes Spring: warme Zophyrus sweetly blew On smiling Flowres, which without setting grew. orth-with the Earth corne, vnmanured, beares; And euery yeere renewes her golden Eares: With Milke and Nectar were the Riuers fill'd; And yellow Hony from greene Elms distill'd. But, after Saturne was throwne downe to Hell, ue rul'd; and then the Siluer Age befell: ore base than Gold, and yet than Brasse more pure. ue chang'd the Spring (which alwayes did indure) o Winter, Summer, Autumne hot and cold: he shortned Springs the yea's fourth-part vphold, hen, first the glowing Ayre with feruor burn'd: he Raine to ycicles by bleake winds turn'd. en houses built; late hous'd in Caues profound, plashed Bowres, and Sheds with Oiers bound. hen, first was Corne into long furrowes throwne: nd Oxen vnder heaue yokes did Next vnto this succeeds the Brazen Age; orse natur'd, prompt to horridwarre, rage: yet nor wicked. Stubborne Yr' the . hen, blushlesse Crimes, which all degrees supast, he World surround. Shame, Truth, and Faith depart. aud enters, ignorant in no bad Art. rce, Treason, and the wicked Loue of gayn. heir sailes, those winds, which yet they knew not, strayn: nd ships, which long on loft Mountaynes stood, hen plow'd th' vnpractiz'd bosome of the Flood.
The Ground, as common earst as Light, or Ayre, By limit-giuing Geometric they share. Nor with rich Earth's iust nourishments content, For treasure they her secret entrailes rent; The powerfull Euill, which all power inuades, By her well hid, and wrapt in Stygian shades. Curst Steel, more cursed Gold she now forth brought: And bloody-handed Warre, who with both fought. All liue by spoile. The Host his Guest betrayes; Sons, Father-in-lawes: 'twixt Brethren loue decayes. Wiues husbands, husbands wiues attempt to kill: And cruell Step-mothers pale poysons fill. The Sonne his Fathers hastie death desires: Foild Pietie, trod vnder foot, expires. Astraa, last of all the heauenly birth, Affrighted leaues the blood-defiled Earth. And that the Heauens their safetie might suspect, The Giants now coelestiall Thrones affect; Who to the skies congested Mountaines reare. Then Ioue with thunder did Olympus teare; Steep Pelion from vnder Ossa throwne. With their owne waight their monstrous bodies groe; And with her Childrens blood the Earth imbru'd: Which shee, scarce thoroughly cold, with life iudu'd; And gaue thereto, t'vphold her Stocke, the face And forme of Man; a God-contemning Race, Greedie of slaughter, not to be withstood; Such, as well shews, that they were borne of blood. Which when from Heauen Saturnius did behold; He sigh't; reuoluing what was yet vntold, Of fell Lycao's late ihhumane feast. Iust anger, worthy Ioue, inflam'd his breast.
A Synod call'd, the summoned appeare. There is a way, well seene when skies be cleare, Tho Milkie nam'd: by this, the Gods resort Vnto th'Almightie Thunderers high Court. With euer-open dores, on either hand, Of nobler Deities the Houses stand: The Vulgar dwell disperst: the Chiefe and Great In front of all, their shining Mansions seat. This glorious Roofe I would not doubt to call, Had I but boldnes lent me, Heauen's White-hall. All set on Marble seats; He, leaning on His Iuory Scepter, in a higher Throne, Did twice or thrice his dreadfull Tresses shake: The Earth, the Sea, the Stars (though fixed) quake; Then thus, inflam'd with indignation, spake: I was not more perplext in that sad Time, For this Worlds Monarchie, when bold to clime, The Serpent-footed Giants durst inuade, And would on Heauen their hundred-hands haue laid. Though fierce the Foe, yet did that Warre depend But of one Body, and had soone an end. Now all the race of man I must confound, Where-euer Nerus walks his wauy Round: And this I vow by those infernall Floods, Which slowly glide through silent Stygian woods. All cures first sought; such parts as health reiect Must be cut off, least they the sound infect. Our Demi-gods, Nymphs, Syluans, Satyres, Faunes, Who haunt cleare Springs, high Mountayns, Woods, and Lawnes (On whom since yet we please not to bestow Coelestiall dwellings) must subsist below. Thinke you, you Gods, they can in safetie rest,
When me (of lightning, and of you possest, Who both at our Imperiall pleasure sway) The sterne Lycaon practiz'd to betray? All bluster, and in rage the wretch demand. So, when bold Treason sought, with impious hand, By Caesar's bloud t'out-race the Roman name; Man-kind, and all the World's affrighted Frame, Astonisht at so great a ruine, shooke. Nor thine, for Thee, lesse thought, Augustus, tooke, Than they for Ioue. He, when he had supprest Their murmur, thus proceeded to the rest. He hath his punishment; remit that care: The manner how, I will in briefe declare▪ The Times accus'd, (but as I hop't bely'd) To trie, I downe from steep Olympus slide. A God, transform'd like one of humane birth, I wandred through the many-peopl'd Earth. 'Twere long to tell, what crimes of euery sort Swarm'd in all parts: the truth exceeds report. Now past den-dreadfull Maenalus confines, Cylene, cold Lycaeus clad with Pines, There where th' Arcadians dwell, when Doubtfull-light Drew on the deawy Charriot of the Night, I entred his vnhospitable Court. The better Vulgar to their pray'rs resort, When I by signes had showne a Gods repayr. Lycan first derides their zealous pray'r; Then said, We straight the vndoubted truth will trie, Whether he be immortall, or may die. In dead of night, when all was whist and still, Me, in my sleepe, he purposeth to kill. Nor with so foule an enterprize content,
An Hostage murders, from Molosus sent: Part of his seuer'd scarce-dead lims he boyles; An other part on hissing Embers broyles; This set before me, I the house ore-turn'd With vengefull flames, which round about him burn'd. He, frighted, to the silent Desart flies; There howles, and speech with lost indeuour ries. His selfe-like iawes still grin: more than for food He slaughters beasts, and yet delights in bloud. His armes to thighs, his clothes to bristles chang'd; A Wolfe; not much from his first forme estrang'd: So horie hair'd; his lookes so full of rape; So fiery ey'd; so terrible his shape. One house that fate, which all deserue, sustaines: For, through the World the fierce Eriys raignes. You'ld thinke they had conspir'd to sinn▪ But, all Shall swiftly by deserued vengeance fall. Ioue's words apart approue, and his intent Exasperate: the rest giue their consent. Yet all for Mans destruction grieu'd appeare; And aske what forme the widowed Earth shall beare? Who shall with odours their cold Altars feast: Must Earth be onely by wilde beasts possess? The King of Gods re-comforts their despaire; And biddeth them impose on him that care: Who promis'd, by a strange originall Of better people, to supply their fall. And now about to let his lightning flie, He fear'd lest so much flame should catch the skie, And burne heauens Axeltree. Besides, by doome, Of certaine Eae, he knew the time shoul'd come, When Sea, Earth, rauisht Heauen, the curios Frames
Of this World's masse, should shrinke in purging flame. He therefore those Cyclopean darts reiects; And different-natur'd punishments elects: To open all the Flood-gates of the skie, And Man by inundation to destroy. Rough Boreas in Aeollan prison laid, And those drie blasts which gathered Clouds inuade; Out flyes the South, with dropping wings; who shrouds His terrible aspect in pitchy clouds. His white hair streams, his swolne Beard big with showres; Mists bind his brows, Rain from his bosom poures. As with his hands the hanging clouds he crusht; They roar'd, and downe in showres together rusht. All-colour'd Iris, Iuno's messenger, To weeping Clouds doth nourishment confer. The Corne is lodg'd, the Husband-men despaire; Their long yeares labour lost, with all their care. Ioue, not content with his aethereall rages. His Brother's auxiliaric flouds ingages. The Streames conuented; 'Tis too late to vse Much speech, said Neptune; all your powres effuse; Your dores vnbarre, remoue what-ere restraines Your liberall Waues, and giue them the full raynes. Thus charged, they returne; their Springs, vnfold; And to the Sea with head-long furie rol'd. He with his Trident strikes the Earth: Shee shakes; And way for Water by her motion makes. Through open fields now rush the spreading Floods; And hurry with them Cattell, People, Woods, Houses, and Temples with their Gods inclos'd. What such a force, vn-ouerthrowne, oppos'd, The higher-swelling Water quite deuoures;
Which hides the aspiring tops of swallowed towres. Now Land and Sea no different visage bore: For, all was Sea, nor had the Sea a shore. He, takes a Hill: He, in a Boat deplores; And, where He lately plow'd, now strikes his Oares. O're Corne, o're drowned Villages He sailes: He, from high Elmes intangled Fishes hales. In Fields they anchor cast, as Chance did guide: And Ships the vnder-lying Vineyards hide. Where Mountayne-louing Goats did lately graze, The Sea-calfe now his vgly body layes. Groues, Cities, Temples, couer'd by the Deep, The Nymphs admire, in woods the Delphins keep, And chace about the boughs; the Wolfe doth swim Amongst the Sheepe: the Lyon (now not grim) And Tygres tread the Waues. Swift feet no more Auaile the Hart; nor wounding tuskes the Bore. The wandring Birds, hid Earth long sought in vaine, With weary wings descend into the Mayne. Licentious Seas o're drowned Hills now fret: And vnknowne surges Ayerie Mountaynes beat. The Waues the greater part deuoure: the rest, Death, with long-wanted sustenance, opprest. The Land of Phocis, fruitfull when a Land, Diuides Ania from th' Actaean strand; But now a part of the insulting Mayne, Of sudden-swelling waters a vast Playne, There, his two heads Parnassus doth extend To touched Stars; whose tops the Clouds transcend. On this Deucalion's little Boat was throwne: With him, his Wife; the rest all ouer-flowne. Corycian Nymphs, and Hill-gods he adores;
And Themis, then oraculous, implores. None was there better, none more iust than Hee: And none more reuerenc't the Gods than Shee. Ioue, when he saw that all a Lake was growne, And of so many thousand men but one; One, of so many thousand women, left; Both guiltlesse, pious both; of all bereft; The clouds (now chac't by Boreas) from him throwes: And Earth to Heauen, Heauen vnto Earth he showes. Nor Seas persist to rage: their awfull Guide The wilde waues calmes, his Trident laid aside; And calls blew Triton, riding on the Deep (Whoso mantle Nature did in purple steep) And bids him his lowd-sounding shell inspire, And giue the Flouds a signall to retire. He his wreath'd trumpet takes (as giuen in charge) That from the turning bottom growes more large: To which when he giues breath, 'tis heard by all, From farre-vprising Phoebus to his Fall. When this the watery Deitie had set To his large mouth, and sounded a retreat; All Flouds it heard, that Earth or Ocean knew: And all the Flouds, that heard the same, with-drew. Seas now haue shores; full streames their channels keep: They sink, and hils aboue the waters peep. Earth re-ascends: as waues decrease, so grow The formes of things, and late-hid figures show. And after a long day, the trees extend Their bared tops; with mud their branches bend. The World's restor'd. Which when in such a state, So deadly silent, and so desolate, Deucalion saw: with teares which might haue made
An other Floud, he thus to Pyrrha said. O Sister! O my Wife! the poore Remaines Of all thy Sex; which all, in one, containes! Whom humane Nature, one paternall Line, Then one chaste Bed, and now like dangers ioyne! Of what the Sunne beholds from East to West, We two are all: the Sea intombs the rest. Nor yet can we of life be confident; The threatning clowds strange terrors still present. O what a heart would'st thou haue had, if Fate Had ta'ne me from thee, and prolong'd thy date! So wilde a feare, such sorrowes, so forlorne And comfortlesse, how couldest thou haue borne! If Seas had suckt thee in, I would haue follow'd My Wife in death, and Sea should me haue swallow'd. O would I could my Father's cunning vse! And soules into well-modul'd Clay infuse! Now, all our mortall Race we two contayne; And but a pattern of Man-kind remaine. This said, both wept: both, pray'rs to heauen addresse; And seeke the Oracle in their distresse. Forth-with descending to Cephisus Floud, Which in known banks now ran, though thick with mud; They on their heads and garments water throw; And to the Temple of the Goddesse goe; At that time all defil'd with mosse and mire; The vnfrequented Altar without fire. Then, humbly on their faces prostrate lay'd, And kissing the cold stones, with feare thus pray'd. If Powres diuine to iust desires consent, And Angry Gods doe in the end relent; Say, Themis, how shall we ou Race repaire?
O, helpe the drown'd in Water and Despayre! The Goddesse, with compassion mou'd reply'd; Goe from my Temple: both your faces hide; Let Garments all vnbraced loosely flow; And your Great-Parents bones behinde you throw. Amaz'd! first Pyrrha silence breakes, and said; By me the Goddesse must not be obay'd; And, trembling, pardon craues: Her Mothers ghost She feares would suffer, if her bones were tost. Meane-while they ponder and reiterate The words proceeding from ambiguous Fate. Then, Promethídes, Epimethida Thus recollecteth; lost in her dismay: Or we the Oracle misse-vnderstand (The righteous Gods no wicked thing command) Or Earth is our Great-Mother: and the stones, Therein contain'd, I take to be her bones. These, sure, are those we should behinde vs throw. Although Titania thought it might be so, Yet she misse-doubts. Both with weake faith rely On ayding Heauen. What hurt was it to try? Departing with heads vail'd and clothes vnbrac't, Commanded stones they o're their shoulders cast. Did not Antiquitie auouch the same, Who would beleeu't! the stones lesse hard became. And as their naturall hardnesse them forsooke; So by degrees they Mans dimensions tooke; And gentler-natur'd grew, as they increast: And, yet not manifestly Man exprest; But, like rough hewne' rude marble Statues stand, That want the Workemans last life-giuing hand. The Earthy parts, and what had any iuyce,
Were both conuerted to the body's vse. The vnflexible and solid, turne to bones: The veines remaine, that were when they were stones. Those, thrown by Man, the for ome of men indue: And those were Women, which the Woman threw. Hence we, a hardy Race, inur'd to paine: Our Actions our Originall explaine. All other creatures took their numerous birth. And figures, from the voluntary Earth. When that old humour with the Sunne did sweat, And slimy Marishes grew big with heat; The pregnant Seeds, as from their Mothers wombe, From quickning Earth both growth and forme assume. So, when seuen chanel'd Nile forsakes the Plaine, When ancient bounds retiring streames containe, And late-left slime aethereall feruours burne, Men various creatures with the gleabe vp-turne: Of those, some in their very time of birth; Some lame; and others halfe aliue, halfe earth. For, Heat and Moysture, when they temperate grow, Forth-with conceiue; and life on things bestow. From striuing Fire and Water all proceede; Discording Concord euer apt to breede. So, Earth by that late Deluge muddy growne, When on her lap reflecting Titan shone, Produc't a World of formes; restor'd the late; And other vnknowne Monsters did create. Huge Python, thee, against her will, she bred; A Serpent, whom the new-borne People dread; Whose bulk did like a mouing Mountaine show. Behold! the God that beares the Siluer Bow (Till then, inur'd to strike the flying Deere,
Their happy Selues, and longs to taste their blisse: Admires her fingers, hands, her armes halfe-bare; And Parts vnseene conceiues to be more rare. Swifter than following Winds, away she runs; And him, for all this his intreatie, shuns. Stay Nymph, I pray thee stay; I am no Fo: So Lambs from Wolues, Harts flye from Lyons so; So from the Eagle springs the trembling Doue: They, from their deaths: but my pursute is Loue. Wo's me, if thou shouldst fall, or thornes should race Thy tender legs, whilst I enforce the chace! These roughs are craggy: moderate thy haste, And trust me, I will not pursue so fast. Yet know, who't is you please: No Mountanere, No home-bred Clowne; nor keepe I Cattell here. From whom thou flyst thou know'st not (silly foole!) And therefore fly'st thou. I in Delphos rule. Inian Claros, Lycian Patara, And Sea-girt Tenedos doe me obay. Ioue is my Father. What shall be, hath beene, Or is; by my instructiue rayes is seene. Immortall Verse from our inuention springs; And how to strike the well concording-strings. My shafts hit sure: yet He one surer found, Who in my emptie bosome made this wound. Of herbs I found the vertue; and through all The World they Me the great Physician call. Aye me, that herbs can Loue no cure afford! That Arts, relieuing all, should faile their Lord! More had he said, when she, with nimble dread, From him, and his vnfinisht court-ship fled. How gracefull then! the Wind that obuious blew,
Too much betray'd her to his amorous view; And play'd the Wanton with her fluent haire, Her Beauty, by her flight, appear'd more rare. No more the God will his intreaties loose; But, vrg'd by Loue, with all his force pursues. As when a Hare the speedy Gray-hound spyes; His feet for prey, shee hers for safetie plyes; Now beares he vp; now, now he hopes to fetch her; And, with his snowt extended, straines to catch her▪ Not knowing whether caught or no, she slips. Out of his wide-stretcht iawes, and touching lips. The God and Virgin in such strife appeare: He, quickned by his hope; She, by her feare, But, the Pursuer doth more nimble proue: Enabled by th' industrious wings of loue. Nor giues he time to breathe: now at her heeles, His breath vpon her dangling haire shee feeles. Cleane spent, and fainting, her affrighted bloud Forsakes her cheeks. Shee cryes vnto the Floud. Helpe Father, if your streames contayne a Powre▪ May Earth, for too well pleasing, me deuour: Or, by transforming, O destroy this shape, That thus betrayes me to vndoing rape. Forth-with, a numnesse all her lims possest; And slender filmes her softer sides inuest. Haire into leaues, her Armes to branches grow: And late swift feet, now roots, are lesse than slow. Her gracefull head a leauy top sustaines: One beauty throughout all her forme remaines. Still Phoebus loues. He handles the new Plant; And feeles her Heart within the bark to pant: Imbrac't the bole, as he would her haue done
As ignorant of what she more than fear'd. Ioue faynes (her importunitie to shift) Her borne of Earth. Saturnia begs the gift. What should he doe? be cruell to his Loue; Or by denying her, suspition moue? Shame that perswades; and Loue doth this disswade▪ But, stronger Loue Shame vnder foot had layd; Yet doubts, if he should such a thing deny His Wife and Sister, 't would the fraud descry. Obtayn'd; not forth-with feare the Goddesse left; Distrusting Ioue, and iealous of his theft, Vntill deliuered to Argus guard. A hundred eyes his head's large circuit starr'd; Whereof, by turnes, at once two onely slept; The other watcht, and still their Stations kept. Which way so-ere he stands, he Iō spyes: Iō, behind him, was before his eyes. By day, she graz'd abroad: Sol vnder ground, He hous'd her, in vnworthy halter bound. On leaues of Tress, and bitter herbs she fed. Poore soule! the Earth, not alwayes greene, her bed; And of the Torrent drinks. With hands Vp-heau'd Shee thought to beg for pity: how deceiu'd! Who low'd, when she began to make her mone; And trembled at the voyce which was her owne. Vnto the banks of Inachus shee stray'd; Her Fathers banks, where she so oft had play'd: Beholding in his streame her horned head, She starts; and from her selfe, selfe-frighted, fled. Her Sisters, nor old Inachus, her knew: Which way so-ere they went, she would pursue, And suffer them to stroke her; and doth moue
Their wonder with her strange expressed loue. He brought her Grasse: She gently lickt his hands, And kist his palmes; nor, longer, teares withstands. And had shee then had words, shee had display'd Her Name, her Fortunes, and implor'd his ayde. For words, she letters with her foot imprest Vpon the Sand, which her sad change profest. Wo's me! cry'd Inachus: his armes he throwes About her snowy Necke. O, woe of woes! Art thou my daughter, throughout all the Round Of Earth so sought; that now, vnsought, art found! Lesse was thy losse: lesse was my miserie. Dumbe wretch (alas!) thou canst not make reply: Yet, as thou canst thou dost: thy lowings speake, And deop-fetcht sighes that from thy bosom breake. I, ignorant, prepar'd thy marriage bed: My hopes, a Sonne-in-law, and Nephewes fed. Now, from the Heard, thy issue must descend: Nor can the length of time my sorrowes end; Accurst in that a God. Deaths sweet reliefe Hard fates denie to my immortall griefe. This said: his Daughter (in that shape belou'd) The Star-ey'd Argus farre from thence remou'd; When, mounted on a hill, the warie Spie Suruayes the Playnes that round about him lie. The King of Gods those sorrowes she indur'd: Could brooke no longer, by his fault procur'd: But, calls his sonne, of fulgent Pleias bred; Commanding him to cut off Argus head. He wings his heeles, puts on his Felt, and takes His drowsie Rod; the Towre of Ioue forsakes; And, winding stoops to Earth. The changed God
His Hat and Wings layes by; retaynes his Rod: With which he driues his Gotes (like one that feeds The bearded Heard) and sings this slender Reeds. Much taken with that Art, before vnknowne, Come, sit by me, said Argus, on this stone. No place affordeth better Pastorage, Or shelter from the Sunnes offensiue rage. Pleas'd Atlantiades doth him obay; And with discourse protracts the speedy Day: Then, singing to his Pipes soft melody, Endeuors to subdue each wakefull eye. The Herds-man striues to conquer vrgent sleepe: Though seiz'd on halfe, the other halfe doe keepe Obseruant watch. He askes who did inuent (With that, he yawn'd) that late-found Instrument. Then, thus the God his charmed eares inclines: Amongst the Hamadryd's and Nonacrines (On cold Arcadian Hils) for beautie fam'd, A Naias dwelt; the Nymphs, her Syrinx nam'd. Who oft deceiu'd the Satyres that pursu'd, The rurall Gods, and thse whom woods include: In exercises, and in chast desire, Diana like: and such in her attire. You either in each other might behold: Her Bow was Horne; Diana's was of Gold: Yet oft mistooke. ar crown'd with Pines, returning From steep Lyeaus, saw her; and, Ioue-burning, Thus said: Faire Virgin, grant a Gods request; And be his Wife. She would not heare the rest; But fled from the despis'd as from her shame, Till to smooth adon's sandy banks shee came▪ There stopt; implores the liquid Sisters aid,
To change her shape, and pitty a fore't Maid. an, when he thought he had his Syrinx claspt Betweene his arms, Reeds for her body graspt. He sighs: they, stir'd there-with, report againe mournefull sound, like one that did complaine. apt with the musick; Yet, O sweet (said he) Together euer thus conuerse will we. Then, of vnequall wax-ioyn'd Reeds he fram'd This seuen-fold Pipe: of her 'twas Syrinx nam'd. The sly Cyllenius, thus discoursing, spyes ow leaden sleep had seal'd-vp all his eyes. Then, silent, with his Magick rod he strokes Their languisht lights, which sounder sleep prouokes, And with his Fawchion lops his nodding head: Whose bloud besmear'd the hoarie Rock with red. here lyes he; of so many lights, the light ut forth: his hundred eyes set in one night, et, that those starry iewels might remayne, turnia fixt them in her Peacocks trayne. Inslam'd with anger, and impatient haste, Before sad ōs eyes and thoughts shee plac't Erynnis Snakes, and through the World doth driue The conscience-stung affrighted Fugitiue. Thou, Nile, to her long toyle an end didst yeeld. Approaching thee, shee on thy margent kneel'd; Her looks (such as shee had) to heauen vp-throwes: With tears, sighs, sounds (expressing worldlesse woes) hee seemed Ioue t' accuse, as too ingrate, And to implore an end of her hard fate. e clips his Wife; and her intreats to free he vniustly plagu'd. Be confident (said he) hee neuer more shall cause thy griefe, or feare:
His vow he bids the Stygian Waters heare. Appeas'd; the Nymph recouer'd her first looke; Sofaire, so sweet! the haire her skin forsooke: Her horns decrease: large eyes, wide iawes, contract: Shoulders and hands againe become exact: Her hooues to nailes diminish: nothing now But that pure White, retaynes shee of the Cow. Then, on her feete her body she erects Now borne by two. Her selfe she yet suspects; Nor dares to speake alowd, lest she should heare Her selfe to low; but softly tries with feare. Now, thee, a Goddesse, is ador'd by those That linnen weare, where sacred Nilus flowes. Hence sprung Ioue's Epaphus, no lesse diuine; Whose Temples next vnto his Mother's ioyne. Equall in yeeres, nor equall spirit wants The Sunne-got Phacton: who proudly vants Of his high Parentatge; nor will giue place. Inachides puts on him this disgrace: Foole, thou thy Mother trusts in things vnknowne; And of a Father boasts that's not thy owne. Vext Phaëton blusht: his shame his rage repels: Who straight to Clymene the slander tels: And Mother, said he, to your grieses increase; I free, and late so fiery, held my peace; Asham'd that such a tainture should be lay'd Vpon my bloud, that could not be gayn-said. But, if I be discended from aboue; Giue proofe thereof, and this reproach remoue. Then hangs about her necke: by her owne Head, By Merope's, her Sisters nuptiall bed, Inn eats her to produce some certaine gage,
That might assure his question'd parentage. Mou'd with her sonnes intreaty, more inflam'd With indignation to be so defam'd, She casts her armes to heauen: and looking on His radiant Orbe, thus said: I sweare my son, By yo faire Taper, that so bright appeares With far-proiected beames; who sees, and heares: That Sun whom thou behold'st, who light and hear Affords the informed World, did thee beget. If not, may he to me deny his sight: And to my eyes let this be his last light. Nor far-remoued doth his Palace stand; His first-vprise confines vpon our Land: If that thy heart doe serue thee, thither goe; And there thy Father, of thy Father, know. Hereat, ioy'd Phacton enlightned grew; Whose towring thoughts no lesse than Heauen pursew. His Aethiopia past, and Ind which fries With burning beames, he climes the Sun's vprise.
OVID'S METRAMORPHOSIS. The second Booke. THE ARGVMENT. RAsh Phaeton fires the World His sisters mourne Hu Tragedie; who into Poplars turne; Their teares to Amber; Cygnus, to a Swan. Ioue, Phoebe-like, Calisto found a Man. Her, Iuno made a Beare: Shee, and her son, Aduanced starres, that still the Ocean shun. Coronis, now a Crowe, sties Neptune's fright, Nictiminè is made the Bird of Night. The too-officious Rauen, late so fayre, Is plum'd with black. Ocyroë growes a Mare. Phoebus, a Heardsman: Mercury, twice such; Who turnes betraying Battus into Tuch. Enuious A glauros, to a Statue, full Of her minde's spots. Loue Ioue conuerts t' a . SOl's loftie Palace on high Pillars rais'd, Shone all with gold, and stones that flame-like blaae' The roofe of Iuory, diuinely deckt: The two-leau'd siluer-doores bright rayes proiect. The workmanship more admiration crau'd: For, curious Musciber had there ingrau'd The Land-imbracing Sea, the orbed Ground, The arched Heauens. Blew Gods the billowes crown'd;
Shape-changing Poteus, Triton shrill; the tall Big-brawn'd Aegeon mounted on a Whale. Gray Doris, and her daughters, heauenly-faire: Some sit on Rocks, and drie their Sea-greene haire; Some seeme vpon the dancing Waues to glide; Others on bacs of crooked ishes ride: Amongst them all, no two appeare the same; Nor dee, more than sisters well became. The Earth had saluage Beasts, Men, Cities, Woods, Nymphs, Satyres, rurall Gods, and crystall Floods: Aboue all these, Heauen's radiant image shines, On both sides deckt with six refulgent Signes. To this, bold Phaëton made his ascent; And to his doubted Father's presence bent; Yet forc't to stand aloose: for, mortall sight Could not induret' approach so pure a light. Sol cloth'd in purple, sits vpon a Throne, Which cleerly with tralucent Emralds shone. With equall-raigning Houres, on either hand, The Dayes, the Moneths, the Yeers, the Ages stand: The fragrant Spring with flowrie chaplet crown'd: Wheat eares, the browes of naked Summer bound: Rich Amn smear'd with crusht Lyaeus blood; New, hy-headed Winter quiuering stood. Much daunted at these sacred nouelties, The fear full Youth all-seeing Phoebus, spies; Who said, What hither drew thee Phaeton, Who art, and wo thily, my dearest Son? He thus reply'd: O thou refulgent t Light, Who all the World teioyeest with thy sight! O Father if allow'd to vse that name, Nor Cymens by thee disguise her shame;
Produce some signe, that may my birth approue, And from my thoughts these wretched doubts remoue. He, from his browes, his shining rayes displac't; And, bidding him draw-neere, his neck imbrac't. By merit, as by birth, to thee is due That name, said he; and Clymene was true. To cleere all doubts; aske what thou wilt, and take Thy granted wish. Beare witnesse thou dark Lake, The oath of Gods, vnto our eyes vnknowne. These words no sooner from his lips were flowne, But he demands his Chariot, and the sway Of his hot Steeds, to guide the winged Day. The God repents him of the oath he made; And, shaking his illustrious Tresses, said: Thy tongue hath made mine erre, thy birth vnblest. O, would I could break promise! this request, I must confesse, I onely would denie: And yet, disswade I may. Thy death doth lie Within thy wish. What's so desir'd by thee, Can neither with thy strength nor youth agree. Too great intentions set thy thoughts on fire. Thou, mortall, do'st no mortall thing desire; Through ignorance, affecting more than they Dare vndertake, who in Olympus sway. Though each himselfe approue; except me, none Is able to supply my burning Throne. Not that dread Thunderer, who rules aboue, Can driue these wheeles: and who more great than Ioue? Steep is the first ascent; which in the prime Of springing Day, fresh Horses hardly clime. At Noone, through highest skies their course they beare: Whence Sea and Land euen We behold with feare.
Then downe the Hill of Heauen they scoure amaine With desperate speed, and need a steady reigne; That Thetis, in whose wauy bowres I lie, Each euening dreads my down-fall from the skie. Besides; the Heauens are daily hurried round, That  the Statres, to other motions bound. Against this violence, my way I force, And counter-un their all--bearing course. My Charriot had: can thy sraile strength ascend The obuious Poles, and with their force contend? No Goues, no Cities, fraught with Gods, expect; N maeble Fanes, with wealthy offrings deckt. Through saluage shapes, and dangers lyes thy way: Which couldst thou keep, and by no error stray, Betweene the Buls sharp horns yet must thou goe; By him that draws the strong Aemonian bowe; The deathfull Scorpion's far-out-bending clawes; The shorter Crab's; the roaring Lyon's iawes. Nor easie is't those fiery Steeds to tame: Who from their mouthes and nosthrils vomit flame. They, heated, hardly of my rule admit; But, head-strong, struggle with the hated bit. Then, lest my bountie, which would saue, should kill, Beware, and whil'st, thou maist, reforme thy will. A signe thou crau'st, that might confirme thee mine: I, by dehorting, giue a certaine signe; Approu'd a Father, by Paternall feare: Book on my looks, and reade my sorrows there. O, would thou could'st descend into my brest; And apprechend my vexed Soules vnrest! And lastly, all the wealthy World behold, Of all that Heauen enrich, rich seas infold,
Or on the pregnant-bosom'd Earth remayne, Aske what thou wilt; and no repulse sustaine. To this alone, I giue a forc't consent: No honour, but a true-nam'd punishment. Thou, for a blessing, beg'st the worst of harms. Why hang'st thou on my neck with fawning arms? Distrust not; we haue sworn: but aske, and take What thou canst wish: yet, wiser wishes make. In vaine dehorted; he, his promise claym'd; With glory of so great a charge inflam'd. The wilfull Youth then lingring Phoebus brought To his bright Chariot, by Vulcan wrought. The Beam and Axeltree of massie gold; On Siluer Spokes the golden Fellies rol'd: Rich Gems and Crysolites the Harnesse deckt; Which, Phoebus beames, with equall light, reflect, Whil'st this, admiring Phaëton suruayes, The wakefull Morning from the East displayes Her purple doores, and odoriferous bed, With plentie of deaw-dropping Roses spred. Cleare Luciser the flying Starres doth chace; And, after all the rest, resignes his place. When Titan saw the Dawning ruddy grew, And how the Moon her siluer horns with-drew: He bade the light-foot Houres, without delay To ioyn his Steeds. The Goddesses obay: Who, from their loftie Mangers, forth-with led His fierie Horses, with Ambrosou fed. With sacred Oyle anoynted by his Syre, Of vertue to repulse the rage of fire, He crown's him with his Rayes; Then, thus began With doubled sighs, which following woes fore-tan.
Let not thy Father still aduise in vaine. Sonne, spare the whip, and strongly vse the raigne. They, of their owne accord will run too fast. 'Tis hard, to moderate a flying haste. Nor driue along the fiue directer Lines. A broad and beaten path obliquely windes, Contented with three Zones: which doth auoid The distant Poles: the track thy wheeles will guide. Descend thou not too low, nor mount too high; That temperate warmth may heauen and earth supply. A loftie course will heauen with fire infest; A lowely, earth: the safer Meane is best. Nor to the folded Snake thy Chariot guide: Nor to the Altar on the other side: Betweene these driue. The rest I leaue to Fate; Who better proue, than thou, to thy owne state. But, while I speak, behold, the humid Night Beyond th' Hesperian Vales hath ta'ne her flight. Aurora's splendor re-inthrone's the Day: We are expected, nor can longer stay. Take vp the reignes, or, while thou maist, refuse; And no my Chariot, but my counsell vse; While on a firme foundation thou dost stand, Not yet postest of thy ill-wisht Command. Let me the World with vsuall influence cheare: And view that light which is vnsafe to beare. The generous and gallant Phaton, All courage, vaut's into the blazing Throne: Glad of the reignes, nor doubtfull of his skill; And giues his Father thanks against his will. Meane while, the Sunnes swift Horses, hot Pyrōus, Strong Aethon, fiery Phlego, bright Eus,
Neighing alowd, inflame the Ayre with heat; And, with their thundring hooues, the barriers beat. Which when hospitious Thetis once with-drew, (Who nothing of her Nephew's danger knew) And gaue them scope; they mount the ample skie, And cut the obuious Clouds with feet that flie. Who, rays'd with plumed pinions, leaue behinde The glowing East, and slower Easterne-winde. But, Phoebus Horses could not feele that fraight: The Chariot wanted the accustom'd waight. And as vnballac't ships are rockt and tost With tumbling Waues, and in their steerage lost: So, through the Ayre the lighter Chariot reeles; And ioults, as emptie, vpon iumping Wheeles. Which when they found, the beaten path they shun; And, straggling, out of all subiection run. He knowes not how to turne, nor knowes the way; Or had he knowne, yet would not they obay. The cold, now hot, Triones sought in vaine To quench their heat in the forbidden Maine. The Serpent, next vnto the frozen Pole, Benum'd, and hurtlesse, now began to rowle With actuall heat; and long forgotten ire Resumes, together with aethereall fire. 'Tis said, that thou Botes ranst away, Though slow, though thee thy heauy Waine did stay. But, when from top of all the arched skye, Vnhappy Phaton the Earth did eye: Pale sudden feare vn-nerves his quaking thighs; And, in so great a light, benights his eyes. He wisht those Steeds vnknowne; vnknown his birth; His sute vngranted: now he couets earth;
To be the sonne of scorned Merope. Rapt as a ship vpon the high-wrought Sea, By saluage tempests chac't; which in despaire The Pilot leaueth to the Gods, and Pray'r. What should he doe? much of the heauen behinde; Much more before: both measur'd in his minde. The neuer-to-be entred West suruay's; And then the East. Lost in his owne amaze, And ignorance, he can nor hold the reignes, Nor let them goe; nor knowes his Horses names: But stares on terror-striking skies (possest By Beasts and Monsters) with a panting brest. There is a place, in which the Scorpion bends His compast clawes; who through two Signes extends. Whom▪ when the Youth beheld, stewd in black sweat Of poyson, and with turn'd-vp taile to threat A mortall wound; pale feare his senses strooke, And slackned reignes let's fall, from hands that shooke. They, when they felt them on their backs to lie, With vn-controlled error scoure the skie Through vnknowne ayrie Regions; and tread The way which their disordred fury led. Vp to the fixed Starres their course they take; And stranger Spheres with smoking Chariot rake: Now clime now, by sleep Praecipies descend: And neere Earth their wandring race extend. To  brother's Steeds beneath her owne The Moon admires! the Clouds like Comets shone. Inuading fire the vpper Earth assayld; All chapt and cond; her pregnant iuyce exhal'd. Trees seed there ruin: Grasse, gray-headed turns: And , by that which did produce it, burns.
But this was nothing. Cities with their Towres, Realmes with their People, funerall fire deuoures. The Mountayns blaze: High Athos, but too high; Fount-fruitfull Ida, neuer till then drie; Oete, old molus, and Cilician Taurus Muse-haunted Alicon, Oeàgrian Aemus. Loud Eetna roreth with her doubled fires: Parnassus grones beneath two flaming spires. Steep Othrys, Cynthus, Eryx, Mimas, glowe; And Rhodope, no longer cloath'd with snowe. The Phrygian Dindyma, in cinders mourns: Cold Caucasus in frosty Scythia burns. High Mycale, diuine Cythaeron, wast; Pindus, and Ossa once on Pelion cast, More great Olympus (which before did shine) The ayrie Alpes, and cloudie Appenine. Then Phaeton beheld on euery side The World on fire, nor could such heat abide; And, at his deadly-drie and gasping iawes, The scalding Ayre, as from a furnace, drawes; His Chariot, redder than the fire it bore; And, being mortall, could indure no more Such clowds of ashes, and eiected coles. Muffled in smoake which round about him rowles, He knowes not where he is, nor what succeeds; Dragg'd at the pleasure of his frantick Steeds. Men say, the AEthiopians then grew swart; Their blood exhaled to the outward part. A sandie Desert Lybia then became, Her full veins emptied by the thirsty flame. With hair vnbound and torn, the Nymphs, distraught, Bewaile their Springs▪ Boetia Dirce sought;
Argos, ymone: Ephyre, faire Pirene mist: Nor streames securer are. Great Tanais in boyling chanell fumes; Tuthr aman Cayeus with heat consumes; Ismenus, old, eneus, Erymanthus, Yellow Lycorn as; to be twice-burnt, Zanthus. Moeandr, running in a turning maze, Mygdonian Melas, and Euroas blaze, Euphrates, late inuesting Babylon; Orontes, Phasis, Ister, Thermodon, Ganges, Alps, Sperchius lately cold, And Tagus flowing with dissolued gold. The Swans, that rauisht with their melodie banks, now in Cayster frie. To farthest Earth affrighted Nilus fled; And there conceal'd his yet vnfound-out head, Whilst his seuen dustie chanels streamlesse lie. Ismarian Hebrus, Strymon now are drie. Hesprian streames, Rhene, Rhodanus, the Po, And Scepter destinated Tyber glow. Earth cracks: to Hell the hated light descends; And frighted Pluto, with his Queene, offends. The Ocean shrinks, and leaues a field of Sand; Where new discouered Rocks, and Mountaines stand, That multiply the scattred Cyclades, Late couer'd with the deepe and awfull Seas, The Fishes to the bottom diue: nor dare The sportlesse Dolphins tempt the sultrie Aire. Long boyld aliue, the mnstrous hocae die, And on the brine with turn' d-vp bellies lie. With  and her daughters, Nerus raues; Who hide themselues beneath the scalding waues.
Thrice wrathfull Neptune his bold arme vp-held Aboue the Floods: whom thrice the fire repel'd. Yet foodfull Tellus with the Ocean bound, Amidst the Seas, and Fountaines now vnfound (Selfe-hid within the womb where they were bred) Neck-high aduanceth her all-bearing head. (Her parched fore-head shaddowed with her hand) And, shaking, shooke what-euer on her stand: Where-with, a little shrunke into her brest, Her sacred tongue her sorrowes thus exprest: If such thy will, and I deserue the same, Thou chiefe of Gods, why sleeps thy vengefull flame? Be't by Thy fire, if I in fire must frie: The Author lessens the calamitie. But, whilst I striue to vtter this, I choke. View my sing'd haire, mine eyes half-out with smoke! The sparkling cinders on my vissage throwne! Is this my recompence? the fauour showne For all my seruice? for the fruit I haue borne? That thus I am with plough and harrowes torne? Wrought-out through-out the yeare? that man and beast Sustayne with food? and you with incense feast? But, say I merit ruine, and thy hate: What hath thy brother done (by equall Fate Elected to the wauy Monarchie), That Seas should sinke, and from thy presence flie? If neither he, nor I thy pittie moue, Pitty thy Heauen. Behold! the Poles aboue At either end do fume: and should they burne, Thy habitation would to ruine turne. Distressed Atlas shoulders shrinke with payne, And scarce the glowing Axeltree sustayne.
If Sea, if Earth, if Heauen shall fall by fire, Then all of vs to Chaos must retire. O! quench these flames: the miserable state Of things releeue, afore it be too-late. This said, her voyce her parched tongue forsook, Nor longer could the smothering vapors brook; But, down into her-selfe with-drew her head, Neere to the infernall Cauerns of the Dead. Ioue calls the Gods to witnesse, and who lent The strayning Chariot; should not he preuent, That All would perish by one destinie; Then mounts the highest Turret of the skie, From thence inur'd to cloud the spacefull Earth, And giue the flame fore-running thunder birth. But, there, for wasted clouds he sought in vaine, To shade or coole the scorched Earth with raine. He thunders; and, with hands that connot erre, Hurls lightning at the audacious Charioter. Him strooke he from his seat, breath from his brest, Both at one blow, and lames with flames supprest. The frighted horses, plunging seuerall wayes, Breake all their tire: to whom the bit obayes; The reignes, torne beame, crackt spokes, disperst abroad, Scotcht Heauen was with the Chariots ruines strow'd. But, soulelesse haton, with blazing haire, Shot he-long through a long descent of Aire; As when a falling starre glides through the skie, Of seemes to fall to the deceiued eye. Whom great Eridanus (farre from his place Of birth) receiu'd, and quencht his flagrant face: Whose Nymphs interr'd him in his Mothers womb; And fixt this Epitaph vpon his Tomb▪
Here Phaton lyes: who though he could not guide His Fathers Steeds, in high attempts he dy'd. Phoebus with griefe with-drew. One day did runne About the World, they say, with-out the Sunne, Which flamie funerals illuminate; That good, deriued from a wretched Fate. When  had said what could be said In such a griefe; halfe-soul'd, in black array'd, She fils the Earth she wanders through, with grones, First seeking his dead corps, and then his bones. Interr'd in forren Lands she found the last: Her feeble-lims vpon the place shee cast, And bath'd his name in teares, and strictly prest The carued Marble with her bared brest. Nor lesse th' Hliades lament; who shead From drowned eyes vaine offerings to the dead: Who with remorselesse hands their bosoms teare; And wayling, call on him that cannot heare. With ioyned horns foure Moons their orbs had fil'd, Since they their customarie plaints vpheld: When Phatusa, thinking to haue cast Her selfe on Earth, cry'd, ah! my feet stick fast! Lamptie, pressing to her sisters ayd, As suddenly with fixed roots was stayd. A third, about t'haue torne her scattered haire, Tore-off the leaues which on her crowne the bare. This, grieueth at her stiffe and senselesse thighes: Shee, that her stretcht-out arms in branches rise. And whilst with wonder they themselues behold, The creeping barke their tender parts infold; Then, by degrees, their bellies, brests, and all Except their mouthes; which on their mother call.
What should shee doe? but run to that, to this, As furie draue; and snatch a parting kisse? But yet, not so suffiz'd, shee stroue to take Them, from themselues, and down the branches brake: From whence, as from a wound, pure blood did glide. O pitty, Mother! (still the wounded cry'd) Nor  vs in our Trees! O! now adieu! With that, the barke their lips together drew. From these cleere dropping trees, tears yearly low: They, hardned by the Sunne, to Amber grow; Which, on the moysture-giuing Riuer spent, To Roman Ladies, as his gift, is sent. Sthenan Cygnus at that time was there, A-kin to Phaëton; in loue, more neere. He, leauing State (who in Liguria raign'd, Which Cities great and populous contayn'd) Fild with complaints the Riuer-chiding floods, The sedgie banks, and late augmented Woods. At length, his voice grew small: white plume contends In whitenesse with his haire: his neck ascends. Red films vnite his toes: armes turne to wings: His mouth, a flat blunt bill, that sadly sings. Becoe a Swan, remembring how vniust lightning was, nor Heauen, nor him will trust. Whom Lakes and Ponds (detesting fire) delight; And lods, to Flames in nature opposite. The wofull Father to dead Phaton, Him  neglecting (all his lustre gon, As when eclipst) day, light, his owne life hates; And  griefe, with anger aggrauates. Reting to illuminate the Earth. ough, too much my toile! born with the birth
Of Time; (as restlesse;) without end, regard, Or honour: recompenc't with this reward! Some other now may on my Chariot sit. If all of you confesse your selues vnfit; Let oue ascend: that he (when he shall trie) At length may lay his murdering thunder by. Then will e finde, that he, who could not guide Those fire-hoou'd Steeds, deseru'd not to haue dy'd. The Gods stand round about him, and request That endlesse Night might not the World inuest. Euen oue excus'd his lightning, and intreats: Which, like a King, he intermixt with threats. Displeased Phoeb, hardly reconcil'd, Takes-vp his Steeds, as yet with horror wild. On whom he vents his spleen: and, though they run, He ashes, and vpbraids them with his Son. The Thunderer then walks the ample Round Of Heauens high walls, to search if all were sound. When finding nothing there by fire decay'd; He Earth, and humane industries suruay'd. Arcadia chiefely exerciz'd his cares; There, Springs and streames, that durst not run, repaire's; The Fields with grasse, the Trees with leaues indue's, And withered Woods with vanisht Shades renew's. Oft passing to and fro, a Nonacrine The God inflam'd; her beautie, more diuine! 'Twas not her Art to spin, nor with much care And fine varietie to trick her haire; But, with a zone, her looser garments bound, And her rude tresses in a fillet wound: Now armed with a Dart, now with a Bowe: A Squire of Phoebe's. Moenalus did knowe
None more in grace, of all her Virgin throng: But, Fauorites in fouo last not long. The parted Day in equall balance held, A Wood shee entred, as yet neuer feld. There from her shoulders shee her Quiuer takes, Vnbends her Bowe; and, tyr'd with hunting, makes The flowry-mantled Earth her happy bed; And on her painted Quiuer layes her head. When Ioue the Nymph without a guard did see In such a positure; This stealth, said hee, My Wife shall neuer know: or, say shee did; Who, ah, who would not for her sake be chid! Diaa's shape and habit them indew'd, He said; My Huntresse, where hast thou pursew'd This morning's chace? Shee, rising, made reply; Harle Pow'r, more great than Ioue (though Ioue stood by) In my esteem—He smil'd: and gladly heard Him-selfe, by her, before Himselfe preferr'd; And kist. His kisses too intemperate grow; Not such as Maids on Maidens do bestow. His strict imbracements her narration stay'd; And, by his crime, his owne deceit betray'd. Shee did what Woman could to force her Fate: (Would  saw! it would her spleene abate) Although, as much as Woman could, shee stroue; What Woman, or, who can contend with Ioue! The Victor hies him to th'aethereall States. The Woods, as guiltie of her wrongs, shee hates; Almost forgetting, as from thence shee flung, Her Quiuer, and the Bowe which by it hung. High  with her traine Now ening, pleased with the quarry slaine,
Beheld, and call'd her: call'd vpon, shee fled; And in her semblance Iupiter doth dread. But, when shee saw the attending Nymphs appeare; Shee troops amongst them, and diuerts her feare. Ah, how our faults are in our faces read! With eyes scarce euer rais'd, shee hangs the head: Nor perks shee now, as shee was wont to do, By Cynthia's side, nor leads the starry crew. Though mute shee bee, her violated shame Selfe-guiltie blushes silently proclaime. But that a Maid, Diana the ill hid Had soone espy'd: they say, her fly Nymphs did. Nine Crescents now had made their Orbs compleat; When, faint with labour, and her brothers heat, Shee takes the shades; close by the murmuring And filuer current of a fruitfull Spring. The place much prays'd the streame as coole as cleere Her faire feet glads. No Spyes, said shee, be here: Here will wee our disrobed bodies dip. Calisto blusht: the rest their faire lims strip. And her perforce vncloth'd, that sought delayes; Who, with her body, her offence displayes. They, all abasht, yet loth to haue it spy'd, Striuing her belly with their hands to hide; Auant, said Cynthia; get thee from our trayne; Nor, with thy lims, this sacred Fountaine stayne. This knew the Matron of the Thunderer; Whose thoughts, to fitter times, reuenge defer: Nor long delaye's; for, Arcas (which more scorne And griefe prouok't) was of the Lady borne. Beheld with ire, which turn'd her eyes to flame; Must thou be fruitfull too, to blaze my shame,
From thence, those stars, the price of whordome, driue; Nor let th'impure in your pure Surges diue. They both assent. Her Peacocks to the skyes Their Goddesse draw; late stucke with Argus eyes. Thou too, thou prating Rauen, turn'd as late From white to blacke, by well-deserued Fate. (The spotlesse siluer oue was not more white, Nor Swans which in the running brookes delight: Nor yet that vigilant Fowle, whose gaggling shall Her e after free th'attempted Capitoll.) Thy tongue, thy tell-tale tongue did thee vndoe: And what was white, is now of sable hew. The Palme, Coronis, of Lariss, bare From all th'Aemonian Dames for matchlesse faire. Who dearly, Delphian, was belou'd by thee; As long as chaste, or from detection free. But, Phoebus Bird her scapes did soone descrie: Nor could they charme th'inexorable Spie: Whom, flying to his Lord, the Crowe pursewes (As talkaiue as he) to know the newes; And, knowing, said: Thy selfe thou dost ingage By thanklesse seruice: slight not my prsage. Know what I was, and am: through all my time My actions sift: thou'lt find my faith my crime. For, Pallas, on a day, in chest compos'd Of Atick Osiars, priuately inclos'd Her Erichthous (whom no Woman bare) Committed to the custodie and care Of three faire Virgin Nymphs, that daughters were To prudent Cecrops, who two shapes did beare: Nor told what it contayn'd; but, charg'd that they Her secrets should not to themselues betray.
These from an Elme I (vnespy'd) espy. Faire Herse and Pandrosa faithfully Performe their charge. Aglauros then did call Her fearfull sisters, and vntyes with-all The wicker Cabinet; whose twigs contayne An infant, raysed on a Dragon's trayne. This, I may Goddesse told; and for reward, Am now cashiered from Minerua's Guard, The Bird of Night preferd. Beware by mee: Nor too officiously tell all you see. Perhaps, you thinke, I to that place aspir'd Without her grace: vnsought-to, or desir'd: Should you aske Pallas, and her anger by; Though more than angrie, this shee would deny. Me had King Coronus, great in fame. Through happy Phocis, by a royall Dame. Rich suters I (despise me not) had store: My beauty wrackt me. Walking on the shore, As leasurely as now I vse to goe, Cold Neptune saw me, and with lust did glowe. The time, his prayr's and prayses spent in vaine; What would not yeeld, he offers to constraine; And follows me that fled. The harder strand Behind me left: and tyr'd with yeelding sand, To Gods and Men I crie. No humane aid Was then at hand: a Maid releeues a Maid. For, as to heauen my trembling armes I threw; My armes cole-black with houering feathers grew. My Robe I from my shoulders thought to throwe: But, that was plume, and to my skin did growe. With hands to beat my naked brest, I trie: But, neither brest to beat, nor hands, had I.
Running, in sand I sunke not as before; But, me the scarce-toucht Earth, vnburden'd bore. Forth-with, I lightly through the Ayre ascend; And on Minerua, without blame, attend. But, what was this; when shee, whose wicked deeds Vnwoman'd her, in our lost grace succeeds? For, know (no more than through all Lesbos spred) Nyctimene defil'd her Fathers bed. Though now a Bird; yet, full of guilt, the sight, The Day, she shuns, and masks her shame in Night. About her, all our winged troops repayre; And, with inuectiues, chace her through the Ayre. To her, the Rauen: Mischiefe thee surprise For staying me. Vaine Omen's I despise; Then, forward flew; and told the hurtfull truth Of lost Coronis, and th'Aemonian Youth. The Harp drops from his hand: and from his head The Laurell fell: his chearefull colour fled. Transported with his rage, his bow he tooke, And with incuitable arrow strooke That brest, which he so oft to his had ioyn'd: Shee shreeks; and from the deadly wound doth wind The biting steele, pursu'd with streames of blood, That bath'd her pure white in a crimson Flood: And said; Though this be dew, yet Phoebus, I Might first haue teem'd: now, two in one must die▪ Shee faints: forc't life in her blood's torrent swims: And stifning cold benums her senselesse lims. His crueltie, to her he lou'd, too late, He now repenteth, and himselfe doth hate, Who lent an eare, whom rage could so incense: He hates his Bird, by whom he knew th'offence;
Hee hates his Art, his Quiuer, and his Bowe; Then, takes her vp, and all his skill doth showe. But (ah!) too late to vanquish Fate he tries; And surgerie, without successe, applies. Which when he saw, and saw the funerall pyle Prepared to deuour so deare a spoyle; Since no coelestiall eye may shed a teare, He fetcht a grone, that made Earth grone to heare: And now vncar'd-for odours powr'd vpon her; And vndue death with all due rites doth honour. But, Phoebus, not induring that his seed (And that by her) the greedie Fire should feed, Snatcht it both from her womb, and from the flame; And to the two-shap't Chiron brought the same. The white-plum'd Rauen, who reward expects, He turnes to blacke; and for his truth reiects. It pleas'd the Halfe-horse to be so imploy'd; Who in his honorable trouble ioy'd. Behold: the Centaur's daughter with red haire, Whom formerly the Nymph Caricle bare By the swift Riuer, and Ocyoe nam'd; Who had her Father's healthfull Art disclaym'd, To sing the depth of Fates: Now, when her brest Was by the prophecying rage possest, And that th'included God inflam'd her mind; Beholding of the Babe, she thus diuin'd: Health giuer to the World, grow Infant, grow; To whom mortalitie so much shall owe. led Soules thou shalt restore to their aboads; nd once against the pleasure of the Gods. o doe the like, thy Grand-sires flames denie: nd thou, begotten by a God, must die.
Thou, of a bloodlesse corps, a God shalt bee: And Nature twice shall be renew'd in thee. And you, deare Father, not a Mortall now; To whom the Fates eternitie allow; Shall wish to die, then when your wound shall smart With Serpents blood, and slight your helplesse Art. Relenting Fates will pitty you with death, Against their Law, and stop your groning breath. Not all yet said, her sighes in stormes arise; And ill-aboding teares burst from her eyes. Then, thus: My Fates preuent me: lo, they tie My faltering tongue; and farther speech denie. Alas! these Arts not of that valew be, That they should draw the wrath of Heauen on me! O, rather would I nothing had fore-knowne! My lookes seeme now not humane, nor my owne. I long to feed on grasse: I long to run About the spacious fields. Woe's me, vndon! Into a Mare (my kindred's shape) I grow: Yet, why throughout? my Father but halfe so. The end of her complaint you scarce could heare To vnderstand: her words confused were. Forth-with, nor words, nor neighings, she exprest; Her voyce yet more inclining to the beast: Then, neigh'd out-right. Within a little space, Her down-thrust armes vpon the Meadow pase. Her fingers oyne▪ one hoose fiue nayles vnite: Her head and neck enlarge, not now vpright: Her trayling garment to a trayne extends: Her dangling haire vpon her crest descends: Her voyce and shape at once transform'd became: And to the Prodigie they giue a name.
Old Chiron weeps; and Phoebus, vainly cryes On thee to change the changelesse Destinies. Admit thou could'st: thee, from thy selfe expel'd, Then Elis, and Messenian pastures held. It was the time when, cloth'd in Neat-herds weeds, Thou play'dst vpon vnequall seuen-fold Reeds: Whil'st thee thy Pipe delights, whil'st cares of loue Thy soule possesse, and other cares remoue; Without a guard the Pylian Oxen stray: Obserued by the craftie sonne of May, Forthwith he secretly conueighs them thence, In vntract Woods concealing his offence. None saw but Battus, in that Country bred; Who wealthy Neleus famous horses fed. Him onely he misdoubts: then, (t'ane a-part) Stranger, said Mercury, what ere thou art; If any for this Herd by chance inquire, Conceale thy knowledge: and receiue, for hire, This white-hair'd Cow. Hee tooke her, and reply'd, Be safe; thy theft shall sooner be discry'd By yonder stone, than me; and shew'd a stone. Ioue's sonne departs, and straight returns vnknowne (A seeming Clowne in forme and voice) who said: Saw'st thou no cattel through these fields conuay'd? Detect the thet; in their recouerie ioyne: And, lo, this Hecfer, with her Bull, is thine. He (the reward redoubl'd) answer'd: There Beneath those hills, beneath those hills they were. Then, Hermes, laughing lowd; What, knaue, I say, Me to my selfe; me to my selfe betray? Then, to a Touch-stone turn'd his periur'd brest; Whose nature now is in that name exprest.
Shee might not enter), and the darke doore strooke With her bright lance; which straight in sunder broke. There saw shee Enuie lapping Vipers blood; And feeding on their flesh, her vices food: And, hauing seen her, turn'd-away her eyes. The Catiffe slowly from the ground doth rise (Her halfe-deuoured Serpents laid-aside) And forward creepeth with a lazie stride. Viewing her forme so faire; her armes, so bright; Shee gron'd, and sigh't at such a chearfull sight. Her body more than meger; pale her hew; Her teeth all rusty; still shee looks askew; Her brest with gall, her tongue with poyson sweld: Shee only laught, when shee sad sights beheld. Her euer-waking cares exil'd soft sleep: Who looks on good successe, with eyes that wep: Repining, pines: who, wounding others, bleeds: And on her selfe reuengeth her misdeeds. Although Tritonia did the Hag detest; Yet briefely thus her pleasure shee exprest: Aglauros, one of the Cecropides, Doe thou infest with thy accurst disease. This said; the hastie Goddesse doth aduance Her body, with her earth-repelling lance. Enuic pursues her with a wicked eye, Much grieu'd at her preuayling industrie. Wrapt in darke clouds, which way so ere she turns, The Corne she lodges, flowry pastures burns, Crops what growes high; Towns, Nations, with her breath Pollutes; and Vertue persecutes to death▪ When shee the faire Athenian towres beheld, Which so in wealth, in learned Arts exceld,
And feastfull Peace; to crie shee scarce forbeares, In that shee saw no argument for teares. When shee Aglaurs lodging entred had, Shee gladly executes what Pallas bade: Her cancred hand vpon her brest shee lay'd, And crooked thornes into her heart conuay'd, And breath'd in banefull poyson; which shee sheads Into her bones, and through her liuer spreads. And that her enuy might not want a cause: The God in his diuinest forme shee drawes: And with it, sets before her wounded eyes Her happy sister, and their nuptiall ioyes: Augmenting all. These secret woes excite, And gnaw her soule. Shee sighes all day, all night; And with a slow infection melts away, Like Ice before the Sunnes vncertaine ray. Faire Herse's happy state such heart-burne breeds In her black bosom, as when spiny weeds Are set on fire: which without flame consume: And seem (so small their heat) to burne with fume. Oft shee resolues to die, such sights to shun: Oft, by disclosing, to haue both vndon. Now sits shee on the threshold, to preuent The Gods accesse; who with lost blandishment, And his best Art, perswades. Quoth shee; forbeare, I cannot be remou'd, if you stay here. I to this bargain, he reply'd will stand; The doore then forces with his figured wand. Striuing to rise, to second her debate, Her hips could not remoue, prest with dull waight. Againe shee struggl'd to haue stood on end: But those vsupple sinewes would not bend.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The third Booke. THE ARGVMENT. ARm'd troops from Dragons late-sowne teeth arise. By his owne Hounds the Hart Actaeon dyes. Iuno, a Beldame. Semele doth frie In wisht imbraces. Bacehus from Ioue's thigh Takes second birth. The wise Tiresias twice Doth change his sex. Scorn'd Eccho pines t' a voice: Selfe-lou'd Narcissus to a Daffadill. Bacchus, a Boy. The Tyrrhen's ship stands still, With Iuy mor'd. Strange shapes the Saylers fright: Who Dolphines turne, and still in ships delight. ANd now the God ariuing with his Rape At sacred Creet, resumes his heauenly shape The King his sonne to seeke his daughter sent, Fore-doomed to perpetuall banishment, Except his fortune to his wish succeed: How pious, and how impious in one deed! Earth wandred-through (Ioue's thefts who can exquire?) He shuns his Country, and his Fathers ire: With Phoebus Oracle consults, to know What Land the Fates intended to bestow. Who, thus: In desart fields obserue a Cow, Yet neuer yoat, nor seruile to the plow.
Follow her slow conduct, and where shee shall Repose, there build: the place Boeotia call. Scarce Cadmus from Castalian Caue descended, When he a Hecfer saw, by no man tended, Her neck vngall'd with groning seruitude. The God ador'd, he foot by foot pursew'd. Cephisus floud, and Panope now past, Shee made a stand; to heauen her fore-head cast, With loftie horns most exquisitely faire; Then, with repeated lowings fild the Ayre: Looks back vpon the company sheeled; And, kneeling, makes the tender grasse her bed. Thanks-giuing Cadmus kift the vnknowne ground; The stranger fields and hills saluting round. About to sacrifice to heauen's high King, He sends for water from the liuing Spring. A Wood there was, which neuer Axe did hew; In it, a Caue, where Reeds and Osiers grew, Rooft with a rugged Arch by Nature wrought; With pregnant waters plentifully fraught. The lurking Snake of Mars this Hold possest; Bright scal'd, and shining with a golden crest; His bulk with poyson swolne; fire-red his eyes: Three darting tongues, three ranks of teeth comprise. This fatall Well th'vnlucky Tyrians found; Who with their down-let Pitcher, rays'd a sound. With that, the Serpent his blew head extends; And suffering Ayre with horrid hisses rends. The water from them fell: their colour fled: Who all, astonisht, shook with sudden dread. Hee wreaths his scaly foldes into a heape; And fetcht a compasse with a mightie leape:
Then, bolt-vpright his monstrous length displayes More than halfe way; and all the Woods suruayes. Whose body, when all seene, no lesse appeares, Than that, which parts the two Coelestiall Beares. Whether the Tyrians sought to fight, or flie, Or whether they through feare could neither trie; Some crash the 'twixt his iawes; some claspt to death; Some kils with poyson; others with his breath. And now the Sunne the shortest shadowes made; Then, Cadmus, wondring why his seruants stay'd Their foot-steps trac't. A hide the Hero's wore, Which late he from a slaughtred Lyon tore: His Arms a dart, a bright steele-pointed Speare; And such a minde as could not stoope to feare. When he the Wood had entred, and there view'd The bodies of the slaine with bloud imbrew'd; Th'insulting victor quenching his dire thirst At their suckt wounds; he sigh't, as heart would burst: Then said, I will reuenge, O faithfull Mates, Your murders, or accompany your Fates. With that, he lifteth vp a mighty stone, which with a more than manly force was throwne. What would haue batter'd downe the strongest wall, And shiuered towres, doth giue no wound at all. The hardnesse of his skin, and scales that grow Vpon his armed back, repell the blowe. And yet that strong defence could not so well The vigour of his thrilling Dart repell; Which through his winding back a passage rends: There sticks: the steele into his guts descends. Rabid with anguish, hoe retorts his looke Vpon the wound, and then the iaueling tooke
Betweene his teeth; it euery way doth winde: At length, tugg'd out, yet leaues the head behind. His rage increast with his augmenting paines: And his thick-panting throte swels with full veines. A cold white froth surrounds his poys'nous iawes: On thundring Earth his trayling scales he drawes: Who from his black and Stygian maw eiect's A blasting breath, which all the grasse infects. His body, now he circularly bends; Forthwith into a monstrous length extends: Then rusheth on, like showr-incensed Floods; And with his brest ore-beares the obuious Woods. The Prince gaue way; who with the Lyon's spoyle Sustayn'd th' assault; and fore't a quick recoyle, His Lance fixt in his iawes. What could not feele, He madly wounds; and bites the biting steele. Th' inuenom'd gore; which from his palate bled, Conuerts the grasse into a duskie red: Yet, slight the hurt, in that the Snake with-drew; And so, by yeelding, did the force subdew. Till Agenorides the steele imbrew'd In his wide throte, and still his thrust pursew'd; Vntill an Oke his back-retrait with-stood: There, he his neck transsixt: with it, the Wood. The Tree bends with a burden so vnknowne; And, lashed, by the Serpents taile, doth grone. While he suruay'd the hugenesse of his foe, This voyce he heard (from whence he did not know) Why is that Serpent so admir'd by thee? Agenor's sonne, a Serpent thou shalt bee. He speechlesse grew: pale feare repeld his blood; And now vncurled haire like bristles stood.
Behold! mans Fautresse, Pallas (from the sky Descending to his needfull aide) stood by: Who bade him in the turn'd-vp surrowes throw The Serpents teeth; that future men might grow. He, as commanded, plow'd the patient Earth: And therein sow'd the seeds of humane birth. Lo (past beliefe!) the Clods began to moue: And tops of Lances first appear'd aboue: Then, Helmets, nodding with their plumed Crefts; Forth-with, refulgent Pouldrons, plated Brests; Hands, with offensiue weapons charg'd, insew: And Target-bearing troops of Men vp-grew. So in our Theater's solemnities, When they the Arras rayse, the Figures rise: Afore the rest, their faces first appeare; By little and by little then they reare Their bodies, with a measure-keeping hand, Vntill their feet vpon the border stand. Bold Cadmus, though much daunted at the sight Of such an Host, addrest him to the fight. Forbeare (a new-borne Souldier cry'd)t' ingage Thy better fortune in our ciuill rage! With that, he on his earth-bread brother flew: At whom, a deadly dart another threw. Nor he that kild him, long suruiucs his death; But, through wide wounds expires his infant breath. Slaughter, with equall furie, runs through all: And by vnciuill ciuill blowes they fall. The new-sprung Youth, who hardly life possest, Now panting, kick their Mother's bloudy brest: But fiue suruiu'd: of whom, Echion one; His Armes to Earth by Pallas counsell throwne,
He craues the loue he offers. All accord As Brothers should, and what they take afford. Sidonian Cadmus these assist, to build His loftie walls; the Oracle fulfild. Now flourisht Thebes: now did thy exile proue In shew a blessing; those that rule in loue And warre, thy Nuptials with their daughter grace: By such a Wife to haue so faire a race; So many sonnes and daughters; nephewes too (The pledges of their peacefull beds) insew; And they now growne to excellence and powre. But, Man must censur'd be by his last houre: Whom truly we can neuer happy call, Afore his death, and closing funerall. In this thy euery way so prosperous state, Thy first misse-hap sprung from thy Nephew's fate, Whose browes vnnaturall branches ill adorne; By his vngratefull dogs in pieces torne. Yet fortune did offend in him; not he: For, what offence may in an error be? With purple bloud, slaine Deare the Hills imbrew: And now high Noon the shades of things withdrew; While East and West the equall Sunne partake: Thus, then Hyantius to his Partners spake, That trod the Mazes of the pathlesse Wood: My Friends our nets and iauelins reake with blood: Enough hath beene the fortune of this day: To morrow, when Aurora shall display Her rosie cheeks, we may our sports renew. Now I hoebu, with inflaming eye doth view The crannyed Earth: here let our labour end: Take vp your toyles. They gladly condescend.
A vale there was with Pines and Cypresse crown'd, Gargaphie call'd; for Dian's loue renown'd. A shady Caue possest the inward part, Not wrought by hands; there, Nature witty Art Did counterfet: a natiue Arch shee drew, With Pumice and light Topases, that grew. A bubbling Spring, with streams as cleere as glasse Ran chiding by, inclos'd with matted grasse. The weary Huntresse vsually here laues Her Virgin lims, more pure than those pure waues. And now her Bowe, her Iau'lin, and her Quiuer; Doth to a Nymph, one of her Squires, deliuer: Her light impouerisht Robes another held: Her Buskins two vntie. The better skil'd If menian Crocale, her long haire wound In pleited-wreathes: yet was her owne vnbound. Neat Hyale, Niphe, Rhanis, Psecas (still Imploy'd) and Phiale the Lauers fill. While here Titania bath'd (as was her guise) Lo Cadmus Nephew, tyr'd with exercise, And wandring through the Woods, approcht this Groue With satall steps, so Destinie him droue! Entring the Caue with skipping Springs bedeaw'd: The Nymphs, all naked, when a Man they view'd, Clapt their resounding brests, and fild the Wood With sudden shreeks: like Iuory pales they stood About their Goddesse: but shee, far more tall, By head and shoulders ouer-tops them all. Such as that colour, which the Clouds adorns, Shot by the Sunne-beam's; or the rosie Morn's: Such flusht in Dians cheeks, being naked tane. And though inuiron'd by her Virgin trayne,
She side-long turnes, looks back, and wisht her bow: Yet, what shee had, shee in his face doth throw. With vengefull Waters sptinkled; to her rage These words she addes, which future Fate presage: Now, tell how thou hast seene me disarray'd; Tell if thou canst: I giue thee leaue. This said, Shee to his neck and eares new length imparts; This Browe th' antlers of long-liuing Harts: His legges and feet with armes and hands supply'd; And cloth'd his body in a spotted hide. To this, feare added. Autonocîus flyes, And wonders at the swiftnesse of his thighs. But, when his looks he in the Riuer view'd, He would haue cry'd, Woe's me! no words insew'd: His words were grones. He frets, with galling teares, Checks not his owne; yet his owne mind he beares. What should he doe? Goe home? or in the Wood For euer lurke? Feare, this; shame that withstood. While thus he doubts, his Dogs their Master view: Black-foot and Tracer, opening first, pursew: Sure Tracer, Gnossus; Black-foot Sparta bare. Then all fell in, more swift than forced Ayre: Spie, hauener, lie-clife; these Arcadia bred: Strong Fawn-bane, Whirlwind, eager Follow-dread; Hunter, for sent; for speed, Flight went before; Flerce Saluage, lately ganched by a Bore; Greedy, with her two whelps; grim Wolf-got Ranger; Stout Shepheard, late preseruing flocks from danger; Gaunt Catch, whose race from Sicyonia came; Courser, Blab; rash Tyger neuer tame; Blanch, Mourner, Royster, Wolfe surpassing strong; And Tempest, able to continue long:
Swift, with his brother Churle, a Cyprian hound; Bold Snatch, whose sable brows a white star cround; Cole shag-hair'd Rug, and Light-foot wondrous fleet, Bred of a Spartan Bitch, his Sire of reet; White-tooth, and Ring-wood (others not t' expresse.) O're Rocks, o're Crags, o're Cliffs that want accesse, Through streightned wayes, and where there was no way, The well-mouth'd hounds pursue the princely prey. Where oft he wont to follow, now he flyes; Flyes from his family! in thought he cryes, I am Actaeon, seruants, know your Lord! Thoughts wanted words. High skyes the noyse record. First, Collier pincht him by the haunch: in flung Fierce Kill-deare; Hill-bred on his shoulder hung. These came forth last; but crost a nearer way A-thwart the hills. While thus their Lord they stay, In rush the rest, who gripe him with their phangs. Now is no roome for wounds. Grones speake his pangs, Though not with humane voyce, vnlike a Hart: In whose laments the knowne Rocks beare a part. Pitcht on his knees, like one who pitty craues, His silent looks, instead of Armes, he waues. With vsuall showts their Dogs the Hunters cheare; And seeke, and call Actaeon. He (too neare!) Made answer by mute motions, blam'd of all For being absent at his present fall. Present he was, that absent would haue beene; Nor would his cruell hounds haue felt, but seene. Their snowts they in his body bathe; and teare Their Master in the figure of a Deare: Nor, till a thousand wounds had life disseis'd, Could quiuer-bearing Dian be appeas'd.
'Twas censur'd variously: for, many thought The punishment farre greater than the fau't. Others so sowre a chastitie commend, As worthy her: and both, their parts defend. Ioue's wife not so much blam'd or prays'd the deed; As shee reioyceth at the wounds that bleed In Cadmus Family; who keeps in mind Europa's rape, and hateth all the kind. Now new occasions fresh displeasure moue: For Semcle was great with child by Ioue. Then, thus shee scolds: O, what amends succeeds Our lost complaints! I now will fall to deeds. If we be more than titularly great; If we a Scepter sway; if Heauen our seat; If Ioue's fear'd Wife and Sister (certainly, His Sister) torment shall the Whore destroy. Yet, with that theft perhaps she was content, And quickly might the iniurie repent: But, shee conceiues, to aggrauate the blame, And by her Belly doth her crime proclaime. Who would by Iupiter a Mother proue, Which hardly once, hath hapned to our loue: So confident is beautie! Yet shall he Deceiue her hopes: nor let me Iuno be, Vnlesse, by her owne Ioue destroy'd, shee make A swift descent unto the Stygian Lake. Shee quits her Throne, and in a yellow clowd Approach't the Palace; nor disinist that shrowd, Till shee had wrinkl'd her smooth skin, and made Her head all gray: while creeping feet conuay'd Her crooked lims; her voice small, weake, and hoarse, Beroc-like, of Epidaure, her Nurse.
Long-talking; at the mention of Ioue's name, Shee sigh't, and said; Pray heauen, he proue the same! Yet much I feare: for many oft beguile With that pretext, and chastest beds desile. Though Ioue; that's not enough. Giue he a signe Of his affection, if he be diuine. Such, and so mightie, as when pleasure warmes His melting bosome, in high Iuno's armes; With thee, such and so mightie, let him lie, Deckt with the ensignes of his deitie. Thus shee aduiz'd the vnsuspecting Dame; Who begs of loue a boone without a name. To whom the God: Choose, and thy choyce possesse; Yet, that thy diffidencie may be lesse, Witnesse that Powre, who through obscure aboads Spreads his dull streams: the feare, and God of Gods. Pleas'd with her harm, of too much powre to moue! To perish by the kindnesse of her Loue: Such be to me, she said, as when the Invites Of Iuno summon you to Venus Rites. Her mouth he sought to stop: but, now that breath Was mixt with ayre which sentenced her death. Then, fetch't a sigh, as if his brest would teare (For, shee might not vnwish, nor he vnsweare) And sadly mounts the skie; who with him tooke The Clouds, that imitate his mournefull looke; Thick showrs and tempests adding to the same, With thunder and incuitable flame. Whose rigor yet he striueth to subdew: Not armed with that fire which ouerthrew The hundred-handed Giant; 't was too wilde; There is another lightning, far more milde,
By Cyclops forged with lesse flame and ire: Which, deathlesse Gods doe call the Second fire. This, to her Father's house, he with him tooke: But (ah!) a mortall body could not brooke AEthere all tumults. Her successe shee mournes; And in those so desir'd imbracements burnes. Th' vnperfect Babe, which in her wombe did lie, Was ta'ne by Ioue, and sew'd into his thigh, His Mother's time accomplishing: whom first, By stealth, his carefull Aunt, kinde Ino, nurst: Then, giuen to the Nyseides, and bred In secret Caues, with milke and honey fed. While this on earth befell by Fates decree (The twice-born Baccbus now from danger free) Ioue, waightie cares expelling from his brest With flowing Nectar, and dispos'd to iest With well-pleas'd Iuno, said: In Venus deeds, The Femal's pleasure farre the Male's exceeds. This shee denyes; Tiresias must decide The difference, who both delights had try'd. For, two ingendring Serpents once he found, And with a stroke their slumy twists vnbound; Who straight a Woman of a man became: Seuen Autums past, he in the eighth the same Refinding, said: If such your powre, so strange, That they who strike you must their nature change; Once more I'le trie. Then, struck, away they ran: And of a Woman he became a Man. He, chosen Vmpire of this sportfull strife, Ioue's words confirm'd. This vext his forward wife More than the matter crau'd. To wreak her spite, His eyes shee mustled in eternall night.
Th'ominpotent (since no God may vndoe An others deed) with Fates which should insew Inform'd his Intellect; and did supply His body's eye-sight, with his mindes cleere eye. He giuing sure replyes to such as came, Through all th' Aonian City's stretcht his fame. First, blew Liriope sad triall made How that was but too true which he had said: Whom in times past Cephisus flood imbrac't Within his winding streams, and forc't the chaste. The louely Nymph (who not vnfruitfull prou'd) Brought forth a Boy, euen then to be belou'd, Narcissus nam'd Enquiring if old age Should crowne his Youth; He, in obscure presage, Made this reply: Except himselfe he know. Long, they no credit on his words bestow: Yet did the euent the prophecie approue, In his strange ruine, and new kind of loue. Now, he to twentie added had a yeare: Now in his lookes both Boy and Man appeare. Many a loue-sick Youth did him desire; And many a Maid his beautie set on fire: Yet, in his tender age his pride was such That neither Youth nor Mayden might him touch. The vocall Nymph, this louely Boy did spy (Shee could not proffer speech, nor not reply) When busie in pursuite of saluage spoyles, He draue the Deere into his corded toyles. Eccbo was then a Body, not a Voyce: Yet then, as now, of words shee wanted choice▪ But onely could reiterate the close Of euery speech. This Iuno did impose.
Beholds his eyes, two starres! his dangling haire Which with vnshorn Apolo's might compare! His fingers worthy Bacebus! his smooth chin! His Iuory neck! His heauenly face! Where-in The linked Deities their Graces fix! Where Roses with vnsullied Lillyes mix! Admneth all for which, to be admir'd: And vnconsiderately himselfe desir'd. The prayses, which he giues, his beautie claym'd. Who seeks, is sought: th' Inflamer is inflam'd. How often would he kisse the flattering spring! How oft with downe-thrust arms sought he to cling About that loued necke! Those cous'ning lips Delude his hopes; and from himselfe he slips. Not knowing what, with what he sees he fryes: And th' error that deceiues, incites his eyes. O Foole! That striu'st to catch a flying shade! Thou seek'st what's no-where: Turn aside, 'twill vade. Thy formes reflection doth thy sight delude: Which is with nothing of its owne indu'd. With thee it comes; with thee it stayes; and so 'Twould goe away, hadst thou the power to go. Nor sleep, nor hunger could the Louer rayse: Who, lay'd along, on that false forme doth gaze With looks, which looking neuer could suffice; And ruinares himselfe with his owne eyes. At length, a little lifting vp his head; You Woods, that round about your branches spred, Was euer so vnfortunate a Louer! You know, to many you haue beene a couer; From your first growth to this long distant day Haue you knowne any, thus to pine away!
I like, and soe, but yet I cannot find The lik't, and seene. O'Loue, with error blind! What grieues me more: no Sea, no Mountayn steep, No wayes, no walls, our ioyes a-sunder keep: Whom but a little water doth diuide, And he himselfe desires to be inioy'd. As oft as I to kisse the floud decline, So oft his lips ascend, to close with mine. You'ld thinke we toucht: so small a thing doth par Our equall loues! Come forth, what ere thou art. Sweet Boy, a simple Boy beguile not so: From him that seeks thee, whither would'st thou go? My age nor beautie merit thy disdaine: And me the Nymphs haue often lou'd in vaine. Yet in thy friendly shewes my poore hopes liue; Still striuing to receiue the hand I giue: Thou smil'st my smiles: when I a teare let fall, Thou shedd'st an other; and consent'st in all. And, lo, thy sweetly-mouing lips appeare To vtter words, that come not to our care. Ah, He is I! now, now I plainly see: Nor is't my shadow that bewitcheth me. With loue of me I burne; (O too too sure!) And suffer in those flames which I procure. Shall I be woo'd, or wooe? What shall I craue? Since what I couet, I already haue. Too much hath made me poore! O, you diuine And fauoring Powres, me from my selfe dis-ioynd Of what I loue, I would be dispossest: This, in a Louer, is a strange request∣ Now, strength through griefe decayes: short  the time I haue to liue; extinguisht in my Prime.
Nor grieues it me to part with well-mist breath; For griefe will find a perfect cure in death: Would he I loue might longer life inioy! Now, two ill-fated Louers, in one, die. This said; againe vpon his image gaz'd; Teares on the troubled water circles rais'd: The motion much obscur'd the fleeting shade. With that, he cry'd (perceiuing it to vade) O, whither wilt thou! stay: nor cruell proue, In leauing me, who infinitely loue. Yet let me see, what cannot be possest; And, with that emptie food, my fury feast. Complaining thus, himselfe he disarrayes; And to remorselesse hands his brest displayes: The blowes that solid snow with crimson stripe: Like Apples party-red, or Grapes scarce ripe. But, in the water when the same appeare, He could no longer such a sorrow beare. As Virgin wax dissolues with feruent heat: Or morning frost, whereon the Sun-beams beat: So thawes he with the ardor of desire; And, by degrees, consumes in vnseene fire. His meger checks now lost, their red and white; That life, that fauour lost, which did delight. Nor those diuine proportions now remaine, So much by Eccbo lately lou'd in vaine. Which when shee saw; although she angry were. And still in minde her late repulse did beare; As often as the miserable cry'd, Alas! Alas, the wofull Nymph reply'd. And euer when he struck his sounding brest, Like sounds of mutuall sufferance exprest.
His last words were, still hanging o're his shade; Ah, Boy, belou'd in vaine! so Eccho said. Farewell. Farewell, sigh't she. Then downe he Iyes: Deaths cold hand shuts his selfe-admiring eyes: Which now eternally their gazes fix Vpon the Waters of infernall Styx. The wofull Naiades lament the dead; And their clipt haire vpon their brother spred. The wofull Dryades partake their woes: With both, sad Eccho ioynes at cuery close. The funerall Pyle prepar'd, a Herse they brought To fetch his body, which they vainely sought. In stead whereof a yellow flowre was found, With tufos of white about the button crown'd. This, through Achaia spred the Prophets fame; Who worthily had purchas't a great name. But, proud Echion's sonne, who did despise The righteous Gods, derides his prophecies; And twits Tiresias with his rauisht sight. He shook his head, which age had cloth'd-in white; And said, 'T were well for thee, hadst thou no eyes To see the Bacchanal solemnities. The time shall come (which I presage is neere) When Semeleian Liber will be here: Whom if thou honour not with Temples due; Thy Mother, and her sisters shall imbrue Their furious hands in thy effused blood; And throw thy seuered lims about the Wood. 'T will be; thy malice cannot but rebell: And then thoul't say; The blinde did see too well. His mouth proud Pentheus stops. Beliefe succeeds Fore-runing threats: and words are seal'd by deeds.
is come; the fields with clamor sound: They in his Orgies tread a frantick Round. Women with Men, the base, and nobler sort. Together to those vnknowne Rites resort. You sonnes of Mars, you of the Dragons race (Said be) what furie doth your minds imbase? Is Brafse of such a power, which drunkards bea, Or sound of Hornes, or Magicall deceit; That you, whom Trumpets clangor, horrid fight, Nor death, with all his terrors, could affright; Loud Women, wine-bread rage, a lustfull crew Of Beasts, and Kettle-drums, should thus subdew? At you, graue Fathers, can I but admire! Who brought with you your flying Gods from Tyre, And sixt them here: now from that care so farre Estranged, as to lose them without warre! Or you, who of my able age appeare; Whose heads should helmets, and not garlands, weare! Not leauy Iauelins, but good Swords adorne The hands of Youth. O you, so nobly borne; That Dragon's fiery fortitude indue, Whose single valour such a number flue. He, in defending of his Fountayne, fell: Doe you th' Inuadets of your fame repell. He flue the strong: do you the weake destroy; And free your Country from foule imfamy. If Destinies decree that bbs must fall; May men, may warlike engines raze her wall: I et sword and fire our famisht liues assault: Then should we not be wretched through our fault, Nor striue to hide out guilt; but, Fortune blame; And vent our pittyed sorrowes without shame.
Now, by a naked Boy we are put to flight: Whom bounding Steeds, nor glorious Arms delight, But haire perfum'd with Myrrhe, soft Anadems, And purple Robes inchac't with gold and gems: Who shall confesse (if you your aid denie) His forged Father, and false Deitie. What? Had Acrisius vertue to withstand Th'Impostor, chaced from the Argiue strand? And shall this vagabond, this forainer, Me Pentheus and the Thehan State deterre? Goe (said he to his seruants) goe your way, And drag him hither bound: preuent delay. Him Cadmus, Athamas, and all disswade; By opposition, more intemperate made. Furie increaseth, when it is with-stood: And then good counsell doth more harme than good. So haue I seen and vnstopt torrent glide With quiet waters, scarcely heard to chide: But, when faln Trees, or Rocks, impeacht his course▪ To some, and roare with vncontrolled force. All bloudy they returne. Where is, said hee, This Bacchus? Bacchus none of vs did see, Reply'd they, This his minister we found (Presenting one with hands behinde him bound) A Lydian. zealous in those mystories. On whom fierce Pentheus looks, with wrathfull eyes: Who hardly could his puishment deferre. Then, thus: thou wretch, that others shalt deterre, Declare thy Name, thy Nation, Parentage; And why thou followest this new-fangled Rage, He in whom innnocency feare o're-came; Made this reply: Acetes is my name:
My life I owe to the Maeonian earth; To none, my fortunes; borne of humble birth. No land my Father left me to manure, Nor Herds, nor bleating Flocks: himselfe was poore. The tempted Fish, with hook and line he caught: His skill was all his wealth: His skill he taught; And said, My heire, successor to my Art, Receiue the riches which I can impart. He, dying, left me nothing; and yet all: The Sea may I my patrimony call. Yet, lest I still should on those Rocks abide, To nauigation I my time apply'd; Obseru'd th' Olenian kids, that raine portend; The Hyades, who weepe when thy descend; Taygeta, and Arcturur; the resort▪ Of seuerall windes; and harbour-giuing Ports. For Delos bound, we made the Cbian shores: And, there arriued, with industrions Oares. Leaping a-shore, I made the beach my bed. When aged Night Aurora's blushes fled, I rose; and bade my men fresh water bring: Shewing the way that guided to the Spring Then, from a Hill obseru'd the windes accords, My Mates I cald, and forth-with went abord. All here, the Master's Mate Ophelies cryes; And thinking he had light vpon a prize, Along the shore a louely Boy conuay'd, Adorned with the beautie of a Maid. Heauy with wine and sleepe, he reeled so. That, thought supported, he could hardly go. When I beheld his habit, gait, and feature, I could not thinke it was a humane Creature.
Fellowes, I doubt (nay, without doubt) said I, This excellence includes a Deitic. O, be propitious, who-so-'ere thou art; And to out industrie successe impart; And pardon these who haue offended thus Then, Dictys said: Forbeare to pray for vs: (Than he, none could the top saile-yard bestride With lighter speed; nor thence more nimbly slide) This, Libys, swart Melanthus (who the Prov Commanded) and Alcimedon allow; Epopeus the Boats-man, so all say; Bewitched with the blind desire of prey. This ship, said I, you shall not violate With sacriledge of so diuine a weight; Wherein I haue most int'rest, and command: And on the hatches their ascent with-stand. Whereat, the desperate Lycabas grew wild; Who for a bloudy murder was exil'd From Tuscam. Whil'st I alone resist, He tooke me such a buffer with his fist, That downe I fell; and had falne ouer-board, If I (though senselesse) had not caught a cord. The wicked Company the fact approue. Then, Bacchus (for, 'twas he) began to moue, As if awaked with the noyse they made (His wind-bound senses now discharg'd) and said: What clamor's this? What doe you? Sailers, whither Meane you to beare me? Ah, how came I hither! Feare not, said Proreus; name where thou would'st be; And to that Harbor we will carry thee. Then, Friends, Lyaeus said, for Naxos stand: Naxos my home; an hospitable Land.
By Seas, by all the Gods, by what auayles, They sweare they will, and bade me hoyse-vp sayles. Which trim'd for, Naxos on the Star-board side; What do'st thou mad-man, foole? Opheltes cry'd. Each feares his losse. Some whisper in mine care: Most say by signes, Vnto the Lar-board steere. Amaz'd: Some other hold the Helme, said I; I' le not be tainted with your periurie. All chafe and storme. What? said Ethalion, Is all our sefetie plac't in thee alone? With that, my office he vpon him tooke; And Naxos (altering her course) for sooke. The God (as if their fraud but now out-found) From th' vpper deck the Sea suruayed round; Then, seem d to crie. Sirs, this is not, said he, That promis't shore, the Land so wisht by me. What is my fault? What glory in my spoyle, If men a Boy, if many one beguile? I wept afore: but, they my teares deride; And with laborious Oares the waues diuide. By him I sweare (than whom none more in view) That what I now shall vtter, is as true, As past beliefe. The ship in those profound And spacefull Sea, so stuck as on drie ground. They, wondring, ply'd their Oares; the sayles display'd; And striue to run her with that added aide When luy gaue their Oares a fore't restraint; Whose creeping bands the sayles with Beriyes paint. He, head-bound with a wreath of clustred Vines, A lauelin shook, claspt with their leauy twines. Stern Tygers, Lyaxes (such vnto the eye) And spotted Panthers, round about him lye.
All, ouer-boord now tumble; whether' twere Out of infused madnesse, or for feare. Then, Medon first with spiny fins grew blacke; His forme depressed, with a compast back. To whom said Lycabas; ô more than strange! Into what vncouth Monster wilt thou change! As thus he spake, his mouth became more wide; His nose more hookt: scales arme his hardned hide. While Libys tugg'd an Oare that fixed stands, His hands shrunke vp; now finns, no longer hands. An-other by a-cable thought to hold; But, mist his armes. He fell: the Seas infold His maymed body: which a tayle est-soone Receiues, reuersed like the horned Moone. They leap a loft, and sprinkle-vp the Flood; Now chace aboue; now vnder water scud: Who like lasciuious Dancers friske about; And gulped Seas, from their wide nosthrills spōue. Of twenty Saylers, onely I remayn'd: So many men our Complement contayn'd. The God my minde could hardly animate; Trembling with horror of so dire a Fate. Suppresse, said he, these tumults of thy feare; And now thy course for sacred Dia beare. Arriued there, with his implor'd consent, I Orders tooke; and thus his Feasts frequent. Our eares are tyr'd with thy long ambages: Which wrath, said he, would by delay, appease. Goe, seruants, take him hence: let his fore't breath Expire in grones: and torture him to death. In solid prison pent; while they proude Whips, Racks, and Fire, the doores flie open wide.
And of themselues, as if dissolu'd by charmes, The fetters fall from his vnpinion'd armes. But now, not bidding others, Pentheus flings To high Cythaeron's sacred top, which rings With frantick songs, and shrill-voic't Bacchanals, In Liber's celebrated Festiuals. And as the warlike Courser neighs and bounds, Inflam'd with furie, when the Trumpet sounds: Euen so their far-heard clamours set on fire Sterne Pentheus, and exasperate his ire. In midst of all the spacious Mountayne stood A perspicable Champain, fring'd with wood. Here, first of all, his Mother him espyes, Viewing those holy Rites with prophane eyes. Shee, first, vpon him frantickly did runne: And first her eger Iauelin pearc't her sonne. Come, sisters, cry'd shee, this is that huge Bore Which roots our fields; whom we with wounds must gore. With that, in-rush the sense-distracted Crew: And altogether the amaz'd pursew. Now trembled he; now, late-breath'd threats supprest: Himselfe he blames, and his offence confest. Who cry'd, Helpe Aunt Autonoē; I bleed: O let Actaeon's ghost soft pitty breed! Not knowing who Actaeon was, shee lops His right hand off: the other Ino crops. The wretch now to his Mother would haue throwne His sappliant hands: but, now his hands were gone. Yet lifting vp their bloody stumps, he said, Ah, Mother, see! Agaue, well appay'd, Shouts at the sight, casts vp her neck, and shakes Her staring haire in cruell hands shee takes
His head, yet gasping: 16 sing, said shee, Iō my Mates! This spoyle belongs to mee. Not leaues, now wither'd, nipt by Autumn's frost, So soone are rauisht from high Trees, and tost By Scattering windes, as they in peeces teare His minced lims. Th'Ismenians, struck with feare. His Orgies celebrate; his prayses sing; And incense to his holy Altars bring.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The fourth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. DErceta, a Fish. Semiramis a Du. Transforming Nais equall Fate dosh pr. White berries Louers blood with black dosiles. Appollo, like Eury nome, beguiles Leucothoe, buried quick for that offence: who, Nector-sprinkled, sprouts to Frankincense. Grieu'd Clitie, turn'd t'a Flowr, turns with the S. Daphnis, to stone. Sex changeth Scytheon. Celmus, a Load-stone. Curets got by showrs. Crocus, and Smilax, rurn'd to little flowrs. In one Hermaphrodite, two bodies ioyne. Mineides, Bats. Sad Ino made diuine, With Melicert. who luno's fact vpbray'd, Or Statues, or Cadmean Fowles are made. Hermione and Cadmus, worne with woe, Proue hurtlesse Dragons. Drops to Serpents grow. Atlas, a Mountaine. Gorgon toucht Sea-weeds To C orall change, From Gorgon's blood, proceeds Swift Pegasus: Crysaor also takes From thence his birth. Fair haires conuers to Snakes. Bvt yet, Alcitboē Minēides The honour'd Orgies of the God displease. Her sisters share in that impietie; Who Bacchus for the sonne of Ioue denic.
And now his Priest proclaimes a solemne Feast; That Dames and Maids from vsuall labour rest; That wrapt in skins, their haire-laces vnbound, And dangling Tresses with wilde luy crown'd, They leauy Speares assume. Who prophesies Sad haps to such as his command despise. The Matrons and new-marryed Wiues obay: Their Webs, their vn-spun Wooll, aside they lay; Sweet odours burne; and sing: Lyaeus, Baccbus, Nrsaeus, Bromius, Euan, great Iacchus; F-e-got, Sonne of two Mothers, The twice-borne, Father Eleleus, Thyon, nouer shorne, Lenaeus, planter' of life cheering Vines; Nyetileus: with all names that Greece assignes To thee. ô Liber! Still dost thou inioy Vnwasted Youth; eternally a Boy! Thou'rt seen in heauen; whom all perfections, grace; And, when vnhorn'd, thou hast a Virgins face. Thy conquests through the Orient are renown'd, Where tawny India is by Ganges bound. Proud Pentheus, and Iyenrgus, like prophane, By thee (ô greatly to be fear'd!) were slaine: The Thuscaus drencht in Seas. Thou hold'st in awe The spotted Lynxes, which thy Chariot draw. Light Bacchanals, and skipping Satyrs follow, Whil'st old. Sylenus, reeling still, doth halloo; Who weakly hangs, vpon his tardie Asse. What place so-e're thou entrest, sounding brasse, I owd Sack-buts, Tymbrels, the confused cryes Of Youths and Women, pierce the marble skyes. Thy presence, we, Ismenides, implore: Come, ô come pleas'd! Thus they his Rites restore.
Yet, the Menēides at home remaine: And with their plyed task's his Feast prophane: Who either weaue, or at their distaffs spin: And vrge their Maids to exercise their sin. One said, as shee the twisted thread out-drew: While others sport, and forged Gods pursew. Let vs. whom better Palles doth inuite, Out vsefull labour season with delight, And stories tell by turnes; that, what long yeares. Denie our eyes, may enter at our eares. They all agree; and bade the eldest tell Her storie first. Shee paus'd, not knowing well Of many which to choose: Tinsist vpon The Sad Dercetis, of fam'd Baylon (Who, as the Palestines beleeue, did take A scaly forme, inhabiting a Lake) Or of her daughter speake, with wing'd ascent High-pearcht on towres: who there her old age spent: Or of that Ndis; who with charmes most strange, And weeds too pow'rfull, humane shapes did change, Into mute Fishes, till a Fish thee grew: Or of the Tree whose berries chang'd their hew; The white to black, by bloods aspersion, growne: This pleaseth best; as being most vnknowne. Who thus began; and draws the following woll. Young Pyramus (no Youch so beautifull Through all the East) and Thube (Who for faire Might with th'immortall Goddesses compose) Ioyn'd houses, where Semiramis inclos'd Her stately towne, with walls of brick compos'd. This neighbourhood their first acquaintance bred: That, grew to loue; Loue fought a nuptial bed:
But Parents, who could not with-stand, with-stood Their ioynt desires, and like incensed blood. Signes onely vtter their vnwitnest loues: But hidden fire the violenter proues. A cranny in the parting wall was left; By shrinking of the new-layd morter, cleft: This, for so many Ages vndescry'd. (What cannot Loue finde out!) the Louers spy'd. By which, their whispering voyces softly trade, And Passion's amorous embassie conuay'd. On this side, and on that, like Snailes they cleaue; And greedily each others breath receaue. O enuious walls (said they) who thus diuide Whom Loue hath ioyn'd! O, giue vs way to slide Into each others armes! if such a blisse Transcend our Fates, yet suffer vs to kisse! Nor are w'ingrate: much we confesse we owe To you, who this deare libertie bestowe. At Night they did farewell. Their kisses greet The senselesse stones, with lips that could not meet. When from th'approching Morn the stars withdrew, And that the Sunne had drunke the scorched dew, They at the vsuall Station meet againe; And with soft murmurs mutually complaine. At last, resolue in silence of the Night To steale away, and free themselues by flight; And with their houses, to forsake the Towne. Yet, lest they so might wander vp and downe; To meete at Ninus tombe they both agree, Vnder the shel er of a shady Tree. There, a high Mulberry, full of white fruit; Hard by a liuing Fountayne fixt his Root.
The Sun, that seem'd too slow, his steeds bestowes In restfull Seas: from Seas, wisht Night arose. Then Thisbe in the darke the cloores vnbarr'd; And slipping forth, vnmissed by her guard, Comes maskt to Ninus tomb: there in the cold Sits vnderneath that Tree: Loue made her bold. When (lo!) a Lyonesse, smear'd with the blood Of late-slaine Beeues, approcht the neighbor flood, To quench her thirst. Far-off by Moon-light spy'd, Swift feare her flight into a Caue doth guide. Flying, her mantle from her shoulders fell: The fatall Lionesse, as from the Well Vp to the rocky Mountaine shee with-drawes, Found it, and tore it with her bloody iawes. When Pyramus, who came not forth so soone, Perceiued by the glimpses of the Moone The footing of wilde Beasts: his looke grew pale. But, when he spy'd her torne and bloody vaile; One night (said he) two louers shall destroy! Shee longer life deserued to inioy. The guilt is mine: 'twas I (poore soule!) that slue thee Who to a place so full of danger drew thee, Nor came before. You Lyons, ô descend From your aboads! a wretch in pecces rend, Condemned by his selfe-pronounced doom: And make your entrailes my opprobrious tomb! But Cowards wish to die. Her mantle hee Carryes along vnto th'appointed Tree. There hauing kist, and washt it with his eyes; Take from our blood, said he, the double dyes. With that, his body on his sword he threw: Which, from the reaking wound, be dying drew.
Now, on his back, vp-spun the blood in smoke: As when a Spring-conducting pipe is broke, The waters at a little breach break out, And hissing, through the aëry Region spout. The Mulberries their former white forsake; And from his sprinkling blood their crimson take. Now she, who could not yet her feare remoue, Retuins, for feare to disappoint her Loue. Her eger spirit seeks him through her eyes; Who longs to tell of her escap't surprise. The place and figure of the Tree she knew; Yet doubts, the berries hauing chang'd their hew. Vncertaine; she his panting lims descry'd, That struck the stayned earth; and starts aside. Box was not paler than her changed looke: And like the lightly breath'd-on Sea she shooke. But, when she knew 'twas he (now dispossest Of her amaze) shee shrecks, beats her swoln brest, Puls off her haire; imbraces, softly reares His hanging head, and fils his wound with reares. Then, kissing his cold lips: Woe's (she said) What cursed Fate hath this diuision made! O speake, my Pyramus! ô looke on mee! Thy deare, thy desperate Thisbe calls to thee! At Thisbe's name he opens his dim eyes; And hauing seen her, shuts them vp, and dyes. But when his emprie seabbard shee had spy'd, And her known Robe; Vnhappy man! she cry'd, These wounds from loue, stom thine own hand proceed! Nor is my hand too weake for such a deed: My loue as strong. This, this shall courage giue To force that life which much disdains to liue.
In death I'le follow thee! instyl'd by all, The wretched Cause, and partner of thy Fall. Whom Death (that had (alas!) alone the might To pull thee from me!) shall not dis-vnite. O you, our wretched Parents (thus seuere To your owne blood!) my last Petition heare: Whom constant loue, whom death hath ioyn'd, interre Together in one envi'd Sepulcher. And thou, ô Tree, whose branches shade the slaine; Of both our slaughters beare the lasting staine: In funerall habit: euer clothe your brood; A liuing monument of our mixt blood. This said, his sword, yet recking, shee reuers't, And with a mortall wound her bosom pearc't. The easie Gods vnto her wish accord; Their Parents also her desire afford: The late-white Mulberryes in black now mourne; And what the fire had left, lay in one vrne. Here ended she. Some intermission made, Leucothoê, her sisters silent, said: This Sunne, who all directeth with his light, Weake Loue hath tam'd: his loues we now recite. He first discouer'd the adulterie Of Mars and Venus (nothing scapes his eye) And in displeasure told to Iuno's sonne Their secret stealths, and where the deed was done. His spirits faint: his hands could not sustaine The worke in hand. Forthwith, he forg'd a chaine, With nets of brasse, that might the eye deceaue, (Lesse curious far the webs which Spiders weuc.) Made pliant to each touch, and apt to close: This, he about the guiltie bed bestowes.
No sooner these Adulterer's were met, Than caught in his so strangely forged net; Who, strugling, in compeld imbracements lay. The Iuory doores then Vulcan doth desplay; And calls the Gods. The shamefully lay bound: Yet one, a wanton, wisht to be so found. The heauenly dwellers laugh. This tale was told Through all the Round, and mirth did long vphold. Venus, incenst on him who this disclos'd A memorable punishment impos'd. And he, of late so tyrannous to Loue, Loue's tyrannie in iust exchange doth proue. Hyperion's sonne, what boots thy pearcing sight! Thy feature, colour, or thy radiant light! For thou, who earth inflamest with thy fires, Art now thy selfe inflam'd with new desires. Thy melting eyes alone Leucothoê view; And giue to her, what to the World is dew. Now, in the East thou hastnest thy vp-rise: Now, slowly sett'st; euen loth to leaue the skyes. And, while that Obiect thus exacts thy stay, Thou addest houres vnto the Winters day. Oft, in thy face thy mindes disease appeares; Affrighting all the darkned World with feares. Not Cynchia's interposed Orbe doth moue These pale aspects; this colour springs from loue. Shee all thy thoughts ingrost: nor didst thou care For Clymen,c for her who Circes bare, For Khodos, Clytie, who in loue abounds, Although despis'd, though tortur'd with two wounds. All, all were buried in Leucothoē Borne in sweet Saba, of Eurynome.
As shee in beautic farre surpast all other: So much the Daughter farre surpast the Mother. Great Orchamus was Father to the Maid: Who, seuenth from Belus Priscus, Persusway'd. In low Hisperian Vales those pastures are Where Phoebus horses o Ambrosrosia fare. There, tyred with the trauels of the day, They renouate what labour doth decay. Now, while coelestiall food their huer seeds, And Night in her alternate raigne succeeds; In figure of Eurynome, the God Approcht the chamber, where his life aboad. He, spinning by a lamp, Leucath o found, With twice six hand-maids, who inclos'd her round. Then kissing her (her Mother now by Art) I haue, said he, a secret to impart: Maids, presently with-draw. They all obey'd. He, after he had cleer'd the chamber, said▪ The tardie Yeare I measure: I am he Who see all Obiects, and by whom all see; The World's cloere eye: by thy fair solse, I sweare, I loue thee aboue thought. Shot shooke for feare; Her spindle and her distasse from her fell: And yet that feare became her wondrous well. Then, his owne forme and radiancy, he tooke: Though with that vnexpected presence strookes Yet, vanquisht by his beautie, her complaint Shee said aside, and suffred his constraint. This Clytic vext (his loue obsecur'd no measure) Who in the furie of her fell displeasure, Divulg'd the quickly-spreading infamy: And to her father doth the fact descry.
Who sterne and sauage, shuts vp all remorse, From her that'su'd, subdew'd. she said, by force; And Sol to witnesse calls. He his dishonour Interres aliue, and casts a Mount vpon her. Hyperion's sonne this batters with his rayes: And for her re-ascent a breach displayes. Yet could not she aduance her heauy head: But life, too hasty, from her body fled. Neuer did Phoelus with such sorrow mourne Since wretched Bhoeton the World did burne: Yet striues he with his influence to beget In her cold lims'a life-rouoking heat. But, since the Fates such great attempts withstood; He steep's the place and body in a floud Offragrant Nectar: much bewailes her end: And sighing, said; Yet shalt thou heauen ascend. Forthwith, her body thawes in to a deaw: Which, from the moy stned earth, an odour threw. Then through the hill ashrub of Frankincense Thrust vp his crowne, and tooke his root from thence Though loue might clyties sorrow haue excus'd, Sorrow, her tongue; Daye's king her bed refus'd. She, with distracted passion, pines away, Detesteth company; all night, all day, Disrobed, with her ruffled haire vnbound, And wet with humour, fits vpon the ground: For nelong dayes all sustenance for beares; Her hunger loyd with deaw, her thirst with teares. Nor rose; but, uets on the God her eyes; And euer turnes her face to him that flyes. At length, to earth her stupid body cleaues; Her wan complexion turns to bloodlesse-leaues;
Yet streak't with red: her perisht lims beget A flowre, resembling the pale Violet; Which, with the sun, though rooted fast, doth moue; And, being changed, changeth not her loue. Thus she. This wondrous story caught their cares; To some the same impossible, appeares, Others, that all is possible, conclude, To true-styl'd Gods: but, Bacebus they extrude. All whist, Alcithoê, call'd-vpon, doth run Her shettle through the web; and thus begun. T'omit the pastorall loues, to few vnknowne, Of young Idaean Duphnis; turn'd to stone By that vext Nymph; who could not else asswage Her iealousie: such is a louer's rage! And Scython who his nature in innouates, Now male, now female, by alternate Fates; With Celmus turn'd into an Adamant, Who of his faith to little loue might vant; The shorne Curetes, got by falling showres; crocos and Smilax, chang'd to prerty flowres, I ouer-passe; and will your eares surprize With sweet delight of vnknowne nouelties. Then, know, how Salmacis in famous grew; Whose too strong waues all manly strength vndo, And mollifie, with their soule-sostning touch: The cause vnknown; their nature knowne too muche Th'ideaean Nymphs nurst, in secure delight, The sonne of Hermes and faire Aphrodite. His father and his mother in his looke You might behold: from whom, his name he tooke. When Summers fiue he thrice had multiply'd; Leauing the fount-full Hills of foster Ide,
He wandred through strange Lands, pleas'd with the sight Of forren streames; toyle less'ning with delight. The Lycian Cities past, he treads the grounds Of wealthy Caria, which on Lycia bounds: There lighted on a Poole, so passing cleer, That all the glittering bottom did appear; Inuiron'd with no marish-louing Reeds, Nor piked Bull-rushes, nor barren weeds: But, liuing Turf vpon the border grew; Whose euer-Spring no blasting Winter knew, A Nymph this haunts, vnpractiz'd in the chace, To bend a Bow, or run a strife-full race. Of all the Water-Nimphs, this Nymph alone To nimble-footed Dian was vnknowne. Her sisters oft would say,; Fie, salmacis, Fie lazic sister, what a sloth is this! Vpon a Quiuer, or a Iauelin seaze; And with laborious hunting mix thine ease. On Quiuer, nor on Iauelin, would she seaze; Nor with laborious hunting mix her ease, But now in her owne Fountayne bathes her faire And shapefull lime; now kembs her golden haire: Her selfe oft by that liquid mirror drest There taking counsell what became her best: Her body in transparant Robes array'd, Now on soft leaues, or softet mosse display'd: Oft gathers flowres; so when she saw the Boy: Whom seen, forthwith shee couets to injoy; And yet would not approch, though big with haste, Till neatly trickt, till all in order plac't; Her loue-inueighling lookes set to insoare; Who merited to be reputed faire.
Sweet Boy, said she, well worthy the aboad Of blest coelestialls! if thou be a God, Then art thou cupid! if of humane race, Happy the Parents, whom thy person grace! Thy sister, if thou hast a sister, blest! Thy Nurse, muchmore, who fed thee with her brest! But (ô!) no lesse than deifi'd is shee Whom mariage shall incorporate to thee! If any such; let me this treasure steale: If not, be't I; and our dear Nuptials seale. This said, she held her peace. He blusht for shame; Not knowing loue: whom shamefac'tnesse became. So Apples show vpon the sunny side; So Iuory, with rich Vermillion dy'd: So pure a red the filuer Moone doth staine. When auxil'ary brasse resounds in vaine. Shee earnestly intreats a sisters kisse: And now, aduancing to imbrace her blisse, He, struggling, said; Lasciuious Nymph, forbeare; Or I will quit the place, and leaue you heare. Faire Stranger, timorous salma is reply'd, I 'Tis freely yours; and therewith stept aside: Yet, looking back, amongst the shrubby Trees She closely sculks, and crouches on her knees. The vacant Boy, now being left alone, Imagining he was obseru'd by none, Now here, now there, about the margent trips; And, in th'alluring waues his ankles dips. Caught with the Water's flattering temp'rature, He streight distobes his body; ô, how pure! His naked beautie Salmacis amaz'd: Who with vnsatisfied longing gaz'd.
Her sparkling eyes shoot flames through this sweet error; Much like the Sunne reflected by a mirror. Now, she impatiently her hope delayes; Now, burns t'imbrace: now, halfe-madde, hardly stayes. He swiftly from the banke on which he stood, Clapping his body, leaps into the flood; And, with his rowing armes, supports his lims: Which, through the pure waues, glister as he swims. Like Iuory statues, which the life surpasse; Or like a Lilly, in a crystall glasse. He's mine! the Nymph exclaim'd: who all vnstript; And, as she spake, into the water skipt: Hanging about the neck that did resist; And, with a mastring force, th'vnwilling kist: Now, puts her hand beneath his scornfull brest; Now euery way inuading the distrest: And wraps-about the subiect of her lust, Much like a Serpent by an Eagle truss't; Which to his head and feet, infettered, clings; And wreaths her tayle about his stretcht-out wings. So clasping luy to the Oke doth grow; And so the Polypus detaines his foe. But Atlantiades, relentlesse coy, Still struggles, and resists her hop't-for ioy. Inuested with her body: foole, said shee, Struggle thou may'st; but neuer shalt be free. O you, who in immortall thrones reside, Grant that no day may euer vs diuide! Her wishes had their Gods. Euen in that space Their cleauing bodies mix: both haue one face. As when wee two diuided scions ioyne, And see them grow together in one rine:
So they, by such a strict imbracement glew'd, Are now but one, with double forme Indew'd. No longer he a boy, not she a maid; But neither, and yet either, might be said. Hermaphrodius at himselfe admires: Who halfe a female from the spring retires, His manly lis now softned; and thus prayes, With such a voyce as neither sex betrayes: Swift Hermes, Aprodir him ô heare Who was your sonne! who both your names doth beare! May euery man, that in this water swims, Returne halfe-woman, with infeebled lims. His gentle parents signe to his request; And with vnknowne receits the spring infest. Here, they conclude: yet giue their hands no rest; But Bacchus slight, and still prophane his Feast. Then, suddenly harsh instruments surprize Their, charged eares, not extant to their eyes: Sweet Myrrhe and Saffron all the house perfume. Their webs (past credit!) flourish in the loome: The hanging wooll to green-leau'd Iuy spreads; Part, into vines: the equall twisted threads To branches run: buds from the diste shoote: And with that purple paint their blushing fruit. Now to the day succeeds that doubtfull light; Which neither can be called day, nor night. The building trembles: torches of fat Pines Appeare to burne; the roome with flashes shines; Fill'd with fantasticall resemblances Of howling beasts, whom blood and slaughter▪ please. The Sisters, to the smoaky roofe retire; And, there disperst, aod both ight and re.
Thus, while they corners seeke, thin films extend From lightned lims, with small beams inter-pend. But how their former shapes they did forgoe, Concealing darknesse would not let them know. Nor are these little Light-detesting things Born-vp with feathers, but transparant wings. Their voyce besits their bodies; small, and faint: Wherewith they harshly vtter their complaint. These houses haunt, in night conceale their shame; And of the loued Euening take their name. All Thebes now feared Bacchus celebrates: Whose wondrous powr his boasting Aunt relates. She onely, of so many sisters, knew No griefe as yet, but what from them she drew. A happy Mother, Wife to Athamas, Nurse to a God: these caus'd her to surpasse The bounds of her felicities; and made▪ Vext Iuno storm; who to her selfe thus said; What? could that Strumpets brat the form defeise▪ Of poore Maeonian Saylers, drencht in Seas? A Mother vrge to murther her owne son? And wing the three Minēides that spun? Can I but vn-reuenged wrongs deplore? Must that suffize? and is our powre no more? He teacheth what to doe; learne of thy Foe: What furie can, the wounds of Pentheus show More than too-much. Why should not Io tread The path which late her franticke sisters lead? A steepe darke Caue, with deadly Ewe reple, Through silence leads to hell's infernall seat. By this, dull Styx eiects a blasting furne: Here ghosts descend, whose bodies earth inhume;
Amongst those thorns, stiffe Cold, and Palenesse dwell. The new-come ghosts nor know the way to Hell; Nor where the roomy Stygian Citie stands; Or that dire Palace where black Dis commands. A thousand entries to this Citie guide: The gates still open stand, on euery side. And as all Riuers run into the Deep: So all vnhoused Soules doe thither creep. Nor are they pestered for want of roome: Not can it be perceiu'd that any come. Here shadowes wander from their bodies pent: Some plead; and some the Tyrants Court frequent; Some in life-practiz'd Arts imploy their times: Others are tortur'd for their former Crimes. Saturnia stooping from her Throne of Ayre (Her hate immortall!) thither makes repayre. As soone as shee had entered the gate, The threshold trembl'd with her sacred waight. Still-waking Cerberus the Goddesse dreads, And barketh thrice at once, with his three heads. Shee calls the Furies, Daughters to old Night; Implacable, and hating all delight. Before the doors of Adamant they sit; And there with combs their snaky curles vnknit. When they through gloomy darknesse did disclose That forme of Heauen, the Goddesses arose. The Dungeon of the Damned this is nam'd. Here Tityus, for attempted Rape defam'd, Had his vast body▪ on nine Acres spread: And on his heart a greedy Vulture fed. From Tantalus, deceitfull water slips: And catcht-at fruit auoids his touched lips.
Thou euer seekest, of roul'st vp in vaine A stone, ô Sisyphus, to fall againe. Ixion, turn'd vpon a restlesse wheele, With giddy head purews his flying heele. The Besides, whom kins-men's blood accuse, For euer draw the Water; which they loose. On all, Saturnia frowns; but most of all At thee Ixion; then, a looke lets fall On Sisyphus: And why (said shee) remaines This brother onely in perpetuall paines; When haughtie Athamas, whose thoughts despise Both Ioue and me, abides in constant ioyes? Then tells the cause of her approch, her hate, And what shee would: the fall of Cadmus state; That Athamas the Furies would distract, And vrge him to some execrable fact. Importunately shee soliciteth, Commands, intreats, and promist, with one breath. Incenst Tisiphone her Tresses shakes; And, tossing from her face the hissing Snakes, Thus said: Younced not vse long ambages; Suppose all done already, that may please: Forsake this Iothsome Kingdome, and repayre To th'vpper world's more comfortable ayre. Well-pleas'd Saturnia then to heauen with-drew: Whom first Thaumantian Iris purg'd with deaw. Forthwith, Tisphone her garment takes, Dropping with blood, and girt with knotted Snakes. About her head a bloody torch she shooke; And swiftly those accurst aboads forsooke. Sull-sighing Sorrow, Horror, trembling Feare, And gastly Madnesse, her associats were.
The entred Palace gron'd: pale poyson soyles The polisht doores: the frighted Sunne recoyles. Then Athamas and Ino, strucke with dread And monstrous apparitions, sought t'haue fled: But sterne Erinnys▪ their escape withstands; And stretching-out her viper-grasping hands, Shook her dark brows. The troubled Serpents hist: Some, falling on her shoulders, there vntwist; Others, vpon her vgly brest descend, Spet poyson, and their forked tongues extend. Two Adders from her crawling haire shee drew; And those at Athamas and Ino threw: These vp and down about their bosoms roule; And with infus'd infection sad the Soule. No wound vpon their bodies could be found: It was the mind that felt the desperate wound. She brought besides, from her abhorred hoe, The surfet of Echidna, with the fome Of hell-bred Cerberus, still-wandring Error, Obliuion, Mischiefe, Teares, in fernall Terror, Distracted Fury, an Affection fixt▪ On murder; altogether ground, and mixt▪ With blood yet recking; boyl'd in hollow brasse, And stird with Hemlocke. While sad Athamas And no quake, she pours into their brests The ragefull poyson; which their peace infests. Her flamy torch then whisking in a round (Whose circularie fire her conquest crown'd) To luto's emptie regiment she makes A swift descent; and there vngirts her Snakes. Forth with, Aeolides with poyso boyles. I, my Mates, he cryes, here pitch your toyles;
Here, late a Lyonesse by me was seen With her two whelps. With that, pursues the Quee And from her brest Clearchus snatcht: The Child Stretch forth his little arms, and on him smil'd: Whom like a sling about his head he swings; And cruelly against the pauement flings. The Mother, whether with her griefe distraught▪ Or that the poyson on her senses wrought, uns howling with her haire about her eares; And in bare arms her Melicerta beares; Cryes Euohe Bacchus! Iuno lught, and said; Thus art thou by thy Foster-child repay'd. There is a Rock that ouer-looks the Mayne, ollow'd by fretting Surges, sonst from rayne; Whose craggy brow to vaster Seas extends. This, Ino (fury adding strength) ascends; Descending head-long, with the load she beares; And strikes the sparkling waues, that fall in teares. Then▪ Venus, grieuing at her Neece's Fate, er Vncle thus intreats: O thou, whose State Is next to Ioue's▪ great Ruler of the Flood; My sute is bold; yet pitty thou my blood, Now tossed in the deepe Inian Seas: And ioyne them to thy warie Deities. Some fauour of the Sea I should obtaine, That am ingender'd of the omy Maine: Of which, the acceptable name I beare. Neptune affords a fauourable eare; Who what was mortall from their beings tooke; Then gaue to either a Maiesticke looke; In all their faculties diuinely fram'd: And her, ; him, Paleman nam'd▪
The Thban Ladies, who her steps pursew'd, Her last on the first Promontorie view'd. Then, held for dead; with haire, and garments rent, They beat their brests; and Cadmus House lament. Of litttle Iustice, and much Crueltie. All, Iuno tax. Indure (shee said) shall I Such blasphemies? Ile make you monuments▪ Of my reuenge. Threats vsher their euents. When one, of all the most affectionate, Cry'd, O my Queene, I will partake thy Fate! And thought to leape into the roring Flood; But could not moue: her feete fastfixed stood. Another, who her bosome meant to beat; Perceiu'd her stiff'ned armes to lose their heat. By chance, her hand This stretcheth to the Maine; Nor could her hand, now stoe, vnstretch againe. As She her violated Tresses tare, Her fingers forthwith hardned in her haire. Their Statues now those seuerall gestures beare. Wherein they formerly surprised were. Some, Fowles became; now cald Cadmēides; Who with their light wings sweepe those gulphy Seas. Little knew Cadus, that his Children raign'd▪ In sacred Seas, and deathlesse States retayn'd. Subdew'd with woes, with tragicall euents, That had no end, and many dire ostents, He leaues his Citie; as not through his owne, But by the fortune of the place o're-throwne: And with his wife Hermione, long tost, At length arriueth at th Illyrian Coast. Now spent with griefe and age, whil'st they relate▪ Their former toyles, and Familie's first fate:
And was that Serpent sacred, which I slew (Said he) whose teeth into the Earth I threw (An vncouth seed) when I from Sidon came? If this, the vengefull Gods so much inflame, May I my belly Serpent-like extend! His belly lengthned, ere his wish could end. Tough scales vpon his hardned out-side grew; The black, distinguished with drops of blew. Then, falling on his breast, his thighs vnite; And in a spiny progresse stretch out-right. His armes (for, armes as yet they were) he spreads: And teares on cheeks, that yet were humane, sheds. Come, O Sad Soule, said he; thy husband touch; Whil'st I am I, or part of me be such. Shake hands, while yet I haue a hand to shake; Before I totally endue a Snake. His tongue was yet in motion; when it cleft In two, forthwith of humane speech bereft. He hist, when he his sorrowes sought to vent; The onely language now which Nature lent. His Wife her naked bosom beats, and cryes, Stay Cadmus, and put off these prodigies. O strange! where are thy feet, hands, shoulders, breast, Thy colour, face, and (while I speake) the rest! You Gods, why also am not I a Snake? He lick't her willing lips euen as she spake; Into her well knowne bosom glides; her waste, And yeelding neck, with louing twines imbrac't. Amazement all the standers-by possest; While glittering combs their slippery heads inuest. Now are they two: who crept, together chayn'd, Till they the couert of the Wood attayn'd.
These gentle Dragons, knowing what they were, Do hurt to no man, nor mans presence feare. Yet were those sorrowes by their daughters sonne Much comforted, who vanquisht India won: To whom th' Achaians Temples consecrate; Diuinely magnifi'd through either State. Alone Acrisius Abantrades, Though of one Progenie, dissents from these: Who, from th' Argolian Citie, made his flie; And manag'd armes against a Deitie. Nor him, nor Persus he for Ioue's doth hold; (Begot on Danaē in a showre of gold) Yet straight repents (so preualent is truth) Both to haue forc't the God, & doom'd the Youth. Now is the one inthroned in the skyes: The other through Ayr's emptie Region flyes; And beares along the memorable spoyle Of that new Monster, conquer'd by his toyle. And as he o're the Lybian Deserts flew, The bloud, that drop's from Gorgen's head, streight gre To various Serpents, quickned by the ground: With these, those much infested Climes abound. Hither and thither, like a cloud of rayne Borne by crosse windes, he cuts the ayrie Mayne; Far-distant earth beholding from on high; And ouer all the ample World doth flie: Thrice saw Aroturus, thrice to Cancer prest; Oft harried to the East, oft to the West. And now, not trusting to approched night, Vpon th' Hesperian Continent doth light: And craues some rest, till Lucifer displayes Aurora's blush, and shee Apollo's rayes.
Huge-statur'd Atlas Iapetonides Here sway'd the vtmost bounds of Earth and Seas; Where Titan's panting steeds his Chariot steepe, And bathe their fierie feet-locks in the Deepe. A thousand Heards, as many Flocks, he fed In those large Pastures, where no neighbours tread. Here to their tree the shining branches sute; To them, their leaues; to those, the golden fruit. Great King, said Perseus, if high birth may moue Respect in thee, behold the sonne of Ioue: If admiration, then my Acts admire; Who rest, and hospitable Rites desire; He, mindfull of this prophecie, of old By sacred Themis of Parnassus told; In time thy golden fruit a prey shall proue, O Iaphets sonne, vnto the sonne of Ioue. This fearing, he his Orchard had inclos'd With solid Cliffs, that all accesse oppos'd: The Guard whereof a monstrous Dragon held; And from his Land all Forrainers expeld. Be gone, said he, for feare thy glories prooue, But counterfeit; and thou no sonne to Ioue; Then addes vnciuill violence to threats. With strength the other seconds his intreats: In strength inferiour; Who so strong as he? Since courtesie, nor any worth in me, Vext Perseus said, can purchase my regard; Yet from a guest receiue thy due reward. With that, Medusa's vgly head he drew, His owne reuersed. Forthwith, Atlas grew: Into a Mountayne equall to the man: His haire and beard to woods and bushes ran▪
His armes and shoulders' into ridges spred; And what was his, is now the Mountaynes head: Bones turne to stones; and all his parts extrude Into a huge prodigious altitude. (Such was the pleasure of the euer-blest) Whereon the heauens, with all their tapers, rest. Hippotades in hollow rocks did close The strife-full Windes: Bright Lucifer ose And rous'd-vp Labour. Perseus, hauing ty'd His wings t' his feet, his fauchion to his side, Sprung into ayre: below, on either hand Innumerable Nations left: the Land Of Aethiop, and the Cephe fields suruay'd; There, where the innocently wretched maid Was for her mothers proud impietie, By vniust Ammon sentenced to die. Whom when the Heros saw to hard rocks chain'd; But that warm tears from charged eye-springs drain'd. And light winds gently fann'd her fluent haire, He would haue thought her marble: Ere aware He fire attracteth; and, astonisht by Her beautie, had almost forgot to fly. Who lighting said; O fairest of thy kinde (More worthy of those bands which Louers bind, Than these rude gyues) the Land by thee renownd, Thy name, thy birth declare; and why thus bound. At first, the silent Virgin was affrayd To speake t' a man; and modestly had made A visard of her hands; but, they were ty'd: And yet abortiue teares their fountaines hide. Still vrg'd, lest she should wrong her innocence, As if asham'd to vtter her offence,
Her Countrie shee discouers; her owne name; Her beauteous Mothers confidence, and blame. All yet vntold, the Waues began to rore: Th' apparant Monster (hast'ning to the shore) Before his brest, the broad-spred Sea vp-beares. The Virgin shreeks. Her Parents see their feares. Both mourne; both wretched (but, shee iustly so:) Who bring no aid, but extasies of woe, With teares that sute the time: Who take the leaue They loathe to take; and to her body cleaue. You for your griefe may haue, the stranger said, A time too long: short is the houre of aid. If freed by me, Ioue's sonne, in fruitfull gold Begot on Dana through a brazen Hold; Who conquer'd Gorgon with the snakie haire; And boldly glide through vn-inclosed aire: If for your sonne you then will me prefer; Adde to this worth, That in deliuering her; I'le trie (so fauour me the Powres diuine) That shee, sau'd by my valour, may be mine. They take a Law; intreat what he doth offer: And further, for a Dowre their Kingdome proffer. Lo! as a Gally with fore-fixed prow (Row'd by the sweat of slaues) the Sea doth plow: Euen so the Monster furroweth with his brest, The foming floud; and to the neere Rocke prest: Not farther distant, than a man might fling A way-inforcing bullet from a sling. Forth-with, the youthfull issue of rich showrs, Earth pushing from him, to the blew skye towrs. The furious Monster eagerly doth chace His shadow, gliding on the Seas smooth face.
And as Ioue's bird, when shee from high suruayes A Dragon basking in Apollo's rayes; Descends vnseene, and through his necks blew scales (To shun his deadly teeth) her talons naile's: So swiftly stoops high-pitcht Inachides Through singing ayre: then on his backe doth sears; And neere his right sin sheaths his crooked sword Vp to the hilts; who deeply wounded, roar'd: Now capers in the ayre, now diues below The troubled waues; now turn's vpon his foe: Much like a chafed Bore, whom eager hounds Haue at a Bay, and terrifie with sounds. He, with swift wings, his greedy iawes auoids; Now, with his fauchion wounds his scaly sides; Now, his shell-rough-cast back; now, where the taile Ends in a Fish, or parts expos'd t'assaile. A streame mixt with his bloud the Monster flings From his wide throat; which wets his heauy wings: Nor longer dares the wary Youth rely On their support. He sees a rock hard by, Whose top aboue the quiet waters stood; But vnderneath the winde-incensed flood. There lights; and, holding by the rocks extent, His oft-thrust sword into his bowels sent. The shore rings with th' applause that fills the skye. Then, Cepheus and Cassiope, with ioy, Salute him for their son: whom now they call The Sauiour of their House, and of them all. Vp came Andromeda, freed from her chaines; The cause, and recompence of all his paines. Meane-while, he washeth his victorious hands In cleansing waues. And lest the beachy Sands
Should hurt the snaky head, the ground he strew With leaues and twigs that vnder water grew: Whereon, Medusa's vgly face he layes. The greene, yet iuicy, and attractiue sprayes From the toucht Monster stiffning hardnesse tooke; And their owne natiue pliancy forsooke. The Sea-Nymphs this admired wonder trie On other Sprigs, and in the issue ioy: Who sow againe their Seeds vpon the Deepe. The Corall now that propertie doth keepe, Receiuing hardnes from felt ayre alone: Beneath the Sea a twig, aboue a stone. Forth-with, three Altars he of Turf erects, To Hermes, Ioue, and Her who warre affects: Minerua's on the right; on the left hand Stood Mercurie's: Ioue's in the midst did stand. To Mercurie, a Calfe they sacrifice; To Ioue, a Bull; a Cow, to Pallas dyes: Then takes Andromeda, the full reward Of so great worth; with Dow'r, of lesse regard. Now, Loue and Hymen vrge the Nuptiall Bed: The sacred Fires with rich perfumes are fed; The house hung round with Garlands; euery where Melodious Harps and Songs salute the eare; Ofiocond mirth the free and happy signes: With Dores display'd, the golden Palace shines. The Cephen Nobles, and each stranger Guest, Together enter to this sumptuous Feast. The Banquet done, with generous wines they cheare Their heightned spirits: Perseus longs to heare Their fashions, manners, and originall; Who, by Lyncides is inform'd of all.
This told; he said: Now tell, O valiant Knight, By what felicitie of force or sleight, You got this purchase of the snaky haires. Then Abantiades forthwith declares, How vnder frosty Atlas cliffy side There lay a Plaine, with Mountaines fortify'd: In whose accesse the Phorcides did lye; Two sisters; both of them had but one eye: How cunningly his hands thereon he lay'd, As they from one another it conuay'd. Then through blind wasts, and rocky forrests came To Gorgon's house: the way vnto the same, Beset with formes of men and beasts, alone By seeing of Medusa turn'd to stone: Whose horrid shape securely he did eye, In his bright target's cleere refulgency. And how her head he from her shoulders tooke, Ere heauy sleepe her snakes and her forsooke. Then told of Pegasus, and of his brother, Sprung from the bloud of their new-slaughtred mother: Adding the perils past in his long way; What seas, what soyles, his eyes below suruay; And to what starres his lofty pitch ascends: Yet long afore their expectation ends. One Lord among the rest would gladly know, Why Serpents onely on her head did grow. Stranger, said he, since this that you require Deserues the knowledge, take what you desire: Her passing beautie was the onely scope Of mens affections, and their enuied hope: Yet was not any part of her more rare (So say they who haue seene her) than her haire.
Whom Neptune in Minerua's Fane comprest. Ioue's daughter, with the Aeis on her brest, Hid her chaste blushes: and due vengeance takes, In turning of the Gorgon's haire to Snakes. Who now, to make her enemies affrayd, Beares in her shield the Serpents which she made.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The fifth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. THe Gorgon seene, Cepheni Statues growe: So Phineus Peaetus, olydect, the foe To Perseus prayse. The fountayne Hippocrene By Horse-hoofe rys'd. The Muses into Nine Rape-flying Birds: Pierides, to Pyes. The Gods, by Typhon cha't, themselues disguis. Sad yane into a Fountayne flowes. Th' ill-nurtur'd Boy a spotted Stellion growes. Lou'd Arethusa thes into a spring. A scalaphus an  Light feathers wing Syrens, who an Waters Stern Lyneus Ceres to a Lynx doth turne. VVHil'st the Danaan Heros this relates, Amidst th' assembly of the Cephen States; Exalted voyces through the Palace ring: Not like to theirs who at a marriage sing; But such as menace warre. The nuptiall Feast, Thus turn'd to tumult, to the life expres A peacefull Sea, whose brow no frown deformes, Streight ruffled into billowes by rude storme▪ First▪ hineus, the rash Author of this warre, Shaking a Lance; began the deadly iarre. Lo, I the man, that will vpon thy life Reuenge, said he, the rapture of my wife.
Nor shall thy wings, nor Ioue inforged gold, Worke thy escape. About to throw: O hold! Perplexed Cepheus cries: What wilt thou do? What furie, frantick brother, tempts thee to So foule a fact? Is this the recompence For such high merit? for her life's defence? Not Perseus, but th' incens't Nereides, But horned Hammon, and the wrath of Seas (That Orke that sought my bowels to deuoure) Haue snatcht her from thee; rauisht in the houre Of her exposure. But thy crueltie Perhaps was well content that she should die, To ease thy losse with ours. May't not suffize, That shee was bound in chaynes before thine eyes; That thou, her Vncle, and her Husband, brought Her perill no preuention, nor none sought; But that anothers aid thou must enuy, And claime the Tropheys of his victory? Which, if of such esteeme, thou shouldst haue strain'd T' haue forc't them from those Rocks, where lately chaind. Let him, who did, enioy them: nor exact What is his dew by merit and compact. Nor thinke, we Perseus before thee prefer; But him, before so abhorr'd a sepulcher. He, without answer, rowling to and fro His eyes on either, doubts at which to throwe: And pausing, his ill-aymed lance at length At Perseus hurles, with rage-redoubled strength, Fixt in the bed-stock; vp fierce Perseus starts, And his retorted Speare at Phineus darts: Who suddenly behind an Altar stept; An Altar vengeance from the wicked kept:
And yet in Rhoetus brow the weapon stuck. He fell: the steele out of his scull they pluck: Who spurnes the earth, and staynes the board with blood, With that, the multitude, with fury wood, Their Lances fling, and some there be who crie, That Cepheus, and his sonne in law, should die. But Cepheus wisely quits the clamorous Hall: Who Faith and Iustice doth to record call, With all the hospitable Gods; that hee Was from this execrable vp-rore free. The warlike Pallas, present, with her shield Protects her Brother, and his courage steel'd. Young Indian Atys by ill hap was there, Whom Ganges-got Limniace did beare In her cleare Waues: his beautie excellent, Which cre and costly ornaments augment: Who scarce had fully sixteene Summers told: Clad in a Tyrian mantle, fring'd with gold. About his neck he wore a carquenet: His haire with Riband bound, and odors wet. Although he cunningly a Dart could throwe▪ Yet with more cunning could he vse his Bowe. Which now a-drawing with a tardy hand; Quick Perseus from the Altar snatcht a Brand, And dasht it on his face: out-start his eyes; And through his flesh the shiuered bones arise. When Syrian Lycabas his Atys view'd, Shaking his formlesse looks, with bloud imbrew'd: To him in strictest bonds of friendship ty'd, And one who could not his affection hide: After he had his tragedie bewail'd; Who through the bitter wound his soule exhal'd:
He took the Bowe, which crst the Youth did bend; And said; With me, thou Murderer contend; Nor longer glory in a Boye's sad fate, Which staines thy actions with deserued hate, Yet speaking, from the string the arrow flew: Which tooke his plighted robe, as he with-drew Acrisioniades vpon him prest; And sheath'd his Harpy in his groning brest. Now dying, he for Atys looks, with eyes That swim in night; and on his bosome lyes: Then chearfully expires his parting breath: Reioycing to be ioyn'd to him in death. Phorbas the Syēnit, Methion's son With him the Libyan Amphimedon; Eager of combate, slipping in the blood. That drencht the pauement, fell: his sword withstood Their re-ascent, which through the short-ribs smote Amphimedon, and cut the others throte. Yet Perseus would not venture to inuade the Halbertere Eritheu with his blade; But in both hands a Goblet high imbost And massie, tooke; which at his head he cost: Who vomits clotted bloud; and, tumbling downe, Knocks the hard pauement with his dying crowne. Then Polydaemon (sprung from Goddesse-borne Semiramis) Phlegyas, the vnshorne Elyce, Clytus, Scythian Abais, And braue Lycetus (old Sperchesiu blisse) Fell by his hand: whose foet in triumph tread Vpon the slaughtred bodies of the dead. But Phineus, fearing to confront his Foe In close assault, far-off a dart doth throw▪
Which led by error, did on I da light; A Neuter, who in vaine forbare to fight. He, sternly frowning, thus to Phineus spake: Since you, me an vnwilling partie make, Receiue the enemie whom you haue made; That, by a wound, a wound may be repay'd. About to hurle the Dart, drawne from his side; With losse of bloud he faints, and falling dy'd. Then, great Odytes fell by Clyman's sword; Next to the King the greatest Cephen Lord: Hypsaeus slew Protnor; Lyedes Hypsus. Old Emathion fell with these; Who fear'd the Gods, and fauoured the right. He, whom old age exempted from the fight, Fights with his tongue, himselfe doth interpose, And deeply execrates their wicked blowes. Cromis, as he imbrac't the Altar, lopt His shaking head; which on the Altar dropt: Whose halfe-dead tongue yet curses; & expire His righteous soule amidst the sacred Fires. Then Btëas and Ammon, Phineus slew; Who from one womb at once their being dre: Inuincible with hurle-bats, could they quell The dints of swords Neere these Alphytus fell, The Priest of Ceres, with a Miter crown'd; Which to his temples a white fillet bound. And thou Lampelides, whose pleasant wit, Detesting discord, in soft peace more fit To sing vnto thy tunefull Lire; now prest With Songs to celebrate the nuptiall Feast: When Pettalus, at him who stood far off With his defenselesse Harp; strikes with this scoff;
Goe sing the rest vnto the Ghosts below: And peart his Temples with a deadly blow. His dying fingers warble in his fall: And then, by chance, the Song was tragicall. This, vnreueng'd, Lycormas could not brooke; But from the door's right side a Leauer tooke, And him between the head and shoulders knocks: Downe falls he, like a sacrificed Ox. Ciniphean Palates then sought to seaze Vpon the left: when fierce Marmorides His hand nayl'd to the door-post with a Speare: Whose side stern Abas pierc't as he stuck there. Nor could he fall; but, giuing vp the ghost, Hung by the hand against the smeared post. Melaneus then, of Perseus partie, fell; And Dorilas, whose riches did excell: In Nasoemoniae none than he more great For large Possessions, and huge hoards of Wheat. The steel stuck in his groine, which death pursew'd: Whom Halcyoneus of Bactria view'd (The Author of the wound) as he did roule His turn'd-vp eyes, and sighed-out his soule: For all thy land, said he, by this diuorce Receiue thy length; and left his bloudlesse corse. The Speare, reuengefull Abantides drew From his warm wound; and at the Thrower threw: Which in the middle doth his nares diuide; And, passing through, appear'd on either side. Whilst Fortune crown'd him, Clytiu he confounds And Danus, of one womb, with different wounds: Through Clytius thighs a ready Dart he cast; An other 'twixt the iawes of Danus past.
Mindean Celadon and Ater slew, His Father doubtfull, gotton on a Iew: Echion, late well seene in things to come, Now ouer-taken by an vnknowne doome: Thoactes, Phineus Squire, his fauchion try'd: And fell Agyrtes, that fould parricide. Yet more remayn'd than were already spent: For, all of them, to murder one, consent The bold Conspirators on all sides fight; Impugning promise, merit, and his right. The vainely-pious Father sides with th'other; With him, the frighted Bride, and pensiue Mother; Who fill the Court with out-cryes; by the sound Of clashing Armes, and dying screeches drown'd Bellona the polluted floore imbrews With streams of bloud, and horrid warre renewes. False Phineus, with a thousand, in a ring Begirt the Heros: who their Lances fling As thick as Winters haile; that blinde his sight, Sing in his eares, and round about him light. His guarded back he to a pillar sets; And with vndaunted force confronts their threat Chaonian Molpeus prest to his left side: The right, Nabathean Ethemon ply'd As when a Tyger pincht with famine, heares Two bellowing Herds within one Vale; for beares▪ Nor knowes on which to rush, as being loth To leaue the other, and would fall on both: So Perseus, which to strike, vncertayne proues; Who daunted Molpeus with a wound remoues; Contented with his flight, in that the rage. Of fierce Ethemon did his force ingage:
Who at his neck vncircumspectly stroke, And his keene sword against the pillar broke. The blade from vnrelenting stone rebounds; And in his throte th' vnhappy owner wounds▪ Yet was not that enough to work his end; Who fearfully doth now his armes extend For pitty vnto Perseus, all in vaine; Who thrust him through with his Cyenian skeine But, when he saw his valour ouer-sway'd By multitude: I must, said he, sec ayd (Since you your selues compell me) from my foe; Friends turn your backs: then Grgons head doth sh▪ Some others seek, said Thessalus, to fright With this thy Monster; and with all his might A deadly dart indeuour'd to haue throwne: But in that positure became a stone. Next, Amphix, full of spirit, forward prest; And thrust his sword at bold Lyncides brest: When, in the passe, his fingers stupid grow; Nor had the power of mouing to or fro. But Nileus (he who with a forged stile Vanted to be the sonne of seuen-fold Nile, And bare seuen sihier Riuers in his shield, Distinctly wauing through a golden field) To Perseus said: Behold, from whence we sprung▪ To euer-silent shadowes beare a-long This comfort of thy death, that thou didst die By such a braue and high borne enemie. His vtterance faultred in the latter clause: The yet vnfinisht sound struck in his iawes; Who gaping stood as he would something say: And so had done, if words had sound a way.
These Eryx blames; 'Tis your faint soules that dead Your powres, said he, and not the Gorgon's head. Rush on with me, and prostrate with deep wounds This Youth, who thus with Magick Armes confound▪ Then rushing on, the ground his foot-steps stay'd; Now mutely fixt: an armed Statue made. These suffer'd worthily. One, who did fight For Perseus, bold Aconteus, at the sight Of Gorgon's snakes abortiue marble grew. On whom Astyages in fury flew, As if aliue, with his two-handed blade; Which shrilly twang'd; but not incision made: Who, whil'st he wonders, the same nature tooke, And now his Statue hath a wondring looke. It were too tedious for me to report Their names, who perisht of the vulgar sort. Two hundred scap't the furie of the fight: Two hundred turne to stone at Gorgon's fight. Now Phineus his vniust commotion rewes: What should he doe? The senselesse shapes he views Of his knowne friends, which differing figures bore▪ And doth by name their seuerall ayd implore. And yet not trusting to his eyes alone, The next he toucht; and found it to be stone. Then turns aside: and now, a Penitent, With suppliant hands, and armes obliquely bent; O Perseus, thine said he, thine is the day! Remoue this Monster. Hence O hence conuay Medusa's vgly looks, or what more strange, Which humane bodyes into marble change! Not hate, not thirst of rule begot this strife: I onely fought to re-obtaine my Wife.
Thine is the plea of Merit; mine, of Time: Yet, in contending I confesse my crime For life (O chiefe of men) I onely sew: Afford me that: the rest I yeeld to you. Thus he; not daring to reuert his eyes On him whom he intreats: who thus replye. Faint-hearted Phineus, what I can afford, (A gift of worth to such a fearefull Lord) Take courage, and perswade thy selfe I will: No wounding sword thy bloud shall euer spill. Moreouer, that I may thy wish preuent, Here will I fix thy lasting monument: That thou by her thou lou'st maist still be seene; And with her Spouse's image cheare our Queene. Then, on that side Phoreynis head doth place, To which the Prince had turn'd his trembling face, And as from thence his eyes he would haue throwne▪ His neck grew stiffe: his teares congeale to stone. With fearfull suppliant looks, submissiue hands, And guiltie countenance, the Statue stands. Victorious Abaniade now hyes This natiue Citie, with the rescu'd prize: There, vengeance takes on Proetus, and restor'd His Grand-father; whose wrongs redresse implor'▪ For Proetus had by force of Armes expeld His brother; and vsurped Argos held. But him, nor Arms, not Bulwarks, could protect Against the snaky Monsters grim aspect. Yet not the vertue of the Youth, which shone Through so great toyle, nor sorrowes vnder-gone; With thee, O Polydecte, King of small Sea-girt Seriphus, could preuaile at all.
Endlesse thy wrath, thy hate inexorable: Detracting; and condemning for a fable Medusa's death. The moued Youth replyes: The truth your selfe shall see; Friends, shut your ey▪ Then, represents Medusa to his view: Who presently a bloudlesse Statue grew. Thus long Tritonia to her brother cleaues: Then in a hollow cloud Seriphus leaues (Scyros and Gyaros on the right-hand side) And o're the toyling Seas her course apply'd To Thebes, and Virgin Helecon; there stay'd: And thus vnto the learned Sisters said. The fame of your new Fountaine, rays'd by force: Of that swift-winged Medusaean horse, Me hither drew, to see the wondrous Flood: Who saw him issue from his Mothers blood. Goddesse, Vrania answered, what cause So-euer you to this our Mansion drawes, You are most wel-come. What you heard is true; And from that Pegasus this Fountaine grew. Then Pallas to the sacred Spring conuay'd, Shee admires the waters by the horse-hoofe made; Suruay's their high-grown groues, coole caues, fresh bow, And meadowes painted with all sorts of flowers: Then happy stiles shee the Maeonides, Both for their Arts, and such aboads as these. O heauenly Virgin, one of them reply'd, Most worthy our Societie to guide, If so your actiue vertue did not moue. To greater deeds: deseru'dly you approue Our studies, pleasant seat and happie state, Were we secure from what we chiefly hate.
Venus a Fish, a Stork did Hermes hide: And still her voyce vnto her Harp apply'd▪ Then call they vs. But, ours perhaps to heare, Not leisure serues you, nor is't worth your care. Doubt not, said Pallas, orderly repeat Your long'd for Verse; and takes a shady seat. Then shee; On one we did the taske impose: Calliope, with Iuy crown'd vp-rose; Who with her thumb first tun'd the quauering strings, And then this Ditty to the musique sings. The gleab, with crooked plough, first Ceres rent; First gaue vs corne, a better nourishment; First Lawes prescrib'd: all from her bountie sprung. By me, the Goddesse Ceres shall be sung. Would We could Verses, worthy her, reherse: For shee is more than worthy of our Verse. Trinacria was on wicked-Typhon throwne; Who vnderneath the Ilands waight doth gron▪ That durst affect the Empire of the skyes: Oft he attempteth, but in vains, to rise. Ausonian Plorn his right hand Down waighs; Pachyne on the left doth stand; His legs are vnder Lilybaeus spred; And Aetna's bases charge his horrid head: Where, lying on his back, his iawes expire Thick clowds of dust, and vomit flakes of fire, Oft times he struggles with his load below: And Townes, and Mountaynes labours to ore-throw Earth-quakes therewith▪ the King of shadowes dreads, For feare the ground should split aboue their heads, And let-in Day affright the trembling Ghosts. For this, he from his silent Empire posts,
Drawne by black horses; tracing all the Round Of rich Sicilia; but, no breaches found. Him Erycina from her Mount suruay'd (Now fearelesse) and, her sonne imbracing, said. My Armes, my strength, my glorie; for my sake, O Cupid, thy all-conquering weapons take; And fix thy winged arrowes in his heart, Who rules the triple world's inferior part. The Gods, euen Ioue himselfe; the God of waues; And who illustrates earth haue beene thy slaues. Shall Hell be free? Thine, and thy mother's Sway Inlarge, and make th' internall Powr's obey, Yet we (such is our patience) are dispis'd In our owne heauen; and all our force vnpriz'd. Seest thou not Pallas, and the Queen of Night, Far-darting Dian; how my worth they slight? And Ceres daughter will a Maid abide, If we permit; for shee affects their pride. But, if thou fauour our ioynt Monarchy, Thy Vncle to the Virgin-Goddesse tie Thus Venus. He his Quiuer doth vnclose; And one, out of a thousand arrows, chose At her Arbitriment: a sharper head None had; more ready, or that surer sped. Then bends his Bowe: the string this eare arriues, And through the heart of Dis the arrow driues. Not far remou'd from Enna's high-built wall, A Lake there is, which men Pergusa call. Cäyster's slowly-gliding waters beare Far fewer singing Swans than are heard there. Woods crown the Lake, and clothe it round about With leauy veils, which Phoebus beames keep-out.
The trees create fresh ayr, th'Earth various flowres: Where heat nor cold th'eternall Spring deuoures. Whil'st in this groue Proserpina disports, Or Violets pulls, or Lyllyes of all sorts; And while she stroue with childish care and speed To fill her lap, and others to exceed; Dis saw, affected, carryed her away, Almost at once. Loue could not brooke delay. The sad-fac't Goddesse cryes (with feare appall'd) To her Companions; oft her Mother call'd. And as she tore th'adornment of her haire, Down fell the flow'rs which in her lap shee bare. And such was her sweet Youth's simplicitie, That their losse also made the Virgin crie. The Rauisher flies on swift wheeles; his horses Excites by name, and their full speed inforces: Shaking for haste the rust-obscured raignes Vpon their cole-black nks, and shaggy maines. Through Lakes, through Palicine, which expires A sulphrous breath, through earth ingendring fires, They passe to where Corinthian Bacchides Their Citie built betweene vnequall Seas. The Land 'twixt Aretsa and Cyne With stretcht-out hornes begirts th'included Sea. Here Cyane who gaue the Lake a name, Amongst Sicilian Nymphs of speciall fame, Her head aduanc't: who did the Goddesse know? And boldly said, You shall no farther goe; Nor can you be vnwilling Cees son: What you compell, perswasion should haue won. If humble things I may compare with great; Anapis lou'd me: yet did he intreat,
And me, not frighted thus, espous'd. This said, With out-stretcht armes his farther passage staid. His wrath no longer Pluto could restraine; But giues his terror-striking steeds the raigne; And with his Regall mace, through the profound And yeelding water, cleaues the solid ground: The breath t'infernall Tartarus extends: At whose darke iawes the Chariot descends. But Cyane the Goddesse Rape laments; And her owne iniur'd Spring; whose discontents. Admit no comfort: in her heart shee beares Her silent sorrow: now, resolues to teares; And with that Fountayne doth incorporate, Whereof th'immortall Deitic but late. Her softned members thaw into a dow: Her nailes lesse hard, her bones now limber grew. The slendrest parts first melt away: her haire, Fine fingers, legs, and feet; that soone impaire, And drop to streames: then, arms, back, shoulders, side▪ And bosom, into little Currents glide. Water, in stead of blood, fils her pale veines: And nothing now, that may be graspt, remaines. Mean-while, through all the earth, and all the Maine, The fearfull Mother sought her childe in vaine. Not deawy-hayr'd Aurora, when shee rose, Nor Hesperus, could witnesse her repose. Two pitchy Pines at flaming Aena lights; And restlesse, carries them through freezing Nights: Againe, when Day the vanquisht Starres supprest, Her vanisht comfort seeks from East to West. Thirsy with trauell, and no Fountayne nye, A cottage thatcht with straw, inuites her eye.
At th'humble gate she knocks: An old wife showes Her selfe thereat; and seeing her, bestowes The water so desir'd; which shee before Had boyl'd with barly. Drinking at the doore, A rude hard-fauour'd Boy beside her stood, Who laught, and cald her greedy-gut. Her blood Inflam'd with anger, what remayn'd shee threw Full in his face; which forthwith speckled grew. His armes conuert to legs; a taile withall Spines from his changed shape: of body small, Lest he might proue too great a foe to life: Though lesse, yet like a Lizard: th'aged wife (That wonders, weeps, and feares to touch it) shuns, And presently into a creuise runs. Fit to his colour they a name elect; With sundry little stars all-ouerspeckt. What Lands, what Seas, the Goddesse wandred through Were long to tell: Earth had not roome enough. To Sicil shee returns: where ere shee goes, Inquires; and came where Cyane now flowes. Shee, had shee not beene changed, all had told; Now, wants a tongue her knowledge to vnfold: Yet, to the mother, of her daughter gaue A sure ostent: who bore vpon a waue Persepbone's rich zone; that from her fell, When, through the sacred Spring, she sunke to hell. This seen, and knowne; as but then lost, shee tare, Without selfe-pitty, her dis-sheueled haire; And with redoubled blowes her brest inuades: Nor knowes what Land t'accuse, yet all vpbraids; Ingrate, vnworthy with her gifts t'abound: Triacria chiefly; where the steps shee found.
Of her misfortunes. Therefore there shee brake The furrowing plough; the Oxe and owner strake Both with one death; then, bade the fields beguile The trust impos'd, shrunk seed corrupts. That soile, So celebrated for fertilitie, Now barren grew: corne in the blade doth die. Now, too much drouth annoys; now, lodging showres: Stars smitch, winds blast. The greedy fowle deuoures The new-sowne graine: Kintare, and Darnell tire The fetter'd Wheat; and weeds that through it spire. In Elean waues Alphaeus Loue appeard; And from her dropping haire her fore-head clear'd: O Mother of that far-sought Maid, thou friend To life, said she; here let thy labour end: Nor be offended with thy faithfull Land; That blamelesse is, nor could her rape with-stand. I, here a guest, not for my Country plead: My Country Pisa is, in Elis bred; And, as an Alien, in Sicania dwell: But yet no Country pleaseth me so well: I Arethusa, now these Springs possesse: This is my seat: which, courteous Goddesse, blesse. Why I affect this place, t'Ortrgia came Through such vast Seas; I shall impart the same To your desire; when you, more fit to heare, Shall quit your care, and be of better cheare. Earth giues me way: through whose darke cauerns roll'd, I here ascend; and vnknowne stars behold. While vnder ground by Styx my waters glide, Your sweet Proserpina I there espy'd. Full sad shee was: euen then you might haue seen Feare in her face: and yet shee is a Queen;
And yet shee in that gloomy Empire swayes; And yet her wll th'infernall King obayes. Stone-like stood Ceres at this heauy newes; And, staring, long continued in a muse. When griefe had quickned her stupiditie, Shee tooke her Chariot, and ascends the skie: There, veiled all in clouds, with scattered haire, Shee kneeles to Iupiter, and made this pray'r. Both for my blood and thine, ô Ioue, I sew: If I be nothing gracious, yet doe you A Father to your Daughter proue; nor be Your care the lesse, because shee sprung from me. Lo, she at length is found, long sought through all▪ The spacious World; if you a Finding call What more the losse assures: but if, to know Her being, be to Finde, I haue found her so. And yet I would the iniurie remit, So he the stolne restore: 'Twere most vnfit That holy Hymen should thy daughter ioyne. To such a Thiefe; although shee were not mine. Then Ioue: The pledge is mutuall, and these cares To either equall: Yet this deed declares Much loue, mis-called Wrong: nor should we shame Of such a sonne, could you but thinke the same. All wants suppose, can he be lesse than great, And be Ioue's brother? What, when all compleat? I, but preferr'd by lot? Or if you burne In endlesse spleen; Let Proserpine returne: On this condition, That shee yet haue ta'ne No sustenance: so Destinies ordaine. To fetch her daughter, Ceres postes in haste: But, Fates with-stood: the Maid had broke her fast.
For, wandring in the Ort-yard, simply shee Pluckt a Pomegranet from the stooping Tree; Thence tooke seuen grains and eats them one by one: Obserued by Ascalaphus alone; Whom Aeron on Orphne erst begot In pitchy Caues▪ a Dame of speciall note Amongst th'Auernal Nymphs. This vtter'd, stayd The sighing Queene of Erebus who made The Blab a Bird: with waues of Phlegtn His face besprinkles;  appeares thereon, Crookt beake, and broader eyes: the shape he had He lost, forthwith in yellow feathers clad. His head or'e-siz'd, his long nailes talons proue; His winged armes for lazinesse scarce moue: A filthy, euer ill-presaging Fowle, To Mortals ominous: a screeching Owle. Yet was the punishment no more than due To his offence. But how offended you Acheloides that wings and clawes disgrace, Your goodly formes, yet keepe your Virgin-face? Was it, you Sirns, that your deathlesse Powers Were with the Goddesse when shee gatherd flowrs? Whom when through all the Earth you sought in vaine, You wisht for wings to swim vpon the Maine; That pathlesse Seas might testifie your care: The easie Gods consented to your pray'r. Streight, golden feathers on your backs appeare: But, left that musick, fram'd to inchant the eare, And so great gifts of speech should be prophan'd; Your Virgin-lookes, and humane voyce remayn'd. But Ioue, his sister's discontent to cheare, Between her and her Brother parts the yeare,
The Goddesse now in either Empire swayes: Six months with Ceres, six with Pluto stayes. Proserpina then chang'd her minde, and looke (Late such as sullen Dis could hardly brooke) And clear'd her browes; as Sol, obscur'd in shrowds Of exhalations, breaks through vanquisht clowds. Pleas'd Ceres now bade Arethusa tell Her cause of flight: and why a sacred Well. Th'obsequious waters left their murmuring: The Goddesse then aboue the Crystall-Spring Her head aduanc't; and, wringing her green haires, Shee thus Alphaeus ancient loue declares. I, of Achaia once a Nymph: none more The chace affected, or t'intoyle the Bore. By beautie though I neuer sought for fame; Though masculine; of faire I bare the name. Nor tooke I pleasure in my praysed face, Which others valew as their only grace: But, simple, was ashamed to excell; And thought it infamy to please too-well. As from Stymphalian woods I made retreat ('Twas hot, and labour had increast the heat) When well-nigh tyr'd; a silent streame I found, All eddilesse, perspicuous to the ground: Through which you euery pebble might haue seen; And ran, as if it had no Riuer been. The Poplar, and the hoary Willow, fed By bordering streames, their gratefull shadow spread▪ In this coole Rivulet my foot I dipt; And by and by into the middle skipt: Where, while I swim, and labour to and fro A thousand wayes, with armes that swiftly row,
I from the bottom heard and vnknowne tongue; And frighted, to the hither margent sprung. Whither so fast, ô Arethusa! twice Out cry'd Alphaeus, which a hollow voyce. Vnclothed as I was, I ran away (For, on the other side my garments lay) The faster followed he, the more did burne; Who naked, seeme the readier for his turne. As trembling Doues the eger Hawkes eschew; As eger Hawkes the trembling Doues pursew; I fled, He followed. To Orchomenus, Psophis, Cyllene, high-brow'd Maenalaus, Cold Erymanthus, and to Elis, I My flight maintayned; nor could he come ny: But, far vnable to hold out so long; He, patient of much labour, and more strong. And yet o're Plaines, o're woody hills I fled, And craggy Rocks, where foot did neuer tread. The Sunne was at our backs: before my feet I saw his shadow; or my feare did sec't. How-ere his sounding steps, and thick drawne breath That fann'd my haire, affrighted me to death. Starke tyr'd, I cry'd: Ah caught! help (ô forlorne!) Diana helpe thy Squire, who oft haue borne Thy Bowe and Quiuer! Mou'd at my request. With muffling clowds she couer'd the distrest. The Riuer seeks me in that pitchy shrowd, And searches round about the hollow clowd: Twice came to where Diana me did hide; And twice he Iô Arethusa cry'd. Then what a heart had I! the Lamb so feares When howling Wolues about the Fold she heares▪
So heartlesse Hare, when trayling Hounds draw nye Her sented forme; nor dares to moue and eye. Nor went he on, in that he could not trace My further steps; but guards the clowd and place. Cold sweats my then-besieged lims possest: In thin thick-falling drops my strength decreast. Where-ere I step, streames run; my haire now fell In trickling deaw; and sooner than I tell My destinie, into a Flood I grew. The Riuer his beloued waters knew; And, putting off th'assumed shape of man, Resumes his owne; and in my Current ran. Chaste Delia cleft the ground. Then, through blind cau, To lou'd Ortygia she conducts my waues; Affected for her name: where first I take Reuiew of day. This, Arethusa spake. The fertill Goddesse to her Chariot chaines Her yoked Dragons, checkt with stubborn raignes: Her course, 'twixt heauen and earth, to Athens bends; And to Triptolemus her Chariot sends. Part of the seed shee gaue, shee bade him throw On vntill'd earth; part on the till'd to sow. O're Europe, and the Asian soyle conuay'd, The Youth to Scythia turnes; where Lyncus sway'd. His Court he enters. Askt what way he came, His cause of comming, Countrie, and his Name: Triprolemus men call me, he reply'd; And in renowmed Athens I reside. No ship through toyling Seas me hither bare; Nor ouer-land came I; but through the ayre. I bring you Ceres gift: which sowne in fields, Corn-bearing crops (a better feeding) yeelds.
The barbarous King enuies it: and, that he The Author of so great a good might be; Giues entertaynment: but, when sleep opprest His heauy eyes, with steele attempts his brest. Whom Ceres turn's t'a Lynx: and home-wards makes The young Mopsopian driue her sacred Snakes. Our Chiefe concluded here her learned Layes. The Nymphs, with one consent, giue vs the Bayes: The vanquisht raile. To whom the Muse: Since you Esteeme it nothing to deserue the due To your contention, but must adde foule words To your ill deeds; nor this your pride affords Our patience roome: we'll wreak it on your heads, And tread the path which Indignation leads. The Paeons laugh, and our sharp threats despise. About to scould, and with disgracefull noyse To clap their hands; they saw the feathers sprout Beneath their nailes, and clothe their armes throug▪ Hard nebs in one another's faces spie; And now, new birds, into the Forrest flie. These Syluan Scoulds, as they their armes prepare To beat their bosoms; mount, and hang in ayre. Who yet retayne their ancient eloquence; Full of harsh chat, and prating without sense.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The sixth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. PAllas, an old-wife,  is thoughts o're-throw Haemus and Rhodope; who Mountaines grw. The Pigmy, a Crane, Antigoe become, A Storke, A statue : His impious daughters, stones. In various shapes The Gods commit adulteries and rapes▪ Arachne, a Spider. Niche yet drownes Her marble cheekes in teares. Vnciill Clownes Are curst to Frog. From His iuory shoulder now-made Pelops . Pogne, a Swallow; sign'd with murder Sad Philomel to secret might complaines▪ Rage to a Lapwing turns th'Odrysian king, Calais and Zetes natius . TRitonia to the Muse attention lends: Who both her Verse, and iust reuenge Then said t'her selfe: To praise is of no worth▪ Let our reuenged Powre our praise set forth. Intends Arathnes ruine. She, she heard, Before her curious webs, her owne prefer'd. Nor dwelling, nor her nation fame impart Vnto the Damsell, but excelling Art.
Deriu'd from Colophnian Idmons side; Who thirstie Wooll in Phocian purple ide. Her mother (who had pay'd her debt to fate) Was also meane, and equall to her mate. Yet through the Lydian townes her praise was spred; Though poore her birth, in poore Hypaepa bred. The Nymphs of Tmolus oft their Vines forsooke; The sleeke Pactolian Nymphs their streames; to looke On her rare workes: nor more delight in viewing The don (don with such grace) than when a doing. Whether she orbe-like roule the ruder wooll; Or, finely finger'd, the selected cull▪ Or draw it into clowd-resembling flakes; Or equall twine with swift-turn'd spindle makes; Or with her liuely-painting needle wrought: You might perceiue she was by Pallas taught. Yet such a Mistresse her proud thoughts disclame: Let her with me contend; if foyld, no shame (Said she) nor punishment will I refuse. Pallas, forth-with, an old-wiues shape indues: Her haire all white; her lime, appearing weake, A staffe supports: who thus began to speake. Old Age hath somthing which we need not shun: Experience by long tract of time is won. Scorne not aduice: with dames of humane race Contend for same, but giue a Goddesse place. Craue pardon, and she will thy crime remit. With eyes confessing rage, ad eye-brows knit, (Her labour-leauing hands scarce held from strokes) She, masked Pallas with these words prouokes. Old foole, that dot'st with age; to whom long-life Is now a curse: thy daughter, or sons wife,
(if thou hast either) aught be they by this▪ My wisedom, for my selfe, sufficient is. And least thy counsell should an intrest clame In my diuersion, I abide the same. Why comes she not? why tryall thu delayes? She comes, said Pallas▪ and her selfe displayes. Nymphs, and Mgdomian dames the Powre adore: Onely the maid her selfe vndaunted bore: And yet she blushe; against her will the red Flusht in her chcks, and thence as swiftly flod. Euen so the purple Morning paints the skyes: And so they whin at the Suns vprise. Who now▪ as desperately obstinate, Praise ill affecting, runs on her owne fate. No more Ioues daughter labors to disswade; No more refuseth; nor the strife delayde. Both settle to their tasks apart: both spread At once their warps, consisting of fine thred, Ty'd to their beames: a reed the thred diuides, Through which the quick-returning shuttle glides, Shot by swift hands. The combs inserted tooth Betweene the warp supprest the rising woofe: Strife less'ning toyle. With skirts ruckt to their waste, Both moue their cunning armes with nimble haste. Here crimson, dyde in Tyran brasse, they weaue: The scarce distinguisht shadowes sight deceaue. So warry clowds, shot by Apllo, showe; The vast sky painted with a mightie Bowe: Where, though a thousand seuerall colours shine, No eye their close transition can define: What touch, the same so neerely represents; And by degrees, scarce sensible, dissents.
Through-out imbellished with ductil gold: And both reuiu'd antiquities vnfold. Pallas in Athens, Marse's Rock doth frame: And that old strife about the Citties name. Twice six Coelestials sit inthron'd on hic, Repleat with awe-infusing grauitie: Ioue in the midst. The suted figures tooke Their liuely formes: Ioue had a regall looke. The Sea-god stood, and with his Trident strake The cleauing rock, from whence a fountaine brake: Whereon he grounds his cla. With speare and shield Her selfe she armes: her head a muion steild: Her brest her Aegis guards. Her lance the ground Appeares to strike, and from that pregnant wound The hoary oliue, charg'd with fruit, ascends. The Gods admire: With victory she ends. Yet she, to snow the Riuall of her prayse What hopes to cherish for such bold assayes, Add's foure contentions in the vtmost bounds Of euery angle, wrought in little Rounds. One, Thracian Rhodope and  show, Now mountaines, topt with neuer-melting showe, Once humane bodyes: who durst emulae The blest Coelestialls both in stile and state. The next containes the miserable doome Of that Pygmian marron, ouer-come By Iuno; made a Ctane, and fore't to ar With her owne nation in perpetuall was. A third presents Antigone, who stroue For vnmatcht beautie with the wife or Ioue. Not Ilium, nor anmedon her sire, Preuail'd with violent Srnia's ire.
Turn'd to a Stork; who, with white pinions rais'd, Is euer by her creaking bill selfe-prais'd. In the last circle Cynaras was plac't; Who, on the temples staires, the formes imbrac't Of his late daughters, by their pride o're-throwne: And seemes himselfe to be a weeping stone. The web a wreathe of peacefull live bounds: And her owne tree her work both ends and crownes. Arachne weaues Europa's rape by Iou: The Bull appeares to liue, the Sea to moue. Back to the shore she casts a heauy eye; To her distracted damsels seemes to cry: And from the sprinkling waues, that skip to meet. With such a burden, shrinks hor  embling feet. Asteria there a struggling Eagle prest▪ A Swan here spreads his wings o're Leda's brest. Ioue, Satyr-like, Antiope compels; Whose fruitfull womb with double ssue swels: Amphitryo for Alemena's loue became: A showre for Daal; for Aegina flame: For beautifull Muemosyne he tak A pastors forme; for Deois, . Thee also, Neptune, like a lustfull Sete, She makes the faire Aetian Virgin beare: To get th' Aloide's in Enip's shape: Now turn'd t'a Ram in sad Bisaltis rape. The gold-hair'd mother of life-strengthning Seed, The snake-hair'd  of the winged Steede, Found thee a Stalion thee Malanth findes A Delphin. She to euery sonne assignes Life-equald looks; to euery place their sites. Here Phoebus in a Heards-mans shape deligh▪
A Lyon's now; now falcons wings displayes: Macarian Issa shepheard-like betrayes. Liber, a grape, Erigone comprest: And Saturne, horse-like, Chiro gets, halfe-beast. A slender wreathe her finisht web confines: I lowres intermixt with clasping iy twines. Not Pallas this, not Enuy this reproues: Her faire successe the vex Virago moues; Who teares the web, with crimes coelestiall fraught. With shtle from Cytorian mountaines brought, Arachne thrice vpon the fore-head hits. Her great heart brooks it not. A cord she knits About her neck. Remorsefull Pallas stay'd Her falling waight: Liue wretch, yet hang, she said. This curse (least after times thy pride secure) Still to thy issue, and their race, indure. Sprinkled with Hecat's banefull weeds, her haire She forthwith sheds: her nose and eares impaire; Her head growes little; her whole body so; Her thighs and legs to spiny fingers grow: The rest all belly. Whence a thred she sends: And now, a Spider, her old webs extends. All Lydia storms; the fame through Phygia rung: And gaue an argument to euery tongue. Her, Niobe, had knowne; when she, a maid, In Sipylus and in Maonia staid. Yet slights that home example: still rebels Against the Gods; and with proud lguage swels. Many things sweld her. Yet Amphis towne, Their high descents; not glory of a crowne, So pleas'd her (though she pleas'd her selfe in all) As her faire race. We Niobe might call
The happiest mother that yet euer brought Life vnto light; had not her selfe so thought. Tiresian Manto, in presages skild, The streets, inspir'd by holy fury, fild With these exhorts: Ismenides, prepare: To great Latona, and her Twins; with prayer Mix sweet perfumes; your brows with Laurel bind▪ By me Latona bids. The Thebans wind About their temples the commaunded Bay: And sacred fires, with incense feeding, pray▪ Behold, the Queene in height of state appeares: A Phrygian mantle, weaud with gold, she weares: Her face, as much as rage would suffer, faire. She stops; and shaking her disheueled haire, The godly troope with hauty eyes suruayes. What madnesse is it Here-say Gods (she sayes) Before the seene Coelestials to prefer? Or while I Altars want, to worship her? Me Tantalus begot, alowd to feast In heauenly bowres; my mother not the least Pleias greatest Atlas fire to those, On whose high shoulders all the stars repose. Ioue is my other Grandfather; and he My father in law: a double grace to me. Me Phrygia, Cadmus kingdomes me obay: My husbands harp-rais'd walls we ioyntly sway. Through-out my Court behold in euery place Infinite riches! adde to this, a face Worthy a Goddesse. Then, to crowne my ioyes▪ Seuen beauteous daughters, and as many boyes: All these by marriage to be multiply'd. Say now, haue we not reason for our pride?
How dare you then Latona, Caeus birth Before me place? to whom the ample Earth Deny'd a little spot t'vnlade her wombe? Heauen, Earth, nor Seas, afford your Goddesse roome: A Vagabond, till Delas harbor gaue. Thou wandrest on the land, I on the waue, It said; and granted an vnstable place. She brought forth two; the seuenth part of my race▪ Happy! who doubts? I happy will abide: Or who doubts that? with plentie fortifi'd. My state too great for fortune to bereaue: Though much she rauish, she much more must leaue. My blessings are aboue low feare. Suppose Some of my hopefull sons this people lose, They cannot be reduc't to such a few. Off with your bayes; these idle Rites eschew. They put them off; the sacrifice forbore: And yet Latona silently adore. As far as free from barrennesse, so much Disdaine and griefe th'inraged Goddesse touch. Who on the top of Cynthus thus begins To vent her passion to her sacred Twins. Lo I, your mother, proud in you alone; (Excepting Iuno, second vnto none) Am question'd if a Goddesse: and must loose, If you assist not, all religious dews. Nor is this all: that curst Tantalian Seeds Adds soule reproaches to her impious deede. She dares her children before you prefer; And calls me childlesse: may it light on her! Whose wicked words her fathers tongue declar About to second her report with praier;
Peace, Phoebus said, complaint too long delayes Conceau'd reuenge: the same vext Phoebe sayes. Then swiftly through the yielding ayre they glide To Cadmus towres; whom thickned vapors hide. A spacious plaine before the citty lie. Made dusty with the daily exercise Of trampling hooues; by strife-full chariots tracke. Part of Amphions actiue sons here backt High-bounding steeds; whose rich caparison With scarlet blusht, with gold their bridles shone. Ismenus Ioe, her pregnant wombs first spring▪ As with his ready horse he bears a Ring, And checks his fomy iawes; ay me he cryes; While through his groing brest an arrow fly▪ His bridle slackning with his dying force, He leasurely sinks side-long from his horse. Next, Siphilus from clashing quiuer flie With slackned raignes: as when a Pilot spies A growing storme; and, least the gentle gaile Should scape besides him, claps on all his saile. His haste th'vneuitable bowe O're-took, And through his throte the deadly arrow strook. Who, by the horses mane and speedy thighes Drops headlong, and the earth in purple dies. Now Phoedimus; and Tantalus the heire This Grand-ires names; that labour done, prepare To wrastle. Whilst with oyled lims they prest Each others power, close grasping brest to brest; A shaft, which from th'impulsiue bow-string flew, Them, in that sad Coniunction ioyntly slew. Both grone at once, at once their bodyes bend With bitter pangs, at once to earth descend:
Her tongue, and pallat rob'd of inward heat At once congeale: her pulse forbeares to beat: Her neck wants power to turne, her feet to goe, Her armes to moue: her very bowels grow Into a stone. She yet retaines her teares. Whom straight a hurle-wind to her Countrie beares; And fixes on the summit of a hill. Now from that mourning marble teares distill. Th'exemplary reuenge struck all with feare: Who offerings to Latona's altars beare With doubled zeale. When, one as oft befalls, By present accidents the past recalls. In fruitfull Lyci once, said he, there dwelt A sort of Pesants, who her vengeance felt. 'Twas of no note, in that the men were base: Yet wonderfull I saw the poole, and place, Sign'd with the prodigie. My father, spent Almost with age, ill brooking trauell, sent Me thither for choice Steeres: and for my guide A natiue gaue. Those pastures searcht, we spy'd An ancient Altar, black with cinders; plac't Amidst a Lake, with shiuering reeds imbrac't. O fauour me▪ he, softly murmuring, said: O fauour me! I, softly murmuring, praid: Then askt, if Nymph, or Faune therein reside, Or rurall God. The stranger thus reply'd. O youth, no mountaine Powres this altar hold: Shee calls it hers, to whom Ioues wife, of old, Earth interdicted: till that floting Ile, Waue-wandring Delo, finisht her exile. Where, coucht on palmes and oliues, she in spight Of frefull Iuno, brought her Twins to light.
Thence also, frighted from her painefull bed, With her two infant Deities she fled. Now in Chimara-breeding Lycia (fir'd By burning beames) and with long trauell tyr'd. Heat-raised thirst the Goddesse sore opprest: By their exhausting of her milk increast. By fortune, in a dale, with longing eyes A Lake of shallow water she descries: Where Clownes were then a gathering picked weeds, With shrubby osiers, and plash-louing reedes. Approcht; Titania kneeles vpon the brink: And of the cooling liquor stoops to drinke. The Clownes with-stood. Why hinder you, said she, The vse of water, that to all is free? The Sun, aire, water, Nature did not frame. Peculiar; a publick gift I clame. Yet humbly I intreat it: not to drench My weary lims, but killing thirst to quench. My tongue wants moysture, & my iawes are dry: Scarce is there way for speech. For drink I dye. Water to me, were Nectar. If I liue, 'Tis by your fauour: life with water giue. Pitty these babes: for pitty they aduance Their little armes! their armes they stretcht by chanc With whom would not such gentle words preuaile? But they, perseuering to prohibit, raile; The place with threats command her to forsake. Then with their hands and feet disturbe the lake: And leaping with malicious motion, moue The troubled mud; which rising, flotes aboue. Rage quencht her thirst: no more Latona sues▪ To such base slaues: but Goddesse-like doth vse
Her dreadfull tongue; which thus their fates imply'd: May you for euer in this lake reside! Her wish succeeds. In loued lakes they striue; Now sprawle aboue, now vnder water diue; Oft hop vpon the banke, as oft againe. Back to the water: nor can yet restraine Their brawling tongues; but setting shame aside; Though hid in water, vnder water chide. Their voyces still are hoarce: the breath they fetch Swels their wide throtes; their iawes with railing stretch. Their heads their shoulders touch; no neck betweene, As intercepted. All the back is greene▪ Their bellies (euery part o're-sizing) white. Who now, new Frogs, in slimy pooles delight. Thus much, I know not by what Lycian, said: An other mention of a Satyre made, By Phoebus, with Tritena's reede, o're-come: Who for presuming felt a heauy doome. Why doe you (oh!) me from my selfe distract? (Oh!) I repent, he cry'd: Alas! this fact Deserues not such a vengeance! Whilst he cry'd; Apollo from his body stript his hide. His body was one wound, bloud euery way Streames from all parts: his sinewes naked lay. His bare veines pant: his heart you might behold; And all the fiuers in his brest haue told. For him the Faunes, that in the forrests keepe; For him the Nymphs, and german Satyres weepe: His end, Olympus (famous then) bewailes; With all the shepheards of those hills and dales▪ The pregnant Earth conceiueth with their teares; Which in her penetrated womb she beares,
Till big with waters: then discharg'd her fraught▪ This purest Phrygian Streame a way out sought. By down-falls, till to toyling seas he came: Now called Marsyas of the Satyres name. The Vulgar, these examples told, returne Vnto the present: for Amphion mourne, And his poore issue. All the mother hate. Pelops alone laments his sisters fate. While with torne garments he presents his woes, The iuory peece on his left shoulder showes. This fleshy was, and coloured like the right. Slaine by his fire, the Gods his lims vnite: His scattered parts all found; saue that alone Which interpos'd the neck and shoulder bone. They then with iuory supply'd th' vnsound: And thus restored Pelops was made sound. The neighboring princes meet: the Cities neare Intreat their kings the desolate to cheare. Pelops Mycaene, Sparta, th' Argiue State; And Calydon, not yet in Dian's hate; Fertill Orehemenes; Corinthus fam'd For high-priz'd brasse; Messene, neuer tam'd; Cleona; Patra; Pylos, Nelius crowne; And Troezen, not then knowne for Pittlus towne; With all that two-sea'd Isthos Streights include: And all without by two-sea'd Isthmos view'd. Athens alone (who would beleeu't) with-held: Thee, from that ciuill office, war compeld. Th' inhabitants about the Pontick coast Had then besieg'd thee with a barbarous hoast: Whom Thracian Tereus, with his Aids, o'rethrew; And by that victorie renowned grew.
Potent in wealth, and people; from the loynes Of Mars deriu'd: Pandion Progne ioynes To him in marriage. This, nor Iuno blest; Nor Hymen, nor the Graces grac't that feast. Eumenides the nuptiall tapers light At funerall fires; and made the bed that Night. Th' ill-boading Owle vpon the roofe was set. Progne and Tereus with these omens met: Thus parents grew. The Thracians yet reioyce; And thanke the Gods with harmonie of voyce. The marriage day, and that of Itys birth, They consecrate to vniuersall mirth. So lyes the good vnseene. By this the Sun, Conducting Time, had through fiue Autumns run: When flattering Progne thus allures her Lord. If I haue any grace with thee, afford. This fauour, that I may my sister see: Send me to her, or bring thou her to me. Promise my father that with swiftest speede She shall returne. If this attempt succeede, The summe of all my wishes I obtaine. He bids them lanch his ships into the maine: Then makes th' Athenian port with sailes and oares; And lands vpon the wisht Pyraean shores. Brought to Pandion's presence, they salute. The King with bad presage begins his sute. For loe, as he his wifes command recites, And for her quick returne his promise plights, Comes Phiomela; clad in rich array; More rich in beauty. So they vse to say The stately Naiades, and Dryad's goe In Syluan shades; were they apparrel'd so.
This sight in Tereus such a burning breeds, As when we fire a heape of hoary reeds; Or catching flames to Sun-dry'd stubble thrust. Her face was excellent: but in-bred lust Inrag'd his bloud; to which those Climes are prone: Stung by his countries fury, and his owne. He streight intends her women to intice, And bribe her Nurse to prosecute his vice; Her selfe to tempt with gifts; his crowne to spend: Or rauish, and by warre his rape defend. What dares he not, thrust on by wilde desire? Nor can his brest containe so great a fire. Rackt with delay, he Progue's sute renewes: And for himselfe in that pretention sues. Loue made him eloquent. As oft as he Exceeded, he would say, Thus charged she. And mouing teares (as she had sent them) sheds. O Gods! how dark a blindnesse ouer-spreds The soules of men! whilst to his sin he climes, They think him good; and praise him for his crimes. Euen Philomela wisht it! with soft armes She hugs her father, and with winning charmes Of her liues safety, her destruction prest: While Tereus by beholding pre-possest. Her kisses and imbraces heat his blood; And all afford his fire and fury food. And wisht, as oft as she her fire imbrac't, He were her sire: nor would haue been more chast. He, by their importunities is wrought. She, ouer-ioy'd, her father thanks: and thought Her selfe and sister in that fortunate, Which drew on both a lamentable fate.
The labour of the Day now neere an end, From steep Olympus Phoebus Steeds descend. The boards are princely scru'd: Lyans flowes In burnisht gold. Then take their soft repose. And yet th'Odrysian King, though parted, fries: Her face and graces euer in his eyes. Who parts vnseene vnto his fancy faines; And feeds his fires: Sleep flies his troubled braines▪ Day vp: Pandion his departing son Wrings by the hand; and weeping, thus begun. Deare Son, since Pietie this dew requires; With her, receiue both your and their desires. By faith, aliance, by the Gods aboue, I charge you guard her with a fathers loue: And suddenly send back (for all delay To me is death) my ages onely stay. And daughter ('tis enough thy sister's gone) For pitty leaue me not too long alone. As he impos'd this charge, he kist with-all: And drops of teares at euery accent fall. The pledges then of promis'd faith demands (Which mutually they giue) their plighted hands. To Progue, and her little boy, said he, My Ioue remember, and salute from me. Scarce could he bid farewell: sobs so ingage His troubled speech; who dreads his soules presage. As soone as shipt; as soone as actiue ores Had mou'd the surges, and remou'd the shores; Shee's ours! with me my wish I beare! he cryes. Exults; and barbarous, scarce defers his ioyes: His eyes fast fixt. As when Ioues eagle beares A Hare t'her ayery, trust in rapefull feares:
And to the trembling prisoner leaues no way For hoped flight; but still beholds her pray. The Voyage made; on his owne land he treads: And to a Lodge Pandions daughter leads; Obscur'd with woods: pale, trembring, full of feares; And for her sister asking now with teares. There mues her vp; his foule intent makes knowne: Inforc't her; a weake Virgin, and but one. Helpe father! sister helpe! in her distresse She cries; and on the Gods, with like successe. She trembles like a lamb, snatcht from the phangs Of some sell wolfe; that dreads her former pangs: Or as a doue, who on her gorget beares Her blouds fresh staines, and late-felt talents feares. Restor'd vnto her mind, her ruffled haire, As at a wofull funerall she care; Her armes with her owne fury bloudy made: Who, wringing her vp-heaued hands, thus said. O monster! barbarous in thy horrid lust! Trecherous Tyrant! whom my fathers trust; Impos'd with holy teares; my sisters loue; My virgin state; nor nuptiall ties, could moue! O what a wild confusion hast thou, bred! I, an adultresse to my sisters bed; Thou husband to vs both; to me a foe; To all a punishment; and iustly so. Why mak'st thou not thy villanies compleat; By forcing life from her abhorred seat? O would thou hadst, e're I my honour lost! Then had I parted with a spotlesse ghost. Yet, if the Gods haue eyes; if their Powers be Of any powre; not all decay with me;
Thou shalt not scape due vengeance. Sense of shame I will abandon; and thy crime proclaime: To men, if free; if not, my voice shall breake Through these thick walls; and teach the woods to speake: Hard rockes resolue to ruth. Let heauen this heare; And Heauen-thron'd Gods: if there be any there! These words the saluage Tyrant moues to wroth: Nor lesse his feare: a like prouok't by both. Who drawes his sword: his cruell hands he winds In her loose haire: her armes behind her binds. Her throte glad Philomela ready made: Conceiuing hope of death from his drawne blade. Whilst she reuiles, inuokes her father; sought To vent her spleene; her tongue in pincers caught, His sword deuideth from the panting root: Which, trembling, murmurs curses at his foot. And as a serpents taile, disseuer'd, skips: Euen so her tongue: and dying sought her lips. After this fact (if we may Rumor trust) He oft abus'd her body with his lust. Yet home to Progne, in the end, retires: Who for her sister hastily inquires. He funerals belyes, with fained griefe: And by instructed teares begets beliefe. Progne her royall ornaments reiects; And puts on black: an emptie tombe erects; To her imagin'd Ghost oblations burnes: Her sisters fate, not as she should, she mournes. Now through twelue Signes the yeere his period drew. What should distressed Philomela doe? A guard restraind her flight; the walls were strong; Her mouth had lost the index of her tongue.
The wit that miserie begets is great: Great sorrow addes a quicknesse to conceit. A woofe vpon a Thracian loome she spreds; And inter-weaues the white with crimson threds; That character her wrong. The closely wrought, As closely to a seruant gaue; besought To beare it to her Mistresse: who presents The Queene therewith; not knowing the contents. The wife to that dire Tyrant this vnfolds: And in a wofull verse her state beholds. She held her peace: 'twas strange! griefe struck her mute. No language could with such a passion sute. Nor had she time to weepe. Right, wrong, were mixt In her fell thoughts▪ her soule on vengeance fixt. It was that time; when, in a wilde disguise, Sithonian matrons vse to solemnise Lyaeus three-yeares Feast. Night spreds her wings: By night high Rhoope with timbrels rings. By night th'impatient Queene a iauelin takes, And now a Bacchanal, the Court forsakes. Vines shade her browes: the rough hide of a Deare Shogs at her sides her shoulder bare a speare. Hurried through woods, with her attendant froes, Terrible Progne, frantick with her woes, Thy milderfuly, Bacchus, counterfets. At length vnto the desart cottage gets: Howles; Euh, cries: breakes ope the doores, and tooke Her sister thence: with iuy hides her looke: In habit of a Bacchanal arrayd: And to her citie the amaz'd onuyd. That hated roofe when I hi  la knew; The poore soule shooke, her  bloudlesse grew.
Progne with-drawes; the sacred weeds vnlos'd; Her wofull sisters bashfull face disclos'd: Falls on her neck. The other durst not raise Her down-cast eyes: her sisters wrong suruayes In her dishonour. As she stroue t'haue sworne With vp-rais'd lookes; and call the Gods t 'haue borne Her pure thoughts witnesse, how she was compeld To that loth'd fact; she hands, for speech, vpheld. Sterne Progne broiles; her bosome hardly beares So vast a rage: who chides her sisters teares. No teares, said she, our lost condition needs: But steele; or if thou hast what steele exceeds. I, for all horrid practices, am fit: To wrap this roofe in flame, and him in it: His eyes, his tongue, or what did thee inforce, Textirp; or with a thousand wounds, diuorce His guiltie soule? The deed I intend, is great: But what, as yet, I know not. In this heat Came Itys in, and taught her what to doe. Beheld with cruell eyes; Ah, how I view In thee, said she, thy father! and began Her tragick Scene: with silent anger wan. But when her sonne saluted her, and ching Vnto her neck; mixt kisses, as he hung, With childish blandishments; her high-wrought bloud Began to calme, and rage distracted stood. Teares trickl'd from her eyes by strong constraint. But when she found her resolution faint With too much pittie, her sad sister viewes, And said, while both, her eyes by turnes peruse. Why flatters he? why tonguelesse weepes the other? Why sister calls not she, whom he calls mother?
Degenerate! thinke whose daughter; to whom wed: All pietic is sinne to Tereus bed. Then Itys trailes: as when by Ganges flouds A Tigresse drags a Fawne through silent woods. Retiring to the most sequestred roome: While he, with hands vp-heau'd, fore-sees his doome, Clings to her bosom; mother! mother! cry'd; She stabs him: nor once turn'd her face aside. His throte was cut by Philomela's knife: Although one wound suffiz'd to vanquish life. His yet quick lims, ere all his soule could passe, Shee piece-meale teares. Some boyle in hollow brasse, Some hisse on spits. The pauements blusht with blood. Progne inuites her husband to this food: And faines her Countries Rite; which would afford No attendant, nor companion, but her Lord. Now Tereus, mounted on his Grand-sires throne, With his sons carued entrails stuffes his owne: And bids her (so Soule-blinded!) call his boy. Progne could not disguise her cruell ioy: In full fruition of her horrid ire, Thou hast, said she, within thee thy desire. He looks about: asks where. And while againe He asks, and calls: all bloudy with the slaine, Forth, like a Fury, Philomela flew; And at his face the head of Itys threw. Nor euer more than now desir'd a tongue; Texpresse the ioy of her reuenged wrong. He, with lowd out-cryes, doth the boord repell; And cites the Furies from the depth of hell. Now from his rising stomack striues to cast Th' abhorred food: now weeps, with griefe agast':
And calls himselfe his sons vnhappy tombe. Then drawes his sword; and through the guilty roome Pursues the Sisters; who appeare with wings To cut the ayre: and so they did. One sings In woods, the other neare the house remaines: And on her brest yet beares her murders staines. He, swift with griefe and fury, in that space His person chang'd Long tufts of feathers grace His shining crowne; his sword a bill became; His face all arm'd: whom we a Lapwing name. This killing newes, ere halfe his age was spent. Pandion to th' infernall Shadowes sent. Erichtheus his throne and seepter held: Who, both in iustice, and bold armes exceld. To him his wife foure sons, all hopefull, bare: As many daughters: two, surpassing faire. Thee, Cephalus, thy Procris happy made: But Thrace and Tereus, Boreas nuptiall stayd. The God belou'd Orithya wanted long; While he put off his powre, to vse his tougue. His sute reiected; horridly inclind To anger (too familiar with that Wind.) I iustly suffer this indignity: For why, said he, haue I my armes laid by? Strength, violence, high rage, and awfull threats. 'Tis my dishonour to haue vs'd intreats. Force me befits. With this, thick clouds I driue; Tosse the blew billowes, knotty Okes vp-riue; Congeale soft snow, and beat the earth with haile. When I my brethren in the ayre assaile, (For that's our field) we meet with such a shocke, That thundring skyes with our incounters rock,
And clowd-struck lightning flashes from on high. When throught the crannies of the earth I flye, And force her in her hollow caues, I make The Ghosts to tremble, and the ground to quake. Thus should I haue wood; with these my match haue made: Erichtheus should haue been compeld, not pray'd. Thus Boreas cha or no lesse storming, shooke His horrid wings, whose ayery motion strooke The earth with blasts, and made the Ocean rore. Trayling his dusky mantle on the flore, He hid himselfe in clouds of dust, and caught. Belou'd Orithya, with her feare distraught. Flying, his agitated fires increast: Nor of his ayerie race the raignes supprest Till to the walled Cicones he came. Two goodly Twins th' espous'd Athenian Dame Gaue to the Icie author of her rape: Who had their fathers wings and mothers shape. Yet not so borne. Before their faces bare The manly ensignes of their yellow haire, Calais and Zetes both vnplumed were. But as the downe did on their chins appeare; So, foule-like, from their sides soft feathers bud. When youth to action had inflam'd their blood; In the first vessell, with the flower of Greece, Through vnknowne seas, they sought the Golden Fleece.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The seuenth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. MEn, Dragons teeth produce. Wing'd Snakes their year By odors cast. A seire branch Oliues beares. Drops sprout to Flowres. Old Aeson yong became, So Libers Nurses. An old Sheepe a Lambe. Cerambus flies. A Snake, a snake-like Stone. An Oxe, a Stag. Sad Mera barks vnknowne. Hornes front the Co dames. The Telchines All change. A Doue-turn'd Maid. The hard to please, Becomes a Swan. His mother Hyrie weepes Into a Lake. High-mounting Combe keepes Her son-sought Life. A King and Queene estrang'd To flightfull Foule. Cephilus Nephew changd Into a Seale. Eumlus daughter flees Through tracelesse regious. Men from Mushrumpe rise, Phinius and Periphas light wings assume. So Polyphemous neece. From Cerberns spume Springs Aconite. Iust Earth a graue denies To Scyrons bones; which now in rocks ise. Arne, a Chough. Stout Myrmidons are borne Of toyling Ants. The late reiected Morne Masks Cephalus. The Dog, that did pursus, And Beast pusu'de; two mrbl Statues grew. VVIth Pagasaean keele the Minyae plow The curling waues: and pneus see; who now
In endlesse night his needy age consumes. The youthfull sons of Boreas, rais'd with plumes, Those greedy Harpyes, with tho virgin face, Far-off from his polluted table chace. They, vnder Iason, hauing suffer'd much; At length the banks of slimy Phasis touch. Now Phryxus fleece the hardy Minyae aske: And from the King receiue a dreadfull taske. Meane-while Aetias fries in secret fires: Who strugling long with ouer-strong desires, When reason could not such a rage restraine; She said: Medea, thou resists in vaine. Some God, vnknowne, with-stands. What will this proue! Or is it such as others fancie, Iouo? Why seeme the Kings commands so too seuere? And so, in truth they be. Why should I feare A strangers ruine, neuer seene before? Whence spring these cares? Why feare I more and more? These furies from thy virgin brest repell, Wretch, if thon canst. Could I, I should be well. A new-felt force my striuing powers inuades: Affection this, discretion that, perswades. I see the better, I approue it too: The worse I follow. Why shouldst thou pursue A husband of an other world; that art Of royall birth? Our country may impart A choice as worthy. If this forrein mate; Or liue, or dye; 'tis in the hands of fate. Yet, may he liue! I such a sute might moue To equall Gods, although I did not loue. For what hath Iason done? his hopefull Youth Would moue all hearts, that were not hard, to ruth;
His birth, his valour. Set all these apart; His person would: I am sure it moues my heart. Yet should not I assist, the flaming breath Of Bulls would blast him; or, assaults of death Spring vp in armes from Tellus hostill womb: Or else the greedie Dragon proues his tomb. This suffer, and thou hast a heart of stone; Borne of Tygresse, and more sauage growne. Yet why stand I not by? behold him slaine? And with that spectacle my eyes profane? Adde fury to the Bulls? to th' Earth-borne ire? And sleeplesse Dragon with more spleene inspire? The Gods forbid! yet rather helpe, than pray. My fathers kingdome shall I then betray? And saue this fellow, whom I hardly know, That sau'd by me, he should without me goe, Marry an other, and leaue me behind To punishment? could he proue so vnkind, Or for an other my deserts neglect; Then should he dye Such is not his aspect; The clearnesse of his mind; his euery grace; To seare deceit, or censure him so base. Besides, before hand he shall plight his troth: And bind the contract by a solemne oath. What need thou doubt? goe on; delay decline: Obliged Iason will be euer thine. Hymen shall crowne, and mothers celebrate Their sons Protectresse through th' Achaian State. My sister, brother, father, country, Gods, Shall I abandon for vnknowne abodes? Austere my father, barbarous my land, My brother, a child, my sisters wishes stand
With my desires; the greatest God of all My brest inshrines. What I forsake is small: Great hopes I follow. To receiue the grace for Argo's safetic: know a better place And Cities, which, in these far-distant parts, Are famous; with ciuilitie, and arts: And Aeson son, whom I more dearely prize Than wealthy Earth and all her Monarchies. In him most happy, and affected by The bounteous gods, my crown shall reach the sky. They tell of Rocks that iustle in the maine: Charybdis, that sucks in, and casts againe The wrackfull waues: how raunous Scylla waits With barking dogs in rough Sicilian straits. My loue poslest; in Iasons besome laid; Let seas swell high: I cannot be dismaid While I infold my husband in my armes. Or should I feare, I should but feare his harmes. Call'st thou him husband? wilt thou then thy blame Mdea, varnish with an honest name? Consider well what thou intendst to doe; And, while thou maist, so foule a crime eschue. Thus she. When honour, pictie, the right, Before her stood; and Cupid put to flight. Then goes where Hecates old Altar stood; O're-shadowed by a dark and secret wood. Her broken ardor she had now reclaim'd: Which Iasons presence forth-with re-inflam'd. Her cheeks blush fire: her face with feruor flashes. And as a dying cinder, rak't in ashes, Fed by reuiuing windes, augmenting, glowes; And tossed, to accustom'd fury growes:
So sickly Loue, which lare appear'd to dye; New life assum'd from his inflaming eye. Whose looks by chance more beauty now discouer Than heretofore: you might forgiue the louer. Her eager eyes she riuets on his face; And, frantick, thinks him of no humane race: Nor could diuert her lookes. As he his tongue Began t'vnloose, her faire hand softly wrung, Implor'd her aide, and promis'd her his bed: She answer made, with tearrs profusely shed. I see to what euents m' intentions moue: Nor ignorance deceiues me thus; but loue. You, by the vertue of my art, shall liue: In recompence, your faithfull promise giue. He, by the Altar of the Triple Powre, The groues which that great Deity imbowre, Her fathers Sire, to whom the hid appeares, His owne successe, and so great danger, sweares. Beleeu'd: from her th' inchanted herbs receiues▪ With them, their vse: and his Protectresse leaues. The Morrow had the sparkling stars defac't: When all in Marse's field assemble; plac't On circling ridges. Seated on a throne, The iuory-scepter'd King in scarlet shone. From adamant nostrils bras-hoou'd Buls now cast Hot Vulcan, and the grasse with vapors blast. And as full forges, blowne by art, resound; As puluer'd flints, infurnest vnder ground; By sprinkled water fire conceiue: so they Pent flames, inuolu'd in noysefull brests, betray; So rumble their scorcht throtes. Yet Aesons Heire Came brauely on: on whom they trune, and stare
With terrible aspects; his ruine threat With steele-tipt hornes. Inrag'd, their cleft hooues beat The thundring ground; whence clouds of dust arise; And with their smoky bellowings rend the skies. The Minya freeze with feare; but he remaines Vntoucht: such vertue Sorcery containes. Their dew-laps boldly with his hand he strokes. Inforc't to draw the plough with heauy yokes. The Colchians at so strange a sight admire: The Minya shout, and set his powres on fire. Then, in his caske, the vipers teeth assumes: Those in the turn'd-vp furrowes he inhumes. Earth mollifies the poys'nous seeds, which spring; And forth a haruest of new People bring. And as an Embrion, in the womb inclos'd, Assumes the forme of man; within compos'd, Through all accomplisht numbers; nor comes forth To breathe in ayre, till his maturer growth: So when the bowels of the teeming Earth Grew great, she gaue mens perfect shapes their birth. And, what's more strange; with them, their armes ascend; Who at th' Aemonian Youth their lances bend. When this th' Achaians saw, they hung the head: And all their courages for terror fled. Euen she, who had secur'd him was affraid, When she beheld so many one inuade. A chil cold checks her bloud; death looks lesse pale. And left the hearbs she gaue should chance to faile; Vnheard auxiliarie charmes imparts: And calls th' assistance of her secret Arts. He hurles a massi stone among his foes: Who on themselues conuert their deadly blowes.
The Earth-borne brothers mutuall wounds destroy, And ciuill warre. The Achiues skip for ioy, And throng t' imbrace the Victor. Her the same. Affection spurd, but was with-held by shame. Yet that too weake if none had lookt vpon her: Not vertue checkt her, but the wrack of honor. Now, in conceit, she hugs him in her armes: Applauds th' inuentiue Gods; with them, her charmes. To make the Dragon sleepe that neuer slept, Remaines; whose care the golden purchace kept. Bright crested, triple tongu'd; his cruell iawes Arm'd with sharpe phangs; his feet with dreadfull clawe. When once besprinkled with Lethaean iuyce, And words repeated thrice; which sleepe produce, Calme the rough seas, and make swift riuers stand; His eye-lids vail'd to sleepes vnknowne command. The Heros, of the Golden Fleece possest, Proud of the spoyle, with her whose fouour blest His enterprize, an other Spoyle, now bore To sea; and lands on safe Iolcian shore. Aemonian parents, for their sons returne, Bring gratefull gifts, coniested incense burne; And chearfully with horne-gilt offrings pay Religious vowes. But Aeson was away; Opprest with redious age, now neere his tomb. When thus Aesonides: O wife, to whom My life I owe: though all I hold in chiefe From thy deserts, which far surpasse beliefe; If magick can (what cannot magick do?) Take yeeres from me; and his with mine renue. Then wept. His pietie her passion stirs: Who sighs to thinke how vnlike she had beene to hers.
Yet this concealing, answers: What a crime Hath slipt thy tongue? thinkst thou, that with thy time I can, or will, anothers life inuest? Hecat' fore-fend! nor is't a iust request. Yet Iason, we a greater gift will giue: Thy father, by our art renew'd, shall liue, Without thy losse; if so the triple Powre Assist me with her presence in that howre. Three nights yet wanted, ere the Moone could ioyne Her growing hornes. When with replenisht shine She fac't the earth; the Court she leaues; her haire Vntrest, her garments loose, her ankles bare: And wanders through the dead of drowsie Night With vnseene steps Men, beasts, and birds of flight, Deepe Rest had bound in humid gyues; who crept So silently, as if her selfe had slept. No Aspen wags, moyst ayre no sound receiues; Stars onely shine: to which her armes she heaues: Thrice turnes about; besprinkles thrice her crowne With gather'd deaw; thrice yawnes: and kneeling down: O Night, thou friend to Secrets; you cleare fires, That, with the Moone, succeed when Day retires: Great Hecate, that know'st, and aid imparts To our designes: you Charmes, and magick Arts: And thou, O Earth, that to Magicians yeelds Thy powerfull simples: aires, winds, mountaines, fields; Soft murmuring springs, still lakes, and riuers cleare: You Gods of woods; you Gods of night, appeare By you, at will, I make swift streames retire To their first fountaynes, whilst their banks admire; Seas tosse, and smooth; cleere clouds, with clouds deforme; Stormes turne to calmes, and make a calme a Storme.
With spels and charmes I breake the Vipers iaw, Cleaue solid rocks, okes from their seasures draw, Whole Woods remoue, the ayrie mountaines shake; Earth grone, and ghosts from beds of death awake. And thee, Ttania, from thy sphere I hale: Though ringing Cymballs thy extreames auaile. Our charmes thy charriot pale; our poys'nous weeds, The frighted Morne; though drawne by rosie Steeds. Flame-breathing buls you tam'd; you made them bow Their stubborne necks vnto the seruill plow; The Serpents brood by you selfe-slaughtred lyes; Your slumbers clos'd the wakefull Dragons eyes, At our command: and sent the Golden Fleece (The guard deluded) to the towres of Greece. Now need I drugs, that may old age indue With vigour, and the flowre of youth renue. Which you shall giue. Nor blaze these stars in vaine: Nor Dragous vainly through the ayrie maine This Charriot draw. Hard by the charriot rests. Mounting, she strokes the bridled dragons crests; And shakes the raignes. Rapt vp, beneath her spies Thessalian Tempe; and her snakes applies To parts retir'd. The hearbs that ssa beare, Steepe Pelion, Othrys, Pindus; euer-cleare Olympus, who the loftie Pindus tops; Vp-roots, or with her brazen Cycle crops. Much gathers on the bank of Apidan; By Amphrsus much; and where Enipeus ran. Nor Sperchius, nor Peneus, barren found: Nor thee smoothe Boees with sharpe rushes crown'd. And rauisht from Euboan Anthedon, That hearb, as yet by Glaucus change vnknowne.
By winged Dragons drawne, nine nights, nine dayes, About she romes; and euery field suruayes. Return'd: her Snakes, that did but onely smell The Odors, cast their skins, and age expell. Her feete to enter her owne roofe refuse Rooft by the sky: she touch of man eschues. Two Altars builds of liuing turfe: the right To Hecate, the left to Youth. These dight With Vervin and greene boughs; hard by, two pits She forthwith digs: and sacrificing, slits The throtes of black-eest rams. With reaking blood The ditches fils; and powres thereon a flood Of honey, and new milke, from turn'd-vp bowles; Repeating powerfull words. The King of Soules, His rauisht Queene, inuokes; and Powers beneath, Not to preuent her by old Aesons death. With pray'rs, and long-breath'd murmurings appeas'd: She bids them to produce the age-diseas'd. Her sleepe-producing charme his spirits deads: Who on the grasse his senselesse body spreads. Charg'd Iason, and the rest, far-off with-drew: Vnhallowed eyes might not such secrets view. Furious Medea, with her haire vnbound, About the flagrant Altar trots a Round. The brands dips in the ditches, black with blood; on the Altars fires th'infected wood. Thrice purges him with waters, thrice with flames, And thrice with sulphur; muttering horrid names. Meane while, in hollow brasse the med'cine boyles: And swelling high, in fomy bubbles toyles. There seethes she what th' Aenonian vales produce; ootes, iuyces, flowres, and seeds of soueraigne vse.
Addes pretious stones, from farthest Orient rest: And pibles, by the ebbing Ocean left. The deaw collected ere the Dawning springs: A Screech-owles flesh, with her infamous wings. The entrailes of ambiguous Wolues; that can Take, and forsake the figure of a man. The liuer of a long-liu'd Hart: then takes The scaly skins of small Cinyphean snakes. A Crowes black head, and poynted beake, was cast: Among the rest; which had nine ages past. These, and a thousand more; without a name, Were thus prepared by the barbarous Dame For humane benefit. Th'ingredients now She mingles with a wither'd oliue bough. Lo! from the caldron the dry stick receiues First virdure; and a little after, leaues; Forth-with, with ouer-burdning Oliues deckt. The skipping spume which vnder flames eiect, Vpon the ground descended in a dew: Whence vernall flowres, and springing pasture grew. This seene, she cuts the old mans throte; out-scrus'd: His scarce-warme blood, and her receipt infus'd. Suckt in at mouth or wound, his beard and head Black haire forth-with adorne, the hoary shed. Pale colour, morphue, meger looks remoue: And vnder-rising flesh his wrinkles smoothe. His limmes wax strong and lustie. Aeson much Admires his change: himselfe remembers such Twice twenty summers past. With all, indu'd. A youthfull mind: and both at once renew'd. This wonder from on high Lyaeus views: By Colchis gift his nurses dates renewes.
Least frand should faile; she, with her bed's Consort Dissention faines, and flies to Pelias Court. His daughters (for sad Age the King arrests) Her entertaine. Who soone with sly protests Of forged loue allures their quick beliefe. Among her  mentions the repriefe Of Aese yeares; insisting on that part. This hope ingenders, that her able Art Might so their father's vanisht youth restore: Whom they, with infinite rewards implore. She, musing, seemes to doubt: and, with pretence Of difficultie, holds them in suspence. But when she had a tardy promise made; To win your stedfast confidence (she said) Take from your flocks the most age-shaken Ram; And suddenly he shall become a Lamb. Streight thither by the wreathed hornes they drew A sunk-ey'd Ram; whose youth none liuing knew. Now, at his riueled throte, out-lanching life (Whose little blood could hardly staine her knife) His carkasse she into a caldron throwes: With it, her drugs. Each limb more slender growes; He casts his hornes, and with his hornes his yeares: Anon a tender bleating strikes their cares. While they admire, out skips a frisking lamb; That sports, and seekes the vdder of his dam. Fixt with amaze: they, strongly now possest, Her promise more importunately prest. Thrice Phoebus had vnyok't his panting Steeds, Drencht in Iberian Seas; whist Night succeeds, Studded with stars: when false Medea tooke, With vselesse herbs, meere water of the brooke.
On Pelias▪ and his drowsie Guard, she hung A death-like sleepe with her inchanting tongue. Whom now the so-instructed sisters led Into his chamber; and besiege his bed. Why pause you thus, said she, ô slow to good! Vnsheath your swords, and shed his aged blood; That I his veines with sprightly iuyce may fill: His life and youth depend vpon your will. If you haue any vertue, nor pursue Vnfruitfull hopes, performe this filiall due. With steele your fathers age expulse, and purge His dregs through wounds. Their zeale her speeches vrge. Who were most pious, impious first became: And, by auoyding, perpetrate the same. Yet hearts they had not to behold the blow: But, with auerted lookes, blind wounds bestow. He, blood-imbrew'd, his hoary head aduanc't: Halfe-mangled, stroue to rise. Who now intranc't Amidst so many swords, his armes vp-help; And, Daughters, cry'd, what doe you! what compeld Those cruell hands t'inuade your fathers life! Downe sunke their hands and hearts. Medea's knife, With following speech his throte asunder cuts: And his hackt limmes in seething liquor puts. And had not Dragons rapt her through the skies, Reuenge had tortur'd her. Aloft she flies Ore shady Pelion, god-like Chirons Den, Aspiring Othrys, hills renown'd by men For old Cerambus safety: who, by aide Of fauouring Nymphs, reliefefull wings displaide; While swallowing waues the waighty earth surround: And swolne Deucalions surges scap't vndrown'd.
Aeolian Pitane on her left hand leaues; That marble which the Serpents shape receiues; Idaean groues, where iber turn'd a Steere (To cloke his sons slye theft) into a Deere; The sand-heape which Corytus Sire containes; And where new-barking Mer frights the plaines: Euryphylus towne, where hornes the Matrons sham'd Of o, when Hercules the Coans tam'd; Phoebeian hode; al, sian Telchines, Drencht by Ioues vengeance in his brothers seas, For all transforming with their vitious eyes: By Caea's old Carthetan turrets flyes, Where fates Alcidamas with wonder moue, To thinke his daughter could become a Doue. Then Hyries lake, Cyneian Tempe view'd, Grac't by a Swan with sudden plumes indu'd. For Phyllius there, had, at a Boyes command, Wild birds, and saluage Lyons, brought to hand. Who bid to tame a Bull, his will perform'd; Yet at so sterne a loue not seldome storm'd, And his last purchase to the boy deny'd. Pouting, You'l wish you had giuen it me, he cry'd; And iumpt from downe-right cliffs. All held him bain'd; When spredding wings a siluer Swan sustain'd His Mother (ignorant thereof) became A Lake with weeping: which they Hyrie name. Next Pleron lies; where Ophian Combe shuns, With trembling wings, her life pursuing sons. Then neere atona-lou'd Calaurea rang'd; In which the King and Queene to birds were chang'd. on the right hand (where the beast would his mother haue comprest.)
Cephisus spies (who for his nephew mourn'd; Into a Sea-calfe by Apollo turn'd). Court, whose daughter sads her Sire, With mounting wings. Her Snakes at length retire. To Piren, Ephyr: men, if Fame say true, Here at the first from shower-raysd mushrumps grew. But after Colchis had the new-wed Dame, And Creons Pallace, wrapt in Magick flame; When impious steele her childrens bloud had shed, The ill-reueng'd from Iasons fury fled. Whom now the swift Titanian Dragons draw To Pallas towres. Those thee, iust Phineus, saw; And thee, old Periphas, at once to flie: Where Polyphemons Neece new wings supply. Aegaeus entertaines her (of his life The onely staine) and took her for his wife. Here Theseus maskt vnknown: who, great in Deed Had two-sea'd Isthmos from oppression freed. Whose vndeserued ruin Phasias sought By mortall Aconite, from Scythia brought. This from Echidna's hel-hound effence drawes. There is a blind steepe caue with foggy iawes, Through which the bold Tirynthian Heros strain'd Drag'd Cerberus, with adamant inchain'd. Who backward hung, and scouling, lookt a-skew On glorious Day; with anger rabid grew: Thrice howles, thrice barks at once, with his three heads; And on the grasse his spumy poyson sheds. This sprung; attracting from the fruitfull soyle Dire nourishment, and powre of deathfull spoyle. The rurall Swaines, because it takes delight In liuing rocks, surnam'd it Aconite.
Aegaeus, by her fly perswasions wonne; As to a foe, presents it to his sonne. He took the cup: when by the iuory hilt Of Theseus sword, Aegaeus found her guilt; And struck the potion from his lips. With charmes Ingendring clouds, she scapes his lengthlesse armes. Though glad of his sons safetie, a chill feare Shooke all his powers, that danger was so neere. With fire he feeds the Altars, richly feasts The Gods with gifts. Whole Hecatombs of beasts (Their hornes with ribands wreath'd) imbrew the ground No day, they say, was euer so renown'd Amongst th' Athenians. Noble, vulgar, all, Together celebrate that Festiuall. And sing, when flowing bowles their spirits raise: Great Theseus, Marathon resounds thy praise For slaughter of the Cretan Bull. Secure They liue, who Cremyons wasted fields manure, By thy exploit and bounty. Vulcans Seed By thee glad Epidaure beheld to bleed. Immane Procrustes death Cephisia view'd: Elusis, Cercyon's. Scinis ill indu'de With strength so much abus'd; who Beeches bent, And tortur'd bodyes 'twixt their branches rent, Thou slew'st. The way which to Alcathoê led Is now secure, inhumane Scyron dead. The Earth his scatter'd bones a graue deny'd; Nor would the Sea his hated reliques hide: Which tossed to and fro, in time became A solid rock: the rock we Scyron name. If we thy yeares should number with thy acts; Thy yeares would proue a cypher to thy facts.
Great soule! for thee, as for our publique wealth, We pray; and quaffe Lyaeus to thy health. The Pallace with the peoples praises rings: And sacred Ioy in euery bosome springs. Aegaeus yet (no pleasure is compleat: Griefe twins with ioy.) for Theseus safe receit Reapes little comfort. Minos makes a war: Though strong in men and ships, yet stronger far Through vengeance of a father: who, his harme In slaine Androgeus, scourgeth with iust armes. Yet wisely first endeuours forraine aid: And all the Ilands of that Sea suruai'd. Who Anaphe and Astipalea gain'd; The one by gifts, the other was constrain'd: Low Mycone, Cimolus chalkie fields, High Scyros, Siphnus, which rich metals yeelds, Champion Seriphos, Paros far display'd With marble browes, and Cythnos il-betray'd By impious Arne for yet-loued gold; Turn'd to a Chough, whom sable plumes infold. Oliaros, Didymae the Sea-lou'd soyle Of Tenos, l'eparethes fat with oyle, Andros, and Gyaros; these their aid deny'd. The Gnossian fleet from thence their sailes apply'd Vnto Oenopia, for her children fam'd. Oenopia by the ancient dwellers nam'd: But Aeacus, there raigning, call'd the same▪ Aegina, of his honour'd mothers name. All throng to see a Prince of so great worth. Straight elamon and Peleus, issuing forth, With Phocus, youngest of that royall race, Make haste to meet him. With a tardie pace
Came aged Aeacus, and askt the cause Of his repaire. At those sad thoughts he drawes His breath in sighs: some intermission made, The Ruler of the hundred Cities said. Assist our armes, borne for my murdred son; And in this pious war our fortunes run: Giue comfort to his graue. The King reply'd: In vaine you aske what needs must be deny'd. No Citie is in stricter league than ours Conioyn'd to Athens: mutuall are our powres. He, parting, said: Your league shall cost you deare. And held it better far▪ to threat, than beare An accidentall warre; whereby he might Consume his force before he came to fight. Yet might they see the Cretans vnder saile From high built walls: when, with a leading gale, The Atck ship attain'd their friendly shore: Which Cephalus, and his embassage, bore. Th! Aeacides him knew (though many a day Vnseene) imbrace, and to the Court conuay. The goodly Prince, who yet the pledges held Of those perfections, which in youth exceld, Enters the Pallace; bearing in his hand. A brancit of Oliue. At his elbowes stand Clytus, and Butes; valorous and young: Who from the loynes of high-borne Palas sprung. First Cephalus his full oration made; Which shew'd his message, and demanded aid: Their leagues, an ancient loues to mind recalls; And how all Greece was threatned in their falls: With eloquence inforc't his embassie. When God-like Aeacus made this replie
(His royall scepter shining in his hand) Athenians, craue not succour, but command: This Ilands forces yours vouchsafe to call; For in your ayde I will aduenture all. Souldiers I haue enow, at once t'oppose My enemies, and to repell your foes. The Gods be prais'd, and happy times, that will Seeke no excuses. May your Citie still Increase with people; Cephalus reply'd. At my approch I not a little ioy'd To meet so many youths of equall yeares, So fresh and lustie. Yet not one appeares Of those who heretofore your towne possest; When first you entertayn'd me for a Guest. Then Aeacus, (in sighs his words ascend) A sad beginning had a better end. Would I could veter all: Day would expire Ere all were told, and t'would your patience tire. Their bones, and ashes, silent graues inclose: And what a treasure perished with those! By Iun's wrath, a dreadfull pestilence Deuour'd our liues: who tooke vniust offence, In that this Ile her Riuals name profest. While it seem'd humane, and the cause vnghest; So long we death-repelling Physick try'd: But those diseases vanquisht Art deride. Heauen first, the earth with thickned vapors shrouds; And lazie heat inuolues in sullen clouds. Foure pallid moones their growing hornes vnite, And had as oft with-drawne their feeble light; Yet still the death-producing Auster blew. Sunke springs, and standing lakes infected grew:
Serpents in vntild fields by millions creepe; And in the streames their tainting poysons steepe. First, dogs, sheepe, oxen, fowle that flagging fly, And saluage beasts, the swift infection try. Sad Swaines, amazed, see their oxen shrink Beneath the yoke, and in the furrowes sink. The fleecie flocks with anguish faintly bleat; Let fall their wooll, and pine away with heat, The generous Horse that from th'Olympicks late Return'd with honour, now degenerate, Vnmindfull of the glory of his prize; Grones at his manger, and there deedlesse dyes. The Bore orgets his rage: swift feet now faile The Hart: nor Beares the horned Herd assaile. All languish. Woods, fields, paths (no longer bare) Are fil'd with carkasses, that stench the aire. Which neither dogs, nor greedy fowle (how much To be admir'd!) nor hoary wolues would touch. Falling, they rot: which deadly Odors bred, That round about their dire contagion spred. Now raues among the wretched country Swaines: Now in our large and populous Citie raignes. At first, their bowels broyle, with feruor stretcht: The symptoms; rednesse, hot wind hardly fetcht. Their furd tongs swell; their drie iawes gasp for breath; And with the ayre inhale a swifter death. None could indure or couerture, or bed: But on the stones their panting bosoms spred. Cold stones could no way mitigate that heat: Euen they beneath those burning burdens sweat. None cure attempt: the sterne Disease inuades The heartlesse Leech; nor Art her author aids.
The neere ally'd, whose care the sick attends, Sicken themselues, and dye before their friends. Of remedy they see no hope at all, But onely in approching funerall. All cherish their desires: for helpe none care: Help was there none. In shamelesse throngs repaire To springs and wells: there cleaue, in bitter strife T'extinguish thirst; but first extinguish life. Nor could th'o're-charg'd arise; but dying, sink: And of those tainted waters, others drink. The wretches lothe their tedious beds: thence breake With giddy steps. Or, if now growne too weake, Roule on the floore: there quitted houses hate, As guilty of their miserable fare; And, ignorant of the cause, the place accuse: Halfe-ghosts, they walk, while they their legs could vse. You might see others on the earth lye mourning; Their heauy eyes with dying motion turning: Stretching their armes to heauen, where euer death Surpris'd them, parting with their sigh't-out breath. O what a heart had I! or ought to haue! I loth'd my life, and wisht with them a graue. Which way soeuer I conuert my eye, The breathlesse multitude dispersed lye. Like perisht apples, dropping with the strokes Of rocking windes; or acornes from broad okes. See you yon' Temple, mounted on high staires? 'Tis Iupiters. Who hath not offer'd praiers, And slighted incense there! husbands for wiues; Fathers for sons: and while they pray, their liues Before th'inexorable altars vent; With incense in their hands, halfe yet vnspent!
How oft the oxe, vnto the temple brought, While yet the Priest the angry Powres besought, And pour'd pure wine betweene his hornes; fell downe Before the axe had toucht his curled crowne! To Iupiter about to sacrifice, For me, my country, sons; with horrid noyse Th'vnwounded Offering fell: the blood that life Bore into exile, hardly staind the knife. The Inwards lost their signes of heauens presage; Out-raized by the sterne Diseases rage. The dead before the sacred doores were laid: Before the Altars too; the Gods t'vpbraid. Some choke themselues with cords: by death eschue The feare of death; and following Fates pursue. Dead corps, without the Dues of funerall, They weakly beare: the ports are now too small. Or vn-inhum'd they lye: or else are throwne On wealthlesse pyles. Respect is giuen to none. For Pyles they striue: on those their kinsfolke burne, That flame for others. None are left to mourne. Ghosts wander vndeplor'd by sons or fires: Nor is there roome for tombs, or wood for fires. Astonisht with these tempests of extreames: O Ioue, said I, if they be more than dreames That wrapt thee in Aegina's armes; nor shame That I, thy son, should thee my father name: Render me mine, or render me a graue! With prosperous thunder-claps a signe he gaue. I take it, said I; let this Omen be A happy pledge of thy intents to me; Hard by, a goodly Oke, by fortune, stood, Sacred to Ioue; of Dodoneian wood:
Graine-gathering Ants there, in long files I saw, Whose little mouthes selfe-greater burthens draw; Keeping their paths along the rugged rine. While I admire their number: O diuine, And euer helpfull! giue to me, said I, As many men; who may the dead supply. The trembling oke his loftie top declin'd: And murmured without a breath of wind. I shooke with feare: my tresses stood an end: Yet on the earth and oke I kisses spend. I durst not seeme to hope; yet hope I did: And in my brest my cherisht wishes hid. Night came; and Sleepe care-wasted bodies chear'd: Before my eyes the selfe-same Oke appear'd; So many branches, as before there were; So many busie Ants those branches beare; So shooke the Oke, and with that motion threw To vnder-earth the graine-supporting crew. Greater and greater straight they seeme to sight: To raise themselues from earth, and stand vp-right. Whom numerous feet, black colour, lanknesse leaue: And instantly a humane shape receiue. Now Sleep with-drew. My dream I waking blame: And on the small-performing Gods exclaime. Yet heard a mightie noyse; and seem'd to heare Almost forgotten voyces: yet I feare That this a dreame was also. Whereupon, The doore thrust open, in rusht Telamon; Come forth, said he, O father; and behold What hope transcends; nor can with faith be told! Forth went I; and beheld the men which late My dreame presented: such in euery state
I saw; and knew them. They salute their King. Ioue prais'd: a partio to the towne I bring; Among the rest I share the fields: and call Them Myrmidons of their originall. You see their persons: such their manners are As formerly. A people giuen to spare, Patient of labour; what they get, preserue. They, like in yeares and mindes, these wars shall serue, And follow your conduct; when first this wind (The wind blow Easterly) that was so kind To bring you hither, will to your auaile Conuert it selfe into a Southerne gale. Discourse thus entertain'd the day; with feasts They crowne the euening: Sleep the Night inuest▪ The morning Sun proiects his golden rayes: Still Eurus blew; and their departure stayes. Now Pallas sons to Cephalus resort, And Cephalus, with Pallas sons, to Court, With early visits: (sleepe the King inchaines). Whom Phocus in the Presence entertaines. For Peteus, with his brother Telamon, To raise an army were already gone. Meane-while th'Athenians Phocus leads into The Priuy chamber, beautifull to view. Talking; his eyes vpon the iaulin seaze, Which grac't the singers of Aeolides. I haunt, said he, the woods; delight in blood Of saluage beasts; yet know not of what wood Your dart is made of. If of ash it were 'Tould look more brown; if Cornel, 'twould appeare More knotty: on what tree so'ere it grew, My eyes did neuer such another view.
One of th'Actaean brethren made reply: You would more wonder at the quality. It hits the aim'd at, not by fortune led; And of it selfe returnes with slaughter red. Phocus the cause desireth much to know: From whence it came; and who did it bestow. He yeelds to his request; yet things well knowne, Restrain'd by modesty, he lets alone. Who toucht with sorrow for his wife, that bleeds In his remembrance; thus with teares proceeds. This Dart, ô Goddesse-borne, prouokes these teare And euer would, if endlesse were my yeares. This me, in my vnhappy wife, destroy'd: This gift I would I neuer had inioy'd! Procris Orithya's sister was; if Fame Haue more inform'd you of Orithya's name. Yet she (should you their minds and formes confer) More worth the rape. Erechtheus, mee to her, And loue, vnite. Then happy! happy, I Might yet haue beene. But ô, the Gods enuy! Two months were now consum'd in chaste deligh When gray Aurora, hauing vanquisht Night, Beheld me on the euer-fragrant hill Of steepe Hymettus: and, against my will, As I my toyles extended, bare me thence. I may the truth declare without offence: Though rosie be her cheeks; although she sway The deawy Confines of the Night and Day, And Nectar drink; my Procris all possest: My heart was hers; my tongue her prayse profest. I told her of our holy nuptiall ties; Of wedlocks breach; and yet scarce tasted ioyes.
Fire-red, she said; thy harsh complaints forbeare: Possesse thy Procris. Though so faire, so deare; Thou' It wish th'hadst neuer knowne her, if I know Insewing fate: and angry, lets me goe. Her words I ponder as I went along: And 'gan to doubt she might my honour wrong. Her youth and beauty tempt me to distrust: Her vertue checks those feares, as most vniust. But I was absent: but example fed My iealousie: but louers all things dread. I seeke my sorrowes; and with gifts intend To tempt the chaste. Aurora proues a friend To this suspition; and my forme translates. Vnknowne, I enter the Athenian gates; And then my owne. The house from blame was free: In decent order, and perplext for me. Scarce with a thousand sleights I gain'd a view: View'd with astonishment, I scarce pursue My first intent: scarce could I but reueale The truth; and pardon with due kisses seale. She was full sad: yet louelier none than she, Euen in that sadnesse: sorrowfull for me. How excellent, ô Phocus, was that face, Which could in griefe retaine so sweet a grace? What need I tell how often I assail'd Her vexed chasticie! how often fail'd! How often said the! One I onely serue: For him, where euer, I my ioyes preserue. What mad man would such faith haue farther prest, But I? indushious in my owne vnrest. With deepe protests, and gifts still multiply'd, At length she wauers False of faith, I cry'd,
Thou art disclos'd: I, no adulterer, But thy wrong'd spouse: nor can this tryall erre. She made no answer, prest with silent shame. Th'insidious house, and me, far more in blame, Forsaking▪ man-kind for my sake eschues: And Dian like the mountaine chace pursues. Abandon'd; hotter flames my blood incense. I beg'd her pardon, and confest m'offence: And said, Auroa might haue me subdude With such inticements, had but she so woo'd. My fault confest, her wrong reuenged, wee Grow reconcil'd; and happily agree. Besides her selfe, as though that gift were small, A Dog she gaue: which Cynthia giuing; All, Said she, surpasse in swiftnesse: and this Speare You so commend, which in my hand I beare. Doe you the fortune of the first inquire? Receiue a wonder: and the fact admire. Dark prophesies, not vnderstood of old, The Naiades with searching wits vnfold. When sacred Themis, in that so obscure, Neglected grew. Nor could she this indure. A cruell Beast infests th'Anian plaines; To many fatall: fear'd by country Swaines, Both for their cattle, and themselues. We met: And with our toyles the ample fields beset. He nimbly skips aboue the vpper lines: And mounting ouer, frustrates our designes. Their dogs the' vncouple; whose pursuit he out-spring▪ With no lesse speed, than if supply'd by wings. All bid me let my alaps slip (for so My dog was call'd) who strugling long agoe,
Halfe-thotled, straind the leash. No sooner gone, Than out of sight; his foot-steps left vpon The burning sand: who vanisht from our eyes As swiftly as a well-driuen iauelin flyes▪ Or as a singing pellet from a sling; Or as an arrow from a Cretan string. I mount a hill which ouer-topt the place; From thence beholding this admired chace. The Beast now pincht appeares, now shuns by slight His catching iawes. Nor (crafty) runs out-right; Nor trusts his heeles: with nimble turnings shunning His vrgent foe; cast back by ouer-running. Who prest, what onely might in speed compare; Appeares to catch th'vncaught; and mouthes the aire. My dart I take to aide: which, while I shooke, And on the thong direct my hastie looke To fit my fingers; looking vp againe, I saw two marble statues on the plaine. Had you these seene, you could not chuse but say That this appear'd to run, and that to bay. That neither should each other ouer-goe The Gods decree'd: if Gods descend so low. Thus he: here paus'd. Then Phocus; Pray'vnfold Your darts offence. Which Cephalus thus told. Ioy griefe fore-runs: that ioy we first recite. Foo, those times I mention with delight, When youth and ymen crown'd our happy life: She, in her husband blest; I in my wife. In both one care, and one affection moues. She would not haue exchang'd my bed for Ioues; could haue tempted my desire: Our bosom flam'd with such an equall fire.
When Sol had rais'd his beames aboue the floods; My custome was to trace the leauy woods; Arm'd with this dart, I solitary went, Without horse, huntsmen, toyles, or dogs of sent. Much kild; I to the cooler shades repaire: And where the vallie breathes a fresher aire. Coole aire I seeke, while all with feruor gloes: Coole aire expect, my trauels sweet repose. Come aire, I wont to sing, relieue th'opprest; Come, ô most welcome, glide into my brest: Now quench, as erst, in me this scalding heat. By chance I other blandishments repeat; (So Fates inforce) as, ô my soules delight! By thee I am fed and chear'd: thy sweets excite My affections to these woods: ô life of death! May euer I inhale thy quickning breath! A busie eare these doubtfull speeches caught; Who oft-nam'd aire some much-lou'd Dryad though And told to Procris, with a leuder tongue, His false surmises; with the song I sung. Loue is too credulous. With griefe she faints; And scarce reuiuing, bursts into complaints: My spotlesse faith with furie execrates. Woe's me, she cryes, produc't to cruell fates! Transported with imaginarie blame, What is not, feares: an vnsubstantiall name. Yet grieues (poore soule!) as if in truth abus'd: Yet often doubts; and her distrust accus'd. Now holds the information for a lye: Nor will trust other witnesse than her eye. Aurora re-inthron'd th'insuing Day: I hunt, and speed. As on the grasse I lay,
Come aire, said I, my tyred spirits cheare. At this an vnknowne sighe inuades my eare. Yet I; O come, before all ioyes prefer'd. Among the withered leaues a rustling heard, I threw my dart; supposing it some beast: But ô, 'twas Procris! wounded on the brest, Shee shreckt, ay me! Her voyce too well I knew: And thither, with my griefe distracted, flew. Halfe dead, all blood-imbrew'd, my wife I found: Her gift (alas!) exhaling from her wound. I rais'd her body, than my owne more deare: To bind her wounds my lighter garment teare; And striue to stench the blood. O pitty take, Said I, nor thus a guilty soule forsake! She, weake, and now a dying, thus applies Her tongues forc't motion: By our nuptiall ties; By heauen-imbowred Gods; by those below, To whose infernall monarchy I goe: By that, if euer I deserued well; By this ill-fated loue, for which I fell, Yet now in death most constantly retaine; O, let not Ayre our chaster bed prophane. This said; I show'd, and she perceiued how That error grew: but what auail'd it now? She sinkes; her blood along her spirits tooke: Who lookes on me as long as she could looke. My lips her soule receiue, with her last breath: Who, now resolued, sweetly smiles in death. The weeping Hero's told this tragedy To those that wept as fast. The King drew nye And his two sons, with wel-arm'd Regiments, New-rais'd; which he to Cephalus presents.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The Eighth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. HArmonious walls. Leud Scylla now despaires; With Nisus, chang'd: the Larke the Hobby dares. Ariadnes Crowne a Constellation made. Th'inuentiue youth a Partridge; still affraid Of mounting. Meleagers Sisters mourne His tragedio: to Foule, so named, turne▪ Fiue water Nymphs the fiue Echinades Defigure. Perimele, neere to these, Becomes an Iland. Ioue and Hermes take The formes of men. A Citie turn' t'a Lake: A Cottage to a Temple. That good pare, Old Baucis and Philemon, changed are At once to sacred Trees In various shapes Blew Proteus sports. Oft selfe▪ chang'd Metra scap Scorn'a' seruitude. The Streame of Calydon Forsakes his owne, and other shapes puts on. NOw Lucifer exalts the Day: to hell Old Night descends. The Easterne winds now fell; Moyst clouds arose: when gentle Southerne gales Befriend returning Cephalus. Full sailes Wing his successefull course: who, long before All expectation, toucht the wished shore.
For no heart is so hard, that did but know, And would a lance against his bosom throw. It takes: with me, my country I intend To render vp; and giue these warres an end. What is to intend? Each passage hath a guard; My father keepes the keyes, and sees them bard. 'Tis he defers my oyes; 'tis he I dread: Would I were not, or he were with the dead! uh, we are our owne Gods. They thriue, that dare: And fortune is a foe to slothfull praire. Long since, an other, scorcht with such a fire, By death had for' a way to her desire. Yet why should any more aduenturous proue? I dare through sword and fire make way to Loue. And yet here is no vse of fire nor sword; But of my fathers haire. This must afford What  so much affect, and make me blest: than all the treasure of the East. This said; Night, nurse of cares, her curtaines drew▪ When in the dark she more audacious grew. In  of rest, when tyr'd with day-bred cares Sleepe all inuests; she silently repaires Into her fathers bed-chamber; and there Extracts (ô horrid act ) his fatall haire. of her wicked prey; with her she bore The  spoyle; vnlocks a Posterne doore: the foe (bold by her merit made) vn-astonisht, said. Seede, my Gods: no meede, aire receiue, not thinke a haire! giue,
But my old fathers head. With that, presents The gift with wicked hand, and bad ostents. Minos reiects it: and much terrifide With horror of so foule a deede, replide: The Gods exile thee (O thou most abhord!) Their world; to thee nor Land nor Sea afford▪ How-ere Ioues Creete, the world wherein I raigne, Shall such a Monster neuer entertaine. This said: the most iust Victor doth impose Lawes, no lesse iust, vpon his vanquisht foes. Then orders, that they forth with ores conuay Abord the brasse-beakt ships, and anchors waye. When Scylla saw the Gnossian nauy swim; And that her treason was abhor'd by him: To violent anger she conuerts her prayers. And Furie-like, with stretcht armes and spred haires; Cry'd; Whither fly'st thou? leauing me for-lore, That conquest-crown'd thee? ô preferd before My Country! Father! 't was not thou didst win; But I that gaue: my merrit, and my sin. Not this; not such affection, could perswade: Nor that on thee I all my hopes had layd. For whither should I goe, thus left alone? What? to my Country? that's by me o're-throwne. Wer't not? my treason doomes me to exile. Or to my father; giuen vnto thy spoyle? Me worthily the Citizens will hate: And neighbours feare th'example in their State. I, out of all the world my selfe haue throwne, To purchase an accesse to Creet alone. Which if deny'd; and left to such despaire▪ Europa ne'r one so vngratefull bare:
But swallowing Syrt's, Charybdis chaft with wind; Or some fell Tygres of th' Amenian kind. Ioe' no thy father; nor with forged shape Of Bull beguild, thy mother culd her rape. That story of thy glorious race is faind: For shee a wild and louelesse Bull sustaind. O father Nisus, thy reuenge behold! Reioyee, O Citie, by my treason sold! Death, I confesse, I merit. Yet would I Might, by their hands whom I haue iniur'd, dye. I or why shouldst thou, who onely didst subdue By my offending, my offence pursue? My Country and my father felt this sinne: Which vnto thee a courtesie hath beene. Thou worthy art of such a wife, as stood A Bulls hot incest in a Cow of wood; Whose shamelesse womb a monstrous burthen bare. Ah! doe my sorrowes to thy eares repaire? Or are my fruitlesse words borne by that wind That braes thee hence, and leaues a wretch behind? What though Pasiphae a Bull preferd? 'Thou far more brutish than the saluage Herd. Woe's me! Make hast I must: the waues with or Refund, his ship for sakes, with vs, our shores. In vame le follow thee vngratefull king: And while I to thy crooked vessell cling Be dragd through drenching seas. This hauing said, Attempts the waues, by Cupid strengthning aid, And cleaes this ship. Her father, now high-flowne Strikes a red-maild Hobbie growne) And st  her with his golden eares. She ps her hd, in feebled by her feares.
While yet a falling, that she might eschue The threatning sea, light wings t'her shoulders grew. Now changed to a bird in sight of all: This, of her tufted crowne we Ciris call. No sooner Minos toucht the Cretan ground, But by an hundred Buls, with garlands crown'd. His vowes to conquest-giuing Ioue he payd: And all his pallace with the spoyle arrayd. And now his families reproch increast. That vncouth prodigie, halfe man, halfe beast, His mothers dire adultery descryd. Minos resolues his marriage shame to hide In multitude of roomes, perplext and blind The work t'excelling Daedalus assignd. Who sense distracts, and error leades a maze Through subtill ambages of sundry wayes. As Phrygian Meander sports about The flowrie vales; now winding in, now out; Himselfe incounters, sees his following floods, His streames leades to their springs; and, doubling, scuds To long mockt seas: so Daedalus compil'd Innumerable by-wayes, which beguild The senses conduct; that himselfe with much Adoe returnes: the fallacies were such. When in this fabrick Minos had inclos'd This double forme, of man and beast compos'd; The Monster, with Athenian bloud twice fed, His owne, the third Lot, in the ninth yeere, shed Then by a Clew reguided to the doore (A virgins counsell) neuer found before; Aegides, with rapt Ariadne, makes For Dia: on the naked shore forsakes
His confident and sleepe-oppressed Mate. Now pining in complaints, the desolate with maage, comforts; and that she Might glorious by a Cnstellation be; Her head burtthens of her crowne, and threw to heauen: through thinner ayre it flew. , the iewels that the verge inchace to fies; fast-fixed in one place; Th retaining. They their station take, that Kneeles, and Him who holds the Snake. The Sea imprisned Paedalus, meane-while, W of , and of his long exile; with his countries loue, and place of birth; Thus said: Though Minos ba both sea aud earth; Yet heauen is free. That course attempt I dare: Held he the world, he could not hold the ayre. I his said to arts vnknowne he bends his wits In naes change. The quils in order knits, Beginning with the least: the longer still The sht succeeds; much like a rising hill. Their in all pipes, the shepheards, long agoe, (Fam'd of vneq all reeds) contiued so. With threds the midst, with wax he ioynes the ends: And these, as naturall wings, a little bends. Young, us stood by, who little thought That with his death he playd; and smiling, caught The feathers that lay hulling in the ayte: Now chases the yellow waxe with busie care, And interrupts his Sie. When his last hand He had imposed: with new-made wings he and The ayte that bare them. Then instructs his son: e sure that in the middle course thou run.
Dank seas will clog the wings that lowly flye: The Sun will burne them if thou for'st too high. Twixt either keepe. Nor on Boôtes gaze, Nor Helicè, nor sterne Orions rayes: But follow me. At once, he doth aduise; And vnknowne pinions to his shoulders ties, Amid his work and words a tyde of teares Fret his old cheeks, who trembling fingers reares. Then kist him, neuer to be kissed more: And rais'd on lightsome feathers flies before; His feare behind: as birds through boundlesse sky From ayerie nests produce their yong to fly; Exhorts to follow: taught his banefull skill; Waues his owne wings, his sons obseruing still. These, while some Angler, fishing with a cane; Or Shepheard, learning on his staffe; or Swaine; With wonder viewes: he thinks them Gods that glide Through ayrie regions. Now on the left side Leaues Iuno's Samos, Delos, Paros white, Lebynthos, and Calydna on the right, Flowing with hony. When the boy, much tooke With pleasure of his wings, his Guide forsooke: And rauisht with desire of heauen, aloft Ascends. The odor-yeelding wax more soft By the swift Suns vicinitie now grew: Which late his feathers did together glew. That thaw'd; he shakes his naked armes, that bare, As then no saile, nor could containe the ayre. When crying, Helpe, ô father! his exclaime Blew Seas supprest which tooke from him their name. His father, now no father, left alone, Cryde Icarus! where art thou? which way flowne?
What region, Icarus, doth thee containe. Then spies the feathers floting on the Maine. He curst his arts interies th copse, that gaue The land a name, which gaue his sonne a graue. The Partridge from a thicket him suruayd; As in a tombe his wretched son he layd; Who clapt his fanning wings, and lowdly churd T expresse his ioy: as then an onely bird. So made of late (vnknowne in former th e) O Palus, by thy eternall crime. To thee thy Sister gaue him to be taught; Who little of his destinie fore-thought: The boy then twelue yeare aged; of a mind Apt for struction, and to Arts inclind. He Sawes inuented, by the bones that grow In fithes backs; the steele indenting so. And two-shankt Compasses with riuet bound; Thone to stand still, the other turning round In  distance. Daeaus this stung: Who from Manerua sacred turret flung The eaud head-long; and his falling faines. Him Palls, fautor of good wits, sustaines: Who straight the figure of foule assumes; Clad in the midst of ayre with freckled plunes. The vigor of his late swift wit now came Into his feet, and wings: he keeps his name. They neuer mount aloft, nor trust their birth To tops of ees; but sleck as low as earth, And lay their egs in tufts. In mind they beare Then ancient fall, haughtie places feare. I yr d  aeu now in Sclia lights: In whole defence hospitious Coca fights.
Now Athens by Aegoeus glorious Seed Was from her lamentable tribute freed. They crowne their Temples: warlike Pallas, Ioue, Inuoke; with all the Deities aboue. Whom now they honour with the large expence Of bloud, free gifts, and heapes of frankincense. Vast fame through all th' Argolian cities spred His praise: and all that rich Acbaia fed His aid in their extremities intreat, His aid afflicted Calydon (though great In Meleager) sought. The cause a Bore: Dian's reuenge, and horrid Seruatore. For Ocneus, with a plenteous haruest blest; To Ceres his first fruits of corne addrest, To Pallas oyle, and to Lyaeus wine. Ambitious honours all the Powers diuine Reape from the rurals; yet neglect to pay Diana dues; her Altars empty lay. Anger affects the Gods. This will not we Vnpunisht beare: nor vnreueng'd, said she, Though vn-adored, shall they vant we be. With that she sent into Oeniean fields A vengefull Bore. Rank-grast Epirus yeelds No big-bon'd bullock of a larger breed: But those are lesse which in Sicilia feed. His eyes blaze bloud and fire: his stiffe neck beares Horrible bristles, like a groue of speares. A boyling fome vpon his shoulders flowes From grinding iawes: his tushes equall those Of Indian Elephants: his fell mouth casts Hot lightning; and his breath the virdure blasts. He tramples vnder foot the growing corne;
And leaues the sighing husband-man for lorne; Reaping the uper eates. Their vsuall graine The baines and threshing floores expect in vaine. Broad-spreading vines he with their burden, sheres: And boughs from euer-leauy oliues teares. Then falls on beasts: the Hedsmen, now vnseard; Nor dogs, nor raging Buls, defend their Herd. The people flye; nor are secure of mind In walled townes, ll Mleager, ioyn'd With youths of choycest worth, inflam'd with praise, Attempts his death. The twin'd Iyndarides; One for his horsemanship, the other fam'd For hurle-bats; Iason, who the first ship fram'd; Theseus with his I trithous, a paire Of happy friends; and Lynetus, Aphar's heire; The two Thestadae, Leucippus crownd For strength; Acastus for his dart renownd; Swist Idas, Caeneus, not a maiden then; Hippothous, ryas; Phoenix (best of men,) Ayntors issue; both th' Actorides, And Pyleus sent from El, came with these: I herees hope; aduenturous elamon; And he who calld the great Achilles son; H the quick grac't Eytion; and ion, who surpast In unning  the Naerycan, With  Hyleus, Hipasan, Now yoath'all : ons to that int , sent: in law,  bred well read In fates, , not as yet betrayd
B'his wife; Tegeaean, Atalant', a maide Of passing beautie, sprung from Schoenus race: Of high Lycaean woods the onely grace. A polisht Zone her vpper garment bound; And in one knot her artlesse haire was wound: Her arrowes iuory guardian clattering hung On her left shoulder; and a bow well strung Her left hand held Her lookes a wench displayd In a boyes face, a boyes face in a maide. The Calydonian Heros her beheld And wisht at once: his wishes fate repeld. Who lurking flames attracts; and said, O blest Is he, whom thou shalt with thy ioyes inuest! But time, and shame, with further speech dispence: Vrg'd by a work of greater con'equence. A Wood o're-growne with trees, yet neuer feld, Mounts from a Plaine, that all beneath beheld. The glory-thirsting Gallants this ascend. Forth-with a part their corded toyles extend; Some hounds vncouple; some the tract of feet Together trace: and danger long to meet. A Dale there was, through which the raine-rais'd flood Oft tumbled downe, and in the bottom stood: Repleat with plyant willowes, marish weeds, Sharpe rushes, osiers, and long slender reeds. The Bore from thence dislodg'd, like lightaing crusht Through iustling clouds, among the hunters rusht: Beares downe the obuious trees; the crashing woods Report their fall. The youths each other bloods With high-rais'd shoots inflame: who keepe their stands: And shake their broad-tipt spear with threatning hands. The dogs he scatters, those that durst oppose
His horrid furie, wounds with ganching blowes. Fton first his iauelin vainly cast, Which struck a beech. The next his sides had past, But that with too much strength it ouer-flew: The weapon Pagasaean Iason threw. O habus, said Ampycides, If I Haue honourd, and doe honour thee, apply Thy succour in successe of my intents. The God, as much as lay in him, assents: But from the dart the head Diana took; Which gaue no wound, although the Bore it strook. The beast like lightning burns, thus chaft with ire: His grim eyes shine, his brest breaths flames of fire. And as a stone which some huge engine throwes Against a wall, or bulwarke man'd with foes: The deadly Bore with such sure violence Assaults their forces. The right wings defence; Fpalaman, and elagonus, cast On ounding earth: drawne off with timely hast. , great  son, Could not so well his slaughtring tushes shun: Which cut the sbrinking sinewes in his thigh, Euen as he trembled, and prepar'd to flye. And  long had perished, perchance, warre, but, vauting on a lance, Iooke a tree, which there his branches spred; And safely saw the foe from whom h'had fled. Who, ull of age, his vengefull tushes whets Vpon an Oke; and dite destruction threats. When usting to his new-edg'd armes, the Bore The manly thigh of great thyus tore. The brother I wins, not yet coelestiall Starres;
Conspicuous both, both terrible in warres; Both mounted on white Steeds, a loft both bare Their glittring speares, which trembled in the aire: And both had sped; but that the Swine with-drew Where neither horse nor iauelin could pursue. In followes Telamon, hot of the chace; And stumbling at a roote, fell on his face. While Peleus lifts him vp, a winged fight Tegaea drew, which flew as swist as sight: Below his care the fixed arrow stood, And staind his bristles with a little blood. The Virgin lesse reioyced in the blow Than Meleager;: who first saw it flow, First show'd his mates the blood: O most renownd Said he, thy vertue hath thy honour crownd. The men, they blush for shame; each other cheare; And high-rais'd soules, with clamors higher reare: Their speares in clusters fling; which make no breach Through idle store: and throwes their throwes impeach. Behold, Ancaeus with a polax sterne To his owne fate; who said, By me O learne You youths, how much a mans sharpe steele exceeds A womans weapons, and applaud my deeds. Though Dian should take armes, and in this strife Protect her beast, she should not saue his life. Thus gloriously he boasts; in both his hands Aduanc't his polax, and on tip-toes stands. Whom, ere his armes descend, the furious Swine Preuents, and sheathes his tushes in his groyne. Downe fell. Ancaeus, out of his bowels gusht, All gore; with blood the earth, as guilty blusht Ixions son Pirithous forward prest:
And with an able at me his lance addrest. To whom Aegides; O to me more deare Than my owne life! my better halfe, forbeare. The we in valour should aloofe contend: Foole hardy courage was Aaeus end. This said his heauy cornell; with a head Of basle, he hurles: which sure had struck him dead (It was deliuered with so true an aime) But that a Medlar interpos'd the same. Aesones then threw his thrilling lance; Which hit (diuerted from the mark by chance) A dog betweene his baying iawes: the wound Rusht through his guts, and naild him to the ground. varying hand dischargd two speares: The earth the one, the beast, the other beares. While now he raues, grunts, turnes his body round, Casts bloud and some; the author of his wound Ru in; prouokes his greater wrath; and where Th thields diffeuer, thrusts his deadly speare. They all with chearfull shouts their ioyes vnfold; Shake his victorious hands; the Beast behold With wonder, whose huge bulk possest so much: And hardly thinke it safe the slaine to touch: Yet with his bloud they die their iauelins red. He set, his foot vpon his horrid head;. My right, said he, receiue rare Nonacrine, And let my glory euer share with thine. Then gaue the bristled spoyle, in terror charm'd; And gastly head with monstrous ushes arm'd. She in the Gift and Gier pleasure tooke. All , with prepostrous enuy, strooke. On whom the violent,  frowne;
And cry aloud with stretcht-out armes; Lay downe: Nor, Woman, of our titles vs bereaue, Lest thee thy beauties confidence deceaue; His aid to weake whom loue hath rest of sight: And snatcht from her, her gift; from him, his right. Onides swels; his lookes with anger sterne: You rauishers of others honours, learne (Said he) the distance betweene words and deeds. With wicked steele secure Plexippus speeds. While Toxeus, whether to reuenge his blood, Or shun his brothers fortune, wauering stood; He cleares the doubt: the weapon, hot before By th' others wound, new heats in his hearts gore. Gifts to the holy Gods Althaea brings For her sons victorie; and Paeans sings. When back she saw her slaughtred brothers brought: At that sad obiect screecht; and griefe-distraught, The Citie fils with out-cryes: off she teares Her royall robes, and funerall garments weares. But told by whom they fell; no longer mournes: Rage dries her eyes; her teares to vengeance turnes. The triple Sisters earst a brand conuai'd Into the fire; her belly newly laid; Thus chanting, while they spun the fatall twine: O lately borne, one period we assigne To thee and to this brand. The charme they weaue Into his fate; and then the chamber leaue. His mother snatcht it with an hastie hand Out of the fire; and quencht the flagrant brand. This in an inward closser closely layes: And by preseruing it, preserues his dayes. Which now produc't; a pyle of wood she rais'd,
That by the hostile fire inuaded, blaz'd. Foure times she proffers to the greedy flame The fatall brand: as oft with-drew the same. A Mother, and a Sister, now contend: And two-diuided names, one bosome rend. Oft feare of future crimes a palenesse bred: Oft burning Furie gaue her eyes his red. Now seemes to threaten with a cruell looke: And now appeares like one that pitie tooke. Her teares the feruor of her anger dryes: Yet found she teares againe to drowne her eyes. uea as a ship, when wind and tyde contends, Feles both their furies, and with either bends: So Thestias, whom vnsteddie passion driues; Fy changes, calmes her rage, and rage reuiues. A sister loue at length subdues a mothers: That bloud may appease the ghosts of bleeding brothers, Impiously pious. Flames, to ashes turne This brand, said she, and my loth'd bowels burne. Then, holding in her hand the fatall wood; As she before the funerall altar stood: You triple Powers, who guiltie Soules persue; Fun enides these Rites of vengeance view. act the crime I punish. Death must be By death atton'd. On murder, murder we Accumulate; redoubling sunerall. Due Image, by congested sorrowes fall. Shall Oeneus ioy in his victorious son? Sad Thestius rob'd of his? be both vndone. I ke vp, ô you my brothers ghosts; you late ledged soules; see how I right your fate. A to: this infernall sacrfizo,
Of high esteeme: my womb accursed prize. Ay me! ô whither am I rapt! excuse A mother, brothers. Trembling hands refuse Their fainting aid. He merits death: yet by A mothers rage me thinkes he should not dye. Then shall hee scape? aliue, a victor, feast In proud successe; of Calydon possest? You, little ashes, and chill Shades, sorlorne? Ile not indure it. Perish Villaine, borne To our immortall ruine. Ruinate With thee, thy fathers hopes, his crowne and state. Where is a mothers heare? a parents praier? Th' vnthought-of burden which I ten months bare? O would, while yet an infant, the first flame Had thee deuour'd; nor I oppos'd the same! Thy life, my gift; by thine owne merit dye: A iust reward for thy impiety. Thy twice-giuen life restore; first by my womb, Last by this rauisht brand; or me a tomb With my poore brothers. Faine I would persue Reuenge; yet would not. O, what shall I doe! Before my eyes my brothers wounds now bleed: And the sad image of so soule a deed. Now pittie, and a mothers name controule My sterne intention ô distracted soule! You haue won, my brothers; but, alas, ill won: So that, while thus I comfort you, I run Your fate. With eyes reuerst, her quaking hand To trembling flames expos'd the funerall brand. The Brand appeares to sigh, or sighes expires: Wrapt in th'imbracements of vnwilling fires▪ Vnknowing Meleager, absent broyles
Euen in those flames: his blood, thick-panting, boyles I vnseene fire. Who such tormenting paines With more then manly fortitude sustaines. Yet grieues that by a slothfull death he fals Without a wound: Ancaeus happy calls. His aged father, brothers, sisters, wife, Now goning names, with his last words of life: Perhaps his mother. Flames and paines increase: Againe they languish; and together cease. To liquid ae his vansht spirits turne. And able coles in shrouds of ashes mourne. I ow he high Calydon: the yongue, the old, Ignoble, noble, all, their griefes vnfold. The Clydonian matrons cut their haire; their beauties: cry, woe and despaire! His heaie head with dust his father hides; yes grueling on the ground; and old age chides. For now his mother, by her guilt persude, Reuenging steele in her owne brest imbrude: Though Ioue an hundred able tongues bestow, A  that should with full inuention flow, A  ituse into my brest; isters followes could not be exprest. Then selues for getting decency, deface: As long as he a bodie, it imbrace; his pallips: when turn'd to ashes, they The ashes in their buised bosoms lay: allon his tomb; his name, that there appeares; Inold, and fill the characters with teares. But when Dana's wrath was satisfide Wan Oeniu rery: they all (beside Gorge and the louely Dian)
On plumy pinions, by her powre, aspire; With long-extended wings, and beakes of horne: Who through the ayre in varied shapes are borne. Meane while to Pallas towres Aegides hyes (His part performd in that ioynt enterprise) Whose hast raine-raised Achelous staid. Renoun'd ecropian Prince, the Riuer said, Vouchsafe my roofe; n to th'impetuous flood Commit thy person; Oft huge logs of wood, And broken rocks, downe-tumbling, lowdly rore. Houses and Herds not seldome here to fore Hurried away: nor was the Oxe of force To keepe his stand; nor swiftnesse sau'd the Horse. And when dissolued snow from mountaines pour'd, The turning eddies many haue deuour'd. More safe to stay vntill the current run Within his bounds. To whom Aegaeus son: Twere folly, if not madnesse, to refuse Thy house and counsell: both I meane to vse. Then exters his large caue, where Nature plaid The Atisun; of hollow Pumice made, And rugged Tophas; floord with humid mosse: The roose pure white and purple shels imbosse. Now had Hyperion past two parts of day: When Theseus, with the partners of his way. Pirihous, and Lelex the renowne Of Troezen, now appearing gray; sat downe: And whom the Riuer glad of such a guest, Preferd vnto the honour of his feast. Forth-with, bare-footed Nymphs bring in the meat: That tane away, vpon the table set Crown'd cups of wine. When Theseus turnd his face
To vnder seas; and poynting, said; What place Is yon', and of what name, that stands alone? And yet me thinks it should be more then one. It is not one, the courteous Flood replyes, But fiue; their neighbourhood deceiues your eyes. The lesse t'admire Diana, late despis'd, Fiue Nymphs they were: who hauing sacrifis'd Ten beeues, inuited to their festiuall The rurall Gods; my selfe forgot by all. At this my surges swell. I, then as great As euer, with inraged waters fret. The woods from woods, and fields from fields I teare With them, the Nymphs (now mindfull of me) beare In exile to the Deep: whose waues, with mine, That then vnited masse of earth dis-ioyne Into as many peeces as in seas Are of the flood imbrac't Echindes. Yet see one Ile, far, ô far off remou'd! Call'd Perimle; once by me belou'd. I, from this Nymph, her virgin honour tooke Rdamas his daughter could not brooke: cast her from a rock into the Deepe. Whom while my thickned streames from sinking keepe; : O Neptune, thou that do'st command he wandering waues that beat vpon the land; To whom we Riuers run, in whom we end; Incline a gentle care. I did offend; In wronging whom I beare: if pious; he Would both haue pittied her, and pardon'd me. Her, whom his furie hath from earth exil'd, And in the strangling waters drencht his child; A place afford: or let her be a place
Which I may euer with my streames imbrace. His head the King of Surges forward shooke: And, in assenting, all the Ocean strooke. The Nymph yet swims; although with feare opprest. I laid my hand vpon her parting breast: While thus I handled her, I might perceiue The earth about her stifning body cleaue. Now, with a masse infolded, as she swims, An Iland rose from her transformed lims. He held his peace. This admiration won In all: derided by Ixions son: By nature rough, and one who did despise All able Gods: who said; Thou tel'st vs lyes, And thinkst the Gods too potent: as if they Could giue new shapes, or take our old away. His saying all amaz'd and none approud'd: Most Lelex, ripe in age and wisdome, mou'd. Heauens power immense and endlesse, none can shun▪ Said he; and what the Gods would doe, is done, To check your doubt; on Phrygian hils there growes An Oke by a Line-tree, which old wals inclose. My selfe this saw, while I in Phrygia staid; By Pitthens sent: where erst his father swaid. Hard by, a lake, once habitable ground; Where Coots and fishing Cormorants abound. Joue, in a humane shape; with Mercurie; (His heeles vnwing'd) that way their steps apply. Who guest-rites at a thousand houses craue; A thousand shut their doores: One only gaue. A small thatch't Cottage: where, a pious wife Old Baucis, and Phileman, led their life. Both equall-ag'd. In this, their youth they spent;
In this grew old: rich onely in content. Who pouertie, by bearing it, declind: And made it easie with a chearfull mind. None Master, not none Seruant, could you call: They who command, obey; for two were all. Ioue father came, with his Cyllenian mate; And stooping, enters at the humble gate. Sit downe, and take your ease, Philemon said. While busie Bauis straw-stuft cushions layd: Who stud abroad the glowing coles, that lay In smothering ashes; ak't vp yester-day. Dry barke, and withered leaues, thereon she throwne▪ Whose feeble breath to flame the cinders blowes. Then slender clests, and broken branches gets: And ouer all a little kettle sets. Her husband gathers cole-flowrs, with their leaues; Which from his gretefull garden he receiues: Tooke downe a flitch of bacon with a prung, That long had in the smokie chimney hung: Whereof a little quantitie he cuts: And it into the boyling liquor puts. This seething; they the time beguile with speech: Vnser word of stay. A bowle of beech, There, by the handle hung vpon a pin: This  with warme water; and therein Washe then feet. A moste-stuft bed and pillow Lay on a homely bed steed made of willow: A , onely vs d at feasts, they spred: Though course, and old; yet fit for such a bed. Downe  the Gods. The palsie-snaken Dame Sets forth a ta le with three legs; one lame, And sheter then the rest, a pot share reares:
This, now made leuell, with greene mint she cleares. Whereon they party-colour'd oliues set, Autumnall Cornels, in tart pickle wet; Coole endiffe, radish, new egs rosted reare, And late-prest cheese; which earthen dishes beare. A goblet, of the selfe same siluer wrought; And bowles of beech, with wax well varnisht, brought. Hot victuals from the fire were forth with sent: Then wine, not yet of perfect age, present. This tane away; the second Course now comes: Philberts, dry figs, with rugged dates, ripe plummes, Sweet smelling apples, disht in osier twines; And purple grapes new gatherd from their vines: I'th midst, a hony combe. Aboue all these; A chearefull looke, and ready will to please. Meane-while, the Muple cup it selfe doth fill: And oft exhausted, is replenisht still. Astonisht at the miracle; with feare Philemon, and the aged Baucis, reare Their trembling hands in prayre: and pardon craue, For that poore entertainment which they gaue. One Goose they had, their cottaqes chiefe guard; Which they to hospitable Gods award: Who long their slow persuit deluding, flies To Iupiter; so sau'd from sacrifice. W'are Gods, said they; Reuenge shall all vndoe: Alone immunitie we grant to you. Together leaue your house; and to yon hill Follow our steps. They both obey their will; The Gods conducting; feebly both ascend; Their stanes, with theirs; they, with times burden bend. A slight-shot from the top, reuiew they take;
Thus stming: Not the Goddesse-lou'd alone; But though this were the Godesse, shee should downe: And sweepe the earth with her aspiring crowne. A he aduanc't his armes to strike; the Oke sigh'd and trembled at the threatning stroke. His leaues and acornes pale together grew: And colour-changing branches sweat cold deaw. Then wounded by his impious hand, the blood from th'incision in a purple flood. Much like a mighty oxe, that falls before The sacred altar; spouting streames of gore. On all amazement seaz'd: when One of all The came deterres; nor would his axe let fall. ntracting his sterne browes; Receiue, said he, Thy preties reward; and from the tree The stroke conuerting, lops his head; then strake The Oke againe: from whence a voice thus spake; A Nymph am I, within this tree inshrin'd, Releu'd ot Ceres. O prophane of mind, Vengeance is neere thee. With my parting breath I prophesie: a comfort to my death. He still his guilt persues: who ouerthrowes With cabels, and innumerable blowes. The sturdy Oke: which, nodding long, downe rusht; And in s loty fall his fellowes crusht. Their sister, and their groue, the Nymphs lament; Who hd in sable stoles, to Ceres went; On Erich hen iust reuenge require. who readly consents to their desire. The faire-brow'd Goddesse shakes her shining haires: With that, the fields shooke all their golden eares. Who to apitteous punishment proceeds,
(Had he had any pitty in his deeds) By staruing. But since not by fatall doome, Ceres and Famine might together come: A mountaine Faery of th' Oreades Dispatcheth thither, with such words as these. In frosty Scythia lies a land, forlorne And barren; bearing neither fruit nor corne, Numb Cold, pale Hew, chill Ague, there abide; And fasting Famine. Bid the Fury glide Into his cursed entrailes, and deuoure All plenty: let her rage subdue my powre. But lest long wayes thy iourny tedious make: My chariot and my yoked dragons take. Taking her chariot; through the empty skies To Scythia and rough Caucasus she flies. There, in a stony field, sad Famine found; Tearing with teeth and nailes the foodlesse ground; With snarled haire, sunk eyes, lookes pale and dead, Lips white with slime, thin teeth with rust ore-spred; Hide-bound, through which her clinged guts appeare; Dry bones, in spare and crooked hips, vp-beare; Her belly bellylesse: low hung her brest; So lank, as if her bosom had no chest: The rising knuckles falling flesh augment; Round knees and ankles leanely eminent, Espide far off (she durst not be so bold To come too neere) the Nymph her message told. After a little stay, although she were▪ Farre off, although but now arriued there; She famine felt. Who wheeles about her Snakes▪ And her high passage to Aemonia takes. Famine obayes the Goddesses command;
Though their endeuors still opposed stand. Who, by a tempest hurried through the skies, Enters the wretches roose: besides him lyes, Then fast asleepe: (for now Nights heauy charmes All eyes had clos'd) imbra'st himin her armes; Her selfe infus'd; breathes on his face and brest: And emptie veines with hungers rage possest. This thus perform'd forsakes the fruitfull earth: And back returnes to her abodes of dearth. Sound Sleepe as yet with pleasurable wings On Frisichthn gentle slumber flings. Who dreames of feasts, extends his idle iawes; With labouring teeth fantastically chawes. Deludes his throte by swallowing emptie fare: And for affected food deuoures the aire. Awak't; hot famine raues through all his veines: And in his guts, and greedie pallat raignes. Forth-with; what Sea, what Earth, what Ayre affords, Acquires: complaines of staruing at full bords. In banquets, banquets seekes. What might alone Haue Iownes and Nations fed; suffize not one. Hunger increaseth with increast repast. And as all riuers to the Ocean hast; Who thirsty still, drinks vp the stranger floods: As rauenous fires refuse no profferd foods; Huge pyles receiue; the more they haue, the more By much desire; made hungry with their store. So  thou, of a mind prophane, Full dishes empties, and demands againe. Meat breeds in him an appetite to meat; Who euer emptie, still prepares to eat. His bellies gulfe his patrimonic wasts:
Consuming famine yet vnlesned lasts; And his insatible throtes extent Now all his wealth, into his bowels sent: A daughter left, vnworthy scuh a Sire, The beggar sold to feed his hungers fire. Her noble thoughts base seruitude disdaine: Who now her hands extending to the Maine; O thou that hadst my mayden-head, said she, Thy rauisht spoyle from hated bondage free! Neptune had this: who to her prayer consents. And, though then by her master seene, preuents His following search: transforming of his Rape Into a man; maskt in a fishers shape. Angler, her master said, that with thy bait Conceal'st thy hooke; so prosper thy deceit, So rest the sea compos'd; so may the fish Be credulous, and taken at thy wish; As thou reueal'st her, who in garments, poore, And ruffled haire, late stood vpon this shore. Fox here, but very now, I saw her stand: Nor farther trace her foot-steps in the sand. She, Neptunes bountie finding; well a paid To be inquir'd for her selfe; thus said. Pardon me Sir, who e're you are; my eyes Haue beene attentiue on this exercise. To win beleefe; so may the God of Seas Assist my cunning in such arts as these As late nor man nor maid I saw before Your selfe, my selfe excepted, on this shore. He credits, and beguil'd, the shore forsooke: When she againe her former figure tooke, Her father, seeing she could change her shape▪
Ost sold her; who as often made a scape. Now hart-like, now a cow, a bird, a mare: And fed his hunger with ill-purchast fare. But when his maladie all meanes had spent, He gaue the mischiefe a new nourishment. Now to deuoure his proper flesh proceeds: And by diminishing, his body feeds. What need I dwell on forrein facts? euen we Can vary shapes, though limited they be Now seeme I as I am; ost like a Snake: And many times a Buls hornd figure take. But while I hornes assum'd, one thus was broke, As you behold. This, with a sigh, he spoke.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The ninth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. A Serpont Achelôus: now a Bull: His senered Horne with plenty euer full. Lichas a Rock. Alcides sunke in flame, Ascends a God. The labourhelping Damo A Weesell. Lotis, flying lust, becomes A Tree: the like sad Dryope intombes Old Iölaus waxeth young agen. Callinhoes Infants sodenly grow Men. Byblis a weeping Fourtaine. Iphis now A Boy, to Isis payes his maiden Vow. HEe, who his high descent from Neptune drawes, Of his so sad a sigh demands the cause, And maimed brow. When thus the God proceeds; His dangling curles impald with quiuering reeds. A heauie taske you impose: his owne disgrace Who would reuiue? yet was it not so base To be subdude, as noble to contend: And such a Victor doth my foile defend. Haue you not heard of faire-cheekt Deianire? The enui'd hope of many: the desire Of all that knew her. We, with others went To Oeneus Court, to purchase his consent.
More strong by twinning heirs. This death-borne crue Growing in wounds; I tam'd: and twice subdue. What hope hast thou, a forged Snake, to scape? That fhest with others armes; and begst thy shape. This said; my necke his grasping fingers clincht; And sruz'd my throat; as if with piners wrincht; While from his gripes I stroue my lawes to pull. Twice euer-come; now, like a furious Bull, Once more his terrible affaults oppose. His armes about my swelling chest he throwes, And following, backward hales: my foreheads birth ixt in the ground; and threw me on the earth. My brow (that not sufficing) disadornes: By breaking one of my ingaged hornes. The Naiades with fruits and flowres this fill: Good Plenty, in my Horne aboundeth still. Here Achs ends. One louely-faire, Gt like Diana's Nymph, with flowing haire, Came in; and brought the wealthy Horne; repleat With Autumnes store, and apples after meat. Day springs, and mountaines shine with early beames. His Guests depart: nor stay till peacefull streames G'yde gently downe, and keepe the it bounded race. When Acheous, his agrestick face And maymed head within the current shrowds. This bleauh much his former beauty clouds: All the compleat. The rupture of his browes He shades with flaggie wreathes, and allow boughes. So Dianna, Nesus, was thy wrack: A deadly arrow preng through thy back. I , with his new wife; so Theves his course Dccg, anc  Lenus: apid sourse.
The big-swolne Streames increast with winters raine, And full of turning gulfes, his Passe restraine. For her he feares: though he selfe-feare abhord. When strong-limd Nessus came, who knew the Ford; And said; I safely will transport thy Bride: Meane-while swim thou vnto the otherside. To him Alcides his pale wife betakes: Who, fearing both the flood, and Nessus, quakes. Charg'd with his quiuer, and his Lyons skin (His club and bow before throwne ouer) in The Heros leapes, and said; How euer vast, These waues, since vnder taken, shall be past. And confident, nor seekes the smoothest wayes: Nor dy declining his transcent delayes. Now ouer; stooping for his bow, he heard His wiues shrill shrecks; and Nessus saw, prepar'd To violate his trust. Thou rauisher, What hope, said he, can thy vaine speed confer? Holla, thou halfe a beast; with hold thy flight: I pray thee heare; nor intercept my light. It no respect of me can fix thy trust: Yet, let thy Fathers wheele resh aine thy lust. Nor shalt thou scape reuenge; how euer fleet, Wounds shall ore-take thy speed, though not my feet. The last, his deeds confirme; for as he fled, An arrow struck his back: the barbed head Past through his brest. Tug'd out, both vents extrude Hot spinning gore, with Hydras blood imbrude. This Nessis tooke: and softly said: yet I, Alcides, will not vnreuenged dy. And gaue his Rape a vest, dipt in that gore: This will (said he) the heat of loue restore.
Long after (all the ample world possest With his great acts, and Iunos hate increast) From raz'd O echalia hastning his remoue, To sacrifice vnto Cenaean Ioue: Fames bablings Deianira's eares surprise (Who falshood ads to truth, and growes by lies) How Iôe, Amphitryoniades With loue in thraul'd. Stung with this strong disease. The troubled louer credits what she feares. At first she nourisheth her griefe with teares: Which weeping eyes diffuse. Then sayd; But why Weepe we? the Strumpet in these teares will ioy. Since come she will, some change attempt I must; Before my bed be stained with her lust. Shall I complaine? be mute? shift houses? stay? Returne to Calydon, and giue her way? Or call to mind that I am sister to Great Meleager, and some mischiefe doe? What iniur'd woman; what the sploenefull woe Of elousie; or harlots death, can show? Her thoughts, long toyld with change, now fixed stood To send the garment dipt in Nessus blood; To quicken fainting loue. The Present she To Lycas gaue (as ignorant as he) And her owne sorrow. Who, with kind commends, The robe to her suspectlesse husband sends. Which now the sacrificing Heros wore: Wrapt inn the poyson of Echidna's gore. Who praying, new-borne flames with incense fed: And bowles of wine on marble altars shed. The spreading mischiefe works: with heat lissolu'd, The manly limmes of Hercules inuolu'd.
Who, whilst he could, with vsuall fortitude His grones supprest. All patience now subdew'd With such extremes; the altar downe he flings: And shady Octe with his clamour rings. Forth-with to teare the torture off, he striues. The riuen robe, his skin that lines it, riues; Or to his limmes vnseparable cleaues; Or his huge bones and sinewes naked leaues. As fire-red steele in water drencht; so toyles His hissing blood, and with hot poyson boyles. No meane! the greedy flames his bowels fret; And all his body flowes with purple sweat: His scorched sinewes crack, his marrow fries. Then, to the stars his hands aduancing, aries. Feast, Iuno, on our harmes. O from on high Behold this plague! thy cruell stomack cloy. If foes may pitty purchase (such are we) This life, with torments cras'd; long sought by thee; And borne to toyle, depriue. For death would proue To me a blessing: and a Step-dames loue May such a blessing giue. Haue I this gain'd For slaine Busiris who Ioues temple stain'd With strangers blood? That from Anteus tooke His mothers aid? Whom Geryans triple looke, Nor thine, ô Cerberus, could once dismay? These hands, these made the Cretan Bull obey. Your labors, Elis; smooth Stympation floods, Confesse with praises; and Parthenin woods. You got the golden belt of Thermodon: And apples from the sleeplesse Dragon won. Nor Cloud-borne Centaures, nor th' Arcadian Bore, Could me reist: nor Hydra wa her store
Of frigtfull heads; which by their losse increast. I, when I saw the Thacian Horses feast With humane flesh, their mangers ouer-threw: And with his steeds, their wicked Master slew. These hands the Nenean Lyon choakt: these queld Huge Cacus: and these shoulders heauen vpheld. Ioues cruell wife grew weary to impose; I neuer to performe. But  these woes, This new found plague, no vertue can repell; No armes, nor weapons! Hungry flames of hell Shoot through my veines, and on my liuer prey. And yet Euryshus thriues: and some will say That there be Gods! Here his complaints he ends, And high-raisd steps ore lofty Oeta bends, Huied with anguish lik a Bull that beares A wounding iauelin; whom the wounder feares. Oft should you see him quake, oft grone, oft striuing To tere his garments; solid trees vp-riuing, Inraged with the mountaines, and to reare His scohed armes vnto his fathers sphere. Hd in a hollow rocke, he Lycas spies: When torture had possest his faculties With all her furies Lycas didst thou giue This hoid gift, said he? Thinkst thou to liue; And I die y thy treason? While he quakes, Lookes gastly pale, vnheard excuses makes; While yet he spake, while to his knees he clung Caught by the heeles, about his head thrice swong, Him into deepe Eubaean surges threw (As engines stones) who hardned as he flew. As faling  congeald with freezing winds Conuert to snow, as snow together binds,
And rouling round in solid haile descends: So while the aire his forced body rends, Bloodlesse with terror, all his moisture gone; Those times his change produc't gid stone. And still within Eubas gulphy : A short rock lies, which mans proportion eepes. Whereon the mariners forbear to , As sensitiue. And this they . But thou, Ioues God-like  with store Of trees aduanc't, which lofty Thy bow and ample Those arrowes that again must visit Troy) Bequeath'st to : who catching fire Puts to the Pyle. While greedy  aspire; Thou on the top thy  didst spread: And lay thereon (thy  thy head) With such a looke; as if Amidst full goblets, . Now all imbracing  made: And their Contem  inuade. The Gods much thought  Defender tooke: When thus Saturnius, with a  looke: This griefe, you Gods, is  with all Our soule we ioy, that  call Vs King and Father , And of our progeny . For though his , You vs oblige. Your loyall : Who conquer'd all, Vulan his  shall but For that's immortall which from vs be drew;
Or if I lie, may my greene branches fade: And, feld with axes, on the fire be layd, This Ifant from his dyig mother beare To sone kinde Nurse: and often let him here Be fed with milke; oft in my shadow play. Let him salute my tree; and sadly say. (When he can speake) This Lotis doth containe My dearest mother: Yet let him refraine All lakes; nor euer dare to touch a flowre: But think that euery tree inshrines a Powre. Deare Husband, Sister, Father, all farewell. Since you I know in pietie excell, Suffer no axe to wound my tender boughes; Nor on my leaues let hungry cattaile brouse. And since I cannot vnto you decline, Ascend to me; and ioyne your lips to mine. My little son, while I can kisse, aduance. But fate cuts off my failing vtterance. For now the softer rine my neck ascends: And round about my leauy top extends. Remoue your hands: without the elpe of those, The wrapping barke my dying eyes will close. So left to speak, and be. Yet humane heat In her chang'd body long retain'd a seat. While  this story told; her eyes, Glaz'd with her teares, the kinde Alemena dryes; And weeps her selfe. Behold, a better change With ioy defers their sorrow: nor lesse strange. For Ioaus, twice a youth, came in: The doubtfull downe now budding on his chin. Faire Hebe, at her husbands sute, on thee This gift bestow'd. About to sweare that she
Would neuer giue the like; wise Themis said, Forbeare; Warre raues in Thbes by Discord swayd: And Capaneus but by Ioue alone Can be subdude. The brothers then shall grone With mutuall wounds. The sacred Prophet, lost In swallowing earth, aliue shall see his Ghost. His Sons red hands his Mothers life extract T' appease his Sire: a iust and wicked fact. Rapt from his home and senses, with th'affright Of staring Furies, and his mothers Sprite, Vntill his wife the fatall gold demands: The kinsman murder'd by Phegides hands. Then Acheloian Callirrha Shall Ioue improtune, that her infants may Be turn'd to men: and due reuenge require (As he, for his) of those who slew their sire; Her prayers shall win consent from Ioue: who then Will bid thee make Cllirro's children men. This, Themis with prophetick rapture sung. Among the Gods a grudging murmur sprung, Why she this gift should not to others giue▪ Aurora for her  doth grieue▪ Ceres complaines of Isus Vulcan would ; And cares of time to ce in That her Anhise might wa yong aine. All sue for some: seditious  stroue In hight of mult; thus opprest by Ioue. What mutter you? Or where is your respect? Think you, you can the power of fate subiect? Old Iolaus was by fate renew'd: By fate Callirrhoe's babes shall be indew'd
What will become of me (she weeping said) Whom new, vnknowne, prodigious oues inuade! If pittifull, the Gods should haue destroid: Or else haue giuen what might haue beene inioy'd. No Cow a Cow, no Mare a Mare persues: But Harts their gentle Hindes, and Rammes their Ewes. So Birds together paire. Of all that moue, No Female suffers for a Female oue. O would I had no being! Yet, that all Abhord by Nature should in Creet befall; Sol's lust-incensed daughter lou'd a Bull: They male and female. Mine, ô farre more full Of vncouth fury! for she pleas'd her bloud; And stood his errour in a Cow of wood: She, to deceiue, had an adulterer. Should all the world their daring wits confer: Should Dedalus his waxen wings renue, And hither flye; what could his cunning doe▪ Can art conuert a virgin to a boy? Or fit Int he for a maidens ioy? No, fix thy mind; compose thy vast desires: O quench these ill-aduis'd and foolish fires! Or know thy selfe, or Selfe-deceit accuse: What may be, seeke; and loue as virgins vse. Hope wings Desire; hope Cupids light sustaines: In thee thy Sex this deads. No watch restraines Out deare imbrace, nor husbands iealousies, Nor rigorous Sires; nor she her selfe denies: Yet not to be inioy'd. Nor canst thou be Happy in her; though men and Gods agree! Now also all to my desires accord: What they can giue, the easie Gods afford;
What me, my Father, hes, her selfe would please, Displeaseth Nature; stranger than all these. She, she forbids. That day begins to shine; Long wisht! wherein Ithe must be mine: And yet not mine. Of mortals most accurst! I starue at feasts, and in the riuer thirst. Iuno, ô Hymen, wher  are you come? We both are Brides: but where is the Bride-groome? Here ended. Nor lesse burne the other Maid; Who, Hymen, for thy swift apparance praid. Yet Telethusa feares what thou affects; Protracting time: oft want of health obiects; Ill-boading dreames, and auguries oft aines: But now no colour for excuse remaines. Their nuptiall rites, put of with such delay; Were to be solemni'd the following day. When she vnbind,  haire; And holding by the . Isis; who Para Smooth Mcotis, and seuen Chear'st with thy presence: thy poore suppliants heare: O helpe in these extremes, and cure our feare! Thee Goddesse, thee of old; these ensignes, I Haue seene, and know: thy lamps, attendancie, And sounding : and haue thee obaid. To me, impunity▪ fe, to this maid, Thy sauing counsell gaue: to both Thy timely pittie. Teares her word persue. The Goddesse shakes her Altar; when the gate Shooke on the hinges: hornes that imitate The waxing Moones, through all the Temple flung A sacred splendor: noyse-full Timbrels rung.
The Mother, glad of this successefull signe, Though not secure, returnes from Isis shrine. Whom Iphis fllowes with a larger pace Then vsuall; nor had so white a face. Her strength augments; her looke more bold appeares; Her shortning curles scarce hang beneath her eares; More courage hath, then, when a wench, she had: For thou, of late a Wench, art now a Lad. Gifts to the temple beare, and I sing! Sing Ioy! Their gifts vnto the Temple bring; And adde a title in one verse displaid: What Iphis vow'd a Wench, a Boy he pai'd. The Morning Night dismasks with welcome flame: When Iuno, Vinus, and free Hymen came To grace their marriage; who, with gifts diuine, Iphis the Boy, to his  ioyne.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The tenth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. FEare turnes a  to . Lethra's blame Olenus beares: ; their shapes the same. Vex Cybele to Pi her Atys turnes. Sweet Cyparisss in a Cypres . Enmoured Ioue at  wings display; And Slaine Hyac inhus sighes in his new . The cruell Sacrificrs by the powre Of Venus turnd to Buls. The Proctiture To Stones. Pygalion wiues the liuing fruit Of his  Art.  doth shine In  to the Virgin Signe. Myrrha,  Tree. Hippomenes And Atalanta, Lyons. Cyprides (Inform'd by Mentha's change) her Turnes to a faire, has quickly  flowre. HEnce to the Cies through boundlesse skies, In saffron mantle, Hymous : By Orp cal'd. But neither vsuall words, Nor chearfull lookes,  happy signes affords. The torch his hand sustain'd, still sputtering rais'd A tearefull smoke: nor yet, though shaken, bla'd.
Th'euent worse then the Omen. As his Bride Troopes with the Naides by Hebrus side; A Serpent bit her by the heele: which forc't Life from her hold, and nuptiall tyes diuorc't. Whom when the Thracian Poet had aboue Enough bewail'd; that his complaints might moue The vnder Shades, at Taenarus descends To Sygian flouds; and his bold steps extends By ayrie Shapes, and fleeting Soules, that boast Of sepulture, through that vnpleasant coast To Plutos Court. When, hauing tun'd his strings, Thus to his harpe the God-like Poet sings. You Powres that sway the world beneath the Earth; The last abode of all our humane birth: If we the truth without offence may tell; I come not hither to discouer Hell, Nor binde that scolding Curre, who barking shakes About his triple browes Medusa's snakes. My wife this iourney vrg'd: who, by the tooth Of trod-on Viper, perisht in her youth. I would, and stroue t'haue borne her losse: but Loue Won in that strife. A God well knowne aboue: Nor here, perhaps, vnknowne. If truly Fame Report old rapes, you also felt his flame. By these obscure abodes, so full of dread; By this huge Chs, and deepe Silence, spd Through your vast Empire; by these prayers of mine; Euryices too-hasty fate vatwine. We all are yours: and after a short stay; Early, or late; we all must runne one way. Hither we throng; for our last home assign'd: Th'eternall habitation of man-kind.
She, when her time by nature shall expire, Againe is yours: I but the vse desire. If Fate denie me this, my second choice Is here t'abide: in both our deaths reioyce. While thus he sung, and struck the quauering strings, The bloudlesse Shadowes wept: not flattering Springs Tempt Tantalus; Ixions Wheele stood still; Their Vrne the Belides no longer fill: The Vultures feed not; Tityus lest to grone: And Sisyphus sate listning on his Stone. The Furies, vanquisht by his verse, were seene To weepe, that neuer wept before. Hels Queene, The king of darknesse yeeld t'his powrefull plea. Among the late-come Soules, Erydice They call: she came; yet halting of her wound. Giuen Orpheus, with this law: Till thou the bound. Of pale Auernus passe, if back thou cast Thy carefull eyes, thou loosest what thou hast. A steepe ascent, darke, thicke with fogges, they clime Through euerlasting Silence. By this time Approach the confines of illustrious Light. Doubting her losse, and longing for a sight, His eyes th'impatient louer backward threw: When she, back sliding, presently with-drew. He catches at her, in his wits distraught; And yeelding aire for her (vnhappy!) caught. Nor did she, dying twice, her spouse reproue: For what could she complaine of, but his loue? Who takes her last farewell: her parting breath Scarce reacht his eares; and so  for dth. Her double losse sad Orpheus stupiside; With equall terror vnto his, who spide
About the pleasant fields in pleasure ride; And with a purple raigne the willing guide. 'T was Summer, and high Noone: Dayes burning eye Made smoking Cancers crooked clawes to fry. Vpon the ground the panting Hart was laide: Coole aire receiuing from the syluan shade. Whom silly Cyparissus wounds by chance: And seeing life pursue his tug'd out lance, Resolues to die. What did not Phoebus say, That might a griefe, so slightly caus'd, allay? He answers him in sight: this last good-turne Implores; That he might neuer cease to mourne. His bloud now shed in teares, a greenish hiew His body dimmes: the locks that dangling grew Vpon his iuory fore-head bristling use; And pointing vpward, seeme to threat the skies. When Phoebus; sighing: I for thee will mourne: Mourne thou for others: Herses still adorne. Such trees attracting; and inuiron'd round With birds and beasts, vpon the rising ground The Poet sits: who, hauing tun'd his strings, Indissonancie musicall, thus sings. From Ioue, ô Mother Muse, deriue my verse; All bow to Ioue: Ieues power we ot rehearse. And late of Giants sung, in lofty straines, Ford y his thunder on Phiegraean plaines. Nw in a lower key, to louely boyes Belou'd of Gods, turne we our softer layes. And sing of womens furies, who persue For breden lusts: persude by Vengeance due. Heauens King, young Ganymed inflames with loue: There was what Ioue would rather be than Ioue.
Yet daines no other shape than hers, that beares His awfull lightning in her golden seares. Who forth with stooping with deceitfull wings, Trust vp Iliades by Ida's springs. Who now, for Ioue (though iealous Iuno scoules) Delitious Nectar fils in flowing bowles. And thee Amyclides, in azure skies Had Phoebus fixt; if cruell Destinies Had not preuented: yet in some sort made Eretnall. For, as oft as Springs inuade Sharpe winters; and to Aries Pisces yeelds: So oft renu'd, thy Flowre adorne the fields. Thee lou'd my Father, best of humane births. Her Guardian quits his Delphos, in wide Earths Round nauill seated: while the God of Beames Haunts wall-lesse Sparta, and Eureas streames. Now neither for his Harpe, nor Quiuer, cares: Himselfe debasing, beares the corded snares; Or leads the dogs; or clambers mountains; led By Lordly Loue, and flames by custome fed. Now Titan bore his equall distant Light, Betweene fore-running and ensuing Night: When lightned of their garments, either shone With suppling Oile, in strife to throw the stone. This swinging through the aire first Phoebus threw: The obuious clouds dispersing as it flew; On solid earth, though flying long, at length Descends; inforc't by art-inabling strength. Th'imprudent Boy attempts with fatall hast To take it vp; when Earth, by boundings, cast The Globe, ô Hyacinthus, at thy head. The Boy lockt pale; and so the God, who bled
Their lookes imboldned, modesty now gone, Conuert at length to little-differing Stone. Pygmalion seeing these to spend their times So beast-like; frighted with the many crimes That rule in women; chose a single life: And long forbore the pleasure of a wife. Meane while, injoury with happy art A Statue carues; so shapefull in each part, As woman neuer equall'd it: who stands Affected to the fabrick of his hands. It seem'd a Virgin, full of liuing flame; That would haue mou'd, if not withheld by shame, So Art it selfe conceal'd. His art admires; From th'Image drawes imaginary fires: And often feeles it with his hands, to try If 'twere a body, or cold iuory. Not could resolue. Who kissing, thought it kist: Oft courts, imbraces, wrings it by the wrist; The flesh impressing (his conceit was such) And feares to hurt it with too rude a touch. Now flatters her; now sparkling stones presents, And orient pearle (loues witching instruments) Soft-singing birds, each seuerall colour'd flowre, First Lillies, painted balls, and teares that powre From weeping trees. Rich Robes her person decke; Her fingers, rings; reflecting chaines her necke; Pendants her eares; a glittering zone her breft. In all, shew'd well; but shew'd, when naked, best. Now laies he her vpon a gorgeous bed: With carpets of Sidonian purple spred. Now calls her wife. Her head a pillow prest Of plumy downe, as if with sense possest.
Now came the day of Venus Festiuall: Through wealthy Cyprs solemniz'd by all. White heifers, deckt with golden hornes, by strokes Of axes fall: ascending incense smokes. He, with his gift, before the Altar stands: You Gods, if all we craue be in your hands, Giue me the wife I wish: one like, he said, But durst not say, giue me my iuory Maid. The golden Venus, present at her Feast, Conceiues his wish; and friendly fignes exprest: The fire thrice blasing, sparkling thrice on high. He hastes to his admired Imag'ne: Couches besides her, rais'd her with his arme; Then kist her tempting lips, and found them warme. That lesson oft repeates; her bosome oft With amorous touches feeles, and fet it soft, The iuory dimpled with his singers, lacks Accustom'd hardnesse: as Hymettian wax Relents with heat, which chasing thombs reduce To pliant formes, by handling fram'd for vse. Amaz'd with doubtfull ioy, and hope that reeles; Againe the Louer, what he wishes, feeles. The veines beneath his thumbs impression beat: A perfect Virgin full of iuyce and heat. The Cyprian Prince with ioy-enhightned words, To pleasure-giuing Venus thanks affords. His lips to hers he ioynes, which seeme to melt: The blushing Virgin now his kisses felt; And fearefully erecting her faire eies, Together with the light, her Louer spies. Venus was present at the match she made. And when nine Crescents had at full displaide
Would I? it will not: he too well inclin'd. O that like fury would inflame his mind! Thus she. But Cinyras, prest with the store Of worthy suters who his voice implore; In his owne choice irresolute, demands (Their names rehearsing) how her fancy stands. She, thoughtfull silent; gazing on his face, Flusht with imbosom'd flames, and wept apace. He, taking this for mayden feare; Desist From weeping, said: then dride her cheeks, and kist; Too much she ioyos. Againe demanded, who She best could like: replyde, One, like to you. Be still, said he, so pious. At that name She hung the head, as conscious of her blame. 'T was now the mid of night: when Sleepe bestowes On men; and on their cares, a sweetrepose. But Myrrba watches, rapt with tamelesse fires; Retracting her implacable desires. Despaires, hopes; will not, will; now shames, againe Desires; nor knows what course to take. As when A mighty Oke (one blow behind) his fall On each side threatens; and is fear'd on all: Euen so her mind, impair'd with various wounds, Waues to and fro; and changes still propounds. No meane, no cure, was left for loue but death: Death pleas'd. Resolu'd to choke her hated breath; Vp-starting, to a beame her girdle ties. Deare Cinyras fare well (she softly cries) And of my ruine vnderstand the cause. That said, the noose about her necke she drawes. Her wakefull Nurses faithfull cares, they say, A whispering heard: who in the Lobby lay.
Straight rose; vnlockt the doores; the instrument Of death beholding, sereecht: together rent Her haire and bosome: and, with trembling haste, The girdle from her pallid nocke displac't. Now had she time to weepe; t'imbrace her Care: And aske the cause of such accurst despaire. She silent, fixes on the earth her eyes: And grieues at deaths preuented enterprise. aring her horie haires and empty brest, The Nurse, by her first food, and cradle, prest Her griefes disclosure. Myrra turnes aside, And sighes. The Nurse would not be so denide: Nor onely promist secrecy; but said: Tell me, my child, and entertaine my aid. My old age is not fruitlesse: charmes haue we, And powerfull medcines, if it furie be: If witchcraft; magicke shall thy torments ease: If wrath of Gods, the Gods we will appease With sacrifice. What can be else sumiz'd? Thy fortunes by incursions vnsurpriz'd; Thy mother, and thy father, well? That Name Drew from her soule a sigh, that soorcht like flame. Nor in the Nurse did this suspition moue Of such a crime: and yet she saw 'twas Loue. Importunate to know what least she feares, Laid in her lap surrounded with her teares, Sh'infolds her in her feeble armes, and said; I know thou lou's;t: wherein (nor be afraid) Thou maist on my sedulity rely: Nor shall thy father euer this descry. At that, in fury from her lap she sprung; Then on the bed her prostrate body flung;
As swift as Scythian shafts; her for me he more Admires; by motion louelier than before. The wind reuerberates her ankles wings, And whiskes her ham-bound buskins purple strings, Tossing her haire, on iuory shoulders spred. Her pure white body so assumes the red; As when carnation curtaines are displayd On pure white walls, and dye them with their shade, While this the stranger view'd the race was run: And Aalanti's browes the garland won. The vanquisht sigh, and pay their forfeiture. Nor could so sad successe his feare procure: Who rose; and fixing on the Maid his eyes; Why seeke you praise by easie victories? Contend with vs: if we obtaine the Bayes, Our victory will not eclipse your praise. Megareus, me begor, Orchastius bloud; He Neptunes, Ruler of the sacred Floud: Nor we degenerate. My foyle, your name Will honour; and immortalize your fame. This while, a well-pleas'd eye She on him threw: Nor knowes her wish: to lose, or to subdue. What God, a Foe to beauty, would destroy This Youth, said she, who seekes my bed t'inioy With his lifes forfeiture? If I may be The iudge, there is not so much worth in me. Nor is't his beauty moues, though it might moue; But that a Boy. We pitie, and not loue. Besides; his courage, and contempt of death! But once remou'd from Neptunes sacred birth! And then, his Loue; content to part with life, If harder, fate deny me for his wife!
Begone, ô Stranger; shun my bloudy bed, While yet thou maist: this Match will cost thy head. No Virgin is there who would not be thine: And such would seeke, whose lusters darken mine. Yet why regard I him, so may slaine? Looke to thy selfe, or perish: since in vaine Admonisht by such numbers, whom this strife Hath sent to death. Thou'rt weary of thy life. And must be die, because hee'd lieu with me? Must death, aduenturous Loue, thy wages be? This murder will our victory defame; And purchase hate: yet am not I in blame. O would thou wouldst desist, and danger shun! Or since so mad, would thou couldst faster run! How Boy and Virgin reuell in his face! Ah poore Hippnenes! O would this place, Th'hadst neuer seene I thou well deseru'st to line. Were I more happy, and hard fate would giue Me leaue to marry; thou art He alone, To whom my bed and bennies should be knowne. Thus she: Who raw, and pierc't with Loues first touch, Erres in her thoughts; and loues; nor knew so much. Now King and People call vpon the Race: When Neptunes Issue thus implor'd my grace. O Venus, fauour my attempts, he said: And those affections, which you gaue me, aid! This friendly winds conuey'd vnto my care: I pitie, and no longer helpe for beare. A field there is, so fertill none, through all Rich Cyprus; which they Damoscenus call. Antiquity this to my honour vow'd: And therewith all my Temples had indow'd.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The Eleuenth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. A Serpent chang'd to Stone. Rough barkes infold The cruell Bacchanals. To sharuing Gold All turnes at Midas touch: He' bodie laues In cleere Pactolus, whose inriched Wash off his gold and gilt: an Asso H flly shame: the whispred Secre beares Like sounding Reeds. Apollo, and the Guide Of sacred Sas, in humane shapes reside. Fore't Thetis varies formes. Daedalion Faleon turn'd. A Wolfe  deo . Morpheus to mortals, Phobetor to Brutes, And Phantasus to shapes inanimate sutes. Transform'd Halcyone and Ceyx fiye So Aesacus, who vaily striues to dye. THus while the Thracian Poet with his songs Beasts, trees, and stones, attracts in following throngs: Behold, Ciconian dames (their furious brests Clad with the spotted skins of saluage beast) The Sacred Singer from a hill espy'd, As he his dittie to his Harpe apply'd. Of these, One scream'd, and tost her flairing haire See, see the Woman-hater! then her speare
Threw at his vocall mouth; which iuie-bound, Kist his affected lips without a wound. An Other hurles a stone; this, as it flew, His voice and Harpes according tunes subdue: Which selfe-accus'd for such a rude assay, Before his feet, as in submission, lay: Rash violence, the meane exil'd, increast: And mad Erinys raign'd in euery breast. His songs had all their weapons charm'd, if noyse Of Bercynthian Shalmes, clapt hands, loud cryes, Drumme, howling Bacchanals, with franticke sound Had not his all-appeasing musique drown'd. The stones then blush with silenst Orpheus blood. But first on rauisht beasts that listning stood, On fowle, and Serpents, they their spight infer; And raze the glory of his Theater. Then all with cruell hands about him fly: And flocke, like birds, when they by day espy The bird of Night. And as a Stag at bay, In early Spectacle giuen to the pray Of eager hounds; assaile, together flung Their leauie speares, not fram'd for such a wrong. Some clods, some armes of trees, some stones aduance: And lest wilde Rage should weapons want, by chance Not far off Oxen drew the furrowing ploughes; And Swaines, prouiding food with sweating browes, Their brawny armes imploy'd: who feare-inclinde, efore them fled, and left their tooles behinde. Their mattockes, rakes, and spades, dispersed lay About the empty fields: these snatcht away, (The oxens hones torne from their skuls) their hate them backe vnto the Poets fate.
Thee, holding vp thy hands, who n'et before Besought'st in vaine, now to preuaile no more, That Rout of sacrilegious Furies slew! Euen through that mouth (ô Iupiter!) which drew From stones attention, which affection bred In saluage beasts, his forced spirits fled! Sad birds, wilde Heards, hard flints, and woods which oft Remou'd to heare thee, wept: trees weeping doft Their pallid leaues; streames with their teares increast: The Naiades and Dryades inuest Their loynes in sullen fable, and display Their scattered haire. Thy limbes dispersed lay. Hebrus had head and Harpe: as borne along The Harpe sounds something, sadly; the dead tongue Sighes out sad dieties: the banckes sympathie; That bound the riuer in their sad replie. Now borne to Sea, from natiue streames they driue; And at Methymuian Lesbos shore ariue. A Dragon on the forren sand prepares To seaze his head, and licke his dropping haires. When gaping to deuoure the Hymnists face, Phoebus descen; and in that very space Into a Stone conuerts him by his powre, With iawes extended readie to deuoure. His Ghost retires to vnder-shades: once more He sees, and knowes, what he had seene before. Then through the Elysian fields among the blest Seekes his Eurydice. Now repossest With strict imbraces, guided by one minde. They walke together: oft the comes behinde, Oft goes before: now Orphens safely may His following Eurydice suruay.
Yet would not accebus so remit their hate: Who vexed for his Prophets cruell fate, Fixt all th'Edonian Dames that then were by With spreading roots; and who more eagerly Persudo his death, their toes he deeper drew Within the sollid earth, which downward grew. And euen as fowle whose feet intangled are Within the subtile Fowlers secret snare Become by fearfull fluttering faster bound: So, each of these, now cleauing to the ground, With terror struggle to escape in vaine; For faster-binding roots their flight restraine. One, looking for her nailes, her toes, her feet: Behold, her twinning legs in timber meet: In passion, thinking to haue strucke her thighes, She strikes hard oke; hard oke her brest supplies; Her shoulders such: her armes appeare to grow In naturall branches; and indeed did so. Not thus content, their fields Lyaeus leaues: Whom Tmolus, with a better crew, receiues, And swift Pactolus, who did then infold No precious sands, nor graines of enui'd gold. Satyres and Bacchanals make their repaire, His vsualleraine: Silenus then not there. Him rst the Phrygian rurals reeling found With age and wine; and novv, with iuie crown'd, To Midas bring: whom Orphens Orgies taught, And sage Eunulpus from Ccrpis brought. When knowne to be his partner in those Rites; Full twice fiue dayes, with their succeeding nights, He entertain'd him with a sumptuous feast. Eleuen times Luciser the starres supprest:
When, with wilde mirth, he treads the Lydian fields; And to the God his Foster-father yeelds. He in his safe receipt doth much reioyce: Whose bounty Midas frustrates by his choyce. For, will'd to wish; Let all, said he, I touch Conuert to go'd. His ignorance was such Forth-with his hurtfull wish Lyaus giues: And at his folly not a little grieues. But in his curle the Berecynthian ioyes: And home-ward bound, the truth by touching tryes. Scarce trusts himselfe. Who from a tree bereaues A slender branch; this shone with golden leaues. Takes vp a stone,; that stone pale gold became: Takes vp a clod, the clod presents the same: Crops stalkes of corne; they yeeld a sneae of gold: An apple pulls; there in you might behold Th' Hesperian purchace: toucht by him alone, The marble pillars with rich mettall shone. And when he washt his hands; that, showr'd in raine, Might simple Dan haue deceiu'd againe. His brest scarce holds his hopes; whose fancie wrought On golden wonden: when his seruants brought Meat to the table. Sooner had not he Toucht Ceres bounty, but that prou'd to be A shining masse: assumed viands straight Betweene his greedy teeth conuert to plate. About to drinke mixt wine; you might behold His thirsty iawes o're-flow with liquid gold. Strucke with so strange a plague; both rich and poore; He hates, and shuns the wealth he wisht before. No plenty hunger feeds; he burnes with thirst: In loathed gold deseruedly accurst.
Then, lifting vp his shining armes, thus praid: Father Lenaeus, ô afford thy aid! I haue offended; pitie thou: and mee From this so beautifull a mischiefe free. The gentle Powre accepts his penitence: And for his faith, doth with his gift dispence. Lest ill-wisht gold about him still abide. Goe, said he, to those Cristall streames that glide By potent Sardis: keepe the bankes that lead A long th'incountring Current to his head. There, where the gushing fountaine fomes, diue in: And, with thy body, wash away thy sinne. The King obeyes: who in the fountaine leaues That golden vertue, which the Spring receiues. And still those ancient seeds these waters hold: Who gild their shores with glittering graines of gold He, hating wealth, in woods and fields bestowes His time with Pan: whom mountaine Caues inclose. Yet his gosse wit remaines: his shallow braine An sottish senses punish him againe. High Tmolus with a steepe ascent vnfolds His rigid browes, and vnder-seas beholds: Whose stretch-out bases here to Sardis ioyne; There to Hypaepis, girt in small confine. Where boasting Pan, while he his verse doth praise To tender Nymph, and pipes t'his rurall layes; Before Apollo's durst his songs prefer. They meet (ill-matcht) great Tmolus arbiter. Th' old Iudge on his owne Mountaine sits; and cleares His eares from trees: alone a garland weares Of Oke, with acorns dangling on his brow. Who thus bespake the God of Shepherds: Now
Your Iudge attends. He blowes his wax-bound reeds: And Midus fancie with rude numbers feeds. Then sacred Tmolus to diuine Apollo Conuerts his lookes: his woods his motion follow. He, his long yellow haire with laurell bound, Clad in a Tyran robe that swept the ground, A Violl holds, with sparkling gemmes in chac't And Indian teeth; the bow his right hand grac't. A perfect Artist shew'd. The strings then strucke With cunning hand: With his sweet musicke tooke, Tmolus bids Pan his vanquisht reeds resigne. All in the holy Mountaines sentence ioyne, But Midas only; whose exclaimes traduce The Censure. Phoebus for this grosse abuse Transformes his eares, his folly to declare: Stretcht out in length, and couer'd with gray haire: Instable, and now apt to moue. The rest The former figure of a man possest. Punisht in that offending part: who beares. Vpon his skull a slow-pac't Asses eares He striues to couer such a foule defame: And with a red Tiara hides his shame. But this his seruant saw that cut his haire: Who bigge with secrets, neither durst declare His Soueraignes seene deformity, not yet Could hold his peace. Who digs a shallow pit, And therein softly whispers his disgrace: Then turning in the earth, forsooke the place. A tuft of whispering Reeds from thence there growes; Which comming to maturity, disclose The husbandman: and by soft South-winds blowne Restore his words, and his Lords eares make knowne.
Reueng'd Apollo, leauing Tmolus, flies Through liquid aire; and on the land which lies On that side Helles streightned surges stands: Where far-obey'd Lamedon commands. Below Rhoeaeu, high aboue the flood, And on the right hand of Sigaum, flood An Altar vow'd to Panomphaean Ioue: From whence He saw Laeomedon improue New Troy's scarce founded walls; with what adoe, And with how great a charge they slowly grew. Who, with the Father of the tumid Maine, Indues a mortall shape: and entertaine Themselues for vnregarded gold to build The Pluygian Tyrants walls. That worke fulfill'd; The King their promised reward denies: And perury by swearing multiplies. Reuengefull Neptune his wilde waues vnbound; Which all the shores of greedy Troy surround, And made the Land a Lake: the country Swaine His labour lost beneath that liquid Plaine. Besides the daughter of the King demands: Who chained to a Rocke exposed stands To seed a Monster of the Sea; for free, By strenuous Hercules. Yet could not Hee The horses of Liomdon enioy; His valours hire: who sackes twice periur'd Troy; And giues his fellow Souldier Telamen Hesione; for Poleus now had won A Deity; nor in his Grandfather Tooke greater pride, than in his Sire by her. For Iupiter had Nephewes more than one: But he a Goddesse had espous'd alone.
For aged Proteus thus foretold the truth To waue-wet Theth: Thou shalt beare a Youth, Who shall in glorious armes transcend his birth And Fathers fame. Lest any thing on earth Should be more great than Ioue, Ioue shuns the bed Of Sea-thron'd Thetis, though her beauty led His strong desires: who bids Aeacides Succeed his loue, and wed the Queene of Seas. A Bay within Aemonia lies, that bends Much like an arch, and fat-stretcht armes extends▪ Which were, if deepe, a harbor lockt by land; Where shallow seas o're spred the yellow sand. The sollid shore (where-on no sea-weed growes) Nor clogs the way, nor print of footing showes. Had by, a mirtle groue affords a shade: In this, a caue; though doubtfull, rather made By art than nature: hither Thetis swimmes On Delphins backes, here ccucht her naked limbes. In this the sleeping Goddesse Peleus caught: Who, when she could not by his words be wrougt, Attempts to force, and claspt her in his armes. And had she not assum'd her vsuall charmes In varying shapes, he had his will obtain'd. Now, turning to a fowle, her flight restrain'd: Now seemes a massie tree adorn'd with leaues; Close to the bole th'inamor'd Peleus cleaues. A spotted Tygresse she presents at last: When he, with terrour strucke, his armes vnclaspt. Who powring wine on seas, those Gods implores; And with perfumes and sacrifice adore: Till the Carpathian Prophet rais'd his head, And said; Aeacides, inicy her bed.
Doe thou but binde her in her next surprise, When in her gelid caue she sleeping lies: And though she take a thousand shapes, let none Dismay; but hold, till she resume her owne. This Proteus said, and diu'd to the Profound: His latter word in his owne waters drown'd. Now hasty Titan to Hesperian seas Descends; when beauteous Thetis, bent to ease Forsooke the floud, and to her caue repair'd. No sooner she by Peleus was insnar'd, But forth-with varies formes; vntill she found Her Virgin limbes within his fetters bound. Then, spreading forth her armes, She sighing said, Thou hast subdude by some immortall aid; And Thetis shew'd; nor his imbrace repell'd: Whose pregnant wombe with great Achilles swell'd. Happie was Peleus in his sonne and wife: And had not Phocus murder soild his life, All-fortunate. With brothers bloud defil'd, Thee Tracbin harbours, from thy home exil'd. Where courteous Ceyx, free from rigour, raign'd; The sonne of Lucifer; whose lookes retain'd His fathers luster: then disconsolate, Not like himselfe, for his lost brothers fate. Hither, with trauell tit'd, and clog'd with cares, The banisht with a slender traine repaires. Mrs Hockes and Heards, with men for their defence, Left in a sadie vale not farre from thence. Conducted to his Royall presence, Hee With oliue brancht, downe bending to his knee, His name and birth declares: the murder maskes With fored cause of flight: a dwelling askes
In field, or citie. Ceyx thus replyes: Our hospitable bounty open lyes To men of vulgar ranke: what owes it then To your high spirit, so renoun'd by men? Of monumentall praise? Whose bloud extracts His sourse from Ioue, improued by your Acts? To sue, is times abuse: your worth assures Your full desires; of all, the choice is yours: I wish it better. And then wept. The cause Ioues Nephew askes: when, after a short pause; Perhaps you thinke this Bird which liues by rape To all a terror, euer had that shape. He was a man; as constant in his minde As fierce in warre, to great attempts inclinde. Daedalion nam'd; sprung from that Star which wakes▪ The deawie Morne, the last that heauen forsakes. Affected peace I fostered, with the rites Of nuptiall ioyes: He ioy'd in bloudy fights. His valour Kingdomes with their Kings subdude; By whom the Thisbian Doues are now persude. His daughter Chione, whose beauty drew A thousand sutors, ripe for marriage grew. By fortune Phoebus, the sonne of Mar, From Delphos, and Cyllenus, came this way: Here meeting, looke, and like. The God of Light▪ Deserres his ioy-imbracing hopes till night. Hermes ill-brookes delay: who on her laid His drowsie rod, and forc't the sleepie Maid. Night spangs the skie with starres. An old wifes shape Apollo tooke, and seconds Hermes rape. Now when the fulnesse of her time drew nie, Autolicbus was borne to Mercurie.
Nor from the Sire the Sonne degenerates, Cunning in theft, and wily in all fleights: Who could with subtiltie deceiue the sight; Conuerting white to blacke, and blacke to white. To Phoebus (for she bare two sonnes) belongs Philammon, famous for his Harpe and songs. What is't t'haue had two sonnes? two Gods t'inflame? A valiant father? Iupiter the same? Is glory fatall? sure t'was so to Her: Who to Diaas durst her face confer, And blame her beauty. With a cruell looke, She said; Our deeds shall right vs. Forthwith tooke Her bow, and bent it: when the bow-string flung Th'eiected arrow through her guiltie tongue. It bleeds; of speech and sound at once berest: And life, with bloud, her falling bodie left. What griefe (ô Piety!) opprest my heart! What said I not, t'asswage my brothers smart! Who heares me so as rockes the roring waues That beat their browes; and for his Daughter raues. But when he saw her burne, foure times assail'd To sacke the flamie Pile: as often fail'd. Then turnes his heeles to flight (much likae a Bull By Hornets stung) whom scratching brambles pull: Yet seem'd to run farre faster than a man, As if his feet had wings; and all out-ran. Who swift in chace of wished death, ascends Paassus top. As he his bodie bends To iumpe from downe-right cliffes, compassionate Apollo, with light wings, preuents his fate: With beake and tallons arm'd; with strength repleat Aboue his size: his courage still as great.
This Falcon, friend to none, all soule persu'th: And grieuing, is the cause of common ruth. Sad Ceyx thus his brothers change relates: When Pa Anctor prest the gates; Who kept the Heard: and cry'd (halfe out of breath) Peleus, I bring thee newes of losse and death. Report, said Peleus, we are bent to beare The worst of fortunes. While the King with feare Hangs on his tongue. He panting still afeard: To winding shores we draue the weary Heard, When Phoebus from the heighth of all the skie The East and West beheld with equall eie. A part on yellow sands their limbs display; And from their ease the wauy fields suruay: While other slowly wander here and there: Some swim in seas, and lofty fore-heads reare. A Fane, vndckt with gold or marble stone Adioynes; high blockt; within a groue o're-growne. This the Nerīdes and Nereus hold: By sea-men, who there dry'd their nets, so told. Neere it, a Marish, thicke with sallowes, stood; Made plashie by the interchanging stood. A Wolfe, a monstrous beast; with hideous noise That frights the confines, from those thickets flies. His lightning iawes with bloud and soame besmear'd: In whose red eyes two darting flames appear'd. Though fell with rage and famine; yet his rage More greedy farre: nor hunger seekes t'asswage With bloud of beeues, and so surcease; but all He meets with, wounds; insuking in their fall. Nor few of vs, while we his force with-stood, Fell by his rankling pangs. The shore with blood,
With bloud the sea-brimme blusht, and bellowing lakes. Delay is losse; and Doubt if selfe forsakes. Arme, arme, while something yet is left to lose: And ioyning force, this mortall Bane oppose. The Heardsman ends. Nor did this losse incense Aeacides; remembring his offence: Borne, as the iustice of sad Psamathe, To celebrate her Phocus Obsequie. The King commands his men to arme: prouides To goe in person. Busie rumour guides This to Alyne: her passion bare Her swiftly thither; running with her haire Halfe vncompos'd: and that disordering, clung About his necke: then weepes; and with a tongue That scarce could speake, intreats, that they alone Might goe; nor hazard both their liues in one. To whom Aeacides; Faire Queene forgoe Your vertuous feare: too much your bounties flow. No force auales in such stents as these: 'Tis prayer that must the sea-thron'd Power appease. A lofty towe within a fortresse stood; A friend to wandring ships that plough the flood. They this ascend; and sigung, see the shore With cattell strew'd; the Spoyler drencht in gore. Here Peleus fixt on seas, with knees that bend, Blew Psamathe implores at length to end The iust of her wrath. She from his speech▪ Diuerts her eares: till Tes did beseech, And got her husbands pardon: nor yet could The saluage Wolfe from thirst of bloud with-hold; Tll she the beast, as he a Heifer flew, Transform'd to marble; differing but in ew:
All else intire. The colour of the stone Shew him no Wolfe: now terrible to none. Yet Fate would not permit Aeacides To harbour here; nor found in exile ease; Till at Magnesi, in a happy time Acastus purg'd him from his bloudy crime. Meane-while perplext with former prodigies Both of his neece and brother; to aduize With sacred Oracles, the ioyes of men, Cyx prepares for Clares. Phrb then, With his Phlegyan hoast, alike prophane, The passage stopt to Dlphian Phoebus Fane. Yet first to thee his secret purpose told, Faith crown'd Alcyone. An inward cold Shot through her bones: her changing face appeares As pale as Box, surrounded with her teares. Thrice stroue to speake, thrice weeps through deare con∣straint: Sobs interrupting her diuine complaint. What fault of mine, my Life, hath chang'd thy mind? Where is that loue that late so cleerely shin'd? Canst thou thy selfe enioy, from me remou'd? Doe long wayes please? is now my absence lou'd? Yet didst thou goe by land, I should alone Grieue without feare: now both combine in one. Seas fright me with their tragicall aspect. Of late I saw them on the shore eiect Their scattered wracks: and often haue I read Sad names on sepulchers that want their dead. Nor let false hopes thy confidencie please; In that my father, great Hippotades, The strugling winds in rockie cauernes keepes. And at his pleasure calmes the raging Deepes.
They once broke loose submit to no command; But raue o're all the sea, and all the land; High clouds perplex, with sterne concursions rore, Emitting flames: I feare, by knowledge, more. These knew I, and oft saw their rude comport; While yet a Girle, within my Fathers Court. But if my prayers can no recesse procure; And that, alas, thy going be too sure; Take me along: let both one fortune beare; Then shall I only what I suster feare. Together saile we on the toyling Maine: And equally what euer hap sustaine. Thus spake Alcyone: whose sorrowes melt Her star-like spouse; nor he lesse passion felt. Yet neither would his first intent forsake Nor her a Partner in his danger make. Much said he to asswage her troubled brest: As much, in vaine. This addes vnto the rest, Which only could her pensiue cares reclaime All stay is irkesome; by my fathers Flame, I sweare, if Fate permit, returne I will E'e twice the Moone her shining Crescens fill. Reuin'd with promise of so short a stay; He bids them lanch the ship without delay, And fit her tacklings. This renues her feares; Presaging ill successe: abortiue teares Flow from their springs; then kist; a sad farewell, Long first, at length she takes; and swowning, fell▪ The Sea-men call aboard: in double ranks Reduce their oares, vp-rising from their Banks With equall strkes She reares her humid eies, And first her husband on the Poope espies
Shaking his hand: that, answers. Now from shore The vessell driues, and thence her Obiect bore. Her following eyes the flying ship persue: That lost, the sailes her eager gazes drew. When all had left her, to her chamber goes; And on the empty bed her body throwes: The bed and place, with teares, to minde recall That absent part, which gaue esteeme to all. Now farre from Port; the winds began to blow On quiuering Shrowds; their ores the Sailers slow: Then hoise their Yards a trip, and all their sailes At once let fall to catch th'approaching gales. The Ship scarce halfe her Course, or sure no more, By this had runne; farre off from either shore: When, deepe in night, fierce Lar fuy blew; And high-wrought Seas with chaing foamie grew. Strike, strike the Top-saile, let the Main-sheat fly, And furle your sailes, the Master cry'd; his cry The blustring winds and roring seas suppresse. Yet of their owne accord in this distresse They ply their taskes: some seeling yards bestri'd And take-in sailes; some stop on either side The yawning leakes; some seas on seas reiect. While thus Disorder toiles to small effect, The bitter storme augments; the wilde Winds wage Warre from all parts, and ioyne with Neptunes rage. The Master lost, in terrour, neither knew The state of things, what to command, or doe; Confsing ignorance; so huge a masse Of ills oppresse! which slighted Art surpasse. Lowd cries of men resound; with ratling shrowds, Flouds iustling flouds, and thunder-crashing clouds.
Who late a scepter held. His father in law, And father, now inuokes: but could not draw (Alasse!) from either succour. Still his wife Runnes in his thoughts in that short span of life. He wisht the waues would cast him on the sands Of Trachin, to be buried by her hands. Who swimming, sighes Alyone; her name His last of speech: in Seas conceiues the same, Behold; an arch of waters, blacke as hll, Brake o're the floud: the breaking surges quell Their sinking Burthen. Luciser that night Became obscure; nor could you see his light. And since he might not render vp his place, With pitchie clouds immur'd his darkned face. Meane-while Alyone, not knowing ought Computes the tedious night; the daies out-wrought Vpon a robe for him; another makes To weare her selfe: whose flattering hope mistakes In his returne. Who holy fumes presents To all the Gods; but most of all frequents The Fane of Iu: at her altars prai'd For him that was not. Grant successe! (she said) A quicke returne! Giue he our right to none! Of all her prayers the last succeeds alone. The melting Goddesse could no longer brooke Her death-crot prayers; but from her altar shooke Her tainted hand; and thus to Iris spake: Haste faithfull Messenger, thy iourney take To drowsie Sleepes dimme palace: bid him send A dreame that may present the wofull end Of Ceyx to Alyone. This said; She, in a thousand-coloured robe araid,
Her ample Bow from Heauen to Earth extends: And in a cloud to his abode descends. Neere the Cirians sculks a Caue, in steepe And hollow hils; the Mansion of dull Sleepe: Not seene by Phoebus when he mounts the skies, At height, nor stooping: gloomy mists arise From humid earth, which still  twi-light make. No crested fowles rill crowings here awake The cheerefull Morne: no baking Sentinell Here watch; nor geefe, who wakefull dogs excell. Beasts tame, nor saluage, no ind-shaken boughes, Nor strife of iarring tongues, with noyses rouse Secured Ease. Yet from the rocke a spring, With streames of Ls softly murmuring, Purles on the pib, and inuites Repole. Before the Euery pregnant Poppie growes, With numerous Simples; from whose iuicie birth Night gathers sleepe, and shede it on the Earth. No doores here on their crcking hinges iarr'd: Through-out this court there was nor oore, nor grd. Amid the Hebon Caue a dowe bed High mounted stand, with sable couerings spred. Here lay the lazie God, dissol'd in rest. Fantasticke Dreames, who various formes exprest, About him coh: then An's cares far more; Or leaues of trees, or  on Neptunes shore. The Virgin ening  the obuirs Dreames: And fils the sacd Coe with the beames Of her bright robe. The God with strife disioines His seeled lid; ag his head declines, And knock  his  against his brest. Aon Himselfe Himselfe iects; and, ing on
His elbow, asketh (for he knew her) why She thither came? When Iris made reply: Thou Rest of things, most meeke of all the Gods; O Sleepe, the Peace of minds, from whose abodes Care euer flies; restoring the decay Of toile-tyr'd limbs to labour-burdning Day: Send thou a Dreame, resembling truth, in post T'Hereulean Trachin; that, like Ceyx ghost, May to Alcyone his wracke vnfold. Saturnia this commands. Her message told, Iris with-drew; who could the power of Sleepe Resist no longer. When she found it creepe Vpon her yeelding senses, thence she flies: And by her painted Bow remounts the skies. The Sire, among a thousand sons, excites Shape-faining Morpheus: of those brother Sprites None (bid t'assume) with subtler cunning can Vsurpe the gesture, visage, voice of man, His habit, and knowne phrase. He onely takes A humane forme: an Other shewes a snakes, A birds, a beasts. This Icelos they call, Whom heauen imbowre; though Pbetor by all Of mortall birth. Next Phantasus; but he, Of different facultie, indues a tree, Earth, water, stone, the seuerall shapes of things That life enioy not. These appeare to Kings And Princes in deepe night: the rest among The vulgar stray. Of all the germane throng Their aged father onely Morpheus chose To act Thauantia's charge, His eies then close Their drowsie lids, and hanging downe his head, Resolu'd to slumber, shrinkes into his bed.
His noiselesse wings through night fly Morpheus straines; And with the swiftnesse of a thought attaines Th' Aemonian towers: then laid them by, and tooke The forme of Ceyx. With a pallid looke He naked stood, like one depriu'd of life, Before the Couch of his vnhappy wife: His beard all wet, the haire vpon his head With water dropt; who, leaning on her bed, Thus spake; while teares from seeming passion flow. Dost thou, ô wretched Wife, thy Cyx know? Or am I chang'd in death? looke on the Lost: And for thy husband thou shalt see his Ghost. No fauour could thy pious prayers obtaine: For I am drown'd; no longer hope in vaine. Cloud-crushing South-winds in Aegaeum caught Our rauisht ship, and wrackt her with her fraught. My voice the flouds opprest, while on thy name I vainely call'd. This, neither wandring Fame, Nor doubtfull Author tels: this I relate; I, that there perisht by vntimely fate. Arise, weepe, put on blacke: nor vndeplor'd For pity send me to the Stygian Ford. To this he addes a voice, such a she knew Exprest her Lords: with teares appearing true, And gesture of his hand She sigh't and wept; Stretch out her armes t'imbrace him as she slept, But claspt the empty aire. Then cry'd, O stay! Ah, whither wilt thou! goe we both one way. Wak't with her voice, and husbands shade; with feare She lookes about for that which was not there. For now the maids, rais'd with her shreekes, had brought A Taper in. Not finding what she sought,
She strikes her cheeks, her nightly linnen tare, Inuades her brests; nor staies t'vubind her haire, But tugs it off. Her Nurse the cause demands Of such a violence. She wrings her hands, And in the passion of her griefe replyde: There's no Alcyone; none, none! she dyde Together with her Ceyx. Silent be All sounds of comfort. These, these eyes did see My ship-wrackt Lord. I knew him; and my hands Thrust forth t'haue held him: but no mortall bands Could force his stay. A Ghost: yet manifest: My husbands ghost: which ô but ill exprest His forme and beauty, late diuinely rare! Now pale, and naked, with yet dropping haire. Here stood the miserable; in this place: Here, here (and sought his aiery steps to trace.) O this my sad mis-giuing soule diuin'd; When thou forsook'st me to persue the wind. But since imbarqu'd for death, would I with thee Had put to sea: a happy face for me! Then both together all the time assign'd For life had liu'd; nor in our death dis-ioyn'd. Now here, I perisht there: on that profound Poore I was wrackt; yet thou without me drown'd. O I, then flouds more cruell; should I striue To lengthen life, and such a griefe suruiue! Nor will I, nor for sake thee, nor defer. Though one Vrne hold not both, one Sepulcher Shall ioyne out titles: though thy bones from mine The seas disseuer, yet our names shall ioyne. Griefe chok't the rest. Sobs euery accent part: And sighes ascend from her astonisht heart.
Day springs: She to the shore addrest her haste, Euen to that place from whence she saw him last. And while she sadly vtters, Here he staid; Here parting, kist me; from thence anchor waid; While she such sighs recalls; her steady eyes Fixt on the Sea, far off she something spies; But knows not what: yet like a cor's. First shee Doth doubt: driuen neerer (though not neere) might see A body plainly. Though vnknowne, yet much The Omen mou'd her, since his fate was such. Poore wretch, who'ere thou art: and such (she said) Thy wife, if wed, by thee a widdow made! By flouds driuen neerer; the more neere, the more Her spirits faint: now nigh th' adioyning shore. Now sees she what she knowes; her husbands cor's. Woe's me! 'tis He, she cries! at once doth force Her face, haire, habit: trembling hands extends To soule-lesse Ceyx; and then said: Here ends My last of hopes: thus, ô then life more deare; O husband, thus return'st thou! Art a Peere Had stretcht into the surges; Which with-stood, And brake the first incursion of the flood. Thither forth-with (ô wonderfull!) she springs; eating the passiue aire with new-growne wings. Who, now a bird, the waters summit rakes: About she ies, and full of sorrow, makes A mournfull noise; lamenting her diuorce: Anon she toucht his dumbe and bloudlesse cor's; With stretched wings imbrac't her perisht bliffe; And gaue his colder lips a heatlesse kisse. Whether he felt it, or the flouds his looke duanc't, the vulgar doubt: vetsure he tooke
Sense from touch. The Gods commiserate: And change them both, obnoxious to like fate. As erst, they loue: their nuptiall faiths they shew In little birds; ingender, parents grow. Seuen winter dayes with peacefull calmes possest. Alcyon sits vpon her floting nest. Then safely saile: then Aeolus incaues For his, the winds; and smoothes the stooping waues. Some old man seeing these their pinions moue O're broad-spread Seas, extols their endlesse loue. By theirs, a Neighbour, or Himselfe, teuiues An others fate. Yon'sable fowle that diues; (And therewith shewes the wide-mouth'd Cormorant) Of royall parentage may also vaunt. Whose ancestors from Tros their branches spred: Ilas, Assaracus, Ioues Ganymod, Laomedon, and Priamus the last That raign'd in Troy: to Hector (Who surpast In fortitude) a brother. If by powre Of Fate vnchanged in his youths first flowre, He might perhaps as great a name haue wonne: Thought Hector were great Dymas daughters sonne. For Alixoth, a country Maid, Bare Aesacus by stealth in Idas shade. He, hating Cities, and the discontents Of glittering Courts; the louely woods frequents, And vnambitious fields; but made repaire To Ilium rarely: yet, he debonaire, Nor vnexpugnable to loue. Who splde Eperia, oft desir'd, by Cebrens side (Her fathers riuer) drying in the Sun Her fluent haire. Away the Nymph did run,
Swift as a frighted Hinde the Wolfe at hand; Or like a fearefull fowle thrust ouer-land Beneath a falcon. He persues the chace: Feare wings her feet, and loue inforc't his pace. Behold a lurking Viper in this strife, Ceaz'd on her heele; repressing flight with life. Franticke, his trembling armes the dead include: Who cry'd, Alas that euer I persude! fear'd not this; nor was the victory Worth such a losse. Ay me! two, one destroy. Thy wound the Serpent, I the occasion gaue: , ô more wicked! yet thy death shall haue My life for satisfaction. There-with flung His body from a cliffe which ouer-hung The vndermining Seas. His falling limmes Vpheld by Tethys pitie; as he swimmes Sh' his person plumes, nor power of dying giues. To be compel'd to liue the Louer grieues: Disdaining that his soule, so well appai'd To leaue her wretched seat, should thus be staid, And mounting on new wings, againe on Seas His body throwes: the fall his feathers ease. With that, inrag'd, into the deepe he diues: And still to drowne himselfe as vainly striues. Loue makes him, leane. A long neck doth sustaine His sable head; long-ioynted legs remaine. Nor euer the affected Seas for sakes; And now a suted name from diuing takes.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The twelfth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. A Snake; a snake-like Stone. Cvnus, awan, Caenis the maid, now Caenens and a man, Becomes a Fowle. Neleius varies shaes: At last an Eagle; nor Alcides scaepet. OLd Priaus mournes for Aesacus; nor knew That he suruiu'd, and with light feathers flew. While Hector and his brethren dues, with teares, Pay to the tombe which his inscription beares. But Paris, absent from that obsequy, Straight, with his Rape, brought ten yeeres warre to Troy. A thousand ships, in one confederate, Persue his stealth, with all the Achaian State. Nor vow'd reuenge so long had beene delaid; If wrathfull Seas had not their passage staid; At fishie Aulis, in Boetia, Their wind-bound Nauy in expectance lay. Here, as th'old vse, to loue they sacrifice. While from the antique altar flames arise; A blew scal'd Dragon, in the Armies view, Ascends a tree, which neere the altar grew.
A feathered nest the vpper branches beare, With twice foure birds: these and their dam (with feare Flying about her losle) the greedy snake At length deuour'd. This all with wonder strake. When Chilchas cry'd (who could the truth deuine) Reioyce, Pelasgans, 'tis a happy signe! Proud Troy shall fall; though with long toile and care: These th'ice three birds, thrice three yeeres war declare. He, wound about a bough, gorg'd with his rape; Became a Stone, hat held the Serpents shape. Still Nerus in Aônian surges raues: Nor warre transferies. Some thinke the God of Waues Would Troy preserue; and saue the walls he made. Thestorides resents: who knew, and said, A virgins bloud must Dian' reconcile. Now did the publike cause the priuate foile; A King a father; I phigeia stood Before the altar to resigne her blood. The Priest did weepe; the Goddesse pittieth too: Who 're their eyes a cloudy mete or threw; And while they prosecute her rites, and praid; Produc't a Hinde to represent the Maid. When fitter sacrifice had dul'd her rage; Her furie and the Seas, at once asswage. A fore-winde then their thousand Vessels bore: Who, suffering much, attaine the Phrygian shore. Ad the world, 'twixt Aire, Earth, Neptunes brine, A place there is; the triple Worlds confine. Where all that's done, though far remou'd, appeare: And euery whisper penetrates the care. The House of Fame: who in the highest towre Her lodging takes. To this capacious bowre
Innumerable wayes conduct; no way With doores debar'd, but open night and day. All built of ringing brasse; through out resounds: The heard reports, and euery word rebounds. No rest within, no silence: yet the noise. Not lowd, but like the murmuring of a voice, As seas that sally on far-distant shores; Or as Ioues terminating thunder rores. Hither the idle Vulgar come and goe: Millions of Rumors wander to and fro; Lies mixt with truths, in words that vary still. Of these, with newes vnknowing eares Some fill; Some carry tales: all in the telling growes; And euery Author addes to what he knowes. Here dwels rash Error, light Credulity, Deiected Feare, and vainly grounded loy; New rais'd Sedition, secret Whisperings Of vnknown Authors, and of doubtfull things. All done in Heauen, Earth, Ocean, Fame sun uiewes: And through the ample world inquires of newes. She notice gaue, how with a dreadfull hoast The Grecian Nauie steered for their coast. Nor vnexpected came: the Troians bend Their powers t'incounter, and their shores defend. First thou thy life, Protesildus, lost By Hectors fatall lance; the battle cost The Greekes a world of soules: so cleerely shone Their fortitudes; great Hector yet vnknowne. Nor no small streames of bloud their valours drew From Phrygian wounds, who felt what Greece could doe. And now their mingled gores Sig staine: Now Neptunes Cycnus had a thousand slaine.
Now, in his chariot, on Achilles fell; And with his lance whole squadrons sent to hell: Seeking for Cyenus, or for Hector, round About the field; at length braue Cycnus found: (For Fate nine yeeres great Hectors life sustaines.) Cheering his horses with the flaxen maines, His thundring Chariot driues against his foe, And shakes his trembling lance: about to throw; O youth, he said, what e're thou art, reioyce: Achilles honours thee with death. His voice His speare persues: the steele no wound imprest Though strongly throwne. When, bounding from his brest He said; Thou Goddesse-borne, Fame brutes thee such; Why wondrest thou (Achilles wondred much) This helme with horse-haire plum'd, this shield I beare, Defend not me: for fashion these I weare. So Mars his person armes. Should I display My naked brest, thy force could finde no way The grace to be Nereus sonne is small: What his, who Nereus, who his Nymphs, who all The Ocean guides? Then at Achilles threw His lance, that pierc't his plated shield, and through Nine oxe-hides rusht: the tenth did it restraine. The Heros caught it, and retorts againe The singing steele; againe it gaue no wound. The third assay no better entrance found, Though Cycs bar'd his bosome to the blow. He rages like a bull in Citcian Shew; Whose dreadfull hornes the stammell, which prouokes His fury, tosse with still deluded strokes. Then searches if the head were off: that on; What, is my hand, said he, so feeble growne?
On one is all my vigour spent? My powre Was more, when first I raz'd Lyrnessus towre: When Tenedos, Eetiou, Thebes, were fil'd With bloud of theirs, by my incounters spild. The red Caycus slaughtred natiues dyde: Twice Telephus my powrefull lauelin tryde. Behold these heapes of bodies! these I flew: Much could my hand haue done; as much can doe. This said, his former deeds almost suspects, And at Menetes brest his aime directs, (A Lycian of meane ranke) the thrilling dart Quite through his faithlesse curasse pierc't his heart: Whose dying body strucke the groning ground. Snatching the weapon from his recking wound; This hand, he said, this now victorious lance Shall vrge thy fate: assist me equall Chance! With that, th'vnerring dart at Cycnus flung. Th'vneuitated on his shoulder rung; Which like a rocke the lance repel'd againe: Yet where it hit it left a purple staine; By vainely glad Aeidas descry'd: He woundlesse: this Menetes bloud had dy'd. Then roring, from his chariot leapes; and made A horrid on-set with his flaming blade: Who sees the breaches in his helme and shield; Yet he secure: his skin the steele vnsteeld. Now all impatient, with the hilt his Foe's Hard front inuades with thicke redoubled blowes: Persues his back retreit, perturbs, insists; Nor lets the astonisht breath. He faints; blew mists Swim o're his eyes: whose now auerted steps A stone with-stood. On whom Achilles leapes
Or else assured. Caenis still for bore All nuptiall ties. As on the secret shore She walkt alone, the Sea-god her dissent Inforc't to Rape: for so the rumor went. Rapt with the ioy of loues first tasted fruit; All shall, said Neptune, to thy wishes sute; Wish what thou wilt. So Fame the story told. My wrong, said Caenis, makes my wishes bold: That neuer like inforcement may befall, Be I no woman; and thou giu'st me all. Her latter words a deeper voice expresse, Much like a mans, for now it prou'd no lesse. The Sea-God had assented to her will: And further addes, that steele should neither kill Nor wound his person, Young Atracides, Departs; reioycing in such gifts as these: Who great in euery manly vertue growes; And haunts the fields through which Paeneus flowes. The sonne of bold Ixi now had wed Hippodame: the saluage Cenraures, bred Of clasped Clouds, his inuitation grac't; In plashed bowres at sundry tables plac't. There were th' Aemoniax Princes; there was I: The Palace rung with our confused ioy. They Hymen sing; the altars fume with flames: Forth came th' admired Bride with troopes of dames. We call Pirithaus happy in his choice: But scarce maintaine the O men of that voice. For Eurytus, more heady than the rest, Foule rapine harbors in his saluage brest; Incenst by beauty, and the heat of wine; Lust and brity, in out-rage ioyne.
Straight, turn'd-vp boords the feast prophane: the faire And tender spouse now haled by the haire. Fierce Eurytus Hippodime: all tooke Their choice, or whom they could: sackt cities looke With such a face. The women shreeke: we rise. When Theseus first; ô Eurytus, vnwise! Dar'st thou offend Pirithous as long As Theseus liues? in one two suffer wrong. The great-sould Heos, not to boast in vaine, Breakes through the throng, and from his fierce disdaine The Rape repris'd. He no reply affords; Such facts could not be iustifi'd by words: But with his fists the braue redeemer prest; Assailes his face, and strikes his generous brest. Hard by there stood an antique goblet, wrought With extant figures: this Aegides caught; Hurl'd at the face of Eurytus: a floud O freeking wine, of braines, and clotted bloud At once he vomits from his mouth and wound; And falling backward, kickes the dabled ground. The Centaures, frantieie for their brothers death, Arme, arme, resound, with one exalted breath. Wine courage giues. At first an vncouth light Of flagons, pots, and boules, began the fight: Late fit for banquets, now for bloud and broiks. First Amycus, Opions issue, spoiles The sacred places of their gifts; downe rampes A brazen cresset tuche with burning yes: This swings a loft, as when a white-hair'd Bull The Sacrificer strikes; which crusht the skull of Celadon the Lapitis, and Iust His face vnknowne: confusion forme bereft.
Out start his eyes; his batter'd nose betwixt His shiuer'd bones slat to his pallat fixt. Pallaean Pelades a tressell tore That propt the boord, and fell'd him to the flore, He knockes his chin against his brest, and spude Bloud mixt with teeth. A second blow persude The first; and sent his vexed soule to hell. Next, Gryncus stood; his lookes with vengeance swell: Serues this, said he, for nothing? there with rais'd A loft a mighty Altar: as it blaz'd, Among the Lapihites his burden threw; Which Broteas, and the bold Orion slew. Orions mother Myale, eft-soone Could with her charmes deduce the strugling Moone. Exadius cry'd, Nor shalt thou so depart Had I a weapon. Of a voted heart The Antlers from a Pine he puls; they six Their forkes in Gryncus darkned eyes: this stickes Vpon the horne, that in concreted gore Hung on his beard. A fire-brand Rhaelus bore, Snatch from the Altar; and Charaxus hed Crackt through the skull, with yellow tresses spred. The rapid flame his blazing curles surround, Like come on fire; bloud broyling in his wound Horribly hisses: asked steele that gloes With seruent blasts, which plant tongues dispose To quenching coole-troughes, sputtors, striues, consumes; And hissing vnder heated , fumes. The Wounded from his singed tresses shakes The greedy flame; and on his shoulders takes A stone torne from the threshold, which alone Would loade a waine, as distant Rhoetus throwne.
This, falling short, Comeles life inuades: And sent his friend to euerlasting shades. When Rhoetus, laughing; May you all abound In strength so try'd; and aggrauates his wound With repercussions of his burning brand. Crusht bones now sinke in braines. Then turnes his hand▪ Vpon young Coritus, Euagrus, Dryas: Which gaue to Coritus a fatall passe. What glory can the slaughter of a boy Afford, Euagrus said? nor more could say: For Rhoetus, e'r his iawes together came, Hid in his throte and brest the choaking flame. Then whiskes the brand about his browes, and driues At valiant Dryas: but no longer thriues. For through his shoulder, who had triumpht long In daily slaughter, Dryas fixt his prong. Who groning, tugs it out with all his might: And soild with bloud, conuerts his heeles to flght. So Lycidas, Arnaeus, Medon (sped In his right arme) Pisenor, Caumaes, fled: Wound-tardie Mermerus, late swift of pace; Meneleus, Pholus; Abas, vs'd to chace The Bore; and Astyls, who fates fore-knew: Who vainly bade his friends that warre eschew; And said to frighted Nessus, Fly not so; Thou art reseru'd for great Alcides bow. But yet Eurynomus, nor Lycidas, Arcus, nor Imbreus, vnslaughtred passe: All quell'd by Dryas hand. Thee Cantus too, Though turn'd about for slight, afore-wound side▪ For looking backe; the point betweene his sights, There where the nose ioynes with the fore-head, lights.
Who with his shield and burganet defends The sounding strokes: yet still his sword extends, And twixt his shoulders at one thrust doth gore His double brests. Yet had he slaine before Phlegraeus, Hyles, with his lances flight; Hiphinôus and Danis, in close fight. Addes Dorylas to these; who wore a skull Of Wolfe-skin tan'd; the sharpe hornes of a Bull, In stead of other weapons, fixt before: And dyde in crimson with Laepithian gore. To whom, with courage fir'd, I said in scorne; Behold how much our steele excels thy horne. And threw my lance: not to be shun'd, he now Claps his right hand vpon his threatned brow; Which both together nail'd. They rore: and while Th'ing aged with his bitter wound doth toile; Thy father, who was neerest, neerer made: And through his nauill thrust his deadly bld. He bounds, and on the earth his bowels trailer; The trailed kickes, the kickt in peces hak; Which winding, fetter both his legs and thighes So falls; and with a gutlesse belly dies. Nor thee thy beauty, Cyllarus, could saue: If such a two-form'd figure beauty haue. His chin now 'gan to bud with downe of gold; And golden curles his iuory backe in sold: His lookes a pleasing vigor grace; his brest, Hands, shoulders, necks, and all that man exprest, Surpassing arts admired images. Nor were his bestiall parts a shame to these: Adde but a horses head and crest, he were For Castors vse; his backe so strong to beare,
So largely chested; blacker than the crow: His taile and feet-lockes, white as falling snow. A number of that nation sought his loue; Whom none but faire ylonome could moue: None for attracting fauour so excell, Of all the halfe-mares that on Othrys dwell. Shee, by sweet words, by louing, by confest Affection, only Cyllarus possest. With combes she smoothes her haire; her person trimmet With all that could be gracefull to such limbes. Of Roses, Rosemary and Violets, And oft of Lillies curious dressings pleats. 'Twice daily washt her face in Springs that fall▪ From Pagasaean hills; twice daily all Her body bathes in cleansing streames: and ware The skins of beasts, such as were choice and rare, Which flowing from her shoulder crosse her brest, Vaile her left side. Both equall loue possest: Together on the shady mountaines stray, In woods and hollow caues together lay. Then to the palace of the Lepithits Together came; and now together fight. A iaueline from the left hand flung, thy brest O Cyllarus, beneath thy necke imprest. His heart though slightly hurt (the dart exhal'd) Grew forth-with cold; and all his body pal'd. Hylonome his dying limbes receiues; oments his wound: close to his lips she cleauer, To stay his flying soule. But when she found Lifes fire extinct; with words in clamour drown'd, Euen on that steele, which through his bosome past, She threw her owne: and him in death imbrac't.
Me thinkes I see grim Phoeocomes yet: Who with two Lions skins, together knit, Protects his man and beast. A log he tooke, Which scarce two teame could draw; this darted, strooke The Crowne of Phonolnides: his braines It through the fractures of his skull constraines; Which from his mouth, eyes, eares, and nosthrils gusht, Like curds through wicker squeasd; or iuces erusht Through draining Colendars. As he the dead Prepares t'vnarme, my sword his bowels shred. Your father saw his downfall. Chthonius too, And stout Teleb our fawchion slew. The first a forked branch, the other held A lengthfull lance: the lance this wound impeld; Whereof you see the ancient scarre. Then I, Then should I haue beene sent t'haue ruin'd Troy. Then might I haue restrain'd, if not o're-throwne Great Hector. But, he either then was none, Or else a child. Now spent with age, I waine. What speake I of two-shape Pyretus, slaine By Periphas? Thy dart, without a head, Braue Ampycus, foure-hoon'd Oicles sped. Macareus, borne by Pelethronian rocks, Huge Erigdupus with a leauer knocks To ecchoing earth. His dart Cymelus sheath'd Deepe in Nessaeus groine, and life bereau'd. Nor would you thinke Ampycides alone Could Fate fore-tell; a lance by Mopsus throwne Odites slue: this, as the Centaure rail'd, His tongue t'his chin, his chin t'his bosome nail'd. Fiue Caeneus slue; Bronus Antimachus, Axe-arm'd Pyracmos, Helins, Sliphls,
Although forgetfull by what wounds they fell; Their names, and number, I remember well. Giant-like Latreus lightneth to these broiles; Arm'd with Emathian Alesus spoiles: His yeares, 'twixt youth and age; nor age impaires The strength of youth, though sprinkled with gray haires, A Maccdonian speare, a sword, a shield, Confirme his powers: o're-viewes the well-fought field, Clashes his armes; and trotting in a round, Infring'd the aire with this disdainfull sound. Shall I indure thee Caenis? still to me Thou art a woman, and shalt Caenis? be. Thou hast forgot thy births originall, And for what fact rewarded; by what fall Aduanc't to this man-counterfeiting shape. Thinke of thy birth; thinke of thy easie rape. Goe, take a spindle and a distaffe; twine The carded wooll; and armes to men resigne. While thus he scoffes; and circularly ran; Caeneus his sides gores with his lance, where man And horse vnite. He, mad with angush, flings His speare at the Phyllaean youth, which rings On his vntainted face; and backe recoiles, As pibbles dropt on drummes, or haile on tiles. Then rushing on, with thrusts affayes to wound His hardned sides; the sword no entrance found. Nor shalt thou scape; the edge shall lanch thy throte, Although the point be dull. This said, and smote At once. The blow, as if on marble, sounds: And from his necke the broken blade rebounds: When he his charmed limbes had open laid Enough to wounds and wonder, Caeneus said:
Now will we trie, if thou our sword canst feele. Then 'twixt his shoulders thrusts the fatall steel Vp to the hilts; which to and fro he wanes Deepe in his guts, and wounds on wounds ingraues. The frighted Centaures, with a horrid cry, On him alone, with all their weapons sly. Their darts rebated fall, but draw no blood: For Caeneus still in-vulnerable stood. This more amaz'd. Ah, Monychus exclaime, One foiles vs all, to all our endlesse shames▪ He scarce a man! nay he the man, and we Are what he was: so poore our actions be. What bootes our mighty limbes? our double force? The strongest of all creatures, man and horse, In vs by nature ioyn'd? sure we are not A Goddesse birth; nor by Ixíon got, Who durst the Queene of Deities imbrace. This Halfe-man conquers his degenerate race. Stones, massie logs, whole mountaines on him roule; And with congested trees crush out his soule. Let woods oppresse his iawes: o're-whelme with waight, In stead of idle wounds. Thus he: and straight An Oke, vp-rooted by the furious blasts Of franticke winds, on valiant Caeneus casts. Th' example quickly Othrys difaraide Of all his trees; and Pelion wanted shade. Prest with so huge a burthen, Caeneus swea: And to th'o're-whelming okes his shoulders sets. But now the load aboue his statue climbes, And choakes the passage of his breath. Sometimes He faints; then struggles to aduance his crowne Aboue the Pile, and throw the timber downe:
Sometimes the pressure with his motion quakes; As when an earth-quake yonder Id shakes. His end was doubtfull: some there be, who tell How with that weight his body sunke to hell. Mopsus dissents; who saw a fowle arise From thence with yellow wings, and mount the skies; (The first I euer saw) which flying round About our Tents, sent forth a mount efull sound. This he persuing with his soule and fight, Cry'd, Haile thou glory of the Lapithite! O Caeneus, late a man at armes; but now An vnmatcht fowle! His witnesse all allow. Griefe whets our fury; brooking ill, that one By such a multitude should be o're-throwne: And Sorrow so long executes the fight, Till half were slaine: halfe sau'd by speed, and night. Tlepelemus could not his tongue debarre: Since in the repetition of that warre, Of Hercules he had no mention made. Old man, how can you so forget (he said) Akides praise? my father oft would tell, How by his hand the Cloud-borne Centaures sell. To this sad Nestor answer'd: why should you Compell me to remember, and renue My sorrow lost in time? or iterate Your fathers guilt; together with my hate? His acts transcend beleefe; his high repute Fills all the world: which would I could refute. But not Polydas Deiphob, Nor valiant Hector, are extol'd by vs. For who commends hisfoe? Messn's walls He raz'd: faire Elis, Pylus, in their falls
Detest his fury; Cities which his hate Had not deseru'd: with them, did ruinate Our House with sword and fire. Not now to tell Of others, who by his sterne out-rage fell; 'Twice six-faire fam'd Neleîdae were wee; Twice six Alsides slew, excepting mee. Conquest is common: but, ô more than strange Was Periclymen's slaughter! Who could change And rechange to all figures. Such a grace Great Neptune gaue; the root of Neleus race. He, forc't to vary formes, at length vnfolds Ioues well-lou'd Fowle, who in her tallons holds Impetuous thunder; and His visage teares Both with his crooked beake, and armed seares. At him his bow, too sure, Alcides drew, As towring in the loftie clouds he flew, And strucke his side-ioyn'd wing. The wound was slight; But sunder'd nerues could not sustaine his flight. When tumbling downe, his weight the arrow smote In at his side, and thrust it through his throat. Now braue Commander of the Rhodian Fleet; Think'st thou Alcides praise a subiect meer For my discourse? Alone with silence wee Reuenge our slaughtered brothers; and loue thee. When Nestor with mellifluous eloquence Had thus much vtter'd; they with speech dispence, And liberall Bacchus quaffe: then all arose; And giue the rest of night to soft repose. The God, whose Trident calmes the Ocean, For strangled Cyenus, turn'd into a Swan, Grieues with paternall griefe, Achilles fate He prosecutes with more than ciuill hate.
Ten yeeres now well-nigh laps'd in horrid fights, Thus vnshorne Smintheus his sterne rage excites. Of all our brothers sonnes to vs most deare; Whose hands, with ours, Troys walls in vaine did reare: O si hist thou not to see the Asian towres So neere their fall? their owne, and aiding powres By millions slaine? the last of all their ioy Dead Hector drag'd about his fathers Troy? Yet dire Achilles, who our labour giues To vtter spoile, then Warre more cruell, liues. Came he within my reach, he then should trie The vengeance of my Trident: but since I Cannot approach t'incounter with my foe; Let him thy close and mortall arrows know. Delius assents: his vnkles wrath intends; With it, his owne; and in a cloud descends To th'Illian hoast: amid the battle seekes For Paris, shooting at vn-noted Greekes. Then shew'd a God, and said: Why dost thou lose Thy shafts so basely? nobler objects chose; If thou of thine at least hast any care: Thy brethrens deaths reuenge on Peleus heire. Then shew'd him sterne Achilles, as he slew The Tro an troopes: and, while his bow he drew, Directs the deadly shaft. This only might Old Priam, after Hectors death, delight. Him, who with conquests cloy'd the iawes of death, A faint adulterer depriues of breath. If by th'esseminate to be o're-throwne; Then should the Pollax of the Amzon Haue forc't thy fate. The Phrygian feare; the fame, And strong protection of the Gaecian Name,
Inuincible Aeacides now burnes: The God, who arm'd, his bones to ashes turnes. And of that great Achilles scarce remaines So much as now a little Vrne containes. Yet still he liues; his glory lightens forth, And fills the world: this answers his full worth. This, ô diuine Pelides, soares as high As thy great spirit; and shall neuer die. And euen his armes, to instance whose they were; Procure a warre. Armes for his armes they beare. Atax Oileus, Diomedes, nor The lesse Atrides, not in age and war The Greater: no nor any; but the Son Of old Latries, and bold Telamon, Durst hope for such a prize. Tantalides, To shun the burden, and the hate of these, The Princes bids to sit before his tent: And puts the strife on their arbitrement.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The Thirteenth Booke: THE ARGVMENT. THose purple flowres which Aiax  display, His bloud produce. Inraged Heub Becomes a Bitch. From Memnons cinders rise Selfe slaughtring Fowle: a yeerely sacrifice. What euer Anius daughters handle, prous Corne, wine, or oyle▪ themselues transform'd to Domes. From honour'd virgins ashes Sonnes ascend. Th' Ambracian Iudge a Stone. Light wings defend Mlossus royall issue. Scylla growes A horrid Monster. Murder'd Acis flowes With speedie streames. The kinde Nercides For Glaucus sue: ibro'd in sacred Sca. THe great Chiefes sate; the Souldiers crowne the field: Vp rose the Master of the seuen-fold Shield. With wrath impatient, his sterne eyes suruay. Sigaeum, and the Nauie which there lay. Then holding vp his hands, Ô Ioue, he said; Before the Fleet must we our title plead? And is Vlysses my Competitor? Whose flightfull feare did Hector's flames abhor.
Thse, I, sustain'd; from those this Nauie treed. Transfer to contend in word than deed, I cannot talke, nor can he fight: as sarre His tongue excells, as I exceed in warre. Nor need I to rehearse what you haue seene In act, renowned Greekes: what his hath beene er Ithacus declare; perform'd by slight, Without a witnesse, only knowne to Night. Great is th' affected prize, I must confesse: But such a Riuall makes the Value lesse. For me 'tis no ambition to obtaine, How eue great, what he could hope to gaine. Who of this stfe now wins the praise; that he, When vanquished, may boast he strove with me. But were my valour question'd, I might on My birth insist, begot by Telamon, Who vnder Hercules Troy's bulwarkes scal'd: And in Pagascan keele to Colchus sail'd. His father, Aeacus; the iudge of Soules, Where Slyphus his restesse torment roules. High Iupiter vpon a mortall Loue Got Aeacus: I Arax third from Ioue. Nor let this pedegree assist my clame, If geat Achilles ioyn'd not in the same. He was my brother, his I aske. Why thus Shouldst thou, thou sonne of damned Sisyphus, Alike in thef▪ and fraud, a stranger to Achille race, the right of his persue? Because I first assumed armes, deseiy'd By no detector, are these armes deny'd? Or rather for the last in field design'd; Who with fun'd lunacie the warre declin'd:
Till Palamed more politicke, and more Selfe-fatall, did his coward-guile explore, And drew him to auoided armes? Must he Now weare the best, who all eschew'd? and we Vnhonour'd, of hereditary right Depriu'd, in that we first appear'd in fight? And would to Ioue he had become truly mad; Or still so thought: nor this companion had, This tempter to foule actions, euer seene The Phrygian towres. The should'st not thou haue beene O Paeaus sonne, exposed by our crime To Lemnian rockes: where thou consum'st thy time In louely caues obscur'd with woods, the stones Preuok't to pitie with thy daily grones, And wishest him, what he deserues, thy paine: If there are Gods thou wishest not in vaine. Now our Confederate (a Prince of braue Command) to whom his shafts Alcides giue; Broken with paine and famine, doth imploy Those arrowes, that import the fate of Troy, For food and clothing: yet he liues the while, In that remoued from Vlysses guile. And Palamed might wish t'haue beene so left: Then had he liu'd, or perisht vnbereft Of his deare fame. This, hellishly inclin'd, Beares his conuicted madnesse in his mind; And falsely him accus'd to haue betraid Th' Achaian hoast; confirming what he said By shewing summes of gold, which in his tent Himselfe had hid. Thus he by banishment Or death, our strength impaires; for this preferr'd: So fights, so is Vlysses to be fear'd.
Though faithfull Nestor he in eloquence, Surpasse, his leauing Nestor, no defence Of words can salue: who slow with tired Age And wounded Steeds, implor'd to his ingage Vlysses helpe; who left to oddes of foes His old acquaintance. This Tydides knowes For no forg'd crime; who vainly call'd, to stay His trembling friend, reuiling his dismay. The Gods with Istice view our humane deeds, Who would not late assist, assistance needs: And now to be forsaken by the law Himselfe prescrib'd. He cry'd; I came, and saw The coward quaking, pale, about to yeeld His ghost for scare. I interpos'd my shield; Bestd him as he lay; and from that strife Redeemed (my least of praise) his coward life. But if thou wilt contend, reioyne we there; Reuoke the foe, thy wounds, and vsuall feare; Behind my target sculke: then plead. This man, Who  with wounds; freed, as vnwounded, ran. Nw  came, and brought the Gods along; Rsla on all parts: not thou alone, the strong And best eslued thrinke: so great a dread He drew on all. Him, as he trumph led Through bloud and slaughter, with a mightie stone to cath: Him I sustain'd alone, When he to all o bold a challenge made; What  my lot you all deuoutly pray'd, No,  in vaine: If you inquire the summe O  ight, I was not ouer come. With vnege full weapons, flames, and loue, the men Of Troy uade our nauie: where was then
Your eloquent Vlysses? I, euen I A thousand ships preseru'd; whereon rely The hope of your returne. These armes for all Your Fleet afford. The meed more honour shall Receiue then giue: our glories iustly pease; These armes doe Aiax seeke, not Aiax these. Rhesus surprise, with ours let him compare; That poore Spie Dolon's, Hellenus despaire; The rapt Palladum: nothing done by day; He nothing worth, take Diomed away. If to such meane deserts these armes accrue; Diuide them: to Tydides most is due. Why would he these? who still vnarmed goes, Conceal'd; and cunningly intraps his foes? This radiant Caske that shines with burnisht gold; Will his deceit, and lurking steps vnfold. His necke can scarce Achilles helmet beare; Nor can his feeble arme imploy this speare: His shield, whose orbe the figured world adornes; A cowards arme, inur'd to theeuing, scornes. O foole, that thus thy owne vndoing seekes! If giuen thee by th'error of the Greekes, It will not make thee dreadfull to thy foe; But be th'occasion of thy ouerthrow, And flight, wherein thou only dost exceed, Clog'd with so huge a weight, will faile thy need. Besides, thy shield in battle rarely borne, Is yet entire: mine, all to hackt and torne With stormes of blowes, a new successor needs. What boots so many words? behold our deeds. These armes deliuer to the foes defence: And let him weare, that wins the prize from thence.
Here Aiax ends. The Souldier in the close A murmure rais'd; till Ithcus arose: Who hauing fixed on the earth a space His eyes, vnto the Princes rais'd his face; And now expected, spake vnto this sense; With all the grace of winning eloquence. Graecians; If heauen, with yours, had heard my prayre; So great a strife had found no doubtfull Heire: hadst kept thy armes, Achilles, and we thee. steine Fate, auerse to you and mee, Sueted an Excellence denies; With that appeares to weepe, and wipes his eyes) Who great Achilles with more right succeeds, Than he who gaue you great Achilles deeds? Let not his folly purchase you assent; Nor let my wit, in that so preualent For you, my losse incurre: nor hate incense, That for my self I arme my eloquence; (It I haue any) oft for you imploy'd. one the glory of his owne auoid. estors, druine originall, And deeds by vs not done, we ours mis-call. Yet in that Aiax vants himselfe to bee eat-grand hilde vnto Ioue; no lesse are wee. I  was my Site, Arcsius his; His Iupiter: in this defent there is None damn'd nor bannit. By the venter I inespring: in both a Deitie. No that more noble by the mothers side, Nor that my father had his hands vndide hers bloud, doe I inforce this claime: Weigh but our worths; and censure by the same
That Telamon and Peleus brethren were, In Aiax is no merit. Not the Neere In birth, but Great in act, deserue this grace. Or if proximity in bloud haue place, Peleus his father, Pyrrhus is his son: What right remaines for Aiax Telamon? To Phthia then, or Scyros carry these. Teucer is coozen to Aeacides As well as he; yet stirs not he herein: Or if he should, should he the honour win? Then since our actions must our sute aduance; Although my deeds surmount my vtterance, Their abstract yet in order to relate: Thetis, fore-knowing great Achilles fate, Disguis'd her sonne: so like a Virgin drest, That all mistooke, and Aiax with the rest. When, Armes, with womens trifles, that might blinde Suspect, I brought to tempt a manly minde. Yet was the Heros Virgin-like araid; Who taking vp the Speare and Shield, I said: O Goddesse-borne, for thee the fate of Troy Her fall reserues: Why doubts thou to destroy Great Pergamus? then made him d'off those weeds: And sent the mighty vnto mighty deeds. His acts are therefore ours. We Telephus Foild with our lance; the suppliant cur'd by vs. Strong Thobes we sackt: sackt Lesbos vs renounes. Chrysa and Tenedos (Apollo's townes) With Cilla; Sea-girt Syros, in their falls Our fame aduance: we raz'd Lyrnessu's walls. To passe the rest; I gaue, who could subdue The braue Priatnides: I Hector slue.
For th'armes that found Achilles, these I craue: He dead, I aske but what, aliue, I gaue. The griefe of one, with all the Greekes preuailes: Eubotan Aulis held a thousand sailes. The long-expected winds opposed stand, Or sleepe in calmes. When cruell Fates command Afflicted Agamemnon to asswage With Ighigenia's death, Diana's rage. But he dissents; the Gods themselues reproues: And in a king a fathers passion moues. His a noble disposition ne're the lesse I to the publike won: and must confesse (Atrdes, pardon;) we did prosecute Before a partiall Iudge a hatefull sute. Yet him his brother, scepter, publike good Perswade to purchase endlesse praise with blood. Then went I to the mother for her child: Now not to be exhorted, but beguild. Had Aax thither gone, our flagging sailes Not yet had swel'd with still-expected gales. Then on a bold embassage I was sent To haughty Troy: to th'Ilian Court I went, Ye fll of men: and fearelesse, vg'd at large The common cause committed to my charge. Falle Paris I accuse: rapt Helena -demand, with all they bore away. Old paam and Antenor iust appeare. Paris, with his brethren, and who were His ollowers in that stealth, from wicked blowes . This Meneläus Knowes. dangers wherein you and I ▪ But what my policie
And force perform'd, behoouefull to this State, In that long warre, too long is to relate. The first great battle fought, our weary foes Long liue immu'd: nor durst their powers expose. Nine yeeres expir'd, warres all the fields affright. Meane-while what didst thou, only fit to fight? What vse of thee? Inquire my actions; I The foe intrap, our trenches fortifie, Incouraging the weay Souldier To brooke the tediousnesse of linging warre With faire expectance: teach them wayes to feed, And arts to fight. Imploy'd at euery need. The king del ded in his sleepe by Ioue, Bids vs the care of future warre remoue. The author was his strong apologie. Aax should haue with-stood; the sacke of Troy He should haue vrg'd; and, what hee could, haue fought. Why was the nobler siege by him vnsought? Why arm'd he not? a speech he might haue made, That would the wauering multitude haue staid: To hm not difficult, who lookes so high, And speakes so big. What, if himselfe did flie? I saw, and sham'd to see thee turne thy backe Io hose thy sailes vnto thy honours wracke. What doe you? ô what madnesse, mates, said I, Prouokes you to abandon yeelding Troy? Ten yeeres nigh spent, what will you beare away But infamie? I this, and more did say; Wherein my sorrow made me eloquent: And from the flying Fleet turn'd their consent. The King a Councell calls; distusts afford No sound aduice: durst Aax speake a word?
When base Thersites durst the King prouoke With bitter words: Who felt my seepters stroke. Their doubts with hope of conquest I Inspire: And set their fainting courages on fire. Since when, what he hath nobly done, by right: To me belongs, that thus reuok't his flight. Besides, what one of all the wiser Greekes Commends thee; or thy conuersation seekes? Tyd des vs approues, builds on our will; Is confident in his Vlysses still. Among a million 'tis a grace for me To be his consort; and the choise so free. The danger of the foe, and night despis'd; , then a counter-sout, surpris'd: Nor slue him, till I forc't his bosome to; Informed what perfidious Troy would doe. All knowne, and nothing left to be inquir'd; I now with praise enough might haue retir'd. Yet nt so satisfide, I forward went; And Rsus slue, with his, in his owne Tent. When like a Victor, on his Chariot I Returnd in triumph. Can you then denie Achelles armes, whose horses were assign'd For one nights hazard? Aiax is more kind. What should I of Sar pedons forces tell, Oe-thrwne by vs? by vs caranes fell, , Alastor, Chromius, Alander, Prytanis, Nee nonus, Haliu, stout , bold Pheridamas, With Charpe: unmon's fatall Passe by my lane: and many more in view Of hstile , of meaner ranke, I slue.
And I, ô Country-men, haue honour'd wounds, Faire in their scarres: nor trust to empty sounds; Behold (said he, with that his bosome bares) This brest, still exercis'd in your affaires. No drop of blod in all these lengthfull warres For Greece hath Aiax shed: shew he his scarres. What boots it, though his deeds his brags approue; That for our fleet he fought with Troy and Ioue? I grant he did so: nor will we detract With hated enuy from a noble act. So he ingrosse not to himselfe alone A common praise, but render vs our owne. Actorides (for great Achilles held) Troy's flames and Fautor from our ships repeld. He thinkes, he onely able, could alone Incounter Hectors opposition: The King, his brother, and my selfe forgot Of nine the last, and but prefer'd by lot. But what euent, ô great in valour, crown'd Your doughty combat? Hector had no wound. Woe's me! With what a tide of griefe I Call That time to mind; wherein the Graecian Wall, Achilles fell! teares, feares, nor sorrow staid My forward zeale; his raised corps I laid Vpon these shoulders: these, euen these did eare Him and his armes; which now I hope to weare. Our strength sufficient is for such a weight: Our knowledge can your bounty explicate. Was Thetis so ambitious for her Son; That such a brainlesse Souldier should put on This heauenly gift, of so diuine a frame? Whose figured shield his ignorance would shame.
Wherein, the Ocean; Earth with cities crown'd, Skies with their starres; cold Arctos neuer drown'd, Sword-git Orion, sad Pleiades; The raine kids. He seekes, yet knowes not, these Vpbraids he me, that I this warre did shun, And time deferd till others had begun? Nor can consider how he wounds in me Achilles honour. If a crime it be To counterfeit; we ioyne in that defame: If, in that tardy; I before him came. Me, my kind wife; his mother him with-drew: Out flowe to them we gaue; the fruit to you. No feare I, should I quit my owne defence, To suer with so cleere an Excellence. Not Aax wit reueal'd Vlysses; yet Reueal'd Achilles was Vlysses wit. Lest I should wonder, why hs foolish tongue Should slander me, he you vpbraids with wrong. Was guiltlese Palamed accus'd by me To my desame? nor must his sentence be To you reprochfull? neither Nauplius Seed Could iustifie so euident a deed: No did your ares informe your faculties; The he of treason laid before your eies. Pntius in Levinos left, was none Of my offence; doe you defend your owne: You to his stay consented. Yet, howee, I must confesse I aduiz'd him to forbeare The auels o long warre: and to appease The anguish his bitter wound with ease. He did▪ he liues. Thaduice was good: successe As fortunate approues it or nolesse.
Since Fate designes him for the fall of Troy: Spare me, and Aiax industry imploy. His tongue the mad with wrath and anguish will Appease: hee'l fetch him with some reach of skill. First Simois shall retire, Id want a shade, Achaia promise to the Troians aide; E're my endeuours in your seruice faile, And sottish Aiax, with his wit, preuaile. And, Philcttes, though obdure thou be, Incenst against the King, these Lords, and me; Though curses lighten from thy lips, though still Thou coue my accesse, my bloud to spill; Yet le attempt thee: and will bring thee backe; That neither may his ager wishes lacke. Thy shafts I must possesse (so Fauour Fate) As I possest the Dardan Prophet late; As I vnknit the Troian destinie, And doubtfull answer of the Gods; as I, Amid a world of foes, the fatall Signe Of Phrygian Pallas rauisht from her shrine. Compare with me will Aiax? this vntane, Troy's hopt-for expugnation had beene vaine. Where was strong Aiax? Where the glorious boast Of that great Souldier? Why in terror lost? How durst Vlysses trust himselfe to night, Passe through the watch, their threatning weapons slight? The walls not onely, but the highest towre Of Ilium scale: and from her Fane the Powre That beares their fate inforce: and with this prey, Repasse the dangers of that horrid way? Which had not  atchieued, Yet in Field Had Aiax vainly borne his seuen-fold Shield.
That night Troy fell before Lartes son: Won, when I made it that it might be won. Forbeare to mutter; nor with nodding gaze On Diomed: he shares in equall praise. Nor for our Nauy didst thou fight alone: Thou by n host assisted, I by one. He knew that wisdome valour should command; That this belong'd not to a strenuous hand: Else he himselfe had ioyn'd in our debate; Or th'other Aiax, fa more moderate; Brae Thoa, fierce Eurypylus; with these Idomenus and Merines Of Creet; or  For they are As strong, nor second vnto thee in warre▪ Yet yeeld to ui aduice. Thou, fit for fight, Dost need my reason to direct thy might. Thy valour wants fore-cast, my studious care Respects the future: thou canst sight thy share; The time and place must be by vs assign'd▪ Thou only strong in body; I m mind. As skilull Plots those surpasse, who row; As wise Commanders, common souldiers; so I thee excell. Our vertue is lesse great In brawne than braine: this vigorously compleat. Then ô remunerate my vigilance: And, nces, for so many yeeres expence In anxious ares, this dignity extend To y deserts. Our worke is at an end: With-standing fates remou'd: I, in that I Haue made it fesable, haue taken Troy. Now by our mutuall hopes, Troy's ouerthrow, Those Gods which late I rauisht from the foe;
If ought remaine to be discreetly done, That courage craues, through danger to be won; If in the Ilian destiny there be A knot yet to vnkit; remember me. Or if you can forget; these Armes resigne To this: and shewes Minerua's fatall Signe. The Chiefes were mou'd. Here words approu'd their charmes: The Eloquent the Valiant now disarmes. He who alone, Ioue, Hector, sword and fie So oft sustain'd; yeelds to one brunt of ire. Th'vnconquered, sorrow conquers. Then his blade In haste vnsheaths: Sure thou art mine, he said; Or seekes Vlysses this? this shall conclude All sense of wrong. And thee, so oft imbrude In Phrygian bloud, thy Lord's must now imbrue: That none but Aiax, Aiax may subdue. This said; his brest, till then with wounds vngor'd, The deadly sword, where it could enter, bor'd. Nor could his strength the fixed steele reuell; Expeld by gushing gore. The bloud that fell, A purple flowre ingendred on the ground: Created first by Hyacinthus wound. The tender leaues indifferent letters paint; Both of His name, and of the Gods complaint. The Conqueror, now hoising sailes, doth stand For chaste Hypsiphile's, and Thoas land; (Defam'd by womens vengefull violence) To fetch the shafts of Hercules from thence. These, with their owner, to the compe conuaid, On that long warre a finall hand they laid. Now Troy and Priamus together fall. Th'vnhappy wife of Priam after all,
Her humane figure lost: whoe rauing Sprite And vncouth howlings forraine fields affright. The flames of Ilium stretch their hungry fire To narrow Hellespont; nor there expire. That little bloud which Priams age could shed, Ioues atar drinkes. By her anointed head Apollos Priest they drag, her hands in vaine To heauen vpheld. The Victor Greekes constraine The Dardan Dames; a deadly-hating prey: Who imbrae their country Gods; and while they may, Behold their burning Fanes. Die violence Astana threw from that towre; from whence He had seene his father, by his mother showne, Fight for his Kingdomes safety, and his owne. North-winds to seas inuite, and prosperous gales Sing in their shrouds: they haste to trim their sailes. The Troian Ladies cry, Deare soile farewell! We are hal'd to loth'd captiuitie! thenfell On kissed earth: and leaue with much delay, Their countries smoking ruines. Hecuba Her sad departure to the last deferres: Now found among her childrens sepulchers, (A sight of uth!) spread on their tombes: there wailes; Their cold bones kissing: whom Vlysses hales From that sad comfort. Some of Hectors dust, Vp snatcht, deliuers to her bosomes trust. Vpon his tombe she left her horie haires (A poe oblation!) mingled with her teares. Opps'd to Ilium's ruines lyes a land, Tilld by the Bistones, in the Command Of Polmnstor▪ Danger to puent, To him his father Polydorus sent.
And wisely; had he not withall consign'd A masse of gold, to tempt his greedy mind. His foster-child, when lingring Ilium drew To her last date, the Thracian Tyrant slew. Whom, as if he his murder with the slaine Could cast away, he casts into the maine. Now rod Atrides at the Thracian shore; Till winds forbore to storme, and seas to rore. When from they yawning earth Achilles rose; Like mightie as in life: whose lookes discose As sterne a wrath, as when his lawlesse blade Was on Atrides drawne; and frowning, said: You Greekes, of me vnmindfull; can you thus From hence depart? shall our deserts with vs Lodge in obliuion? Proue not so ingrate. With slaine Polixena regratulate Our Sepulcher: tis she I couet most: A sacrifice, that will appease our Ghost. Then vanisht. They th'vngentle Sprite obaid; And from her Mothers bosome drew the Maid, (High-sould, vnhappy, more then feminine,) To his resembled tombe; with lie to signe Infernall Dues. Of her high birth she thought: And now vnto the bloudy altar brought; Seeing the sacrifice for her prepar'd, And the Neoptolemus vpon her star'd With sword aduanc't; she said, vntoucht with dred: Our generous bloud to your intentions shed: Dispatch; I am ready; in my throat or brest Your weapon sheath. (With that, with-drew her vest▪ Polyxena doth seruitude despise: And yet no God affects such sacrifice.
I onely wish my death might be vnknowne To my afflicted mother. She alone Disturbs the ioyes of death: though Priams wife My death should lesse bewaile, then her owne life. Nor let the touch of man pollute a maid: That my free soule may to the Stygian shade Vntainted passe. If this be iust, remoue Your hand: I shall more acceptable proue Vnto that God or Ghost, what ere he bee To whom I am offer'd, if my bloud be free. And if a dying tongue preuaile at all; I, late great Priams daughter, now a thrall, Sollicit that my corps may not be sold; But giuen my mother: nor exchange for gold Sad rites of sepulture. In former yeares Sh' had gold to giue, now poore, accept her teares. This hauing said; for her that would not weepe, The people wept: the Priest could hardly keepe His eyes from teares; Yet did what he abhord; And in her proffered bosome thrust his sword. On doubling knees she sinkes, with silent breath; And cheerefully incounters smild-on Death. Then when she fell, she had a care to hide What should be hid; and chastly-decent dide. Her corpes was carried by the Troian dames: Who in a funerall long repeat the names Of Pris mourn'd-for Seed; what streames of gore One House had spent. Thee, Virgin, they deplore: And thee, O royall Wife, intitled late The mother Queene, and glory of that State: A Captiue now, cast by a scorned lot On victor Ithachas; refusd, if not
For bearing Hector. Hector, so renoun'd, A master hardly for his mother found. She hug's the corps that such a spirit kept. Who for her country, children, husband, wept o oft; now weepes for her: her lips comprest, Her wounds hs with her teares. Then beats her brest: Her hoarie haire besmear'd with clotted gore, And bosome torne, this spake she; and much more. Poore daughter, our last sorrow: (what is left For Fortunes spight!) by bloudy death bereft. On thee I see my wounds. That none of mine May woundlesse die, these wounds thy bosome signe. In that a woman, thee I held secur'd: But thou, a woman, suffer'st by the sword. This Bane of Troy, our Depriuation, who So many of thy princely brothers slue; Hath slaine thee also. When his life was laid y Paris and Apollo's shafts, I said, Now is Achilles to be fear'd no more. Now dead, to vs as dreadfull as before. Against my race his ashes raues: his tombe Presents a foe. O my vnhappy wombe! T'his siny fruitfull! Ruin'd Troy descends; And sad successe the publike sorrow ends: Yet they are ended. lium alone o vs remaines: our sorrowes freshly grone: erst so potent and so fortunate husbands, sons, and height of humane State; exile now am hal'd: despis'd, and torne my owne sepulchers: from Phrygia borne serue Penelope; that while I sew spin at her commandement, she may shew
Her slaue to Ithacensian dames, and say, Loe Hectors mother, Priam's Hecuba. My sorrowes sole reliefe, so many lost, Is offered to appease an hostile Ghost. Infernall sacrifices to the dead, Euen to my foe, my cursed wombe hath bred. Hard heart, why break'st thou not? What hopes ingage Thy expectation? Mischienous Old-age, For what reseru'st thou me? You cruell Powres, Why lengthen you a poore old womans howres To see new funerals? O Priam, I May call thee happy, after ruin'd Troy. Happy in death. Thou seest not this sad fate: Thou lost thy life together with thy state. Rich funerals attend thee, royall Maid: And by thy Ancestors thou shalt be laid. O no! thy mothers teares, a heape of sand, Must now content thee in a forreine land. All, all is lost! Yet liues a little Boy My last, and youngest ioy, when I could ioy; For whom I condescend to lieu a space; Here foster'd by the courteous King of Thrace. Meane while why stay we with the cleansing floud To wash these wounds, and lookes besmear'd with bloud? Then with an aged pace, her horie haires All tne and scattred, to the Sea repaires. And while the wretched said; You Troades, A pitcher being to draw the brinish Seas: She saw th' eiected corps of Polydore Stucke full of wounds vpon the beachie shore. The Ladies sheeke; the dumbe with sorrow stood: Internall griefe her voice, her teares, her blood,
At once deuout'd. And now, as if intranc't Stares on the earth; sometimes to Heauen aduanc't Her scouling browes: oft on his visage gaz'd; But oftner on his wounds. By anger rais'd, Arm'd, and instructed; all on vengeance bent, Still Queene-like, destinates his punishment. And as a Lyonesse, rob'd of her young, Persues the vnseene-hunters steps: so stung With fury, when her sorrow with her rage, Had ioyn'd their powers; vnmindfull of her age, But not of former greatnesse, ran with speed To Polymnestor, author of this deed. And crauing conference, the Tyrant told How she would shew him summes of hidden gold To giue her Polydor. This held for true; He thusty of his prey, with her with-drew. And flattering her thus craftily begun: Delay not, Hecuba, t'inrich thy son: By all the Gods we iustly will restore What thou shalt giue, and what thou gau'st before. She with a truculent aspect beheld The falsely swearing King: with anger swel'd. Then calls the captiue dames, vpon him flyes; Who hides her fingers in his periur'd eyes, Extracts his eye-balls: more then vsuall strong With thirsty vengeance and the sense of wrong, Her hand drownes in his skull; the roots vp-tore Of this lost sight, imbrued with guilty gore. The men of Thrace incensed for their King, Weapons and stones at Hecuba now fling. She, gnarling, bites the followed flints: her chaps, For speech extended, barke. Of whose mis-hap
That place is nam'd. She, mindfull of her old Mis-fortunes, in Sithonian deserts howld. Kinde Troians, Grecian foes, both loue and hate; Yea, all the Gods commiserate her fate. So all, as Iuno did to this descend; That Hecuba deseru'd not such an end. Auroa had no leasure to lament (Although those armes she fauour'd) the euent Of Troy or Hecuba. Domesticall And nearer griefe, affilicts her for the fall Of Memnon who Achies lance imbru'd In Phrygian fields. This as the Goddesse view'd, The rosie die, that deckt the Mornes vp-rise Grew forth with pale, and clouds immur'd the skies. Nor could indure to see his body laid On funerall flames: but with her haire displaid, As in that season, to high Io repaires; And kneeling, thus with teares, vnfolds her cares. To all inferior, whom the skie sustaines (For mortals rarely honour me with Fanes) A Goddesse yet, I come: not to desire Shines, Festiuals, nor Altars fraught with fire; Yet should you weigh what I, a woman doe, That Night confine, and sacred Day renue, I ment such: such sute not now our state; Nor such desires infect the desolate. Of Memnon rob'd who glorious armes in vaine Ba to his vnkle, by Aclles slaine In slow of youth (so would you Gods) come I. O chiefe of powers, a mothers sorrow, by Some honour giuen him, lessen: death with fame Recomot Ioue assents. When greedy flame
Deuour'd the funerall Pile; and curling fumes Day ouer-cast: as when bright Sol assumes From streames thicke vapours, nor is seene below. The flying, dying sparkles ioyntly grow Into one body. Colour, forme, life, spring To it from fire, which leuity doth wing. First like a Fowle, forth-with a Fowle indeed: Innumerable sisters of that breed Together whiske their feathers. Thrice they round The funerall Pile; thrice raise a mournfull sound. In two battalions then diuide their flight; And like two strenuous nations fiercely fight: Their opposites with beake and tallons rend; Cuffe with their wings; in sacrifice descend. Now dying on the ashes of the dead: Remembring they were of the valiant bred. These new-sprung Fowle, men of their author call Memnonides No sooner Sol through all The Signes returnes; but they reioyne againe In ciuill warre, and dye vpon the slame. While others therefore doe commiserate Pooe barking Hecuba in her chang'd fate: Aurora her owne griefe intends; renewes Her pious teares, which fall on earth in dewes. Yet fates resist, that all the hopes of Troy Should perish with her towres. The Son and Ioy Of Cythere, with his houshold Gods, And aged Sire, his pious shoulders lodes. Of so great wealth he onely chose that prize, And his Ascanius: from Auandas flies By seas, and shuns the wicked Thracian shore, Defil'd with bloud of murdered Polyde:
With prosperous winds arriuing with his traine At Phoebus towne, where Anius then did raigne, Apollo's holy Priest; who, with the rest, Into the Temple leads his honour'd Guest: The City, with the sacred places, showes; And ees held by Latona in her throwes. Inense on flames, and wine on incense powr'd; Entrales of slaughtered beeues by fire deuour'd; His Guests conducts to Court: on carpet spred, With Ceres and Lyaeus bounty fed. When thus Anchses: ô to Phoebus deare! I am deceiu'd; or, when I first was here, Foure daughters and a son thy solace crown'd. He shooke his head, with sacred fillets bound; And sighing said: ô most renoun'd of men, I was the father of fiue children then: Whom now (such is the change of things!) you see Halfe childlesse: for my absent sonne to mee I of small comfort; who, my Vice-roy, raignes Isea-girt Andros, which his name retaines. Him, Delius with prohetick skill inspir'd. A gift past credit, still to be admir'd, My daughters Bachas gaue; aboue their sute That all they toucht should presently transmute To wine, to come, and to Minerua's oile. Rich in the vse. To purchase such a spoile, Great Troy's Depopulator, Atreus Heire, (Lest you should thinke we haue not borne a share In your mis-haps) with axmed violence Inforc't them from me: charged to dispence That heauenly gift vnto th' Argolian Hoft. They scape by flight: two to Euboea crost;
Two fled to Andros: these the Souldier Persude, and threaten (if vnrender'd) warre. Feare nature now subdude: hid sisters were By him resign'd; forgiue a brothers feare. Not Hector nor Aeneas then were by To guard his towne, who so long guarded Troy. About to binde their captiue armes in bands; Reating to heauen their yet vnchained hands, O father Bacchus helpe! While thus they prai'd, The Author of that gift presents his aid. (If such a losse may be accounted so) Yet how they lost their shapes I could not know; Not yet can tell. It selfe the squell proues; Conuerted to thy Wiues white-feather'd Doues. With such discourse they entertaine the feast: That to'ne away, dispose themselues to rest. With day they rose; the Oracle exquie: Who bids them to their ancient Nurse retire, And kinred  shores. With them the King conuents, And their departure with rich gifts presents. A septer to Anchises giues: a braue Rich cloke, a quiuer t'Ascanius gaue: A figur'd goblet on Aeneas prest; By Theban Theses sent him, once his Guest. Mylcan Alcon made what Therses sent; And caru'd thereon this ample argument. A City with seuen gates of equall grace; These painly character the name and place. Before it, exequies, tombs, piles, bright fires. Dames with spred haire, bare brests, and torne atres, Decipher mourning: Nymphs appeare to weepe For their dry Springs: sap-fearing cankers creepe
On naked trees: Goats licke the foodlesse earth. In midst of Thebs, Orion's female birth Vndnted stand: This proffers to the sword Her manly brest; her hands her death afford, For common safety. All the people mourne; And with due funerals their bodies burne. Yt lest the world should such a linage lose, Two youths out of their virgin ashes rose. Thee Ophans wandring Fame Coronae calls: Who celebrate them mothers funerals. The antke brasse with fulgent figures shin'd: Whose bim neat wreaths of guilt Acamhus bind. Nor were the Troian gifts of lesse expence: Who gaue a Censor for sweet frankincense, An ample Chalice of a curious mold; With these a crowne, that shone with gemmes and gold. In that the Turans sprung from Teuers blood, They saile to Creet: but Ioue their stay with-stood. I auing those hundred Cities, now they stand For wisht Ausonia's destinated strand. Tost by rough Winter and the wrath of seas, They anchor at the faith losse Strophdes. Thence frighted by Aello; saile away By steepe Dulichium, stony Ithaca, Samus high Neritus clasp'd by the Maine; All subect to the slye Vlysses raigne. Then  Ambracia touch, the strife and grudge Of angr Gods; the image of the Iudge Behold, them conuerted into stone: Now to Aiacan Apollo knowne. Then the odoncan vocall Oke they view; Chaonia,  Molssus children flew
With aidfull feathers from the impious flame; Next to Phaeacia, rich in hort-yards, came; Then to Epirus: at Buthrotos staid, Whose scepter now the Phrygian Prophet swaid; And see resembled Troy. Fore-told of all By Priam's Helenus, that would befall, They reach Sicania. This three tongues extends Into circumfluent Seas. Pachynus bends To showrie Auster; flowrie Zphyr blowes On Lilybaeums browes; Pelorus showes His Cliffs to Boreas, and the Sea expel'd Arcturus. Vnder this their course they held With stretching ores; and fauour'd by the tide, That night in Zncle's crooked harbour ride. The right-side dangerous Sylla, turbulent Charybdis keepes the left; on ruine bent. She belches swallowed ships from her profound: Her sable wombe, dogs euer rau'ning, round; Yet beares a Virgins face: if all be true That Poets sing, she was a Virgin too. By many sought, as many she despis'd: To Nymphs of seas, of sea-nymphs highly priz'd, She beares her vizet; and to them discouers The history of her deluded louers. To whom thus Galatea, sighing, said; While Scylla comb'd her haire. You, louely Maid, Are lou'd of generous-minded men, whom you With safety may refuse, as now you doe. But I, great Nereus and blue Doris Seed, Great in so many sisters of that breed; By shunning of the Cyclops loue prouok't A sad reuenge. Here teares her vtterance chok't.
These cleansed by the marble-finger'd maid; Who, hauing comforted the Goddesse, said: Relate,  most ador'd, nor from me keepe The wretched cause that makes a Goddesse weepe; For I am faithfull. Nereis consents, And thus her griefe to Cratis daughter vents. The Nymph Siwethis bore a louely Boy To Faunus, Acis cal'd; to them a ioy; To  a greater. For the sweetly-Faire To me an innocent affection bare. His blooming youth twice told eight Natals crowne, And signe his cheekes with scarce appearing downe. As I the gentle boy, so Polypheme My loue persu'd; vnlike, a like extreme. Whether my loue to Acis, or my hate To him were more, I hardly can relate. Both infinite! ô Venas, what a powre Hath thy command! He still austere and sowre, A terror to the woods, from whom no guest With life escapes, accustomed to feast On humane flesh; who all the Gods aboue, With them Olympus scorn'd; now stoops to loue. Forgetfull of his flocks and caues, a fire Feeds in his brest, conuerts into desire. His feature now intends, now bends his care To please: with rakes he combes his stubborne haire▪ His bristles barbes with seithes: and by the brook's Vnsolid mirror calmes his dreadfull lookes: His thi of bloud, and loue of slaughter cease; Lesse cruell now: ships come and goe in peace. When Teus came from Sicilian Seas, Augurious clemus Euryides,
And said to Polypheme, thy browes large sight Shall by Vlysses be depriu'd of light. O foole, he laughing said, thou tell'st a lye; A female hath already stolne that eye; Thus flouts the Prophets true prediction: And with extended paces stalks vpon The burdned shore; or weary, from the waue- Bet beach retireth to his gloomy caue, A promontory thrusts into the maine; Whose cliffie sides the breaking Seas restraine: The Cyclop this ascends: whose fleecy flocke Vnforced follow. Seated on a rocke; His staffe, a well-growne Pine, before him cast, Sufficient for a yard-supporting mast; He blowes his hundred reeds: whose squeaking fils The far-resounding Seas, and ecchoing hils. Hid in a hollow rocke, and laid along By Acis side, I heard him sing this song. O Galatea, more than lilly-white, More fresh than flowrie meads, than glasse more bright, Higher than Alder-trees, than kids more blithe, Smoother than shels whereon the surges driue, More wisht than winters Sun, or Summers aire, More sweet than grapes, than apples far more rare, Cleerer than Ice, more seemly than tall Planes, Softer than tender curds, or downe of Swans, More faire, if fixt, than Gardens by the fall Of springs inchac't. Though thus, thou art withall More fierce than saluage bulls, who know no yoke, Then waues more giddy, harder than the oke, Than vines or willow twigs more easly bent, More stiffe than rocks, than streames more violent,
Prouder than Peacocks prais'd, more rash than fire, Than Beares more cruell, shal per than the brier, Deafer than Seas, more fell than td-on Snake; And, if I could, what I would from thee take, More speedy than the Hound-persued Hind, Or chased clouds, or than the flying wind. If knowne to thee, thou wouldst thy flight repent; Curse thy delay, and labour my content. For I haue Caues within the liuing stone; To Summers heat, and Winters cold vnknowne: Trees charg'd with Apples, spreading Vines that hold A purple grape, and grapes resembling gold. For thee I these preerue, affected Maid. Thou Straw-berries shalt gather in the shade, Autumnall cornels, plummes with azure rin'd, And wax-like yellow, of a generous kind; Nor shalt thou Ches-nuts want, if mine thou bee, Nor scalded wildings: seru'd by euery tree. These flocks are ours: in vallies many stray, Woods many shade, at home as many stay. N can I, should you aske, their number tell: Who number theirs, are poore. How these excell, Beleeue not me, but credit your owne eyes: See how their Vdders part their stradling thighes. Im my sheep-coats haue new-weaned lambs; And fsking kids late taken from their dams. New milke, fresh curds and creame, with cheese well prest, Are neuer wanting for thy pallats feast▪ Nor will we gifts for thy delight prepare Of easie purchase, or what are not rare: Deere, red and tallow, Roes, light-footed hares, Nests, sead from cliffes, and doues produc't by paires.
A rugged Beres rough twins I found vpon The mountaines late, scarce from each other knowne, For thee to play with: finding these, I said, My Mistris you shall serue. Come louely Maid, Come Galatea, from the surges rise, Bright as the Morning; nor our gifts despise. I know my selfe; my image in the brooke I lately saw, and therein pleasure tooke. Behold how great! not Iupiter aboue (For much you talke I know not of what Ioue) Is larged siz'd: curles on my browes displai'd, Affright; and like a groue my shoulders shade. Nor let it your esteeme of me impaire, That all my body bristles with thicke haire. Trees without leaues, and horses without manes, Are sights vnseemely: grasse adornes the planes, Wooll sheepe, and feathers fowle. A manly face A beard becomes: the skin rough bristles grace. Amid my fore-head shines one onely light; Round, like a mighty Shield, and cleere of sight. The Sun all obiects sees beneath the skie: And yet behold, the Sun hath but one eye. Besides your Seas obey my fathers throne: I giue you him for yours. Doe you alone Vouchsafe me pity, and your suppliant heare: To you I onely bow; you onely feare. Heauen, Iupiter his lightning I despise: More dread the lightning  angry eyes. And yet your scorne my patience lesse would moue, Were all contemn'd. Why should you Acis loue, And slight the Cyclop? why to him more free? Although himselfe he please; and pleaseth thee,
The shore a meddow bounds; whereof one side Is fring'd with weeds, the other with the tide. On this nor horned cattle euer fed, Nor harmlesse sheep, nor gotes on mountaines bred. No bees from hence their thighes with honey lade; Those flowers no geniall garlands euer made: That grasse ne're cut with sithes. Of mortals I First thither came; my nets hung vp to dry. While I expos'd the fishes which I tooke; By their credulity hung on my hooke, Or masht in nets; (what would a lye behoue? Yet such it seemes) my prey began to moue, Display their sinnes, and swim as on the flood. While I neglect their stay, and wondering stood; They all by flight auoiding my command, Together left their owner and the land. Amaz'd, and doubting long; the cause I sought, If either God, or Herbe, this wonder wrought. What herbe, said I, hath such a powre? in haste An herbe I pul'd, and gaue it to my taste. No sooner swallowed, but my entrailes shooke: When forth with I another nature tooke. Nor could refraine; but said, O Earth, my last Farewell receiue! in seas my selfe I cast. The Sea-gods now vouchsafing my receit Into their sacred fellowship, intreat Both Tethys and Oceanus, that they Would take, what euer mortall was, away. Whom now they hallow, and with charmes nine times Repeated, purge me from my humane crimes: And ade me uch beneath a hundred streames. Forth-with the riuers rusht from sundry Realmes;
And sea-rais'd surges roule aboue my crowne. As soone as streames retire, and seas were downe, Another body, and another mind; Vnlike the former, they to me assign'd. Thus much of Wonder I remember well: Thence-forth insensible of what befell. Then first of all this sea-greene beard I saw, These dangling lockes, which through the deepe I draw; Broad shoulder-blades, blew armes of greater might; And thighes which in a fishes taile vnite. What boots this forme? my grace with Gods of seas? Or that a God? If thou affect not these? While this he spake, and would haue vttered more, Coy Scylla flies. He with impatience bore His loues repulse: whom strong desires transport To great Titanin Circes horrid Court.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The Fourteenth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. INchanted Scylla, hemb'd with horrid shapes, Becomes a Rocke, Cercopeans turn'd to Apes. Sibylla weares t'a Voice. Vlysses Transform'd to Swine, are re-transform'd agen Picus a Bird: his Followers. Beasts. Despaire. Resolues sad-singing Canens into Aire The Mates of Diomed vnreconcil'd Idalia turnes to Fowle. An Olius wild Rude Apulus deciphers. Turn us Aeneas ships: these Berecynthia turnes To Sea-nymphs; who Alcinôus Ship wish ioy Behold a Rocke. The Troian flames destroy Besieged Ardea; from whose ashes springs A meager Herne, that beares them on her wings. Aeneas, Deis'd. Vertumnus tries All shapes. Rhamnusia; for her , Congeales proud Anaxaiete to Stone. Cold Fountaines boele with heat. T' a heaenly thr▪ Mars Romulus assumes. Herfilia Like grace receiues: who ioynt in equall . NOw Glaucus, thron'd in tumid floods, had past High Aetna, on the iawes of Typh cast;
Cyclopian fields, where neuer oxen drew The furrowing plough, nor euer tillage knew; Crookt Zancle; Rhegim on the other side; The wrackfull Straights, whose double bounds diuide Sicilia from Asonia: forward driues Through spatious Tyrrhen Seas; at length arriues At hearbie Hills, Phoebean Circes seat, With sundry formes of monstrous beasts repleat. When, mutually saluting, Glaucus said: A God, ô Goddesse, pitie: on your aid Alone relies (if my desert might moue So deare a grace) th'asswagement of my Loue. For none than I, Titania, better knowes The powre of hearbs, that am transform'd by those. T' informe you better, in Italia Against Messenia, on a sandie Bay, I Scylla saw: it shames me to recite My slighted court ship answered by her flight. Doe thou, if charmes auaile, in charmes vntie Thy sacred tongue: or soueraigne Hearbs apply, If of more powre. Yet I affect no cure, Nor end of Loue: like heat let her indure. But Circe (none to such desires more prone, Or that the cause is in her selfe alone; Or stung by Venus angry influence, In that her Father publisht her offence) Reply'd: The willing with more ease persue; Who wish the same, whom equall flames subdue. For thou ô well desern'st to be persude: Giue hope, and, credit me, thou shalt be woo'd, Rest therefore of thy beautie confident: Loe, I, a Goddesse, radiant Sols descent,
In hearbs so potent, and no lesse in charmes; Proffer my selfe, and pleasures to thy armes. Scorne her that scornes thee; her, that seekes, persue: And in one deed reuenge thy selfe of two. Glaucus reply'd to her who sought him so: First shady groues shall on the billowes grow, And Sea-weeds to the mountaine tops remoue; Ere I (and Scylla liuing) change my loue. The Goddesse frets: who since she neither could Destroy a Deitie, nor, louing, would; On her, preferr'd before her, bends her ire: And high-incensed with repulst desire, Forth-with infectious drugs of dire effects Together grindes; and Hecat's charmes iniects: A sullen robe indues, the Court forsakes Through throngs of fawning beasts: her iourney takes To Rhegium opposite to Zancle's shore; And treads the troubled waues that lowdly rore. Running with vnwet feet on that Profound; As if sh'had trod vpon the solid ground. A little Bay, by Scylla haunted, lies Bent like a bow; sconst from the Seas and skies Distemper, when the high-pitcht Sunne inuades The World with hottest beames, and shortens shades. This with portenteous poisons she pollutes; Be sprinkled with the iuyce of wicked roots: In words darke and ambiguous, nine-times thrice Inchantments mutters with her magicke voice. Now Scylla came; and, wading to the waste, Beheld her hips with barking dogs imbrac't. Starrs backe: at first not thinking that they were Part of her selfe; but rates them, and doth feare
Their threatening iawes: but those, from whom she flies, She with her hales. Then looking for her thighes, Her legs, and feet; in stead of them she found The mouthes of Cerberus; inuiron'd round With rau'ning Curres: the backes of saluage beasts Support her groine; whereon her belly rests. Kinde Glaucus wept; and Circes bed refus'd: Who had so cruelly her Art abus'd. But Scylla still remaining, Cir hates; Who for that cause destroy'd Vlysses mates. And had the Troian nauie drown'd of late, If not before transform'd by powerfull Fate Into a Rocke: the stony Prodigie Yet eminent, from which the Sea-men flie. This, and Charybdis past with stretching oares; The Troian fleet, now neare th' Ausonian shores, Crosse winds, and violent, to Libya draue. There, in her heart, and palace, Dido gaue Aeneas harbor: with impatience beares Her husbands flight: forth-with a Pile she rearos, Pretending sacrifice; and then doth fall Vpon his sword: deceiu'd, deceiuing all. Flying from Carthage, Eryx he re-gain'd; There where his faithfull friend Acestes raign'd▪ His fathers funeralls re-solemniz'd, He puts to Sea, with ships well-nigh surpriz'd By Iris flames. Hippotade's Command, The sulphur-fuming Iles, the rockie Strand Of Acheloian Sirens leauing, lost His Pilot: to Inarime then crost, To Prochyta, and Pithecusa, wall'd With barten hilles; so of her people call'd.
For Iupiter, detesting much the slie And fraudulent Cercopeans periury, Into deformed beasts transform'd them then; Although vnlike, appearing like to men: Contracts their limbes, their noses from their browes He flats, their faces with old wrinkles plowes; And, couering them with yellow haire, affords This dwelling, first depriuing them of words, So much abus'd to periury and wrongs: Who iabber, and complaine with stammering tongues. Then on the right-hand left Parthenope, Misenus on the left, far-stretcht in Sea, So named of his Trumpetor: thence, past By slimie Marishes, and anchor cast At Cuma; entring long-liu'd Sibyls caues. A passage through obscure Auernus craues T' his Fathers Manes. She erects her eyes, Long fixt on earth, and with the Deities Reception ill'd, in sacred rage reply'd. Great things thou seek'st, ô thou so magnifi'd For mighty deeds: thy piety through flame, Thy arme through Armies consecrate thy name. Yet feare not, Troian, thy desires inioy: T' Elysian Fields, th'infernall Monarchie, And Fathers Shade, I will thy person guide: No way to noble Vertue is denide. Then to a Golden bough directs his view, Which in Auernian Iuno's Hort-yard grew: And bade him pull it from the sacred tree. Aeneas her obeyes: and now doth see The Spoiles of dreadfull Hell; his Grand-sires, lost In death, and great Anchises aged Ghost.
Is by his bounty: that the Cycops fowle And hungry maw had not deuour'd my Soule: That now I may be buried when I die; Or at the least, not in his entrailes lie. O what a heart had I! with feare bereft Of soule and sense! when I behinde was left, And saw your flight! I had an Out-cry made, But that afeard to haue my selfe betray'd. Yours, almost had Vlysses ship destroy'd. I saw him iue out of the mountaines side A solid rocke, and dart it on the Maine: I saw the furious Giant once againe, When mightie stones with monstrous strength he lung: Like qaries by a warlike engine slung. Left ship should sinke with waues and stones I feare: Not then remembring, that I was not there. He, when your flight had rescu'd you from death, Oe Aetna paces; sighing clouds of breath: And groping in the woods, bereft of sight, Incounters rustling rockes: mad with despight Extends his bloudy armes to vnder waues, The Greekes perues with curses; and thus raues. O would some God Vlysses would ingage, Or some of his, to my insatiate rage! Id gnaw his heart, his liuing members rend, Glpe downe his bloud till it againe ascend, And cra his panting sinewes. O, how light A losse, or none, were then my losse of sight! This spake, and more. My ioynts pale horror shooke, To see his , and slaughter-smeared looke, His bloudy hands, his eyes deserted seat, Vast limbes, and beard with humane gore concreat.
Death stood before mine eyes (my least dismay:) Now thought my selfe surpriz'd; now, that I lay, Sou'st in his paunch. That time presents my view, When two of ours on dashing stones he threw: Then on them like a shagged Lion lies; Their entrails, flesh, yet mouing arteries, White marrow, with crasht bones, at once deuoures. I, sad, and bloudlesse stood: feare chill'd my powres, Seeing him eat, and cast the horrid food; Raw lumpes of flesh, wine mixt with clotted blood. Euen such a fate my wretched thoughts propound. Long lying hid, afraid of euery sound, Ahorring death, yet couering to die; With mast, and hearbs repelling famine; I, Alone, forlorne, to death and torment left, This ship espy'd: this by my gestures weft, Tranne to shore, nor safety vainly seeke: A Trian vessell entertain'd a Greeke. Now, worthy friend, your owne aduentures tell; And what, since first you put to sea, befell. He told how Aeolus raign'd in Thusan Seas, Storme-fettering Aeolus Hippotades, Who nobly gaue to their Dulichian Guide A wind, inclosed in an oxes hide. Nine daies they sailed with successefull gales; Sought shores descry'd: the tenth had blancht their sailes; When greedy Sailers, thinking to haue found A masse of enuy'd gold, the wind vnbound. This though rough seas the Nauie backward driues, Which at the Aeolian port againe arriues. To Lestrigonian Lamus ancient towne From thence, said he, we came. That countries crowne
Prosfering th'insidious Cup, her magicke wand About to raise, he thrusts her from her stand; And with drawne sword the trembling Goddesse frights. When vowed faith with her faire hand shee plights; And grac't him with her nuptiall bed: who then Demands in dowry his transfigur'd men. Sprinkled with bitter iuyce, her wand reuerst Aboue our crownes, and charmes with charmers dispers; The more she chants, we grow the more vpright, Our bstles shed, our clouen feet vnite, Shoulders and armes possesse their former grace. With teares our weeping Generall we imbrace, And hang about his necke: nor scarce a word Breathes through our lips, but such as thankes afford. From hence our passe was for a yeere deferr'd; In that long time much saw I, and much heard: Of which, a Maid (one of the foure, prepar'd For sacred seruice) closely this declar'd. For while my Chiefe with Circe spotts alone, Shee shew'd a youthfull Image of white stone Clos'd in a Shrine, with crownes imbellished; Who bare a Wood-pecker vpon his head. Demanding whose it was, why placed there, Why he that Bird vpon his summit bare? I will, reply'd she, ô Macareus, tell In this my Mistis power: obserue me well. Saturnian Picus in Ausonia raign'd, Who generous horses for the battle train'd. His forme, such as you see: whom had you knowne, You would haue ta'ne this feature for his owne. His minde as beautifull. Nor yet could hee Four Graecian wrastlings in th'Olympicks see
The Dryades, in Latian mountains borne, His lookes attract: nor Nymphs of fountaines seore To sue for pitie. Those whom Albul, Nunicus, Anio, Alm short of way, And headie: Nr sustaine, the shadie Flood Of Farfarus, the Scythian Cynthis woo'd▪ Inuiron'd marishes, and neighbouring lakes. Yet for one only Nymph the rest forsakes: Who whilome on Mount Platine, the faire Venilia to the two-fac'd Ianus bare. The Maid, now marriageable, honoured Laurentian Picus with her nuptiall bed. Her beauty admirable: yet more fam'd For artfull song; and thereof Canens nam'd. Her voice the woods and rockes to passion moues; Tames saluage beasts, the troubled Riuers smooths, Detaines their hasty course; and, when she sings, The birds neglect the labour of their wings. While her sweet voice coelestiall musicke yeelds; Young Picus followes in Laurentian Fields The salage Bore, vpon a fiery Steed; Arm'd with two darts: clad in a Tyrian weed With gold close-buckl'd. Thither also came The daughter of the Sunne; who left her name. Retaining fields, and on those fruitfull hills Her sacred lap with dewie Simples fills. Seeing vnseene, his sight her sense amaz'd: The gathered hearbs fell from her as she gaz'd: Whose bones a marrow-melting flame inclos'd. But when she her distraction had compos'd; About t'impart her wish, attendance, And swiftnesse of his horse, accesse denie.
Thou shalt not so escape, said shee, altho' The winds should wing thee; if my selfe I know, If hearbs retaine their power, if charmes at least My trust deceiue not. Then creates a Beast Without a body, bid to runne before The Kings persuit; and made the ayrie Bore To take a thicket, where no horse could force His barr'd accesse. He leaues his foming horse On foot to follow a deceitfull Shade, With equall hopes? And through the forrest strai'd. New Vowes she straight conceiueth, aid implores: And Gods vnknowne with vnknowne charmes adores. Wherewith inur'd t' eclipse the pale-fac't Moone: And cloud her Fathers splendor at high Noone. And now with pitchie fogs obscures the Day, From earth exhal'd. His Guard mistake their way In that deceitfull Night, and from his straid. When she, the time and place befitting said: By those faire eyes, which haue inthralled mine; And by that all alluring face of thine, Which makes a Goddesse sue; asswage the fire y thee incenst; and take vnto thy Sire The all-illuminating Sunne: nor proue Hard-hearted to Titanian Circes loue. Her, and her prayers, despis'd; What ere thou art, I am not thine, said he: my captiue heart Another holds; and may she hold it long. Nor will I with externall Venus wrong Our nuptiall faith, so long as Fate shall giue Life to my veines, and aus daughter liue. Titaia, tempting oft, as oft in vaine; Thou shalt not scape my vengeance, nor againe
Returne to Canens. What the wrong'd can doe, A wronged Louer, and a Woman too; Thou shalt said she, by sad experience proue? For I a woman, wrong'd and wrong'd in loue. Twice turnes she to the East, twice to the West; Thrice toucht him with her wand, three charmes exprest. He flyes; at his vnwonted speed admir'd; Then saw the feathers which his skinne attir'd: Who forth-with seekes the woods; and angry still, Hard okes assailes, and wounds them with hi, bill. His wings the purple of his cloake assume; The gold that claspt his garment turnes to plume, And now his necke with golden circle chaines: Of Picus nothing but his name remaines. The Courtiers Picus call, and seeke him round About the fields, that was not to be found. Yet Circe finde (for now the day grew faire, The Sunne and Winds set free to clense the aire) And charge her with true crimes: their King demand With threatning lookes, and weapons in their hand. Shee sprinckles them with iuyce of wicked might. From Erebus and Chaos coniures Night, With all her Gods; and Hecate intreates With tedious mumblings. Woods forsake their seates, Trees pale their leaues, Hearbes blush with drops of gore, Earth grones, dogs howle, rockes horcely seeme to rore: Vpon the tainted ground blacke Serpents slide; And through the aire vnbodied Spirits alide. Frighted with terrors, as they trembling stand, Shee strokes their wondering faces with her wand: Forthwith the shapes of Saluage beasts inuest Their former formes; not one his owne possest.
Phebus now entring the Tartessian Maine, Sad Caneus with her eyes and soule, in vaine Expects her Spouse. Her seruants shee excites To runne about the woods with blazing lights. Who not content to weepe, to teare her haire, And beat her brests (though those present her care) In haste forsakes her roofe; and franticke, strayes Through broad-spred fields. Six nights, as many dayes, Without or sleepe, of sustenance, shee fled O're hills and dales, the way which fortune led. Now tir'd with griefe and trauell, Tybris last Beheld the Nymph: on his coole bankes she cast Her feeble limbes: there weepes, and weeping sung Her sorrowes with a softly warbling tongue. Euen so the dying Swan with low-rais'd breath, Sings her owne exequies before her death. At length her marrow melts with griefes despaire: And by degrees she vanisheth to Aire. Yet still the place doth memorize her same: Which of the Nymph the Rurall Caens name. In that long yeere, much, and such deeds as these I saw and heard. Vn-neru'd with restie ease, Againe we put to Sea: by Circe told Of our hard passage, and the manifold Disasters to ensue, I grew afraid (I must confesse) and here ariuing, staid. Macareus ends. Cateta Vre-inclos'd, This verse had on her marble tombe impos'd. Here, with due fites, my pious Nurse-child mee Caieta burnt; from Graecian fires set free, They loose their cables from the grassie strand; Auoiding Cirs guilfull palace, stand
For those tall groues, where Tybris, darke with shades, In Tyrrhen Seas his sandy streames vnlades. The throne of Faunus sonne, the Latian starre Lauini gaine; but not without a warre. Warre with a furious Nation is commenst; Sterne Turnus for his promist wife incenst: While all Hetruria to Latium swarmes: Hard victory long sought with pensiue armes. To get Recrutes from forren States they try. Nor Troians, nor Rutulians want supply. Nor to Euanders towne Aeneas went In vaine: though vainly Venulus was sent To banisht Dimeds Citie, late immur'd: Those fields Iapygian Daunus had insur'd To him in dowre. When Venulus had done His embassie to Tydeus warlike sonne: The Prince excus'd his aid; as loth to draw The subiects of his aged father in law T'vnnecessary warre: that none remaine Of his to arme. Left you should thinke I faine; Though repetition Sorrow renouates; Yet, while I suffers heare the worst of faes. After that Pergamus our prey became, And lofty Ilium fed the Graecian flame: A Virgin, for a Virgins rape, let fall Her Vengeance, to Oileus due, on all. Scattered on faithlesse Seas with furious stormes, We, wretched Graecians, suffer'd all the formes Of horror: lightning, night, showres, wrath of skies, Of Seas, and dire Capharean cruelties. To abridge the story of so sad a fate; Now Priam would haue pitied our estate.
Yet Pallas snatcht me from the swallowing Maine; Then from my vngratefull Country chac't againe. For Venus, mindfull of her ancient wound, New woes inflicts. Much on the vast profound, Much suffering in terrestriall conflicts, I Oft call'd them happy, whom the iniury Of publike tempests, and importunate Capharcus drown'd: and now enui'd their fate. The worst indur'd; with seas and battles tyr'd, My men an end of their long toyle desir'd. But Amon, full of fire, and fiercer made By vsuall slaughters: What remaines (he said) O mates, which now our patience would eschue? Though willing, what can Cytherea doe More than sh'hath done? when worse mishaps affright, Then prayers auaile: but when Mis-fortunes spight Her worst inflicts, then feare is of no vse: And height of ills, securitie produce. Let Venus heare: although she hate vs all, As all she hates that serue our Generall) Yet let vs all despise her emptie hate; Whose Powre hath made vs so vnfortunate. Pluronion Aman angry Venus stung: Reuenge reuiuing with his lauish tongue. Few like his words the most seuerely chid His tongues excesse. About to haue reply'd, His speech, and path of speech, at once grew small, His haire conerts to plume; plumes couer all His necke, backe, bosome: larger feathers spring From his rough armes, and now his elbowes wing. His feet diuide to toes, hard horne extends From his chang'd face, and in a bill descends.
Rhetenor, Nycteus, Lycus, Abas, Ide, Admire! and in their admiration try'd Like destiny. Most of my Souldiers grew Forthwith new Fowle; and round about vs flew. If you inquire, what shape their owne vn-mans; They are not, yet are like to siluer Swans. These barren fields, with this poore remnant, I, As sonne in law to Daunus, scarce inioy. Thus farre Oenides, Venulus forsakes Tydides Kingdome: by Puteoli takes His way, and through Mesapia: there suruaid A Caue, inuiron'd with a syluan shade, Distilling streames. By halfe-goat Pan possest: Which erst the Wood-nymphs with their beauties blest. They terrified at first with sudden dread, From home bred Apulus, the shepheard, fled. Straight, taking heart, despised his persuit: And danced with a measure-keeping foot. He scoffes: their motion clowne-like imitates: Nor only raileth, but obscenely prates. Nor ceaeth, till a tree inuests his throte; A tree whose berries his behauiour note: An oliue wilde, which bitter fruit affords, Becomes; dis-seasned with his bitter words. Th'Embassador returnes without the sought Aetolian succours: the Rutulians fought 'Gainst foes and fortune; of that hope depriu'd: Whole srteames of bloud from mutuall wounds deriu'd. Loe, fire-brands to the Nauie Turnus beares: And what escaped drowning, burning feares. Pitch, rozen, and like ready food for fire, Now Valcan feed: the hungrie flames aspire
Vp to the sailes along the lofty mast; And catch the yards, with curling smoke embrac't. But when the Mother of the Gods beheld Those blazing Pines, from top of Ida feld; Lowd shalmes and Cymballs vsher'd her repaire: Who, drawne by bridled Lions through the aire, Thus said: Thy wicked hands to small effect, O Turnus violate, what we protect. Nor shall the greedy fire a part of those Tall Woods deuoure, which shelter our repose. With that she thunders, powring downe amaine Thicke stormes of skipping haile, and clouds of raine. Th' Astran Sonnes in swift concursions ioyne; Tossing the troubled aire, and Neptunes brine. One shee imployes, whose speed the rest out-strips; That brake the Cables of the Phygian Ships, And daue them vnder the high-swelling Flood. The timber softens, flesh proceeds from wood, The crooked Sterne to heads and faces growes, The Oares to swimming legs, fine feet and toes; What were their holds, to ribbed sides are growne, The lengthfull keele presenting the back-bone; The yards to armes, to haire the tackling grew: As formerly, so now, their colour blew. And they, but lately of the floods afraid; Now in the flouds, with virgin pastime, plaid. These Sea-nymphs, borne on mountaines, celebrate The Seas, foretfull of their former state. Yet weighing, what themselues so oft endur'd On high-wrought waues, oft sinking ships secur'd; Ex, span; as Glacians cay: those They hate, memorious of the Troian woes.
Who saw Vlysses ships in surges queld With pleased eyes, with pleased eyes beheld Alcinous ship, in swiftnesse next to none, Vnmoueable; the wood transform'd to stone. 'Twas thought this wondrous prodigie would fright The Rutuli, and make them ceasoe from fight. Both parts persist, both haue their Gods to friend; And Valour no lesse potent: nor contend Now for Lauinia, for Latinus crowne, Nor dot all Kingdome; but for faire renowne: Asham'd to lay their brused armes aside, Till death or conquest had the quarrell tride. Venus her sonne victorious sees at length. Great Turnus fell; strong Ardea falls, of strengh While Turnus stood, decour'd by barbarous flame, In dying cinders buried. From the same A Fowle, vnknowne to former ages, springs; And fannes the ashes with her houering wings. Pale colour, leanenesse, shreeking sounds of woe, The image of a captiue City show. Who also still the Cities name retaines: And with selfe-beating wings of Fate complaines. And now Aeneas vertues terminate The wrath of Gods, and Iuno's ancient hate. An opulent foundation hauing laid For young Iuius, by his merit made Now fit for Heauen: the Powre, who rules in Loue The Gods solicits; then, imbracing Ioue: O Father, neuer yet to me vnkinde; Now ô inlarge the bountie of thy minde. A God-head, meane, so it a God-head be, Aeneas giue; that art to him by me.
A Grand-father: th'vn-amiable realmes Suffice it once t'haue seene, and Sygian streames. The Gods agree; nor Iuno's lookes dissent. Who with a chearefull freenesse forward bent. Then Ioue; He well deserues a Deity: Thy sute, faire Daughter, to thy wish enioy. Shee, ioyfull, thankes returne: and through the aire, Dawne by heyoaked Dones, lights on the bare Lu enan shotes; where smooth Numicius creepes Through whispering reedes into the neighbour Deepes. Who  him from Aeneas wash away All vnto death obnoxious, and conuay It silently to Seas. The horned Flood O eyes; and what subsists by mortall food, With water pug'd, and only left behinde His better parts. His mother they refinde Anoints with sacred odors, and his lips In Nectar, mingled with Ambrosia, dips; So deifi'd: whom Indges Rome calls; Honour'd with altars, shrines, and sestiualls. Two-nam'd Ascanus Latium then obey'd, And Alba: next, the scepter Syluius swai'd. His sonne Latinus, held that ancient name, And crowne. Him Epitus, renown'd by Fame, Succeed. Then Capys. Capetus, his Son Succeeded him. Next Tiberine begun His gne: who, drown'd in Thuscan waters; gaue Those streames his name: who Remulus got, and braue▪ Sould Acrota. But Remulus was slaine With thunder; who the Thunderer durst faine. More moderate Acrota resign'd his throne To : vpon the Mount whereon
He raign'd, intomb'd; which yet his name retaines. Ouer the Palatines next Procas raignes. Pomona flourisht in those times of case: Of all the Latian Hamadryades, None fuitfull Hort-yards held in more repute; Or tooke more care to propagate their fruit. Thereof so nam'd. Nor streames, nor shadie groues, But trees producing generous burdens loues. Her hand a hooke, and not a iauelin bare: Now prunes luxurious twigs, and boughs the dare Transcend their bounds: now slits that barke, the bud Inserts; inforc't to nurse an others bood. Nor suffers them to suffer thirst, but brings To moisture-sucking roots, soft-sliding Springs. Such her delight, her care. No thoughts extend To loues vnknowne desires: yet to defend Her selfe from rapefull Rurals, round about Her Hort-yard walls; t'auoid, and keepe them out. What left the skipping Satyrs vn-assai'd: Rude Pan, whose hornes Pine-bristled garlands shade; Silenus, still more youthfull than his yeares; Or he who theeues with hooke, and member feares, To taste her sweetnesse? but farre more than all Vertumnus loues; yet were his hopes as small. How often, like a painfull Reaper, came, Laden with weighty sheafes; and seem'd the same! Oft wreathes of new mow'd grasse his browes array; As though then excercis'd in making hay. A gode now in his hardned hands he beares, And newly seemes to haue vnyok't his Steees. Oft Vines and fruit-trees with a pruning hooke Corrects, and dresses; oft a lather tooke
To gather fruit: now with this crooked skeine A Souldier seemes; an Angler with his cane: And various figures daily multiplies To winne accesse, and please his longing eyes. Now, with a staffe, an old-wife counterfeits; On holy hae, a painted miter sets. The Hot yard entering, admires the faire And pleasant fuits: So much, said he, more rare Then all the Nymphs whom Albula enioy, Hale spotlesse flowre of Maiden chastity: And kist the prais'd. Nor did the Virgin know, (So innocent) that old wiues kist not so. Then, sitting on a banke, obserueth how The pregnant boughs with Autums burthen bow. Hard by, an Elme with purple clusters shined: This paising, with the Vine so closely ioyn'd; Yet, said he, if this Elme should grow alone, Except for shade, it would be priz'd by none: And so this Vine, in amorous foldings wound, If but dis-ioyn'd would creepe vpon the ground. Yet art not thou by such examples led: But shun'st the pleasures of a happy bed. Nor would thou wouldst: net Helen was so sought, Nor the for whom the lustfull Centaures fought, As thou shouldst be; no nor the wife of bold. And tmorous Vlysses. Yet, behold Though thou auerse to all, and all eschue; A thousand men, Gods, de-gods, persue Thy constant scorne; and euery deathlesse Powre Which Alha's high and shady hils imbowre. Put thou, it wise,  thou'lt well married be; Or an old woman trust, who credit me,
Affects thee more than all the rest, refuse These common wooers, and Vertumnus choose. Accept me for his gage; since so well none Can know him; by himselfe not better knowne. He is no wanderer, her's his delight: Nor loues, like common louers, at first sight. Thou art the first, so thou the last shalt be: His life he onely dedicates to thee. Besides his youth perpetuall; excellent His beauty; and all shapes can represent. Wish what you will, what euer hath a name; Such shall you see him. Your delights the same: The first-fruits of your Hort-yard are his due; Which ioyfully he still accepts from you. But neither what these pregnant trees produce He now desires, no herbs of pleasant iuyce: Nor ought, but onely You. O pity take! And what I speake, suppose Vertumnus spake. Reuengefull Gods, Idlia, still seuere To such as slight her, and Ramnusia feare. The more to fright you from so foule a crime, Receiue (since much I know from aged Time) A story, generally through Cyprus knowne; To mollifie a heart more hard than stone. Ip, of humble birth, by chance did view The high-borne Anaxarete, who drew Her bloud from Tucer. Seeing her, his eyes Extracts a fire, wherein his bosome fies. Long struglng, when no reason could reclaime Hi fury, to her house the Suppliant came. Now to her Nurse his wretched loue displaid; And by her loster'd hopes implor'd her aid:
Now humbly sues to some of most repute In her affection, to prefer his suit. Sad letters of this desperate passions beares: Oft myrtle garlands, sprinkled with his teares, Hangs on the posts: the stonie threshold lades With his soft sides, and rigid doores vp-braids. But she more cruell than the seas, imbroyl'd With rising stormes; more hard than iron, boyl'd In fire-red furnaces; or rooted rocks; Disdaines the louer, and his passion mocks: Who to her forward deeds addes bitter words Of no lesse scorne, nor hope to loue affords. Impatient of his torment, and her hate; These words, his last, he vtters at her gate. O Anaxerete, thou hast o're come! Nor shall my life be longer wearisome To thy disdaine. Triumph, ô too vnkind! Sing Paeans, and thy browes with laurell bind. Thou hast o're-come; loe, willingly I die: Proceed, and celebrate thy cruell ioy Yet is there something in me, ne're the lesse, That thou wilt raispe; and my deserts confesse. Thinke how my loue my heart no sooner left Then life it selfe: of both at once bereft. Nor rumor, but euen I will death present In such a forme, as shall thy pride content. But O you Gods, if you our actions fee (This onely I implore) remember me! Let after ages celebrate my name: And what you take from life, afford to same. Then heaues his meger armes and watry eyes To those knowne posts, oft crown'd with wreaths, and tyes
A halter to the top. Such wreathes, he said, Best please; hard-hearted, and inhumane Maid! Then turning toward her, he forward sprung: When by the neck th'vnhappy louer hung. Strucke by his sprawling feet, wide open flies The sounding wicket; and the deed descries. The seruants shreeke; the Vainely raised bore T'his mothers house; his father dead before. His breathlesse corps she in her bosome plac't; And in her armes his key-cold limbs imbrac't. Lamenting long, as wofull parents vse; And hauing paid a wofull mothers dues; The mournfull Funerall through the City led; And to prepared fires conueyes the dead. This sorrowfull Procession passing by Her house, which bordering on the way, their cry To th'eares of Anaxarete arriues: Whom now sterne Nemesis to ruine driues Wee'l see, said she, these sad solemnities: And forth-with to the lofty window highes. When seeing Iphis on his fatall bed; Her eyes grew stiffe; bloud from her visage sled, Vsurpt by palenesse. Striuing to retire, Her feet stuck fast; nor could to her desire Diuert her looks: for now her stony heart t selfe dilated into euery part. This Salamis yet keeps, to cleere your doubt, n Venus temple; call'd, the Looker-out. Inform'd by this, ô louely Nymph, decline Thy former pride, and to thy louer ioyne. So may thy fruits suruiue the Vernall frost: Nor after by the rapefull winds be tost.
When this the God, who can all shapes indue, Had said in vaine; againe himselfe he grew: Th'abiliments of heatlesse Age depos'd. And such himselfe vnto the Nymph disclos'd, As when the Sunne, subduing with his reyes The muffling clouds, his golden brow displaies. Who force prepares: of force there was no need; Strucke with his beauty, mutually they bleed. Vniust Amulius next th' Ausonian State I'y strength vsurpt. The nephews to the late Deposed Numior, him re-inthrone: Who Rome, in Pales Feasts, immur'd with stone. Now Tatius leades the Sabine Sires to warre. Tarpia's hands her fathers gates vnbarre: To death with a melets prest; her treasons meed. The Sabine Sires like silent Wolues proceed T'inuade their sleeping sonnes, and seeke to seaz Vpon their gates; barr'd by Iliades. One Iuno opens: though no noise at all The hinges made; yet by the barres lowd fall Descry'd by Venus: who had put it too; But Gods may not, what Gods haue done, vndo. Ausnian Nymphs the places bordering To Ianus held, inchased with a spring. Their aid sh'implores. The Nymphs could not deny A sute so iust, but all their flouds vntie. As yet the Fane of Ianus open stood: Nor was their way impeached by the flood. Beneath the fruitfull spring they sulphure turne; Whose hollow veines with blacke bitumen burne: With these the vapours penetiate below; And waters, late as cold as Alpin snow,
The fire it selfe in seruour dare prouoke: Now both the posts with flagrant moisture smoke. These now-rais'd streames the Sabine Powre exclude, Till Mars his Souldiers had their armes indu'd. By Romulus then in Batalia led: The Roman fields the slaughtred Sabines spred; Their owne the Romans: Fathers, Sonnes in law, With wicked steele, bloud from each other draw. At length conclude a peace; nor would contend Vnto the last. Two Kings one throne ascend With equall rule. But noble Tatius slaine, Both Nations vnder Romulus remaine. When Mars laid by his shining caske; and then Thus spake vnto the Sire of Gods, and men. Now, Father, is the time (since Rome is growne To such a greatnesse, and depends on One) To put in act thy neuer-failing word; And Romulus a heauenly throne afford. You, in a synod of the Gods, profest (Which still I carry in my thankfull brest) That one of mine (this ô now ratifie!) Should be aduanc't vnto the starry skie. Ioue condescends: with clouds the day benights; And with flame-winged thunder earth affrights. Mars, at the signe of his assumption, Leanes on his lance, and strongly vaults vpon His bloudy Chariot; lashes his hot horses With sounding whips, and their full speed inforces: Who, scouring downe the ayrie region, staid On faire mount Palatine, obscur'd with shade: There Romulus assumeth from his Throne, Vn-kinglike rendering iustice to his owne.
Rapt through the aire, his mortall members waste, Like melting Bullets by a Slinger cast: More heauenly faire, more fit for lofty shrines; Our great and scalet-clad Quirinus shines. Then Iuno to the sad Herslia (Lost in her sorrow) by a crooked way Sent Iris to deliuer this Command. Star of the Latian, of the Sabine land; Thy sexes glory: worthy then the vow Of such a husband, of Quirinus now; Suppresse thy teares. If thy desire to see Thy husband so exceed, then follow mee Vnto those woods, which on mount Querin spring; And shade the temple of the Roman King. Iris obayes: and by her painted Bow Downe-sliding, so much lets Hersilia know. When she, scarce lifting vp her modest eyes: O Goddesse (which of all the Deities I know not; sure a Goddesse) thou cleere light, Conduct me, ô conduct me to the sight Of my deare Lord: which when the Fates shall shew, They heauen on me, with all the gifts, bestow. Then, with Taumantias entering the high Romua Hills, a Star shot from the Skie, Whose golden beames inflam'd Hersilia's haire; When both together mount th'enlightned Aire. The Builder of the Roman City tooke Her in his armes, and forth-with chang'd her looke: To whom the name of Ora he assign'd. This Goddesse now is to Quirinus ioyn'd.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The Fifteenth Booke. THE ARGVMENT. BLacke Stones conert to White. Pythagoras In Ilium's lingring warre Euphorbus was. Of transmigrations, of the change of things, and strange effcts, the learned Samian sings. Recur'd Hippolyus  deiide; Whom safer Age, and name of Virbius bids. Aegeria thawes into a Spring. From Earth Prophetick Tages takes his wondrous birth. A Speare a Tree. Gra Cippus vertues The rowne, his Horues present. Appollo's Son Assumes a Serpents shape. The Soule of Warre, Great Caesar, slaine, becomes a Blazing Starre. MEanewhile, a man is sought that might sustaine So great a burthen, and succeed the raigne Of such a King: when true-foreshewing Fame To God-like Numa destinates the same. He, with his Sabine rites vnsatisfi'd To greater things his able mind appli'd In Natures search. Inticed with these cares, He leaues his countries Cures, and repaires
To Croton's City! askes, what Grecian hand Those walls erected on Italian land? One of the Natiues, not vnknowing old, Who much had heard and seene, this story told. Ioues sonne, inrich't with his Iberian prey, Came from the Ocean to Lacinia With happy steps: who, while his cattle fed Vpon the tender clouer, entered Heroick Croton's roofe; a welcome Guest: And his long trauell recreates with rest. Who said, departing; In the following age A City here shall stand. A true presage. There was one Mycilus, Argolian Alemons issue: in thoso times, no man More by the Gods affected. He, who beares The dreadfull Club, to him in sleepe appeares; And said: Begon, thy countries bounds forsake; To stony Aesarus thy iourney take. And threatens vengeance if he dis-obay. The God and Sleepe together flew away. He, rising, on the Vision meditates: Which in his doubtfull soule he long debates. The God commands; the Law forbids to goe: Death due to such as left their Country so. Cleare Sol in seas his radiant fore-head vail'd, Swart Night her browes exalts, with starres impal'd; The selfe same God the same command repeats: And greater plagues to disobedience threats. Afraid, he now prepares to change his owne For foreine seats. This through the City blowne; Accus'd for breach of lawes, arraign'd and try'd; They proue the fact, not by himselfe deny'd.
His hands and eyes then lifting to the skie: O thou, whom twice Six Labours deifie, Assist, that art the author of my crime! White stones and blacke they vs's in former time; The white acquit, the blacke the pris'nor cast: And in such sort this heauy sentence past. Blacke stones all threw into the fatall Vrne: But all to white, turn'd out to number, turne. Thus by Aleides power the sad Decree Was strangely chang'd, and Mycilus set free. Who, thanking Amphitryoniades, With a full fore-wind crost th'Inian Seas. Lacedemonian Tarentum past, Faire Sybaris, Neaethus running fast By Salentinum, Thurin's crooked Bay, High Temesis, and strong Iapygia: Scarce searching all that shores sea-beaten bound, The fatall mounth of Aesarus out-found. A Tombe, hard by, the sacred bones inclos'd Of famous Croton: here, as erst impos'd, Alemons sonne erects his City walls: Which of th'intombed he Crotona calls. Of this Originall, this City boasts: Built by a Graecian on Italian coasts. Here dwelt a Samian, who at once did flie From Samos, Lords, and hated Tyrannie: Preferring voluntary banishment. Though farre from Heauen, his mind's diuine ascent Drew neere the Gods: what natures selfe denies To humane Sight, he saw with his Soules eyes. All apprehended in his ample brest, And studious cares; his knowledge he profest
To silent and admiring men: who taught The Worlds originall, past humane thought: What nature was, what God: that cause of things; From whence the Snow, frā whence the lightning springs Whether Ioue thunder, or the winds that rake The breaking Clouds: what caus'd the Earth to quake; What course the Stares obseru'd; what e're lay hid From vulgar sense: and first of all forbid With slaughtred creatures to defile our boords, In such, though vnbeleeu'd; yet learned Words. Forbeare your selues, ô Mortals, to pollute With wicked food: corne is there; generous fruit Oppresse their boughs; plump grapes their Vines attire; There are sweet hearbs, and sauory roots, which fire May mollifie; milke, honey redolent With flowers of Thime, thy pallat to content. The prodigall Earth abounds with gentle food; Affording banquets without death or blood. Brute beasts with flesh their rau'nous hunger cloy: And yet not all; in pastures horses ioy; So flocks and beards. But those whom Nature hath Indu'd with cruelty, and saluage wrath (Wolues, Beares, Armenian Tigers, Lions) in Hot bloud delight. How horrible a Sin, That entrailes bleeding entrailes should intombe! That greedy flesh, by flesh should fat become! While by the Liuers death the Liuing liues! Of all, which Earth, our wealthy mother, giues; Can nothing please, vnlesse thy teeth thou imbrue In wounds, and dire Cyclopean fare renue? Nor satiate the wilde votacitie Of thy rude panch, except an other die?
But that old Age, that innocent estate, Which we the Golden call; was fortunate In hearbs, and fruits, her lips with bloud vndy'd. Then Fowle through aire their wings in safety ply'd▪ The Hare, then fearelesse, wandred o're the plaine; Nor Fish by their credulity were ta'ne. Not treacherous, nor fearing treacherie, All liu'd secure. When he, who did enuie (What God so e're it was) those harmlesse cates And cramb'd his guts with flesh; set ope the gates To cruell Crimes. First, Slaughter without harme (I must confesse) to Piety, did warme (Which might suffice) the reeking steele in blood Of saluage beasts, which made our liues their food▪ Though kil'd; not to be eaten. Sinne now more Audacious; the first sacrifice, the Bore Was thought to merit death; who, bladed corne Vp-rooting left the husband-man forlorne. Vine-brouzing Gotes at Bacchus altar slaine, Fed his reuenge: in both, their guilt their bane. You Sheep, what ill did you? a gentle beast, Whose vdders swell with Nectar▪ borne t'inuest Exposed man with your soft wooll; and are Aliue, then dead, more profitable farre. Or what the Oxe? a creature without guile, So innocent, so simple; borne for toile. He most vngratefull is, deseruing ill The gift of corne; that can vnyoke, then kill His husband-man: that necke with axe to wound In seruice gall'd, that had the stubborne ground So often til'd; so many crops brought in. Yet not content there with,  the sinne
To guiltlesse Gods: as if the Powres on high In death of labour-bearing oxen ioy. A spotlesse sacrifice, faire to behold, ('I is death to please) with ribands trickt, and gold, Stands at the Altar, hearing prayers vnknowne: And sees the meale vpon his fore-head throwne, ot by his toile: the knife smear'd in his gore, By fortune in the lauer seene before. The entrailes, from the panting body rent, Forth-with they search; to know the Gods intent. Whence springs so dire an appetite in man To interdicted food? O Mortals, can, Or dae you feed on flesh? henceforth forbeare I you intreat, and to my words giue eare: When limbs of slaughtred Beeues become your meat; Then thinke, and know, that you your Seruants eat. Phoebus inspires; his Spirit we obay: My Delphs, heauen it selfe, I will display: The Oracle of that great power vnfold: And sing what long lay hid; what none of old Could apprehend. I long to walke among The lofty starres: dull earth despis'd, I long To backe the clouds; to sit on Atlas crowne: And from that hight on erring men looke downe Tht reason want: those thus to animate That feare to die; t'vnfold the booke of Fate. O You, whom horrors of cold death affright; Why feare you Stix, vaine names, and endlesse Night; The dreames of Poets, and fain'd miseries Of forged Hell? whether last-flames surprise, Or Age deuoure your bodies; they nor gieue, No suffer paines. Ou Soules for euer lieu:
Yet euermore their ancient houses leaue To lieu in new; which them, as Guests, receiue. In Troin warres, I (I remember well) Enphorbus was, Panthōus sonne; and fell By Menelaus lance: my shield againe At Argos late I saw, in Iuno's Fane. All alter, nothing finally decayes: Hither and thither still the Spirit strayes; Guest to all bodies: out of beasts it flies To men, from men to beasts; and neuer dies. As pliant wax each new impression takes; Fixt to no forme, but still the old for sakes; Yet it the same: so Soules the same abide, Though various figures there reception hide. Then lest thy greedy belly should destroy (I prophesie) depressed Piety, Forbeare t'expulse thy kindreds Ghosts with food By deach procur'd; nor nourish blood with blood. Since on so vast a sea, my saile's vnfurl'd, And-stretcht to rising winds; in all the World There's nothing permanent; all ebbe and flow: Each image form'd to wander to and fro. Euen Time, with restlesse motion, slides away Like liuing streames: nor can swift Riuers stay, Nor light-heel'd Howers. As billow billow driues, Driuen by the following; as the next arriues To chace the former: times so flye, persue At once each other; and are euer new. What was before, is not; what was not, is: All in a moment change from that to this. See, how the Night on Light extends her shades▪ See, how the Light the gloomy Night inuads.
Nor such Heauens hew, when Mid-night crown's Repose; As when bright Lucifer his taper showes: Yet changing, when the Harbinger of Day Th'inlightned World resignes to Phoebus sway. His raised Shield, earths shaddowes scarely fled, Lookes ruddy; and low sinking, lookes as red: Yet bright at Noone; because that purer skie Doth fare from Earth, and her contagion flie. Nor can Night-wandring Dian's wauering light Be euer equall, or the same: this night Lesse than the following, if her hornes she fill; If the contract her Circle, greater still. Doth not the image of our age appeare In the successiue quarters of the Yeare? The Spring-tide, tender; sucking Infancie Resembling: then the iuyefull blade sprouts high; Though tender, weake; yt hope to Plough-men yeelds. All things then flourish: flowers the gaudy fields Wh colours paint: no virtue yet in leaues. Then following Summer greater strength receiues: A lusty Youth; no age more strength acquires, Mo fruitfull, or more burning in desires. Maturer Autumne, heat of Youth alaid, The sober meane twixt youth and age, more staid And temperate, in Summers waine repaires: His reuerend temples sprinckled with gray haires. Then comes old Winter, void of all delight, With trembling steps: his head or bal'd, or white. So change our odies without rest or stay: What we were yester-day, not what to day, Shall be to morw. Once alone of men The seeds and hope; the wombe our mansion: when
Kind Nature shew'd her cunning; not content That our vext bodies should be longer pent In mothers stetched entrailes, forth-with bare Them from that prison, to the open aire. We strengthlesse lye, when first of light possest; Straight creepe vpon all foure, much like a beast; Then, staggering with weake nerues, stand by degrees, And by some stay support our feeble knees: Now, lusty, swiftly run. Youth quickly spent, And those our middle times, incontinent We sinke in setting Age: this last deuoures The former, and dimolisheth their powres. Old Milo wept, when he his armes beheld, Which late the strongest beast in strength excel'd, Big, as Alides brawnes, in flaggie hide Now hanging by slake sinewes: Helen cry'd When she beheld her wrinkles in her Glasse; And asks her selfe, why she twice rauisht was. Still-eating Time, and thou ô enuious Age, All ruinate: diminisht by the rage Of your deuouring teeth, All that haue breath Consume, and languish by a lingring death. Nor can these Elements stand at a stay: But by exchanging alter euery day. Th'eternall world foure bodies comprehends, Ingendring all. The heauy Earth descends, So Water, clog'd with weight: two light, aspire, Deprest by none; pure Aire and purer Fire. And though they haue their seuerall fites; yet all Of these are made, to these againe they fall. Resolued Earth to Water rarifies; To Aire extenuated Waters rise;
The Aire, when it it selfe agiane refines, To element all Fire extracted, shines. They in like order backe againe repaire: The grosser Fire condenseth into Aire; Aire, into water: Water thickning, then Growes solid, and conuerts to Earth againe. None holds his owne: for Nature euer ioyes In change, and with new formes the old supplies. In all the world not any perish quite: But onely are in various habits dight. For; to begin to be, what we before Were not, is to be borne; to dye, no more Than ceasing to be such: although the frame Be changeable, the substance is the same. For nothing long continues in one mold. You Ages, you to Siluer grew from Gold; To Brasse from Siluer; and to Y'ne from Brasse. Euen place oft such change of fortunes passe; Where once was solid land, Seas haue I'seene; And solid land where once deepe Seas haue beene. Shls, far from Seas, like quarries in the ground; And anchors haue on mountaine tops beene found, Torrents hue made a valley of a plaine; High hils by delges one to the Maine. Deepe standing lakes suck't dry by thirsty sand; And on late thirsty earth now lakes doe stand. Here Nature, in her charges manifold, Sends forth new fountaines; there shuts vp the old. Streams with impetuous earth-quakes, heretofore Hue broken forth; or sunke, and run no more. So ycus, swallowed by they yawning Earth, Takes in an other world his second birth.
So Erasinus, now conceales, now yeelds His rising waters to Argolian fields. And Mysus, hating his first head, and brayes, Calcus nam'd else-where his streame displayes. Coole Amasenus, watering Sicily, Now flowes; now spring-lockt, leaues his channell dry. Men formerly drunke of Anigrus streames: Not to be drunke (if any thing but dreames The Poets tell) since Centaures therein washt Their wounded limbs, by Alcides arrowes gasht. So Hypatis, deriu'd from Sythian Hills, Long sweet, with bitter streames his channel fills. Antissa, Tyrus, and Aegyptian Phare, The flouds imbrac't: yet now no Ilands are. Th'old Colon knew Leucadia Continent: Which now the labouring surges circumuent. So Zancle once on Italie conn'd; Till interposing waues their bounds dis-ioyn'd. If Bura and Helice (Graecian townes) You seeke; behold, the Sea their glory drownes: Whose buildings, and declined walls, below Th'ambitious floud as yet the Sailers show. A Hill by Pitthean Troezen mounts, vncrown'd With syluan shades, which once was leuell ground. For furious winds (a story to admire!) Pent in blinde cauernes, strugling to expire; And vainly seeking to inioy th'extent Of freer aire, the prison wanting vent; Th'vnpassable tuffe earth inflated so, As when with swelling breath we bladders blow, The tumor of the place remained still, In time growne sollid, like a lofty hill.
To speake a little more of many things Both heard and knowne: New habits sundry Springs Now giue, now take. Horn'd Hammns Well at Noone Is cold; hot at Sun-rise, and setting Sun. Wood, put in bubling Athamas then fires; When farthest from the Sun the Moone retires. Ciconian streames congeale his guts to stone That thereof drinkes: and what therein is throwne. Crathis, and Sybaris (from your mountaines rold) Colour the haire like Amber, or pure gold. Some fountaines of a more prodigious kind, Not onely change the body but the mind. Who hath not heard of obscene Salmacis? Of th'AeTHiopian Lake? who drinke of this, Runne forth-with mad: or if their wits they keepe, Fall suddenly into a deadly sleepe. Who at Clitoi Fountaine thirst remoue; Loath wine, and abstinent, meere water loue. Whether it by antipathie expell Desire or wine; or (as the Natiues toll) hauing with his herbs and charmes Snatcht Proeu franticke daughters from the harmes Of entred ries, their wit's physicke cast Into this spring; infusing such distast. With streames, to these oppos'd Lyncestus flowes: They , as drunke, who drinke too much of those. A Lake in faire Arcadia stands, of old Call'd Pheus; suspected, as two fold: Feare, and forbeare, to drinke thereof by night: By night vnwholsome, wholsome by day-light. So other lakes and streames haue other powre. Ortygia sloted once; fixt at this houre:
Once Argo fear'd the iustling Cyenes; Which rooted now, resist both winds and seas. Nor Aena, burning with imbowel'd fire, Shall euer, or did alwayes, flames expire. For whether Tellus be an Animall, Haue lungs, and mouthes that smoking flames exhale; Her organs alter, when her motions close These yawning passages▪ and open those. Or whether winds, in caues impris'ned, raue; Iustling the stones, and minerals which haue The seed of fire, inkindled with their rage: They then extinguish when the winds asswage. Or if Bitumen doe the fire prouoke; Or sulpher burning with more subtill smoke: When Earth that food and oylie nourishment With drawes, the matter by long feeding spent; The hungry fire of sustenance beeft, Ill-brooking famine, leaues, by being left. In Hyperboean Pallene liue A People, if to Fame we credit giue, Who, diuing three times thrice in Tritons lake, Of Fowle the feathers and the figure take. The like, they say, the the Scythn Witches doe With magicke oyles: incredible though true. If we may trust to triall, see you not Small creatures of corrupted flesh begot? Bury your slaughtred Steere (a thing in vse) And his corrupted bowels will produce Flowre-sucking-Bees; who, like their parent slaine, Loue labour, fields, and toile in hope of gaine. Hornets from buried horses take their birth. Breake off the Crabs bent clawes, and in the earth
Bury the rest; a Scorpion without faile From thence will creepe, and menace with his taile. The Catterpillers, who their cop-webs weaue On tender leafes (as Hindes from proofe receiue) Conuert to poysnous Butterflies in time Greene Frogs, ingendred by the seed of slime, First without feet, then leg, assume; now strong And apt to swimme, their hinder parts more long Then are their former, fram'd to skip add iumpe. The Beares deformed birth is but a lumpe Of liuing flesh: when lked by the Old, It takes a forme agreeing with the mold. Who sees the Young of honie-bearing Bees In their sexangular inelosure, sees Their bodies limb-lesse: these vnformed things In time put forth their feet, and after, wings. The starre-imbellsht Fowle, which Iuno loues, Iones Armour-beaer, Cytharea's Doues, And birds of euery kinde; did we not know Them hatch't of egges, who would coniecture so? Some thinke the pith of dead men, Snakes becomes; When their back-bones corrupt in hollow tombs. Yet these from others doe deriue their birth. One onely Fwle there is in all the Earth, Call'd by th' Assyrian Phoenix, who the waine Of age rpaires, and swes her selfe againe. No  on graine no hes, but on the gumme O Frankinense, and mycre Amomum. Now, when her life iue ages hath fulfil'd; A neither  beake and tallons build Vpon the  of a trembling Palme: This strewd with Caia, Spicknard, precious Balme,
Bruz'd Cinamon, and Myrrh; thereon she bends Her body, and her age in odors ends. This breeding Corp's a little Phoenix beares: Which is it selfe to liue as many yeeres. Growne strong; that load now able to transferre; Her Cradle, and her parents sepulcher, Deuoutly carries to Hyperions towne: And on his flamie Altar layes it downe. If these be wonderfull, admire like strange Hyaena's, who their sex so often change: Those foodlesse creatures, fed by ayre alone; Who euery colour, which they touch, put on. The Lynx, first brought from conquered India By vine bound Bacchus, his hot pisse, they say, Congeales to stone. So Corall, which below The water is a limber weed, doth grow Stone-hard, when toucht by aire. But Day will end, And Phoebus panting Steeds to Seas descend, Before my scant oration could persue All sorts of shapes, that change their old for new. For this we see in all is generall. Some Nations gather strength, and others fall. Troy, rich and powrefull, which so proudly stood; That could for ten yeeres spend such streames of blood; For buildings, onely her old ruines showes; For riches, tombs; which slaughtred Sires inclose. Sparta, Mycenae, were of Greece the flowres; So Cecrop's City, and Amphion's towres; Now glorious Sparta lies vpon the ground; Lofty Mycenae hardly to be found, Of OEdipus his Thebes what now remaines, Or of Pandion's Athens, but their names?
Now Fame reports that Rome by Dardans Sons Begins to rise, where yellow Tybris runs From fountfull Appenines; and there the great Foundation of so great a fabricke seat. This therefore shall by changing propagate, And giue the World a Head. Of such a fate The Prophets haue diuin'd. And this of old, As I remember, Priam's Helen told To sad Aeneas, of all hope forlorne, In sinking Troy's eclipse. O Goddesse-borne, If our Appollo can presage at all; Troy, thou in safety, shall not wholly fall. Both fire and sword shall giue thy vertue way: Flying with thee, thou Ilium shalt conuay; Vntill thou finde a Land as yet vnknowne, To Troy, and thee, more friendly than thy owne. A City built by Phrygians I fore-see; So great none euer was, is, or shall bee. Others shall make it great: but He, whose birth Springs from lus, Soueraigne of the Earth. He, hauing rul'd the World, shall then ascend Aethereall thrones▪ and Heauen shall be his End. This, I remember, with propheticke tongue, Sage Helen to diuine Aeneas sung. We ioy to see our kindreds City grow: The Phrygians happy in their Ouer-throw. But lest our heedlesse Steeds too far should range From their proposed course; All suffer change: The heauens themselues, what vnder them is found; We, of the World a part, since we as well Haue Soules as Bodies, which in beasts may dwell:
To those, which may our parents Soules inuest, Our brothers, dearest friends, or men at least; Let vs both safety, and respect afford: Nor heape their bowels on Thyestes boord. How ill ur'd! to shed the bloud of man How wickedly is he pepar'd, who can Asunder cut the throats of calues; and heares The bellowing reeder with relentlesse eates! Or silly kids, which like poore infants cry, Sticke with his knife! or his voracitie Feed with the fowle he fed! ô to what ill: Are they not prone, who are so bent to kill! Let Oxen till the ground, and die with age: Let Sheepe defend thee from the winters rage: Goats bring their vdders to thy paile. Away With nets, grns, snares, and arts that doe betray: Deceiue not birds with lime; nor Deere inclose With terrors; nor thy baits to fish expose. The hurtfull kill: yet only kill: nor eat Defiling flesh; but feed on fitter meat. With other, and the like Philosophy Instructed; Nma, now return'd, was by Th'intreating Latne crown'd. Taught by his Bride The Nymph Aegeria, by the Muses guide, Religion institutes; a People rude And prone to warre, with lawes and peace imbu'd. His raigne and age resign'd to funerall; Plebeians, Roman Danies, Patricians, all For Numa moune. His wife the Citie fled: Hid in Aricia's Vale, the ground her bed, The woods her hroud, disturbes with grones and cries Orestean Diana's sacrifice.
How oft the Nymphs who haunt that Groue and Lake Reprou'd her teares, and words of comfort spake! How oft the Thesean Heros, Temperate Thy sorrow, said! Nor onely is thy fate To be deplor'd: on worse mis-fortunes looke; And you will yours with greater patience brooke. Would mine were no example to appease So sad agrie: yet mine your griefe may ease. Perhaps y'haue heard of one Hippolytus; By  fraud, and fathers credulous Beleefe deuow'd to death. Admire you may That I am he, if credit, what I say. Whom Phoedra formerly solicited, But vanly to do file my fathers bed. Fearing tection, or in that refu'd; She  he crime, and me of her's accus'd. My father, nishing the innocent, Along with me his winged curses sent. Toward Pittan Troezen me my Chariot bore: And ding now y the Corinthian shore, The smooth Seas swell; a monstrous billow rose, Which, rouling like a mountaine, greater growes; Then, bellowing, at the top asunder rend: When from the breach, brest high, a Bull ascends; Who at his dreadfull mouth and nosthrils spouts Part of the Sea. Feare all my followers routs: But my afflicted minde was all this while Vnterifi'd; intending my exile. When the hot horses start, eect their eares: With horror rapt, and chased by their feares, ragged rocks the tottr'd Chariot driue: While I to curbe their fury vainly striue;
The bits all frotht with fome: with all my might Pull backe the raignes, now lying bolt vp-right. Nor had their heady fright my strength o'r-gon; Had not the feruent wheele, which roules vpon The bearing Axel-tree, rusht on a stump: Which brake, and sell asunder with that iump. Throwne from my chariot, in the raignes fast-bound, My guts drag'd out aliue, my sinewes wound About the stumpe, some of my limbs hal'd thence You might haue seene, some hanging in suspence; My breaking ones to cracke, not any whole, While I exhal'd my faint and weary soule. No part of all my parts you could haue found That might be knowne: for all was but one wound. Now say, selfe-tortred Nymph, or can, or dare You your calamities with ours compare? I also saw those realms, to Day vnknowne: And bath'd my wounds in wauy Phlegeton. Had not Apollo's Son imploi'd the aid Of his great Art; I with the dead had staid. But when by potent hearbs, and Paens skill, I was restor'd, 'gainst angry Plutos will: Lest I, if seene, might enuy haue procur'd, Me, friendly Cynthia with a cloud immur'd: And that, though seene, I might be hurt by none; She added age, and left my face vnknowne. Whether in Delos, doubting, or in Creet; Reiecting Creet and Delos as vnmeet, She plac't me here. Nor would I should retaine The memory of One by horses flaine: But said; Hence forward Virbus be thy name. That wer't Hippolytus; though thou the same,
One of the Lesser Gods, here, in this Groue, I Cynthia serue; preserued by her loue. But others miseries could not abte Aegeria's sorrowes, nor preuent her fate. Who, couched at the bases of a hill, Thawes into teares, that streame-like ran; vntill Apollo's Sister, pitying her woes, Turn'd hert' a Spring; whose current euer flowes. The Nymphs and Amazonian this amaz'd; No lesse than when the Tyrrhen Plough-man gaz'd Vpon the fatall clod, that mou'd alone: And, for a humane shape, excharg'd its owne. With infant lips the newly Animate, Reueal'd the Mysteries of future fate: Whom Natiues Tages call'd. He first of all Th' taught to tell what would be fall. Or when astonisht Romulus of old Did, on Mount Palatine, his lance behold To flourish with greene leaues: the fixed foot Stood not on steele, but on a liuing root. Which, now no weapon, spreading armes displai'd; And gae admirers vnexpected shade. Or when as Cippus in the liquid glasse Beheld his hornes, which his beleefe surpasse. Who lifting oft his fingers to his brow, Felt what before he saw: nor longer now Condemnes his sight. Return'd with victory; His eyes and hornes erecting to the skie: You Gods, what e're these prodigies portend; If prosperous, he said, let them descend On Romans and on Rome: but if they be Vnfortunate, ô let them fall on me!
An Altar then of liuing turfe erects; The fire feeds with perfumes, pure wine iniects: And with the panting entrailes of a beast New slaine, consults; to know the Gods behest. This, when the Tyrrben Augur had beheld, And saw therein endeuours that excell'd, Although obscure; he from the sacrifice To Cippus hornes conuerts his steady eyes: Haile King, to thee, and to those hornes of thine, This place, and Latian towers, their rule resigne. Delay not; enter thou the yeelding gate: Haste, Cippus, haste: such is the Will of Fate. Thou shalt be crown'd a King vpon that day: And safely an eternall Scepter sway. He, starting backe, from Rome diuerts his face: And said; You Gods, farre hence this Omen chace. Better that I in banishment grow old; Than me, a King, the Capitoll behold. Hiding his hones with leauie ornaments, The people and graue Senat he conuents. Then mounts a Mound, late by the Souldier made, And praying first (as was the custome) said; Vnlesse expell'd your Citie, here is One Will be your King: though not by name, yet knowne By his strange hornes. I heard the Augur say, If once in Rome, you all should him obey. He might, vnstopt, haue entred without feate: But I withstood; though none to me more neare. Be he, Quirites, into exile sent: Or, if he merit such a punishment, Binde him in heauie chaines, and keepe him sure: Or with the Tyrants death your feares secure.
The troubled People such a murmuring make; As when farre off the roring surges take On ratling shores; or when throught high-trust Pines Lowd Eurus howles. One only Voice dis-ioynes In this confusion; asking, Which is he? All seeking for the hornes they could not see, Cippus repli'd; Behold the man you looke. Then from his head (with-held) his garland tooke; And shew'd the hornes which one his fore-head grew. Not one but sigh'd, and downe his count'nance threw: And those cleare browes (a thing beyond beliefe) Adorn'd with merit, they behold with griefe. Nor suffer him his honour to debase: But on his head a laurell garland place. And since he his owne entrance did with-stand: The Nobles, in due fauour, so much land To Cippus gaue, as well two oxen might Round with a plough from morning vntill night. The Monumentall figure of his hornes, So much admir'd, the golden Posts adornes. Now Muses, Goddesses of Verse, relate (You know, nor yeares your memory abate) How Aesculapius in our Citie found A Temple, by circumfluent Tybris bound. A deadly plague the Latian aire defil'd: Soules from their seats the pale disease exil'd. Wearied with funeralls, when physicke fail'd; Nor any humane industry preuail'd; They seeke coelestiall aid. To Delphos sent, Built in the round Earths nauell, and present Their prayers to Phoebus; that he would descend To their reliefe, and giue their woes an end.
His Temple, Laurell, and his Quiuer, shake: Who thus, they trembling, from his Tripod spake. What here you seeke, you nearer should haue sought: And seeke it nearer yet. Apollo ought Not now to cure you, but Apollo's Seed. Goe with successe; and fetch my Sonne with speed. The Senat hauing heard this Oracle, The Citie search, where Phoebus sonne should dwell. The shore of Epidaure the Legate seekes: There anchoring, he intreats th' assembled Greekes To send their God: who might th'Ausonian State To health restore; and vrg'd the charge of Fate. They vary in opinion: some assent To send this succour; many, not content To lose their owne in giuing others aid, Striue to retaine him, and the rest distwade. While thus they doubt, the Day declin'd his Light: And Earth-borne shadowes cloth'd the world in Night. Th' Health-giuing God, in sleepe, appears to stand In his old forme; a stafe in his left hand: And stroking with his right his reuerend beard; From his hope-rendring brest these words were heard. Feare not, I come; my shape I will forsake: View, and marke well this staffe-infolding Snake: Such will I seeme, yet shew of greater size; So great as may a Deity comprize. God with the Voice, with God and Voice away Sleepe flew: fled Sleepe persude by chearefull Day. The Starres now vanquisht by the mornings flame; The doubtfull Nobles to the temple came, Intreat him by coelest all signes to shew Whether he were content to stay or goe.
This hardly said, the God in Serpent's shroud, His high crest gold-like glistring, hist aloud. His statue, altar, gates, the marble flore, And golden roofe, shooke at th' approching Powre. He, in his Fane, brest-high his body rais'd: Rouling about his eyes that flame-like blaz'd. All tremble. The chast Priest, his haire imbraid With Virgin fillet, knew the God, and said: 'Tis he! 'tis he! all you who present are Pray with your hearts and tongues: ô heauenly-Faire, Propitious proue to those who thee implore! All that were there the present Powre adore; Reiterating what the Priest had said: With heart and tongue the Romans also pray'd. He, by the motion of his lofty crest, And doubled hisses, signe's to their request. Then sliding downe the polisht staires, his looke Reuerts on his old altars; now forsooke: Salute's his shrine, and Temple deckt with towres. Then creeping on the ground, strew'd with fresh flowres. Indenteth through the Citie; stopping where The Harbour is defended by a Peere. The following troopes, and those whose zeales assist In honouring him, with gentle lookes dismist; He climbes th' Ausonian ship: which felt the waight, And shrunke with pressure of so great a fraight. The ioyfull Romans, offering on the strand A Bull to Neptune; anchor weigh, and land Forsake with easie gales, Rais'd on his traine, He, leaning, lookes vpon the blew-wau'd Maine. Through Inian Seas by friendly Zphyrus borne, They fell with Italy on the sixth morne.
Lacinian Iunos Fane, Scyllaean shores, Iapygia past; they shun with nimble ores Amphrysian rockes; Ceraunian, weather-cleft; Romechium, Caulon, and Naryciae left: Scilian Straights o're-come, and wrackfull seas, Saile by the mansion of Hippotades: By Temesa, in metalls fruitfull; by Leucosia, and the Paestan Rosary. Nere capreae, and Minerua's Fore-land row, Surrentine hills, where wines so generous grow; Heraclea, Stabiae, Naples borne to ease, Cumaean Sibyl's Temple: next to these, Hot Baths; Linternum, sweet with masticke flowres; Vultrnus, who his sandy channel skoures; Sinuessa, swarming with white Snakes; ill-air'd Minturnae; and where Pietie prepar'd His Nurse a tombe: forthwith the mansion make Of fell Antiphates; and then the Lake— Besieged Trachin: thence directly bore To wee's Ile, and Antium's solid shore. The Sea now swelling high, this harbour holds The Saile-wing'd ship. The God his orbs vnfolds: And, with huge doublings o're the yellow sand Slides to his fathers Temple on that strand. Rough waues asswag'd, the Epidaurian Guest His fathers altar leaues; to Sea-ward prest, Slicing the sandie shore with rustling scales: And, by her sterne the ship ascending, sailes Till he to Castrum, to Lauinia's name— Retaining Seat, and mouth of Tyber came. All hither throng; sonnes, daughters, mothers, fires, The Nunnes who keepe the Phrygian Vesta's fires,
The Gods appease: the headlesse inwards shew Signes of succeeding Tumults, Death, and Woe. Dogs nightly, in the Court, about the Gods, And holy Temples howle. From sad abodes The Dead arise, and wander here and there: Rome trembling, both with Earth-quakes and with feare, These Warnings of the Gods no changes wrought In Fate, or Treason. Murderous swords were brought Into the Temple: for no place might sort With such a Slaughter, but the sacred Court. Then Venus smote her brest: who sought to shroud, And snatch him thence in that Aethereall cloud, Which Paris from Atrides rage conuaid: And freed Aeneas from Tydids blade. Daughter, said Ioue, canst thou resist the doome Of conquering Fates? Into their mansion come, There shalt thou see Decrees that needs must Passe, Writ in huge folds of solid steele and brasse. Which safe, eternall, euer fixed there; My thunder, lightnings rage, nor ruine feare. In lasting Adamant there mast thou reade What shall to thy great Progenie succeed. I read, remember well, and will relate What may informe thee in succeeding fate. He, whom thou striust to saue, his race hath runne Of Time and Glory: whom, thou and his Sonne Shall make in heauen a God; on Earth, with praire And Temples dignifi'd. His names great Heire Alone his Load shall beare: and strongly shall By our conduct reuenge his fathers fall. By his good fortune Mutinae, o're-throwne, Shal ue for peace: Pharsalian fields shall grone▪
Slaughter againe Philippi shall imbrue: On red Sicilian Seas he shall subdue A mighty Name. Th'Aegyptian Spouse shall fall, Ill trusting to her Roman Generall: To make out stately Capitoll obay Her proud Canopus, shall in vaine assay. What need I of those barbarous People tell, And Nations, which by either Ocean dwell? He shall the habitable Earth command; And stretch his Empire ouer sea and land. Peace giuen to Earth; he shall conuert his care To ciuill Rule, iust Lawes; and by his faire Example Vertue guide. Then looking to The future times, and Nephewes to ensue; A Sonne shall blesse him from a holy wombe: To him he shall resigne his name, and roome. Nor shall, till full of age, ascend th'aboads Of heauenly Dwellers, and his kindred Gods. Meane-while from this flaine corps his soul conuay Vp to the starres, and giue it a cleare Ray: That Iulius may with friendly influence Shine on our Capitoll and Court from thence. This said: inuisible fae Venus stood Amid the Senate; from his corps, with blood▪ Defil'd, her Caesars new-fled spirit bare To heauen, not suffer'd to resolue to aire. And, as in her soft bosome borne, shee might Perceiue it take a Powre, and gather light. When once let loose, It forth with vp-ward flew; And afte it long blazing tresses drew. The radiat Starre his Sonnes great acts beheld T'out-luster his: and ioy'd, to be excell'd.
Though he would haue his Fathers deeds preferr'd Before his owne: yet free-tongu'd Fame, deterr'd By no commandement, yeeld th'euited Bayes To his cleare browes; and but in this gain-sayes. So Atreus yeelds to Agamemnons fame; Aegeus so to Theseus: Peleus name Stoopes to Achilles. That I may confer Th'illustrious to their equalls, Iupiter So Saturne tops. Iou rules the arched Skie, And triple-World; th Earths vast Monarchie T' Augustus bowes: both Fathers, and both sway. You Gods, Aeneas mates, who made your way Through fire and sword; you Gods of men become; Quirinus, Father of triumphant Rome; Thou Mars, inuincible Quirinus Sire; Chast Vsta, with thy euer-burning fire, Among great Caesars Houshold-Gods inshrin'd; Domesticke Phoebus, with his Vesta ioyn'd; Thou Ioue, Whom in Tarpeian towres we adore; And you, all you, whom Poets may implore: Slow be that day, and after I am dead, Wherein Augustus, of the world the Head, Leauing the Earth, shall vnto Heauen repaire; And  those that seeke to him by prayer. And now the Worke is ended, which, Ioue's rage, Nor Fire▪ nor Sword shall raze, nor eating Age. Come when it will my deaths vncertaine howre; Which only of my body hath a powre: Part transcend the skier; And my immortall name shall neuer die.
For, where-so-ere the Roman Eagles spread Their conquering wings, I shall of all be read: And, if we Prophets truly can diuine, I, in my liuing Fame, shall euer shine.
planations. With these I had thought, in their seuerall places, to haue char∣ged the margent: but the hastinesse of the Presse, and vnexpected want of leasure, haue preuented me. The same reason may serue for diuers slips, aed errours, which I not only know but acknowledge. Yet if the too cleanly Criticke sweepe not all the dust together and lay it on one heape, it may perhaps be hardly dis∣cerned, howsoeuer borne-with in so long and interrupted a labour.
A ABantiades. pag. III. vers. 7. Actisius the Sonne of Abas King of Argos. Abantiades. pag. 117. vers. 4.and pag. 124. vers. 25. and pag. 128. vers. 21. Perseus great grand-childe to Abas. Acheloides. the Syrens, daughters to Achelous. Acheron. a Riuer in Hell, and signifies depriuati∣on of Ioy. Acrisionides. Perseus grand-child to Acrisius. Actorides. pag. 212. vers. 20. Euritus and Creatus the sonnes of Actor. Actorides. pag. 359. vers. 13. Patroclus grand∣childe to Actor. The Aeacides. pag. 188. vers. 19. Peleus, Tela∣mon, and Phocus, sonnes to Aeacus. Aeacides. pag. 297. vers 7. and 32. pag. 302. vers. 6. Peleus the son of Aeacus. Aeacides. pag. 321. vers. 21. and thence-forth, A∣chillles
the grand-childe of Aeacus. Aello. one of the Harpyes. Aeetias. Mdea, the daughter of Aeeta. Aegides. Theseus, the sonne of Ae geus. Aegis. Minerua's shield. Aeolian Virgin. pag. 149. vers. 24. Arne, the daugh∣ter of Aeolus. Aeolides. pag. 107. vers. 31. Athamas, the sonne of Aeolus. Aeolides. pag. 194. vers. 20. Cephalus, the grand∣child of Aeolus. Aeolides. pag. 250. vers. 17. Macareus and Ca∣nace, the sonne and daughter of Aeolus. Aesonides. Iason, the sonne of Aeson. Agenorides. Cadmus, the sonne of Agenor. Otus and Ephialtes, got by Neptune on the wife of Aloeus. Alcides. a name of Hercules, which signifies strength. Amzonian Heros. Hippolytus, sonne to Hippo∣lyte the Amazonian. Amiclydes. Hyacinthus, the sonne of Amyclas. Amphritite. the daughter of Oceanus, and wife to Neptune; taken for the Sea. Amphitryonides▪ Hercules the son of Amphitryo. Ampycides. Mopsus, the sonne of Ampycus.
Anubis. an Idoll of the Aegyptians with the head of a dog. Apis. a blacke Oxe spotted with white, worshipped by the Aegyptians in remembrance of Osiris Aphrodites. a name of Venus, in that sprung from the foam of the Sea. Arcturus. a Star in the taile of the Greater Beare. Astraea. Iustice, so called of Astraeus, a most iust, Prince. Astraean sons. The winds, sons to the Gyant Astraen. Athamantiades. Palaemon, the sonne of Athamas. Atlantiades. pag. 24. vers. 8.and pag. 48. vers. 13. Mercurie the grand-childe of Atla. Atlantiades. pag. 102. vers. 23. Hermaphroditus, the sonne of Mercurie, and great grand-childe of Atlas. Atracides. Caeneus, so called of Atrax a Citie of Thessalie. Atrides. Agamemnon; sometimes Menelaus; both sonnes to Atreus. Auernian Iuno. Proserpina. Auernus. a lake in hell, oer which no birds can flie without falling. Autonoeius. Actaeon the sonne of Autonoe, Gad∣mus daughter. Auster. The South-wind.
B BAcchiadae. the off-spring of Bacchia the Co∣rinthian. Bacchanals. Women solemnizing the feast of Bac∣chus. Belides. the Necces of Belus, and daughters of Danaus. Berecynthian. pag. 293. vers. 9. Midas of Bere∣cynthus, a Citie of Phrygia. Bootes. the Star, that followes Charles Waine. Boreas. the North-wind. Bromius. a name of Bacchus, which signifies ra∣ging. Bubastis. an Aegyptian Goddesse, companion to Isis. C CArpathian Prophet. Proteus a God of the Sea. Cecropides. the daughters of Cecrops, King of Athens. Centaures. said to be halfe men and halfe beasts, in that they were the first that rid on horses. Cerastae. men with hornes.
Cerberus. the Hell-bound with three heads, signif∣ing a deourer of the dead. Chimaera. a monster; hauing the face of a woman, the body of a goat, and the taile of a Serpent. Colchis. Medea, so called of Colchis, where shee was borne. Crataeis daughter. Sylla. Cyclades. Ilands in the Aegaean Sea, dispersed in forme of a cycle. Cyclops. Giants, and sons of Neptune; so called of the round eye, which they had in their fore-hads. Cyclopan darts. Thundr and Lightning forged by the Cyclops. Cyllenius, a name of Mercuric, in that borne on the hill Cyllene. Cynthius Cynthia names of Apollo and Diana, of Cyn∣thus a hill in Delo, where they were borne. Cyprides a names of Venus, of the Iland of Cy∣prus, where shee was worshipped. Cytherea. a name of Venus, of the Iland Cythera, dedicated to Venus. D DAnaean Heros. Perseus the son of Dance. Drdan Prophet. Helenus the son of Prian
Hymen. the God of marriage; sometimes takèn for marriage. Hyperion. sometimes taken for the Sun, some∣times for the father of the Sun. I IAcchus. a name of Bacchus, which signifies cla∣mour. Iapetonides. Atlas the sonne of Iapet. Idalia. Venus of Idalia, a hill in Cyprus, where she had her groues. Ilia des. pag. 267. vers. 4 Ganymed, grand-child to Ilus. Iliades. pag. 412. vers. 18. Romulus, descended from Ilus. Ilithyia. a name of Lucina, Goddesse of child birth. Inachis. pag. 21. vers. 30. Iö, the daughter of Ina∣chus Inachides. pag. 26. vers. 19. Epaphus, the sonne of Iö, and grand-child of Inachus. Inachides. pag. 115. vers. 5. Perseus. The Argo∣lians being so called of the riuer Inachus. Iö. an acclamation of joy: where it stands not for Io the daughter of Inachus. Iris. the Raine-bow.
Ismenides Ismenians Thebans, so called of Ismenus, a riuer of Boeotia. Ithacus, Vlysses, of the land Ithaca, where he was borne. Iülus. a name of Ascanius. L LEmnian issue. pag. 55. vers. 22. Erichthonius son to Vulcan, who dwelt in Lemnos. Lenaeus. a name of Bacchus, of the vessell that re∣ceiues the wine from the presse. Lethe. a riuer of Hell, and signifies forgetfulnesse. Liber. a name of Bacchus, in that wine sreeth the heart from sorrow. Lucifer. the Morning Starre. Lyaeus. a name of Bacchus; the same with Liber. M MAeandrius. Caunus, grand-child by the mo∣thers side to the riuer Maeander. Maedusean Herse. Pegasus, sprung from the bloud of Medusa. Maeonidae. the Muses. Of Maeonia, where they dwelt.
Paeons. the daughters of Pierus, so called of the woods of Paeonia, which they frequented. Palladium. the Image of Pallas. Paphian Heros. Pigmalion of Paphos. Pelides. Achilles, the son of Peleus. Persephone. The same with Proserpina. Phasias. a name of Medea, from the riuer Phasts. Phegides. Themenus and Axion the sonnes of Phegeus. Pheres hope. Admetus, the son of Pheres. Phlegeton. a burning river in hell. Phoebus Phoebe names of the Sun and Moone, in regard of their splendor. Phorcydes. the daughter of Phorcus. Phoronis. Iô, the sister of Phoroneus. Pleias. Maia, one of the Pleiades, and mother to Mercury. Pleiones Nephew. Mercury, grand-childe to Plei∣one, the wife of Atals. Poeans Heire Poeantius Philoctetes, the sonne of Paean. Pramides. pag. 355, vers. 32. Hector, the son of Priamus. Promerhides. Deucalion, the sonne of Prome∣theus. Properides. Infamous women of Cyprus.
Q QVirinus. a name of Romulus. Quirites. Romans, so called of Quirinus. R RHamnusia. a name of Nemesis, of the city Rhamnus, where she badher Temple. S SAturnius Saturnia Iupiter and Iuno, the sonne and daughter of Saturne. Smintheus. a name of Apollo, for destroying of mice. Sol. the Sun. Stygian shades. Hell; socalled of Styx, an infernall riuer. T TAntalides. pag. 348. vers. 15. Agamemnon, grand-child to Tantalus. Taygeta. one of the Pleiades, or seven Starres. Tellus. the Earth. Teucrans. Troians, descended of Teucer. Thaumantias. Iris, the daughter of Thaumas. Thspiades. the Muses; of Thesplae, a City neere Helicon.
Thestiadae. Toxeus and Plexippus, the sonnes of Thestius. Thestias. Althaea, the daughter of Thestius. Thestorides. Chalcas, the son of Thestor. Thyen. Bacchus; of Thyone, a name of his mo∣ther Semele. Thyrsus. a Iauelin woond with Iuy, borne by Bac∣chus. Titan. a name of the Sun, from his mother Titea. whose 45. children were generally called by the name of Titans. Titania. p. 14. v. 19 Pyrrha, descended of the Titans. Titania. pag. 67. vers. 19. and pag. 179. vers. 5. Diana, grand-child to Titaea. Titania. pag. 157. vers. 11. Latona, daughter to Coeus, one of the Titans. Titania. pag. 386. vers. 13. Circe, descended of the Titans. Triones. the seuen stars, that turne about the Pole. Triopeius. Eresichhon, the sonne of Triopas. Tritonia. Pallas, so called for her wisdome. Troades. the women of Troy. Tydides. Diomedes, the sonne of Tydeus. Tyndaridae. Castor and Pollux, the sons of Tyn∣darus. Tyrinthian. Hercules of Tyrus.
V VVlcans seed pag. 186. vers. 19. Periphaus. Z ZEphyruthe West-wind. FINIS.
