19084 99838902 3292
THE SINNERS Sanctuary. ISA. 7.55. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him re∣turne unto the Lord, and hee will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for hee will abun∣dantly pardon. HIERON. The Lord doth neither performe the good things which he promised to the Saints, if they returne to iniquities; nor the evils which hee threatned to sinners, if they returne unto sal∣vation. By THOMAS PACKER, his Majesties Servant. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Haviland, for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold at his shop in S. Pauls Church yard at the signe of the Angel, 1638.
TO THE CHILDREN of Men. ROM. 3.23. For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God. COme now,Isa. 1.18. and let us reason to∣gether, saith the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crymsin, they shall be as wooll. Have I any pleasure atEzec. 18.23
all, that the wicked should die, saith the Lord God? and not that hee should returne from his waies, and live? 31.Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby yee have trans∣gressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spi∣rit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel? 1 Sa. 12.23.I will teach you the good and the right way. 24.Onely feare the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your heart: for cōsider how great things he hath done for you.
Wee must serve the Lord, our God,Deu. 28.47 with joi∣fulnesse and with glad∣nesse of heart, for the a∣bundance of all things. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart,Pro. 35. and leane not unto thine owne un∣derstanding. In all thy waies ac∣knowledge him,6. and hee shall direct thy paths. Blessed is that man that maketh the Lord his trust.Psal. 40.4. And be not conformed to this world;Rom. 12.2 but be yee transformed by the re∣newing of your mind, that ye may prove what
is that good, that accep∣table, and perfect will of God. Augustin.Doe not understand that thou maist beleeve, but beleeve that thou maist understand; un∣derstanding is the reward of Faith. Iohn. 11.40Jesus saith unto Mar∣tha, Said I not unto thee, that if thou wouldest be∣leeve, thou shouldest see the glory of God? Act. 18.27.When Apollos came into Achaia, hee helped them much, who had beleeved through grace. Isa. 7.9.If ye will not beleeve,
surely yee shall not bee established. We beeleve, and know,Ioh. 6.69. that thou art Christ, that Sonne of the living God. Teach me good judge∣ment and knowledge,Psal. 119.66. O Lord; for I have be∣leeved thy Commande∣ments. It belongeth to every private man to judge of the doctrine of religion,Brentius. [for satisfaction of his owne conscience] and to discerne the truth from falshood. That Religion whichLipsius. is sincerely taken out of
the holy Scriptures, is the true, and Christian Religion. Andrad.For they containe the most ample Canon, that is, the rule, and square of Piety, Faith, and Reli∣gion. August.They have delivered unto us, that there is but one God, and one Christ; one Hope, and one Faith; one Church, and one Baptisme. Ferus.They are the sole rule of veritie; and whatsoe∣ver differs, or contradi∣cteth the same, it is error, and cockle, with what
shew soever it commeth forth. They are all plaine to him that understandeth,Pro. 3.5. and right to them that finde knowledge. All those things which appertaine to faith,Aug. and direction of life, are laid downe plainly in the holy Scriptures. They are manifest to them,Epiphan. who repaire unto them, with a religious heart. Let not our Religion therefore consist in our fantasies; for any truth,Aug. whatsoever it be, is better
than any thing, that can of our own head be devised. Aug.Godly humility doth more easily finde out the Maker of the stars, than proud curiosity the order of the starres. Booke of nature into the book of Grace.The depth of Predesti∣nation, and the manner of Regeneration are diffi∣cult points of divine my∣steries, which a studious Divine, an illuminated spirit cannot find out. Ibidem.Let us religiously adore these things by faith, and not curiously search into them by rea∣son, further than Gods
Word doth allow. This is the perfection of the regenerate;August. If they acknowledge themselves to be imperfect. The doctrine of the holy Ghost doth not encou∣rage curiositie,Bernard. but infla∣meth charitie. When the soule is o∣vercome by the fever,Chrysost. or fiery heat of imaginati∣ons, then it questioneth; but when it is sound, and in good temper, it reaso∣neth not, but faithfully beleeveth. As zeale must erect our discretion,Bernard. that wee run
not too slowly; So dis∣cretion must direct our zeale, that we run not too fast. Aug.God will reveale wis∣dome onely to such as walke continually in the way of peace; not in the way of precisenesse. Harsnet.Tell me, what is not contained in the ten Cōmandements, which of a Christian is to bee performed? Lactant.When God opened his truth unto us, he would have us know those things only which it be∣hooved man to know for
obtaining life: But of those things, which ap∣pertained to curious, & profane desires, he spake not, that they might bee hidden. Why then doest thou seeke those things which thou canst not know? neither art thou more blessed, if thou knowest them? Grace teacheth a man to put his knowledge in practice.Harsnet. He desires to be taught,Idem. that he may walke; not that he may talke, as too many doe. Adde to your faith ver∣tue,2 Pet. 1.5.
and to vertue know∣ledge; 6.And to knowledge temperance; and to tem∣perance patience; and to patience godlinesse: 7.And to godlinesse brotherly kindnesse; and to brotherly kindnesse charitie. 8.For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you, that you shall neither be barren, nor un∣fruitfull in the know∣ledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Luther in Luke 6.Let us first repose Faith in God alone; and
then let us direct our works to the benefit of our neighbour. As many as will not fol∣low God,Idem in Ephes. 5. and walke in love, and I shew forth their faith by their works, are neither the sons of God, nor heires of his kingdom. What doth it profit,Ia. 2.14. my brethren, though a man say hee hath faith? can faith save him? The end of the Com∣mandement is Charity,1 Tim. 1.5. out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeined. By faith which is con∣ceivedHaymo.
in the heart, pro∣fessed with the mouth, and adorned with good works, the just man li∣veth eternally. Cyprian.Life is here lost, or wonne; everlasting sal∣vation is here provided for, by the due worship∣ping of God, and the fruits of faith. Epiphan.For in the age to come, after a mans death, there is no more helpe by fa∣sting, no more calling to penance, no more exhi∣bition of Almes. Epiphan.It is as the corne, that swelleth not, after it is
reaped, neither can bee spoiled with the wind. The garners are sealed up, the time is past,Idem. the combat is finished, the lists are voided, and the garlands are given.Aug. Let us therefore bee at one with the word of God, while we are in this life, for when we are gone out of this world, there shall bee no more com∣punction, or satisfaction; there remaineth no more, but the Judge, the Gao∣lour, and the Prison. When wee were ene∣mies,Rom. 5.10. we were reconciled
unto God, by the death of his Son. Heb. 9.26.Once in the end of the world hath he appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himselfe. Acts 10.43.To him give all the Prophets witnesse, that, through his name, who∣soever beleeveth in him, shall receive remission of sinnes. Bellar.Wee confesse, that Christ hath truly, yea most fully satisfied God the Father for us, and for the whole world. Aug.JESUS CHRIST taking upon him the pu∣nishment
but not the fault, hath therby blotted out both the fault, and the punishment. Let us hold fast the pro∣fession of our faith,Heb. 10. with∣out wavering, for hee is faithfull that promised. The rule of Catholike faith is certain & known.Bellar. There is nothing more knowne,Idem. nothing more certain, than the holy Scriptures, which are contained in the writings of the Prophets and A∣postles. They are Catho∣likes,Aug. which be of sound
Faith, and good life. Idem.Hereticks doe violate faith by beleeving false things of God. Tertul.Whatsoever favoureth against the truth, is an heresie, be it never so an∣cienta custome. Aug.And schismatiks (though they beleeve the same things with us, yet) doe fly from brotherly Cha∣ritie, by their wicked di∣visions. Idem.Wherefore neither doth the Heretick belong to the Catholike Church, because hee loveth not God:
Nor the Schismatike,Idem. because he loveth not his neighbour. Pure Religion,Ja. 1.27. and undefiled before GOD, and the Father, is this, To visit the fatherlesse, and the widowes in their af∣fliction; and to keepe himselfe unspotted from the world. If true charity,Casarius. and humility be wanting, we ought not to presume, and trust to the habit on∣ly of Religion. Let us search,Lam. 3.40. and try our waies, and turne a∣gaine unto the Lord.
25.The Lord is good to them that wait for him; to the soule that seeketh him. 30.For hee doth not af∣flict willingly; nor grieve the Children of Men. 1 PET. 2.17. Feare God. Ho∣nor the King.
The contents are these, viz. THe Sinners conversion. Pa. 1 His godly desire. 4 His comming unto God. 7 His Repentance. 10 His Confession. 15 His Absolution. 19 His amendment of life. 23 His assurance of Salvation. 30 Gods mercy. 34 Death. 40 The last Iudgement. 44 4. Helps to the amendment of life. 1. Prayer. 51 2. Reading the Scriptures. 55 3. Hearing the Word prea∣ched. 59 4. Sacraments. 62 The holy Eucharist, or Sacra∣ment of the Body and Bloud of our Lord. 64 A remembrance of the death, and passion of our Saviour Christ. 68 Worthy Receivers. 70
Vnworthy Receivers. 74 Transubstantiation. 76 To be received in both kinds. 80 The Prayer before receiving the Communion. 83 The Prayer after receiving the Communion. 85 A Prayer before reading the holy Scriptures. 87 A Prayer for faith. 88 For Repentance. 89 A short and effectuall Prayer. 90 The generall Confession. 91 A Prayer for the Morning. 93 A Prayer for all times. 95 A Prayer before going to bed 96 A Psalme of contrition, and con∣fession. 98 A Psalme for remission. 100 A Psalme for mercy, and dire∣ction. 102 A Psalme of confidence in Gods mercie. 104 A Psalme of praise. 106
THE SINNERS Conversion. O Israel,Hos. 14.1. returne un∣to the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine ini∣quity. Returne unto mee,Malac. 3.7 and I will returne unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts. Our conversion will al∣waies finde him prepared.August. Humble your selves there∣fore under the mighty hand of God,Iam. 4.10. that hee may exalt you in due time.
Lyra in Eph.Humility is the foundation of the spirituall building. Iam. 4.8.Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Greg. Naz.O the readinesse of Gods gratious love! O the easinesse of his exorable reconcile∣ment! Perkins.A man beginning to bee converted, is at that instant the childe of God. Idem.Inward motions, and incli∣nations of Gods Spirit, are the materiall beginning of a Sinners conversion. Phil. 3.13.For it is God that worketh in you, both to will, and to doe, of his good pleasure. Luke 15.The prodigall son, when he came to himselfe, said: I will arise, and goe to my father, and will say unto him; Fa∣ther, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee;
And am no more worthy to be called thy sonne,Ibidem. make me as one of thy hired ser∣vants. And he arose,Ibidem. and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. Though a man come to the height of vice,Chrysost. and yet be willing to returne into the way of vertue, God recei∣veth, and embraceth him wil∣lingly. None ought therefore to despaire of pardon,Greg. if about the end of their life they turne to repentance. And although our conver∣sion be good in our last sick∣nesse; yet is that better,Idem. which is performed long before our
death; that wee may with more security passe out of this world. Hieron.God grant the sinner may be as soone turned to repen∣tance, as the Lord is ready to change his determined judge∣ment. Ezech. 33.Turne yee, turne ye from your evill waies; for why will ye dye, O house of Is∣rael? Lam. 15.Turne thou us unto thee, O Lord, and wee shall bee turned. His godly desire. Psal. 42.AS the Hart panteth af∣ter the water brookes, so panteth my soule after thee, O God. 84.My soule longeth; yea,
even fainteth for the Courts of the Lord: My heart, and my flesh crieth out for the li∣ving God. The more earnestly God is desired of us,Gregor. the more sweetly is hee delighted in us. Our desires doe sound more powerfully in the se∣cretest eares of God,Idem. than our words. Hee that searcheth the heart,Rom. 8. knoweth what is the mind of the spirit; because he maketh intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God. God hath annexed a pro∣mise of blessednesse,Perkins. and life everlasting to the desire of grace. Blessed are they which doe hunger,Mat 5. and thirst after
righteousnesse; for they shall be filled. August.The whole life of a good Christian is an holy will and desire. Bradford.God hath given thee a pe∣nitent, and beleeving heart, that is, an heart which desi∣reth to repent, and beleeve; for such an one is taken of him for a penitent and belee∣ving heart, he accepting the will for the deed. 2 Cor. 8.For if there bee first a wil∣ling mind, it is accepted ac∣cording to that a man hath, and not according to that a man hath not. Kmnit.When I have a good desire (though it doth scarcely shew it self in some little, & slender sigh) I must be assured that the Spirit of God is present, and worketh his good worke.
He will fulfill the desire of them that feare him,Psal. 145. he will also heare their cry, and save them. His comming unto God. HEe that commeth unto God,Hebr. 11. must beleeve that he is, and that he is a rewar∣der of them that diligently seeke him. Let us draw neere with a true heart,10. in full assurance of faith. In Christ we have boldnes,Ephes. 3. and accesse, with confidence by the faith of him. The first comming to God,Hom. de fi is through faith, whereby we be justified before him. For the faith of the Ca∣tholike Religion,Chrysost. is the light of the soule; the doore of
life; the foundation of e∣ternall salvation. Aug.Without it, no man can come neere the number of the sons of God; without it, all the endevour of man is void. Gal. 3.For ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. Beda.It commeth not from the wisdome of eloquent words; but from the gift of the hea∣venly calling. Phil. 1.For unto you it is given, in the behalfe of CHRIST, not onely to beleeve on him; but also to suffer for his sake. Mark. 1.When the Scribe said, that to love GOD with all the heart, and with all the un∣derstanding, and with all the soule, and with all the strength; And to love his
neighbour as himselfe, is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices: Jesus said unto him,Ibid. thou art not farre from the King∣dome of heaven. If thy heart can onely sobbe unto GOD, despaire not,Knox. thou art not destitute of Faith; for that onely sobbe is an acceptable Sacrifice unto GOD. The Faith which the Scrip∣ture commendss is nothing else, but,Ferus. To trust in the free mercy of GOD. Come unto mee all yee that labour,Mat. 11. and are heavie laden; and I will give you rest. Incline your eare,Isa. 55. and come unto mee; heare, and your soule shall live: and I will make an everla∣sting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. His Repentance. 2 Pet. 3.THe Lord is long suffe∣ring to us ward, not wil∣ling that any should perish; but that all should come to repentance. Act. 3.Repent ye therfore, and be converted, that your sinnes may be blotted out. Glos. ord.Repentance is a bewayling of our former sins, and a care not to commit the like a∣gaine. Chrysost.God never despiseth re∣pentance, if it bee offered unto him intirely and simply. Hieron.For the Lord respecteth not the length of time; but considereth the upright affe∣ction
of him that repen∣teth. When we feele the bur∣then of our sins,Ʋdall. and be grie∣ved in heart for them, it is the worke of the holy Ghost, and in time will bring forth fruit worthy of repentance. There are foure parts of true repentance.Hom. de poenit. Contrition, which is an un∣fained  sorrow conceived in the heart for our sinnes com∣mitted. Confession, which is an  humble and unfained ac∣knowledging of our sins unto God. Faith whereby we stedfast∣ly  beleeve, that God, for his Sonne Christ Jesus sake, will forgive us all our iniquities. Amendment of life, which  is, to become new creatures,
and to bring forth fruits wor∣thy of repentance. Aug.Neither is it sufficient to repentance, to change our manners into better, and to depart from our evill waies; unlesse GOD be satisfied for our sins past, by the sorrow of repentance, by the groane of humility, by the sacrifice of a contrite heart, Almes deeds accompanying. Chrysost.Not to bee grieved for thy sins, doth more displease God, and provoke his anger, than the sinne which before thou diddest commit. Ioel 2.Therfore now also saith the Lord; Turne ye even to me, with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. Ibidem.And rent your heart, and not your garments, and turne
unto the LORD your GOD; for he is gratious, and merci∣full, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse. When thou so repentest,Aug. that thy soule hath a bitter taste of that, which before was pleasant in thy life; and what before was delightfull to the body, the same tormenteth thee in thine heart, even now dost thou lament, and mourne before GOD. If a man be never so great a sinner,Latimer. yet if he have true re∣pentance, with faith, and hope in GODS mercy, he shall be forgiven. GODS mercy hath no li∣mits at all;Chrysost. if any doe call for helpe, there is one that will heare readily; If any doe re∣pent, there is one that will shew mercy.
Lyra moral.As the Palme tree, which is rugged in the stocke; and hath pleasant fruit in the top; even so a righteous man be∣ginneth in the roughnesse of repentance, and endeth in the sweetnesse of heavenly com∣fort. Hom de poenit.Let us therefore repent for straying from so good a Lord; let us confesse our un∣worthinesse before him; but yet let us trust in Gods free mercy, for Christ Jesus sake, for the pardon of our sins. Gregor.For Gods mercy doth helpe those who repent in this world; but in that which is to come, we doe not repent, but give account of our works. Rom. 2.Despisest thou the riches of his goodnesse, and forbea∣rance, and long suffering, not knowing that the goodnesse
of God leadeth thee to re∣pentance? His Confession. HE that covereth his sins,Prov. 28. shall not prosper, but who so confesseth, and forsa∣keth them shall have mercie. Confesse thy sinnes before God,Chrysost. and declare thine offen∣ces with prayer to the true Judge; not with thy tongue, but with remembrance of thy conscience. That confession delivereth from death,Ambr. which is made by repentance. David said unto the Lord,2 Sam. 24. I have sinned greatly in that I have done: And now I be∣seech thee, O Lord, take a∣way the iniquity of thy ser∣vant,
for I have done foo∣lishly. Basil.I doe not confesse with my lips, that I may manifest my selfe to many; but inwardly in my very heart, shutting mine eyes, to thee alone, that seest the things that are in secret, do I shew my groanes, roaring within my selfe: for the groanes of mine heart, and the lamentations sent to thee, my God, from the depth of my soule, suffice for a confession. Hom. de poenit.This is the chiefest, and most principall Confession, that in the Scriptures, and Word of God, wee are bidden to make; and with∣out the which, we shall never obtaine pardon, and forgive∣nesse of our sins. Bernard.Without this Confes∣sion,
the righteous man is judged unthankfull, and the sinner reputed a dead man Therfre Conf ssion is the way of the sinner, and ne∣verthelesse becommeth the righteous. Lord be mercifull unto me,Psal. 41. heale my soule, for I have sin∣ned against thee. If any say, I have sinned,Iob 33. and perverted that which was right, and it profited mee not; He will deliver his soule from going into the pit,Ibidem. and his life shall see the light. If we will with a sorrowfull,Hom. de poenit. and contrite heart, make an unfeined confession of our sins unto God, he will freely for∣give them, and put all our wic∣kednesse out of his remem∣brance.
Ibid.I doe not say, but that if any do finde themselves troubled in conscience, they may re∣paire to their learned Curat, or Pastor, or to some other godly learned man, and shew the trouble, & doubt of their conscience to him, that they may receive at his hand the comfortable salve of Gods word. Hom. de poenit.But it is against the true Christian liberty, that any man should be bound to the numbering of his sinnes, as hath beene used heretofore, in the time of blindnesse, and ignorance. Bellar.Calvin admitteth of private confession unto the Pastor, when any is afflicted in his conscience, and shall need an∣others helpe: Yet with this moderation, that this con∣fession
bee free, and not exa¦cted; and not injoyning a rehearsall of all particular sins. Let us with a true and con∣trite heart,Hom de oenit. use that kind of confession, which God hath commanded in his word. If we confesse our sins,1 Ioh. 1. he is faithfull, and just, to forgive us our sins; and to cleanse us from all unrighteousnesse. His Absolution. WHo can forgive sins,Mark. 2.7. but God onely? The Son of Man hath power upon earth to forgive sins.10. He will purge your consci∣ence from dead workes,Heb. 9.14. to serve the living God. For this is not an humaneAmbros.
worke, neither is the holy Ghost given by man; but be∣ng called upon by the Priest, is bestowed by God; wherin the gift is Gods, the ministery is the Priests. Pet. Lumb.God onely doth remit, and reteine sins; and yet he hath given unto the Church pow∣er of binding, and loosing. But God bindeth, and looseth otherwise than the Church doth: for he by himselfe on∣ly remitteth sins, because hee purgeth the soule inwardly from the spot of sin, & freeth it from the depth of eternall death; which the Church can∣not do, but hath power of bin∣ding, and loosing, that is, of declaring what sinners are ei∣ther loosed, or bound. Chemnit.In absolution God himself, by the ministery of the Go∣spell,
doth remit sins unto all beleevers. The vertue and effect of re∣mission is not in the Disciples,Cajetan. but in God, who pardoneth. We account of them,Ambros. as the Ministers of Christ, & Stew∣ards of the Mysteries. Sins are not loosed or retei∣ned at the pleasure of men;Aug. but according to the will of God, & praiers of the Church. To the Lord our God be∣long mercies,Daniel 9.9 and forgive∣nesses, though we have rebel∣led against him. Delivering fom sin,Chrysost. he in∣grafteth righteousnes; yea he extinguisheth sin, and suffe∣reth it not to be. O Lord God Almighty,Ordo Rom. antiq. de Offic divin. pag. 18. edi. Rom. 1591. be mercifull to me a sinner, that I may worthily give thankes unto thee, who hast made
me an unworthy one, for thy mercies sake, a Minister of the Priestly Office; and hast appointed mee a poore, and humble Mediatour, to pray, and make intercession unto our Lord Jesus Christ for sinners, that returne unto re∣pentance: And therefore, O Lord, the Ruler, who wouldest have all men to bee saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth; who dost not desire the death of a sinner, but that he may bee reconciled, and live; Receive my prayer, which I powre forth before the face of thy mercy, for thy servants, and handmaids, who have fled to repentance, and thy mer∣cie. Nehemiah 9.17.Thou art a God, ready to pardon, gracious, and mer∣cifull,
slow to anger, and of great kindnesse. Behold,Ambros. that by the holy Ghost sins are forgiven; but men, to the remission of sins, bring their Ministery: They exercise not the authority of any power. Therefore in all the ser∣vants, there is no dominion,Optat. but a Ministery. Almighty God give unto thee absolution,Tho. Aquin. and remis∣sion. His amendment of life. YOu were sometimes darknesse:Ephes. 5. but now are yee light in the Lord; walke as children of light. Set your affection onColos. 3.
things above; not on things on the earth. Ephes. 4.Put ye off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt after the deceitfull lusts. Ibidem.And put yee on the new man, which after GOD, is created in righteousnesse, and true holinesse. Playfer.That which is borne of the old man, which is the flesh, must dayly decrease in us, and grow downwards. Idem.But that which is borne of the new man, which is the Spirit, must daily increase in us, and grow upward. Latymer.Repentance and amend∣ment of life, are a sure reme∣dy, that our sins shall not bee our shame and confusion. Ʋdall.Bee carefull to live in god∣linesse, reforming your affe∣ction
inwardly; and your conversation outwardly, ac¦cording to the prescript rule of God word. They that from the bot∣tome of their heart doe ac∣knowledge their sins,Hom. de oenit. and are unfeinedly sory for their of∣fences, will cast off all hypo¦crisie, and put on true hu¦militie, and lowlinesse of heart. And as they did before give themselves to unclean∣nes of life,Ibidem. so will they hence∣forth with all diligence, give themselves to innocency, purenesse of life, and true godlinesse. The graces of God,Oecumen. as the flowers of a garden, must not only be kept, but also dressed; that they may have not only a being, but also an abounding.
Coloss. 3.Put yee on therefore, as the elect of GOD (holy and belo∣ved) bowels of mercies, kind∣nesse, humblenesse of minde, meeknesse, long suffering. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another,4 if any have a quarrell against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also doe ye. Ibidem.And above all things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectnesse. Raban.Mercy consisteth in giving almes cheerfully, in suffering wrong patiently, in refor∣ming the rude lovingly. Chrysost.It is the safety of salvation, the ornamnt of faith, and propitiation for sins. Lyra.Let Christs humility also bee inwardly in your hearts, and not outwardly, as it is with hypocrites.
For unlesse wee bee beaten downe in humility,all. we are no vessels for Christ to dwell in. Humilitie is a signe of worth; but pride,Bernard. of empti∣nesse, and vanity. If the minde be constantly directed to GOD,Greg moral. whatsoe∣ver in this life is bitter unto us, through patience, wee ac∣count it pleasant. Let a man looke into his heart,Aug. and see if he have Cha∣rity; and then let him say, I am borne of GOD. Charity is a desire of the minde to love GOD for him∣selfe;Idem. and to love our neigh∣bour for GOD. It is the stay of wisdome,Idem. the fruit of Faith, the riches of the poore, and the life of them that are dying.
Luther.A Christian life consisteth in this; that we deale with faith, and with the heart in things apperteyning to GOD; but use our life, and works to∣wards our neighbour. Ephes. 2.For wee are his workman∣ship created in Christ Jesus unto good works; which God hath before ordeined, that we should walke in them. Hom. de fid. & oper.There is one work, in which be all good works, that is; faith which worketh by charity. If thou have it, thou hast the ground of all good works. Luther.GOD will have works done freely, not that wee may me∣rit any thing therby; but that we may doe them to the pro∣fit of our neighbours, and wit∣nes our sincere faith by them. Aug.No man doth good works to receive grace by them; but
because he hath first received grace, therefore consequent∣ly he doth good works. Behold,Iohn 5. thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee. Which penance wee shall never be able to fulfill,Hom. de poenit. with∣out the speciall grace of him, that saith,Ioh. 15.5. without me ye can doe nothing. It is therfore our parts,Hom de poenit. if at least wee bee desirous of the health and salvation of our own soules, most earnestly to pray to our heavenly father, to assist us with his holy spi∣rit, that we may bee able to hearken to the voice of the true Shepheard, and with due obedience to follow the same. Let us heare the conclusion of the whole matter,Eccl. 12. feare God, and keepe his comman∣dements;
for this is the whole duety of man. His assurance of Salvation. Iohn 3.HE that beleeveth on the Sonne hath everlasting life. 1 Pet. 1.Whom having not seene, ye love; in whom, though now yee see him not, yet be∣leeving ye rejoyce with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Ibidem.Receiving the end of your Faith, even the salvation of your soules. Bish. Fisher.If wee will enter into hea∣ven, we must not come with a double heart, or wavering faith; but with that which is altogether without doubting, and most certain. Hillar.The LORD will have us hope for the Kingdome of
Heaven without any doub∣ting, for otherwise there is no justification of faith, if faith be uncertaine. The just living by faith,Fulgent. saith confidently, I beleeve to see the goodnesse of the LORD in the land of the li∣ving. We have hope,Heb. 6. as an An∣chor of the soule, both sure, and stedfast, and which en∣treth into that which is with∣in the Vaile. Because ye are sons,Gal. 4. GOD hath sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, cry∣ing Abba father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son,Ibidem. and if a son, then an heire of God through Christ. Wee leave not a sinner inStapleton. the middest of wavering
doubtfulnesse, but we place him in good, and firme hope; when once his conscience witnesseth with him, that he hath truely repented. Aug.There is a kind of glorying in thy conscience, when thou knowest thy faith is sincere, thy hope certain, thy love without dissembling. Altisiodor.Wee may discerne we are in grace, by our good desire, comfort of minde, and good works. Bernard.The spirit by faith revea∣leth to a man the eternall pur∣pose of God, concerning his future salvation; which reve∣lation is nothing else, but the infusion of spirituall grace, whereby the deeds of the flesh are mortified, and the man prepared to the kingdome of heaven.
Gods truth, and his power,Ʋdall. is the cause of our assurance of salvation; his truth, because we doe not doubt but he will keepe his promise; his power because all things are possible to him. Herein we looke not upon our own worthines,Idem. (for then we must needs doubt) but up∣on him that promised, who will faithfully performe. God hath promised to thee,Aug. O man that thou shalt live for ever; dost thou not beleeve it? Beleeve it, beleeve it; for that wch he hath already done for thee, is a greater matter than that wch he hath promised. These things have I writen unto you that beleeve on the name of the Sonne of God,1 Ioh. 5. that yee may know that yee have eternall life; and that ye
may beleeve on the name of the Son of GOD. Rom. 15Now the GOD of hope fill you with all joy, and hope in beleeving, that yee may a∣bound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost. Gods mercy. Lam. 3.IT is the LORDS mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions faile not. Psal. 103.Hee hath not dealt with us after our sinnes, nor rewar∣ded us according to our ini∣quities. Lam. 3.But though hee send affli∣ction, yet will he have com∣passion, according to the multitude of his mercies. Psal. 103.For as the heaven is high
above the earth, so great is his mercy towards them that feare him. This is the glory of man,Hieron. that hee may know, and un∣derstand, that GOD is the LORD, who giveth mer∣cie, and justice upon the earth. The omnipotency of God excelleth two waies;Hieron. in gran∣ting mercy to the penitent, and punishing such as conti∣nue in sin, according to their desert. Hee rejoyceth not of his owne gaine,Chrysost. but of our sal∣vation; hee is not grieved for his owne displeasure, but for our destruction. When hee punisheth,Idem. and taketh vengeance; he doth it not with passionate anger but with all unspeakable cle¦mency;
with the affection of an healer, not of a de∣stroyer. How rich art thou, O Lord GOD, in mercy? how great in justice? how bountifull in grace? Bernard.Thou beholdest the humbie with favour; the Innocent thou judgest righteously; & savest sinners mercifully. Kempis dial. inter Deum & peccator. de imitat. Christi, si. 4. cap. 18.Although a sinner do abide still in the flesh; yet doe I re∣ceive him into my favour, so that he is not to feare the ut∣ter confusion for his sins cō∣mitted; but rather to thanke & praise God, that old things bee passed away, and that all things are become new. Ibid.So gracious and mercifull am I, that alwaies I am more ready to forgive, than thou art to begge forgivenesse at
my hands; more ready to give, than thou art to aske. To hope well of my goodnesse,Ibidem. is a very token of true humilitie, and of great faith. What?Ibid. looke you to bee all worthy, before you make accesse unto mee? And of your selfe, when will you bee so? If onely such as are good,Ibid. and worthy, and great, and perfect, should approach unto mee, to whom should sinners and publicans ap∣proach? So then,Luke 15. what saith the Gospell? Then drew neere unto him all the publicans and sinners for to heare him. Therfore let the unworthy approach,Kempis. that they may be∣come
worthy; let the wic∣ked approach, that they may bee made good; let the weake, and unperfect ap∣proach, that they may prove strong, and perfect; yea let all, and every one approach, that they may receive from the abundant streames of the well of life. Iohn. 7.Hee which is a thirst, let him come to me and drinke.Isay 55. And he which hath nothing, let him come and buy with∣out silver, and without mo∣ney. Mat 9.Hee that is sicke, let him come to be healed. Mark. 9.Hee that is neither hot, nor cold, let him come to be in∣flamed. Kempis.Hee that is fearfull, let him come to bee encoura∣ged.
Hee that is sorrowfull let him come to bee com∣forted.Idem. Hee that is wearied with cares,Idem. let him come to be re∣freshed with joy. Loe, my delight is,Idem. to bee with the children of men. And therefore bee ever mindfull both of your fraile condition,Idem. and of my glori∣ous Majestie, and so with humble reverence approach boldly into my presence. For I am hee that putteth away thine iniquities,Isa. 43. and will not remember thy sins: It is I that justifie the un∣godly;Rom. 4. and this I doe for my holy Name sake: yea, and I am still ready to minister greater gifts of mercy unto thee. Because I doe ever chuseKempis.
to shew favour, rather than displeasure, as one who had rather spare, than punish. 2 Cor. 1.Blessed bee God, even the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the Father of mer∣cies, and GOD of all com∣fort. Death. Heb. 13.14.HEre have wee no conti∣nuing City; but wee seeke one to come. Luk. 12.4.Be yee prepared; for the Sonne of man will come at an houre that yee thinke not. Aug.All men know that the day of death will come; yet all, or almost all doe notwith∣standing labour to put it off; yea even those, who beleeve,
that after death, they shall live more blessedly: So great power hath the sweet fellowship of the flesh, and soule. Take heed, watch, and pray;Mar. 13 33. for yee know not when the time is. The last day of our life is unknowne,August. that all daies may be observed; the remedies are too late provided, when the dangers of death approach. Plato his opinion is,Hieron. that the whole life of wise men is the meditation of death. Wee ought therefore to premedi∣tate what we shall be hereaf∣ter; and that whether we will, or not, death cannot be lon∣ger from us. Hee which is assured hee shall dye,Gregor. opposeth him∣selfe against all the desires of
this life. For the perfect life is a meditation of death; which while just men doe performe, they escape the snares of sin. Aug.That death is not accoun∣ted evill, which a good life hath gone before. Colos. 3.2.Set your affection on things above; not on things of the earth. Gregor.If wee consider what, and how great things are promi∣sed to us in heaven; all things in earth will be vile, and base in our estimation: For earth∣ly substance compared to the heavenly felicity, is but an heavy burthen, not an helpe and succour. This tem∣porall life compared to the e∣ternall, is rather to bee ac∣counted a death than a life. Eccl. 12.7.Then shall the dust returne
to the earth as it was; and the spirit shall returne unto God, who gave it. They which desire to bee dissolved,Aug. and to bee with Christ, doe live patiently, and die cheerfully. They are not lost,Ambros. but sent before, whom eternity hath received. All the daies of my appoin∣ted time, will I wait,Iob 14.14. till my change come. For to me, to live, is Christ;Phil. 1.21. and to die, is gaine. When Christ,Colos. 3.3. who is our life, shall appeare; then shall ye also appeare with him in glory.
The last Iudgement. Heb. 9.IT is appointed unto men once to dye; but after this, the Judgement. Rom. 14.Wee shall all stand before the Judgement Seat of Christ. Eccles. 12.For GOD shall bring every worke to judgement, with e∣very secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it bee e∣vill. Hieron.It is not in us to know the day of Judgement; but be∣ing alwayes uncertaine of the comming of the Judge, let us so live, as if we were, to bee judged the next day. Idem.If there bee any joy in this present life; let it be so used, that the bitternesse of the Judgement to come do not
at any time depart out of our memory. Nothing doth more set forward an honest life,Ambros. than to beleeve he shall be judged; whom hidden things doe not deceive: evill things doe of∣fend; and good things doe delight. That judge is not preven∣ted by favour,Aug. nor led now by mercy, nor corrupted with money, nor appeased by sa∣tisfaction, or repentance; let the soule while it hath time here, labour for it selfe by re∣pentance, so long, as here is place for mercy; because there is the place of Justice. God doth so behold our waies, and number our steps,Greg. moral that, evē our smalest thoughts, and least words remaine not unexamined in his Judgemēt.
Psal. 37.The Lord knoweth the daies of the upright, and their inheritance shall be for ever. Ibid.But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of Lambs; they shall consume, into smoke shall they consume a∣way. Chrysost.In that day wee have no∣thing to answer for our selves, where Heaven, and Earth, the Aire, and Wa∣ter, and the whole world shall witnesse our sinnes against us. And if all else doe hold their peace, our thoughts themselves, and our works especially shall stand before our eies, accusing us before God. Bernard.That day will come, in which upright hearts shall
more prevaile, than eloquent words; a good Conscience more, than a full purse; be∣cause that Judge will not bee deceived by words, nor tur∣ned by gifts. On the right hand,Anselm. will bee our sinnes accusing us; on the left hand, innumerable Divels; underneath us, the terrible deepnesse and dark∣nesse of Hell; above, the Judge offended; without, the world burning; within, the conscience tormenting: there shall the just scarce be saved. Alas miserable sinner, being thus taken unawares, whither wilt thou fly? for to hide thy selfe, is impossible, and to ap∣peare, is intolerable. The rich man also died,Luk. 16.22 and was buried; And in hell hee lift up his23.
eyes, being in torments; and seeth Abraham a farre off, and Lazarus in his bosome. 24.And he cryed, and said; Fa∣ther Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, & coole my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame. 25.But Abraham said; Sonne, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things; and likewise Lazarus evill things, but now hee is comforted, and thou art tor∣mented. Gregor.At the recompence of the last Judgement, the wicked doe see the upright in peace, that perceiving them in joy, they may not onely bee tor∣mented with their owne pu∣nishment, but also with the
others prosperity. But the righteous doe alwaies see the wicked in torments, that from hence their joy may increase; because they see the paine, which, by GODS mercie, they have escaped; and doe give the greater thanks unto their Maker, when they be∣hold that in others, which they might have suffered, had they beene forsaken. When the Sonne of Man shall come in his glory,Mat. 25. and all the holy Angels with him; then shall hee sit upon the throne of his glory; And before him shall bee gathered all Nations,Ibid. and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divi∣deth his Sheepe from the Goats. And he shall set the sheepeMat. 25.
on his right hand; but the Goats on the left. Ibidem.Then shall the King say un∣to them on his right hand; Come ye blessed of my fa∣ther, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you, from the foundation of the world. Ibid.Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, yee cursed, into e∣verlasting fire, prepared for the Devill, and his Angels. Iude 24.Now, unto him that is able to keep you from falling, & to present you faultlesse, before the presence of his glorie, with exceeding joy; 25.To the onely wise GOD, our Saviour, bee Glory, and Majesty, Dominion, and power, now, and ever, Amen.
FOURE HELPS to the amendment of Life. 1. Prayer. 2. Reading the holy Scriptures. 3. Hearing Gods Word prea∣ched. 4. Worthy receiving the Sacra∣ment of the Body and Bloud of our Lord. 1 Prayer. O LORD, I know,Ier. 10.23. that the way of man is not in him∣selfe: it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps. It is written in the Pro∣phets;Ioh. 6.45.
And they shall be all taught of GOD; Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the father, commeth unto me. Iohn 15.5.I am the vine, yee are the branches; he that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: For without me, yee can doe nothing. 1 Tim. 2.8.I will therefore, that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath, or doubting. Iude 20.Building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost. Mat 6.7.But when ye pray, use not vaine repetitions, as the Hea∣then doe, for they thinke, that they shall be heard, for their much speaking. 8.Be not ye therefore like un∣to
them; for your heavenly father knoweth, what things yee have need of, before yee aske him. What things soever ye de∣sire, when ye pray,Mar. 11.24. beleeve that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. Let us lift up our heart,Lam 3.41. with our hands, unto God in the heavens. It is not in man to direct his owne waies;Ʋdall. and therfore we must pray to God continu∣ally, to guide us for his glory, and our soules comfort. Praier is a thing most neces∣sary for all men, at all times,Hom. de orat. and in all places. It is the first thing wherwith a righteous life beginneth,Hooker. & the last with wch it doth end. It is the turning of a godly & humble minde to God,Hugo. sup∣ported
by Faith, Hope, and Charity. Isidor.Neither is it a worke of the lips, but of the heart. GOD intendeth not the words, but beholdeth the heart of him that prayeth. It is better to pray with the heart, in si∣lence, without the sound of the voyce, than in words a∣lone, without the affection of the minde. Iust. Mart.We sacrifice unto GOD, without ceasing, the sacrifice of praise, sincere prayer, and the sweet savour of good works. Perkins.Our prayers are our sacri∣fices, and Christ alone is the Altar, whereon wee must offer them to GOD the Fa∣ther. Aug.Faith is the fountaine of prayer, neither can the stream
run, if the head of the Spring bee dryed up. When prayer is faithfull,Bernard. humble, and fervent, doubt∣lesse it entreth into Heaven; from whence it cannot returne empty. 2. Reading the Scrip∣. EZra the Priest read in the Booke of the Law,Nehemiah 8.3. from the morning, untill the mid day, before the men, and the womē, & those that could understand; and the eares of all the people were attentive unto the Book of the Law. The children of Israel read in the Booke of the Law,9.3. of the LORD their GOD, one fourth part of the day;
and another fourth part they confessed, and worshipped the Lord their God. Acts 13.15.After the reading of the Law, and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent to Paul, and Barnabas, saying; Ye men, and brethren, if yee have any word of exhorta∣tion for the people; say on. Chrysost.The reading of the Scrip∣tures is a great defence against sinne. Hom. de legen. Scrip.Whosoever is diligent to read this word, & in his heart to print that he readeth, shall finde his affection diminished towards this world; and his desire of heavenly things in∣creased. Ibidem.There is nothing that so much strengtheneth our faith; that so much keepeth up
the innocency, & purenesse of heart, and of outward godli∣nesse, and conversation, as continuall reading, and recor∣ding of Gods word. Many times,Kempis through our owne curiosity, we profit lit∣tle in reading, while we stand to discusse things, which ought simply to be beleeved. If thou desirest to reap commodity,Idem. reade with all humility, simplicity, & zeale; and never covet to bee ac∣counted learned. Read it therefore with an humble, and lowly heart,Hom. de legen. Scrip to the end you may glorifie GOD, and not your selfe, with the knowledge of it. Pray daily to GOD, that hee would direct your reading to good ef∣fect.
Hom. ex∣hort. to reade and know Script.Unto a Christian man no∣thing can be more necessary, or profitable, than the know∣ledge of holy Scripture: In which is conteyned GODS true Word, setting forth his glory and mans duty. Socrat.It was the custome of Theo∣dosius the Emperour, that to∣gether with his houshold, he spent much time in reading the Scriptures, and singing of Psalmes. Hom. de leg. Scriptur.Wherefore as you have any zeale to the pure honouring of GOD, and regard to your owne soules, and the life that is to come; apply your selves, chiefly above all things, to read, and heare GODS Word; Marke di∣ligently therein, what his will is you shall doe, and withall endevour, apply
your selves to follow the same. Blessed is he that readeth,Revel. 1.3. and they that heare the words of this Prophecie, and keepe those things which are writ∣ten therein. 3. Hearing the Word preached. EArly in the morning Jesus came into the Temple,Ioh. 8.2. and all the people came unto him, and he sate downe, and taught them. In the day time Jesus was teaching in the Temple,Luk. 21.37 and at night he went out, and a∣boad in the Mount, that is called the Mount of O∣lives.
38.And all the people came early in the morning to him in the Temple, to heare him. Acts 13.44The next Sabbath day came almost the whole City of An∣tiochia together, to heare the word of God preached by Paul and Brnabas. Acts 8.5.Then came Philip into the City of Samaria, & preached Christ unto them. 6.And the people gave heed unto those things, which Phi∣lip spake, with one accord. Acts 17.11.The Jewes of Berea were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all readinesse of minde; and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Wickliff.That the hearing of the
Word, and Law of GOD, is commmanded to the peo∣ple, it is evident, both by the old, and new Law. Take opportunity to heare preaching; and to prove,Grashop. by the Scriptures, that which is taught. The first,Bayne. and princi∣pall meanes to uphold a Christian life in godli¦nesse, is, the Word of GOD, read, preached, and heard, as the Lord prescri∣beth. Where there is a good or∣der of teaching,Idem. with dili∣gence, skill, love, and plain∣nesse, we must be attentive, and reverent in hearing. As drinke is pleasant to them that be dry,Hom. de leg. Scriptur. and meat to them that be hungry; so is the reading, hearing sear∣ching,
and studying of the holy Scriptures, to them that bee desirous to know God, or themselves, and to doe his will. Bayne.The ordinarie preaching of the Word, is a singular meanes provided for the per∣fecting of GODS elect, and for their growing in a Chri∣stian life. 4. Sacraments. Eccles. Ang.CHrist hath ordained in his Church two Sacra∣ments onely, as generally ne∣cessary to Salvation; that is to say, Baptisme, and the Supper of the Lord. Cosler.A Sacrament is an out∣ward, and visible signe, of a
divine, invisible grace, insti∣tuted by Christ, by vertue whereof, the receiver ob∣taineth grace and sanctifica∣tion. In Sacraments,Bellar. both the matter, and words must bee instituted by GOD; and are not alterable by man, either by addition, or diminuti∣on. They are therefore called Sacraments,August. because one thing is seene in them, and another thing understood. That which is seene, hath a bodily kinde, forme, and shew; but that which is un∣derstood, hath spirituall fruit. Wee must not consider,Idem. what they be, but what they signifie. It is a dangerous matter,Idem.
to take the signe in stead of the thing that is signified. The holy Eucharist, or Sacra∣ment of the Body and Bloud of our Lord. Mat. 26.AS they were eating, Jesus tooke bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his disciples, and said; Take, eat, this is my body. Ibidem.And he tooke the cup, and gave thankes, and gave it to them, saying; Drinke yee all of it. Ibid.For this is my Blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the remis∣sion of sins.
In stead of the Flesh,Beda. and Blood of the Lambe, Christ hath ordained the Sacrament of his Body and Bloud, in the figure of bread and wine. Neither doe wee receive them, as common bread,Iust. Mart. nor as common drinke. The bread which is of the earth,Iren. receiving the invocati∣on of God, is not now com∣mon bread, but the Eucha∣rist, consisting of two things; earthly, and heavenly. Christ taking bread,Tertul. and di∣stributing it to his disciples, made it his body, saying, this is my Body, that is to say, this is a figure of my body. It is evident,Bertram. that the bread and wine, are figu∣ratively the body and bloud of Christ. By the commandement andIsidor.
authority of Christ, we call it the Body and Bloud of Christ; because that, though it bee made of the fruits of the earth, it is yet notwith∣standing sanctified, and so be∣come a Sacrament, GODS Spirit working invisibly therein. Bertram.That body wherein Christ suffered, was his proper, and true body; having no my∣sticall, or figurative matter in it. But this latter, is a my∣sticall body; shewing one thing outwardly in figure, and inwardly representing another thing, through the understanding, and appre∣hension of faith. Eccle. Angl.The body of Christ is gi∣ven, taken, and eaten in the Supper onely, after an hea∣venly manner. And the
meane, whereby the body of Christ is received in the Sup∣per, is Faith. To beleeve in Christ,Aug. is the eating of the Bread of Life; prepare not your mouths; prepare your hearts. This is to eat that living bread, to beleeve in Christ;Clem. Alex. that is to say, with love to cleave fast unto him. This is to drinke the bloud of Jesus;Idem. to be made partaker of his immortality. This is therefore,Aug. to eat that meat, and drinke that drinke; To dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwelling in us.
A remembrance of the death, and passion of our Saviour Christ. 1 Cor. 11.THe LORD JESUS, the same night, in which he was betrayed, tooke bread; Ibid.And when hee had given thanks, he brake it, and said; Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you; this doe in remembrance of me. Ibid.After the same manner also hee tooke the cup, when hee had supped, saying; This cup is the new Testament in my bloud; this doe, as oft as yee drinke it, in remembrance of me. 1 Cor. 11.For as often as yee eat this bread, and drink this cup, yee
doe shew the Lords death till he come. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was ordained for the continuall remem∣brance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ,Eccles. Ang. and the be∣nefits which we receive there∣by. This bread, and this cup,Bertram. which is called the body, and blood of CHRIST, doe lively represent, or set out the remembrance of the Lords passion, or dath; even as himselfe hath said in the Gospell;Luke 22. Do this in remem∣brance of me: which the Apo∣stle Paul expoundeth, saying,1 Cor. 11. As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup ye shew the Lords death till hee come. Our Lord gave unto his disci∣ples,Walfrid. Strab. the Sacramēt of his body
and Bloud, in the substance of bread, and wine; and therin taught them, to celebrate the memory of his most blessed Passion. Ammon.Having taken the bread, then afterwards the cup of wine, and testified it, to bee his Body and Bloud; he com∣manded them, to eat, and drinke thereof; forasmuch as it was the memoriall of his future passion and death. Worthy Receivers. 1 Cor. 11.BUt let a man examine himselfe, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drinke of that Cup. Ibid.For he that eateth, and drin∣keth unworthily, eateth, and
drinketh damnation to him∣selfe; not discerning the LORDS body. They which are of a cleane conscience, upright in heart,Chrysost. moral. and of an unreprovable life, may alwaies come to this Table; but they, which are not so, may not once ap∣proach unto it. S. Augustine thus speaketh;Alcinnus. I like well of your humility, that you presume not to ap∣proach to the Body, and Bloud of Christ; But it were better you would depart from your iniquities; and being made cleane by repen∣tance, would take the Body, and Bloud of Christ. Hee is a worthy receiver,Cyprian. that, remembring the benefit of Christ his passion, lifteth up his heart unto the living God with
his heart unto the living God with comfort, abhorreth all bitter drinks of sinne, and all savour of carnall pleasures is to him, as sharp, and soure vineger. And the sinner be∣ing converted, receiving the holy mysteries of the Lords Supper, giveth thankes un∣to GOD, and boweth down his head, knowing that his sinnes be forgiven, and that he is made cleane, and perfect; and his soule (which GOD hath sanctified) he rendreth to God againe, as a faithfull pledge; and glorieth with S. Paul, saying; Now is it not I, that live; but it is Christ, that liveth in me. Cyprian.The worthy eating, is our dwelling in him, and our drinking is, as it were, our in∣corporating in him; being
subject to him, in obedience; joyned to him, in our wils; and united, in our affecti∣ons. Foure things most requi∣site,Eccle. Angl. to make us meet parta∣kers of the holy mysteries. To repent us truly for our  sinnes past. To have a lively, and sted∣fast  faith in Christ, our Savi∣our. To amend our lives, and be  in charity with all men. To give most humble, and  hearty thankes to GOD, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, for the redemp∣tion of the world, by the death, and passion of our Sa∣viour Christ.
Vnworthy Receivers. Eccl. Ang.THe wicked, and such as be void of a lively faith, although they doe carnally, and visibly presse with their teeth (as S. Augustine saith) the Sacrament of the body, and bloud of Christ; yet, in no wise, are they partakers of Christ, but rather, to their condemnation, doe eat, and drink the signe, or Sacrament of so great a thing. Aug.Outwardly, they have the Sacrament of Christs body; but the thing it selfe, inward∣ly in their hearts, they have not; And therefore they eat, and drink their owne judge∣ment. Idem.Neither Heretike, nor such as professe a true faith in their
mouths, and in their living shew the contrary, are to bee accompted among the mem¦bers of Christ. Therefore it may not be said, that any of them, doe eat the body of Christ. As corporall meat,Chrysost. finding the belly possessed with evill humours, doth more offend, and hurt, and helpe nothing at all: So also this spirituall food, finding a man polluted with sinne, will rather de¦stroy him; not by its owne nature; but by the Receivers corruption. For he that hath yet a will to sinne,August. I account him rather more burthened, by receiving the Eucharist, than cleansed: Therefore, albeit a man doe moderate sinne, purposing not to sinne hereafter, yet let
him make satisfaction by teares, and prayers, when hee intendeth to communicate, trusting in the mercy of God; who upon godly confession of his iniquity, useth to par∣don: Then let him approach unto the Eucharist safely and without feare. Transubstantiation. Eccl. Ang.TRansubstantiation, or the change of the sub∣stance of bread, and wine, in the Supper of the Lord, can∣not be proved by holy writ: but it is repugnant to the plaine words of Scripture, overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath given occasion to many superstiti∣ons.
The mysticall signes,Theodoret. after consecration, depart not from their owne nature; for they abide still in their former substance, figure, and forme; and may bee seene, and tou∣ched, as before. Touching the substance of the creatures,Bertram. they abide the same, after con∣secration, as they were be∣fore. Before the bread be sancti∣fied, wee call it bread;Chrysost. but when GODS grace hath san∣ctified it, by meanes of the Priest, it is delivered from the name of bread, and is re∣puted worthy the name of the LORDS body, al∣though the nature of bread remaine still. Hee honoured the visibleTheodoret. signes with the name of
his body and bloud; not changing the nature; but ad∣ding grace, to nature. Idem.For he would have the par∣takers of the divine myste∣ries, not to respect the nature of those things, which are seene; but to beleeve the change which is done by grace. Scot.We cannot be brought to determine transubstantiation, either by any plaine place of Scripture, or sentence of An∣cient father. Cyril.For like as when hee was conversant here in earth, as man; yet then he filled hea∣ven, and did not leave the company of Angels: Even so being now in heaven with his flesh; yet he filleth the earth, and is in them that love him, by the power of his di∣vinity.
Although Christ be corpo∣rally in heaven;Gre. Valen. Ies. yet he is re∣ceived of the faithfull com∣municants, in this Sacrament, truly; both spiritually, by the mouth of the mind; through a most neere conjunction of Christ, with the soule of the Receiver, by faith: And also sacramentally, with the bo∣dily mouth; receiving not Christ (according to his locall presence) but bread, and wine, as seales, and signes of the promise of redemption in his body and blood. According to his body,Greg. Naz. hee is within the limitation of place; according to his Spi∣rit, and Godhead, he is with∣out the limitation of any place.
To be received in both kinds. Eccl. Ang.THe cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay people; for both the parts of the Lords Sacra∣ment, by Christs ordinance, and commandement, ought to be administred to all Chri∣stian men alike. Vasques Ies.Each kind in this Sacra∣ment, (as it is a part of the Sa∣crament) hath a divers signi∣fication by it selfe: And each kind in this Sacrament, doth worke its owne effect, by it selfe. Durand.The bread signifieth the body, and not the bloud; and the wine signifieth the bloud, and not the body. Alex. Hales.Whole Christ is not con∣tained
under each kind, by way of Sacrament; but the flesh onely, under the forme of bread; and the bloud, un∣der the forme of wine. In the Primitive Church,Durand. all present at the Communi∣on, did participate of the cup; because all the Apostles did so, our Lord saying unto them; Drink ye all of this. Wee have understood,Gelas. Pap. that some, having onely re∣ceived a portion of Christs body, doe abstaine from the cup of his sacred bloud; But sith they are moved, by a fond superstition (which I know not) thus to abstaine; either let them receive the whole Sacrament, or bee put from all together; for there can bee no division of this Sacrament, and
high mystery, without great sacriledge. Ignat.I exhort you to imbrace one faith, one manner of preaching, and use of the Sa∣crament, of the LORDS Supper; for the flesh of the LORD JESUS, is one, and his bloud, one, that was shed for us: There is one bread also, broken for all; and one cup, distributed unto all.
The Prayer before receiving the Communion. ALmighty GOD,Eccle. Angl. Fa∣ther of our Lord Je∣sus Christ, Maker of of all things, Judge of all men, we acknowledge, and bewaile our manifold sinnes and wic∣kednesse, which wee, from time to time, most grievously have committed, by thought, word, and deed, against thy divine Majesty; provoking, most justly, thy wrath, and indignation against us; We doe earnestly repent, and be hartily sory, for these our misdoings; the remem∣brance
of them, is grievous unto us, the burthen of them is intolerable; Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most mercifull Father, for thy Sonne, our Lord Jesus Christs sake, forgive us all that is past: And grant, that we may ever hereafter serve, and please thee, in newnesse of life, to the honour and glory of thy holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord; Amen.
The Prayer after receiving the Communion. O Lord,Eccl. Angl. our heavenly fa∣ther, wee, thy humble servants, intirely desire thy fatherly goodnesse, merciful∣ly to accept this our sacrifice, of praise, and thanksgiving, most humbly beseeching thee, to grant, that by the merits, and death of thy Son Jesus Christ, and through faith in his bloud, wee, and all thy whole Church, may obtaine remission of our sinnes, and all other bene∣fits of his passion. And here we offer, and present un∣to thee, O Lord, our selves,
our soules, and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice, unto thee; Humbly beseeching thee, that all we, which bee partakers of this holy Communion, may bee fulfilled with thy grace, and heavenly benediction. And although wee bee unworthy through our manifold sins, to offer unto thee, any sacri∣fice; yet we beseech thee, to accept this, our bounden du∣ty, and service; not weighing our merits, but pardoning our offences, through Jesus Christ, our Lord; by whom, and with whom, in the unity of the holy Ghost, all honor, and glory be unto thee, O fa∣ther Almighty, world with∣out end. Amen.
A Prayer before reading the holy Scriptures. O Gracious GOD,Grashop. and most mercifull father, which hast vouchsafed us, the rich and pretious jewell, of thy holy word: Assist us, with thy spirit, that it may be writ∣ten in our hearts, to our ever∣lasting comfort; to reforme us, to renew us, according to thine owne image, to build us up, and edifie us, into the perfect building, of thy sonne Christ Jesus; sanctifying, and increasing in us, all heavenly vertues. Grant this, O hea∣venly Father, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.
A Prayer for faith. MOst mercifull, and lo∣ving Father, I beseech thee, for Christ Jesus sake, to strengthen, and increase my faith, that I may goe forward in all godlinesse. And grant, O Lord, that my faith may bee builded upon the rock, Christ Jesus; that I be not carried away with every blast of vain doctrine, but, through faith in thee, I may be, as an invin∣cible fortresse, to my enemy, the Devill, so that he may ne∣ver prevaile against me. Also Lord, I pray thee, let not my faith bee an idle faith, but a working faith; that daily pro∣ceedeth, from one good work, to another, and in the end, to life everlasting, there to reigne with thee, world without end. Amen.
For Repentance. MAke cleane my heart, O most gracious God, with the water of thy heaven∣ly grace, from all the staines, and corruptions of sin; wher∣by it appeareth most vile and loathsome in thy sight. Sprin∣kle it with the hysop of un∣fained repentance, and com∣punction; that being washed in the most cleare fountaine of thy grace, I may become whiter than snow; and ever∣more serve thee, in holinesse, and purenesse of life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A short and effectuall Prayer. I Most humbly beseech thee, O most gracious God, and loving Father; to take from me, the sway of mine owne affections: Incline mine heart wholly, to the obedience of thy heavenly will: Suppresse, and quench in me, all desires whatsoever, that may alienate, and withdraw me to wander, from the way of thy testimo∣nies: Grant unto mee ever∣more, the assistance of thy holy Spirit, to conduct, and bring me, to the inheritance of thy everlasting kingdome; for the love of thy onely Son, our Saviour Jesus CHRIST, Amen.
The generall Confession. ALmighty,Eccl. Angl. in liturg. and most mercifull Father, I have erred, and strayed from thy waies, like a lost sheep; I have followed too much, the de∣vices, and desires of my owne heart; I have offended against thy holy Lawes; I have left undone, those things, which I ought to have done; and have done, those things, which I ought not to have done: And there is no health in me; but thou, O LORD, have mercie upon me, miserable offender; Spare thou mee, O GOD, which confesse my faults;
restore thou mee, that am penitent, according to thy promises, declared unto man-kind, in Christ Jesu our Lord; And grant, O most mercifull father, for his sake, that I may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and a sober life, to the glory of thy holy name. Amen.
A Prayer for the Morning. O Lord,Eccles. Ang. in Liturg. our heavenly fa∣ther, Almighty, and e∣verlasting GOD; I most humbly thanke thee, for thy great mercy, and goodnesse, in keeping, and preserving me from all perils, and dan∣gers this night past, and brin∣ging me safely to the begin¦ning of this day: Defend me, O Lord, in the same, with thy mighty power; And grant, that this day I fall into no sinne, neither run in∣to any kind of danger, but
that all my doings, may bee ordered by thy governance; to doe alwaies that, which is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen. Our father which art in heaven, hallowed, &c.
A Prayer for all times. O Almightie Lord,Eccles. Ang. Ibid. and everliving God, vouch∣safe, I beseech thee, to direct, sanctifie, and governe, both my heart, and body, in the waies of thy Laws, and in the works of thy commande∣ments; That through thy most mighty protection, both here and ever, I may be pre∣served, in body, and soule, through our LORD, and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
A Prayer before going to bed. O Eternall, and ever-living GOD, I render unto thy divine Majestie, most humble, and hearty thankes, for thy mercifull preservation of mee this day, from the hands of mine ene∣mies; Beseeching thee, of thy fatherly goodnesse, and mercy, to remit and par∣don all mine offences, which in thought, word, and deed, I have commit∣ted
against thy holy Laws and Commandements: Fur∣thermore, I humbly be∣seech thee, that, by thy most gracious protection, I may bee defended, and pre∣served this night, from all perils, and dangers, both of body, and soule; that mine eyes may sleep quietly, my body rest securely, and my soule ever watch unto thee constantly; so that I never consent to the temptations, and allurements of Satan; but by the continuall directi∣on, and assistance of thy hea∣venly grace, I may come to thine eternall glory, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen. Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed, &c.
A Psalme of contrition, and confession. Psal. 38.O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither cha∣sten me in thy hot displeasure. Ibidem.I am troubled, I am bowed downe greatly; I goe mour∣ning all the day long. 22.I am powred out like water, and all my bones are out of joint, my heart is like wax, it is melted in the middest of my bowels. 31.I am forgotten, as a dead man out of minde; I am like a broken vessell. 41.Lord be mercifull unto me; heale my soule, for I have sinned against thee. 38.All my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee.
For I will declare mine ini∣quity;Ibid. I will be sorry for my sinne. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken,51. and a contrite heart, O Lord, thou wilt not despise. O GOD,69. thou knowest my foolishnesse; and my sinnes are not hid from thee. I have gone astray,119. like a lost sheep; seeke thy servant, for I doe not forget thy com∣mandements. I acknowledge my trans∣gressions;51. and my sin is ever before me. Against thee,Ibidem. thee onely have I sinned; and done this evill in thy sight. There is no soundnesse in my flesh,38. because of thine an∣ger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin.
Ibidem.For mine iniquities are gone over my head; as an heavy burthen, they are too heavy for me. Ibidem.My wounds stinke, and are corrupt, because of my foo∣lishnesse. 40.Innumerable evils have com∣passed me about, mine ini∣quities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to looke up; they are moe than the haires of mine head, ther∣fore may heart faileth me. A Psalme for remission. Psal. 51.HAve mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindnesse; according to the multitude of thy ten∣der mercies, blot out my transgressions.
Wash mee thorowly from mine iniquity;Ibid. and cleanse me from my sinne. Purge me with hysop,Ibid. and I shall be cleane; wash me, & I shall be whiter than snow. For thy name sake, O Lord,25. pardon mine iniquity; for it is great. Remember not the sins of my youth,Ibid. nor my transgres∣sions; according to thy mer∣cy remember thou mee, for thy goodnesse sake, O Lord. Turne thee unto me,Ibid. and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate, and afflicted. Looke upon mine afflicti∣on, and my paine;Ibid. and for∣give all my sins. O keepe my soule,Ibidem. and de∣liver me; let me not be asha∣med, for I put my trust in thee.
39.Deliver mee from all my transgressions; make me not the reproach of the foolish. 31.Make thy face to shine up∣on thy servant; save me, for thy mercy sake. 51.Hide thy face from my sins; & blot out all mine iniquities. Ibid.Create in me a cleane heart, and renew a right spirit with∣in me. Ibid.Cast mee not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me. 141.Mine eyes are unto thee, O Lord God, in thee is my trust; leave not my soule destitute. A Psalme for mercy, and direction. Psal. 69.HEare mee, O Lord, for thy loving kindnesse is good; turne unto me, accor∣ding
to the multitude of thy tender mercies. Remember, O Lord,25. thy tender mercies, and thy lo∣ving kindnesse; for they have beene ever of old. Be mercifull unto mee,86. O Lord; for I cry unto thee daily. Shew mee thy waies,25. O Lord; teach me thy paths. Lead me in thy truth,Ibid. and teach me, for thou art the God of my salvation; on thee doe I wait all the day. O send out thy light,43. & thy truth, let them leade me; let them bring me to thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles. Cause me to heare thy loving kindnesse in the morning;143. for in thee doe I trust; cause me to know the way wherin I should walke; for I lift up my soule unto thee.
Ibid.Teach me to doe thy will, for thou art my God, thy spi∣rit is good; lead me into the land of uprightnesse. 40.With-hold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord; let thy loving kind∣nesse, and thy truth, continu∣ally preserve me. 119.Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. 86.Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth; unite my heart to feare thy name. 39.Lord, make mee to know mine end, and the measure of my daies, what it is; that I may know how fraile I am. A Psalme of confidence in Gods mercie. Psal. 23.THe Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.
He maketh me to lie down in greene pastures;Ibidem. he leadeth me beside the still waters. He restoreth my soule;Ibidem. he leadeth mee in the paths of righteousnesse, for his Names sake. Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will feare none evill;Ibidem. for thou art with me, thy rod, & thy staffe, they comfort me. I will abide in thy Taber∣nacle for ever,61. I will trust in the covert of thy wings. Because thou hast been my helpe;63. therefore in the sha∣dow of thy wings will I re∣joyce. For thou hast beene a shel∣ter for me;61. and a strong tower from mine enemies. I will come into thy house,5. in the multitude of thy mercy:
& in thy feare, will I worship towards thine holy Temple. 62.My soule, wait thou onely upon God; for my expecta∣tion is from him. Ibid.He only is my rock, and my salvation; he is my defence, I shall not be moved. 40.Blessed is that man, that maketh the Lord his trust. A Psalme of praise. Psal. 104.I Will sing unto the Lord, as long as I live; I will sing praise unto my God, whiles I have my being. 7.I will praise the Lord, ac∣cording to his righteousnesse, I will sing praise unto the name of the Lord, most high. 8.O Lord, our God, how ex∣cellent is thy name in all the earth; who hast set thy glo∣rie
above the Heavens. I will give thee thankes in the cōgregation:35. I will prais thee, among much people. I will worship towards thy holy Temple,138. and praise thy name, for thy loving kind∣nesse, and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name. I will extoll thee, my God,145. O King, and I will blesse thy name, for ever and ever. Every day will I blesse thee;Ibid. and I will praise thy name, for ever and ever. My mouth shall speake the praise of the Lord;Ibid. and let all flesh blesse his holy name, for ever and ever. The Lord liveth,18. and bles∣sed be my rock; and let the God of my salvation be exal∣ted.
28.Blessed be the Lord, because hee hath heard the voyce of my supplications. 41.Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting: Amen, Amen. ECCLES. 12.12. OF making many books there is no end, and much study is a wearinesse of the flesh. 13.Let us heare the conclusion of the whole matter: feare GOD, and keepe his Com∣mandements, for this is the whole duty of man. Collectanea T. P. FINIS. Imprimatur, SA. BAKER. Iunii 30. 1637.
