19791 99836576 857
THE POORE MANS APPEALE. In a Sermon preached at Leicester Assises before the Iudges. By T. P. PRO. 22.22.23. Rob not the Poore, because hee is poore; neither oppresse the afflicted in the gate: For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoyle the soule of those that spoyle him. AT LONDON, Printed by Edw: Griffin, for Arthur Iohnson, and are to be sold at his shop neere the great North doore of St. Pauls. 1620.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE Sir HENRY HOBART, Knight and Baronet, Lord chiefe Iustice of his Maiesties Court of Common Pleas, and Chauncellor to the most ex∣cellent Prince CHARLES, Prince of WALES, Grace and Peace. MY LORD,
THat reuerend Regard your Honor gaue this Sermon, when it was de∣liuered you, as a message from the Highest, was but a iust Regard▪ But for your vouchsafing to per∣use, and giue the frame thereof approbation, both it and I haue therein largely tasted of your fauou∣rable Regard. Both your Regards it then had, and I now in regard of both, conceiued an hope that the publike inscribing it thus to your Lordships name, would passe, at least for a pardonable transgressi∣on, and might (peraduenture) in the noblenesse of your interpretation be accepted, (as I intend it) for an act of my dutifull regard to your Honor. Whereof how can I forbeare presumption, remem∣bring who hath said; Yee are Gods, and are all children of the most High. Your Lordship then cannot vnresemble your heauenly Father, who gently takes the meanest oblations of the poorest and lowest, being himselfe rich ouer all, and Higher then the highest. He, the Iudge of all; The Lord Chiefe Iustice of Heauen and Earth, blesse and direct you so, as we may long en∣ioy, from him, thorough you the beames and influ∣ence of his Iustice in earth, and you, after this life iustly finisht, the bright beames of his Glorie, and that blessed Regard, and reward of his euer∣lasting Mercie in the highest Heauen; So prayes. Your Lordships true honourer, T. P.
THE POORE MANS APPEALE. ECCLESIASTES 5.8. If in a Countrie thou seest the oppression of the poore, and the defrauding of Iustice and Iudgement; Bee not astonied at the matter; For he that is higher then the highest regardeth, and there bee higher then they. I Shall haue some vse of the whole verse, but these words, (For hee that is higher then the highest, regardeth.) I choose forth for the Text, as being axis and Cardo, the hindge vpon which all turnes; For they are a reason of the for∣mer, the substance of the latter. Their parts are visible; two persons, and an action. First, the persons, Altus desuper altum, &c. or
Altus su∣perior Alto, (sayes Tremelius.) Two persons then, and two titles, high ones both, yet largely differing: Supe∣rior stands betwixt them here like an Istmus, or Hiatus rather, large in extent, as the space betwixt earth and heauen. For thou couldst haue none (sayes Christ to Pi∣late) not the lowest degree, except it were giuen thee de∣super, from aboue. So that the one depends of the other; the one absolute, and in recto: Altus the high one by way of excellence; the other in obliquo, and with rela∣tion to a Superiour: Alto an high one too, but not like Altus, no, the case is altered; Alius is primus and sum∣miu, the first, the chiefest high one, comes therefore be∣fore Superior, as hauing none, but Alto is set after, and would soone come all to nothing, if not gouerned by Superior here: So much, and so iustly is Altus superior Alto. In summe, the latter of these titles belongs to men; that is plaine by the addition here, or reddition rather; For it is the same againe another way. And there be higher then they: then who? then those men spoken of before. But for the first title here it does, it can belong to none but God. He onely is the high one, or that high one: It is a peculiar of his, and his prero∣gatiue onely. So Dauid, Thou whose name is Iehovah, thou alone art most high ouer all. Psal. 83. vlt. And that Solomon here intends this onely high God, is apparent too, in the last straine of the verse; where he names him Alti, in the plurall, which tho some interpret of God, and his Angels, yet Iunius better of God alone, excusing the difference of number, partly by the sacred mysterie of three persons in the God-head, and partly by an He∣braisme, expressing by the positiue plurall a singular su∣perlatiue, so raysing the title from Altus to Altissimus, or as the english here, higher then the highest. So high in∣deed, that all words forsake vs in the vtterance; But of that when we trie this Title. We know now the persons; The action remaines, and is ascribed to Altissimus. God regards. Observ. How meanes he? what does he regard? It is left here indefinite, Regards, and no more, but may be
diuersly vnderstood, first by making this indefinite and vniuersall too, the same with Hesiods , sees all things, and Dauids, Quo fugiam? Whither shall I goe from thy presence? And so his regard is the same with prouidence: or diuide this Sea into two armes of mer∣cy and iustice, acts of his speciall prouidence ouer all men and all their actions; or apply it lastly to this par∣ticular in the text, and wee shall finde that God in both these hands of mercie and iustice takes, and with both these eyes beholds oppression. Oppression? why? is that the matter here? yes. If thou seest oppression, bee not astonished; for hee that is, &c. It is true, hee mentions heere rapinam too, stealth or defrauding of iustice, but vpon the point it comes all to one: for bee it violence, or be it cunning, by fraud or by force, it forces not; it is oppression: that is the Ocean which deuoures, and the common sinke that swallowes both these flouds of wickednesse, both these filthy channels of corruption: But oppression is an action, and actio est vis illata; so is oppression right, and does inferre a passion; wee must haue a patient then, and we must finde out the agent: for if oppression be obserued, if God regard it, hee can not but regard them. These in reason are like Plaintiffe and defendant in law, which is grounded on reason.
These would be brought in then before we can pro∣ceede with our action: The Law will allow the Plain∣tiffe first; cal him we need not; If thou seest the oppressi∣on of the Poore. Hee's adest, there he is; the Poore, Alas poore man, poore and opprest too, thats an heauy case: who is there to speak for him? not any man, no; for no mā regards him: the poore is despised of his own neigh∣bour: heere he seemes to stand poore silly soule, with a face couered ouer with teares, his very heart broken his tongue cleaues to his roofe; onely his hands and hi eyes are lift vp towards heauen: I, there is his refuge, there is one that vnderstands the language of his sighs, and bends an eare to the voyce of his weeping, and though the high ones of the world turne away their eyes, yet hee that is higher then the highest regardeth: But where is the agent and defendant? wee shall need a quest of inquiry for him: If thou seest, &c. Non est in∣uentus: what, does hee slie for it? so much the worse: But tis not possible he should bee farre; the very sinne will finde him out without a Cryer, tis a crying sinne: Sure hee is hidden heere, this greedy eating Adam a∣mong the leaues, or like Saul among the stuffe of the Text. Let vs turne it ouer againe: If thou seest the oppressi∣on of the Poore, soft, the Poore opprest; who can this bee? and defrauding of iustice and iudgement, in whose power is it to doe that hee that is higher then the highest. There is all the persons this Text affords. It is betwixt these two then; either the high one of heauen, or the high one of earth hath done this. It can∣not bee the first, alas no; God oppresse the Poore? hee is their helper and defender, tis hee that regards him: or does God vse to defraud in iudgement or iustice? Oh no, Shall not the Iudge of all the world doe according to right? yes, With righteousnesse shall he iudge the earth, and the people with equity. It is the other high one then, it can be none but he: hee is the Oppressor, whether it be an height of wealth, this, and so liker to fall vpon the poore è diametro, or an height of authority, and so apter to defraud in iudge¦ment and iustice; and whether this oppression bee by violence or secret cosenage it skils not; they are both like to abide it; for God can abide neither of them both: but abhorres both the blood-thirsty and the de∣ceitfull man. Ps 5.6. Yet since the principall intended heere by Salomon, is the high one that abuses his height of place and power to the oppressing of the poore: such as these, if thou seest them doe so and so, and goe cleare away with it, yet bee not astonish'd, let not this stag∣ger thee; for hee that is higher then the highest regar∣deth.
Out of this text thus opened, arise these doctrinall conclusions. And first from the persons. First, that there bee high ones vpon earth. Secondly, that these are sometimes oppressors. Thirdly, that God is still the highest. From the action then. First, God regards, does marke and obserue all things. Secondly, obserues men and their actions with a double Respice, a twofold obseruat, of mercy to the good, iustice to the bad. Lastly, hee both wayes regards oppression, the pati∣ent in mercy, because pauperem first, and then paupe∣rem pressum, the poore oppressed: The agent in iustice, because altum first, and then altum oppressorem, the high Oppressor. Of these in order, and order requires wee begin with the latter person first, and from it the first obseruation is the that there be such, or there are higher powers. Height of wealth I passe ouer, and in∣sist on dignitie. Height is by ascending; assents are by staires and de∣grees, such asconding is motion properly, all motion from some principle and euer to some end: The gene∣rall end of motion is
quies, peace and rest, that is the end of this motion, wherein men ascending are heighthen∣ed by degrees; Peace opposed both to warre and to dis∣order. This height is in differently called Magistracie: Magistracy I mean subordinate is either Ecclesiastique or secular: secular is militarie or ciuill, polemick or po∣litick. The first of these (wee blesse God) wee haue had little practise of, so little, wee can scarce imagine there is such a thing: but wee may haue: It is not good to ne∣glect the knowledge of it, first; for these men, soldiers, and warriours despised in this dull and fusty time of peace, if occasion serued, would be as highly esteemed, as now basely, who are of so high and braue an order, that God himselfe is said to bee the soueraigne of their order: The Lord is a man of warre (saith Dauid) the Lord of Hoasts is his name; hee teaches my hands to warre and my fingers to fight: and as the motion from God, so the ascent is by degrees, ranks they haue, and orders, Officers, sergeants, Lieftenants, Captaines, Co∣ronels, Generals, Admirals: of the height whereof iudge, but by that of Dauid to Ioab and his brethren: you are too mighty for mee, yee sonnes of Zeruiah, and Eli∣shas offer to the Shunamite; wouldest thou be spoken for to the King or to the Captaine of the hoast, as (hap∣pily) the second person in the Kingdome. Now the end of armes is peace, the Ciuile Magistrate also (I meane subordinate, for of regall power the supreame on earth I speake not now) is in high place; such are the nerues and glory of a Kingdome, therefore Chronicled in the dayes of Dauid and Salomon, and their offices registred; such & such were Chancellors and Recorders, such o∣uer the tribute, such Iudges and Rulers. And in this ranke wee see and know a diuersity of order, and de∣grees of dignity, and all from God, a Deo ordinate, or∣dered and ordained by him; And as Salomon calls mar∣riage, Pro. 2. the Couenant of God, propter eximiam san∣ctitatem; so Dauid the Session of Iudges and Magi∣strates, coetum Dei, as approued of him and honoured with his presence, in a speciall manner, Ps. 82. He sits, in medio corum, 2. Chron. 19. But as the wilde and foo∣lish Anabaptist would destroy all Magistracie from the libertie of the Gospell; so there want not some such froward disputers (as the Apostle speakes of) men of peruerse minds, that reason from the old Testament, that sinne first brought in seruitude, or else God had made no subiection: It is true indeed that the sinne of
Cham occasioned his slauery, A seruant of seruants shalt thou bee, Gen. 9 But yet in purest nature, euen in the state of innocencie there was a superioritie, not onely in man ouer the creatures, but coniugall in the husband ouer the wife, in which estate had children beene borne, there would euen in the law of nature haue sprung vp, patria potestas, a fatherly power, which in time must needs haue risen to regia, or the same that regia is. And of this motion to and promotion, which comes from the Lord, comes also the right end set downe by saint Paul, That we vnder them may lead a quiet & a peaceable life, in, &c. Where peace may bee opposed to tumult, strife, and priuate reuenge. For first, if we had not these lawfull assemblies, but that Demetrius and his fellow hammer heads might rush into the halls and seates of iudgement, what would they doe? why shout they would and teare the ayre with noyses, and so part a∣gaine before they knew why they were come together: and secondly, where would contention stop her course, did not the lawes confine vs, and (as God giues a law to the Sea) bound vs in, with a decree of, Hitherto shalt thou come and no further? And last of all would the Rorers of the Age, and Bretheren of the Sword bee re∣strained, either by Gods prohibition (the God of peace) or the Kings Proclamation (a King of peace) were it not for Iudex & vindex, the Iudge and the auenger of blood, who is appointed betwixt plea and plea, betwixt blood and bloud, Deutr. 17. that these vnruly and bloudy people may heare, and feare, and doe no more presumptuously. I named Ecclesiastique, and will but name it, which together with the ciuill meete and are vnited vnder regall and soueraigne maiesty; as all the coniugations of sinewes in the naturall body runne vp to the head: which is enough to ioyne and com∣bine those two states and powers with the heauenly masticke of true charitie. For as the vaile of the temple rending presaged the ruine of the whole; so if these two flye off and fall to maligne, and seeke to consume each other, it is no good Omen to the whole frame: It shall be∣come me only to remember, that Moses & Aaron were bretheren, and to sing a Requiem with Dauids Ecce, Be∣hold, how good it is for bretheren to dwell together in vnitie.
2. Vse.There is vse to be made of this too for subiects, which is obedience▪ The glory of rule to Princes and magi∣strates (sayes hee in Tacitus) the glory of obedience God hath giuen to the subiect; which must be yeelded both to the good and ill, either actiue or passiue, to the good as causes, to the wicked rulers as occasions of our benefit; the good are nurses, the ill in stead of temp¦ters, which must be endured as we endure drought and dearth, & other things from heauen; And both the rule & the reason is from God. Let euery soule be subiect, &c. for there is no power but of God, and powers that bee are by him ordered. The second conclusion from this first person is, that high ones are sometimes oppressors, & here if I would speake of wealth, it were easie to shew that such do fall into temptation and noysome lusts, and this among o∣thers: but I meddle onely with honour and aduance∣ment, and of that wee may say, as Nehemiah (in ano∣ther case) The Princes and Rulers haue beene chiefe in this trespasse. Nehem. 9.2. They bee fat kine of Bashan fatted in the mountaines, that oppresse the poore and orush the nee∣die, Amos 4.1. High place being like high knowledge. This made Angels & man scorne Gods direction that makes vs despise his dominion; then we haue no Lord wee know him not, What Lord shall controule vs, say they in the
Psalme, and they are oppressors that so say: Then breake his bonds and cast his yoake from vs: wee are Lawmakers then our selues, and our will shall be a Law, or we can do mischiefe and the Law shall defend it. Ex plebiscitis, & Senatus consultis, scelera exercentur. They becomming actors that should bee reformers; it is the miserie of the weakest and lowest things to bee opprest by the higher: The earth as lowest of all, is therefore blasted from heauen, burnt with fire, colickt and pincht with winde, ouerflow'd and wasted with water, her bo∣some and her belly plowed and ript vp by her owne Children, who are but euen althought higher than shee, For dust they are, and to dust they returne; If the ear∣then Pitcher will venture the streame along with the brasse-pot, it is sure to be knockt; The shrub that grows vnder the Oake is beaten bare with dropping on; what poore beasts soeuer chance to come neare the lyon, though but in visitation, the Foxe can spie Vestigia nulla retrorsum; It is so with oppressors, they are neuer high enough, till others be vnder their feete, and by a cou¦sening argument, then pride themselues as highest, when they haue made others lowest.
Let Rhehoboam be an example. 1. Kin. 12.11. Before he was well warme in the Kingdome, he begins to ruf∣fle, and shake vp the subiect: They come with pittifully complaining of the yoke made grieuous by his Father, and would haue him mend it; Come, come, (sayes he) my Father? my Father was not so wise as he might haue beene. He did indeed but piddle, and trifle with you, I tell you my little finger shall be heauier than my Fa∣thers loines: Hee pressed you indeed, but I will adde to it: adde what? What is more then pressing? Why oppressing▪ that is pressing with a vengeance: He cha∣stised you with whips, but I will sting you with Scorpi∣ons: Ther's a Gallant; ther's a firker indeed: Take heed you come not in his fingring. And doe we want expe∣rience of the like? And that we may preserue the mo∣destie of the Text, contenting our selues with Countrie and home examples, for so it is. If in a Countrie thou seest the oppression of the poore, &c. Take one of these things that Fortune lifts vp, when shee is pleased to iest, and to make sport in the world; a young heyre of the Countrie, suppose young Nymrod, of the race of the Gyants, comes to an estare of many thousands, & mo∣mento turbinis exit. Marcus Dama is incontinently knighted (as that is a thing of nought) Sir Rhehoboam Nymrod; what will he doe now? why? bluster & breake in vpon the poore tenants, downe they goe before this golden Calle, and worship him all ouer; Now adde to this measure of Altitude, a Cubite of Iusticeship, and on that a Quorum; quantum vertice in aur as, tantum ra∣dice in Tartara, said Virgill of a Tree; and it is true of such blocks as he; The higher in dignitie, the deeper in crueltic. And as Philoctes Coous is sayd (being madd) to haue made him shooes of Lead, for feare the Wind should blow him away; so he imagines his honor would evaporate vnseene, if his power were vnfelt, he will tread vpon the poore: and as if he had leaden feet indeed, or feete like that Image in Daniel, halfe clay, halfe iron, nay, as if he had mill-stones in's feete, so hee will grind the faces of the poore, and tread them as Dauid trod his enemies,Psal. 18. that is, flat, as myre in the streets. Entring like a tempest, or a whirlewind, that leaues nought behinde it, nothing stands that is mankinde about him; his ma∣nie are oues & Boues, &c. Vse.But to dispatch him out of the way, wee shall heare more of him, and his fellows, in Gods particular regard: till then, all the vse wee can make of him is to shew the daunger of high place and authoritie; attendo celfitudi∣nem, & ê vicino periculum reformide, (sayes Bernard to his Eugenius) the danger of falling into grieuous sinnes, and this among, and aboue the rest; For this is Salomons verdict, at least, such are returned as principall here, Alis oppressores. The high ones are oppressors. 3. Doctrine.The third conclusion from the chiefe person here is, the triall of a Title, which is giuen God; Altissimus, the Highest. The schoole makes three degrees of percei∣uing God, both in nature, and scripture. First, Negatie∣nis, remotionis; He is not the Sunne, Moone not finite, mutable: Secondly,
Perfectionis, affirmationis, when what is most excellent in things create, wee applie to God by way of Analogie and resemblance: So wee call him iust, mercifull, high, glorious: Thirdly, of excel∣lence, or super-heminence, as this here implies. A title therefore sutable to his nature, for to seeke him among the highest things, we know is ridiculous; to pin or de∣termine him there impious; vltra, vltra quaerendus, still aboue and beyond all we must enquire for him, (sayes Bernard.) And as sutable, so there is none of his titles more auncient; so soone (I thinke) as we find mention of any height amongst men, regall, or sacerdotall, as hoth are referred to him, so with this title annext, Gen. 14 Melchizedek king of Salem, and priest of the most high God. It is held throughout the old Testament, and not left of in the new. So Luke 1. Iohn is called the Prophet of the highest: and Luke 6.35. Doe good, &c. and so be Children of the highest: So that as Dauid speakes of his greatnesse: God is great, and there is no end of his greatnesse; So he is high too, and no end of his high∣nesse. We haue those on earth that are to day high, to morrow low as the graue, and therefore though men haue, and doe weare this title of most high, yet God weares it with a difference (sayes the Prophet.) But thou O Lord art most high for euermore. Psal. 92.8. And as it belongs to him for euer, so to euery person in Tri∣nitie, to the Father first, acknowledged both by the powers of heauen and hell: In Luke 1.32. A celestiall Angell testifies of Christ, He shall be called sonne of the highest: and in Luke 8.28. the Confession of a spirit in∣fernall: Iesus thousonne of the most high God. So the sonne himselfe is styled, (the same S. Luke still 1.78.) Oriens ex alto, the day spring from on high. And in Ephes. 1.21. He is sayd to sit at his Fathers right hand, farre aboue all principalities and powers, hauing put all things vn∣der his feete, and giuen him to be head ouer all things: So the holy Ghost is not onely called virtus ex alto, power from on high, Luk. 24.49. but of him sayd; The power of the most high shall ouer-shadow thee. Luke 1.35. In so much that God himselfe seemes to receiue delight and complacencie in this title; for whether men prayse him on earth, it must be with an Hosanna in the highest, or Angels and Hosts from heauen, it must hee with a Gloria Deo in excelsis, Glorie to God in the highest. Now
this title is applied to God, either in respect of his es∣sence, or his attributes and diuine vertuer. First in es∣sence and nature he is Altissimus, among the causes ef∣ficient, exemplarie, finall, he in all these hath the pre∣heminence, as primum, principium, and vltimus finis. In puritie of nature, water aboue earth, aire aboue water, then fire, then light, and he Pater luminum, the Father of lights. Beasts aboue plants, men aboue beasts, aboue men, Angels and spirits, and he Pater spirituum, the Fa∣ther of spirits. In sublimitie of nature, there being in him, the perfection of all his creatures, and that in a most eminent, and vnspeakeable degree. So that none is Highest but he onely; nay, none like the Highest; He that said, he would be, fell the lowest; I saw Satan fall from heauen like lightning. As thus in essence, so last of all in Diuine vertue. Now there is incident to God none of thosevertues, which suppose imperfection, as Faith, Hope, &c. But such as these; mercy, bountie, power, iustice, wisedome, holinesse: and in all these is GOD superlatiue, nay, infinitely aboue all degrees of compa∣rison: we may choose to shew it in these foure for all the rest, mercie, wisedome, iustice, power. His mercie first is highest ouer all his workes. Psal. 144. For his power made nothing, but what his mercy mooued him to; of an vnknowne height it is then, as appeares by Psal. 103.11. As high as heauen is ouer the earth; for it is stablished in the heauens. Psal. 88. and the earth is full of his mercie. Psal. 32. In both places hee is Pater misericordiarum, a father of mercies. 2. Cor. 1. ac∣cording whereto the Church prayes; O God whose na∣ture and propertie is to haue mercie, &c. For if we inquire a reason of his mercy at large to all his creatures; to men as his image, to good men as his sonnes; what can bee returned but ô altitudo! O the height of the exceeding ri∣ches of his mercie!
Againe, his wisedome is another ô altitudo! Rom. 11. Mans knowledge is farre aboue the beasts, in quibus non est intellectus. But we come to no height, no perfection, in enigmate, in part and but darkely, like the Foxe lick∣ing the Viall, when he could not come at the liquor it selfe: And if yet euen from men, wee see so manie wise lawes of Princes, and Bookes of Councellors and Iud∣ges, in which there is extant a strange light of humane. reason, what shall we thinke of the Highest, in whom is the highest law, out of which as out of a fountaine these are drawne, and thither as waters to the Sea returned. For there is one Law-giuer, and one Iudge, Iam. 1. By whose onely wisedome it is that Kings doe raigne, and Princes decree Iustice. Pro. 8. What euer the Creature hath, is a deriuatiue from that Primitue, as Art is con∣ueighed (sayes Aquinas) from the mind of the Artizan into his workemanship. So that this whole Vniuersitie of Gods worke is (as it were) a certaine common place of wisedome: But that poore deale whereof men are capable, is receiued in long time, and but by drops; by many acts we vnderstand one thing, hee in one act all; distinctly: they are naked and bare in his sight, with their substances, formes, differences; wee read of wise men from the East, and of the high wisedome of Salo∣mon, excelling all the East, but nor he, nor those three attained to the first three; not to Alti here, in the end of this verse. Downe then with all humane presumption, and ascribe vnto the Lord (as the glory) so the wise dome due vnto his name, for as his name is here, so is his wisedome, higher than the highest. There is no Iudge aboue God, nor none that hath vnderstanding like the highest. 2. Es. 7.19. We come to his Iustice and Power, of which it is here especially vnderstood, that he is Altissimus. His Iu∣stice first, so high that he is sayd to be Iudge alone; and this height of Iustice is best discerned by the armes, or top branches;
Proemium & poena, Reward and punish∣ment: whosoeuer shall but regard those foure conditi∣ons of Hell torments, for varietie the most, for their greatnesse insufferable, for puritie vnmixt with the least allay of comfort, or hope of mitigation, for their conti∣nuance euerlasting, will easily discouer in them Gods Iustice to be highest. And contrary for reward it excels all, a good measure, pressed downe, yet running ouer: Great is your reward in Heauen. Earthly Monarches thinke they goe far, when they speake like Herod, euen to the halfe of my Kingdome: And what a poore thing is that? Not an inch in the mapp, and in the forme of the Heauens nothing. The goodly houses they bestow, are but as Childrens, Kings halls, made of shells and dust, and what pleasures the Courts of Princes can af∣ford vs,Heb. 13. let Moses refusall tell vs; pleasures of sin, common to vs with beasts, and but for a season, for a moment. But whom God exalts and aduances, hee rewardes with his owne kingdome, a kingdome of glory; his owne cittie, a cittie of pure gold, in that mansion to remaine with him, at the same Table, and yet higher, to sit with him vpon the same throne. Apoc. 3. This is more then euer was: Omnis potestas impatiens consortis. And Pharoah to Ioseph his prime fauorite,Lucan.onely in the throne I will be aboue thee. What might be added of the high nature of those ioyes, which the Angels enioying doe adore; and of their eternitie? At his right hand are pleasures for euer∣more. To giue vs heauen (if wee could doe his Law) were Iustice high enough, though but for one instant of time, but when it is added, For euermore, it is Iustitia in excessu, & in excelso too. T'is Iustice at the Highest. And finally, no lesse admirable is the Power of God, which is so high in him (sayes Beza) it makes him euer Agent, and neuer Patient, and that can neuer cease be∣ing the same it is.
Bellarmine would proue the Popes su∣premacie, by his twelue great names giuen him by his Parasites, more easie were it from Scripture, recounting the glorious names of God, as also from his miracles to draw vp this Power to a supreame head. But it is a bea∣ten way, and a subiect so full, that who euer handles it, cannot choose but handle it well. I will onely instance in that height of Power, which is exprest, and prooued by place. Power terrestriall is declared by ascending to thrones, and if exaltation be measured so, then the Lord alone (as Esay sayes) shall be exalted; For hee dwells, (sayes Esdras) aboue the Aire, super altitudinem aëris. 2. Es. 6. Nay, super altitudinem coelorum, a second super, aboue the height of the heauens. 2. Es. 4. That is a maine height. For who can find out the height of Hea∣uen? (sayes Syracides) the pride of the height, as hee termes it, Ecclus 43. I but there is another super yet, a∣boue the heauens, and the heauens of heauens. What? aboue all? I farre (sayes the Apostle) gone vp on high farre aboue all heauens, Ephes. 4.10. The Queene of Sheba viewing the high throne of Salomon, of which the Text sayes, There was none like it in any kingdome. 1. Reg. 10.20. and obseruing all his royaltie: Non habebat vltra spiritum; shee was astonished. But an higher than Salo∣mon is here; For Salomon in all his royaltie was not clo∣thed like the Lillit of the field, much lesse like the Lord of Heauen, who dwells in light inaccessible, and cloths himselfe with light as with a garment. As Salomon had no such roabe, so no throne like Gods: For he prepares his throne in Heauen, (sayes the Psalme) Solium excel∣sum, a throne high, and lift vp, Esay 6. a glorious high throne sayes Ieremie, 17.12. Before which throne all thrones are cast downe (sayes Daniel) for it is a fire flaming aloft, and towring vp higher than the highest. Now as the throne, so is the Power of God, that the embleme of this. And therefore King Dauid will not repent his kneeling to God. Psal. 95. For (as he adds) the Lord is a great God, and a great King aboue all Gods: Nor will Salomon for all his owne highnesse, rob God of his honour, but stand to the title, which he hath giuen him here: It is no more than right. He is a King, euen Rex regum, a king ouer all kings, and higher than the high∣est: Most high aboue all the earth, and much exalted aboue all Gods. Psal. 97.9.
But of what vse is this Title for vs?Vses. of manifold vse: We may draw all to Timor & Amor, Feare and Loue. First, Feare, and that first in gesture, when wee present our selues before him. It is exacted by himselfe. We may beleeue him when he sweares it: I haue sworne by my selfe (sayes the Lord) that euery knee shall bow to me. Repeated in Rom. 14.11. Esay 45.23. And hee giues vs such examples as we cannot refuse. Christ Iesus him∣selfe, who best knew this height, & the infinite distance betwixt the Creator and the creature as hee was most humbled in soule, so he profest it, in lifting vp his eyes to Heauen, in prayer, in kneeling, falling on his face. The glorious Angels adore with couering their faces, and falling downe before him. The Church begins her Lyturgie with that inuitement; O come, let vs worship, and fall downe, and kneele before the Lord And yet I know not how it comes to passe, we seeme (many of vs) asha∣med of doing this reuerence to God. Hic homo erubes∣cit timere Caesarem (said Macaenas:) So rude is our beha∣uiour, and such a sacrifice of fooles we offer him, as if we neither thought vpon our owne condition, which is but dost and ashes, with one blast disperst past gathering vp againe; nor remembred him to be our God, for then we would not stand like Elephants, or stonie Pillars in his Temple; but prostrate our selues, and thinke no abase∣ment too much, not the lowest, being done to him that is the Highest. So in our tongues (secondly) forbearing that sawcinesse, and familiaritie some vse in Prayer; wherein as the heart must be Faith, so the lungs would be Feare, least it catch an heate. So coole a forme is that of holy Church: Graunt vs O Lord those things which for our vnworthinesse, we dare not presume to aske. Remem∣ber (sayes Salomon) God is in Heauen, and thou on the earth; Let thy words be warie, and few. The same feare should possesse vs when we speake of, or sweare by his name, not vainely, falsely; For holy and reuerend is his name.
2. Vse.Amor, Loue: And this is natiue and radicall in the very temper of oursoules, and as a sparke would breake to flame, but that the world and the Diuell choake and keepe it downe, and this fraile corruptible masse weighs downe the immortall spirit: for these two are contrary one to another: The bodie of the earth, carthie, but the soule from heauen, heauenly, tho forced like the Sunbeames to conuerse with filth and dost, yet haeret o∣riginisuae; cleaues still in affection to God, and hath restlesse motions of desire to returne to him that made it, but clogd with sinne and feebled in all her powers, shee must begge and wait now a superinduction of gra∣ces, that so being stablished in faith and rooted in chari∣tie, and borne vp by the assistance of Gods spirit, as by the wings of a Doue she may flye vnto her rest.
This is exemplarie in holy Dauid, whose heart once touched with these diuine graces, he lifts vp thē his eies and hands, and heart, and voyce. O Lord, whom haue I in heauen but thee? or whom doe I desire in compa∣rison of thee? As the Hart after the riuers, as the thirsty drye ground after shewres, so longs, pants, gasps my soule after the liuing God. So will the heart of euery man that is like him, a man after Gods owne heart, make him his chiefe trust, and marke of highest regard; for he that loues any thing better then mee, is not wor∣thy of mee (sayes Christ) hee is highest, and will haue the highest place in our affection, and hath therefore made it his first and great commandement. Loue the Lord thy God with all thy minde and might, and loue him aboue all things: They were stonie hearted Iewes that cryed, wee will not haue him rule ouer vs, not rule, then nothing: if hee may not bee the head stone, hee will not lye in any part of the building: and if wee ven∣ture to build without him, wo be to our foundation. Let valabour then to lift vp our heart, together with our hands vnto God in the heauens: Let vs call daily for his grace, and crye vnto him to draw vs after him, and hee hath promised to heare from his holy place, and send downe his hand from aboue, to mount vs vpon those blessed stayres of iustification, sanctification, glo∣rification; and then wee are where wee would be, with him that is higher then the highest. The action heere referred to God is regarding,2. Part. an action sutable to the title. High places and noble acti∣ons should goe together: God is not then such a God as Eliah makes Baal, perhaps hee sleepes, no hee regards. First generally all things: For in him they liue, moue, are: and as the eyes of all things look vp towards him, so his downe on all, in heauen, earth, vnder the earth:  His prouidence extending it selfe like that tree in Dan. 4. from one end of heauen to another; whose branches reach out shade and sustenance to all those creatures reckoned vp in Ps. 104. For as the soule minds all the bodies actions, and the Sun penetrates all corners, so this true soule of the world and this Sunne of righteous∣nesse, but with a remarkable difference (sayes Saint Iames) he does it without varrying or shadow of tur∣ning vnmoued, euer the same, hee sits in midst of hea∣uen; and yet they bee the eyes of the Lord that runne too and fro through the whole earth, Zach. 4.10. raig∣ning aboue, and yet containing all below, compassing all about and yet piercing all within: and what is yet more maruellous, this generall regard and discerning of Gods, to extend euen to all things: al the stars, al the sons of men, all the Cattell on 10000. hills, all those number les shoales of fishes in the seas, all foules of the ayre, euen to seueralls & minuities: the little sparrowes, not one of them is forgotten, all the miseries of all his seruants, all their teares in his bottle, in Man alone to regard all the members of his body, gressus (sayes
Dauid) the steps of his feete, capillos (sayes our Sauiour) hayres on his head, all the sinnes of his soule, and all in order, all our workes, not a word in our tongue, nay, in our heart, (from whence imaginations rise as fast as sparks from a furnace) not a thought, but our heauenly father, who sees in secret, sees it though nere so secret; nay long be¦fore either birth or conception: and as hee calls, so hee knowes too and regards the things that are not as if they were. O Lord our gouernour, how excellent is thy name, for it is higher than the highest, & how excellent is thy knowledge in all the world, for there is nothing, was, nor can, nor shal be nothing but thou O Lord knowest it altogether. 2. Now this generall runnes into two speciall respi∣ces or obseruats, the one of mercy ouer the good, and the other of iustice ouer the wicked: His eyes behold, Ps. 11. and his eyelids trye the children of men▪ but with a different regard: hee watches ouer all, but ouer some for preseruation, ouer others for destruction: Ier. 31 and in Ier. 44. hee calls it a watching for good, and a watching for ill: with the first hee daily watched ouer his owne Israel, in a cloud and fiery pillar, but through them both it is said hee looked on the hoast of Aegypt and troubled it, Exod, 14.24. Tis true he delights most in the first of these watchings, and then his highnesse i best pleased, when ioind with a mercifull regard, when hee shewes vs the beauty of his holinesse, & causes the light of his countenance to arise: But if our sinnes pro¦uoke him to anger, he will suffer his displeasure to arise, and tho wee be his owne people, tender as the apple of his eye, and his chiefe treasure aboue all nations; yet then, as hee threatens Israell, Leuit. 26 9. hee will set his face against vs, then (as Daniel hath it) he will watch vpon the euill and bring it vpon vs. So that it is a true title Seneca giues him, Deus bonorum, malorumque obser∣uator & custos. Our good and our euill, Hee that is high∣er then the highest regardeth. 3. Lastly, regards this particular sin Oppression; the patient, first in mercie, and first of all as
pauperem, then (most of all) as pauperem pressum, the poore oppressed: God regards the Poore: And the maiesty of the title prefixt, makes this action glorious: what hee? whose excellence hath no stint vpward, aboue the clouds, starres, heauens of heauens, still higher then the high∣est, to looke downe de super, so low: a solio, ad solum, from his throne of glory, in excelsis, to regard the cries of the poore, de profundis? yet so it is, thou God seest mee (sayes poore Agar) Gen. 16. And the euer-blessed Virgin: Thou hast regarded the low or poore estate of thy handmaid: And this seemes a kinde of state in God, and then his highnesse is in full Maiesty, when hee shewes his powerfull regard ouer the meanest, and the most de∣spised on earth, such as men sell for shooes and count not worth looking after▪ yea God is expressed in Scrip∣ture as if hee laboured for the aduancement of the Poore, and then most of all when they are most wretch∣ed: so in Psalm. 113. hee is said to lift at it, to raise the poore euen out of dung, to set him with Princes, &c. It is a great mercy to behold an hūble God, who being highest, yet bowes down himselfe to regard the poore: but much more pauperem pressum, the poore oppressed. Pouerty is but a shallow plash of misery, but Oppres∣sion breaking in, raises it to a floud, euen a red sea of bloudy cruelty, deepe and deadly: but then one deepe calls vpon another, and it seemes not to be in the pow∣er of God to withhold his mercifull regard; as we see by visiting his Israell in Aegypt, and by his owne con∣fession: Now for the sighing of the needy and oppression of poore, I will vp (saith the Lord) Psal. 12.5. If once they come to the shadow of death, to bee fast bound in mi∣serie and iron, & then crie to the Lord in their trouble, he deliuers them out of their distresse. One example, & tis a full one indeed. Dauid in a case of oppression he be∣takes himselfe (as his known & only refuge) vnto God, & calls him by this very name in the text, Altissimus, Ps. 56 2. Mine enemies (it is indeed my obseruers) daily op∣presse me and would deuoure me. Be mercifull vnto mee, O Lord thou most high: though they be high ones and dai∣ly
obserue me watching ouer me for euill, doe thou re∣gard me for good, for thou art higher then they, & thou beholdst iniquity & wrong, yea thou regardest the poor but much more pauperem pressum, the poore oppressed. We come to the agent whom he regards in iustice, as altum first, & then as altum oppressorem: first as high God sees not as man sees; man thinks high things best and brauest stupet in titulis & imaginibus: But that wch is al∣tum high amōg men, is abomination to God. They that lookt into the book of nature, saw the lightening scorch the mountains most, & Lucretius obserued, that res abdi∣ta quedam (as he cals it) a certain hidden thing there was which did stil proculcare kick down the highest things, & Iudibrio sibi habere, seem'd to take pleasure in so doing. And in the book of Gods scripture wee see what deso¦lation he threatens oft, & oft seems delighted to bring vpō the high ones of the world: so he seems to triumph ouer the Amorite, whose height was as the Cedars; yet I destroid (saies he) his fruit frō aboue, & his root frō be low: so he doth menace Edom, tho high roosted & nest¦ed among the stars, yet there & thence will I fetch thee down (saith the Lord) Ie. 49.16. these do indeed escape all power on earth (perhaps) but cannot free thēselues frō being the quarrie of him which is the highest. The hearn & vulture outflying both falcon & Gyrfalcon, is by the Sacre seizd on in an instant, which foule (as the name imports) is made by all a symbole & hyeroglyphick of the Deity, of whom it is said, Wisd. 6. That he will come horribly & speedily vpon the wicked gouernours, & a sharpe iudgement shall be to them in high places: for mercy will soone pardon the meanest, but mighty men shall be mightily tormen∣ted. But all this is to bee vnderstood of high ones that are wicked on whom as he looks in speciall iustice, so particularly on altum oppressorem, the high Oppressor.
Why, oppression seems no such great matter: at sea the great fish eat the smal, in the ayre & vpō the earth there be beasts & birds of prey, that liue per rapinam (here) by cauening: I but non sic inter vos, it shal not be so amongst your God had another care in making mā after his own image, & in keeping him vses a gard of Angels, gards & regards him, regards (saies the Scripture) all his hones, & therfore who euer shede mans bloud, this great regarder wil require it. I, his bloud; but oppression is not murde∣ring: tis true, things may bee flead aliue with cunning handling, but as good take vit as victum, life as liue∣load; beside, there is more in this sin then is yet discoue∣red: for who is it that bleeds? Non cruer hic de stipito ma∣nat, Polydorus ego sum; and doth not Christ Iesus say the same, I am Iesus of Nazareth whom you persecute, so whom you oppress to; it shall come all to a reckoning: for inas∣much as you haue done it to them, you haue done it to me: therfore he giueth vs caueats, Rob not the poore be∣cause he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the gate: why? what wil he do? The Lord wil rise vp an aduocate and plead their cause, in forma pauperis, and spoile the soule of those that spoile him, Pr. 22.23. And as there an aduocate, so in Malachy a witness too, & a swift one comes in (belike) before he is cald or lookt for. And tis no dallying in this case, for their Redeemer is mighty (sales Salomon) Pr. 23.11 And if I commit this sin (saith Iob) he wil terrifie me & (be∣cause of altissimus here) because of his highnes I cannot en∣dure: So in Ier. 22. he frights Iohoiakim that had liued by
oring like a Lyon, with the burial of an asse, euē drawn and cast our, ye, cast out into vtter darknes, where for eating the poore & not regarding his tears, he shall haue both weeping and gnashing of teeth: For ouer these terri∣ble ones on earth that watch for iniquitie, Esa. 29. there is a terrible supervisor aboue, who (without repentance) will de∣liuer them to a terrible one below too, euen the King of terror who will ourore them; for tis his propertie, (& they do but learne of him to goe about like a roring Lyon, seeking whom he may deuoure. And this the Lord calls recom∣pencing their own way, Destroying for destroying, Ezech. 22. vlt. And (that which is worthy our regard &1619. now seasōable) so sore an auenger is God of this sin, that for it he threatens not the agēts only, but the whol land. In Am. 8. see what work the Lord swears he wil make there. he wil neuer forget it, he wil make it a bitter day; nay, the land shal tremble and rise vp wholly as a floud, & be drowned as in the floud of Egypt, which was a whole destructiō (indeed) for the text saies (i remember) there was not one of thē left: so terribly doth the regard of his iustice fal vpō these 2. when ioin'd together, alū oppressorē, the high oppressor. He that in wise will consider this. And the considera∣tion is vsefull.Vse. First, to make vs take out Salomons lesson of Nemixiris: Be not astonisht, doe not wonder at the matter, that is, istem v em; at this will or purpose in God; for Iunius interpretation of the will or councell of wicked men is too cold, & vnlikely. No: Salomon would not haue vs repine at Gods ordering the matter Nemi∣xiris. Where simply to wōder is not forbidden for hat's the seed of knowledge & an impressiō of delight, which man may & is invited to take in sorveighing the workes of God. O consider and behold! And cherefore the Philo∣sophers in their , wherein they placed per∣fection did not d to take away this pleasant admi∣rings and obsecuring the world, nor to hinder our liuely, actiue, & vigorous contēplation of God, for it becomes not onely our religion, but discretion too, to mount our holiest & chastest thoughts vnto him, cōfessing him in∣finitely aboue the highest endeuours of our imaginati∣ons, but they taught the same that Salomon do here ne mireris not wōder with astonishment, which they could not vnderstand of a profound carelesnesse, for then women & idle dissolutes would doe it duly. But they meant a beauteous sweet state of the soule, by taking downe the sails of vulgar opiniō & passiō which make men nice, & soon disquieted. So that in Salomōs mireris here, 2 things onely seeme prohibited. 1. a distrust of Gods prouidēce; 2. vexing our selues about the execution of his Iustice.
The first is a torment, which is onely in men; Beasts know it not; nor seeme they to know either God or thē∣selues that practice it. Why? He regards (sayes Salomon) he rules in heauen, in earth, & in all deepe places, He is thy King, Thou must either endure his sway, or get out of his dominion. It is a very good one, the Mexican sal∣uation to their infants new borne ô child thou art borne to suffer, suffer and hold thy peace. Doe not whine and cōplaine as the vulgar ignorant at euery storm or more or may the tumor of an earth quake or a water wrack, though a 1000. leagues off, and but in a ballade, drawes them together like Bees at sound of a bason, and holds them suspended and astonisht. The simple plow-man is afraid those cowling  of heauen should not re∣member their duties do him, and is ready to brawle with God, for crossing the contents of his Almanack, & not sending him drought and showers at his pleasure. But what speak of these? we all labour of the same infirmi∣tie, no man thinkes sufficiently, that he is but man, and but one: for euery man take vpon him to be a publicke paedagogue, and would rule this world with a rod; and we are prone all to quarrell with God of carelesnes, or of presumption, that would make a would, & not geuen is better than he does. Foodmen I. (sayes Salomon) doe not breake your soules with these imaginations; better deny him vtterly, than thinke ill, or idly of his prouidence; as it is better for a man to be rumor'd dead, than reported wicked; For he regards the world, & that law which was the part ne to make it, is the Card to guide it by; not af∣ter thy wil or wisedome happily, but
, &c. Ep. 1.11 according to the councell of his owne will; and if it force thee to a stand to cōsider it, beware yes of murmuring either at his prouidence, or iustice, wch is the second thing for∣biddē  T'was a wōder to Cato, that when Ptis did all against right and reason, he euer prospered, but for the Common-wealth had no successe: and it would make any man wonder indeed, nay, vexe with Dauid to see the wicked in no mis-fortune, like other men, nay, like good men (oftentimes.) for ny are the troubles of the righteous, and among those many, this is a maine one, Oppression, which is able to make euen a wise man madd (sayes Salomon) to suffer it, and enough (as it seemes by this very Text) to stagger vs, beholding the poore op∣pressed, and the oppressor goe free. I; but be not asto∣nisht (sayes the Breacher.) Iudge nothing before the time (sayes the Apostle.) We cannot by one title, or by one word iudge of the masons fabrique, or the Poets verse; we must view the contexture, and heare all the syllables sound. And shall wee thinke to take a true estimate of Gods iudgement (sayes St Austen) ante quam totus orde decurrat. Before the whole streame and course thereof be runne out? There remaines mercy for the righteous, as sure it is that a iudgement to come remaines for the wicked; and as if none were punished here, none would beleeue our report, that, The highest Regardeth; so if all here striken, who would regard a iudgement to come? 2 Vse.Secondly, since God regards the poore oppressed, here is double consolation for the poore, all poore, for it is no personall priuiledge this. They are Lampes de∣spised in the opinion of the rich, but not in his, who is rich ouer all. He regards them, in mercy, and the rather for being poore, nay, the more poore, the more he re∣gards thē: for thats true the t'other way too: that which is abomination to men, he that is higher than the high∣est regardeth. And of what can they despaire, who are thus highly regarded, by him who is able for earthly to giue treasure in heauen? which nor defrauder, nor op∣pressor can bereaue, for a smoakie cottage here, a buil∣ding of a 1000. stories high, not made with hands, but eter∣nall in the heauens. Meane time, wanting mony they haue his louing fauour, which is aboue siluer and gold; in stead of corne, and wine, and oyle, he shewes them the light of his countenance, and in mercie regards them.
Secondly, consolation too for Panperem pressum. What though opprest & deprest, euen as low as the dungeon, or the den, or the belly of the Whale or the bottome of the belly of hell (sayes Sirach:) yet here are two words like a payre of heauenly pullies, able to fetch them vp, to an high & liuely consolution, Altissimus, observat. He that is higher than the highest regardeth. This then is, The poore Mans Appeale, so call this Text, when stung with those fierie serpents, they may yet fixe their eye on this brazen serpent, that is lift vp higher than the highest, and yet from thence Regards and send downe that cheatful voice of the Prophet; The needy shall not alway be forgot∣ten;Psal. 9.18.the patient abiding of the poore shall not perish for euer. Last vse is of feare, to the High one first, and then the oppressor.  Let the high one of earth haue an awfull re∣gard of the highest regarding him, regarding all wicked ones in Iustice, but wicked rulers in seueritie. And then let the oppressor feare, foure this cursed sin even pidling oppression, (which we count a pregnancie, and a verie fine qualitie,) defrauding and circumventing our bro∣ther in barganing; for euer of such things the Lord is the avēger. 1. Thes. 4.6. Much more let the high oppres∣sors feare that crying and bloudie sin, who tho they can scape the iudgement of men, yet how will they preuent or escape super inspectorem, he that is in his holy watch tower aboue, and in whose sight all thinge are naked & manifest, & whose vengeance is both suddaine & pow∣erfull, vno nutu, at one becke able to presse and crush, & for euer perish a whole world of oppressore, at the very blasting of the breath of his displeasures. The Appli∣cation.And first doe you (most Reuerend Iudges) suffer the word of Exhortation: you see your calling is an high one, sharing with God, in names of Lord & Iudge: nay,
I haue said you are Gods, and are all children of the most high. Be followers of God as deare children; follow him, tho non passibus aequis. For humane nature is not capable of perfect iustice, no more then of other things in their pu∣ritie; onely see that you bend your highest endeuors in imitation of the highest; not kept downe by the basenes of the world, nor your sweet and wholesome acts of Iu∣stice (like the Sun-beames in a burning glasse, bowd, & contracted by passion or partiality, & be merciful, as your heauenly father is merciful, sans hope of earthly reward or sting of vainglory: and being in the place of God, learn his action heere of regarding, for this end sits he in hea∣uen, and he hath not set you here to be regardlesse, like Gallio, Act. 18. one that cared for nothing, as so many Scarcrowes in a garden of Cucumers; but to
regard the poor in mercy, & the high Oppressor in iustice: & say not you to him as Ioseph to old Iacob, not so, my father, reach∣ing rather your hand (clean cōtrary) of iudgment to the poor, & of fauor to the oppressor: but in mercy respect the poore & needy, that are sick and need your physick, not purges or lettings bloud with the whip, so much as your cordials of prouision, your gentle laxatiues, your blessed lenitiues & restoratiues: And in justice regard their ad∣uersaries, & look that such as ar the grand thieues sit not neer you on the bench, while the petite ones plead at the bar for mercy. I know that simple people think you may do wōders, but my prouocatiō tends no further then to vrge the execution of that lawful power, which to you throgh our excellent Soueraign is conuaid frō him that is higher then the highest. And that therin you would op∣press the oppressor, & beware lest (as the Apostle saies in another case) the strength of sinne is the Law, so these high ones do not strengthen their hands in this sin of oppres∣sion, either by the shelter or conniuence of the Law or Magistrate, wch if you do not, he regards that is higher then they or you: and wch if you labour to do, by despi∣sing (as the Prophet speaks) the gain of oppression, sha∣king your hands frō taking of bribes, stopping both eies and eares from seeing euill, or bearing bloud, then he re∣gards in mercy, & great is your reward in heauen, for your defence shall be the munition of rocks, and you shall in∣habit loca altissima, the highest place, Es. 33.16. And this speech to you (my gracious Lords) is but like a second impulsion to a wheel already moud, and I admonishing to do what you ar obserud to do already, do in my admo∣nition bear along both praise & approbation. Consider then what I haue said, and that Lord Iudge of heauen and earth, who is only wise, giue you vnderstanding in all things. And next let vs learn to aply this text, we that ar now in his sight, speaking, hearing, for he regards out instant ac∣tions, sees our reuerēce, knows our thoughts. When we part from hence, the Text will follow vs, in our houses, chambers, closets, his eye is euer on vs, let then the eyes of our soules be euer fixt on him, & euer even in midst of night & silent darknes suppose our selues in a Theater since he sees vs; & euery where vpon our walls and gar∣ments, in our rings, and on our fore-heads, and in the palmes of our hands, ingraue this posie, Altissimus ob∣seruat. Doe you in speciall that are to attend the Courts of Iustice & iudgement, Councellors in your pleas, and witnesses in your depositions; Ere you ope your mouths hearken to the voice of Salomon here, nay, lend but an eare to the call of your owne consciences, and they will preach this text vnto you; He that is higher then the high∣est regardeth. And you of the Iewry be not like those Physitians, who vse to erect a figure, by that minute, in which they are consulted, and thereby giue their iudge∣ment. For thats too vsuall with ordinary Iurors, to haue regard to certaine aspects, and relations, and predomi∣nancies, and to giue verdicts according as they find Su∣periors enclin'd. Their Landlord may chance to frowne else, and take away their leases, or cast them out of their houses: I, but Salomon tels vs of a superior here far aboue all Lords, by Land or by Water, one that can depriue them of inheritance in the kingdome of Heauen, and able to cast them both bodies & soules into Hell: And therefore feare him; feare not their regarding, but hi-regarding; His that is higher then the highest: To whom be prayse and glory, now and for euer. Amen. Gloria Deo in Excelsis. FINIS.
