21493 99846064 11002
To the most irreuerend Pope-holy Fathers of the two Seminaries at Rheimes and Rome. ¶A Confirmation of thexposition of the former Emblemes, containing a messe of spirituall Sonnets, or two paire of pastorall Eclogues, in rurall meeter: for the Kings Crowne and Dignitie, against the Popes Miter and Rochet. The first paire of Pastorall Eclogues. ¶The first spirituall sonnet, containing an exhortation to true subiects, for due obedience to their lawfull Magistrates, vpon diuers waightie reasons. The Preface. TO euery lawefull Magistrate, and Ruler in preheminence, and to their lawefull officers, all people yeeld obedience: Loue, honour, tribute thankefulnes and euery kinde of loyaltie, for conscience sake, and not for feare, nor by constraint, but willingly. The Sonnet. 1 WHo beare Gods Image and his name, and represent his Maiestie, And occupie his roome on earth (though subiect to mortalitie.) Like sunne that shines full bright in skie, and dazells mortall eye, To shew blind folkes the Lord of life much more to magnifie. 2 Who are Gods cunning worke-maisters, directed by his hand, With power and skill, rude thinges to cause in order faire to stand: Like sope and water, scowring white, and washing very cleane, So as no spot in countenance, nor wrincle may be seene. 3 Who weelde Gods Scepter and his Sword to purpose, with effect Hard things to soften, wrong to right, and hidden to detect: Like fire and flame, with parching heate, which by a secret influence, In hardning clay, and softning waxe, declares a wondrous difference. 4 Who execute Gods holywill, and are a liuing lawe, With paine and price, from ill to good, a number to withdrawe: Like Adamant stone, vplifting yron, or Frankensence to smell, The sence to please, the ae to purge, ill sauours to expell. 5 Who by Gods plentie peace procure, and common-wealth maintaine, With stately porte, in carefull sorte, more then for hope of game: Like fertile soile, bespred with flowers in comfortable spring, For mans reliefe, without rewarde, great store of fruite to bring. 6 Who Nurses are of Christ his Church, religion to defend, Lost soules to saue, and safe conduct, and bountie to extend: Like goodly Armies, furnished with shields of beaten golde, The walles of brasse, the gates of pearle, in sure defenced holde. Conclusion, Beholde the happy progenie of Peeres that neuer die, Each after other ministring, by course successiuely, Who sway that ciuill gouernment, which God alone doth beare, Prowd spirits to daunt in lewd attempts, meeke spirits in good to reare. A short instructi∣on or auouch∣ment with some notice giuen to the greatest gain∣saiers thereof. THus euery seemely propertie imports in full effect, That euery lawfull magistrate is one of Gods elect: To rule his subiects orderly, in honest conuersation, And so to further common wealth with godly reformation. Which pointe, no wise man dare denie, nor beastes (if they could speake) Who in their kinde are very loth, Gods ordinance to breake: Sith nature teacheth, lawe requireth, the King of kings doth say, Superiors ought to rule aright, inferiors must obay. Howbeit the romish Anabaptists, for the popish Monarchie, Haue labourd long all gouernements to bring into an anarchie: That they, and theirs, may rule the roast, who haue to doe the least, Vnlesse it be to heale the wounds of that seuen headed beast. The second spirituall sonet containing an encouragement of all lawfull Magistrates to suppresse the Pope of Rome, and his romish Complices, for sundry good considerations. The Preface. All Christian Princes of the earth, pull downe the Popes estate, who made you hornes to wrecke his wrath, and furie, (till of late,) And drunken with the poysny cuppe of spirituall fornication, to bring you, and your subiects all, to vtter desolation. The Sonnet. 1 WHose ordination is but pompe and pride, full of confusion, Like errand theeues, that breake the fence, and enter by intrusion: Not rightly callde, (as Aron was, annoint with sacred oyle,) But startvps stout, with reuell rout, to liue vpon the spoile. 2 Whose insolent supremacie to raigne aboue the rest, As though he had all holines and wisdome in his breast, No lesse then Christ, the sonne of God, and th'oly Ghost his deputie, Is like Goliahs blasphemie, against the blessed Trinitie. 3 Whose Iurisdiction is too large, for mortall man to teach. Like Babells Tower, which Bablers thought beyond the cloudes to reach: Or Nimrod hunting lustily for praye in euery ground, Or scornefull Ismaell quarrelling with euery one he found. 4 Whose Canons serue to starue the Saintes, and bellie-gods to feed, Pretensedly to build the Church, and helpe the poore at need: Like Iudas, who to spare his purse, enquir'd, what waste is this? And did for thirtie pence betraye his Maister with a kisse. 5 Whose Officialls are hirelings all, which on his seige depend, The cursed courts of wrangling wights to bolster and attend: Like Pilates, Pyrats, Iewes, and Turkes, who naughtie shiftes do vse, Or, bawdes and harlotes impudent, who liue vppon the stewes. 6 Whose marchandize is not the marke of any Pastor pure, But fleshly, worldly, diuelish prancks to forge and put in vre, Like hammer, nailes, speare, spunge, and whip, of Annas Caiphas brood, Who cried, away with Christ to th crosse, and shed his pretious bloud. Conclusion. BEholde the Chaire of pestilence, and throne of grosse iniquitie, Ordaining mischiefe, for a lawe, and exercising crueltie: Heere wisdome is, and patience, this mystery to spell, How Lucifer climde vp in heauen, and was throwne downe to hell. A briefe recapi∣tulation, or re∣hearsall, with a certaine chal∣lenge to the gain∣saiers thereof. THus euery vitious qualitie, the substance doth disgrace, Of popish Pseudo-hierarchie, and put it out of place, And proue it no such Bishopricke, as scripture setteth downe. Much lesse to be so catholike, and weare a triple crowne. No Writer euer could declare by any demonstration, With all his labour and his wit, such Lordly domination, To come from Christ by Peters kayes, or other argument, Directly, or, by consequence, in either testament. Howeuer Ecchius, Pigghius, and the rest of that fraternitie, By hooke or crooke, with bell and booke, support the Popes authoritie: And Verstegan-Bochi-skenkely, bragge Champions on a rowe, With scutchions blaze the Popish armes, and cast the King too lowe. The second paire of Pastorall Eclogues. The third spirituall sonnet, containing an admonition of all states and degrees, in their seuerall places and callings, to prouide for their owne safties and welfares, by roo∣ting out the romish Monster, with his brutish Companions. 1 IN iust defence of Magistrates, All people hie and lowe, As on your countrie Fathers deare, both limme and life bestowe, Whom God hath railed vp to rule their subiects in his place, All Traitors false, especially proude Papists to deface. 2 Surmounting high, deep searching wits, sound politike, Noble Sates Preserue your roiall dignities from Antichristian mates. 3 Braue ancient stocks, right famous blouds, whom worth hath set aloft Let not Italian Hipocrites your Honours bring to nought. 4 Graue Iudges wise, and Councel learnde, to tell the truth be bolde, That Soueraintie from shauen crownes, al Princes may withholde. 5 Good neighbors neere, Confederats kind, and Bordrers round about, Suppresse sedition euery where, cast Romish rebels out. 6 True subiects all, with loyall mindes, fast feeding on the hill Of safe defence, in fruitfull ground, by watchfull Shepheards skill, Plucke vp your hearts, addresse your selues, with deadly foes to fight: Namely that monstrous Babilon, who worketh most despight. ¶The fourth spiritual Sonnet, containing an alarme to all the creatures of God, in their kinde, and especially his faithfull seruants, in their vocation, to resist and abandon that sauage tyrant of Rome, with his bloudie Colleagures. 1 AGainst that purpled Whore of Rome, harke all Gods creatures, harke, Who murdereth all his seruants deere, that do refuse her marke, Come, and reuenge their blood on her, and feed vpon the beast, Whose houre is come, whose fall is neere, God bids you to the feast. 2 Come, all his Saintes, withdraw your selues from her abhomination, And double pay her for her hire, and worke her desolation. 3 Come, yee her false friends, flattring faire, and take againe the glory, Which she from you tooke, of your lands and liuings transitorie. 4 Come, yee her wretched wies and prancks, forepast from age to age, Out of records, and testifie against her on the stage. 5 Come, thou Gods word, the breath of life, that triest raines and heartes, Set forth and marre her vgly shape, and all her filthie partes. 6 Come last of all, deere Sauiour Christ, once more, and quite consume The remnant of her forgeries, with fire for aye to fume, In furnace of thy Fathers wrath, where breed those monsters fell, Who persecute thy chosen flocke, and mangle thy Gospell. Foure principall properties of a Christian Magi∣strate. 1 To know the vertuous, 2 to cherish them. 3 To finde out offenders. 4 to punish them. Such as honor me, I will honor thē; saith the Lord Foure euill fauo∣red qualities of that vsurping Antichrist. 1 To exalt himself in the temple of God. 2 to dispise gouernment. 3 To counterfaite the truth. 4 to dene the vertu of it. Such as honor &c A fit Praier. Lord saue thy Church, our Queene, and realme, and graunt they may preuaile, Against that hideous Antichrist, his body, head and taile: And that we stil thy blessed wil may seeke sincere and pure Till we shall be all one with thee, for euer to endure. By G. W. P. S. one of the meanest Ministers of the Gospel in England.
