23037 22575158 25613
A DESCRIPTION of the Ciuill VVarres of ENGLAND. IN this Platforme are contained (gentle Reader) the seueral battels fought by Sea and Land, at se∣uerall times and in seuerall places of England and Ireland, and the parts ad∣ioyning, within these fiue hundred yeeres last past. Description of pictures after the manner of sight, as the plot will giue roomth I haue placed, and in the margent by numbers marked, ob∣seruing the time, yeere, and euent of e∣uery battel, which being performed by me in satisfaction of the honorable de∣sire of certain Martial Gentlemen pro∣fessors of Armes, & louers of learning, were desirous to see these mixtures of matters of their owne profession, and the passed proceedings of their owne countries affaires, and desired me with my poore labour to further so good a worke: which being finished in large with the liking of the motioners, and good allowance of her Maiestie, to whose sacred person it was commen∣ded, and there contented to haue re∣sted. The counterfeit whereof notwith∣standing much lessened and more bad∣ly performed, hath since come forth in print, either through the greedy de∣sire of gaine (the bane of all good pro∣ceedings) or the gainsaying mindes of such as are enuious to others pains, lest their owne profit thereby be empay∣red, whose barren inuentions must be supported by other mens endeuours, and their shallow conceites carried through the currants of others springs otherwise runne they from little to no∣thing. The silence of Englands ciuill wars I could haue wished, being the markes of our owne infamies, and staines to be washed away rather with repen∣tance, then againe to be renewed by remembrance: had not these drawne my paines to their owne headlesse in∣uentions, and shot my shafts from their owne Bowes: for lucre making common that, which in priuate and for great Estates I intended: and by their indirect meanes am inforced to bring mine owne (yet much abridged) to the Presse. Wherein if it so fall out, as that this my endeuour doe yeeld contentment to them which hitherto haue allowed my labours, I meane in time to come (if God permit) to se∣cond the same with another plot of other Warres, performed by English∣men in other Countries, against others and forraine forces: a matter of more honour to our Country and pleasure
to our Countrey-men, in regard the same are accompanied with many fa∣mous victories, vnder the Standers of whose Kings, mighty Kings many times haue beene forced to bowe, and Martiall men constrayned to yeeld to Englands glorious obtained victories. These being for the most part Ciuill Battels betweene meere English-men of one Nation, wherein the parties vi∣ctorers, besides the losse of their owne side, procured on the other, the fall and ruine of them that were all of his owne Countrey, many of them of his owne acquaintance and alliance, and most of them perhaps his owne friends in any other cause, then that in which hee contended for. But from this generall argument, to proceede to some parti∣culars, it shall not be amisse to make some diuision of them, according to their seuerall qualities, of the seuerall quarrels in them which are found to be diuers, and of three seuerall na∣tures. Whereof the first were the in∣uasions attempted by forraine Prin∣ces, and enemies against the Kings and people of this Realme. The second were meere rebellions of Subiects a∣gainst their annointed Princes. And the third dissensious factions betwixt Princes of the blood Royall: of these three, all these effusions of blood haue consisted. And to begin with the first battell in this plot, which was the first begin∣ning of gouernement of this state as it yet continueth. Such was the attempt of William Duke of Normandy against King Harold the sonne of Earle Good∣win, who preuailed so against him in fight at Battaile in Sussex (a place so called by this euent) as the said Duke was afterward King of this Land, and brought the whole nation vnder his obedience, as it hath beene continued to his posterity euer since. Such was the arriuall of Lewes sonne and heyre to Philip King of France against Iohn King of England, who being carried by his owne ambition, accompanied with French forces, and assisted by the rebellious Barons of this Realme, after variable fortune of fight in seuerall skirmishes, battels, and assaults, was forced in the end, without all honour, or hope to preuaile, to make a very shameful retreat into his own country. Such was also the entrie made by Iames the fourth King of Scots, against King Henry the eight of famous memory, his brother in law, and sworne allie, at that time absent in the wars of France, who contrary to his oath and alliance formerly made, entered the North frontires of England, with a mighty Army, had the same discomfited and ouerthrowne, and was himselfe slain in the field by the En∣glish forces, vnder the leading of the Earle of Surrey, at that time Lieutenant generall for King Henry. And especially such was the late enterprise remaining fresh in memory, of Phillip late King of Spaine, against our dread Soueraigne Lady now raigning, in the yeere of our Lord 1588. attemp∣ting by his inuinible Nauy as he thought, and so termed, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Medina Celi, which with great pride and cruelty entended a∣gainst vs, arriued on our coasts to Englands inuasion and subuersion, had yet neuerthelesse here in the nar∣row Seas, the one part of his Fleet discomfited, taken, and drowned, and the other part forced to their great shame in poore estate to make a fearefull and misera∣ble flight about the coast of Ireland homeward so that of 158. great ships furnished for warre, came to their owne coast of Spaine but few, and those so torn and beaten by the English Cannons, that it was thought they were vnseruiceable for euer, and eleuen of their ensignes or banners of Idolatry, prepared for triumph and pride in conquest, were contrariwise to their shame and dishonour shewed at Pauls-Crosse, and in other places of this Realme, to Gods glory, our ioy, and their endlesse infamy. The second sort of quarrels in these wars, were meer rebellions of subiects against their annointed Princes and Gouernors and of these some haue been priuate▪ and some generall. Of the first kinde for priuate occa∣sions, was that of Thomas Earle of Lancaster, against King Edward the second his cosin-germane, vpon mislike of the Spencers, greatly fauoured by the King, and as much enuied of him, who hauing his forces de∣feated at Burrowbridge, was there taken prisoner, & after beheaded at Pomfret. Of the same kind was that of Henry Lord Percie, surnamed Hot spurre, & Thomas Percie Earle of Worcester his Vncle, against K. Henry the fourth, at Shrewesbury; where the said Lord Hen∣ry was slaine, and the other taken prisoner, and after beheaded in the same towne. So was that of Michaell Ioseph the black-smith in Cornwal and his company against King Henry the seauenth, for a Subsidie gran∣ted in Parliament to the same King, who gathered a head of rebellion so strong, that at Black-heath neare London, they abode battell against their Soueraigne, but were there taken, and afterward drawne, headed and quartered at Tiburne. Also such was that of Ro∣bert Ket the Tanner of Windham in Norfolk, against King Edward the sixt, pretended against inclosures and liberty to the weale publike, was at Norwich ta∣ken in the field, and afterward hanged on the top of the castle of the same towne. And lastly, so was that of
Sir Thomas Wiat and the Kentishmen against Queen Mary for the bringing in of Phillip of Spaine, they be∣ing cut off at S. Iames, & himself yeelded at the Court. Of the latter sort of Rebellions being generall, were those of the Barons against King Iohn, & King Henry the third his son, in their seuerall raignes. Against the father, in bringing in of forraine powers; & working a resignation of the Crowne & Diadem, to the great blemish of their King & Kingdome. And against the son so prosecuted their attempts, that their warres to this day are called and knowne by the name of the Barons-wars, which had so lamentable consequence, as that after the ouerthrow & consummation of sun∣dry most noble and ancient houses of England, and both parties wearied with warres: the conclusions of peace which ensued are reported in regard of the precedent murthers to be written with bloud. The third sort of these quarrels in these Ciuil-wars and dissentions, were factious dissentions betweene Princes themselues of the blood Royall, ambitiously aspiring the Crowne of this Kingdome, and titles of Kings thereof: Of which kinde there haue been two most notable knowne amongst vs. The first fell be∣twixt Stephen of Bloyse, Earle of Bolloigne, wrong∣fully succeeding his vncle king Henry the first, in the Crowne of England, on the one party, and Maude the Empresse, Daughter and sole heire to the said King Henry, and Henry Duke of Normandie (his sonne and heyre, who af∣terward succeeded the same K. Stephen) on the other part, which was followed with such va∣riable successe of fortune in many conflicts on both parts, that King Stephen himselfe was taken prisoner, & laid in irons, with extremity vsed, and the Empresse to saue her life dange∣rously aduentured thorow the Scouts of the
enemy, in the snow slenderly guarded, and before that was driuen to such di∣stresse, that faining to be dead, she was laid as a liuelesse coarse in a coffin, and so conuaied away in a Horse-litter. But the second & last of these two, being the greatest of all the rest, was that which happened between the House of Yorke descended of Lionell of Andwarpe, Duke of Clarence, second sonne to King Edward the third: and the house of Lancaster, issued of Iohn of Gaunt, the third son liuing of the same King; The occasion of a Ciuill warre that ra∣ged most cruelly for a long time toge∣ther, but at that time most extreamely, when there raigned two Kings, of ei∣ther Family; one of Lancaster, Henry the sixt, another of Yorke, Edward the fourth: betweene whom with the fa∣uourers and followers, there were twelue seuerall battels fought in little more then twelue yeeres space. In so much as one of our owne writers Ed∣ward Hall, the great Chronicler, saith, that in these Ciuill wars betwixt these two Families it cost more English blood, then twice had done the win∣ning of France: and of forraine writers Phillip Comi, Lord of Argentine in France, reporteth that it consumed no lesse then fourescore Princes of the bloud Royall: and Paulus Iouius a Bi∣shop of Nouo Como in Italy, resembleth the state of these warres to the most tragicall story of the City Thebes. So let these few examples shewed in these three generall heads, suffice in this briefe Description in stead of ma∣ny that might be brought; for by these we may iudge of the rest. Now the benefit that may be gathe∣red by perusing the seuerall sorts of them, shall be to consider, in the first, the blessing of God poured vpon vs, in preseruing our Countrey and Nati∣on against the seuerall inuasions of for∣raine enemies, notwithstanding their seuerall and many attempts. In the se∣cond the fall and ruine of rebellious Subiects taking armes against their an∣nointed Kings, Princes & Gouernors. And in the third the power of God and his heauy punishments inflicted vpon vs for our sinnes, in making the one party the scourge or maule of the other, with reuenging murder by mur∣der, working the depopulation of our fruitfull Country, and ruinating of our Cities at home, with losse and reuol∣ting of the territories in subiection vn∣to vs by iust title of inheritance and conquest abroad. And in all of them representing vnto vs the lamentable stories of the times fore-passed and gone, to compare with the same the peaceable estate of the happy times possest and present, wherein Martiall men haue leasure to winne honour abroad, the rest to liue in quiet and wealth at home, all factions forgot∣ten,
and all rebellions surceased and repressed: and for these blessings to yeelde due thankes vnto Almighty God, that hath prouided for vs such a Prince, and so directed her in her gouernement ouer vs, that with ease and pleasure we may both behold the one, and enioy the other, especially in these dangerous dayes of these latter times, when all hostility and outrage of ciuill warres, broiles, and dissentions, haue seemed by the power of the Al∣mighty hand of God stretched forth in our defence, to haue beene trans∣ported out of this Iland ouer the Seas into other Countryes, insomuch as notwithstanding this calme security of our owne at home, our neighbour-Nations of all sides abroad, either tho∣row the licentious tyranny of vngod∣ly Princes, that haue laid persecution vpon their Subiects, or the mutinous dissentions of disobedient people, that haue raised Rebellions against their Princes, haue been so turmoyled with garboyle of warres, as they haue beene pittifully enforced to pray and seeke ayde at her Maiesties hands, and to submit themselues vnder the pro∣tection of her, whom with vs they ac∣knowledge to be the very defendresse of the Christian Faith and Peace, and the most naturall Nurse of the true Church of GOD. By all loyall duty therefore, wee are indebted to yeeld obedience vnto her Maiestie, and to her Maiesties most religious gouerne∣ment, by whom wee haue receiued such peace as the World doth admire, and following ages to her eternall fame shall record: and with faithfull hearts pray, that peace may euer dwell within her wals, and prosperity abide within her Pallaces, and that the abun∣dance of her peace may continue so long as the Sun and Moone endureth. Cease ciuill broyles, O Englands subiects cease, With streames of blood staine this faire soyle no more: As God, so Kings must be obeyd with peace, Yeeld thou thy due, to them their right restore: Wash with repentance, these thine acts before: Giue loyall pledge, with might resist her wrongs, That raignes thy Prince, to her thy Sword belongs.
THE INVASIONS OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND WITH ALL THEIR CIVILL WARRS SINCE THE CONQVEST, TO THE RIGHT Worshipfull Sir Oliuer Sanct Iohn Knight.
(1) AT Battaile the 14. of October being Saturday, the yeere of Christ, 1066. William Duke of Norman∣die obtained this Land by Conquest, and slew Harold King thereof, with Gerth and Leofwine his brethren, with 67974. Englishmen. (2) Yorke burnt and 3000. of the Citizens and Normans slaine by the Danes, vnder the leading of Harold and Canutus, sonnes to Sweno King of Denmarke, for the recouery of the Crowne to the Danish bloud, 1069. W.C. reg. 3. (3) Malcolme King of Scots inuaded Tefidale, Holder∣nesse, and Cumberland, charging his Souldiers to spare neither sexe nor age of the English nation, An. 1071. but the yeere following was himselfe forced to doe homage to W. C. reg. 5. (4) Elie surprised and won by the Conquerour, the last part of this Land that flood out against the Normans, vnder Hereward their most valiant Captaine. An. reg. Conq. 7. 1073. (5) The first seating of the Englishmen in Wales, through the dissention of their Princes, who being called for part∣takers, tooke from the Welch that which they could not againe recouer. 1090. reg. 1. Ruf. 3. (6) At Alnwicke Malcolme king of Scots inuading Nor∣thumberland, with his sonne Edward was slaine, and all his boast discomfited by Rob. Mowbray Earle of North. reg. Ruf. 5. 1092. (7) Northampton endammaged and the Countrey adioy∣ning spoiled through the ciuill dissention of the three bre∣thren William, Robert, and Henry, sons to the Conq. H. 1. An. 7. 1106. (8) Powes-land inuaded by King Henry I. and resisted so by the Welch, being strooke with an arrow on the breast that it had almost cost him his life. Au. reg. 21. 1121. (9) At Cardigan a sore battell was fought in October 1136. wherein many thousands were slaine, and men by women led away captiues. reg. Steph. 1. (10) Bristow taken by Robert Earle of Glocester in de∣fence of his sister Maud the Empresse, against K. Ste∣phen. reg. 3. 1138. (11) Dauid K. of Scots inuading Northumberland, made his spoile as farre as Aluerton in Yorkeshire, where be∣ing encountred by Thurston Archbishop of Yorke, Will. Earle of Albemarle, Wa. Espeke, Wil. Peuerel, and the two Lacies, August. 22. was with his sonne Henry put to flight, and ten thousand Scots slaine, 1139. Steph. 4. (12) Nottingham taken and burned by Rob. bastard Earle of Glocest. in defence of his sister Maud the Empresse, 1140. Steph. 5. (13) At Lincolne by Ranulph Earle of Chester and Rob. Earle of Glocest. K. Stephen was taken prisoner, had to Glocest. thence to Bristow, and there laid in irons. Feb. 2. 1141. reg. 5. (14) From Winchester Maud the Empresse, her Armies both of Scots and English dispersed and ouercome, fled to Lutegarshal, to Vies, and thence to Glocester, laid in a horse-litter▪ fained to be her dead corps, and her brother Rob. taken prisoner. reg. Steph. 6. 1141. (15) From Oxford Maud the Empresse with fiue persons moe, apparelled in white sheetes, to deceiue the Kings Scoutwatch, fled through the Snow, and so scaped that besieged towne. An. 1142. Steph. 7. (16) At Edmundsbury Rob. Earle of Leicest. with Pe∣tronill his Countesse were taken prisoners, and 20000. taken and slaine, by Richard Lucie L. chiefe Iustice, and Humfrey de Bohun high Constable of England, Octob. 17. 1173. H. 2.19. (17) At Alnwicke W. King of Scots was taken prisoner by Rob. Scotuile, Randulph Mandeuile, Barnard Bai∣liol and Will. Vescy Captaiues, his armie containing 80000. fighting men, Iuly 7. 1174. he was sent to Lon∣don,
and by K. Henry carried into Normandy, impri∣soned at Roan, and ransomed at 4000. pounds. (18) At Lincolne all the English Barons with 400. knights that tooke part with Lewes, were ouerthrowne and ta∣ken, May 19. 1217. and first of H. 3. (19) At Montgomery Llewellin Prince of Wales through the practise of a traiterous Monke, ouercame and slew many of the Kings power▪ An. 1231. reg. H. 3.15. (20) At Chesterfield a conflict was done, wherein Robert Ferrers Earle of Darby was taken, and many slaine, An. H. 3.41. 1256. (21) Northampton surprised by King H. 3. against his re∣bellious Barons, Aprill 4. 1263. reg. 48. (22) At Lewes, May 12. 1264. K. H. 3. by his vnfaith∣full Barons, with his Brother Rich. King of Alman, and his sonne Prince Edward were taken prisoners. There were slaine about 4500. by Simon Montfort and Gil. Clare Earles of Leicest. and Glocest. reg. H. 3.48. (23) At Euesham, the 5. of August 1265. a sore battell was fought, wherein K. H. 3. preuailed against the Ba∣rons through their owne dissentions, and most of them slaine, as Sim. Montfort Earle of Leic. and 17. Lords and knights besides; Humfrey Bohun & with him ten men of great account taken prisoners, with slaughter of all the Welshmen. An. reg. 48. (24) Berwick woon, and 25000. Scottish slaine, An. E. 1.24. 1296. (25) At Bluith Leolin the last Prince that bare rule of the Britains, cōming from Snowdown, by Rog. Strangb. was slaine, and his head crowned with Iuie set vpon the Tower of London. E. 1.10. An. 1282. (26) At Mitton 3000. Yorkeshire men were slaine encoun∣tring with the Scots inuading their countrey, called the white battell, for that it consisted most of Cleargy men. An. 1318. reg. E. 2.12. (27) Vnto Preston in Andernesse Rob. Bruse K. of Scots inuaded England, burned the said towne, and haried the countrey before him, reg. E. 2.14. An. 1322. (28) Borrowbridge battell fought betwixt E. 2. and his Barons, March 16. 1322. vnder the leading of Andr. Hercley Earle of Carlle, where Tho. Earle of Lanc. was taken and with him 65. Lords and Knights, Hum. Bohun being thrust into the fundament throgh a bridge was slaine. An. reg. 14. (29) At Blackamore the Scts following the English army, took priso∣ners the Earle of Richm. and the French Ambassador, the King himselfe hardly escaped. An. reg. E. 2.15. 1323. (30) At Glamorgan K. E. 2. by his vnnatural & cruel wife was taken Nou. 16. 1326. and conueyed to Monmouth, to Ledbry, to Kenil∣worth, to Corffe, to Bisow, thence to Barkley Castle, & there la∣mētably murdered, . 21. (31) At Stannop parke th Scots intrenched themselues, and against the English made rim of disgrace as followeth. An. E. 3.2. 1328. Long beards hetlesse, painted hoods witlesse, Gay coates gracesse, make England thriftlesse. (32) At Halidown hil a geat battel fought against the Scots, wherin were slain 8. Earles, 100. horsmen, & common souldiers 35000 and their chiefe Chapion Turnbul ouercome by Rob. Venal Knight of Norfolke▪ An. E. 3.7. 1333. (33) Southampton sackd by Genowaie Pirates vnder the leading of the King of Sicils , yet the townesmen slew 300. of them, and their Captaine braied by a Husbandmans club. An. 1338. E. 3.12. Carleil, Penrth, & many townes else burnt by the Scots, vnder Wil. Dowglas, yet latly are ouercome by the manhood & policy of Th. Lucy, Rob. Ole, & the B. of that sea, an. r. E. 3.19. 1345. (35) At Neuils crosse Dauid Bruse K. of Scots inuading England with 60000. Souldiers, was taken prisoner by o. Copland Es∣quire, and conuayed to London with many of his Nobilitie, besides many noble men slaine in the field vnder the leading of Wil. Yong Archbishop of Yorke, vicegerent, the Lords Mowbray, Percie & Neuil, Queene Phillip in her owne person present, encouraging her people to fight. reg. E. 3.20. 1346. (36) The insurrection of the commons vnder the leading of Iack Straw, Wat Tiler, and others, after many rebellious acts done in Kent and Essex, from Black-heath, Mile-end▪ and Smith-field, were dispersed, where the said Wat Tiler was worthily slaine by Wil. Walworth Maior of London, on Saturday, Iune 15. reg. Rich. 2.4. An. 1381. (37) At North-Walsham the rebellious commons, by the instigation of Io. Wraw, who had gathered 50. thousand in Suffolke, and vn∣der the leading of Iohn Litisar of Norwich Dyer, calling himself king of the commons were by Henry Spencer Bishop of that Ci∣ty ouercome, and their rustical king drawn, hanged, & beheaded, who had by violence carried with him the Lord Seales, the Lord Morley, Stephen Hales, and Robert Sale Knights, to serue at his Table, and take his assayes. Rich. 2.4. 1381. (38) Neare Hatfield the rebellious commons of Essex were ouer∣come, and 500. of them slaine by Thomas Woodstock Duke of Glocest. An. 1382. R. 2.. (39) At Radcot bridge Tho. Duke of Glocester, the Earles of A∣rundel, Warwicke, Darby, and Nottingham, encountring with Rob. Vere Duke of Ireland, maintained by King Ric. 2. against them, with 5000. men, slew Sir Tho. Moineux Constable of Chester▪ and put the said Duke to such strait, that in swimming Thames he had almost lost his life, 1387. reg. Ric. 2.11. (40) At Otterborne vnder the leading of Wil. Dowglas 1100 En∣glish men were slaine, and 0000. put to fligt, Lord Henry & Ralph Prcies sons to the Earle of Northumberland, were ta∣ken prisoners, notwithstanding the said L. Henry had manfully slaine that valiant captaine Wil. Dowglas at the first encounter, 1388. R. 2.12. (41) At Flint castle King Rich. 2. was by the falsenes of Henry Percie Earle of Northumb. deliuered into the hands of Henry Duke of Lancaster, and thence conueyed as prisoner to London, committed to the Tower, and shortly deposed: thence sent to Leeds castle in Kent: lastly, to Pomfreit, and there murthered, Feb. 13. 1400. (*) At Circester the conspirators against K. Henry 4. were dis∣comfited: the Dukes of Excester & Surrey, the Earles of Salis∣bury, Glocester, & Huntington, Sr Th. Blunt & Barnard Bro∣cas knights, were there taken, and in sundry places beheaded, 1400. Ian. 15. reg. 2. (42) At Hallidown hill againe another great and bloudy battel was fought Sep. 14. against the Scots by K. Henry 4. wherein the said Scots were beaten downe and slaine, and besides the losse of many thousand common Souldiers, fourscore Earles, Lords & knights of account were also then slaine. An. 1402. reg. 3. (43) At Pelale in Wales 110. Englishmen were slaine by Owen Glendouer, and Edmund Mortimer Earle of March taken prisoner, reg. H. 4.3. 1402. (44) At Shrewsbury a bloody battel was fought against K. Henry 4 by the Percies Henry & Thomas, wherein Henry L. Percie surnamed Hotspur, was slaine in the place called Olde field, and Lord Thomas Earle of Worcester taken and beheaded: there were slaine on both sides 6600. An. 1403. (45) The French comming to aide Owen Glendouer besieged Carmarden and spoiled it. An. 1405. reg. H. 4.6. (46) At Bramham-moore Henry Percy Earle of Northum. with Tho. Lord Bardolfe, and many moe, in taking armes against K. Henry. 4. were slaine by Thomas Rockley Sherife of York∣shire, 1408. reg. 9. (47) On Black-heath twise Iack Cade (naming himselfe Iohn Mortimer, captain of the kentish rebels) camped against K. H. 6. reg. 28. An. 1450. (48) At Sennocke the Kings power was ouercome by Iack Cade, and the two Staffords, brethren, slaine by those rebels: but from Southwarke they were dispersed, and Cade slaine lurking in a garden, by Alexander Eden Gentleman of Kent. 1450. (49) At Dertforth vpon Brent-heath, Rich. Duke of Yorke incam∣ped himselfe with an army of 10000. men, against K. Henry 6. reg. 30. An. 1452. (50) Saint Albons first battell fought May 23. against King H. 6. by Richard Duke of Yorke, wherein on the Kings side were
slaine Edmund Duke of Somerset, Henry Earle of Northumb. Humfrey Earle of Stafford, Iohn L. Clifford, with many Knights of valour, and 5000. men on their parties besides: the King himselfe was wounded with an arrow, and but onely 600. of the Dukes men slaine. An. 1455. reg. 33. (51) Blore-heath field foughten Septemb. 23. by Richard Earle of Salisbury against K. Henry 6. the Lord Audley being gene∣rall for the King; where the said Lord was slaine, with many Knights of Cheshire in his part, and with them 2400. persons lost their liues. An. 1459. reg. 38. (52) At Northampton the Earles of March and Warwick fought against K. Henry 6. in the quarrell of Richard Duke of York, wherein the King himselfe was taken and conuayed to London, Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewesbury, the Lords Beamont and Egremont were there slaine. 1459. Iune 10. reg. 38. (53) Wakefield battell fought Decem. 30. 1461. by Q. Margaret, in defence of K. Hen. 6. her husbands title, wherein the said Duke was slaine with young Edmund Earle of Rutland his sonne, the two bastards Mortimers Knights, and 2200. more: there Th. Neuill Earle of Salisbury was taken prisoner, and after behea∣ded at Pomfreit. An. reg. 39. (54) At Mortimers crosse Edw. Earle of March, in reuenge of the death of Rich. Duke of Yorke his Father, obtained a great victory against the Earles of Penbroke & Wiltshire in the quarel of Q. Margaret, and there slew 3800. Englishmen, Feb. 2. being the day of Maries Purification: in this battell Owen Teuther was taken and beheaded. An. 1461. reg. H. 6. 39. (55) Saint Albons last battell fought by Q. Margaret, against the Dukes of Norfolke and Suffolke, the Earles of Warwicke and Arundel, that kept by force K. Henry her husband, with whom by constraint he held and fought, and lost the field: there were slaine of Englishmen 1916. persons. Februar. 17. being Shroue. tuesday. 1461. (56) Towton-field a most deadly and mortal battel fought on Palm-sundry. March 29. wherein were slaine of Englishmen 35091. or as other haue, 36776. persons, amongst whom these Nobles dyed. Earles: Northumberland, Shrewesbury & Deuonshire. Lords: Clifford, Beamont, Neuil, Willoughby, Wels, Roos, Seales, Grey, Dacres, Fitz-hugh, Mollens, Bechingam. Knights: the two Bastards of Excester, Percie, Heyron, Clif∣ton, Hamys, two Crakenthorps, two Throlopes, Haril, Or∣mond, Mollin, Pigot, Norbohew, and Burton, with many more Knights, and others not named. K. H. 6. with such as es∣caped fled into Scotland, leauing E. 4. victor, 1461. (57) Hexam battell fought May 15. against King H. 6. vnder the conduct of Iohn Neuil, L. Montacute, wherin Henry D. of So∣merset, with the L. Roos, Mollens, and Hungerford were ta∣ken. K. Hen. flying into Lancashire remained there in wants and secret a yeere and more, and whence by deceit he was taken and conuayed to the Tower of London, 1464. reg. E. 4.4.
(58) Edgecot-field fought vpon Danes moore, Iuly 26. by the Northren Lords, their captaines being Sir Iohn Coniers, and Robbin of Ridsdale, against K. E. 4. vnder the leading of Wil. Herbert Earle of Pembrook, who together with his brother Ric. was taken, as also Ric. Wooduile, L. Riuers, brother to the Q. with Iohn his son, and all foure beheaded, 5000. of their hoast being slaine, with most of the Welchmen, 1469. reg. E. 4.9. (*) At Wolney K. Edw. 4. gathering his hoast to recouer his losse, was taken prisoner by his brother George D. of Clarence, and Ric. the stout E. of Warwick, & conuaied to Middleham Castle in Yorkeshire, whence shortly hee escaped to Lond. 1469. (***) At Stamford the Lincolnshire men, vnder the conduct of Sir Rob. Welles Knight, instigated by Ric. Earle of Warwicke against K. E. 4. were ouercome, and 1100. of them slaine, the rest in flight so cast away their furniture, that to this day the battel is called Losecote field, 1470. E. 4.10. (59) Barnes-field fought April 14. being Easter-day, by the Earles of Warwick, Oxford, and Marques Montacute, against K. E. 4 who led H. 6. prisoner to the field with him▪ in this battell were slaine Ric. Earle of Warwick, & Marq. Montacute his brother. On K. Edwards part were slaine the Lords Cromwel, Say & Mountioy: the slaughter in all amounted to 10000. saith Hal, 1471. E. 4.11. (60) At Tewkesbury K. E 4. obtained the diadem in sub∣duing H. 6. vnder the leading of prince Edward, who was there slaine, and Q. Margaret taken prisoner: there died likewise Th Courtney E. of Deuonshire, Iohn Somer∣set Marques Dorset, & the Lord Wenlake: of Knights, Hamden, Whittington, Vaus, Haruy, Deluys, Fil∣ding, Leukenor, Lirmouth, Vrman, Seamer, Roos, and Henry: Edm. D. of Somerset was there taken, & be∣headed with Iohn Bough L. Prior of S. Iohns. May 4. 1471. E. 4. 11. (61) Bosworth-field fought vpon Redmoore, Aug. 22. 1485. and 3. of Ric. 3. where himselfe was slain, with Ioh. D. of Norfolke, Wa. L. Ferrers, Ric. Ratclif, and Rob. Bra∣kenbury Knights, & 4000. more of his company: on the E. of Richmonds part only ten persons, the chiefe whereof was Wil. Brandon Knight, his Standard-bearer. Earle Henry was there crowned in the field, and the vnion of Lancaster with York effected, whose ciuill dissentions had cost more English bloud; then twice had done the winning of France. (62) Stokefield Iune 16. 1487, was fought to arrest Lam∣bert a counterfeit Warwicke against King H. 7. where 4000. with the naked Irish were slaine, and with them dyed De La Pole Earle of Lincolne, Francis L. Louel, Tho. Geradine Chancellor of Ireland, Martin Swart, and Sir Tho. Broughton, Knights, generall against the King. Lambert was there taken and made a turne-spit. H. 7.2. (63) At Cockeledge neare Yorke, the commons rose and slew Hen. E. of Northumb. for a tax collected by him, granted in Parliament: their Captaine named Iohn a Cumber was hanged at Yorke, 1489. H. 7.4. (64) Excest. besieged by Perken Werbeck a counterfeit, naming himselfe Ric. D. of Yorke, before murthered in the Tower of Lond. after he had indammaged the North and Northumb. was from this City expulsed to Bewdley sanctuary, and lastly executed at Tiburne, 1497. reg. H 7.13. (65) This same City was againe besieged by the rebels of Deuonshire and Cornwall the 3. of E. 6. vnder the lea∣ding of Hum, Arundel, Holmes, Winslow, & Burie, but was rescued by Io. L. Russel, with the L. Grey, and 4000. of them slaine, 1549. (66) On Black-heath againe was fought a sore battell by Tho. Flamock gent. Michael Ioseph Blackesmith, & Iam. Twichet. L. Audley, with the Cornish-rebels, wher 2000. of them were slaine by Giles L. Daubeney gene∣ral for the King, & 1500. taken prisoners. Iu. 22. 1497. H. 7.
(67) Floden-field the 9. of Sep. and 5. of K. H. 8. was fought against the Scots, by L. Tho. Howard, E. of Surrey, lieu∣tenant generall for the King, where Iames 4. K. of Scots with 3. Bishops, 2. Lord Abbots, 12. Earles, 17 Lords, & 8000. souldiers were slaine, the dead body of K. Iames wrapped in lead, was brought to Shine in Surrey, & there cast into a corner, not long since remaining and seene. (68) At Solommosse 15000. Scots vnder the leading of the L. Maxwel: by Tho. bastard Dacres, and Iack Mus∣graue, were valiantly vanquished, and 21. of their nobi∣lity (whereof eight were Earles) brought as prisoners to London, and 200. more of great account, besides 800. common souldiers slaine and taken, for very griefe where∣of King Iames fell sicke, and shortly after dyed. 1542. H. 8.32. (69) Muscleborrow-field fought Sep. 10. 1546. by Edw. D. of Somerset L. Protector, and Ioh. Dudley E. of Warw. against the Scots, where 14000. were slaine, and 1500. taken prisoners, onely 60. English then slaine. E. 6.1. (70) At Norwich in a commotion led by Rob. Ket Tanner of Windham, Wil. Lord Marques of Northamptō was put to flight, and the L. Sheffield slaine, the City fired, and many outrages done, 1549. E. 6.3. (71) At Mount Surrey the rebels, with their leader Rob. Ket, were by Ioh. Dudley E. of Warwick ouercome & forced to yeeld, 5000. of them being slain, & Ket taken and hanged on the Castle of Norwich, or as some haue, vpon the Oke of reformation, Aug. 27. 1549. E. 6.3. (72) Sir Tho. Wiat with his company of Kentishmen dri∣uen to march from Southwark to Kingston & thence to S. Iames, yeelded himself at Temple-bar, with the losse only of 40. persons on both parts, Feb. 7. 1554. Mar. 1. (73) At Tadcaster Tho. Percie Earle of Northumb▪ & Charles Neuil E. of Westmerland in their cōmotions tooke 200. footmen repairing toward York for the de∣fence of the City against those rebels, 1569. Eliz. 12. (74) Durham taken by the rebels of the North, vnder the leading of Percie & Neuil Earles, which had gathe∣red 7000. and surprised Barnards Castle▪ were by the Earle of Sussex, lieutenant generall for the Queen, for∣ced into Scotland, and many of their Associates worthi∣ly put to death, 1569. And lastly (which God grant may be the last) Tho▪ late Earle of Northumb. was be∣headed in Yorke. Aug. 20. 1572. Eliz. 14.
1) Wexford conquered by Robert Fitz-Stephen, May 1. 1170. Anno. H. 2.16. 2) Dublin and Waterford won by Richard Strong∣bow Earle of Chepstow, 1170. Reg. H. 2.16. 3) Downe and Vlster conquered by Iohn Curcy a strong Englishman, Anno 1177. Reg. H. 2.23. 4) A battell fought against Roderick K. of Vlster, who preuailed against King H. 2. 1177. Reg. 23. 5) At Colraine in Vlster Edward Bruce entituled King of Ireland, put the English power to flight, & took many of the Nobles prisoners, E. 2.9. 1315. 6) Armagh battell fought against Edw. Bruce, who was there taken, and beheaded at Dundalk, and with him 6200. Scots lost their liues, Ann. 1318. Reg. E. 2.12. 7) At Kilkenny R. 2. with an hoast of 30000 strong besieged Mackmur, but little preuailed, thorow the sodain arriual into England of H. Bullingbrook Earle of Hereford, Anno 1399. Reg. R. 2.23. 8) At Dundalk Sham Oneal with the losse of 3500. men was put to flight by S. Henry Sidney Knight, and flying for succour to the wilde Scots, was by them murdered in Clan Abbey, Elizab. 9. 1567. 9) At Smerwick the Italians and Spaniards sent by the Pope to aide Desmond in his rebellions, in∣trench themselues vnder the Popes banner, where the Lord Gray slew 400. of them, and put the rest to their ransome. Eliz. 22. 1580 10) Iames Earle of Desmond, after many noto∣rious rebellions by him committed, wandering from place to place in great distresse, was lastly slaine in his cabbin by an Irishman, Decemb. 13. 1580. Reg. Eliz. 22. 11) Clanowan in Thomond fortified against her Maiestie by Mahown Obrion, but himselfe was slaine, and his castle worthily raced by S. Richard Bingham Knight, An. 1585. Eliz. 27. 12) In the Countrey of Mayo the Burkes stirre re∣bellion against her Maiesties Ciuill gouernment, but were dispersed and ouerthrowne by captaine Iohn Bingham and the Earle of Clanrikard, 1586. Reg. Eliz. 28. 13) At Ardnary 2000. Scots brought in to aide the Burkes, vpon promise to enioy that Countrey, were by Sir Richard Bingham all slaine except 80. persons that saued themselues by swimming the riuer Mayo: their leaders the Burkes with them al∣so dyed, 1586. Reg. Eliz. 28. 14) Tyrone in his rebellions against her sacred Maiestie, hath ouerlong troubled the peace of Ireland, but chiefly the Prouince of Vlster, whose treacherous acts and sauage cruelties hath moued her Highnesse to send forces thitherward, for whose prosperous successe, with the ouerthrow of all treasons and rebellions, let all true hearted Subiects pray.
Collected by IOHN SPEEDE Citizen of London. Anno 1600.
