23491 99853156 18525
GODLY Meditations vpon the most holy Sacrament of the Lordes Supper. With manie thinges ap∣perteininge to the highe Reuerence of soe greate a Mysterie. In the end. De Eucharistia controuer∣sia, admonitio breuis. LONDON Printed by I. W. and are to be sold at the Exchange by Cuthbert Burby. 1601.
To the vertuous and modest Gentlewoman Mi∣stris ELIZABETH SOVTHWELL, one of the Maides of Honor atten∣ding vpon the Queenes Maiestie. THat desire you haue to serue GOD, in holinesse of life, and very towardly dispo∣sition
euen from ten∣der yeares so applia∣ble to vertue & lear∣ning, (wherein you may waxe olde by the grace of God,) haue often mooued me, to beseech him, who hath beganne this good in you, to continue the same, euen vnto an aged, and happy ende. For assuredly our reli∣gious dutie, and res∣pectiue deuotion to God, is woorth all
the worldes dignitie beside, nay without this, all the dignitie of this worlde is no∣thing worth. Is not godinesse the flower of all our actions? Yes verily. Do but trie me (saith the Lord) if I will not poure out a blessing? Malach 3.10. hath he not sayd, I will honor them that honor me. 1. Sam. 2.30. Et diligentes me dili∣go, & I loue them that loue mee, Prou. 8.17?
To exercise your deuotionate duetie to God, so often, (and therefore often) as you prepare your selfe vnto the Blessed Sacramente (that high misterie of hu∣mane saluation) I commend vnto you, the Meditations hereafter following: which Meditations, in part gathered out of the auncient Fa∣thers, & some late re∣uerend writers of this age, as Luc. Penel.
& others translated, augmented, & brou∣ght to a methode, I offer withall (as a te∣stimonie of my due∣tiefull regarde to∣wardes you) vnto your sober and gen∣tle paronage, where∣in, what is performed you may happily by obseruinge finde. The occasion first moouing mee to ga∣ther somewhat ten∣ding to deuotion vp∣on this subiecte, I
meane the vse of the most holy Sacrament was the necessitie I found, of some good meanes, to stirre v at times beseminge mens best, and best disposed considera∣tions, towardes the high misterie they had in hand. With discourse of contro∣uersie nowe a longe time, no lesse lear∣ned, then large wri∣ting, we haue had in our English tongue▪
but all this while, we haue not much ex∣tant appertayning to the substance of the misterie it selfe, and our Christian deuo∣tion towardes the sme. In the olde Law the Leuites must first bee sanctifyed, and then they sanctifie the people, the priests prepare themselues. and others: but vnto this passeouer euerie one with all prepares
himselfe, for that e∣uery one hath a soule to saue. God saith vnto the people of Israell▪ when your children shall say vnto you. Quae est ista religio, Exod. 12.16. What meanes this religion o what is this so∣empne obseruation wee keepe? you shall sy vnto them, this is the Lords passe-ouer &c. which, as it had a memoriall of a
great deliueraunce past, so was it a most liuely type and figure of the true passe-o∣uer that was to come, wherein the bloud of that most inno∣cent Lambe of God, that tooke away the sinnes of the world, was in loue, shedde, for the redemption of vs all. And there∣fore, of all in generall may that of Ezechi∣ath, 2. Cron. 30. bee well inferred. The
Lord be mercifull vnto them, that prepare thē∣selues heereunto &c. And to your selfe (most vertuous gen∣tlewomn) I may more properly apply the same in particu∣lar, the Lord euer∣more bee mercifull vnto you, in prepa∣ring your whole hart to keepe this Passe-ouer, vnto the Lord your God, who, of his infinite mercy, graunt you a prospe∣rous
course of life, for the time present, and for the time to come, I se euerlasting. Yours in all humble manner Christopher Sutton
A preface to te Chri∣stian Reader. IN perusinge the con∣trouersies of these times (good Christian Reader) with a minde desirous af∣terwarde to satisfie the ho∣nest Christian, in some questions, (wherein with∣out question, wee are mis∣taken, and are not accor∣dinge to right, rightlye vn∣derstoode) in perusinge these controuersies, I saye (to speake a plaine truth as in the sight of God) I founde them n both sides soe full of inuectiue dis∣courses,
as I was then so∣rie to reade, and am now loath to mention. But a∣mongest other enteringe in∣to the controuersie of the holy Sacrament, mee thought I was entred into a tempestuous Sea of all contention, for there I sawe most vnnaturall bitternesse amongest Christians, scismes in the church, fac∣tions in common wealthes, all tossinge, and turmoyling about this sacred misterie, as is wonderfull to consi∣der. 2 I beganne at first to admire the patience of God, to see this heauenlye
league of humane saluati∣on, least vnto the worlde, by him who did redeeme the worlde, as a seale of mercie, as a pledge of peace and loue beetweene God, and man, to beecome by the contentious humors of manye a verye subiecte for all dissention. 3 At the behouldinge heereof, might not the pro∣phet Ieremie wish, (did hee liue) That hee had water enough, and that his heade were euen a fountayne of teares Ieremie: 9: 1? Did the sonne of God in∣stitute this most deuine or∣dinance
to exercise our o∣uerrunning fantsis, an not rather to nourish, and grace our redeemed oules? 4 In that allmighty God put emnitie beetweene the seede of the woman and the seede of the serpent▪ wee may gather, that as the seede of the woman should bee at nitie with the seede of the serpent, soe should it bee at vnitie with it selfe. Wee haue enemies enough abroade in the worlde, though Christians bee not at variance with in themselues, and that which is most to bee lamen∣ted, aboute some principal
pointes of their Christian profession. But of all other, this sacred institution of Christ our Sauiour should bee fardest off from the contentious humore of anie, vpon paine and perill of beeinge a worthye recei∣uer of this soe holy a miste∣rie anie more, and of true obedience to the author thereof, whoe lefte this his ordinance not to raise matter of contention, but to continue a ioifull re∣membrance of his loue in sufferinge and dieinge for the sinnes of the worlde vntill his second appea∣rance or comminge againe
in glorie. There is a farre better, and safer course then to contend anie longer, if men woulde at last sette them selues on all partes to fol∣lowe it, which is, to reue∣rence the sonne of God in the vnsearchable misteries of his wisdome which are past finding out; and not to stande weigheinge them in the light scales and bal∣lance of theire own reason, to drawe a vaile ouer them, or say with the wo∣man of Samaria Puteus est altus: this well is deepe 5 When wee haue done
striuinge, and euen wea∣ried our selues in a thou∣sande difficulties, brought our mindes into a labyrinth of doubtes; to drawe at last to an issue; the faithfull re∣ceiue the Blessed Sacra∣ment, well, what doe they receiue, certainlye Christ Iesus, truly▪ Reallye, to make farther scruple is needelesse curiositie, to giue lightlye credence, heere vnt is in parte increduli∣tie. What the lementes of breade and wine are in themselues is on thinge, what they are beeinge now cōsecrated to so holy a vse, and receiued of the spiri∣tually
minded, as the spiri∣tuall foode of theire soules is an other, what they are (I say) Christes owne wordes are sufficient war∣rant for a beeleeuing world vntill the worldes ende. Wherfore to be ouerwted in seeking, or doubting how thi should bee, is noe waye agreeable to that faith and obedience that beecometh Christians. Rerum ab∣sentium (saith an anci∣ent Father) presens est fides, rerum impossi∣bilium possibilis est fides; of thinges absent faith is presnt, of thinges impossible faith is possible.
Panem vides, verbum audis, cui potius cre∣dis sensui vel Christo? thou seste the breade, thou hearest the worde to which rather doest thou giue cre∣dit whether to thy sense or to Christ? cur non potius gaudes quam quaeris why doest thou not rather riyce then question? 6 In this case, that of the Blessed virgin spoken of Christ at the mariage at Cana in Galelee would bee remembred. Quodcunque dixerit vobis facite: whatsoeuer hee shall say vnto you doe
it; when sathan saide vnto Eue, cur praecepit vobis Deus vt non comede∣retis why hath God com∣maunded you not to eate? had she aunsweared, Scio quod praecepit, non spectat ad me inuesti∣gare causam: quare praecepit: I know he hath commanded me so, to seeke a reason why, or the cause wherefore, I neede not, I ought not, had shee not done farre better? some haue faith saith S. Austen in his 139. Sr. de tem∣pore, which haue not arte to defende it or skill to shewe a reason thereof, hee
which hath, is not the faith∣fuller but a little the lear∣neder. Wee haue manie thinges in Christianitie of∣fered vnto vs as obiectes of our faith when wee moste holde captiue hu∣mane reason. Et Deus erat, et homo erat, et matererat, et virgo e∣rat. There was a God, and yet a man, a mother and yet a virgine, that it is so we knowe it, how, or after what manner this is brought to passe, knowe, we cannot. Of those things which may bee knowne, S. Bernade speaking of
the blessed Sacramente serm: de coena Domi∣ni, Mira sunt saith hee quae de Sacramento di∣cuntur fides est ncessa∣ria, scientia ratioms superuacua, scentia ra∣tione et intellectu col∣ligitur, fides sola au∣thoritate inducitur: Wonderfull thinges are they which are spoken of the Sacrament, heere faith is necessarie, neede∣lesse is the science of reason, this science is gathred by discourse, and the vnder∣standing, faith is brought in by authoritie onely, and going forward, hee addeth,
haec sut, quae expe∣tunt simplicem credi∣torem, arnunt impi∣um di cussorem, credi opotet simpliciter, quod inuestigari non potest vtiiter, nolite quaerere quomodo fi∣at, nolite quaerere v∣trum fiat, these thinges require an humble bele∣uer, and not an vngodlye discusser, that which cu∣riously may not bee sought, may bee beeleeued with safetie, secke not howe this should bee done, doubte whether it bee done or noe. Wee haue scope sufficient to exercise our Christian
consideration if wee call to minde the ineffable wis∣dome and loue of God, who like a most prouident Fa∣ther was not onelye content to prouide costly benefites for his children, but hath alsoe founde out soe bee∣houefull a meane for their participation of the same as is this holy misterie. 8 Wee will not aske our phisition how it shall come to passe, that this, or that potion, should doe vs good, and shoulde wee bee more busie when Christ him selfe doeth minister soe precious a receite, soe hea∣uenly phiscicke for the
health of our soules, God forbid? they were of the Capernaites men with∣out faith, and loue in Christ who in murmuring manner saide quomodo potest, how or which way can hee doe this, it was a faithfull and louing disci∣ple that answered, Tu Do∣mine habes verba v∣tae, Lorde thou hast the wordes of life. 10 The people as wee reade in the Gospell who were cured by our Saui∣our, they came not vnto him to know, or enquire by what meane, vertue should proceede from him, it suf∣ficed
them to receiue health and therfore without more adoe, they gaue glorie vn∣to God who had shewed such mercie vnto men. 11 There is both Doc∣ta ignrntia and in∣docta scienia, a lear∣ned ignorance, and an vn∣learned science, the one, when men keepe them selues within the listes and limites of obedience and faith, the other when they neither respect, neither har¦ken to the counsell of the holy Ghost, bee wise ac∣cording to sobrietie. 12 Was not the Apost∣tles O Altitudo? O the
deapth, better then the search of the worlde in soe vnsearchable a misterie where he made silence the safest eloquence? 13 Without all questi∣on the church of Rome hath erred, in medlinge too much with this sacred mis∣terie, and troublinge the worlde with a multitude of vnprofitable and endlesse disputes about Transub∣stantiation, and the like, for which, as for there haulfe communion, lette them shewe there Acce∣pimus a Domino: as wee haue receiued from the Lorde, or els wee plain∣lye
tell them, theire plea is not sufficient in lawe, and will not hold for good. 14 Let the worlde in name of God now iudge of both, which giue greater reuerence to the most de∣uine institution of the Sonne of God, whether they who too busely talke of changinge the substance of the elementes into other, or they, who heare conceiue more and with more reue∣rence then wordes canne mention. They who saye , this is a greate misterie, or they who laboure to search out the power and virtue vn¦searchable.
In a worde, they who will needes sette downe a manner howe Christ is present in the Sacrament, or they whoe acknowledge his presence there after a manner ex∣plicable. 15 All this while our due estimation of this so high a misterie is not fully vnderstood (as I suppose) of manie, who refuse our Christian assemblies in times beeseeming. Wee ho∣nour the passion of Christ our Blessed Sauiour in this most holy ordinance (I trust) with as dutifull hearts as any christians in the worlde. The heate of
some fanciers wee wish it were more temporate, and there zeale more accor∣ding to knowledge, who e∣uer loue to bee fishinge in troublesome waters, wee confesse that all the deuo∣tion a Christian harte can yealde is noe way answea∣rable to the deapth & dig∣nitie hereof. 16 God saide vnto Moses put off thy showes, for the grounde where thou standest is holy grounde, howe reuerently therefore wee esteeme of this sacred institution God knoweth, and what wee houlde let men consider, the
state of the controuersie it selfe is laide downe at the end in a breife admonition to the godly Reader, which admonition (some speciall reasons mouing me there∣vnto) I haue written in the latine tongue, vnto which I referre the learned: but cheefely I commend vnto euerie honest Christian in generall, the tracte it selfe, which onelye tendeth to deuotion. For when wee haue all done striuing a∣boute a hundred difficul∣ties, it must bee our deuo∣tion to God that must doe vs good in an other worlde. 17 It were to be wished
wee had lesse contending in matters of controuersie, which auaile little to god∣linesse, and more sincere following the actions of Christian pietie, which are much decied in these sin∣full times (wee see it too apparantlye beefore our eies) that wee had lesse questioning in generall, & in particular, lsse curious prying into this Sacred misterie, and more religi∣ous preparing our selues to a due and dutifull partici∣pation of the same; wee may consider that after all the sturre about this con∣trouersie, the deuotion of
most is but Soe, Soe, for the heape of volumes that treate of this subiect how they all in a manner tende onely vnto matter of con∣tradiction, wherefore bee∣seech wee God to increase in vs reuerence more, and more, towardes this most holy ordinance of Christ Iesus his Sonne, that pre∣paring our selues dutifully to receiue him in the state of grace, we may be recei∣ued of him into the state of glory: To sit at his table in his Kingdome, to liue with him, and raigne with him.
The Contents of this tracte following. 1 OF the Institution of this most holy Sa∣crament. 2 The first Meditation con∣cerning this Institution with the fruites thereof. 3 Of the loue of Christ shewed in ordayning this most holy Sacrament. 4 The excellencie and woor∣thynesse hereof. 5 Of the woonderfull thinges contayned in this Sacra∣ment. 6 The manifold effectes and fruites of this holy Insti∣tution.
7 A Dialogue betweene Man, and the Soule. 8 Of the principall causes which may mooue man to come to this Sacra∣ment. 9 Of frequenting the most ho∣ly Communion. 10 Of the impedimentes which detaine men from com∣ing thereunto. 11 A Dialogue beetweene the distressed sinner, and faith. 12 A Conference betweene the soule and faith. 13 Of Remouing the daunge∣rous effectes which hinder
the worthye receiuing of this most holy Sacrament. 14 Of Preparing our selues be∣fore we come to this most holy Sacrament. 15 A Forme of confessing our selues. 16 An Exhortation vpon these words: whence commeth this that my Lorde com∣meth to mee. 17 A Meditation vppon the wordes of the Centurion Math. 8.9 Non sum dig∣nus vt intres sub ectum meum I am not worthye that thou enter vnder my roofe. 18 A Meditation vppon that which followeth dic ver∣bum
& sanabitur anima mea, but onelye say the worde and my soule shall liue. 19 A Meditation vppon these wordes of Christ veniam curabo eum, I will come and heale him. 20 A Meditation vppon that which S. Paule teacheth 1. Cor: 11. 21 A Meditation of the Prodi∣gall Sonne when hee was receiued of his Father. 22 A Meditation for the day we are to communicate in. 23 A Meditation of the historie of Zacheus Luke. 19.2 24 An Application of this histo∣rie.
25 A Meditation vppon the wordes of Christ follow∣ing Hodie oportet me ma∣nere indomo tua This day I must abide in thy house. 26 A short forme of confession to bee made in priuat be∣fore the receiuinge of the Blessed Sacrament. 27 An Admonition mouinge all to reconcile thē selues and forgiue their enimies before they bee partakers of the most holy Sacra∣ment. 28 A Prayer beefore the holy Communion. 29 Of the deuout man to whōe Christ in his last supper sheweth fauoure.
30 Certaine Meditations vppon some speciall sayinges of holy Scipture to bee vsed when you are about to communicate. 31 Of the reuerence and deuo∣tion giuen by the aunci∣ent Fathers to this most holy Sacrament. 32 A Prayer, with thanksgiuing after the receiuinge of the most holy Communion. 33 An other forme of thanksgi∣uing. 34 A Generall meditation after the receiuing of the Bles∣sed Sacrament. 35 Considerations to bee re∣membred of the deuout
Christian after his recei∣uing. 36 Names of excellency attri∣buted vnto the holy Sa∣crament. 37 A Short meditation vpon the names of Excellencie. 38 Certaine meditations vppon the passion to bee vsed af∣ter the receiuinge of the holy Communion. 39 A Praier vpon the passion vsed by S. Austen. 40 Concerning the spirituall Communicating. 41 That this holy Sacrament is giuen to the sicke as ne∣cessarie for the time of a∣ny visitation.
4 What hee ought to doe who is to communicate. 43 The manner of Communi∣cating vsed by a certaine virgine. 44 Breife Questions and aun∣sweares concerninge the Blessed Sacrament. 45 Certaine short obseruations to bee remembred before our accesse to the Lordes supper. 46 A Dialogue beetweene a worldly man and a spiri∣tuall wherin is disputed whether it bee better of∣ten to communicate or abstaine from the holye Communion, how, & af∣ter
what manner both may be done. 47 An other Dialogue whereein is touched the Doctrine and benefite of the Bles∣sed Sacrament. The end of the Table.
Godly Meditations vpon the most holy Sacrament of the Lordes Supper. Of the Institution of this most holy Sacrament. Amongest other parts of diuine worshippe & religious acti∣ons of a Chris∣tian life, which knitte men in loue and dutie vnto God (for who should haue the fruite but hee that planted the tree) there is none more solemne, more diuine, then is our re∣uerent accesse to the most holy Sacrament, where wee present our selues beefore God, where, wee honour him in the misterie of hu∣mane redemption, where by a spirituall vnion with Christ
him selfe wee become par∣takers of our greatest good. Fasting humbleth, praier be∣seecheth, repentance bewai∣leth, charitie worketh, faith beleeueth; but the holy Sa∣crament applieth al to the sal∣uation of our soules. 2 If any aske (saith an uncient Eather) the Iewes why they keepe there passe∣ouer, all that they will aun∣swear is to relate of a bon∣dage in Egipt, of Pharoe their oppressor, of a Moyses Gods seruant theire deliuerer: But if any aske mee which am a Christian of our heauenlye passeouer, I can shew him, not of Moyses a seruant, but of Christ Iesus the only sonne of God; of a more terrible Pharoe the prince of darke∣nesse, of a more wofull bon∣dadge, the shaddow of death,
and last of all, of a deliue∣rance indeede, by the bloud of that Immaculate Lambe, once offered for the sinnes of the world. Heb. 9.28. 2 For our comfortable accesse to this most holy mis∣terie, wee haue Christes own precept, and his promise, Math. 26.26. Luke. 22.19 His precept, hoc facie doe this: His promise, hoc est cor∣pus meum, hic est saenguis meus, This is my bodie, which was giuen for you, this is my bloud, which is shed for you; as if, heare I offer you the benefite of all my suffe∣ringes, & leaue you a pledge at parting, of my deerest loue, Nouum Testamentum, a new Testament, a newe league or couenant, between God, and man, that hee will now thinke vpon your sinnes
in iustice no more. 4 S. Austen in his 118. Epistle Ad Ianuarium saith, our Sauiour deferred the in∣stitution of this most diuine Sacrament, to the end of his life, as his last farewell, that the dignitie and excellencie thereof, might make the more deepe impression in his disciples heartes, increase in them greater loue, and de∣uotion, after his departure from them. 5 In the 14. and 16. of Exodus, God gaue the peo∣ple of Israell for the time of theire abode in the wilder∣nesse Manna from heauen, which manna, they gathered vntill they came vnto the lande of promise: in like manner, soe longe as wee remaine in the wildernesse of this worlde; wee are gathe∣ringe
this our heauenly ma∣na but when wee come vnto that promised Chanaan, then neede wee gather Manna, no more. 6 Christ our Sauiour when the time drewe neere that hee should bee betrayed and deliuered vp vnto death, hee communeth with his disciples after this manner Luk: 22.15. I haue earnestly desired to eate this passeouer with you before I suffer; In consecrating the elementes of breade and wine, his prai∣ers went vp to heauen, his benefites remaine with his church heere on earth, the visible signes which hee tooke, and gaue declare two thinges, the one that hee would the morrow follow∣inge make himselfe an obla∣tion for the redemption of
many vpon the aulter of the Crosse, the other that hee would become vnto the faithfull by this meanes a di∣uine sustinance for their soules And thus hee proui∣deth for himselfe an aulter, for his, a table in both, Gods is the glorie, and mans the benefitte. The first Meditation of this Blessed Institution. COnsider howe God created the world for man, and man onelye to worshipe his Creator: A most excellent parte of which worshippe, is the holy Sacrament. 2 Consider how the Lord
Iesus forseeinge the good of his church, and the affliction of his Apostles, to followe after his passion, decreede to leaue vnto them the holy Eucharist, that they might receiue helpe and strength by vertue thereof. 3 Consider how hee now departing from this life vnto the Father, did institute this beloued Sacrament, that hee might leaue vnto vs, a liuelye remembrance of his passion. 4 Consider how this re∣membrance is had by a spi∣rituall repast, that as nurrish∣mentes and the bodie nurri∣shed become one, soe Christ, and the faithfull receiuers: And what more heauenly then to become one with the sonne of God? 5 Consider Christ in his passion as a Testator his in∣heritance
giuen is heauen, his legaces are his graces, the executor is the holy Ghost, his testament or will, promi∣ses of life laied downe in his worde, the seales are the two Sacraments confirming these promises The fruite of this Medita∣tion. The fruite of this Medita∣tion is this: that euerie one dispose himselfe with all de∣uotion to this holy misterie, that hee leaue all earthly co∣gitations beneath, as Abra∣ham in the 22. of Genesis did his seruantes when hee went vp to the mount to doe sa∣crifice vnto God.
A Spirituall Soloquie or me∣ditation of the Soule. O Omnipotent & euerlastinge God, make mee, I bee∣seech thee,  in the performance of this soe high a parte of thy most holy worship. I come Lorde as the sicke to the Phisition of life, as an offen∣der to the fountaine of mer∣cie, as the blinde to the light of the eternall sunne, as the poore and needie to the Lorde of heauen and earth, therefore O Lorde, cure my infermitie, pardon my of∣fences, lighten my blindnes, enrich my pouertie, graunte that I may reuerēce this hea∣uenly manna with such reue∣rence,
and humanitie, with such contrition and deuoti∣on, with such puritie and faith, with such a purpose and intent, as is expedient for my saluation, and graunt that at last I may beehoulde perpetuallye thy beloued sonne with face reueiled, whome now I receiue in the way by faith onely: who li∣ueth and raigneth with thee for euer and euer Amen. Of the loue of Christ shewed in ordaining this most holy Sacrament of his last Supper. FOr that this Sa∣crament is a Sacrament of loue, and lefte vnto vs as the loue of our be∣loued Sauiour, it is conueni∣ent
that to put a way the suspition of ingratitude it be receiued and handled with loue cheefely, seeinge wee can requite in no other thing the loue declared in orday∣ning this Sacrament soe full of loue, then by loue, of which loue God would that wee should dispose, and soe change it into what wee see most pleasing to him, wher∣vpon, as Christ while hee giueth himselfe to vs for meat, giueth vs a token of his highest loue, with his grace▪ with soe many merites of his preachings, labores, fastings, praiers▪ soe wee, when wee giue to God our loue, do giue him all thinges which wee haue most precious, hence it commeth that God doth more esteeme and that more worthyly too, of
this one loue thē of all other thinges in the world, neither doth hee require anye other thinge of vs. When els wher saith, Prouerb: 23.26: My Sonne giue mee thy hearte, that is to say the loue which is thine. When Christ our Sauiour humbled himselfe to bee Baptized of Iohn the Baptist Math: 3.14: it made Iohn more humble himselfe to Christ: his loue shoulde wounde our heartes, and make vs loue him who is loue it selfe, and this loue of his is manifest vnto vs by in∣stituting this holy Sacra∣ment. When Nathan the Pro∣phet would shew Kinge Da∣uid in the 2 of Samuell 12.3: what loue the poore man bare to that sheepe which he nourished in his bosome,
hee gaue him saith hee of his owne morsels to eate, and of his owne cup to drink: Christ to shew his loue towardes vs hath giuen vs of his owne breade, and of his owne cup, nay hee hath giuen his owne bodie as breade, his owne bloude as wine for the nur∣rishment of our soules. Dauid wondred at the ex∣ceeding loue of God 1. Sa∣muell: 1.18: saying who am I, O Lord God that thou hast brought mee to this? Lorde what is earth and ashes that thou hast exalted man to this dignitie? God did highly honour Iosua in that hee made the sunne to stay vntill hee had the victorie, but what honour had it bin, had hee brought it downe from heauen this hath hee done for vs by the
sonne of righteousnesse who exiled himselfe 33. yeares from the throne of glorie & became the sonne of mā that wee might bee made the sonnes of God. The Second Meditation. COnsider how in this holy misterie thou art bounde to loue the guifte, with the giuer: If when the people woulde haue made Christ a Kinge Iohn: 6.15: hee had then sought to re∣quite theire fauour it had not bin soe much: but when they gaue him gale to eate, and viniger to drinke, then to leaue this testimony of fa∣uour and loue, it was loue without example, had hee
bestowed this foe greate: guift on the Saintes or An∣gells it had not bin so won∣derfull, but bestowing it on poore sinners it was most ad∣mirable. 2 Consider how great care our Sauior hath shewed towards vs in instituting this sacramēt seeing nothing could be giuen more excellēt more deere. When hee loued his which were in the world hee loued them vnto the end. Io: 13 1. 3 Consider that Saint Chrysostome saith our Lorde instituted this diuine Sacra∣ment that we might be made one with him, for as much as hee is such a meate as doth turne it selfe into the worthy receiuer. Soe hereby Christ doth drawe vs vnto him with the bondes of loue, and doth
in this guift allure vs to loue him, heate doth turne the nourishmentes into the bo∣die nourished, the same is done by feruencie of loue in faithfull receiuers. The fruite of this Medita∣tion. The fruit of this Meditati∣on is that euerie one medi∣tate of the loue of Christ, say with the Prophet in the 116. & 11: Quid rependam, what shall I giue vnto the Lorde for all the benefites hee hath done vnto mee? I will take the cup of saluation, and call vpon the name of the Lorde.
A Spirituall soloquie vpon this meditation. O Swete Iesus could it be that such was thy loue towardes vs, that when thou wast the King of glorie and creator of all the worlde, thou woul∣dest thy selfe bee meate for thine owne creatures. O Loue, thy power is too too great; for I thought suffici∣ent that which the wise man speaketh of thy power: Thy loue is as stronge as death. But I see much more may bee spoken of it for thy ar∣rowes ouercomming heauen doe penetrate the verye loue of God, where death doth not come nor approach, nei∣ther staying thy selfe heere, thou doest fixe this loue in
the hearte of man, and not onely plucke it away from all thinges created, but euen from it selfe. It was sufficient that thou wast giuen to vs for a Lorde and God, in which thinge th Prophet hath placed thi blessednesse: Psalm. 145 6 Blessed are the people whose God is the Lorde. But lou hath drawne thee to t which the wisdome of man cannot comprehend, and it remaineth most true that thou when thou wast God of all maiestie infinite, and im∣mortall wert made man, did∣dest die and suffer for vs. When I consider that thou in the selfesame time wherein the streames of thy tribulations did ouerflowe, wherein thy onelye thought constrained a blooddie sweat
out of thy bodie, forgetfull of thine owne selfe, and all the tormentes which were preparing, wast carefull of procuring such a meare for vs as might strengthen vs in the state of grace, vntill wee see thee in the state of glory, O amiable Iesu how truly is it written of thy loue in the 8. of the Canticles & 6 verse. Many waters could not ex∣tinguish this loue, nor floodes ouerwhelme it, namely ma∣ny waters of thy passion, and floodes of thy greefe, could not with houlde thee wherby thou wouldest not prouide and impart this singular and precious guift for vs, O sweete Iesus it had beene e∣nough to call vs brethren when thou wert humbled on earth▪ but wilt thou so call vs in thy throne in heauen?
Math: 25:50: The Prophet Elisha in the second of the Kinges 2.8. greatly esteemed the cloke of his Maister Eliath, left him at his departure where∣with hee deuided the waters of Iordaine and passed ouer on drie foote; But the Lorde and God of Eliath hath left vnto thee not any garment but his most sacred bo∣die that hee may bee a companion with thee in this laboursome pilgrimage, strength in tribulation, and wholsome foode in a spiritu∣all life. Iudge nowe then howe much thou oughtest to reue∣rence him, and with what ∣dent afectiō receiue him? In the meane time beseech this benefactor that it happen not vnto thee as vnto the people
of the Iewes to whome when our Lorde Iesus had offered himselfe for theire Maister and Captaine they renoun∣cing his doctrine and mais∣tership, keepe still the coue∣ring of their eies, and which was worse ioyned to theire blindnes the sinne of vn∣thankfullnesse. The excellencie and worthy∣nes of this Sacrament. MOst high and sumptu∣ous is that preparati∣on which wisedome hath or∣dained, bountie furnished & Christ himselfe with his ho∣nourable presence beautifi∣ed. This preparation is not as that in times passed in the wildernesse, or in the moue∣able Tabernacle of Moyses, or the fixed Temple of Salo∣mon
but in a great chamber, a large vpper roome, in the most ample church disper∣sed farre and wide vpon the face of the earth, here Christ himselfe is the giuer and the guift, the feeder and the foode. It is saide of Ezechiah in the second of Chronicles 30. that hee kept a passeouer and such a passeouer as neuer was there any the like before; but much more may be saide of Christs holy supper. Admire not any longer the great∣nes of the guift, of the King, Assuerus in the 4. of Hester after he betrothed vnto him Hester in marriage for those guiftes were earthly and could not giue life and spirite, admire rather th precious guift of Christ gi∣uen vnto his church after hee
had espoused vnto himselfe the nature of man which guift is heauenly, and of infi∣nite value, giueth life to the that worthyly receiue it, many are the nourrishmentes of the bodie, but this of th soule doth exceede them all▪ The third Meditation. COnsider the great excel∣lencie of this holy and hea∣uenly feast where Christ is receiued, the memory of his death & passi¦on recounted the mind filled with grace, and a pledge o future glorie geuen vnto vs. 2 Consider these 5. differences which are betweene
this feast and the feasts of the world. 1 These feastes are pro∣phane for in them neither is there holy meate, neither are the ordained for the health of the soule, but this feast is a sanctified feast, and ordai∣ned principally for the health of the soule. 2 In the feastes of the world there is variety, and by how much the more the va∣rietie is the greater, by so much the more is the feast commended: in this spiritual banquet it is not so, wherein Christ being infinite contai∣neth in him all perfection and can alone satisfie the soule. 3 In the feastes of the world there is little speach had of death, suffering afflic∣tion, and tribulations, rather
discourse is had of matters of pleasures: but in this feast of Christ the memoriall o his death and passion, his sufferinges of loue for our saluation is remembred. 4 In this banquet the minde is filled with the grace of Christ which bringeth sal∣uation and the increase of heauenly guiftes: but in the banquets of the world, the bodie is replenished with meates that often bring di∣seases to the bodie and spi∣rituall destruction to the soule. 5 In the feastes of the world for the great excesse vsed in them they open a way to hell: but this holy feast of Christ stteth open vnto vs the readie way to heauen.
Farther considerations of this heauenly banquet. COnsider how well plea∣sing it is to the Lord Ie∣sus that we do all those things in this his feast which guestes inuited of the prince to some solemne preparation, are wont to doe. 1 First they expect with great desire the houre of this banquet, and giue theire di∣ligent attendance that they come in decent and seemly manner, well adorned. 2 Secondly, they know∣ing that nothing is more ac∣ceptable vnto the prince who inuiteth them, then to feede hartely on the meates prepa∣red, they come with emptie stomackes and a desire to be satisfied. 3 Thirdly, they diligent∣ly
beware that they neither doe or speake any thing which may be offensiue to the person which hath called them. 4 Fourthly, they doe not by and by depart but stay a∣while and enterchaung fami∣lier conference with the prince at one time praising his liberalitie, at on other the magnyficencie of the feast. 5 Fiftly, at there depar∣ture they yeeld reuerence, & giue humble thankes for the fauour vouchsafed them, ac∣knowledging their bounden dutie vnto so noble a prince, they offer them selues to bee readie at his pleasure, to per∣forme any seruice he shall commaund them. These properties of good and thankfull guestes should
much rather be performed in this heauenly feast wherunto wee are called by the sonne of God himselfe, and there∣fore we should expect, re∣ceiue with ioy: yeeld thankes for this heauenly banquet. The fruites of these considera∣tions. The fruite of these conside∣rations may be drawne frō a meditatiō the of greatnes, & magnificencie of this so holy a misterie, which greatnesse may stirre vs vp to be thank∣full to so liberall a Lord who calleth vs to so great honour, and bestoweth so many be∣nefites, yet requireth so fewe of vs againe.
A Spirituall Soloquie. IT is no mer∣uell O Lorde if the bounti∣fulnes of thy holy feast doe make vs astonished, for Esai∣as in the 25. Chap. of hie prophecie forseeing it many ages before as a picture sha∣dowed ouer-stood amazed thereat, and saith to the praise & glory therof: the Lord of hosts shal make to al people on this hil a feast of fatlings. Esa: 25.6: Great shall this feast be O holy prophet, for that not euerie one but the Lord of hostes shall ordaine it, and that not to certaine men alone, but to all people of the world, neither in eue∣ry place but on a hill, lastly it shall be a feast of fatlinges,
yea of the most heauenly foode that euer was. Be glad O holy church for that thou art that holy hill chosen of God for that hea∣uenly banquet, in thee doth stand the table prepared, thy deere children are like the oliue branches in the com∣passe thereof. Arise O my soule and de∣part from thy selfe forth∣with out of this dark vallie, for the lord doth expect thee at his feast, not thundring & lightning as he did to ye chil∣dren of Israell in the 19 of Exodus, but he inuiteth thee wih louing wordes Math: 11.2: come vnto me all ye that labour and are heauie loden and I will refresh you. Wee may now goe in saftie. That law doth not any lon∣ger stand in force, hee that
toucheth the hill shall die the death, Exodus: 19.23: but rather hee that commeth to the hill and eateth of this Sa∣crament shall liue for euer. But marke my soule that all cannot ascend to this hill, but only as the kingly Pro∣phet speaketh Psalme: 15.4: the harmlesse and pure in heart this is the wedding garment Math: 22.16: wher∣with we ought to be decked at Christes feast, otherwise wee shall heare those terrible wordes: cast him bound hand foote into vtter darknesse. Woe be to mee O Lord, who like the Prodigall sonne Luke 15.23: by luxurious li∣uing haue bewraied and torn the garment of innocencie receiued in holy baptisme woe wretched creature that I am if thou help me not O
Lord I dare not appeare at thy holy feast what shall I doe? if for my sinnes I shall be refused of thee, what shall I doe when with shame I am forbidden to come without a garment? happily I may sow mee a garment of leaues as Adam did after hee lost the garment of innocencie giuen him of God, but alas that will little profite mee as it profi∣ted Adam when he durst not come into Gods sight with that garment but hid him∣selfe: but if I hide my selfe shall I not be depriued of thy heauenly and healthsome feast. I turne me therfore to thee O Father of mercie, and I confesse that I haue offended thee after that manner that I am no more worthy to bee called thy sonne, but trusting
to thy infinite goodnes I be∣seech thee that thou wilt not respect my offences but the greatnes of thy mercies. I am not worthy to bee called thy sonne make mee O Lord as thy meanest seruant. Of the wonderfull thinges of this Sacrament. WOnderfull is God in all his workes, but in non more to bee admi∣red, then in the reuerent Sa∣crament of the bodie and blood of our Lord, wherein the blessed sonne of God gi∣ueth many high misteries vnto his church. Amongst other names of ex∣cellencie which the Prophet Esay attbuteth to the se∣cond
person in Trinitie, this is one: his name is wonder∣full Esa. 9.11. How truly this is verified in this holy Sa∣crament may be left vnto the contemplation of faith which is then most strong when reason stands mute. When as almightie God rained downe Manna a∣mōgst ye people of Israel the people being amazed at the sight therof, saide, Manhu: that is, what is this? and the thing seemed so wonderfull that they behoulding it truly admirable passed ouer as it were vnto vs the first word manhu, Lord what is this? what is this that the sonne of God should vndertake the nature of man and after a spi∣rituall and heauenly manner be giuen for meate to a new people, to whom all thinges
are manifest in truth? What is this? that he which dwelleth in heauen, sitteth amongst the quier of Angels, would come into the world and after a wonderfull and admirable manner dwell with the sonnes of men? What is this? that the Lod of maiestie who is of the same substance with the the Father and the holy Ghost, will be made one with man and take vp his mansion with him. What meate is this which doth clense our leprosie, comfort the conscience, and cure our soules? What is this? what pietie is this? what bowels of mer∣cie are these? surely the guift is worthie of the giuer. Salo∣mon brake out into a certain kind of admiration, speaking
of the Arke of couenaunt in he first of Kinges 8.27. Er∣one putandum est quod vere Deus habitet super terram s im caele & coelicoelorū cape∣re non possunt quanto minu lnus haec. And is it true in deed that God will abide o earth whom the heauens, no he heauens of heauens ca ot containe, much lesse thi house? O the deapth of th wisdome of the most high∣st? thy iudgmentes are pas inding out but should wee roceede to lift vp our eie against those glistering beames wherwith the sharpest Eagle may be dazled  surely: for then there woul be no end of admiration▪ superfluous were it to wad farre, wee best know God misteries whē with all thank∣fullnesse wee admire them, &
say blessed bee God in all his workes. Saint Chrysostome in his 61 Homily to the Preistes of Antioch calleth this Sacra∣ment the miracle of the mis∣teries of the Christian law, wherein our Sauiour impar∣teth his bodie and blood therby to declare the desir wherwith he burneth of vni∣ting himselfe vnto vs which is proper to them that loue ardentl, heere Sampsous ri∣dle is solued de comedēte exiuit cibus de forti egressa est dulcedo, out of the strong come sweetnes, what is stronger then the Lion? what sweeter then hony? Christ is the Lion of the tribe of Iuda, hony, the sweetnes of the ho∣ly Eucharist.
The fourth Meditation, of the wonderfull thinges of this Sacrament. LEt vs beehoulde with the eies of our faith one of the greatest workes o God vnder hea∣uen and for this inestimable misterie laud and praise his holy name. 2 Let vs with thankfull hartes wonder at the loue of God, who after hee receiued vs into his familie, there pla∣ced vs, not as seruantes but as sonnes, and that he might shew the part of a carefull fa∣ther, doth prouide a meane to nourish vs, and not contēt with that, would haue his
owne sonne to institute that meane by the spirituall parti∣cipation of himselfe. 3 Consider, the diuine wisedome of the sonne of God, who respecting our weaknesse hath conuaied vn∣to vs his bodie and blood af∣ter a diuine & spiritual man∣ner, vnder the forms of bread and wine. 4 Consider, how by this misticall Communion, occa∣sion is giuen to exercise our faith, and to prepare our soules which liue by grace, as our bodies doe by foode. 5 Consider the high and worthy effect of this heauen∣ly foode, which is not so much changed into the sub∣stance of the eater, as it doth rather chang vs to a diuine essence, the meate being di∣uine doth make vs also di∣uine,
O the omnipotent wis∣dome, and power, & loue of God? The Fruite. The fruite of this medita∣tion is to lift vp our selues a∣boue our selues, and blesse God for this wonderfull be∣nefit, without curious sear∣ching, and needlesse questi¦oning after the manner how, but to giue God thankes and bee ashamed rather at our selues that neither the won∣derfullnes of his power, nor the greatnes of his benefites, can make vs no more to loue him then wee doe. The spirituall Soloquie. O my soule thou art happie which hast prepared for
thee so wonderfull and so high a repast as there can bee found none either in heauen or earth more, for in it is cō∣tained that which the Apostle in the 1: & 3. to the Hebr. cal∣leth the brightnes of the glo∣ry of God, but hidden, that he might heap on thee the more benefits, thou knowst Moyses descending from the mount Sinah on which hee had tal∣ked with God, the children of Israell could not talke with him for the brightnes of his face, wherefore as the Scrip∣ture saieth he put a couering before his face: Exodus 34.16: that all might speake with him, in like sort our heauenly Moyses hath done, who not content with thy deliuerance from the hard seruitude o Egipt and spirituall Pharoe, but that thou shouldest not
bee terrified with the greate brightnes of his glorie, after an ineffable manner doth come vnto thee, and com∣mune with thee. Iacob said, surely God was in this place & I was not aware of it. Gen. 28:16. O wonderfull loue how farre hast thou gon with my Lord? Iust cause hast thou O my soule to reioice, and in reioicinge to admire the goodnes of thy blessed Savi∣our: cease to measure the greatnesse of this worke by the weaknes of thine owne vnderstanding, say rather with the Prophet Psalme 111 Memoriam facit mirabilium suorum, The mercifull Lord hath made a memoriall of his wonders, he hath giuen meate to them that feare him.
When the sonne of God clothed himselfe with our nature it was a worke verie admirable, for therein he as∣sumed humane nature mor∣tall, and passible, but when the faithfull receiue the holy Eucharist man doth partici∣pate a diuine nature immor∣tal, & heauenly: Hence was it said of God, Psal. 86.9. Tu es magnus faciens mirabilia, Lord thou art great and do∣ing wonderfull things. The manifold effectes and fruites of this holy Sacra∣ment. WEe may remember, which we cannot for∣get, that as man con∣sisteth of soule and bodie, so doth he also leade a two∣fold life, the one temporall,
readie to fall into a thousand dangers and casualties. The other spirituall, subiect to as many and more. The life of the body consisteth of the v∣nion of the Soule with the body. The life of the soule consisteth of another vnion, with grace in Christ. Both these, as they haue their de∣fects and casualties, so haue they also their remedies and sustentations. For the life na¦turall, God hath ordained naturall sustenance; for the life supernaturall, supernatu∣rall nourishment, which is this most holy Sacrament. But that which at all times is most to bee lamented is, whereas the spirituall life is farre more excellent then the temporall, notwithstanding is more regarded and pre∣ferred. For what thing doth
not a sicke body doe, to re∣couer his health, hee neglec∣teth all charges and griefes, he esteemeth nothing of the bitternesse of Medecines, he contemneth the sharpnesse of paines: the most experi∣enced Phisitions, the best preseruatiues are sought for, and all for bodily health, which endureth for a little time And are wee so carefull for the health of our Soule? would to God we were, then would we repaire with more deuotion▪ vnto this most holy Sacrament, where our spirituall life is preserued and strengthened. Three things there are sayth one, necessarie for the life of man, the mother which brings him forth, the meate which sustaineth him, and the Phisition that cures
him when hee is sicke. The same three are ne∣cessarie for the life spirituall. The mother is Baptisme, the meate is the holy Eucharist, the Phisition to cure is re∣pentance. Now then, as the body without meats cannot endure labours and liue, no more can the Soule without this spirituall repast, sustaine the labours of this Pilgri∣mage, the assaults of her ene∣mies and liue. The ayre be∣ing corrupted when we goe forth of doores, wee fortefie vs with some preseruatiue. This world is corrupted, our preseruatiue against tempta∣tions, is this holy Eucha∣rist. Men entring a way pos∣sessed by the enemie, arme themselues with weapons, get them good companie:
seeing we haue in all the way of our life many enemies visible and inuisible, shall we not arme our selues, & take vnto vs Christ our Captaine. Of the most principall effects of this Sacrament. THe first is, as wee may so speak to Deifie, that is, to make man di∣uine, or like vn∣to God himselfe, heere in the state of grace, and hereafter in the state of glory, and for this cause it is instituted in forme of nourishments. For as nourishments and the bo∣dy nourished, become one so Christ and the faythfull receiuers. Other meates re¦ceiue life of the body, this giueth life to the Soule.
2 A second effect is, that with Christ are giuen vs all his merites and rewards, which hee hath purchased, here the hiue is giuen vs with the honey. 3 The third effect of this Sacrament, is, that hereby a continuall and constant re∣membrance of Christ Iesus our Sauiour is continued, whereby we shew his death vntill he come, and therefore he sayth, Math. 26.26. Hoc facite in mei memoriam, Doe this in remembrance of mee. 4 The fourth effect is to stirre vp in vs the loue of God, and our neighbour. Of God, who first loued vs, of our neighbour, for his sake that sayd, Hee that loueth God, should loue his neigh∣bour also, 1, Ioan. 4. 21.
What should we enter into hat sea of the manifold effects of this Sacrament: If I m sick, here I may cure me, if I am whole, here I shall keep me, if liuing, here I shall comfort me, if dead in sinne heere I shall raise mee, if I burne with the loue of God▪ here I may inflame me, if I am cold in deuotion, here I may warm me, if I am blind, here I may enlighten mee, if potted, here I may clēse me. I wil not flie as Adam sometime did frō the presence o od, because here I cā coue ne, nor run away for feare of he enemie, for heere I shall find grace to strengthen me. Cyrill in his 4. booke vpo Iohn, sayth, here not onely eath is put to flight, but als pirituall diseases that caus ath, are expelled, the cruel
and inordinate loue of our members is repressed, and the perturbations of the mind quieted. Tho. Aquinas calleth this Sacramēt a precious banket, admirable, holsome, & full of all sweetnes, & to prouoke vs the more to lou it, hee ad∣deth, Here sinnes are clensed, vertues increased the minde made fertill with all spirituall graces, and that when Christ saw his Disciples to wax sad for his departure, he left vnto them this Sacrament for a singular comfort. The fruits of this Sacrament. The fruits hereof may bee reduced to these 12. proper∣ties: the first is to quicken, 2. To set at libertie, 3. To enflame, 4. To giue patience
in trouble, 5. To nourish. 6. To restore, 7. To vnite, 8. To communicate, 9. To make whole, 10. To pre∣serue, 11. To strengthen, 12. To conduct through, and therefore this Sacrament is called Viaticum, the proui∣sion for the way, as Elias passed his iourney in the strength of his meate. It is written of Obededon in the second of Sam. 3. that he and his did prosper, be∣cause he receiued the Arke of God into his house: how much more shall this bee ac∣complished in those, who receiue Christ Iesus truly in∣to their soules, the manifold effects whereof by increase of grace, from grace to grace, the faithfull feele and finde as much.
The fift Meditation. Of the fruit and effecte of this most holy Sacrament. COnsider that as the soule newly created of God, so soone as it cometh in∣o the body, which descen∣ed of Adam, is forthwith contaminated & made peraker of the whole euill and isery, wherin he inwrapped mankind by his transgressiō▪ So likewise, as soone as the soule receiueth Christ it i forthwith made partaker of his merits and righteousnes. And this is one cause why his Sacrament is called a Communion. 2 Consider that as hee bringeth vnto thee the fruit of his life and death, his resurrection and ascention: so also he desireth to communi∣cate thee vnto his members.
3 Consider that the vnder∣stāding is so lightned by this holy Sacrament, that it easily commenth into the know∣ledge of God, whence those 2. Disciples going to Emans straight after the receiuing of bread, as the Scripture sayth, their eyes were opened, and they knew the Lord. 4 Consider that it was not the hem of the garment, for what vertue could there bee in so meane a subiect to pro∣cure health, but it was the hemme of Christes gar∣ment. So it is not bread and wine, but this bread, this wine that sanctifieth our soules. 5 Consider how it re∣neweth Gods grace, that like as bodilie foode doth renew that which naturall heate had consumed. So this heauenlie nourish∣ment,
restoreth that which the Soule through the heate of euill desires, had lost. 6 Consider it ioyneth vs to Christ our head, & to our neighbours, who are Christs mēbers, prouoking vs to loue them with true charitie: and therefore this Sacrament is called of the Fathers, the Sacrament of vnion & loue. For Christ by giuing his the same food, vniteth thē in one diuine essence. S. Augustine writeth that this Sacramēt is instituted vnder the forme of bread and wine. For as bread is made of many grains, and the wine one, of many grapes, so the faithful by loue and vnitie, are made one in Christ their head one, by cō¦sent and concord amongst themselues. 7 Consider the great peace
and tranquility of the minde, which cōmeth by this sacra∣ment, yt as the ship was tossed & troubled before, but when Christ came into it, all was calme: so in this world we are often troubled, but when Christ comes, all is quiet: he would haue his Disciples say vnto what house they entred, Peace bee vnto this house, Luc. 10.5. How much more may it e sayd to that heart, where this holy mystery is truely & worthily receiued: Peace be vnto this heart. The fruit of this Meditation. The fruit is to desire with our whole harts to haue par in these effects, to hūger and thirst after righteousnes. To remember that of the womā of Samria, Io. 4.25. who when she heard Christ spea
of the waters of life, sayd Giue me Lord of this water So, O Lord, giue vs of th foode, which may worke in our Soules these so many, and so worthie effects. The Soloquie. DOst thou desire to know O my soule, with what good things Christ in this holy mysterie hasteth vnto thee? how hee commeth loaden and inriched with so many merits and rewards? whatsoeer he brought into the world▪ al these he exhibi¦teth in this most diuine Sa¦crament. Hee that ministret such foode to him that fighteth, what doth hee keepe in store for him that ouercom¦meth? Surely in that immor∣tall life, in that land of promise,
hee will fill thy desires with all happines, which in this wildernesse giueth thee such heauenly Manna. And what doth hee so much co∣uet of thee my Soule, by this most noble foode, the that hee may plentifully re∣ward thee with vnspeakable graces. Marke what hee ringeth, more I assure thee hen thou canst wish or de∣ire. Behold, sayth hee, Apoc. 3.21. I stand at the doore and knocke, if any heare my voyce, and shall open to mee the gate, I will enter in vnto him, and suppe with him. What wlt thou do O my soule in so great aboundance of all good things▪ do what thou art able, & do it quick∣ly. Bee thou enlarged to re∣ceiue such mysteries. Make
cleane the place of thy hart▪ Prepare the vpper roome o thy best, & best disposed de∣uotion. Exclude a mind bea∣ting vpon vain & idle cogi∣tations. Exclude an entrance to euill desires, yeeld accep¦table passage to the bride∣groome Christ Iesus, to whome be prayse for euer and euer, Amen. A Dialogue betweene Man and the Soule. Man. IT is true my soule, that thi heauenly foode doth bring with it many great & excellēt effects to the liuing, but tell me, what doth it pro∣fite one dead? Soule Nothing. Man. Then
will not this Sacrament doe thee any good if thou bee dead. Soule. But how can I die being immortall▪ Man. It is sure thou canst not bee extinguished with bodily death, like beastes without reason, but thou mayest die well enough with spirituall death, which is a seperation of Gods grace from the soul, as the death of the bodie consisteth in the seperation of the soule from the bodie. Soul. Doth the grace of God giue life to the soule? Man. Yea, euen as the soule giueth life vnto the bodie. Soul. But who can depriue the soule of grace which is the life there∣of? Man. Sinne, As the Pro∣phete Ezechiel saith 18.6. That soule that sinneth that soule shall die, that is, shall bee depriued of grace, and
which is more, of future glorie. So. From whence hath sinne that power▪ Ma. From Gods iust decree▪ Sou. Well seeing sinne is so dangerous I will not continue in the vn∣seemely actions thereof any more. Ma. Surely then shalt thou be happie in the end, & we shall be blessed partakers together of Christs inestima∣ble benefites both in this world, and in the worlde to come. Of the principall cause which may moue v to come to this holy Sacrament. THe obedience we all owe vnto the author of this sa∣cred ceremony, who in the ordayning there∣of had no other end but the
glory of God his father, with mans true and perfect good, and a consideration of our owne weaknesse, who stand in need of so many assistant helpes, as we do, cannot but moue vs to vse with all reue∣rence and desire, with all our harts affectiō this holy mean of receiuing grace, left vnto vs by the giuer of grace: For we do not celebrate a remē∣brance onely of some thing past, but we are partakers al∣so of grace present which grace though not from, yet by the Sacrament. As wa∣ter from the fountaine by the cunduit pypes is conuey∣ed and deriued vnto vs: That we offer vnto God the sacri∣fice of laud and prayse, giue testimony vnto men wee are members of that misti∣call bodie whereof Christ is
the head, shew euidently vn∣to the world, how desirous wee are to continue in that holy vnion with God, and  the onely celebration of his most holy Sacrament doth well declare and shew, & the sundrie and manifold effectes thereof doe giue suf∣ficient testimonie in the be∣halfe of the faithful receiuer. The sixt Meditation. COnsider that the vnion of the bodie and soule is neere▪ but the vnion of Christ and the faithfull neerer; that seperable, this inseperable. 2 Consider that this most diuine Sacrament is ordai∣ned
by Christ our Sauiour, as a meane to deriue his grace vnto vs, to preserue vs from euil and also spiritually to su∣staine & nourish our soules. 3 Consider hee hath left vnto vs this meat that by the benefit thereof we might be transformed into him by li∣uing according to his will, which is no other thing, then God to liue in vs. 4 Consider how much it concerneth vs to returne vn∣to Christ, to exercise religious actions of our Christian dutie, to offer God the sacri∣fice of thanksgiuing for the inestimable benefite of our redemption, to obserue and keepe with all reuerence this high and holy ordinaunce left vnto vs.
The Fruite. THe fruit of this medita∣tion is to apply our dilgence in the performing of this excellet part of God eruice, to remember that which was said to Moyses. D ccording to the example which I shewed thee in the Mount. Exod. 25.6. The Soloquie. THou art too lo∣uing (O my sa∣uiour,) it had beene sufficiēt to procure som remedie for vs of thy crea∣tures, and we had taken it in great sauour, but it was not sufficient for thy burning loue but thou wouldest be
thy selfe a remedie for ou uls, that the saying of the iseman, Eccles. 6.4. migh e accomplihed in thee. A ithfull friend is the mediine of life and immortlitie: hat friend more faithful hen my blessed Sauiour hat medicine of more efcacie then this diuine Sacrament? but that thou wol∣est that the effect thereo hould in part depend of vs that was an argument of loue indeed. If bodily medicines should worke according to the inent and desire of the sicke, i ould bee very acceptable nd all sicke flkes woul hinke themselues bond to he authors thereof, howe much more are we beholdng to thee who with so great oue hast prouided for vs
medicine of such efficacie & so holesome that doth work more of it selfe then wee can desire. How much O Lord doth the lawes of humane Philo∣sophie differ from the lawe of thy loue? what philosophy of the world hath euer writ∣ten, or thought, that a king of all maiestie, the infinite sea of all perfectnes would leaue himselfe for food to so mean a creature? What wisedome of this world had euer beene able to conceaue that God the king of all glorie, to the intent he might couple & v∣nite man vnto himself, would bee willing to become his meat. O my soul stand ama∣sed at the loue of thy Sauior! make an end of tears, bewaile not any longer thy own vile∣nes and weakenes, for three
louing sisters and aduocates haue pleaded our cause, and found fauour. Mercie hath presented our infirmitie, and found grace: wisedome hath inuented the meanes to ob∣taine helpe, loue hath con∣strained Christ to put it in execution: This is the meane that Iesus by the benefite of this most powerfull Sacra∣ment would vnite vs vnto himselfe, that we might bee made one with him, and to this end we receiue him. We giue thee thankes O heauenly Adam, which hast restored that which the earth¦ly Adam had destroyed. He by his meat caused vs to de∣part from God, and thou by thy meate to bee vnited to God, I pray thee my louing Iesus that this vnion may be firme and sound, that neither
life nor death, neither tribulation may seperate vs from thee. Cause me O Lord that I may be wholly ioyned to thee, that I may glorie with thy Apostle and say, Galat. 2.21. I liue, but now not I, but Christ liueth in me. Of frequenting the holy Communion. IT hath beene shewed, that the holy Eucharist is th sustenance of the soule as breade and wine are the sustenance of the bodie, but the soule▪ being of farre more ex∣cellencie then the bodie, it were then most vnseemely that the bodie which is transitorie should bee carefully
feed, and the soule which is according to the image of God should bee neglected, and little respected meate vnlesse it be taken in due sea∣son doth not profit the recei∣uer, treasure that is not im∣ployed, doth turne vs to no benefite. The vse and fre∣quent vse of this heauenly repast is very godly & Chri∣stianlike, wee haue no more special meanes to relieue our infirmities, no more profita∣ble and effectuall remedie & directiō to guide vs through the way and passage of this wearisome life. There are (saith one) three thinges amongst the rest, which do alwayes hold man bound to God: The first i the multitude of his benefits for which wee ought to giue thankes, the second is
the multitude of our sinnes, for which we ought to aske mercie. The third is the mul∣titude of miseries and infir∣mities for which wee are bound to seeke a remedie, now for the acknowledge∣ment of our duety. The blotting out our offences, the reliefe of our miseries, there is at once no more strong & forceable a meane then this most holy sacrament, where∣in wee offer praise vpon the aultar of our hearts, beg re∣mission in his merites, who died for vs, receiue strength against all distresse of this troublesome world. Where∣fore man which oweth so great and many thinges for benefites receiued, which so often laboureth vnder the burthen of his sinnes, whom so many necesities doe inui∣ron,
what better course then to approach vnto this diuine misterie, which is saith Saint Bernard, phisicke to the sick. The way to the traueller, strength to the weake, ioy to the hole, refuge to the poor, counsell to the rich, helpe to them that are in danger, the consideration wherof should somewhat quicken vp our slownesse in this case. It is the manner of mar∣chants to frequent those pla∣ces where greater hope of gaine groweth: the pore are wont to flocke thither where larger almes are giuen, and should not the Christian re∣paire thither where great & gainfull giftes are distribu∣ted, when hee findeth him∣selfe in miserie, poore, and distressed. The loue of God may
moue and inuite some, the beholding of their owne mi∣series should vrge others, some the conscience of sinne should induce, others a desire of obtaining grace, but the honour we all owe vnto God should solicite all seeing wee haue not a more high and excellent meanes of perfor∣ming the same. One friend doth willingly come vnto another: It is a signe of small loue to Christ, when wee come so seldome to his holy Passeouer, as on the contrary his loue is aug∣mented more & more in vs, by often communicating. A great and louing remem∣brance of his blessed passion, we celebrate in the frequent participation of this holy mi∣sterie, so often saith the A∣postle, 1. Corinth. 11.26.
And therfore often you shew ye Lords death vntil he come. Last of all we see in winter when the Snne is farther off barrennesse followeth, in the coldnesse of our deuotion when this misterie is negle∣cted, what ensueth but loose∣nesse of life and an vnaptnes to all pietie. The seuenth Meditation. COnsider that in the Primitiue Church which was gouerned of the Apostles themselues the Christians of∣ten communicated, which did shew that great deuotion and feruentnesse of spirit did possesse the mindes of men: and euident it is that by how much the more that godly custome did waxe more cold by so much the feruentnesse
and holinesse of Christian people did waxe lesse & lesse. 2 Consider that by often communicating pietie and perfection of life is augmē∣ted, the Christian man is made more religious, the bodie made chaste and obe∣dient to the soule, the soule to God. 3 Consider, that to re∣ceiue Christ in the sacrament with due preparation, is no other thing then to worship him with great reuerence: he therefore which by this di∣uine communicating doeth often receiue him, doth oft∣ner also praise him and wor∣ship him with diuine honor, but hee which honoureth Christ in earth shall be like∣wise honored of his heauen∣ly father in heauen. Luc. 9.26 4 Consider seeing this
diuine sacrament is the meat of the soule, wherewith it is strengthened and maintay∣ned in a spirituall life, it doth manifestly follow, by how much the more often the soule is nourished with this meat, by so much the perfe∣cter it is made in a life spiri∣tuall. The fruit. THe fruit of this seuenth Mediation is to make a firme purpose of ap∣plying our selues to this fre∣quent and often communi∣cating, to beseech the Lord, that the soul may neuer loath this heauenly food, but with an inward affection desire it, from which affection sprin∣geth perseuerance & a readi∣nes to sanctimony & holines of life, a longing to walk be∣fore
The Solquie. WHat is this grace O sweete Iesu, which thou dost affect me with? for thou not on∣ly vouchsafest to open vnto me the precious mine of gold lying in the field of the holy Church, that is the hidden treasure for which the man that found it, sold all that hee had to buy that field: but al∣so doest often inuite mee to digge so precious a trea∣sure that thou mayest inrich my soule. But that which draweth me into admiration is, that to the purchasing of this fielde and digging this treasure as often as I will thou hast added so great a commodity that I need not
sell any of my goodes much lesse all that I haue. Lord if to obtaine this trea∣sure thou hadst ordained hard fasts, long pilgrimages, shedding of bloud, and other sharpe pennances, all these labours & afflictions ought worthily to haue been suffe∣red to tast euen but once thy sacred bodie: but O loue vn∣hard of that had hadst rather make the entrance easie and delectable that I might often returne to this mine. O A∣dam how much better is the condition of thy posteritie, then was thine which is now broght to passe by the mean of our louing and liberall Ie∣sus: thou wert driuen out of paradise, and that thou shouldst not returne thither to eate of the tree of life and liue, one of the Cherubines
armed with a fierie sword, was set of the righteous God to keep it: But wee thy chil∣dren liuing in the Paradise of the holy Church, are not on∣ly not driuē away by an An∣gell with a fiery sword, but are inuited of the Lord of Angels, by the fire of his loue to taste often the fruites of the tree of life, yea to re∣ceiue him who hath giuen all strength to the tree of life that giueth a blessed and e∣uerlasting life: for so he in∣uiting vs, hath promised. He which eateth of this breade shall liue for euer. Ioh 6.58. O my soule be somewhat stirred vp, and magnifie thy God, for he which is migh∣tie hath done great thinges for thee: doest thou not see him that he is made thy trea∣sure to make thee rich, re∣turne
often to digge it, it is a precious treasure, & there∣fore it will satisfie thy desires, it is infinite, and therefore will neuer decay. Of the impediments which de∣taine men from the blessed Sacrament. IN the second of Exod. and 6. Pharaoh to withhold the people from doing sacrifice, causeth his Taske-masters to set them about drudgerie. It is the wilinesse of the olde serpent to draw vs from performing this holy seruice vnto God, to make the world and the flesh, distract our thoughtes and desires so to keepe vs from this spirituall part of
Gods worship, either by re∣misse and carelesse neglect, or at least by a timerous con∣ceit of our vnfitnesse: this carelesse and remisse neglect ariseth of our many encum∣brances and businesses in the world. We can find time to follow profits and pleasures, but for to enter into this so serious businesse of our soule we are not at leasure. Esau to satisfie his appetite left his patrimonie: The Gre∣gesems respecting their swine neglected Christes heauenly presence. What great indig∣nitie was offered vnto the rich man, Luk. 14.16. who prepared a great supper, sent his seruants to call them that were bidden to come in, whē ye vnthankful guests returned answere they were other∣wise imployed, in deed they
cared not for comming. If feare keep any away be∣cause it may seeme presump∣tiō to approach vnto so holy a place as the altar of the Lord, let it bee remembred that Christ calleth all that be weary & heauy loaden to re∣fresh them. Mat. 11. & 28. If slouth and negligence, let a carefulnesse of our estate to come stirre vs vp. If the affaires of the worlde, cast them all aide. If any finde himselfe cold and slow with∣out desire and deuotion to∣wards this heauenly meat, he ought not therefore to ab∣stain from the holy commu∣nion, for hee shall here finde sensible deuotion, when al the powers of the soule & disper∣sed apetites are gathered to∣gether, whē our wil & strēgth is forceablie caried to God &
we maruellously moued to honour the passion of our blessed Sauiour. The impe∣diments therefore conside∣red we may endeuour then to auoide them, that so wee may come & offer our soules & bodies a sacrifice to God, that neither by the subtilnes of Sathan, the affaires of this world, the pleasures of the flesh, we bee drawen away from so high and heauenly a repast prepared for vs, as is this great misterie of salua∣tion. The eight Meditation. COnsider that the Diuel can not endure the vse of this profitable sa∣crament, for hee knoweth howe much it is of force to
attaine blessednes, from whence hee for his pride fell. And hee hateth the Sacra∣ment, for in it is represented the passion, by force wherof he is bound, and thrust from the tyrannie which he would evercise vpon mankind. 2 Consider for what causes the diuell doth labour by duers meanes and arts to withdraw men from often communicating, whence we may gather howe profitable this holy Sacrament is to the Soule, when it is manifest, it so much displeaseth Sathan the Capitall enemie of our good. 3 Consider that our na∣ture is of it selfe prone to e∣uill, how the allurements of the flesh the affayres of the world, are readie to carry vs away from Gods worship,
and therefore by so much the more wee should shake off all impediments, and re∣ceiue this holy Eucharist, whereby wee are strengthe∣ned to resist temptations, v∣nited vnto Christ, armed with his grace, which shall protect and saue vs. 4 Consider that whereas this sacrament is numbred a∣mongst the greatest benefits giuen to vs of God in this life, that wee doe in nothing more auoyde the tokens of vngratefulnes, then by often communicating: for besides that it is most acceptable vnto God, the memory also of Christ is often renewed, which he also desireth to bee done▪ saying: Doe this in re∣membrance of mee. 5 Consider how the inter∣mission of this holy institu∣tion,
doth make men in time lesse religious, how it proceedeth for the most part of want of loue. For it cannot bee that one should loue Christ, and yet neg∣lect this his holie ordi∣nance. The Fruit. The fruit of this Medi∣tation, is first to begge of the Lord an inward affection and deuotion to this sacrament: next, strength against the temptations and allure∣ments, which are readie to withdraw vs from the same.
The Soloquie. BEhold now O good Iesus, by howe manye meanes my in∣fernall enemie indeuoureth to draw mee a∣way from thy heauenly ta∣ble: At one time he assayleth me in the faith of this most holy and hidden Sacrament: at another time he tortureth mee with scruples, very often he striueth to pull me backe from many humane respects and that hee may effect his purpose, hee laboureth that the world may wihdraw me, by the affayres thereof, and that the flesh should com∣plaine, her repentance and
turning vnto God is grie∣uous vnto her. O my soule, if there were not an inesti∣mable benefite receiued by this holy Sacrament, the di∣uell would not bee trouble∣some vnto vs; yea, hee would reioyce in the time misspent herein. But the enemie of man is not ignorant of the great good that hereby commeth to a man. Now behold O Lorde the assaults of this aduersary of our Soules, I desire no o∣ther thing of thee, then that thy seruant Ib desired, and obtained, Iob. 19.3. Place me by thee, and let the hand of whomsoeuer fight against mee, stand on my part O Lord, and I shall bee safe. None shall sty me from fre∣quenting this heauenly Sa∣crament, I pray thee there∣fore
my mercifull Iesus, that like as thou hast inspired me of thy mercifull goodnes, that I might begge the taste of this precious meate, so thou mayst bestow on mee grace to frequent the same with ioyfull perseuerance. Cause O Lord, that the me∣morie of this holy Sacramēt fall not from mee, otherwise I know that my heart will waxe faint, and I shal be con∣strained to say with the Pro∣phet: my heart is withered within mee, that I forget to eate my bread. Let not the distrust of my owne vilenes, deterre and fray mee from such a heauenly meate, so full of comfort.
A spirituall complaint of the Soule. WHat shal I doe my sweet Ie∣su, for twoo most strong Captaines do greatly assault me, that is to say, Feare and Loue? Feare obiecteth to my minde, the highnes of this most hono∣rable Sacrament, which doth make me draw backe my foote. But loue sheweth me the excellencie of that v∣nion', which this admirable mistery doth procure, makes that with pleasant desire I dare come into thy sight O what shall I doe? if o∣uercome with feare, I depart further from thy holy ta∣ble, when thou hast sayde:
Vnlesse yee eate of the flesh of the Sonne of Man, you shall not haue life in you? If  bee ouercome with Loue, shall I be so bold with∣out feare to receiue the Sa∣crament of so great a Maie∣stie? What then shall I doe O my sauiour? I know well the one cannot please thee without the other: for fee∣ing thou art our Father, lou is worthily due vnto thee, & seeing thou art our Lord, feare and reuerence. Wherefore I determine to giue my diliḡce to both, to receiue both into my companie. Loue shall cause that I come often and wil∣lingly. Feare that I come re∣nerently, and with diligent prepartion. And thou my most gentle Redeemer, see∣ing thou vouchsafest to in∣uite
me so often to thy sa∣cred feast, bring to passe that these two Captaines may not forsake me. Oh my heauēly Father, for that thou hast bound mee with so many benefites vnto thee, and tyed mee with so great bondes of Loue, I beseech thee by the same loue, wherewith thou dost alwayes prosecute thy onely begotten and beloued sonne, that thou wilt not leaue mee so bound, but ra∣ther draw mee to thy sonne, seeing thou hast promised it to mee by the Prophet O∣sea, when thou sayst, I will draw them vnto mee with chaines of loue. Remember also (O my blessed Sauiour) that thou hast promised this drawing, when thou saydst: When I am lifted vp from the earth, I will drawe all
things vnto my selfe. Now O Lord thou art exalted, it remaineth that thou dra y hart vnto thee, and wh t cannot finde where it may est, like the Doue it may re¦urne to the Arke of Saluatin. But if thou O Lord, dost ot stretch forth thy hand t raw it vnto thee into the Arke, it shall stay withou oores, and soone perish in he waters. A Dialogue betwixt the dis¦stressed Sinner and Faith. Sinner. I Am not wor¦thye to ap∣proach vnto  high a place as the table o
the Lord, and therefore I come so seldome as I doe. Faith. Didst thou doe this of true humilitie, and not of negligence rather, it were well. But I doubt thou dost it of slouth, because thou wilt not take paines to re∣pent as thou oughtest. Sin∣ner. The very truth is I am a∣frayde. Faith. Why man, let the loue of him that so lo∣uingly calleth thee, aban∣don feare. Sinner. But I am sinfull in my owne consci∣ence. Faith. Who can say his heart is cleane? all haue sin∣ned, and al haue gone astray. Si. But my sins are grieuous, and therefore I absent my slfe? Fai. Are they grieuous? and therefore thou shouldst the rather seeke a remedie where it may be had. Sinner. But I haue not sensible
deuotion to seek. Fa. Thogh we cannot bee as strong as Sampson, wee must not let all alone, Christ will accept a good heart. Sin. But I cannot so well dispose my selfe yet▪ by reason of the affayres of this world? Faith. Christ willes vs to cast our care of earthly things vpon him, be∣cause wee should cast our care about heauenly. Sin. But may I bee so bold as to come, and bee partaker of so holy a mysterie. Fai. Thou mayst, and therefore prepare a penitent heart, and come in the name of God.
Another conference betweene the Soule and Faith. Soule. SHall I be so bold as to approach to this sacred Ark, and receiue the Lord of glo∣rie. Faith. Why mayst thou not bee so bold? Soule. For because I am weake, mise∣rable, and ill inclined. Faith. He is both the Phisition and the medicine, hee himselfe hath sayd, The whole neede not the Phisition, but the sicke. Soule. If Iohn the Bap∣tist sanctified in his mothers womb, reputed himselfe vn∣worthy to loose the latchet of Christs shoos: And S. Peter
thinking himselfe vnwor∣thy of his presence, saith: Goe from me O Lord, for I am a sinful man, how shall I, being a miserable sinner, without the daunger of eternall pu∣nishment, dare receiue vnto mee so high a mysterie? Fai, If he descended from heauē to saue sinners, if he call vnto him all that ate wearie and heauy loaden, shall hee not accept of thee if thou come vnto him? Sou. What shall make mee secure of punish∣ment? Fa Humility & Loue. By humilitie thou shalt bee exalted, by loue thou shalt be rewarded. Come therfore vnto him by this holy meane left vnto thee. Sou. But if the Bethshamets in the first of Sam. 6. were so sharply pu∣nished for looking into the Ark, how may I presume to receiue the Lord of the arke
himselfe? Fai. The Bethsha∣mits were worthily puni∣shed, for that they looked into the Arke of Curiositie, they did not honour & reue∣rence it as they ought. Wher¦fore if thou hast humility & loue, thou needest not feare the punishment of the Beth∣shamits. Sou. But I cannot chuse but acknowledge with the Centurion, that I am not worthy to receiue Christ vn∣der my roofe. Fa. The Lord maketh thē worthy, who ac∣knowledge their own vnwor¦thines. Wherfore with al hū∣ble submission say: O Lord Iesu I come vnto thee, besee∣ching thee to turne away thine eyes from my sinnes: if thou wilt beholde them, behold them Lord not as a iudge to punish them, but as a Phisition to cure them. Cause I beseech thee,
that my infirmities may hap∣pen to thy greater glory, as the infirmitie of him did, that was borne blind, Ioh. the 9.3. Thou deliuering me, by so much the more shal thy glo∣ry shine, by how much the more I am vnworthie and miserable. Of remoouing the dangerous effects which hinder the wor∣thy receiuing of this holy Sacrament. THere is, saith the Wise∣mā, a word clothed with death, God grant it bee not founde in the house of Israel. And there is too saith the Apostle, an vnworthie re∣ceiuing of Christ vnto con∣demnatiō. 1. Cor. 11.27. And God grant it bee not found amongst the society of chri∣stians. That which is to some
the sauour of life vnto life, and these are the worthie re∣ceiuers: the same may bee vnto others the sauour of death vnto death, and these are the vnworthy. What is therefore more needfull then to remooue al dangerous defects, which may hinder the fruit and ef∣ficacie of so high a mysterie, to remooue, I say, all sensuall desires, faithlesse cogitati∣ons, impenitent affections, and all other euils whatsoe∣uer, which may withdraw the heart of man from God, and hinder the good of this most excellent medecine of our soules. The sun to them which are in health, is wholsome, but vnto those who are pained in the head, it falleth out to bee farre otherwise. A potion re∣ceiued
in due season, doth help the Patiēt. The showres & dews of heauen, make the tree wel planted to prosper & fructifie, but that tree which hath some worm at the root, & doth wither vpward, doth more and more decay by all this moysture. The soule rooted in faith and charitie, is as a good plant, whom this heauenly dew doth nourish. the corrupt hart is that worm which maketh the withered tree to fade away so lōg, vn∣til the master of the vineyard say, Cut downe the vnprofi∣table tree. Now therfore, that the faithful Christian may be as the tree plāted by the wa∣ters side, Psalm. 1. which shall bring foorth his fruit in due season, let him in the name of God remoue all dangerous defects, as enuie, euill concu∣piscence,
infidelitie, and the like, that he eate not of this bread, and drinke not of this cup vnworthily. The ninth Meditation. COsider that to come vn∣worthily to the holye Eucharist, as without Faith, without deuotion, without repentance, without reuerēce, is very dangerous. 2 Consider how respectiue we should be in comming to this holy mystery, how care∣full, how religious. 3 Salomon saith, when thou sittest to eate with a Ruler, consider diligently what is set before thee, Prou. 24.1. 4 Abraham when hee was making his offering to God,
Gen. 15.11. the foules came to hinder Abrahams offe∣ring, as wandering thoughts would doe ours: Abraham rose and droue them away. The fruit. The fruit of this Medita∣tion is to prepare our selues in the best and most reuerent maner wee can, that wee eate paenem Domini, contra domi∣num, the bread of the Lord against the Lord, as S. Austen speaketh, to remoue all dan∣gerous defects, to bee sorie for our sins past, and resolue vpon amendment, for the time to come. The Soloquie. SEest thou not my soule that it is thy part to come with all deuotion and at∣tētion
of mind vnto this holy acracramēt▪ Remeber that when God, Exo. 19.1.3. was to talke with Moyses vpon the mount, how he cōmanded ye neither man nor beast should approach to the Mountaine, least Moyses by the sight of any creature, should bee di∣sturbed: yea, that hee should haue fitter oportunitie of at∣tention, without distraction, the whole hill was couered with a great & darke cloude. No otherwise, my soule, do, that no euill affection come with thee to the holy Altar, which may draw thee frō de¦uotiō: here God doth expect thee. Consider with thy selfe that hee can neuer bee truly desired and loued of thee, vnlesse in comming to this sacred table, thou cleane for∣get all earthly things. Heare
what the Kingly Prophet saith, Psa. 45.11. My daugh∣ter hearken and consider, in∣cline thine eare. Forget also thine owne people, and thy Fathers house, so shall the King haue pleasure in thy beautie, for he is thy Lord God, and worship thou him. But O Lord, what shall I doe to attaine this deuotion? for my minde doth remaine so corrupt, since that generall fall of our first Father Adam that often times against my will, it wandereth vagarant where it shuld not, what shall I do when my infernall ene∣my either indeuoreth by ma∣ny earthly occasions to draw me away from this heauenly table, or to come (which is no lesse feareful) vnworthily vnto the same. Thou seest O mercifull Iesus, in what state
I stand, that is to say, howe weake I am by nature, helpe I beseech thee, my weaknes with thy holy grace, that all defects remooued, I may ap∣proach vnto thy heauenly ta∣ble, with heart and soule pre∣pared. Of preparing our selues before we come to the most holy Sacrament. IF in our earth∣ly affaires, wee often times for¦get heauenly, good reason is it that in our heauenly wee should much rather forgette all earthly businesse what∣soeuer, and prepare our selues to this so solemne a ceremonye, which doth consecrate man vnto God.
Christ sent 2. of his Disciples before to make ready the vpper roome, wher he would keepe his mandy with his A∣postles: our faith & repētance as 2 messengers may prepare before the vpper roome of our souls. The Israelites kee∣ping their Passeouer, put le∣uē out of their houses. Christ washeth his Disciples feet, & the Prophet Dauid sayth, I wil wash my handes in inno∣cency, & so wil go to thy Al∣tar. Psa. 26.6. Hester cōming to find grace & fauour in the sight of Ahashuerath, first hū∣bleth her selfe by fasting and prayer. Iacob comming for a blessing, putteth on E∣saus garment. Wee are ap∣proaching to the Lords Al∣tar, comming for a blessing, seeking fauour, what should we else but wash our hearts
by faith in the blood of the Lambe, humble our soules: Take vnto vs the garment of Christes righteousnes. Againe, it behoueth euery one that will safely come to this table to direct all his af∣fections and desires to God onely. To do nothing, to af∣fect nothing but Gods plea∣sure respected and his hea∣uenly grace now offered. For him which will right∣ly bee partaker of this holy misterie: First, faith is neces∣sarie, whereby hee belieueth remission of his sins in Christs merites. 2 Secondarily repentance is necessarie, whereby he ac∣knowledgeth the greatnes of his sinne. 3 Thirdly, charitie is re∣quired whereby the mind is at peace and quiet with men,
hee that dwelleth in charitie (saith S. Iohn) dwelleth in God, and God in him: dwel∣leth in God, what more se∣cure, and God in him, what more sweet? 4 Fourthly, attention must be had, that he bee not carried away from respectiue deuotion, and chiefly from the meditation of Christes passion, his resurrection the third day, his descention into hel, his ascention vp into hea∣uen, his glorious sitting at the right hand of God, from whence he shall come at the ende of the world to iudge both the quicke and dead. 5 Fiftly, fasting is neces∣sarie, where by the Prophete Dauid humbled his soule, Psal. 35.13. Hester by fa∣sting disposed her selfe to God, and found grace in the
sight of Assuerus, Hest. 4 16. The tenth Meditation. COnsider howe busie & care∣full Martha was, Luk. 10.40. to receiue Christ into her house, and therefore much more careful should euerie one bee to re∣ceiue him into his heart. 2 Consider, what reue∣rence and deuotion is meete by that of the Prophete of Christes entrance into hea∣uen: Be ye lifted vp ve euer∣lasting gates, and the king of glorie shal come in, Psa. 24.6 3 Consider, that to enter∣taine an earthly prince all things are made decent and cleane. 4 Consider, it was saide
to him that came vnto the mariage feast after an vn∣seemely manner, friend, how camest thou in hither, and hast not on a wedding gar∣ment. Mat. 22.12. 5 Consider how the Apo∣stle S. Peter, when Christ would wash his feet, thought himselfe vnworhy that so great honour should be done vnto him said within himself what am I worme that the Lord of light should doe this vnto me. The fruit. THe fruit of this Medi∣tation: The first is, to prepare vs with all humble reuerence, but chief∣ly to offer vnto God the sa∣crifice of a broken and con∣trite heart, that as his bodie
was broken for vs, so should our heart be broken. 2 The second is to crie out with the Prophet, Crea in me Domine nouum cor: Create in me O Lord a new heart. 3 The third is to become surueyours of our selues, and call a little consistorie in our owne soules. A forme of confessing our selues before we come to re∣ceiue the most holy Sacra∣ment. O Lord thou art not wonte to driue away sin∣ners, but callest them, and con∣uertest them to thee: Thou
art he that hast said, Mat. 11.26. Come all that are weary and heauie loaden: It was publikely spoken of thee, that thou didst receiue Pub∣licans and sinners, and didst tate with them: O my Lord thou art now at the throne of mercie, and therefore hast not chaunged thy nature, which thou hadst sometimes here in the world. Thou cal∣ledst them from heauen whō thou didst cal on earth: wher∣fore comforted with this re∣membraunce of thy loue I come vnto thee loaden, and labouring & burthened with my sinnes, I come as the sick to the Phisition, beseeching thee to heale mee: As a sin∣ner to the welspring of righ∣teousnesse, beseeching thee to iustifie me, I acknowledge I acknowledge, my great vn∣worthines.
If thine owne holy Apo∣stle, or as he seemed, prince of the Apostles, could crie out and say, Go from mee O Lord for I am a sinfull man: how much more shall I who am an vnhallowed creature and prince of sinners say: I am not worthy to whō thou shouldst come, nay, I am not worthy to come to thee, much lesse to receiue thee. It was lawfull for none to tast of the shew bread which was onely a shadow of this profound misterie but onely for him who was cleane and sanctified, how shall I eate thereof, who am so farre re∣moued from true holines? It was so great an offence to touch thy sacred Arke that Vzzah stretching out his hand to touch it. The 2. of Kinges, 6.7. was suddenly
stricken, how can I not but feare & tremble in this case? O Lord as I feare thy great∣nesse. So do I also feare the multitude of my sinnes. I am that foole, Psal. 14 1. that said in his heart there is no God. I liued so dissolutely as (by my manners I profest as much) I feared not thy iu∣stice, I dreaded not to trans∣gresse thy lawes, I rendred not thanks as I ought: What other thing hath my life beene then a dayly warre a∣gainst thee? What other thing haue I done by my sins and carelesse comming to this misterie of former times then offered thee open wrong, stricken thy blessed head with a reed? My sinnes haue beene the speare that gored thee, the thornes that pearced thee: How there∣fore
shall I bee so bold as to come vnto thee? Shall I re∣pose thy sacred bodie in a denne of Dragons, a nest of Scorpions? what other thing is a soule ful of sinne? where∣fore doest thou cast thy chil∣drens bread vnto dogs, and thy precious Margarite to swine? How wilt thou rest with me O my Lord which art the puritie of a virgine, the fountaine of all pulchri∣tude? Thy most holy bodie taken from the crosse, was wrapped in fine linnen, laide in a new Sepulcher, wherein neuer any was laid, but what part of my soule is cleane, what new? How then shall I receiue thee O my Saui∣our and redeemer? I am a∣shamed so often as I behold my selfe in such a state, I blush considering, what I
am, and whether I am about to come, my refuge is to flie vnto thy mercy accor∣ding to which mercy O Lord looke vppon mee, did the stones cleaue asunder when thou sufferedst thy passion & shall my stonie heart bee nothing moued for whome thou didst suffer? did the earth moue, and shall my earthly mind stand vnmoue∣able like a dead center? noe noe, I am moued O my Sa∣uiour. Another forme of cofession. TAke it not hay∣nously, O my Lord, that be∣ing such a one as thou seest me to bee, dare presume to
come into thy sight? I re∣member thou wast not offē∣ded with the poore woman which had the issue of blood, Matth. 9. But didst accept her, saying, bee of good comfort daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole, I haue a greater issue, and come vnto thee to be cu∣red. I call to minde Ma∣rie Magdalene, who wa∣shed thy feet with her teares, and wiped them with the hayre of her heade who had much forgiuen her. Behold here lyeth a sinner which hath more sinnes, but fewer teares, shee was not the first nor the last whome thy mercie receiued, re∣ceyue mee O Lord though I haue not shedde so many teares as may washe thy feete, yet hast thou
shead as much bloud as can wash my sinnes O my Lord thou hast not chaunged thy office and nature though thou seemest to bee farre a∣way. I reade in the holy Gospell that all that were diseased did resort vnto thee, and that the multitude, Luk. 6.19. sought to touch thee for there went vertue from thee, the leapers came vnto thee, and thou streatching forth thy blessed hand didst heale them, thou gauest vnto the blind their sight, vnto the lame their limmes. Thou didst cure the sicke, dispossese the deuill, raise the dead, and canst thou not forget to shew mercie which art mercy it selfe? I come vnto thee O my Re∣deemer, I come vnto thee O eternall creator of hea∣uen
and earth beseeching thee, that as the holy king Dauid did accept at his ta∣ble, and shewe fauour vnto Mesphbosheth, 2. Sam. 9.11 though of himself deformed, yet for the loue of Ionathan of whom hee came willing, thereby to honour the sonne for the fathers sake. So may it please thee to admit mee, though of my selfe most de∣formed, in the loue of him in whom thou art well pleased. I offer vnto thee an hum∣ble heart, and had I many hearts, I would offer them all vnto thee, Lord I can be no more without thee, nor liue without thee then can this bodie of mine remaine when life is taken from it. Where∣fore necessitie driueth mee vnto thee, and mercie mi∣nistreth boldnesse, by howe
much the more vnworthy I am, by so much the more art thou glorified in shewing mercie. A Meditation vpon these wordes. Whence commeth this that my Lord commeth vnto me. HE bringeth him self that sendeth not an other, he which hath so many spirits his ministers, commeth himselfe vnto his seruants, visiteth the sicke, lifteth vp, and comfor∣teth the fallen, helpeth the afflicted, refresheth the hun∣grie with his owne body and bloud, who aboundeth with so many, so diuers meanes, & medicines, as to whome the fulnesse of the whole earth
doth appertaine. He bring himselfe vnto thee, O  soule as a father, when hee prosecuteth thee with loue as a brother, when he ma∣keth thee by adoption the sonne of God, as a fellowe when hee appointeth thee a coheire of his heauēly king∣dome, as a heauenly repast, for thy eternall safetie, as an intercessor for the remission of all thy sinnes. O the won∣derfull loue of the sonne of God! vnde veit. from whence commeth this that my Lord commeth vnto me.
A Meditation vppon these wordes of the centurion. Mat. 8.8 Non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum meum. Lord I am not worthy that thou enter vnder my roofe. O Lorde hadst thou rather be at an other mans house with disho∣nor then at thine owne with honour? at least O good Iesu, if thou hadst no re∣spect of thine honour if thou castest vnder foot all praise & renowne, if thou takest vn∣to thee euerie vile sinner, yet haue regard to my estate: Lord I confesse I am not worthy thou shouldest come vnder my roofe: Thou kno∣west my pouertie and need I
haue this poore cottage farre vnmeet to cetertain so great a guest as thou O my Lord: This body is not compact of gold & siluer, but of dust & ashes, and also subiect to in∣firmities, diseases and death. This soule ioyned to my bo∣die is farre from that holines it should bee endued withall, farte vnmeet a place is it for such a personage, I am alto∣gether confounded, I trem∣ble & shake at the comming of so great a guest into so poore a house as my selfe. Tantum dic verbum & sa∣nabitur anima mea. But onely say the worde and my soule shall liue. ANd art thou ignorant O my Lord who thou art, what a one, and how
great. Thou art God omni∣potent, thou art Lord of all, thou art the Creator of hea∣uen and earth, & whatsoeuer is contained in the vast com∣passe thereof, thou hast ray∣sed me vp as all other things els of nothing: Thou hast clothed me with this bodie, and hast giuen me a right & and righteous soule: thou hast restored this soule fallen from the state of innocencie. Thou hast illuminated it by grace, and washed it in the sacred Fonte of baptisme, O my Lord thou art he that ru∣lest and gouernest me, thou wouldest for my sake be∣come man, die for mee, suf∣fer for mee the verie death of the crosse, so much could loue and charitie preuaile with thee, Lord, thy grace is sufficient, and wilt thou turne
then into my house to re∣fresh my faint soule, to cure mee being weake, and heale me being sicke? will not thy only word suffice where with thou hast cleansed the lea∣pers, dispossessed the Diuels, raysed the dead, it will suffice O my Lord, Dic verbum, & sanabitur anima mea, say the word & my soule shalbe hea∣led. A Meditation vppon those wordes, Veniam & curabo eum I will come and cure him. Mat 8.7. IF it please thee so, neither wilt thou haue it o∣therwise, be∣holde thy ser∣uant? Be it vnto me accor∣ding to thy worde. Come downe Lorde Iesu, or euer my soule dieth. Nowe a way lyeth open vnto thee
my soule, O my soule I will shew the great ioy, reioyce and be glad, for thy Creator commeth vnto thee, thy Sa∣uiour cōmeth vnto thee, who hath fought with thy ene∣mies, sustained woundes, spent his life for thee: Be∣hold how he desireth to en∣large thee with the most am∣ple gift of his most blessed diuinitie? Where wilt thou lay vp these things my soule? How great is hee to whom the thrones and dominations serue, on whome the holy host of heauen do attend? O my soule admire the wonderfull pietie, and inef∣fable dignitie wherewith hee hasteth to visite thee, and maketh speed to come vnto thee? But arise, runne forth to meete him, hasten this meeting, reioyce and con∣gratulate
for the comming of such a guest, crie with a deuout heart: Lord what is man that thou art so minde full of him? Psalme 8.2. and say with the same Prophete who am I that thou hast brought me to this? 2. Sam. 7.18. The Soloquie. LOrde, howe much doest thou submitte thy selfe while thou dost not disdain to en∣ter into the vile cottage of my soule? It was sufficient for thy loue to bee borne for me in a stable? That thou descendest from heauen to rest in the womb of the bles∣sed virgine was not such a
maruell for that it was the wombe of a most pure crea∣ture, O holy Elizabeth who being visited and saluted by the mother of this Lord con∣sidering the dignity of this maiestie didst say whence cōmeth this vnto me, that the mother, of my Lord com∣meth to me? Therefore what shall I say to whom the Lord himselfe commeth by infi∣nit parts, farre aboue Marie? he commeth vnto mee not onely to visit me, but also to vnite me to him, and enrich me with heauenly gifts. O my soule, I greatly reioyce that thou hast deliuered to Iesus of thine owne will the gouernment & possession of thy selfe? but vnderstand that by this acte thou are bound to proclaime open warre to all sinnes the capital enemies
of thy Lord to whome thou art deliuered, neither canst thou any more without ma∣nifest offence of rebellion giue an entrance of sinne in∣to thine house now dedica∣ted vnto Christ. O my soule enter into consideration, see with what bond of relouing Iesus who hath loued thee, first thou art bound; O God, how vnlike are thy doings to the actions of the princes of this world? King Ezechias. 2. King. 20.13. that he might declare his fauor vnto the Embassadors of the k. of Babel, shewed thē all his riches & treasures, not giuing them any part therof. Thou doest O most gracious Lord not onely shew vs thy treasures, but freely bestow them vppon vs, I see not O my soule how thou art able
to recompence so great good wil only yeeld thy self wholy to the loue of thy redeemer, for it cannot be thou shoul∣dest serue two maisters: It cannot bee that the Arke of God, and the idoll Dagon, 1. Sam. 5.4. should stand in one temple: If thou prostrate thee to the loue of crea∣tures, thou shalt vndergoe a hard seruitude; but if thou followe Christ thou shalt find rest and quiet. O my soule wee were created to serue and worshippe God: what higher part of this wor∣ship then to come and bee partakers of his dietie. O my soule be prepared.
A meditation vpon that which Saint Paul teacheth in the first to the Corinthians, Chap. 11. COnsider that the Apostle in the preparati∣on to the most holye Com∣munion, re∣quireth three things: the first is, that the Communicant examine his owne consci∣ence, which is signified in these words, Let a man proue himselfe, and so let him eate of this bread, and drinke of this cup. If hee find his con∣science defiled with some mortall sinne. let him make a most humble and penitent
confession thereof. 2 Secondarily, the Apo∣stle would that the holy Eu∣charist be receiued worthily, otherwise the dāger is great: for hee which with a corrupt mind and euill intention, ap∣proacheth vnto the Lordes table, eateth and drinketh his owne iudgement. 3 Thirdly▪ S. Paul would that a difference be made be∣tweene these holy Elements, consectated to a most diuine vse, and the prophane re∣pastes of the body onely. A Meditation vppon that of the Prodigall Sonne, when he was receiued of his Fa∣ther. Luke 15.20. THese three things which the Apostle requireth in this preparation, may
bee considered in the recei∣uing of the Prodigall sonne. First he feeleth with griefe his own misery, he acknow∣ledgeth his own vnthriftines, confesseth his sinne, whereby inclusiuely hee craueth par∣don, which done, his father receiueth him. 2 Secondly, he is clothed with a new garment, which may signifie the cloathing of righteousnes, which is made white in the bloud of the Lambe, Apoc. 7.14. 3 After all he sitteth down at the table, catcth the fatte calfe, or that blessed sacrifice that was once offered for all, is entertained with mirth and melodie. For is there not ioy in the presence of the An∣gels of God in heauen, ouer one sinner that repenteth? Luc. 15.10.
The Soloquie vpon this preparation. LOrde although thy Apostle had neuer mentio∣ned the purity of consciēce, which is required to this diuine sa∣crament, who would not iudge that thou the fountain of all puritie, oughtest to be receiued with a pure & clean hart. O most merciful Lord, how little dost thou require of vs, to eate of that Lambe sent of thee from heauen, by whose offering wee are deli∣uered from the seruitude of sinne. The Iewes to eate their Pascall Lambe, which was
but a shadow and figure of this, ought to prouide them a Lambe of a yeere olde, Exo. 12.13. without blemish, which rosted by fire, should bee eaten htily of them with sweete bread and wilde Lettice, with their loynes git, their shooes on their feete, their staues in their hand. O howe grieuous and troublesome was this bur∣den, (containing the force of the law.) It was of that sort which S. Peter witnesseth, Neither your Fathers nor you were able to beare. But to the eating this true lamb, which taketh away the sins of the world, thou dost re∣quire no other thing in the law of , but the puritie of conscience, and deuotion of heart. O how true is it my louing Iesus▪ which thou
hast said of the law, Math. 11.28. My yoake is sweete, and my burden light, yea truely, so light and sweete, that if there were not that would i∣magine a labour in the pre∣cept, it shuld not deserue the name of a burden or yoke. O my soule, now thou seest to how few thinges Christ hath bound thee, and how he hath giuen thee aboundance of his grace in this life, by the benefit of this most holy Sacramēt, & in the other life eternall. Onely take heed to thy self, that seeing the Lord of his infinite goodnes, hath giuen thee so easily this in∣estimable commoditie, thou dost not againe relapse into destruction. Consider earnestly what thou shouldst doe, not to re∣ceiue
so gentle a Lord, which cōmeth to enrich thee with his gifts, were great inhu∣manity, very pernicious vnto thy selfe. But to receiue him vnwoorthily by th default, were meere slouthfulnesse, which procureth iniurie to him, and punishment vnto thy selfe. Thou shalt doe well to i∣mitate the example of the poore country man, who vn∣derstanding that the King would rest in his house, re∣mooued al things which hee thought might offende the Kinges eyes, diligentlye swept all his house, and although hee could not beautifie it according to the worthinesse of such a guest, yet hee did as much as hee was able, to receiue him in seemely and decent manner,
he goeth to meete the king with all speed, receiueth him with great ioy, giueth him many thankes for this so great fauour. If then so many things are done to an earth¦ly King, what wilt thou doe O my Soule, to the King of heauen, who commeth not to liue at thy cost, but to im∣part his goods vnto thee? Labour therefore in clensing and decking thy selfe, hange the chamber or vpper roome of thy best deuotion, with the Tapestrie of holinesse, and welcome him with loue, who of Loue sayth, My de∣light is to be with the sonnes of men, Prou. 8.31.
A Meditation for the day we are to Communicate in. IN what day you com∣municate, as soone as you awake early in the morning, thinke that the Lord doth expect you this day at his heauenly table. Thinke of putting on the inward ornaments of the Soule, as Faith, Repentance, Deuotion, Charitie, Hum∣blenes of mind, & such like. 1 Consider how Christ in his conception, tooke our nature, and that wee in this spirituall conception of him, should expresse many diuine
qualities of his nature. 2 Consider you are to re∣ceiue him this day in the state of grace, who shall one day receiue you in the state of glory. 3 Consider that of the first eating it was sayd, that day thou eatest thou shalt die, but by this eating, that day thou eatest thou shalt liue, Ioh. 6. 4 Esteeme thy selfe vn∣worthy, and say, Sweete Iesus what loue is this thou pursu∣est mee withall, behold Lord I prepare my self this day to receiue thee into the poore Cottage of an humble hart, but alas. the Wiseman Salo∣mon himself, when he had in many yeeres, and by much cost built thee a Temple, 1. Kin. 8. Did notwithstanding maruaile that thou the God
all Maiestie, wouldst vouch∣safe to abide and dwell in it. what shal I say, who haue be∣stowed so little paines. so small cost, in preparing thee a Temple, I beseech thee to turne my Soule into a house of prayer, to whippe out all euill affections, that it may bee rightly sayd to bee Do∣mus tuae, Thy house. 4 Make one repentance with Mary Magdalen, one heartie repentance for al that is past. A Meditation taken out of the History of Zacheus. Luke 19 2. ZAcheus desirous to see Iesus, but for that hee was of a lowe stature; hee
could not see him for the multitude of people, he went vp into a tree where Christ should passe by. 2 Christ passeth by, and casting his mercifull eyes on Zacheus, sayd, Zachee, make haste to come downe, for to¦day I must abide in thine house. He came down then all reioycing, and receiueth him into his house, thin∣king that hee was greatly re∣warded. 3 Thirdly, the Iewes when they saw Christ turne into the house of a sinner, they murmured, which Za∣cheus perceiuing, turning to Christ, sayd, Behold, halfe of my goods I giue to the poore, and if I haue defrau∣ded any thing from any mā, I restore foure fould. But Iesus sayd vnto him, Saluati∣on
is come vnto thy house. The application of this Historie. THat thou mayst be par∣taker of saluation, which is offered in this sacra∣ment, it is necessary that thou be desirous to know and tast Christ, which is contained in this holy mysterie. And to knowe him, it is necessarie first, that thou lift vppe thy mind on high, and consider the greatnes of God, kee∣ping in the meane while, the ground vnder thy feete, as Zacheus kept it, when hee stood vpon the tree, that is, to procure that our temporal businesse bee then vnder vs, and not ouer our head, by distracting vs in deuotion.
2 Wee must receiue our Lord not with melancholie or anguish of doubts, but as Zachee did with ioy, which springeth from a vehement affection towardes this holie Sacrament. 3 Consider that it is not sufficient to receiue Christ into our house, & then to put the hand in the bosome, but wee must furnish the sacred Communion with good works, by releeuing the ne∣cessities of our neighbours, after the example of Zache∣us,: and hee which doth so, shall heare that comfortable voyce, This day saluation is come into thine house. The fruit. THe fruit of this Medita∣tion, shall bee to desire
and ask of God, an affection to this Sacrament, frō which affection springeth spirituall consolation, necessarie to the Communion. The Soloquie. O My bountifull Iesus, how li∣berall art thou towardes him, who doth de∣sire and seeke thee? Zachee was held with desire of thee, but of seeing thee onely, and thou not onely didst shewe thy selfe to him to be seene, but also calledst him, and in∣uitedst thy self into his hous, on whome to augment thy fauour, thou bestowedst
Saluation. Oh how well hath the Prophet sayd of thee, All Nations seeking thee, shall reioyce and bee gladde And let them say alwayes which loue thy sauing health. The Lord bee magnified. Zachee thou worthily re∣ioycedst, because thou hast him in thine house, which maketh al Angels to reioyce. Onely reioyce and esteem as nothing, if the Iewes mur∣mur and cal thee sinner, since hee is at hand for thee, which can defend and iustifie thee, ioyne thy selfe to him, and he will be as a buckler for thee, and thou shalt also vnder∣stand how sweet the Lord is. O my soule, thou hast also cause of reioycing, and per∣aduenture greater then Za∣cheus had, seeing to thee also this day commeth the foun∣taine
of all ioy and gladnes Heare what the Prophet Za∣charie sayth vnto thee: Re∣ioyce O daughter Sion, and be gladde O daughter Ieru∣salem, behold thy righteous King and thy Sauiour com∣meth vnto thee, nor com∣meth hee to exact a tribute, or to command any task, but onely for the cause of sauing thee, & defending thee from the rebuke of thine enemies. Think not that a greater be∣nefite shewed to Zacheus then to thee, for while thou dost spiritually receiue him vnder the accidents of bread and wine by faith, and after a most heauenly manner, hee sheweth that he is come vnto thee, not onely to conuerse with thee, & bestow saluati∣on, as hee did to the house of Zachee, but also to vnite him
selfe to thee, that thou maist bee one certaine thing with him, which is the effect of this heauenly meate. Who doth not see then that this is a far greater be∣nefite? oh my gracious Lord, seeing thou hast vouchsafed to enter this poore house of mine, giue me grace that it happen not to mee, as to the vngratefull Iewes, who in the day of Palmes, receiued thee with great ioy and triumph into Ierusalem, but a little af∣ter they cried to Pilate, cru∣cifie him, crucifie him, & ca∣sting thy crosse vppon thy shoulders, cast thee forth of this citie. Let me die O Lord before, yea, let me dy a thou∣sand deaths, then that I cast thee out of mee. For that were to thrust thee out of thine owne house.
A Meditation vppon those words of Christ, Luk. 19.5. Hodie oportet me manere in Domo tua. To day I must abide in thine house. WHo am I O most boun∣tifull Iesu, that thou de∣sirest to a∣bide with mee? who am I that may deserue to enter∣taine thee the Lord of hea∣uens? What dost thou find in mee', that doth so much delight thee, and inuite thee to come vnder my roofe? art thou ignorāt of my most vile beginning? I am not of the number of that cele∣stiall
and diuine Legion, I am not a Seraphin, not an Arch∣angell, not an Angell, nor a∣ny of the Thrones, or other most sacred Spirits, my being differs much from thē, freed are they from all admixtion of body, pure, and innocent, I was born in sinne, drawing my beginning frō the earth, so meane a subiect, I am not worthie. O my Sauiour, of thy diuine presence, happily thy delight is to bee with the sonnes of men, true, but I am not Abraham, I am not Moy∣ses, I am not as the blessed virgin, no, I beare not the least similitude of these bles∣sed Saints in heauen, while they remained in the world, What shall I say? I am sorie O my Lord, I am no more worthie to receiue thee then I am, but my comfort is,
thou tookest mercie on the woman of Canaan, and all distressed people that came vnto thee. A short forme of confession to bee made in priuate, before the receiuing of the bles∣sed Sacrament. I Miserable sinner, con¦fesse & ac∣knowledge with ben∣ded heart, and handes lifted vp in the presence of Almightie God, my many and manifolde sinnes, and that I haue trans∣gressed
sundry waies against the precepts of the first and second table, I am sory from the bottome of my hart, and it greeueth mee that I haue so often offended thee, I come vnto thee as an hum∣ble sutor, to obtaine mercie and pardon for all my offen∣ces, I beseech thee to sancti∣fie me by thy holy spirit, to strengthen my faith against all assault, so seale vp in mee by this holy mysterie, that comfortable hope of the life to come. Direct me, I be∣seech thee, now approching to thy holy table, that I may abide with thee, and be a fit habitation for thy holy pre∣sence, both nowe and for e∣uermore, whē I cōsider thou didst create me, not being as∣ked, redeeme me, not being required, it turned my teares
of sorrow into teares of ioy, my teares of fear, into teares of loue. O my Sauiour shew mercie, for with such great sinnrs as I am, thou gttest greatest honour, as thou did∣dest by Mary Magdalen. An admonition moouing all to reconcile themselues, and for∣giue their enemies, before they be pertakers of the most ho∣ly Sacrament. WHen thou brin∣gest thy gift to he altar. (sayth Christ our Sa∣uiour, Mathew 5.25.) and there remem∣berest that thy Brother
hath ought against thee, leaue thy offering before the Altar, & go thy way, first bee reconciled to thy brother, & then come and offer thy gift. In the 11. also of Saint Mar. and 25. hee sayth vnto his Disciples: When you shall stande to pray, forgiue, if you haue ought against any man, that your Father which is in heauen may for∣giue you your trespasses. By both which testimonies of holy Scripture, we learne, y• all our oblations and pray∣ers, (otherwise in themselues amongst the best actions of a Christian life) are in no case acceptable vnto God, without our reconcilement & charity first had with mē. The Wiseman, Eccl. 28.2.3. could thinke it vnmeet in ve∣ry reason, to ask mercy, whē
we our selues denie mercie. We may remember, that the vnthankfull debter that wold not remit his fllow seruant. Mat. 18.30. for his vncom∣passionate vsage of his fel∣low: found himselfe the like measure, that is, iudgement without mercie, at his may∣sters hand. With what countenaunce (saith one) can we looke vp to heauen and say, Lord for∣giue vs our trespasses, and yet reuenge with all extrea∣mitie the least offences of∣fered vnto our selues. Noe, no, hee that seeketh ven∣geance, shall surely find ven∣geance, Mihi vindictam, ego retribuā vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, I wil reuenge. We must let God alone to right our wrongs, vnlesse we will vsurpe that poore which
is onely proper vnto hi, for our selues we should not for∣get the Wisemans counsell. Forgiue thy neighbour the hurt that he hath done thee, so shall thy sinnes also be for∣giuen thee when thou pray∣est: should a man beare ha∣tred againt man and desire forgiuenesse of the Lord? Peter saith vnto Christ, mai¦ster: how often shall my brother sinne against mee, and I forgiue him? vntill sea∣uen times, no Peter (saith our Sauiour) I say not vnto thee, vntil seuen times, but vntil se∣uenty seuē times, that is, quo∣ties totes, how often soeuer he sinne against thee, so often shalt thou forgiue. The offering vp of sacri∣fices in the olde lawe was a speciall parte of that wor∣ship the people were wont to performe vnto Almightie
God as an acceptable ser∣uice vnto him. But the pro∣phete Esai telles them, Esa. 1.11. all their offerings were vtterly displeasing vnto him, for why? they were all set on crueltie, and reuenge, their hands were ful of blood and therefore God woulde accept of no sacrifice at their handes. Our oblations that are done in loue with God, and man: these ascend like the smoke of Abels sacrifice, and are wel pleasing vnto the most highest. But howe shoulde fleshe and bloode forgiue, where wrong and iniurie hath been offered? that which Adam cannot beae, Christ can, that which to nature is so much against nature, and therefore difficulty, is to grace nothing so, that which heathen men
will so hardly brooke, is to Christians who haue, or should haue a further perfec∣tion, more facile and easie. Wherefore our Sauiour tels his disciples▪ of somewhat more thn louing them, who loue first, Ego dico, vobis dili∣gite inimicos, I say vnto you loue your enemies, do good vnto them that hurt you, pray for them that persecute you, we forgiue, we loue our very enemies for his sake who hath done farre more for vs. What greater loue (saith Saint Iohn) then for one to giue his life for his friende? yet greater was Christes loue who gaue his life for vs that were his ene∣mies, we haue some reason to helpe the distressed, to re∣lieue the poore & needie, for the verie beholding of their
necessitie doeth often moue compassion: but to loue our enemies wee haue no reason in the world, but onely for his sake who hath comman∣ded all those who professe his name, and expect his king∣dome saying, Diligite inimi∣ces, loue your enemies. We forgiue, and why? Christ hath forgiuen vs, wee shewe mercie, and why? Christ Ie∣sus hath shewed mercy vnto vs. Quid contra nos proximus, saith an ancient father, shall wee see what our neighbour hath done against vs, and shal we not see what Christ hath done for vs? God forbid? All that we do, or can forgiue are pence only, Christ he for∣giues tallentes, wee some few, hee ten thousand; wee shew loue, but Christ shew∣ed loue in deed, loue with∣out
example. Were we as readie to remember bene∣fites as wee are iniuries, wee would bee more charitable then we often are. But being readie to re∣uenge, doe wee know how soone wee may stande in need of God our selues? no verily? and therefore we had need to shewe compassion to others. When as now Iacob their father was dead, Iosephs bre∣thren thought Ioseph would reuenge all the wrong they before vniustly offered their brother they were decey∣ued, Ioseph telles them he meant nothing lesse. Am not I (saith he) vnder God? as if hee shoulde haue sayde my selfe am reedie to aske forgiuenesse of God and should I not from y heart
forgiue you my brethren? I doe, I doe. Wherefore one saith, Qualem erga te De∣um habere vis, talem te er∣ga proximum ostendas, as thou wouldest haue God bee vnto thee, so bee thou to thy neighbour that hath offended thee. To moue Christians to this loue, Christ our Sauiour goeth further and sayeth: forgiue, that you may bee children of your father, which is in heauen, for he causeth the Sunne to arise on the iust, and on the vn∣iust. It was a token that Dauid was of the stocke of Iesse when hee would not onely not hut King Saule his enemie when hee was aliue, but woulde euen shewe mercie vnto his
ofspring when he was dead; they giue testimonie that that they are his followers who prayed for his enemies (father forgiue them) who shew themselues ready to re∣mit, and can finde in their hearts to forgiue offences offered. S. Amrose told a great Emperor of the world how Christians did auenge themselues: our weapons (saith he) are our prayers & our teares: we weep for our persecutors, wee pray for them. Neither shal our forgiuing go away emptie for this ac∣tiue mercy shewed vnto men, shall be rewarded with pas∣siue mercy by him, who hath said: Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtaine mercy. Hence it commeth to passe, that our enemies may doe
vs as much good as the best friends we haue in the world: whereas in forgiuing them wee receiue forgiuenesse of God: but for one drop of wa∣ter giuen, wee receiue by a gainefull interest a whole o∣cean sea, for our two mytes, the whole treasure of the temple. We giue and for∣giue some small benefites, trespasses, but with God there is no depth of his bountie, no number of his mercies. If at any time we are iust∣ly moued (as we often are) to vse that Quid rependam, as of the Prophet, Psal. 116.11. what shall wee doe vnto the Lord for all the benefites hee hath done vnto vs? then most especially approaching to these holy misterie: which the old Christians in the Pri∣mitiue Church well remem∣bring,
gaue euident testimo∣nie at this solemne occasion by their liberalitie to the poore, their visiting the sicke, and other like works of mr∣cie. And besides their charita∣ble reliefe of the needie; it is wonderfull to consider, and it may do a good mans hart good to call to mind the vi∣forme peace, and peaceable vnion, they retained amongst themselues all assembled in one communion of Saints, to worship him in earth, with whom they hoped shortlie to reioyce in heauen. They forgat not that charge left by Christ at his departure from the worlde: by this shall men know that you are my Disciples that you loue one another, nor that louing entreatie of Abra∣ham
had with Lot, Gen. 13 11. Let there bee no strife betweene thee and me, be∣tweene thy heardmen and my heardmen, for we are brethren. Bee of one mind saith the Apostle, 2. Corinth. 13. liue in peace, and the God of loue and peace shall be with you: and to the Ephesians he saith, let all bitternesse, and anger, and wrath, bee put away from you, with all maliciousnesse bee courte∣ous one to another, forgi∣uing one another, euen as God for Christes sake for∣gaue you. There is but one bodie, one spirit, on faith, one baptisme, one God which is aboue all, through all, and in vs all. In this misterie as the faith¦full find, wrought tranquilli∣tie
of conscience within: So also finde that the spreading of charitie towardes men a∣broade, which charitie thin∣keth no euill, beleeueth all thinges, hopeth all thinges, endureth all things. When as Christ our Saui∣our was now to celebrate his last supper, he washeth him∣selfe his disciples feet, wypeth them with a towell, giueth a precedent of humility, & loue admitteth Iudas that bare an euill mind towardes him to his owne-dish, giueth him a soppe, speakes mildly vnto him, which all were tokens of loue: should we not take example by our Lorde and master? When may we more fitly vse that hymne of the Angels respecting the com∣mon cause of ioy: wee haue Glorie be to God on high, in
earth peace, towardes men good will: and not good will in shewe, but euen in singlenes of heart. Where∣fore to conclude with that of the Apostle, Philip. 3.1. If there be any consolation in Christ, any comfort of loue, any fellowship of the spirite, be we of one accord, let the same mind be in vs that was in Christ, who humbled himselfe: wherefore God hath highly exalted him, and giuen him a name aboue all names, that at the name of Iesus euery knee shold bow, Philip. 2.10.
A Prayer before the holy Communion. O Lorde Iesus Christ which art the onelie Sonne of God the most high king of kinges, Lorde of Lords, the image of the Fa∣ther, the brightnesse of eter∣nall light, whom the Angels do only desire to behold, who after all thy suffering, pray∣ing for thine enemies, now sittest at the throne of glorie, who am I that doe presume not onely to beholde thee my God, but also to take and receiue thy bodie into the lodging of my bodie, and house of my soule, con∣taminated
sinner. O mise∣rable that I am, and most vnhappie of all men which doe this so exceeding great iniurie to thee my God and Sauiour? for when a thou∣sand yeares of teares are not sufficient to receiue at the least but once worthily this reuerent and most precious Sacrament, so high and di∣uine a misterie, I wretched and vnworthy creature day∣ly offending and adding sinne vnto sinne, vnprepa∣red, and of a heart lesse con∣trite and purged, doe not∣withstanding take vppon me often to receiue it. But for because thy mercy is greater by infinite then my mise∣rie, neyther hath it beene heard from the beginning of the world that thou hast euer despysed the prayers
of the humble, which sauest them that trust in thee, and which hast shed thy precious bloud for our saluation, and the saluation of the world, & for an euerlasting pledge of thy loue towardes vs hast or∣dained this Sacrament, tru∣sting in this thy vnspeakable loue, I most humblie thinke of comming to thy table, of putting out from the house of my soule, the sower lea∣uen of hatred and euill will towards all, that I may keep this holy passeouer with the sweet bread of sinceritie and loue. Graunt me thy grace, that this holy misterie may turne and become effectuall to the life and saluation of bodie and soule, that I may firme∣ly abide in thee, which in∣tend to receiue thee into
mee. Let my mind bee confir∣med amongst so great miste∣ries with thy comfortable presence, that it may vnder∣stand thou art present with her, and reioyce perfectly before thee, the fire which alwayes burneth, the bright∣nesse which alwayes shineth, sweet Iesu, good Iesu, the bread of life which refreshest vs euer, and yet neuer de∣cayest, which art alwayes ea∣ten, and remaynest alwayes whole, inflame and sanctifie thy vessell, purge it from malice, fill it with thy grace, and being filled, preserue it euermore in thy holy loue, which liuest, and rugnest one God worlde without ende. Amen.
Of the deuout man, to whom Christ in his last supper, she∣weth fauour. IMagine thou hadst beene at Ierusalem when this noble Sa∣crament was in∣stituted by Christ, that thou hadst beene inuited by some of the Apostles to be present, consider with what ioy thy soule had reioyced at this message, and how hastily all businesses laide aside thou wouldest haue runne thither. Imagine, that as soone as thou hadst come to the sup∣per the Lorde had washed thy feet, and said with teares falling on them, I do this to wash away many sins com∣mitted against thy Creator,
by walking through vngod∣ly wayes, I wash thee also for the labours which thou shalt suffer for mee in a spirituall lie. 3 Lastly, imagine how he biddeth thee sit downe at the ble, casting his most louing eyes vpon thee saying, De¦siderio desaderau, with a a  I desired to eate this passeouer with you. I haue preuented thee with great benefites, and will hereafter enrich thee with greater, onely continue in the loue of mee. Consider what modestie thou wouldst haue vsed at that holy table, with what attention thou wouldest haue receiued the wordes of Iesus.
The fruit of this Medi∣tation. THe fruit is to giue the Lord hearti thanks for this inestimable bene∣fite now readie to bee recei∣ued, to beseech him that hee would not suffer thee to die vngratefull, to call to  that Christ kept the best wine vntill the last, least this holy repast as sweet remembrance of his loue at parting: that this loue of hs was a motion naturall, which motion (say the Philosophers) is most forceably towards the end.
The Soloquie. O My soule how louingly doeth the Lord knock at thy dore with a desire of en∣tering in, and resting with thee: arise O my soule, and Christ shall giue thee light, not onely the shepheardes of Bethleem had cause of ioy who found as it was told thē, but thou hast cause of ioy too, who shalt find the ioy of Isral, no maruell though Martha and Mary went forth to meet the Lord, knowing how he would fil their minds with celestiall consolation, go forth O my soule to meet him that commeth vnto thee who is the stay, yea the whole stay of all thy being. The water that is seperated from
the fountaine vanisheth, the bough that is cut from the tree withereth, the body from which the soule is gone dieth, depart not therfore O my soule from the soule of thy soule, but embrace with all gladnes. Lord as there is no doubt but that such was the excesse of thy loue & fa∣uour, whereat euen the An∣gels were amased: so is it sure that I was most bound not onely to runne the way of all thy commandements, but al∣so to spend my life for the loue of thee, Thou hast be∣stowed on me this so excel∣lent a gift more noble then humane vnderstanding is a∣ble to conceiue, from whence springeth an obligatiō which doeth binde mee vnto thee. Who doth not see that I shal be most vnthankfull if I ac∣knowledge
not thy singular loue, O my hart open thee & shew with what bond of re∣louing Iesus, louing thee thou art bound. When you are about to com∣municate, and are now re∣ceiuing the most holy Eu∣charist meditate vpon these sayings of holy scripture. ECce spouss venit: Behold the bridegroom cōmeth, go forth to meete him. Mat. 25.6. 2 Ecce ancilla Domini: be∣holde the handmaid of the Lord, bee it vnto me accor∣ding to thy word, Luc. 1.38. 3 Dic verbum & viuet a∣nima: I am vnworthy &c. do but say the worde and my soule shall liue. Mat. 8.29. 4 Lift vp your heads O ye gates, & be ye lift vp ye euer∣lasting dores, & ye k. of glory shall come in. Psal. 24.7.
5 Taste and see how gra∣cious the Lord is, Blessed is the man that putteth his trust in him, Psal. 34.8. saying: O good Iesu ioyne me in∣wardly vnto thee, to the glo∣ry of thy name, and the salua∣tion of my soule. In the time of communi∣cating say. O Most louing and sweet Ie∣sus, the loue, and sweetnes of my heart, the life of my soule, my mellifluous and e∣uerlasting good, haue mercy vpon me, bee with mee O Lord now and for euer. Immediatly after say the 103. Psalme. Praise the Lord O my soule, and all that is within mee prayse his holy
name, prayse the Lord O my soule, and forget not all his benefits, which forgiueth all thy sinnes, and healeth all thy infirmities which saueth thy life from destruction, and  thee with mercy and louing kindnesse, which satisfieth thy mouth with good things, making thee ong and lastie as an Eagle. Wherein wee acknewledge these sixe benefites: first, the forgiuenesse of our sinnes: secondly, the healing of our infirmities: thirdly, our pro∣tection from euill: fourthly, our adorning by grace: fiftly, the receiuing of foode tem∣porall: sixtly, the effect of that foode which is spiritual.
Of the reuerence and deuoti∣on giuen by the auncient Fa∣thers, to this most holy Sacrament. WIth what charitie of body and puritie of mind, ought I to re∣ceiue that mysterie, where thou O Lord art the feeder, and the foode, the giuer, and the gift. Ambrosius, in orati∣one aut. sac. caen. Saint Ierome a little before his departure, being about to receiue, humbly knee∣ling, did communicate with many teares. Euseb. in vita S. Hieronimi. It is written of Constan∣tine, no lesse godly then mightie, an Emperour, that
with great reuerence and de∣uotion, before any attempt against his enemie, his wont was to receiue the holy Eu∣charist. Euseb. in vita Con∣stantin. By the force of this Sacra∣ment, the force of the diuell is rebated. Ignatius ad Ephes. Saint Cyprian calleth this blessed Sacrament, a ioyfull solemnitie. Cypria. de caena. Dom. Of the olde Christians it was called , an as∣sembly of loue, Charitie it selfe. A prayer of thanksgiuing, af∣ter the receiuing of the most holy Com∣munion. I Giue thee thankes O most louing Iesus Christ,
who hast vouchsafed to ad∣mit me a sinfull creature, to the magnicent and quick∣ning feast of thy sacred ta∣ble. Thou wouldst that I shuld bee as the Arke of Coue∣nant, where thou thy selfe vouchsafest to abide. Thou wouldest that in this Arke Mnna should bee kept, wherewith thou didst feede thy people▪ vntill they entred into the Land of Promise. Cause I beseech thee, that this Manna nowe receiued, wherof that was but a figure, may bee preserued in my Soule, that I may feele the effectual fruit of thy passion, for the remission of my sinnes, the merit of righte∣ousnes, and reward of euer∣lasting glorie. Cause also, that like as in the Arke the
Tables of the Lawe were kept, so a desire of fulfilling thy will, may bee contained in my Soule. Graunt that I may honour, loue, and obey thee▪ that I be seperated from this loue, by no allurement whatsoeuer of my ghostly enemie. Tarrie with mee O blessed Iesu, vntill the eue∣ning of my age, and when the night of death approa∣cheth, I will not let thee goe till thou hast blessed mee, and yeelded to this petition of my sobbing soule. O Lord fulfill her desire, neuer depart from her. What blessing shal I giue vnto thee, O my deere Saui∣our? where shall I beginne to expresse by loue and duetie towardes thee, which hast sayd, Behold I am with you euen vnto the end. My soule
desireth to be satisfied in the beholding of thy counte∣nance, euen as the Hart lon∣geth for the fountains of wa∣ter. Turne thee O my soule into thy rest, for the Lorde hath done well for thee, hee hath shewed thee maruailous great kindnes in the land of the liuing. Fr this cause also shall my flesh rest in hope, Blesse thou the Lord O my Soule. Another forme of thanks∣giuing. OMnipotent & most louing fa¦ther, I cannot giue thee thāks worthy inogh, according to
the desire of my minde, for the treasure of this heauenly foode, which thou hast now giuen mee in this heauenlie mysterie ineffable, that is to say, the true bread of heauē, that euerlasting meat that a∣abideth for euer, thy blessed Sonne our Lord and Sauior Christ Iesus, in whom I haue obtained, by the gift of this hly Communion, a pledge of an inheritance to come. Grant, O Lord, that I may daily profit in vertue & god∣lines, that this sacred vnion with Christ, may bee of such force in me, that reiecting al euill waies, I may goe for∣ward in pietie towards God, instruction towards my selfe, charitie towards my neigh∣bour, to thy good pleasure, through the same our Lord & sauior Iesus Christ, Amen.
The Soloquie. AWake O my oule, and be∣hold the new uor where∣with louing  prosecute thee. Thou hast good cause to re∣ioyce that the Lord of Ma∣iestie vouchsafeth to come vnto thee, to comfort thee. Continue onely a good will for all this bountie. Bee not as the nine vnthankfull Lea∣pers, who forgat their cu∣ing. Cast all thy care vpon him, who careth for thee, cease not to magnifie him O my soule, for he that is migh¦tie hath magnified thee, and done great things for thee.
Thou knowest how the son of God loued thee, when departing out of this world vnto the Father, hee left so comfortable a remembrance and seale of all his mercyes. O loue without measure, re∣turne O my soule vnto thy rest, for the Lord hath bles∣sed thee. Returne vnto thy gracious Sauiour, of whome thou mayst say, Here will I rest, here will I dwell for∣euer. Can it bee O Lord, that thou wouldest follow man with such loue, as to vnite thy selfe vnto him? Reioyce O yee sonnes of Adam, for no longer shall that of the Prophet be applyed against you. My teares haue beene my meate day and night, whilst they yet daily sayd, where is nowe thy God?
Teares are now no longer your meare, but the glad∣some foode of Angels, your God is with you euen vnto the end. The poore do eate and are satisfied. O Lord graunt mee the grace of Deuotion and thankfulnes, that I may aske it instantly, expect it patiently, receiue it gratefully, conserue it hum∣bly, vse it diligently, to the glorie and honor of thy ho∣ly and blessed name Amen. I desire to offer my selfe, my soule and body, a sacri∣fice vnto thee, nay, I offer vp all my sinnes, both origi∣nall and actuall, vpon the ac∣ceptable Altar of thy mercy, consume them with the sa∣cred fire of thy loue, and let this offering as Abels offe∣ring, be well pleasing in thy sight, but to returne vnto
this heauenly foode now of¦fered. Ah hard and peruerse hart of mine, how canst thou continue earthly, when as thou art fed with the bread of heauen? When at length wilt thou become heauenlie? Howe is it that thou dost re∣maine sensuall and alienated from the spirit, which art spi¦ritually conserued? Is it be∣cause thou dost consist of earth? O Iesus remember here what thou hast else wher sayd, I come to send a fire, and what is my desire, but that it bee kindled: Let it be kindled in mee, that I may be carried vpward, and seek the things where Christ sit∣teth at the right hand of God, that though my body con∣uerse here in earth, my affec∣tions may bee in heauen, that from henceforth not
so much I liue, as thy grace may bee sayde to liue in mee. The eleuenth generall Medi∣tation to bee vsed aftr the receiuing of the blessed Sacrament. COnsider with what labours & teares Adam, after hee was cast out of Pa∣radise, did eate the bread of carefulnesse, all the dayes of his life. But now man recei∣ued into the state of grace, is come to feede on the bread of life it selfe. 2 Consider that as the Israelites when they had ea∣ten the Pascall Lambe, were
deliuered frō Pharaoes bon∣dage, made no stay in the darknes of Egipt, but set for∣ward forth with towardes the Land of Promise. So after this our Passeouer, wherein a mighty deliuerance from the hands of our spirituall Pha∣ro is signified, were to depart from the works of darknes, to go forward without delay fō grace to grace, frō ver∣tue to vertue, vntill we come to our heauenly Canaan. 3 Consider how the wise∣men, when they had seene Christ at Bethlem, and there done their humble reuerēce, Math. 2.12. they returned not by ambitious and cruell Herod, nor by troublesome Ierusalem but Per aliam vtam, another waye. So wee hauing visited Christ at our Bethlem, which
signifieth the house of bread, and there offered our Soules and bodyes a sacrifice vnto him, should returne towards our owne countrey, which is aboue, not by the ambi∣tious and troublesome de∣sires of this world. but passe along peaceably anew, ano∣ther way. 4 Cōsider how iust Noah was an hundred yeeres toge∣ther, labouring to frame and build an Arke to saue him from the floud, and should we not indeuor for the time to come, to spende it wholy in framing a good consci∣ence before God and man, which shall one day saue vs from a floud of miseries? 5 Consider that a Publi∣cane, Luc. 19.3. who before did exact by extremity from others, but hauing receiued
Christ into his house, became beneficiall vnto the poore, & was ready to make restituti∣on for all the wrong hee had offered. 6 Consider the admonition and absolution yt Christ gaue vnto him that was lately cu∣red, Ioh. 5.14. Beholde thou art made whole, sin no more 7 Consider how God doth complain by his Prophets a∣gainst the ingratitude of his people, and how hee accep∣teth those who are thankfull vnto him. 8 Cōsider how to make an Apostatie frō this calling of grace, were great indignitie offered vnto God, and hurt our selues. The fruit of this Meditation. The fruit hereof, is first to acknowledge all thākfulnes,
secondly to apply our selues wholy for the time to come to serue God in holines and righteousnes all the dayes of our life, that we may pro∣ceede from grace to grace, vntill we come to the state of glory. The Soloquie. REmember O my Soule, that thou hast beene fed with the foode of An∣gels, and therefore shouldest not nowe turne to feede on the husks of sensuall affec∣tions. Thou knowest that wise king Salomon, 1. kin. 7.8 would not that his own wife, who was Pharoes daughter, should dwell in the house
where the Arke of God was, for he counted it wickednes, that a woman descending from the stocke of the Gen∣tiles, enemies vnto God and his people, should inhabite so holy a place. How great wickednesse thn should it be, to receiue sinne, where God himselfe, the Lord of the Arke, is conuersant? Whē the God of all power & ma∣iestie, hath made thee his handmaid, is it not a signe of singular loue & fauor? ough∣test thou not to render him againe all seruice and duty? The Patriarke Iacob was cō¦tent to serue 7. yeeres, & af∣ter that 7. more, & al for Ra∣chell, which time notwithstā∣ding seemed short vnto Ia∣cob himselfe, for the loue he bare to Rachel. Much shorter shuld the time seem to thee,
wherein thou seruest this Lord, all labours may be ac∣counted light for his loue, who is more to bee beloued then any earthly creature, by infinite degrees. Thou shoul∣dest be happie O my Soule, if thou knewest what digni∣tie it is to serue so high a Lord. Call to minde how thou hast serued in times past this vaine world, whereby thou hast beene subiect to many perturbations, howe many bitter crosses hast thou sustained in this seruice, now by the helpe of thy heauenly Lord, whome thou hast this day receiued, thou art able to tread vnder foote all the al∣lurements of thy ghostly e∣nemies, and become mistris of thy owne passions. Consi∣der that now to serue God, is to beare rule. Thinke thou
art no longer thy owne, but Gods, to whome thou hast consecrated thy self. His will, not thine, ought euer to bee fulfilled, that in all thinges thou yeelde humble obedi∣ence. And replie with the A∣postle, Quid vis me facere, Act. 9.6 Lord what wilt thou that I doe. Considerations to bee remem∣bred of the deuout Christian after his receiuing the ho∣ly Sacrament. THat thou be no lese careful now after this hea∣uenly repaste, in the exercises of deuotion, then he was before in preparing himselfe.
2 That hee vse much si∣lence, and some solitarinesse, the same day that hee be pri∣mate sibi & Deo, to himselfe and God. 3 That he retire himselfe from worldly affayres. 4 That he often determine of his uture conuersation, to bee religious and fearing God. 5 That hee resolue with the Pophet, Psa 39.1. Dixi custodiam ias meas I sayd I will take heede vnto my wayes. 6 That hee resigne him∣selfe wholly to Gods plea∣sure.
The chiefest Figures of the most holy Sacrament. THe first Figure of his reuerent Sa∣crament, is men∣ioned in Genesis  14.18, when Abraham obtained a noble victory a∣gainst those Kings there spo∣ken of, Abraham returning from the victorie (sayth the Scripture) Melchisedech the King of Salem, for that hee was a King of the most high God, offered bread and wine, and blessed Abraham. But that Melchsedech was a Fi∣gure of Christ, Saint Paule to the Heb. proueth▪ chap. 7. And that the bread and
wine offered of him, were a figure of the body & bloud of Christ, which (hee being a King and priest after the order of Melchisedech, Psa. 109) offered to the most high God, and afterward left to vs his body spiritually vn∣der the shew of bread, and his bloud vnder the forme of wine, the holy fathers with one consent doe teach. But of this Figure wee learne, as in the most holy Sacrament, wee fruitfully receiue Christ, and obtaine a blessing of him, so it is necessarie that first wee prepare a fight a∣gainst the vnruly motions of our minde, and put away our sinnes by the workes of con∣trition and confession, as that valiant Abraham cast out the King his enemies. 2 A figure of this most
royall Sacrament was the shew bread, which was kept on the table of propositiō in the sight of God, Exo. 25. Le∣uit. 24. none could eate of this bread, but those which were cleane & sanctified, and therfore it was caled the holy & sanctified bread, 1. Ki. 21. Math. 12.4. By which is sig∣nified, that if wee be fed with the sacred bread of the law of grace, prefigured by that bread, it is necessarie that wee bee chaste, and that we haue a good conscience. 3 A figure of this diuine Sacrament, was the cake ba∣ked vnder the ashes, which the Angell brought to Elias, by vertue whereof he being strengthened, as the holy Scripture in the 3. Kin. 10. Cha▪ doth testifie, walked 40. dayes & 40. nights, euen to
the mount of God, Horeb, where afterward hee saw the Lord. This figure doth signi∣fie the power and effecacy, which the holy communion doth yeelde vs, to finish the troublesome peregrinatiō of this life, euen vntill we come to the heauenly hill, where we shall see God with incre∣dible pleasure. 1 Now as common bread doth procure the preseruati∣on of the life temporall, 2. doth augmēt & strengthē it. 3. although often eaten, yet it doth not breed lothsomnes, yea, rather it is an euill signe whē bread doth not relish to any one. 4. A feast▪ without bread, although it abounde with most costly dishes, is vn∣perfect. So this heauēly meat vnder the forme of bread▪ 1. doth preserue a spirituall life,
2 By conferring grace, which is the life of the soule, it aug∣menteth the same, and ma∣keth it strong against the di∣uell. 3. This sacred meat to men spiritually minded, ne∣uer bringeth loathsomenesse but it pleaseth not the sicke, that is for because the natural man perceiueth not ye things which are of God. 1. Cor. 2.4. Let the Christian man haue all the goods of this mortall life, if that bee wanting him which is contayned in the holy Sacrament lie hath no∣thing▪ yea rather he may tru∣ly bee called miserable. 5. Lastly the bread before it cō∣meth to his perfection it suf∣fereth many things; for the graine of corne which is the matter thereof, is first sowen & is couered in the earth, thē is cut, bound as a malefactor,
imprisoned in the barne, is threshed out, winowed, groū∣ded in the Mill, is boulted, scorched with fire so that it may very well agee with this Sacrament, wherein the ele∣mentes are, not whole, but broken, powred out where∣in also the passion of Christ our Lorde his suffering so great thinges for vs, is re∣presented, before he become this diuine foode of our soules. 4 The Pasall Lamb was a figure of this Sacrament, Exod. 12.3. of which this was the ceremony. It must be a Lambe without blemish, of a yeare old, it must be eaten at Ierusalem rosted, and in haste with wild Lettice, and sweet bread: those who shold eate thereof must haue their shooes on their feete, by
which ceremony God signi∣fied to the Iewes that they were strangers. Saint Chry∣sostome in his 83. Homely vpon Mathew, applyeth in this manner that ceremonie vnto vs: If (saith hee) the Iewes about to go onely through Palestina, were fed with a Lambe after so curi∣ous an order, with what vigi∣lancie ought we to be fed in this Sacrament, with the true immaculate Lambe, which haue our iourney to heauen? do eate thereof in his church, heat with charitie, going for∣ward to our land of rest, in 15. of Leuit. God saith, you shall eate of the old fruit, vn∣till the new come, so did his people of the old passeouer, the same day they were deli∣uered from Egypt had wee deliueraunce from a worser
seruitude of the Pascall lamb a bone must not bee broken; those parts of this lambe are the faithful, as if it were from God sacrificate filium, sacri∣fice my Sonne, Sinite hos a∣bine, let these go Iohn 18. 5 A Figure of this, was Manna, giuen to the people of Israel in the desert, Exo. 10.15. Saint Paul saith that the redde Sea was a figure of Baptisme, and Manna of this holy Sacrament, which Manna had these properties. First although some ga∣thered much, and others lesse yet there was one sufficient measure for all, so in this Sa∣crament of the Lordes Sup∣per there is no lesse vertue in the lest part thereof then in the whole. 2 Manna might be gathe∣red any day except the Sa∣both,
and when the sunne a∣rose it vanished. So this ve∣nerable Sacrament serueth vs vntill the euerlasting Sa∣both of the life to come, and when the Son of glorie shall appeare, it shall then cease. 3 Manna did giue taste of all kind according vnto the will of the eater. This Man∣na hath sweetnesse vnto the faith of the faithfull recey∣uers so and so disposed. 4 Many of the Iewes were grieuously punished, for that they contemned Manna, say∣ing our soule loathed this light meate. Numb. 21.5. So S▪ Paul sheweth 1. Cor, 1. & 30. That in his time many were weake and sick among thē, for that this most diuine Sacrament was dispised and many vnworthily communi∣cated.
6 The sixt Figure was the Arke, for like as the Arke saith, Th. Aquinas was made of Shitim wood, Exod. 25.10. that is to say, of shining and pure cedar: so was this of the most pure bodie of the Sonne of God. Againe, the Arke was guilded within & without, which may resemble the wisdom & loue of Christ. Ther were 3. things in the ark of speciall note, The golden pot, the rod of Aaron, and the two tables of the law. The golden pot contay∣ning Manna may betoken the soule of Christ contay∣ning the fulnesse of the dietie: The rod of Aaron his priest∣ly power, the two tables, that he was the eternal lawmaker. But the holy scripture ma∣keth mention of two things principally concerning the
Arke which do maruellously appeare in this Sacrament. The one, that by the be∣fite of the Arke the people were not onely preser∣ued. but much pestered. The other, that God grie∣uously punished those who vnworthily entreated this Ake, or gaue not worthie reuerence vnto the same: we reade Samuel 1. & 4. when the people of Israel in one warre against the Philistines had lost foure thousand men, they procured that the Arke was brought into their tents, hoping that by the presence thereof to obtaine the victo∣rie. But the contrary happe∣ned, for the Arke of God was taken by the enemie, and 30000. men perished of the host of Israel for their per∣uerse▪ life, and small pietie.
The Philistines also which vnworthily handled the Ark setting it with their idolatrie so sharply were they puni∣shed, but chiefly the men of Ashdod, as that the holy scripture saith, 1. Sam. 5. The hand of God was greeuous vpon them. 7 A figure of this Sacra∣ment was the meale of He∣lizeus, 1. King. 4. when the prophet commaunded that certaine hearbes should bee sodde for the children of the prophets, they tasting them found that they were so bit∣ter, that they cryed to Heli∣zeus, O man of God death is in the pot? Wherefore the holy prophet cast meale into the pot, wherewith he tooke away the bitternes: So Christ by meale or bread of the Sa∣crament taketh away the bit∣ternesse
of our afflictions, & causeth that they bring vs life and not death. 8 A figure of this most ho∣ly institution was that great Passeouer which K. Hezechi∣ah kept, 2. Chron. 30.17. whē he prayed for the people that God would be mercifull vn∣to him, that prepared his hart to seeke the Lord God of his Fathers though hee were not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary, when he spake comfortably vnto the Leuits, & the whole multitude kept the feast with great ioy. Our Hezechiah hath not onely praied for the purifying of his people, but hath sanctified them, spoken comfortably, kept a ioyfull passeouer, such as neuer was in Israel.
Names of excellencie attri∣buted vnto the holy Sa∣crament, and gathe∣red out of the wri∣tings of ancient Fathers. O Great Sacrament. O Inestimable Sacrament. O Diuine Sacrament. O Most noble Sacrament. O Pure Misterie. O Venerable Misterie. O Eternall Misterie. O Laudable Misterie. O misterie of Pietie, O misterie of Peace. O Holy of holies. O Blessing. O Hidden Manna.
A short Meditation vppon these names of excellencie. WHat couldest thou do most merciful Lord for vs and our good that thou hast not done? Thou hast taken our fraile nature vpon thee, and giuen vs thy diuine, thou hast freely offered vnto vs the ri∣ches of thy mercie, the trea∣sures of thy grace, the abun∣dance of thy loue, by this great inestimable, and most diuine Sacrament, by this blessed, pure, and venerable misterie, the mistery of peace and pietie, the holy of holies, the hidden Manna, whereby it is euident, with what
flames of loue thou didst burne, whose delight is to shew mercy: And because the fire of this loue could no longer be hid, it must needs breake out by this holy mi∣sterie left vnto vs, For which O Lord wee giue vnto thee honour, prayse, power, and dominion, now and for e∣uermore, Amen. Certain short meditations vp∣on the passion to be vsed be∣fore and after the receiuing of the holy Communion. O Good and gra∣cious Iesu, thou didst eate the Pascall Lambe in Ierusalem, with thy deare beloued dis∣ciples, and arising from sup∣per didst gird thy selfe about
with a towell, and powredst water into a bason, and knee∣ling vpon thy knees, thou meekely didst wash the feete of thy disciples, and wipedst them with a towell. O most good & gracious Iesu, thou before thou shoul∣dest suffer, didst bequeath a most excellent good thing vnto thy children, leauing for vs thy most sacred bodie to be our meate, and thy most precious bloode to bee our drinke, there can no wit nor vnderstanding penetrate and throughly see the bottomles depth of thy charitie. O most good and gracious Iesu, thou comming to the garden of Oliuer, begannest to feare, and to bee heauie, wherupon y• saidst to thy dis∣ciples▪ My soule is sorrowfull vnto death. And then diuided
and sundred from thē, thou setst thy selfe vpon thy knees, and falling vpon the earth flat on thy face, thou pray∣edst vnto thy Father, and ful∣ly and wholly resignedst and yeeldedst thy selfe vnto him, saying, Father, thy will bee done, and at length through most painefull agonie, wher∣with thou was grieuously o∣prest & afflicted, thou swea∣test throughout all thy body a bloudy sweate. O good & gracious Iesu, thou kindled & burning with an ineffable desire to redeem me, wentst to meete thine e∣nimies, & sufferedst Iudas the traitor to kisse thee, thy selfe to be taken, & to bee bound with all confusion & shame, & most vnworthily to be led vnto Annas, where thou suf∣feredst most meekly to bee
striken on thy most innocent face. O good & gracious Iesu, thou being fast bound like a notorious malefactor, wast led vnto the house of Cay∣phas the high Priest, wher the Iewes most vniustly accused thee, most spitefully struck & buffetted thee, scornefully wast thou mocked, & blind∣folded, being bidden to pro∣phesie who strucke thee, do∣ing to thee innumerable in∣iuries all the night. O good & gracious Iesu, thou in the morning wast broght before Pilate, & with most sweet & plesant coūte∣nāce casting thine eies down, stoodest before him in the Iudgemēt hall, & when thou wast most fasly accused of ye Iews, & many a rebuke & re∣proach was giuen thee, thou meekly heldst thy peace, and
madest no answere. O good and gracious Ie∣su thou was sent from Pilate to Herode: this Herode of a very curious and vaine mind coueting to see some miracle at thy hand, asked & deman∣ded many things of thee; the Iewes cried out against thee, but thou amongst all these most wisely heldst thy peace: For this cause Herod and all his despised thee: O how vn∣measurable was this humility and obedience▪ at the will & pleasure of thine enemies thou wentst forth, thou re∣turnest again, suffering thē to do to thee what they would. O good and gracious Iesu thou in the iudgement hall stripped naked, and without all compassion being bound fast to a pillar, wast most cru∣elly scourged, there was thy
virginall and tender flesh cut with whips, and torne with stripes, altogether mangled, and deformed, with blacke & blew, and many a wound, so that the streames of thy most precious blood ranne downe on euery side vpon the earth. O good and gracious Ie∣su after that sore and sharpe scourging of thine, to put thee to more shame thou waste clothed with a purple red garment, vile and torne: They also making a crowne of thornes painefully pressed the same vpon thy most holy heade: and while the sharpe thornes pricked grieuously, & wounded sore thine head, thy most pure blood ranne down aboundantly ouer all, thy louely face & neck, then they putting a reed into thy right hand, and kneeling
downe before thee, in scorne saluted thee saying, All haile King of the Iewes. O good and gracious Ie∣su, thou wast brought forth by Pilate vnto the furious Iews, to bee gazed & looked vpon, wearing thy crown of thornes & purple garment, but they cryed out with more cruelnes to haue thee crucified. O good & gracious Iesu, thou wast deliuered vp vnto the will & pleasure of the Iewes, which by and by led thee to bee crucified, laying thy heauie crosse vpon thy sore and bloudy shoulders: thus didst thou beare most meekly thine owne crosse, whose great weight pained thee ful sore, & cōming vnto the place of thy suffering, all weary and breathlesse wyth paine, for my sake thou didst
not refuse to taste wine min∣gled with gall and mirrhe, which was there giuen vnto thee. O good & gracious Ie∣su whē thou wast stripped na∣ked thē were thy sore woūds by the violent plucking of thy clothes renewed, O what a bitter and cruel paine didst thou suffer when thy tender hands & vndefiled feet were with blunt and rough nayles fast nailed to the crosse, and when the ioyntes of thy lims were loosed, oh with what loue and sweetnes of charity didst thou offer thy hands & feet to bee bored through? Then out of the woundes of thy hands & feet as it had bin out of the wels of thy preci∣ous blood plentifully gushed out. O good & gracious Ie∣su, thou hanging vpō ye crosse betweene two theeues, wast assailed with blasphemies, but
thou praiedst vnto thy father the while, saying: Father for∣giue it them, they wot not what they doe. Then didst thou promise Paradise vnto the thiefe: then gauest thou thy deare beloued Mother (who pearced with the sword of sorrow stoode by the crosse) vnto thy disciple Iohn; and after thou haddest suffred three long houres in∣tollerable paines, and thirsted very vehemently, they gaue thee eysell to drinke, which when thou hadst tasted bow∣ing downe thy venerable head thou yeeldedst vp thy spirit O good and gracious Iesu, O good shepheard thus thou bestowedst thy selfe for thy sheepe: the right side of thy bodie was opened with a speare, out of which flowed
both water and blood, for vs thou wouldest that thy lo∣uing and tender heart should be wounded, for my sake afterward thy immaculate bo∣die was taken downe from the crose, Ioseph & Nicho∣demus wound it vp in sindon or cleane linnen, laide it in a sepulcher. My dear beloued, yea the deare beloued of all my desires, thou didst vouch∣safe thus to die & bee buried for my sake, which liuest and raignest blessed, & glorious, for euer and euer, worlde without end, Amen. A Prayer. O Sonne of the liuing God, most highest God, which for thy exceeding great charitie that thou didst beare towards me hast vouchsafed to bee made man, thou wouldst for my
sake be borne in a stable, and laid in a manger, to be fedde with the little milke of the maiden thy mother, to suffer needines and pouertie, to be sore troubled three & thirtie yeares with manifold labors and careful paines, thou wol∣dest for very inward paine & agonie bee all in a bloodie sweat, and to be apprehended and taken, shamefully bee bound, vnworthily to bee condemned, vniustly to bee stricken with buffettes and blows, to be cloathed in pur∣ple by way of mockage, thou wouldest bee beaten & torne most cruelly with stripes, crowned with thornes, ouer∣lden with a painfull & heauy crosse, be nailed & fastened to the same crosse: Thou the clother and garnisher of the stars hangest all naked, despi∣sed,
woūded. And with innu∣merable sorrowes afflicted vpon the crosse for my sake: Thou sheddest for mee thy most pure & precious blood; all this thou didst for mee. I embrace in the armes of my soule thy venerable passion, I forsake and renounce all sen∣suall pleasure, I resigne all, put me wholly into thy hand and pleasure: thine onely wil, thine only wil be done in me. O most sweet and merciful Iesu, mortifie whatsoeuer liueth sensually in me, gar∣nish and adorne me with thy merites and vertues, Oh pre∣pare Lord a delectable and pleasant habitation for thy selfe in mee, renue my spi∣rit, my soule and my bodie with thy excellent grace, knit mee vnto thee most neerly, change & transforme
me altogether into thee, that thou mayest haue delight in me. Heare mee graciously O Lord, heare me gracious∣ly, not at my will, but at thy blessed pleasure. O Lorde teach me, direct mee that I may do nothing, speake no∣thing, thinke nothing desire nothing, but that which may bee acceptable before thee, Amen. A prayer of S. Augustine, Meditat. 1.7. WHat hast thou cōmitted most sweet child, that hou shouldest bee so iudged? What hast thou offended most louing innocent, that yu shouldst be so hardly intrea∣ted? what is thy offence? what
is thy fault? What is the cause of thy death, and occasion of thy condemnation? For I it is that am the wound of thy sorrow, the cause of thy slau∣ter, I am the desert of thy death, the wickednesse of thy punishment, the stroke of thy passion, the labour of thy torment. O wonderful man∣ner of correction, and order of vnspeakeable mysterie, the wicked offendeth, & the iust is punished, the guiltie transgresseth and the inno∣cent is beaten, the vniust sin∣neth, and the iust is condem∣ned, that which the euil man deserueth, the good suffereth and what the seruant cōmit∣teth, the Lord dischargth, what man hath offended, God satisfied. Whether O Sonne of God, whether hath thy humilitie descended?
whether hath thy charitie burnt? whether hath thy pit∣ty proceeded? thy benignitie increased? whether hath thy loue attained▪ whether hath thy compassion extēded? for I haue done wickedly, and thou art punished, I haue cō∣mitted the offence, and thou art chastened, with reuenge I haue done the fault, & thou art subiected to torment, I haue waxē proud, & thou art humbled, I am puffed vp, and y• art diminished, I became inobedient, & thou paidst the punishmēt of inobedience, I gaue my self to gluttony, and thou art afflicted with hūger. The tree carried mee to vn∣lawful desire, perfect charity ledde thee to the tree of the crosse, I tasted of the forbid∣den fruit, and layedst vnder the torment, I am delighted
with meat, and thou laborest at the doore, I inioy deli∣cates, and thou art torne in peeces with nailes, I the sweet¦nesse of an apple, thou tast∣edst the bitternesse of gaule. Eue reioyceth laughing with me, Mary suffereth wayling with thee, Behold the king of glory, behold my impietie, and thy pittie shineth, behold my vnrighteousnes, and thy righteousnesse appeareth. What O my King and my God, what shall I render thee for all thy benefites which thou hast bestowed on mee? for there cannot be found in mans heart, which may worthily be rendred for such rewards, can the sharp∣nes of mans wit deuise wher∣to the mercy of God may be compared. Nor is it the part of the creature to recōpence
the sufficiencie of the Crea∣tor. But there is O Sonne of God, there is in this so admi¦rable despensation, to which my weakenes may in sme things relie. If my mind pric∣ked with thy visitation cruci∣fie her flesh, with the vices and concupiscences thereof, and this thing when thou hast graunted, it beginneth now as it were to suffer with thee, for that yu hast vouchsa∣fed to die for my sinne. And so by the victory of the in¦ward man▪ by thy conduct, it shall bee armed to the out∣ward triumph, for as much as this spirituall persecution ouercome, it may not feare for thy loue, to yeeld it selfe to the materiall sword. And so the smalnesse of my con∣dition, if it please thy good∣nesse, shall bee able for her
power, to answere the great∣nesse of the Creator. I pray thee for thy accustomed mercyes, powre into my woundes, that the rankor of my viperous infection cast forth, may restore me to my woonted health, that tasting the nectar of thy sweetenes, it may cause mee to despise with all my heart, the plesant allurements of this world, and to feare no aduersitie thereof for thy sake, & mind∣full of my eternall nobilitie, I may loathe the windes of this transitorie feare. Let no∣thing be sweete I pray thee vnto me, without thee, no∣thing please mee, nothing precious, nothing beautifull beside thee. Let all things I beseech thee bee vile vnto mee, without thee, let them be of no account: that which
is contrarie to thee, let it bee troublesome vnto mee, and let thy good will bee my continual desire. Let it grieue me to reioyce without thee, and delight mee to bee sor∣rowfull for thee. Lette thy name be my comfort, & the memorie of thee my conso∣lation. Let teares bee my bread day and night, in sear∣ching out thy iudgements. Let thy law bee better vnto mee, then millions of gold and siluer. Let it be delight∣full vnto mee, to walke in the way of thy commaun∣dements vnto the end.
The twelfth Meditation. Concerning the spiritual com∣munion of Christ. FOr yt the spiri∣uall Commu∣niō also is pro∣fitable vnto soules, it is ne∣cessarie that wee enter into some consideration of the same, and therein obserue these circumstances. First what it is, secondlie, after what meanes it may be vsed, thirdly, what profite we reape by it, fourthly, how ac∣ceptable it is to God. For the first, wee must knowe that as the Sacramen∣tall
Communion, hath wor∣thily the first place amongst all the spirituall exercises of a Christian life. So also, the spirituall Communion hath a very godly and diuine vse. When the deuout man (saith Gerson) doth euery day re∣ceiue spiritually the body of his Redeemer, so often doth hee mystically communicate the mystery of Christs birth and passion▪ is inflamed in his loue, and reuolued in his deuotion: so when wee re∣ceiue Christ in affection and desire of minde (which the faithfull often should doe) this is called our spirituall Communion. For the second, what com∣moditie this bringeth to the Soule, wee may gather by the manifold effects thereof. For as hee which moued by
the holy Gost beleeueth, sor∣roweth for his sinnes, and by louing God, desireth to bee baptised, doth obtaine the grace of Baptisme, which de∣sire of Baptisme is called by the Diuines, Baptisma spiri∣tus, the Baptisme of the Spi∣rit, so doth it also happen in this spirituall Communion. 3 The third, howe wee reape profite by receiuing Christ into the holy desires of our Soule, it may be easily vnderstood by the increase of loue, While I was musing sayth the Prophet, the fire kindled. The eleuatiō of the mind vnto God, doth take vs away from earthly affecti∣ons, and carrie vs vnto him, on whom our desires are fixt 4 How acceptable this is vnto God, wee all know, hee that accepted the in∣tention
of Abraham, and said vnto Salomon, because this was in thine heart, doth not onely accept of our good desires, to embrace him in the armes of our affection, hut also doth reward this de∣sire as the deed done. But we are to consider, that we must not onely stay vpon the de∣sire of our will, and receiue Christ spiritually, but wee must proceed farther, to re∣ceiue him together, both spi∣ritually and sacramentally. For it is not inough to fol∣low Christ in our intention, but wee must also receiue him in this holy mysterie, wherein we shew reuerence vnto his blessed institution, and that wee are become his Temple, as the Apostle speaketh, 1. Cor. 6. wherfore that we may be partakers of
so great a blessing, as is our vnion with Christ, wee may not omit this speciall part of our Christian duetie, which hee who will please God, and proceede to the perfection of a Christian life, must of∣ten vse, that so hee may goe forward in all vertue and ho∣linesse of life, yea, euen vnto the end. That this holy Sacrament is giuen to the sicke, as necessa∣rie for the time of any visitation. COnsider, that amongst the effects of this heauenly Sa∣crament, that
to be cheeely numbred, that it maketh those strong in in∣during temptations▪ which worthily receiue it. Whence it is, that in times past it was giuen to men in places of visitation, or danger of death, that they might bee constant in the confession of Christ, and able to withstand the temptations of the diuell. 2 Consider that it also pro∣fiteth to attaine the health of the body, seeing it is so a∣uaileable to the saluation of the soule. For if at the onely touch of Christs garment many receiued health, what cannot Christ himselfe doe, entring into the Soule of the sicke? 3 Consider that Christ, foreseeing our conflict to come, ordayned this most holy Sacrament, for the
spirituall helpe of our soules, we must think by how grea∣ter necessitie wee labour, by so much this sacrament doth exercise more effectually his wholsome effects, seeing it is proper vnto the Lord to helpe more readily, then when greater necessity doth require. 4 Consider, that here the distressed either in bodie or mind, may apply vnto him∣selfe in particular, the merits of Christs passion, and raise vp himselfe by a comforta∣ble participation of this holy mysterie, and say: Thou hast good cause to reioyce O my Soule, that the Lord of ma∣iestie commeth vnto thee, that hee may comfort thee departing this world, and by thy assistant helpe against the assaults of Sathan, who
indeuoureth to draw thee a∣way from the reward of life, continue onely a good will for all, though thou art faint and feeble, though thy ene∣mies bee many and mighty, yet hauing receiued diuine strength, thou shalt say, I can doe all thinges in him that strengthneth me. Cast all thy hope on Iesus, and thou shalt neither be ouercome of thē, nor put to shame, thou know¦est well that the body of a certaine dead man was re∣stored to life, 2. Kin. 13. by the onely touch of the body of Elizeus. If the boones of a dead Prophet had so great vertue, that they restored one from death to life, and the theeues amazed by the mi∣racle of the thing, durst doe no euill, what will not the
liuing and glorious bodie of Iesus doe entring into thee, I doubt not but it will exercise greater might in thee, seeing hee is God omnipotent, and Lorde of all, and the diuell shall be ouercome and confounded at his presence. O holy Daniel, teach mee howe I ought to giue thankes to my louing Lord, who seeing me in time of neede beset with infernall Lions, doth sende me food not by the Prophet Abacucke, Daniel. 14. or by any heauenlie Angell, but himselfe commeth to bee my foode. O Loue with∣out measure. Cōsider O my Soule, this vnspeakeable mercie, thou knowest thou wast loued of him in his greatest extremities,
when hee departing out of this life vnto the Father, did institute this holy sacrament for thy welfare. Thou seest also hee loueth thee in thy extremities, it remaineth, that crying out with the Prophet Dauid, Psal. 8. Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or with the Apo∣stle, Rom. 14. If I liue, I liue vnto the Lord, if I die, I die vnto the Lord, to whom bee prayse and honor for e∣uer, Amen.
What he ought to doe, who is to communicate before hee come to the holy table of the Lord. HEE who will doe the thing which he oght cōcerning this Sacrament, and that which the dignitie of such a mysterie doth re∣quire, must lot out a certaine space of time to himselfe, wherein hee may performe those things which pertaine to the preparation thereof. And that we may discourse more at large of this mat∣ter, and more familiarlie
with them which doe often communicate, I say they shall do very well▪ if as Moy∣ses commanded the people, that three dayes before they were to receiue the Lawe, they should prepare them∣selues. So also they should prepare themselues in three dayes, that they may bee apt and disposed to receiue the Lord, which bringeth a Law, not of death, but of life, not of the letter, but of the spirit, not of feare, but of loue The holy Scriptures do te∣stifie, that the maides of the king Assuerus, Hest. 2.12. cō∣ming only into his sight but once in sixe moneths, prepa∣red thē with oyle of mirrhe, and other sixe moneths with certaine sweet odors. If these did doe this that they might find fauour with an earthly
man, what preparation shall bee required of v, that wee may find fauour in the sight of the true God▪ One of the cheefest pray∣ses of the blessed Virgine Mary, for which the Angell did commend her, he shew∣th, when he sith. Thou hast ound fauour with God, and ought it to seeme a hard and troublesome thing vnto vs to do, for so great glorie and dignitie, that which this wo∣men hath done for such va∣nitie? With what face I pray, will wee refuse labour? yea, although all the pow∣ers, & strength of our soules & bodies were to be imployed that we may come at least but into the grace & fauor of God, specially when wee heare that these miserable maids spent their whole life,
that they might come into the fauour of one mortall man. But because this is an hard thing for vs to doe, at least let vs prepare our selues in those three daies whereof I haue spoken, doing al that which in vs lyeth. But if you shall aske mee what that is, I say that the first thing is that thou walke carefully all this time, that with the holy man Iob thou feare all thy works, that thou haue diligent re∣gard of thy selfe, & through∣ly examine thy conscience, and that thou take heede in all thy conuersation, that thou committe nothing, which may offende the eyes of God, not onely mortal∣ly, but negligently, also, as much as thou canst. Nei∣ther onely ought wee to de∣cline from the sinnes them∣selues,
but also from the oc∣casions of them, as immo∣derate laughing, pastimes, and wanton sports, and all vaine conuersation, and all those exercises which are seldome done without sinne, no otherwise, saith a learned man, then a handsome and adorned woman, when on the Saboth day shee hath put on cleane apparrell, and go∣eth forth abroad, doth most diligently beware that shee handle not those thinges, wherewith shee may be con∣taminated▪ So wee in this time ought to walke more carefully then at another, and to bee  loathed, that wee may bee worthie to come to receiue the King of Angelles, and sitte at his Table. Before all thinges the tongue must bee kept
with all diligent care all this time: in the old law, the ves∣sels without couer were counted vnclean. Let regard be had, that the mouth vtter no vaine & idle words, much lesse offensiue, that the doore may be kept pure and clean, through which that heauen∣ly foode shall enter to our Soule. No lesse diligently let the heart bee kept pure from all vain, vncleane, and vnqui∣et cogitations. For an vn∣seemely thing is it, that in the place where GOD should take vp his mansi∣on, to leaue any thing of∣fensiue to his cleane and heauenly sight. And because the place of his abiding is peace, for in peace saith the Psalmist, is his stay∣ing. Lette vs therefore put farre from vs all vnquiet∣nesse
of minde, and per∣turbations whatsoeuer. The euening beeing come when as thou shouldst Communicate, early in the morrow following, verie laudable is it either to misse a meale, or else at the least to bee content with a small or light Supper, after which thou mayst not ey∣ther betake thee to plea∣surable delights, or be pre∣sent in the concourse of ma∣m, but that thou mayst bee quiet, and more fitte to spende a good part of the night in preparing thy mind for the daye following. When thou art layde in thy bed, before sleepe doth close thy eies, perseuere & cōtinue in good thoughts, besee∣ching God that hee deliuer thee frō all idle fantasies and
illusions of the diuell, that thou mayst the next day goe vnto the Lords table, with more puritie both of bodie and Soule. So often as thou awakest in the night, by and by call to minde the same thoughts in prayer. Very earlie in the mor∣ning, thy eyes not yet fully opened, thinke thou art ly∣ing in the armes of Christ crucified, exercise thy minde in the remembrance of his passion, about which wee spend the day following, sometime thinking of his in∣effable Loue, sometime of his extreame suffering, in a word, because this sacrament was instituted in remēbrance of his Passion, most pro∣fitable and acceptable vn∣to God, is our deuout re∣membrance of the same, that
by this meanes we may ac∣complish also the will of the Testator. The manner of communica∣ting vsed by a certaine vir∣gine. In prax. vit. sprit. BEfore the com∣munion I pre∣pare my selfe after this man∣ner some two daies before, I examine mine owne conscience, I humblie confesse me, and am hartely sorie for my sinnes: when I may not fast, at the least I eat and drinke sparingly. 2 The nexte morning I beginne sooner then at other times a prayer in my minde, therin desiring grace of God
to be communicate and that he make me such a one as I ought to be, comming to his holy table, that this most ho∣ly Sacrament may obtaine in my heart that fruite which it obtayneth in the heartes of them which worthily communicate. 3 Then I consider how great a thing it is to bee par∣taker of so holy a misterie, to receiue him whom the An∣gelles adore, the Prophetes haue desired, the Apostles loued, the martyrs imitated, and all holy men coueted with vnspeakeable desire, to honour, loue and vnite them vnto him by this holy Sacra∣ment. 4 Moued with this desire, I studie to enflame my soule more largely, by considering Christs vnspeakable loue by calling to mind the manifold
graces this sacrament brin∣geth with it to the soule of the deuout communicant. 5 When I come to com∣municate I exerecise my hart in these contemplations. 1. I call to mind my own vilenes, 2. I cast my selfe downe at the fet of esus by humility. 3. I make a short confession of my faith, as I belieue that thou art the very Sauiour of the world O blessed Son of od▪ which wast crucified for me, dead and buried, descen∣dedst into hll and didst rise againe. 4. I am sory that I come so little prepared as I do, but euer hoping hee will accept my humble intention, I put my trust in his mercie and merites. 6 Sometimes I talke thus with my soule, saying: behold my soule thy Lord and God, loue him whom thou desirest
with such care, account thy selfe happie if thou acknow∣ledge him, loue him, desire him to dwell with thee. 7 Laly, I lay before him all my sinnes and infirmities had in the depth of my heart, and I most feruently desire, that hee would pardon them all, & I purpose earnestly to amend and so with al humble reuerence I come to the Lords table. My demeanour after the Communion. AFter the com∣munion I be∣take mee to some secreate place that I may talke onely with my Lord, whom I haue by faith receiued into the house of
my soule, and first I set be∣fore God the Father the holy sacrifice of Christ our Lord, and I set before him whatso∣euer he hath suffered for me, vsing these or the like words. Behold O eternall Father thy sonne whom of thy infi∣nite loue thou hast sent from heauen vnto the earth, that hee might take flesh of man, be borne in a stable, flie into Egypt by the persecution of Herod, & should be in great pouertie. Behold O Father, what great thinges hee hath done and suffered for mee in the wildernesse, in preaching, in fasting, in praying, in iourning, in persecutions of the Iewes, in hearing blas∣phemies, sustayning iniuries, and reproaches; all which he suffered at the handes of the vngratefull Iewes, see him,
betrayed and sold for thirtie pence, I offer him to thee O holy Father bound in the garden, lead away to Annas, beaten and busseted in the house of Caiphas, accused before Pylate, mocked of Herod, sourged and crufi∣ed of the Iews. Behold, O Fa∣ther his head hanging down, his face pale with death, his handes and eete pearsed through, his most sacred side opened. Behold the heauens and earth mourning after their manner, the sorrowfull mo∣ther, the deere disciples be∣wayling him, and the vn∣gratefull Iewes by so much the more to waxe madde a∣gainst him: I offer him vnto thee annointed with myrrhe, wrapped in cleane linnen, buried in a newe
sepulcher. These thinges done, I make an end, prai∣sing, blessing, and giuing thankes to God that hee hath loued vs, so that he gaue his onely sonne for our sal∣uation. 2 Secondly, I turne mee vnto Christ with alll thank∣fulnesse for his benefites▪ and I open vnto him as vnto a most holy phisition my infir∣mities, and all my faults as to a most gentle Lord, I open vnto him all my defectes in∣to which I am wont to fall, desiring him to minister a remedie that I relapse not so often, and specially I pray that hee would graunt mee grace to receiue him hereaf∣ter worthily. 3 I purpose to amende, wherin I am wont to offend, and namely, I decree to
roote out some one sinne, in the place whereof, to insert some vertue, whereof I haue neede, that I may alwayes goe forward from better to better, and I humbly pray his diuine maiestie, that he grant mee strength to exe∣cute that thing. 4 Last of all, I diligently keepe my heart all that day, thinking that the Lord re∣steth therein as his house, wherefore I giue my in  that I may vse all modestie, as well in speaking, seeing, & walking, as in al my outward cōuersation, often I say with my selfe: This day O Lord, thou hast come▪ to mee a sinner, this day thou hast re∣newed my heart by thy ho∣ly Passion, I pray thee abide with mee, goe not from me. And so applying my selfe
vnto the prayers of the day, I vse the same prayers with greater deuotion then ordi∣narie, I giue thankes for all benefites, especially for those receiued by this most high and holy Sacrament. Certaine breefe questions and answeres concerning the blessed Sacra∣ment. Question. FOr what cause doe you receiue the blessed Sa∣crament? Answere. First that I may obserue and dutifully keepe Christs most holy institution. Se∣condly, that I may shew my selfe a member of that body
wherof he is the head. Third∣ly, that I may receiue this so∣ueraigne rpast to the health of my sinfull soule. Question. What do you receiue? Answere. The very body and blood of Christ, after a most diuine & heauenly manner. Question. What profit haue you by receiuing? Answere. Increase of grace, of loue with God and man. Question. Why do you often com∣municate? Answere. Because my hope is I am one of Gods children, and therfore desire to come often vnto him as to a louing fa∣ther. Question.
After what maner come you? Answere. By faith and repentance, hauing a ful purpose to serue him in holines and righte∣ousnes al the daies of my life. These few obseruations may be obserued before our ac∣cesse vnto the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. YOu must sted∣fastly belieue in Christ crucifi∣ed. 2 You must humble your selfe by a seri∣ous consideration of your manifold sinnes. 3 You must thinke Christ worketh in you that which his wordes do promise. 4 You must prepare your soule to receiue the bodie
and bloud of our Lorde Iesus. 5 You must meditate of Christs passion, his resur∣rection, and your owne ri∣sing againe to a better life to come. 6 You must giue your selfe both before and after this most holy Sacrament, to prayer and deuotion. 7 You must applie your selfe to meditation, and open to God the closet of your heart. 8 You must beare sincere affection and loue, both to God and man.
A Dialogue of the most ho∣ly Communion, between a worldly man and a spirituall. Wherein is disputed whether it be better often to com∣municate or abstaine from the most holy Communion, how & after what manner both may be done, that of loue, and deuotion: this of humilitie, and reuerence. Mundanus: Spiritualis. MVndan. I know not truely what fruit there is by often commu∣nicating, for I see thee continue subiect to the same vices, to be often
angrie and threaten▪ Spirit. But I knowe certainely that by the benefit of often com∣municating I haue rooted out some euill manners, and vnlesse I should often com∣municate without doubt I should be worse and worse, and happily at this hower I should burne in hell fire. Mu. Whence knowst thou that yu shouldst be worser. Spir. For that I haue experience in my selfe when the time of com∣municating is at hand, to be∣thinke my selfe more and more carefully to abstaine, yea from the least sins. Con∣trariwise when the time of communicating is farther off, I am not so collected in minde, I waxe also faint in deuotion, I am prone to vanities and trifles, and if no other profit should come vn∣to
my soule, that profit alone ought to bee sufficient to moue me to frequent this di∣uine Sacrament. Mund. But I feare not a little least if I come too often to the Lords table I make shipwrack both of loue and feare, for that is wont to fall out by too often vse and familiaritie. Spirit. Yea rather the contrarie doth often fall out, for if of the often and familiar cu∣stome and frequentation of the communion any imper∣fection were therein coue∣red there were iust cause to diminish our loue and feare towards him as it commeth to passe in humane thinges: But that thing is not so: for when hee is a certaine infi∣nite sea of all perfection, by howe much one vseth this often familiraitie, by
so much the more hee decla∣reth his goodnes & perfecti∣ons, and causeth that loue, feare, and reuerence towards his diuine maiestie, do equal∣lie increase. Mund. Let it be as it is, dayly experience tea∣cheth that the often vse of a thing although the best doth breed contempt & lothsom∣nes. Spir. But that is in things temporal, and in sensual plea∣sures, but in spirituall delights (as Saint Gregorie hath well obserued) saciety doth breed a desire, for then the good∣nesse of them are made kno∣wen, and therefore by how much the more surely they are possessed, by so much the more ardently they are desi∣red, whence the heauenly wisedome saith: They which eate me doe still hunger, and they which drinke me do still
thirst. Mund. But Saint Paule saith, Hee that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his own dam∣nation, but if thou commu∣nicate often, it seemeth thou thinkest thy selfe woorthy, and is not this pride? Thou also dost vnworthily Com∣municate. Spirit. As if to Communicate seldom, doth make a man worthie. It is not so. But heare mee, if thou calst him woorthie, whose perfection doth equall the worthines of this Sacrament, thē no creature, although the holiest, yea, nor all creatures put together, were worthy of this Sacrament. And if such worthines were so necessary, none should cōmunicate, for that none can attaine perfec∣tion equall to thi sacrament. But neither that any be wor∣thie
is it necessary, that he at∣taine some excellent perfec∣tion, or bee endued with rare vertues, for these are acqui∣ted by the rare vertues of this sacrament, and frequenting therof. Therefore that a man be worthy according to that of the Apostle S. Paul, it is e∣nough that hee bring that preparation wherwith God is contented, that is, that first he examine his conscience, bee sorry for his sins committed, humbly confesse them with a penitēt hart, & with this pre∣paration to come to the cō∣munion is no pride. Mun. If this be sufficient, wherefore then did certaine godly men of reuerence spake so often of effectual preparing them∣selues as they haue done? Spirit. These of humilitie & reuerence to this holy miste∣rie
haue spoken in deede of solemne preparation, which assuredly is meete, but fre∣quenting of this holy com∣munion is a most ancient cu∣stome, wherewith the church of Christ first sprange, as S. Luke the Euangelist in the Actes of the Apostles shew∣eth. Mund. But in the Pri∣mitiue Church the feruent∣nesse of Christians was great, which when it is not now in vs, it seemeth more safe to abstaine from often com∣municating: for if it bee o∣therwise it is in daunger that we come not so disposed to communicate as wee ought. The safer way is, rather to be held then the lesse safe. Spir. Yea the selfe same thing for that so great desire is wanting in vs ought to driue vs to frequent this wholsome
Sacrament, for by the benefit thereof, wee may both waxe hot, & be set on fire. For hee which is cold, ought rather to betake himself to the fire, thē he which is hot. So often as one humbleth himself before God, & hath a good intentiō there is no danger. M. I haue often heard the Sacraments are instituted of Christ as me∣decines, but we vse not me∣decines often. S. If a mā were spiritually sick, but somtimes then the argument were a∣uaileable, but wheras our na¦ture is weak. For the iust fal∣leth 7. times a day (sayth the Wiseman) our nature there∣fore often needeth help, & so ye vse of a spiritual medicine. Moreouer, wheras this sacra∣ment is of force o draw a∣way al these euils both pre∣ent & to come frō the soule,
it is better to preuent infirmi∣ty, then to cure it once con∣tracted. Lastly, ther is a great difference between corporall medecines and this spirituall, for they only put away bodi∣ly diseases, & often with euil humors, take away the good also, but this bringeth to the soul, grace, strength, & other heauenly gifts, and therefore these seldome, this often is to be vsed. Adde yt for the most part bodily medecins are bit∣ter & lothsome, to the intent that as seldom as may be we vse them. But this sweete and delightfull▪ and therfore God would that it be often recei∣ued of vs. Mun. But thou canst not denie to abstaine from the holy Communion, for reuerence of so great a Sacrament, to be a good act, and agreeable to vertue. Spi.
I deny nor but that it is good to giue reuerence to it, yet this I say that to frequent this communion of deuotion & desire of vniting himself with Christ is a better action, for because this springeth of loue, but that of feare, and it is manifest to all, that loue is better then feare, wherfore it argueth a religious minde to communicate often. Mun. But I am vnworthy so to do. Spirit. Wherefore. Mund. Because I fall dayly into ma∣ny sinnes. Spir. If sinnes de∣aine thee then shouldst thou neuer communicate because thou neuer ceasest to sinne. Mundan. But communica∣ting seldome I haue more time to examine my selfe. Spiritual. Thou art decey∣ued, for seeing our nature is prone to euill, by how
much the more grieuously sins raigne in it, by so much the harder they are to be be∣gun: for a crooked tree the longer the turning thereof is deferred, by so much the more hardly, & with greater paine is it made strait. Mun. I do not wel vnderstand what this my errour is▪ for I see dayly with mine eyes those which often communicate, to come coldly and without deuotion, and as it were customarily to the holy ta∣ble, and no more adoe, but they which come seldome, come with farre greater de∣uotion and reuerence as see∣meth to me, wherefore it is better to communicate sel∣dom then often. Sp. First that is false Mundanus, which thou affirmest, yea rather many of them which come
so seldom, come most coldly without deuotiō, without fee¦ling of loue, rather indeed of custome and constraint, then of loue. Mund If it be better to communicate often then seldom, how commeth it to passe that this often commu∣nicating is not praysed of some learned men? Spirit. I neuer sawe nor heard of any learned man, indued with iudgement & vertue, that re∣prehended this action, so ho∣ly, so profitable, so accepta∣ble vnto God, but that it is dispraised of some carnall men it is no maruell, for they thinke others vnworthilie cōmunicate this Sacrament, for as they liue euilly them∣selues, so they thinke that those liue euill also, who of∣ten Communicate. Munda. You say true, I acknow∣ledge
that it is more safe, of∣ten to strengthen the soule with this heauenly food, but I doe it not, least I giue oc∣casion to the worlde, of whome those that often Communicate, are had in derision. Spirit. If in this matter thou wilt haue a re∣gard of the world, then hast thou not only lost thy soule, but also thy wit. Art thou ig∣norant that it is the proper∣tie of the world, to flie from all spirituall things, to fauour the wicked, and speake euill of the good? Munda. As long as we are in this world▪ wee ought to frame our selues, and conforme our manners to the world. Spirit. But that is manifest foolishnesse. If the world be one of thy three Capitall enemies, how mayst thou apply thee
to it, and obey the will ther∣of, without manifest and ap∣parent ruine: knowest thou what it is to abstaine from the sacred Communion, for the obliquies of the world. No other thing then to bee ashamed, and to account it a reproach, if thou art a good Christian, and indued with vertue, wherefore & worthily too, may Christ be ashamed to receiue thee into heauen. Mund. If I should often com∣municate, I must repent of∣ten, become a good example to others, keep me at home. Cast off al recreations, which were to take away all my li∣bertie from mee, and so I should pine away and waxe old before my time, Spi. Al∣though thou Communicate but once in a yeere, thou art boūd to repent, to giue good
exāple to others, neither art thou ignorant how great a sin it is to giue a scandall to others. And the often cōmu∣nicating, doth not take away recreations, but doth allow thē, so they are lawfull & ho∣nest. In that thou sayst thy li∣bertie is taken away, it is not true, for if thou dost thinke any thing forbidden lawfull vnto thee not Communica∣ting, thou art deceiued, for whether thou communicate often or seldome, thou art bounde to abstaine from sins. He which for recreation offendeth his creator, looseth true liberty, when he maketh himselfe a seruant of sin, yea, he looseth true ioy, which springeth of a good consci∣ence, & this the foolish world doth not vnderstand. Mund. To ye receiuing of this most
holy Communion, it is re∣quired that a man bee of a quiet minde, which cannot bee commonly brought to passe, for the aduersities and perturbations of this world, it is not conuenient therfore often to Communicate. Spirit. Yea, rather the afflicti∣ons of this world, and this wretched place of exile, ought to driue vs to cōmu∣nicate often. For amongst the effects thereof, this one is mentioned, that it giueth strength in aduersitie, as the Prophet signifieth, when hee sayd. Thou hast prepared a Table in my sight against those that trouble me. Mun. If I did perceiue I were cal∣led of God to communicate often, I would willingly o∣bey, Spirit. I pray when thou commest to thine or∣dinarie
prayers thou goest to the Church, dost thou per∣ceiue thou art called of God? Mund. No. Spirit. Why then dost thou these things? Mun. For that they seeme to mee good things, and are layde down as parts of Gods wor∣ship. Spirit. But the holy Cō∣munion without question is better then all, and more commended, and is so profi∣table, as it is called of the Church the pledge of future glorie. Mund. Howsoeuer the matter is, to say truth, I dare not come often to this heauenly table, by reason of my manifold imperfections that I often fall into. Spirit. It hath beene answered to this before, either thou desi∣rest to bee deliuered from these euils, or not, if thou de∣sirest to bee ridde of them,
this most holy sacrament re∣ceiued with due preparation, wil minister such strength, yt thou mayst by little and lit∣tle remooue them, as it is e∣uident many haue done, who by the vse of this spirituall meate, of carnall haue beene made spirituall. Munda. I yeeld to thy reasons, and would gladly communicate, but I feele no deuotion. Spir. Perchance thou thinkst thou hast no deuotion, vnlesse thou shead forth teares, that is not absolutely necessarie, neither in these consisteth all deuotion. The teares of the heart may suffice. That is sorrow for thy sinnes past, and a purpose to preuent those to come. Moreouer hee is called deuout, which in all thinges conformeth himselfe to Gods will,
wherefore I would not that thou shouldest therefore ab∣staine, because teares and sighs are wanting, for these are not alwaies necessarie, God giueth them to whom he pleaseth. Mund. To say what I think, and that I may confesse a truth▪ thou hast plainely perswaded mee that it is better to communicate often, then to abstaine, but one thing yet remaineth, I am loath to acknowledge my sinnes, Spirit. If wee ac∣knowledge our sinnes, God is mercifull to forgiue vs our sinnes, bee not loath. Munda. Many businesses do occurre, which hinder this so waightie a matter, I meane the woorks of repentance. Spirituall, This is the, temptation of the Diuell who that he may spoyle thee
of the fruit of this diuine sa∣crament, causeth that repen∣tance seemeth troublesome vnto thee, and the whole pre∣paration to the communion. Furthermore, businesses doe not hinder good works, the businesses of greater momēt are to bee preferred before the lesse. There is time to dispatch earthly affayres in good order. When the Son of God standeth and knoc∣keth at the doore of thy hart, open vnto him, let him not knocke in vaine. To con∣clude, remember that the kingdome of heauen, suf∣fereth violence, when we see, wee must labour to attaine the same. Mund It is euen so, I must needes confesse I am ouercome, wherefore my re∣solution is, with Gods good grace, to repaire oft to the blessed Sacrament.
Another Dialogue wherein is discussed the doctrine and be∣nefite of the blessed Sa∣crament. The Speakers. Catechumenus. Doctor. Catechumenus. I Desire to bee instructed in the Doctrine of the holy Sacrament. D. I confesse in regard of the spirituall consolation we reap by this holy mystery, thou mayst well desire to bee in∣structed in this doctrine, but for my part, there is no doc∣trine wherin I more feare to deliuer my mind, then this,
because the more I consider of it, the more I admire the excellencie thereof, which to me is more then words can expresse. Catecu. I can bee content to submit my selfe to the iudgement of the learned, without curious questioning. Doctor. Tis wel as thou sayst, I had rather by farre commune with the humble in this case, then any other. The goodnes of God herein, should with reuerence be admired Catecu. I rest sa∣tisfied in this case, but I wold learne of you what might mooue me to loue the Gi∣uer of so great a gift. Doc. The meanes to loue the Author of this gift, is to cōsi∣der his bounty, how he doth herein offer himselfe vnto vs and all the benefites of his suffering, Catecumenus. I
am mooued with incre∣dible ioye, to thinke of the innumerable benefites, wee receiue hereby, and it stirreth me vp to deuotion and reue∣rence. Doct. It may well so doe, for what ioy is here of∣fered vnto the faithfull the faithfull shall find, what may they not hope for at his hands who hath giuen him∣selfe vnto them, what pro∣uokements to loue and hope we haue, there need no long discourse to manifest and shew. Catecum. I acknow∣ledge my selfe satisfied be∣seeching God to make me a dutiful receiuer of this most holy misterie. Lau Deo.
PIO LECTORI, DE EVCHARI∣STIAE CONTRO∣uersi, contra nonnullas Ro∣berti Bellarmini rationes, Admonitio bre∣uis. CVm omnis quae∣stio, in causa fidci, ad Tri∣bunal sacrarū litterarum stare, ibi{que} iudu∣cari oporteat, nnunimi∣rm videatur, si vt olim
Paulus Caesarem, ita nos forensi quodam mōdo, sac∣rarum literarum sententi∣am (salua semper venerā∣da patrum authoritate) primo in loco, idque iure optimo appellamus. Quid enim? Cum in his non so∣lum veritatem ipsam con∣tra omnes ommium ma∣chinationes sarte tecte con∣seruatam Ecclesiae consensu approbatm, inueniamus, verumetiam veritatis in∣quirendae modum quem, si tanquam Ducem opti∣mum sequamur, errare labi, decipi, non possi∣mus. 2 Veriatis autem in∣quirendae
modus per Iere∣miam Prophetam sic vide tur propositus Diit: domi∣nus, interrogate de semitis antiquis, quae sit via bona∣& ambulate in ea, Iere∣miae. 6. vers, 16. Seruator noster in Euangelio Pha? reseis tentantibus eum. Quid ergo Moyses man∣duit libellum repudii? Respondit, ad duritiem cordis vestr scripsit vobis Moysis praeceptum illud, ab initio autem non fuit sic ex quo liquet, per se∣mitas antiquas ad viam bonam, per institutio∣nem ab itio pri∣mam, ad institutionem
veram, interrogantes, err∣antes, omnes, posse venire. 3 Cum Deus populo suo Israeletico tabernaculi formā disponendā propo∣suerat respice inquit, & fac secundum exemplar, quod tibi in monte monstratum est, Exod. 25. vers, 48. E∣saias Propheta, vt super∣stitiosos a pythonibus & mortuis auerteret, clamat, ad legem & testimonium, Esaia 8. vers. 20. Item Christus in Euangelio, cū vendentes & ementes e templo eiecisset▪ propheta∣rum de templo prfere te∣stimonium, Scriptum est, Domus mea est Domus
orationis Lucae decimo no∣no, vers. 40. Apostolus ad Corintheos Epistola prima Cap. vndecimo, genuinam dominicae institutionis rati∣onem in hunc modum in∣nuit. Ego accepi a Domino. Si forte patres in fidei con∣trouersiis haesissent aliquā∣do, statim diuinarum lite∣rarum oraculum adeunt, sic Ambrosius, interrogetur scriptura: sic Augustinus, rogemus Petrū & Paulū. 4 Hinc ediscamus ve∣ritatis inquirendae mo∣dum, patres nempe ad A∣postolos▪ Apostolos ad Christum, Christum ad Prophetas, Prophetas ad
legem, legem, ad primum exemplar, retrospexisse. De sūma et salutifera Christi institutione diu iam, contē∣dere Christiani institutione diam contendere Chri∣stiani, a patribus ad Apo∣stolum, ab Apostolo, ad Christum, adeóque ad pri∣mum exemplar in coena sua funebri institutum, manu, manus, ascendatur, Hoc secum fidelis quispiam serio recolligat eum qui de pane dixit, Hoc est corpus meum, qui de vino dixit, Hic est sunguis me∣um, de Ioanne Bapti∣sta dixisse hic est Elias. Habitote foedus meum in
carne vestra: Conspulti sumus in Baptismo: Multi sumus vnus panis: vnum corpus, frequens est scrip∣turae phrasis. 6 Adhaec, quia magis videtur ratiom consorium, quam in spirituali ibo▪ spi∣ritualem sensum admitte∣re. Omnes inquit Aposto∣lus andem escam cum e∣dimus spiritualem. Post cae∣nam, mensura admodum parua, spiritus est qui vi∣uificat. Progredior, Pia, pia haec ex Christi ver∣bis, de Christi instituti∣one consideratio, & anima∣rum salutarem alimoni∣am, & mysterii eminentiā facile cōmendat, exornat{que}
