25712 99855245 20726
¶ A iustification or clee∣ring of the Prince of Orendge agaynst the false sclaunders, wherwith his ilwillers goe about to charge him wrongfully. Psalm. 17. ¶ The malitious person layeth wayte for the righteous, and seeketh hym to put hym to death. But the Lorde wyll not leaue hym vp into his handes, nor ac∣count hym for an offender, though he be taken for such a one. Psal. 5. ¶ Thou wylt destroye them that speake lyes, The Lorde abhorreth the murtherer and the deceyuer. Lord leade me forth in thy righteousnesse, because of thē that lye in wayt for me. Psal. xciiij. ¶ They imbattell them selues agaynst the soule of the righteous, and condemne the gylt∣lesse bloud. But the Lord wyl be my defence, and my God shalbe the rocke of my truste. ¶ Imprinted at London, by Iohn Day, dwellyng ouer Aldersgate. Febr. 24. These bookes are to be sold at his long shop at the West doore of Paules.
¶To the Reader. THe thynges (among o∣ther) that are cheefly to be cōside∣red, in this Iustification of a moste rightful case and innocēt person, against vniust slaūders and slaun∣derers: are the vnmeasurable crueltie and vntolerable trechery of the Papistes. Who to maynteine the wrongfull authoritie of their tyrannous kingdome, agaynst God and his Christ, and agaynst the Maiestie of lawfull Princes, whom God hath ad∣uaunced to Souereintie for the maynte∣naunce of his trew Religion, and for the welfare of the people committed to theyr charge: do so stoppe the eares and blynd the eyes of Princes with their horrible leazynges (where they take place and beare sway): as they nother can see the wronges done to their subiectes by those ministers of Antichrist, nor herken to
their iust complayntes, that they might vnderstand them and redresse them. For whereas they themselues hauyng shaken of al obedience towards God and his Mi∣nisters, and confounded the generall bonds of naturall and cōmon reason, do both re∣siste all law and lawfull Magistrates, and also (as much as in them lyeth) inforce men either to most miserable thraldome, (of conscience by forsaking God and all godlynesse, and of body by losse of goodes, landes, libertie, wiues, children, lyfe, and good name) or to some meanes to with∣stand so extreme wretchednesse whereun∣to they driue them by streyning them be∣yond all abilitie of humane patience: yit most slaunderously they beare the states and potentates of the world on hand, that those most innocent and giltlesse persons, (whiche stand in nothyng but onely that which their Prince hath both graunted and sworne that it should bee lawfull for them to do, and in such wise as he by lyke graunt and othe hath giuē them leaue and commaundement to do, as appeereth most euidently by his solemne Protestation and vowe made at the tyme of his ioyfull en∣try,
when he was first admitted to the su∣perioritie of those countreyes, at the ear∣nest request and intreataunce of the late Emperour Charles his father, who made the lyke solemne othe Protestation and vowe before him and with him:) are the authors, practizers and workers, of all dis∣orders, confusions, mutinies, vprores, trub∣bles, rebellions, and treazons: only bycause that after suffrance of their excessiue tor∣mēts, & the thrustyng of thē out of their natiue countreys: they giue them not leaue to tread thē vtterly vnder foot as myre, or rather to rid thē quite & cleane out of the world, with the Gospell and Religion of Christ. Which thyng they could not doe, if the Princes whō the Romish Antichrist holdeth yit captiue in the prison of super∣stitious ignoraūce, would vout safe but one∣ly to stand as indifferent Iudges, and to make that simple account of them, which euen comō reazon would they should, that is to wit, as of their subiectes. For no righ∣tuous Iudge condemneth without heering the allegatiōs of both parties, nother doth any rightfull Prince permit his subiectes to reuenge their owne wrongs, and much
lesse to oppresse, deuour, and eate vp one an other. Therfore when the hartes of the So∣uereine liege Lordes are so shet vppe, and their myndes so alienated aforehād, by the sinister perswasions of cankerharted Pa∣pistes and sly Sycophantes, which care not whose house be on fire so they may warme themselues by the coales of it, as no truth can haue enterance into their eares or ac∣cesse into their presence: needes must the people go to wrecke to the preiudice of the Prince, and the people being so wronged cā not but seeke to iustifie the right and truth of their cace, by all good and reasonable meanes, to the church of God, and vnto all such as are not so wholly caried away with blynd and fantasticall affection, but that they haue some abilitie to discerne right and equitie: as may appeere by the treatise heere insewyng. For heere is nothyng sayd or intended to the defence, maintenance or allowyng of any disobedience, disorder, or vnlawfull behauiour of the subiect towards his Prince: but to shewe most humbly and dewtifully both to Prince and subiect, the intolerable incōueniences that grow by ne∣glecting the mutuall regard that eche of
them ought to haue of other, and by the permittyng of Papistes to intrude them∣selues into suche state of credite and au∣thoritie, as they may be able to inforce a Gouernement to the vpholdyng of their owne kingdome. And forasmuch as in this treatise there is mention made of a Ioyfull Entrey: it is necessarie to know what the same was. Therfore it is to be vnderstode, that when soeuer any souereine Lord entered into the possession of dominion ouer the Low Coun∣treys, whither it were by name of Earle, Duke, or any other title of superioritie: by succession, election, or otherwise: he first tooke a sacred and solemne othe, to main∣teyne the Lawes, Statutes, Customes, Li∣berties, and Priuiledges of those Coun∣treys, and not to procure, cause, suffer, or permitte the infrindging, breaking, abro∣gating, disanulling, impeaching, or alte∣ring of them or any of them, or the brin∣ging in, setting vppe, or stablishing of any new, without the consent, counsell, aduice, and agreement of the states of the same Countrey, to the benefite and commoditie of the people: before the whiche othe he
was in no wise allowed or acknowledged as Lord there. By reason wherof, Charles the Emperour, and his sonne Philippe nowe king of Spayne, to stablishe the continew∣aunce of their possession in those Coun∣treys, as their predecessours had alwayes done at their first Entryes: did lately make solemne and faithfull promis, Prote∣station, vowe, and othe, as well for their heyres and successours as for themselues, that besides their maynteinyng of the cō∣mon weale, peace, rest, quietnesse, tranqui∣litie, and securitie of those Countreys: they and euery of them should and would keepe, obserue, and performe all the auncient cu∣stomes, Lawes, Statutes, Liberties, and Priuiledges of the same inuiolable, and not bryng in any new customes or orders, or suffer any to be brought in: nor set any Gouerner, Magistrate or Officer ouer them or in authoritie among them, beyng not the same Countreyman borne and ha∣uing landes goodes or possessions there: nor call any assembly of the States, nor cause any leuying of money or men of warre: no nor any coyning of money to bee made there, without the consent and aduice of
the States of the same Countrie. And for the more confirmatiō and assurance ther∣of: after the rehearsall of the particular poyntes and Articles of the said Entrie, (whiche are many) they added in effecte this conclusion folowing: That if they, their heyres, or successors shall by them selues, or by any other, either wholy or partly, doo, or cause to be done, any thing contrary or preiudiciall to the premisses, after what sort soeuer it be: they consent, agree, and graunt to their Prelates, Barōs, Knights, Townes, Cities, Liberties, and al other their subiectes, that then and from thencefoorth they shall not doo to thē, their heyres or successors any kind of seruis, nor owe them any duetie of allegeāce, nor obey thē in any matters wherein they shal haue neede of them, or which they shall desire or require at their handes, vnlesse that vpon reconciliation, satisfactiō, and attonemēt, they be by the states of the same Countries accepted new againe. And to the same in∣tent they decreed and ordeyned, that all officers appoynted or placed contrary to the faythful purport and true meanyng of this their sayd Entrie, should be dischargcd &
displaced: and likewise that what soeuer thing were or should be done or attempted in preiudice or impeachment of the pre∣misses, should be esteemed as voyde and of none effecte. In witnesse and euerlastyng confirmation whereof, the said Emperour & the Prince his sonne did set their han∣des and seales to the sayd othe in writyng, at Louane the fift day of Iuly. 1549. And this is it that is called the ioy∣ful entrie. Whereby, and by many pre∣sidentes of their stories, (whiche make mention how the people of those Countries haue refuzed, renounced, reiected, remo∣ued, and depozed diuers of their Lords & soueraignes for their misgouernment, and for infrindging their sayd othe: and in their places elected, appoynted, set vp, and established others, of whose Iustice they had better opinion aud likelyhood: which thyng notwithstandyng they haue not v∣sed to doo, but vpon most vrgent and ex∣treme necessitie, after long sufferance and seking of redresse by all reasonable meanes with most duetifull iutreatance, submis∣sion, supplication, and humilitie:) It may playnly appeare, that the state of the lowe
Countreys is not an absolute Monarchie or heritable kingdome, after the maner of this Realme, and of Fraunce, and such o∣ther like: but a State with condition, ter∣minable, and not to continue any longer than the Lorde whom they doo so accept, vpon hope of his good gouernment, dooth continue in reignyng and rulyng accor∣dyng to his oth taken at his entrie. Which if he violate, then are they by the same his othe discharged of their subiection and o∣bedience to hym, and haue full authoritie and free libertie both to resist hym and his Officers, and also to chooze and take to them any other head or Soueraigne that wyll be more frendly and beneficiall to their Countrey, as appeareth by that so∣lemne and autentike deede of Duke Iohn, dated at Louane the fourth of Maye. 1420. and by diuers other Records to the same effecte. Whereupon it foloweth, that this Iustificatiō of the Prince of Orendge, and of suche as take his parte, and of the cace wherein they stande, is most iust and rightfull euen in these respectes, though there were no further proofes, wberof not∣withstandyng there are very many in this
treatise folowing. Thus I commyt thee to God, who giue thee the spirite of iudge∣ment, to discerne accordyng to truth, that thou be not lead into errour, to allowe the thyng that is euyll, or to condemne the thyng that is good.
¶ A Iustification of the Prince of Orendge, against his sclaunderers. SUch as haue experience of the affayres of states and common weales, are wel able to discerne them that seeke to trouble the trau∣quilitie and quiet of the publike weale, through ambition and desire of priuate commoditie, and doo take all maner of straunge and vnaccustomed kinde of dealyngs, which mē of power, credite, and authoritie doo vse, to bee sure and infallible tokens of lyke driftes. And therefore to shewe who haue bin the chiefe ringleaders and authours of the troubles that haue happened in the low Countrey: the onely thyng to be consi∣dered, is, who they were that had cause to desire innouation in that Countrey, for any commoditie or profit which they looked for, and were the first beginners and putters therof in execution. For the doing wherof, in my opinion it is necessarye to set downe the state of the sayd low Countrey, in such wise as it was before the late troubles, and af∣ter the warres, whiche as well the late
right high and cenoumed Emperour Charles, as the kyng of Spaine, Prin∣ces of the same lowe Countrey, and so∣ueraigne Lordes of the subiectes there, maynteyned in maner continually by the space of ten yeares together, against the French king. Which state was such, that although in the meane season the people were in some vnquietnesse, by reason of the Inquisition and Iniunctions that were obserued iu diuers Prouin∣ces in the case of Religion, whiche vn∣quietnesse augmented dayly more and more through the increase of the Reli∣gion, and through the rigour of the In∣iunctionsIt appea∣reth by the Iniunctions put forth in the yeares, 1521. 1526. 1529. 1531. 40. 44. 46. 50. 56. and others. (which grew so extreme, and so farre out of all square, as it was a woonder that they were suffered and borne withal so long tyme, and so pati∣ently in so freee a Countrey,) as shalbe declared hereafter: yet notwithstāding it was euidently seene, that in all other respectes the subiectes were ready, not onely to yeelde al due obedience, but al∣so to spend their bodyes and goodes for his maiesties sake. For the Nobilitie behaued them selues with incredible courage and forewardnesse in the sayd warres, and the States of the Countrey dyd freely and of their own accord geue an incre∣dible
masse of money towards the char∣ges thereof, amountinge fully to the summe of fourty millions of Florens: & that so wyllyngly, as there was neuer any signe of iniikyng perceyued for the matter: by reason wherof it might wel haue bene thought, that the Coun∣trey was so affectioned towardes his maiestie, as they would not haue spared any thyng for the mayntenaunce of his state and honour against his enemyes. And therefore his maiestie might easily thereby assure hym selfe thereof against all forreyne powers. And for as muche as it is a naturall thyng, that all great seruices and well dooinges shoulde ingender truste: it could not be, but that the said countrey, (namely the Noble men in considera∣tiō that by their peril, bloudshed, & pro∣wesse his maiestie had atchieued so ma∣ny honourable victories, and the com∣mons, for that he had dispatched so long and tedious a warre with so great honour, by their succour, ayde, and ai∣staunce,) must needes be in great hope that his maiestie would haue regard of their so great duetifulnesse and notable seruice, whē so euer occasion were offe∣red. By meanes whereof a man might also haue openly warranted the Coun∣trey
from al inward troubles and com∣motions. For when the subiecte can looke for nothyng but well at his Princes hand, he continueth the more wyllyngly and earnestly in his obedience. So that cō∣sideryng how the state of the Countrey florished by the intercourse of al kindes of trafique and marchaundise, and of all other thyngs dependyng therupon: al∣though it were sore nipped by the for∣mer warres, and ouercharged, & in ma∣ner oppressed with tallages, impostes, and exactions layde vpon them by rea∣son of the said summes of money, which they had graunted to be leuyed for the charge of the sayd warres: yet is it most apparāt, yt beyng sure frō enemies with out, and vnited with their Prince with∣in, and mainteined with priuiledges & ordinaunces accordyng to the tyme, it would not onely haue bin refreshed & set cleare, & discharged of all dettes, but also haue atteined to yt top of all world∣ly felicitie within few yeares. By meanes wherof his Maiestie cō∣myng to bee renowmed and feared of straūgers: and to be reuerenced & loued of his subiectes, might haue bin taken for the greatest kyng & happiest Prince of his time. In somuch as it must nedes
be confessed, that they whiche haue bin the hinderers of this prosperitie & hap∣py state, by breakyng the sayd vnion, & by turnyng away the sayd affectiō, haue committed so great an offence to the do∣mage of his Maiestie and of the cōmon weale, that they deserue to be punished and chastised to the example of others. And I beleue, that all such as see the coūtrey at this presēt, how it is brought from so apparaunt felicitie to extreme wretchednesse, bōdage, and miserie, wil∣e of myne opinion, and iudge as I do. And we William of Nassaw Prince of O∣rēdge beyng takē for theIt appea∣reth by the writ of Sū∣mones da∣ted the xix. of Ianuary and by the Proclama∣tion the 24. of the same moneth in∣serted in  end hereof. author of this alteration, by the Attourney generall, accordyng to the letters patētes of sum∣mons & citation, refuse not the sayd pu∣nishment, in case that the suggestion of the said Attourney be true. Who to pre∣tend some cause and occasion that might haue prouoked vs thereto, and hauyng not any likelyhode that wee would en∣terprise it without cause: alledgeth that our ambition and vnordinate desire of authoritie was the cause of it. Whereupō it followeth that the finall cause of our doings and attēptes should be honour, desire of dealynges and extraordinarie authoritie. But to bereue the Attourney of that
groūd, wherupon he pretēdeth to build his accusatiō: it might suffise for such as are acquaynted with our person, to al∣ledge myne owne naturall disposition, whiche is nothyng inclined to such de∣sires: and for other men, to alledge the portion of worldly substaunce, where∣with God of his grace hath indewed vs by good gouernment & order, where through we might rather hope for ad∣uauncemēt and authoritie, then by any other kynde of dealynges. For all men must needes graūt, that to get vs home to our owne house and to liue priuate∣ly, was a much better meane to gather treasure and riches, wherby to get, pre∣serue, and mainteine authoritie: than to spend wastefully in the Court in hope therof by vsurping superioritie vpō vs. For they that haue any vnderstandyng at all of our dealynges, do know very well that I neuer passed for any superi∣oritie. And in asmuch as the coūtrey is so affectionate to his maiestie, as is said afore, there is nothing more vnlikly thā to charge vs with intent of vsurpation, aboue the authoritie of hym and of the countrey. Specially seyng I was alwayes of opiniō, that his Maiestie should rather keepe still his subiects in the sayd loue &
good wil, by mitigating of his Edictes, than turne them away from it, by pro∣ceedyng with newe deuises of rigour: which is the only point & meane wher∣by it might haue bene pretēded, that we would haue atteyned to the foresaid at∣tempt. For it cannot be denied, but that loue & good will are the meanes wher∣by a Prince may mainteine his autho∣ritie and keepe his countrey. And ther∣fore it must needes be confessed, that in being of that opiniō, we sought the pre∣seruatiō of his Maiestie, and not the v∣surpyng of authoritie ouer hn. Now thē whereas others were of opiniō that it was more expedient that his state should be mainteined by rigour: it fol∣loweth of necessitie that I was of con∣trary opinion vnto them, onely as tou∣chyng the meane of the maynteinyng therof, but not as touchyng the mainte∣naunce and preseruation it selfe, whiche thing experience sheweth to be vnpossi∣ble to be done by rigour, so long as the foresaid countreys continue in this ap∣paraunt prosperitie, wherein my desire was that they should haue bene main∣teined, vnder his Maiesties iurisdictiō: whiche thyng was (next Gods seruice) the onely cause that I allowed not y• ri∣gour of the foresayd Inquisitiō & Edtes.
Wherof all our other doynges also will beare record, in that they be aliena∣ted or rather cleane contrary to all am∣bition. For euen before that time, I had giuē ouer my roome which I had in the Counsell of Estate, & the office of Lord TreasurerIt appea∣reth by the commissiōs dispatched therupō and sent backe agayne. An. 1558. apparant places to win the attendance & sute of all the states, yea & to bryng as it were the ouerrulyng of all affaires to my hands, if I had listed, & whereof other men had so good skill to make their owne gayne. But God be thāked, I was so farre of frō such mea∣nyng, that when I saw I could not do his Maiestie good seruice in those offi∣ces as I would aine haue done, by rea∣son of the practises of other mē that let∣ted me: I surrendered thē both into his handes. And yet notwithstandyng, like as his Maiestie after our sayd demea∣nour, and vpon the surrender of our cō∣missions, left not to call vs often tymes to counsell: so we on our part haue dis∣charged our selues as much as is possi∣ble, in coūsellyng him what we thought best for his seruice, and for the benefite of the coūtrey. And it was a great hart∣breaking to vs, to see that a two or three persons should so ouerthrow his Ma∣iesties good meanyng. Neuerthelesse whereas his Maiesty
haning knowē the sinceritie of my dea∣lyngs, and my forewardnesse in his ser∣uice of all that tyme, and beyng then in Zeland on his way towardes Spayne, treated me very earnestly to take vpō me agayne the state of a Counseller: I after much excusing of my selfe, obeyed him. Howbeit when I saw afterward, that thyngs kept on their wōted trade, and went farre otherwise than his Ma∣iestie had put me in hope of: I sewed to be put of againe about a ij. yeares after. It appea∣reth by let∣ters sent to the king the 23. of Iuly. 1561. And for asmuch as I saw them inde∣uer by all meanes to bryng the coun∣trey to bondage, (which some mē terme full obediēce) as shalbe shewed hereaf∣ter: bycause I would haue no occasiō to deale with that poynt, which seemed to tend wholly to the hinderaunce of his Maiestie and of the common weale: I made the more earnest sute and intrea∣taunce to be discharged of my gouerne∣ment, that I might withdraw my selfe, and intend wholly to myne owne pri∣uate affaires, and not bee blamed for the inconneniēces that were like to en∣sue therof. To the which endIt appea∣reth by let∣ters sent to the king the 11. of March 1562. & the 29. of Iuly. 1563. I made diuers sutes, as wel to his Maiestie, as also to the Regent, yea euen more then once after the putting vp of the petition of the Confederates, which is so great∣ly
It appea∣reth by let∣ters sent to the king the 20. of April, & the. 27. of May. 1566. defamed by our aduersaries. And surely if I had bene any thyng suspected of ambition, it is not likely that his Maiestie would haue refused to remoue me: at lest wise he would not so often hae expresly commaūded and in∣stantly requested me, to be contented to It appea∣reth by the kings letters dated the 2. of Sept. . & the 6. of Ine. . & the 31. of Iuly. 1566. cōtinue in office still. For it is a playne case, that such as are douted to be ambi∣tious, ought to be remoued from all au∣thoritie and gouernement. And therfore his maiesties causing of me to continue in the said rowmes & offices, is a plaine proofe directly against the allegation of the foresayd Attorney general, that nei∣ther before nor after his maiesties de∣parting frō these low Coūtreys, I was neuer suspected of any ambitious desire of vsurpyng authoritie ouer him or his countreys. Nay rather it appeareth suf∣ficiently therby, that I desired nothyng so much, as to be discharged of al admi∣nistration and authoritie. And if a man consider how that afterThe vsurpa tion of the Cardinal of Granuil. the kyngs departure, the managyng of all affaires was in the hāds of the Car∣dinal Granuil, and how ielous the Car∣dinal was of his own estate: (insomuch as it was his common fashion to cause all such to be quyte banished & shet out from all authoritie and medlyng in mat¦ters
of state, as seemed in any wise able to hinder the increase and continuance of his superioritie: as for example, in the tyme of the late renowmed Emperour Charles, hee perswaded his Maiestie to admit no Lordes of great valour to the affaires of the Empire, nor any such as might deface or diminish his authority: after the which maner (to come to par∣ticularities) hee delt with the Lord Fer∣dinando Gonzaga Gouernour of Mil∣laine, and with Reinart a Counsaylour here: insomuch that while the Cardinal had the orderyng of the affayres of Ita∣lie, the sayd Lord Ferdinando was fayne to geue ouer his gouernment there, and euen vnto his dying day, to folowe the suite of a certayne criminal action, com∣menced agaynst hym by the Cardinals meanes, thereby to get the Spaniardes the ful superioritie of that countrey, like as they had of al other the kings domi∣nions in Italie: And the sayd Reynart is constreyned to leaue his house, wyfe, chyldren, & goodes here in the low coū∣trey, & to get hym into Spaine, where he is like to ende his dayes as an exiled and banished man:) he shall not find it any thing likely, that if I had gone a∣boute to vsurpe authoritie aboue the king by my gouernment, (which thing
I coulde not haue done without dimi∣nishyng of the Cardinals authoritie) I should haue bin helde styll in the sayde offices: but rather cōtrarywise after the examples afore mentioned, I shoulde haue bin driuen to leaue them vnreque∣sted, or at leastwise I should haue had leaue to depart from them vpō my first suit, and much rather vpon myne often renuyng of my sutes afterward. But the Cardinal knowing my na∣ture to be vtterly voyde of al ambition, and that in very deede I couted not to haue any dealinges at al, and much lesse any great and extraordinary dealings, whereby I might haue seemed to ouer∣match hym in authoritie: was wel wil∣ling to seeke meanes to keepe me styll in office, therby to bleare the eyes of the people, of whom he knewe hym selfe to be sore hated, & by ours and other mens meanes to make his owne doynges to seeme better then they were, after the exāple of Dennis the Tyrāt of Silie, who intertayned such men of his coū∣saile, as the people had good opiniō of, not to the intent to vse their aduice, (as he bare them in hand) but only to make a countenance that he vsed it. And after the departure of the sayde Cardinall, when occasion was offered
me to haue bewrayed myne amion, if any had bin in me: it was neuer sen that I tooke any thing at all vpon me aboue others, were it neuer so litle: but that I yeelded the Duches of Parma, thē Gouernesse, the authoritie that be∣longed vnto her, and whiche the sayde Cardinall had vsurped from her, ma∣king her (as he had done the rest of the Cosayle) but as a cloke and shadow to shroude his owne doings: insomuch that the Duchesse dyd afterward open∣ly declare and confesse, that shee vnder∣stood more of the affayres of the Coun∣trey, within a fewe monethes after the Cardinals goyng away, than shee had done of all the tyme that he was about her. And when as afterwarde at the firste troubles shee was mynded to haue for∣saken the towne of Brusselles, and to haue withdrawen her selfe to Mons, leauyng all thyngs to their own sway, wherby shee should haue ministred oc∣casion to such as had lysted, to incroche vpon her authoritie: We with others made greate suite and supplication vn∣to her, requestyng and beseechyng her, that shee would not do so great wrong to her selfe, nor so great dishonour and yaltie to the kings maiestie▪ Which
dealyng of ours shewed well, that our deedes and thoughtes haue bene cleane contrary to ambition, whereof I am wrongfully accused at this present. And surely if I had had any intent to vsurpe the authoritie to my selfe alone: a more fit and conuenient occasion or meane could not haue ben offred me, than to see the Regent accomplishe her purpose. But because my meanyng was cleane cōtrary, I hindred it to the vttermost of my power, as is sayd asore. Also, when as it was infourmed his maiestie, that it was expedient for his seruice, that the Counsayle of the lowe Countrey shoulde be augmented with Lordes and men of learnyng, further authorised in some poyntes, for preuen∣tyng of all confusion and disorder, that they might be the better able to go tho∣row with a number of matters, & spe∣cially also to the ende that the decrees & determinations of the same myght be obserued & take effect with the greater authoritie & regard, & al occasiō be takē away frō euery man to vsurpe any au∣thority or iurisdictiō, or to seke his own commoditie, to the losse of the common Weale: I beyng required by the Du∣ches to name some persons meete to be preferred to that place, dyd shyfte my
handes of it, because I woulde gee no occasion of mistrust, that I woulde put in any man that were at my deotion, or with whom I had had familiaritie: and I referred the whole to the kynges maiestie, without makyng of any coun∣tenance of myndyng myne owne pecu∣liar profite. Whereupon it may be inferred, that we be not onely wrongfully, but also without all likelyhood of truth accused of practising to vsurpe against his ma∣iestie, through ambition and desire of gouernment and superioritie, and for the same purpose to haue troubled the peace and tranquilitie of that countrey, to the whiche we be in maner as muche beholden, as to our owne natiue soyle: yea, and that without hauyng any regard to our owne losse & hynderance, which we should needs openly incurre by reason of the poōs that we haue in the same Countrey, if it should be in any trouble, insomuch as our welfare, hynderance, or damage are inseparable from that Countrey. For wheras the nature of ambitious folkes is to desire to raigne aloue, with foredetermination to exclude al others: I contrarywise haue not onely geuen y cōsent, that the Counsaile should be
reased, & the authoritie cōmunicate to many: but also haue offered to depart out of it, to giue roome to others, wher of the Regent & they that are of the said Counsell can be witnesses. Therefore it is meete to seeke more apparaunt causes of the troubles some where els, and for the accomplishment thereof, to consider, that the sayd coun∣treys were very ielous for the preser∣uation of the liberties and fraunchises which they had as well by vertue of co∣uenauntes made with their Princes, as by force of priuiledge obteined by them, and specially of the Emperours of old time, for feare least they might be depri∣ued of thē by bringyng in of straūgers, and namely of the Spanyardes, bicauseThe pra∣ctises of the Cardinall. the forenamed Cardinall had sayd, that the kyng should neuer keepe well those Coūtreys, vnles he mainteined a pow∣er of Spanyardes there, and caused the Pope to assoyle him of the othe that he made to them at their receiuyng of him, and conquered them new agayne, so as he might abolish all the sayd couenaūts and priuiledges, and rule them as he li∣sted: whiche thyng he sayd could not be brought to passe, without ye cuttyng of, of iiij. or fiue of the chief princes heades. By reason whereof all innouations
became so much the more suspicious & odious, the rather bycause that in the tyme of the last warres, the extreme ri∣gour of the Inquisition and Iniunctions had bin meetly wel moderated and bri∣dled, and libertie procured by the bryn∣ging in of the Almayn souldiers (wher∣with they were inforced to strengthē thē selues) to make Sermōs openly amōg them as well in Cities as in Townes, and secretly also among others in many o places, besides that the doctrine whiche is contrary o the doctrine of Rome, was receiued already in all the Countreys thereaboutes: by meanes wherof the state of Religion was so ad∣uaunced from time to tyme by the space of so many yeeres togither in that coū∣trey so well peopled and haunted on all sides, that in the end men abhorred the very name of the sayde Inquisition & In∣iunctions,Horrible persecutiōs. whereby an exceedyng multi∣tude of folke, that is to witte, aboue fiftie thousād persons had bin most cru∣elly executed and put to death, and the ke nomber bin oren to forsake their goodes, parētes, frendes and kinsfolke, and to liue continually in miserable ex∣ile, only (as was sne and perceiued e∣uery day more euidently thā other) by∣cause they would not swarue frō Gods
commaundementes, and follow mens inuentions. Which thing only did breede an alte∣ratiō, but also so great a hartburnyng a∣geynst the Inquisition & Iniūctions in di∣uers respectes, that in many places the officers durst not proceede any more to the execution of them, but by night & by stelth, and that not without perill and daunger of truble. And they themselues cā witnesse, whither they had not much ado oftentymes to saue their liues from the rage of the comons, moued to dis∣pleasure at the pitifull beholdyng of so horrible executions. Wherby all they that had experience in maters of state, foresawe that that only point woold be an occasiō of great trubles, if it were not wysely preuented in tyme. The which incōuenience and diuers others the Lady The Queene of Hungary. Mary gouernesse of that Coūtrey fearyg euen in hir tyme, went in propre persone to Awspurg in the yeere. 1550, vnto Charles y• late Em∣perour of most happy memory, to as∣swage & mitigate the rigour of the In∣iunctions It appee∣reth by the Proclama∣tiō set forth in April. 1550. that were thē a setting forth, and to procure the holdyng backe of the Inquisition from the Citie of Andwerp and the Coūtrey of Brabant, & from o∣ther
places that had not yit bin subiect to it: Which thyng shee obteined at his maiesties hand. It appee∣th by the Iniunction set forth in Septē. 1550. Neuerthelesse the fore said Cardinall wi his creatures & In∣quisitors, ceassed not their persecutions and practizes, whereat the people dyd greatly murmur and grudge. Yea and they practized a great point of suttelie: for in the begynnyng of the kings Maiesties reigne which was the yeere 1555. they got out letters of com∣mission in his name to assiste the Inqui∣sitors. It appee∣reth by the Commissiō set foorth. 1555. and by the letters of reuocatiō graūted af∣terward▪ And although they were reuo∣ked incontinently after, as soone as his Maiestie was infored of the thynges that were aedged ageinst the Inquisi∣tion: yit did it cause a great hartburning among the people when they saw their maner of dealyng. And therefore at his Maiesties departing, they had their eye vpon him that should be appointed ge∣nerall gouernour of the Countrey: and that so much ye more, bycause the states in general had much  at that time o obteine at his Maiesties had, that the Spanish souldiers wherwith the Car∣dinal minded to fortifie himselfe, should be withdrawen out of the Countrey. Which thyng the Cardinall also (thē Byshop of Arras) foreseeing at length, notwithstanding that he intended in ef∣fect to haue the gouernment of the coū∣trey
alone. Yit did so much that the title and name of Regēt or Gouernesse was giuen to the Duchesse of Parma, (who at that tyme had no perience of the af∣faires and dispositions of the low coū∣treys,  shee had continewed al∣wayes in Italy, and therfore should be fayne to referre hirselfe to that which he should perswade her): and to counte∣nāce his doyngs the better, he had cau∣sed the kyng before his departure, to or∣deine a counsell of estate, wherin certein of the chief Knightes of the ordre were appointed deputies, and among the rest we also, notwithstandyng our refuzall, as is sayd afore. For the Cardinall per∣ceiuyng himselfe to be coūted an enemy to all liberties fraūchizes and priuiled∣ges that might hinder his procedings, & to be the chief Author, Ringleader and furtherer of the Inquisition and of the ex∣ecution of the Comissions: knew ve∣ry well that the people of those Coun∣treys woold not haue suffered his Go∣ernement without settyng of themsel∣ues ageynst it euen at the first. Now then whereas the rest & tran∣quillitie of the Coūtrey was vphild vn∣der this shadow countenance & couert, that the affaires were managed by the authoritie of the sayd Regēt, and by the
aduice of the said Counsel of estate: this vizor was anon after plucked of & layd bare by the Cardinals owne ambition and vnaduized dealyng: For within a while after the kyngs departure, he be∣gan to deale with all matters of ipor∣taunce alone by himselfe, or with some one or two that hung vpon his sleeue, without makyng the Regent priuie to them as he ought to haue done, & with∣out communicatyng or propoūdyng of them to the Counsell of estate: saying o∣penly to the deputies of the Prouinces and Cities, that it behoued them to re∣payre to him and to none other, if they woold come to a good end and haue re∣dy dispatch of their matters: and yit ne∣uerthelesse bearyng the Lordes of the Counsell in hand, that they should an∣swer all alike for the inconueniences if any happened: Which thing seemed ve∣ry straūge and vnreasonable to some of the Counsell, who also aduertized the kyng thereof by their letters accordyng as he had left order that they should do in such caces. And they certified his maistie ther∣withall, howe that of a Bishop he was become a Cardinall, and one Viglius a Pries, one of the chiefe about hym was made President, and the report went,
that there should be new Bishoprikes and incorporations of Abbies and Pre∣lacies, It appee∣reth by the Bulles of Paule the 4. & Ps the fourth. and an executyng of the deter∣minations of the Councell of Trent, (thinges agreed vpon by his Maistie before his departure by the connsayle of the two aforesayd, and of three or foure others that went about to satisfie their owne ambition and  ther∣by) wherethrough the people was sore vexed and disquted, insomuch as there was no mēber nor degree of thē, which fealt not it selfe greatly touched with it. For the Lords and Noble men were ofInnouatiōs ade by the ardinall. opinion, that this authority of the Car∣dinall and his new bringyng in of Bi∣shoppes, which should relye altogether vpon hym, tended to their depressing, to the puttyng of the gouernment and rule of the Countrey into the handes of the Churchmen, and to the depriuyng, not only of al othr men, but also of the kin∣ges maiestie, to whom the said Church∣men could fynde in their harts, nother to yeeld nor to owe any obediece at al: And that the Abbyes, Prelacies, Co∣uents,Incorpora∣tion of Ab∣byes. and Colledges should serue but to inrich the sayde Bishops with their spoyles, specially by incorporatyng the Abbeyes and Prelacies, whereby they shoulde bereue them of all election and
hope of attaynment to their accustomed dignities. And the pple were of opi∣nion, that that was the high way to in∣frindge all their libertis, fraunchises, & priuiledges & to bring in the Inquisition, & to renue the rigour of the Iniūctions, & finally to bring them in bondage to the clergy. Which thyngs were ye very cau∣ses and welsprings of all the distrustes, troubles, & mischiefes that insued after∣ward, (in as much as some would haue put the things in execution, which those good Counsaylers had perswaded his maiestie to doo, who ought of right to be blamed and rebuked for their so doo∣yng) wherof they go about to cleare the Cardinall, and to charge vs therewith, without any colour or likelyhood at al. And although it appeare in histories that alterations, troubles, and rebelli∣os haue happened vpon lesse occasi∣ons: yet notwithstandyg, that Coun∣trey was so intirely affectioned to∣wardes their soueraigne Lord & prince, as those causes had not yet taken their ordinary and accustomed effectes, be∣cause it was hoped, that the States of the Countrey beyng commended to his Maiestie by their  and ser∣uice done in the former warres, myght turne his mynd, so as he would rather
apply his determinations to the tyme, and stop all new deuices, yea, and the proceedynges of the Bishops, and the Inquisition, and the rigorous Iniunctions at the request of so loyall and faythfull a people, accordyng to their treaties and priuiledges: than to further so vnmea∣surable alterations, at the pleasure of a straunger, and of certayne vnknownen persons, agaynst the oportunitie of the time, the priuiledges of the Countreys, his owne promises, and in effect euen nature it selfe: specially consideryng that the troubles in France were styrred vp at the same tyme, by occasion of Ordi∣naunces and Edictes tendyng to like effect, howebeit, that the Realme of Fraunce is not so frequented, and on al partes so inclosed and inuironed with Countreys that folowe the Religion, contrary to the Romishe Religion, as the sayd low Countreys are. And their hope was, that he would doo it so muche the rather, because the sayd innouations began also to be mis∣liked of strangers, namely of the Arch∣bishops and Bishops of the Empire, whose iurisdiction within their own di∣oces, was impeached by the foresayd e∣rection of the newe Bishoprikes: and that his Maiestie would reape none o∣ther
profit by them, than to bestowe his authority vpon such as made open pro∣fession, that they woulde neuer thinke them selues beholden to hym for it. In respect of which reasons and o∣ther like, which euery man dyd set be∣fore hym, accordyng to the capacitie of his wyt, and specially vpō hope, which the said Countreys, as well generally as particularly conceyued of his maie∣sties goodnesse, for as muche as he no lesse than his predecessors, had alwayes dealt reasonably with them by Iustice, and accordyng to the customes of their countreys, and that wherin soeuer they foūd them selues greeued, they had bin woont to open it vnto his maiestie, by waye of request and complaynt: their desire was to take the same way nowe also, and thereby to aduertise his maie∣stie of the sayd innouations and incon∣uenicnces that wer like to ensue, if they were not remedied out of hand: in con∣sideration wherof, as well on the behalf of the Regent, as of the Lordes assem∣bled in counsell, (whom the Cardinall bare in hand (as is said afore) that they should be burthened with all incōueni∣ences that might insue, as wel as he) the Baron of Mountignie, a knyght of the Order was In Au∣gust. 1562. sente to his Maiestie in
post, with all speede that might be, with charge & instructiōs to shew the state & necessitie of the Coūtreys, & their gene∣rall mislikyng of the sayd innouations, which made the Noble men and states of the Countrey to surcease all further and particular pursuite of the matter, in hope that his Maiestie would vpon such declaration, take order for some a∣mends, or at leastwise for some mitiga∣tion of those poyntes, wherewith they found them selues distressed and gree∣ued: the rather, in as muche as for the staying of the incorporation of the Pre∣lacies and Abbeys then vacant in Bra∣bant, the Prelates & other Noble men of the Countrey, (like as they of And∣werp also had done) had sent their In Febru∣ary. 1562. de∣puties afore to In May. 1562. stop the Inquisition, and the bringyng in of the newe Bishop: whiche thing helde the Countrey for a tyme in suspence without any commo∣tion or trouble, vpon hope that by those deputies of theirs, they should obteyne some such good redresse and cōposition, as the state of the case required. But yet notwithstandyng the stateAssemblyes at Sermons & to heere preachyngs. of Religion went foreward styll on all sydes, in so muche that in some places, men began to preach, not only secretly, (which thyng could neuer yet be letted
by any rigour) but also openly: namely at Ualenciennes, Tournay, and diuers other places, the occasions wherof wer geuen, or at leastwise increased, by the libertie of the Religion agreed vpon in Fraunce, for to their seemyng, they had deserued no lesse at the handes of their kyng and prince, than the Frenchmen had at theirs, and in as muche as they had in many respectes bin dealt withall after the same maner that the Frēchmē had bin, they thought also yt they deser∣ued to obteine liberty of cōsciēce, as wel as they. And it was euident to be seene, that (in as much as those low countreis were inuironed with others that folo∣wed euerychoe the contrary religion, and that their mayntenaunce stood vp∣on the intercourse of marchaundise, and vpon the recourse and traffique of their neighbours thyther:) it was vnpossi∣ble for them to obserue che auncient or∣dinaunces and lawes of Religion any more, by whiche lawes although men had gone about to roote vp al Religion quite and cleane, yet notwithstandyng it was foūd by experience, that it grew and increased euen in the greatest rigor of all, and therfore that it is vtterly vn∣possible to inforce or constrayne Religi∣on or conscience, at leastwise any fur∣therforth
than to a kynde of dissimula∣tion. Notwithstandyng all this, the Car∣dinall continued his bringyng in of the sayd Bishops, & his inuestyng of them, incrochyng to hym selfe the Archbisho∣prike of Mechline (by vertue wherof he intended to syt as Metropolitane and Primate of those Countreys, and to de∣uoure the Abbey of afflighem, which is the richest in all Braband, nexte to the Abbey of Saint Amand, which he had seised into his possession already) and partyng the residue among so vnfit and vnmeete persons, that men mocked at them openly. And although those in∣uestitures were made in some Cities without any open withstandyng, yet was it easie to be perceyued, that many folke misliked of it, and some also did set thēselues euen openly against it, name∣ly they of Andwerpe, of Grooning, of Leedward, of Deuenter, and of Ruer∣mond. And it was easie to see wherto these doyngs tended, in as much as the Car∣dinal (who ouerruled all the Counsay∣lers, yea and the Regent her selfe, and had so absolute power and authoritie) was become the head of all those Bi∣shops, who by reason of their vnfitnes
and lacke of experience, should hang all vpon hym, by meanes wherof he tooke more vpō him thā euer any prince of the Countrey had done. And to mainteine, stablishe, increase, and augmente his authoritie by forcible meanes, he had set forewarde the Inquisition and the Iniunctions aforesayde. And to plea∣sure me withal, he had at his commaū∣dement, the geuyng, distributyng, & be∣stowing of all the kyngs offices, Bene∣fices, and Fees, and likewise of the Re∣gentes, also ouer and besides the helpes that he had of his owne and of his sayd Byshops. So that in conclusion he had opened himselfe the right way to get & mainteine superioritie ouer the kyng & his Coūtreys. And moreouer, to be ad∣uertized trewly of thynges that were done euery where, and to hold in with the Kyngs and Princes that were next neighbours: hee had as it were in his hand & at his becke, all the kynges Am∣bassadours, Agentes, and deputies, and among others, his owne brother also, who did set the affaires of Fraunce in such a broyle, that for the benefite and quietnes of the same realme, the queene there did make very earnest request to the kyngs Maiestie to take him thence. Therfore whosoeuer looketh well to
theis things, shall eazly be able to iudge who it was that tooke vppon him au∣thoritie aboue the kynges Maiestie: na∣mely whither it was we whiche vsed not any of the foresaid meanes, (but vt∣terly misliked all innouations: and had once afore refuzed to be of the Counsell and giuen ouer the office of thief treazu∣rer, desiryng nothyng so much as to haue bin spared afterward ageyne from Counsell in matters of estate and from office of gouernmēt, and specially from that Counsell): or the Cardinall whiche bare all the sway, & by his innouatiōs & extraordinary dealynges, shewed him selfe to haue the said authoritie, with in∣tent to stablishe and mainteine himselfe in the same by their meanes, yea and in farre greater thā euer any Prince of the Countrey had. Surely I am of opiniō, that such as consider well the thyngs aforesayd and iudge of thein without affection, shall finde as litle reason why mē should go about to accuze vs in this behalfe, as why they should excuze the sayde Car∣dinall. But whē as the deputies of the Pre∣lates had by meanes of rewardes and pensions obteined, that the Incorpora∣tion of the Abbyes should not go fore∣ward:
and when as the men of And∣werp had obteined that no man should molest them with the Inquisition, & that they should bee winked at concernyng the bryngyng in of the new Byshop: for auch as the sayd Lord of Moūtignie was returned without sufficiēt resolu∣tion for the remedying of other incon∣ueniences, so as there was smalf hope that matters should bee redressed, in as much as by meanes of the sayd Pensiōs the doynges of the Bishops (whose on∣ly labour was to bryng in the Inquisiti∣on) was furthered, and it was practized to disappoint the mē of Andwerp of the benefite of winkyng at them, & to bring them in subiectiō to the Cardinal, & vn∣der the Archbyshopricke of Mechlyne: y• Regent thought it good by the aduice of hir Coūsell, to informe the king once ageine of the state of the Countrey, and specially of Ualēcien & Turnay, where it seemed vtterly impossible to keepe y• people from the exercize of the Religiō, without a continuall garrison. Wheru∣pon hir hyghnesse sent a Counseller of hirs named The yeere 1564. Armenteros to his Ma∣iestie, so that in conclusion it was fully resolued by him, that the Cardinall the apparant authour of all the alterations and discontentementes, should get him
out of the Countrey: whiche thyng did giue the people some contentation and hope of amendement of their state. But forasmuch as the Cardinals cre∣atures continewed still their innouati∣ons, & managed all affaires in his ab∣sence after the same maner that he him selfe had obserued: the former disorders returned by and by ageyne. And it was vnpossible to remedy them, bycause of the disagreemēt that was betweene the three cheef Counsels, that is to wit, the Coūsell of the States, the priuate Coū∣sell, and the Counsell of the Erchequer, which were all three ouerruled in effect by the Cardinall and his creatures, but yit in such wise as they coulde neuer come to agreement among themselues. Wherein a man may note the notable leawdnesse and wylinesse of the Cardi∣nall, who to keepe the rest of the sayd Coūsell of the estates from doyng such seruis to the kyng as they woold haue doone, had vtterly excluded them from all entrance & intermedlyng with chec∣kermatters and matters of Law, and from all such orders as were taken in gouernement or otherwise, knowyng well that without the intelligēce of thē, it was impossible for them to consult & determine well of most matters of im∣portance
all whiche drift tended to the reteyning and stablishyng of his owne authoritie. And yit for all that, he labo∣reth to accuze vs & others of high trea∣zon, bycause that for the better seruis of the king, we desired to haue the secretes of the sayd Courtes communicated to the Counsell of the estates, as a need∣full thyng for the discharge of our dew∣tyes, whereas in the meane season, hee himselfe, & after him the President Ui∣glius ouerruled all the sayd three Coū∣selles, as though that of right all autho∣ritie had belonged to him and his, and that on the contrarye part it had bin a heynous crime and offence for o∣ther men to require any part of the same authoritie to be conueyed ouer, not vn∣to vs which do offer to depart from the same Coūsell, but to ye whole cheef coū∣sell togither. Such is ye sinceritie wher∣by they proceede at this presēt in ye low coūtrey, for the preseratiō of the kings authoritie as they beare men in hand. For asmuch therefore as the affaires of the Countrey were so disseuered, as it was not possible for the Lordes of the cheef Counsell (whom they went about to burthen with all the incōueniences, that might happen) to prenēt & redresse the same incōniences & thereby to set
foreward the seruis of his Maiestie, for want of authoritie & cōference with the other counsels: & forasmuch as the peo∣ple saw that the new Byshops, by rea∣son of their vnfitnesse & their disordered life & behauiour, (whiche was so great that y• Regent was fayne to call thē be∣fore hir and to rebuke them,) could not serue to do any good to the Coūtrey, & that ye pride, the threatnings, & the other maner of dealynges vsed by them and their followers, bewrayed that it was decreed at It appee∣reth by the foresayd Bulles of the Popes and the De∣cree of the seuen Car∣dinals. Rome that euery Byshop should haue ix. prebēdes affectioned to helpe foreward the Inquisition, whereof two should be Inquisitors themselues, by reason whereof they should serue to none other purpoze, but to set foreward & stablish the Inquisition: To ye end they might by his Maiesties good meanesThe Coun∣ty of Eg∣mōds iour∣ney into Spayne. incounter the mischeeues that were like to spryng of the thynges aforesayd the Counsell thought it good to In the be∣gynnyng of the yeere. 1565. send vn∣to his Maiestie the Prince of Gawre Erle of Egmond: who at his returne gaue great hope and likelyhode of some amment and redresse of matters, as in respect of mitigatyng the Iniunctions and of abolishyng the Inquisition, vpon the performaunce or not performaunce whereof it was to be seene openly both
in deede and by experience, (as well by the exāple of Fraunce (as hath bin sayd afore) as otherwize,) that the cōmotion or appeasement of the people depēded, and therefore that all that euer insewed afterward was to be imputed vnto thē, and not to any ambitiō of ours as they pretended. In the S∣mer. 1565. For to the purpose aboue mētioned there mette togither iij. By∣shops, three Diuines, three professers of the Ciuill law, & three other of the Ca∣non law: whose aduice beyng taken cō∣cernyng the foresayd mitigation, was sent to the kynges Maiestie: but by the instigation of the Cardinall and others that were continewally ticklyng him in the eare, he had no regard of it (notwith stāding that it was still ouerrigorous,) nor yet to the former informations, butThe kynges resolution. t It appee∣reth by the extractes of the kynges letters sent abrode by the Regetes letters da∣ted the 18. Decēb. 1565 both the whiche are inserted in the ende. commaunded expresly in the end of the. 1565. yeare, t that without any further replying, they shoulde proceede to the bryngyng in of the new Byshops who were not as yit installed, and to the pu∣blication of the Decrees of the Counsell of Trent, and to giue the Inquisitors the authoritie that belonged to them by the Ciuill and Canon law, and moreouer to execute the Iniunctions in very deede with all rigor immediatly vpon the re∣ceit of his letter.
Hereof were diuers Copies and ex∣tractes sent abroad byandby to all Ci∣ties, and they were inioyned and char∣ged to conforme themselues to his ma∣iesties resolution and commaundemēt, which was the second and cheef cause of all the alterations, mischeeues and in∣conueniences that followed afterward, the very fountaine wherof was not any ambition of ours, but the ambition of the Cardinall & the distrust that he had caused amōg the people by his foresayd innouations, as appeereth euidently by that which hath bin sayd, and is confir∣med by theIt appea∣reth by the reports and requests ex∣hibited in Court. complaintes made after∣ward by the Cities of Graband and the members of Flanders and other pla∣ces, matched with the confederacie that was made anon after betweene certein Lordes and Gentlemen, ageinst the In∣quisition and the rigour of the foresayd Iniunctions. Wherefore it hath no likelyhode ofWordes ta∣ken out of the Sum∣mons. truth that the Attourney Generall al∣ledgeth, namely that we should haue bin the cause of the sayd confederacie, by perswadyng certeine persons that the kyng ment to bryng in the Spanishe In∣quisitiō, as though the maner and forme of the Inquisition, rather than the effect & executiō of it should cause men to make
insurrection. Which is a thyng so  the more ageynst reason, for asmuch as it is not the qualitie of death that put∣teth mē in feare & causeth them to make mutinies, insurrections, and vprores, but the very terrour of death it self: spe∣cially in this present case, where by the addyng of this word Spanish, nother the qualitie nor the kinde of punishment is puishment, but only the generalname of Inquisition is restrayned to the particu∣lar name of Spanish: which is no suffici∣ent cause to make men to rye and to re∣bell. Howbeit, that to speake more pe∣emptorily, I say playnly, it lay neither in me nor in any others▪ to make men beleue that his Maiestie intended to bring in the Spanishe Inquisition, for as much as there had neuer bin any m∣tion made of tha Inquisition befor: and that afterward the forme of the ∣quisition that was to be set foorth, was she wed expressely by the kyngs , in maner hereafter writtē, wherby they be readily conuinced, whiche  that the people wer  vp and mo∣ued to  by means of thisThe Inqui∣sition was the foūtayn of al the al∣terations in the lowe Countrey. word Spanish. For as much then as the Inquisition  and declared by his  saie letters, was the cause of the po∣ples
displeasure, and that there was no further hope of remedy to be looked for: it foloweth, that al the thyngs that insu∣ed afterward, are to be wyted vppon it, & not vpon any other thyng, and conse∣quently that it is not true, that I by my like inductiōs & perswasiōs, had caused many of his maiesties subiectes to ryse and to rebel agaynst hym, or that I had so seduced, corrupted, and prouoked a great part of the Nobilitie aforehande, that they made leagues, conspiracies, & coniurations, and had sworne to defend and fortifie them selues thereby agaynst his Maiestie and his ordinaunces that had bin kept and obserued at all tymes afore, and that to the same end there had bin certayne meetings kept in my hou∣ses, as well at Breda, as at Brusselles, by meanes whereof I should haue bin the chiefe head, author, furtherer, fauou∣rer, and barbro gher of Rebels, Con∣spiters, Coniurators, priuie practisers, and troublers of the cominō weale and quietnesse. For there appeareth not any rebelli∣on or commotion made against his ma∣iestie, whereof we should be bounde to answere. And as for the said cōfederacy, it came not by our occasion, but by rea∣son of the distresses that were caused by
the sayd Inquisition and Iniunctions, and by infrindgyng the promises made the yeares. 1550. 1555. 1562. 1565. and at o∣ther tymes, as hath bin shewed hereto∣fore: and therfore the troublyng of the common Weale, and the distrbing of the peace of the Countrey, are to be im∣puted to them selues and to the Cardi∣nals ambitiō, & not to so fonde perswa∣sions & impressiōs, as the terme of Spa∣nish Inquisition, & such like. For no lesse fond is that allegatiō, than were ye wor∣des of hym,Viglius. who thought to staye all innouations, by saying that the kyng meant not to stablish an Inquisition, but onely a visitation: as who should say, men respected more the woord than the deede, and were more hasty to make in∣surrection for the termes of Inquisition and Spanish, than for the rigor and cru∣eltie that they had seene and wer afraid of by the execution of the Iniunctions. And therfore I say, that the sayd con∣federacie and complaints, and al the est of the thyngs that insued, dyd but onely shewe the effecte of that whiche we had told the Lady Regent asorehand, in o∣pen counsel, that we feared would come to passe: that is to wyt, that his maie∣sties sayd resolution would cause some great alteration, specially by reason of
the hope that a number had conceyued vpon the returne and report of the sayd Lord the Countie of Egmond. It appea∣reth by two letters sent in the be∣ginnyng of the yeare 1566. And wheras I wrote the same thyng in ef∣fect to her highnes afterward: she con∣fessed to vs by her answer, that she per∣ceyued clearly howe the sayd resolution was the cause of all the troubles: and therfore (as is sayd) the sayd confedera∣cie being made without my knowledge or aduice, ought not to be imputed ther∣unto. For when I was aduertised of it within a while after, (as it were a fif∣teene dayes or theraboutes) before the confederats were mares, I protested openly and atly, that I liked not of it, ne thought it to be the right meanes to maynteyne the quietnesse and tranqui∣litie of the common Weale. It is very true that I esteemed it not as a rebellion, conpiracie, or coniurati∣on, because the confederates stood std∣fastly vpon this poynt, that they meant not to doo or attempt any thing against the welfare of his Maiestie and of his Countrey, It appea∣eth by the xpresse ordes of he confe∣deracie sig∣ed with heir hands. wherein they were of the same opinion that we be, confirmed by common experience, whiche was, that the Inquisition and rigour of the Iniun∣ctions coulde neuer come to good, in so muche that by the examples whiche we
had seene afore in Almain, France, In∣gland, and Scotland, we were driuē to confesse that the kynges resolution in that behalfe, could not but bryng great waste, desolation, & destruction to those Countreys, without any furtheraunce of his proceedings: wheras on the con∣trary part it was to be seene, that the Countreys which haue the libertie of Religion, or at leastwise of conscience, and where the Inquisition and the rigor of the Iniunctions is not put in executiō, continue in rest and quiet: which is an euident proofe, that to lyue without the Inquisition in libertie of conscience, is an other maner of thing, thā to liue loose∣ly, lawlesly, and without order, as some haue falsly and sclaunderously reported: for otherwise the princes of Germanie, which set as much store by the rest and quietnesse of their Countreys, as the kynges maiestie doth, would in no wise abyde it, specially if they mistrusted that any disobedience would insue of it. And was so much the more confir∣med in this opinion, because the confe∣derates shewed not them selues stub∣borne, ne meant to obteyne their re∣quest by force, but onely sued that It appea∣reth by the request of the confe∣derates and the answer thereto, which are both inser∣ted hereaf∣ter. his maiestie (who (sayd they) was abused by certayne persons, which vnder the
colour and pretence of Religion, went about to satisfie their owne ambition & couetousnesse) would vouchsafe to take intelligence of their complaint and suit, and thereupon folow the aduice of his counsell, offryng them selues to be ru∣led and lead accordingly as the same be∣ing duely informed, should decree con∣cernyng the matter of Religion. So that when they were once vp in this rebellion, conspiracie, or coniuration, he ought to haue inclined to their petition, and to haue regard of their supplicati∣ons, either in that they required to haue their Noble mē heard, or for that all cō∣federacies▪ generally without exceptiō, do stande in their own conceyt, wherin I confesse I liked none of both his ma∣iesties doings. For in my iudgement, a Prince may be ased: and therfore it is good reason that the subiect, vassall, or what soeuer he is that is indomaged, shoulde haue leaue to vtter his griefe. And Emperours and kinges haue bin commended in that they haue uffe∣red them selues to be rebuked by pri∣nate persons, for not seemyng to geue eare to their requestes and complaints, as he was which suffered one to say to hym in open strate, If thou lyst not to heare our suites, lyst not to be our Em∣perour:
and as an other was, who be∣yng a kyng and soueraigne Lord, dyd notwithstandyng suffer an old woman to appeale from hym, because (as shee sayd) he gaue no are to her matter. And seeyng that in these low Coun∣treys, in cases of importances, where∣upon both honour and goodes depend, whether it be publikely or priuatly, mē haue bin wont to referre them selues to the states, who haue b of that autho∣ritie, that in all tymes, yea & euen in the tyme of Charles late the Emperour of happy memorie, they haue oftentymes assēbled by reason of occurrents of lyke or lesse importance, yea, and euen in the case of Religion, and an Edict by their aduice, in the yeare. 1531. whiche was then published, as appereth by the style and processe therof: let vs not thinke it vnlawfull for vs to require the same thyng nowe which we see to haue bin done and vsed in like cases heretofore. And many good cōfederacies and holy leagues are founde to haue bin made heretofore, (as for example, the confe∣deracies of the Machabees & other do∣inges) and that men may make them styll to the honour of God and to the prosperitie of their kynges and coun∣treys: So that in my iudgement, there
can no rebellion be inferred vppon the poyntes aforesayd. For as touching that the cōfederats did promise and sweare to mainteine, helpe and defend one an other agaynst the In∣quisition and Iniunctions: seeyng that that promise might haue bin made to cease by the meanes aforesayd, and they offered in effect by their petition to goe from it, because it seemed to be agaynst the kyngs commoditie, & to obey what soeuer should be ordeyned by the aduice of the States: it seemeth against rea∣son, that whereas hunters and others that deale with the tamyng of vnreaso∣nable beastes, do indeuour to put away their fiercenesse, moodinesse, and wyld∣nesse, by diligence, company, and cheri∣shing, rather than by cudgelling, whip∣pyng, and roughnesse, the kyng should by the froward instigations of the Car∣dinall and his hangers on, vse rigour and roughnesse towardes so loyall sub∣iectes and faythfull vassals, rather than meeldnesse and clemēcie, to keepe them at his accustomed deuotion by surceas∣sing (at leastwise for a tyme) the executiō of the sayd Inquisition & Iniunctiō, which (to all mens seemyngs) could not be set foreward nor continewed in that tyme, without apparant domage, hurt, & pre∣iudice
to his Maiestie and Countreys, specially seyng that the former warres had already as good as suspended and asswaged the rigour of them as is sayd afore, whereby it was come to some dis∣continewation, and the variances and alteratiōs which had risen vp since that tyme euery where, seemed not to suffer that it shoulde by any meanes bee re∣newed and set vp agayne. And it should seeme that the Regent also was of the same minde: who before the commyng of the confederates, sayd that she had considered aforehand of the mitigation of the It appea∣reth by the purposed conceit of a new Edict. Iniunctions. And she had already on the kings behalfe decla∣red the Coūtrey, of It appea∣reth by the agreement made the 24 of March. 1566. by the commō Register of 1565. called the Regi∣ster of Bra∣band. Braband to be ex∣empted from the Inquisition, in somuch that nother at the first nor at the last (at leastwise vntill the tyme of my depar∣ture) she made not any countenaunce of accountyng the sayd confederacie or the supplication presented vpō the same, for any rebellion. Which thyng I thought good to shewe, not of purpose to enter into any forme of Protestatiō in respect o he confederacie, which toucheth not me (as appeereth by that which is said:) but only to shew that there was no rea∣son why I alone should take the confe∣derates for rebels, & so seclude them frō
their accustomed resortyng to my hou∣ses, in the which I am sure, that to my knowledge, there hath not any assem∣bly bin made, agaynst the welfare ho∣nour, and prosperitie of the Kynges Maiestie. And agayne seyng that the Lady Re∣gent tendered the confederates so farre by the kinges commaundement and by the aduice of all his Counsell, as to pro∣mis thē by letters signed with hir own hād and sealed with hir scale, It appee∣reth by hir letters of assuraunce dated the 25. of Au∣gust. 1566. hereafter in serted. that they should not be blamed for the same cōfe∣deracie or for any thynge that insewed thereupon: there was no reason that I should deale otherwise with them, or make any other account of them, than she had done. And if any man will say she did it to an other end, only to bryng them a sleepe & to serue hir owne turne by them agaynste those that had ouer∣shote thēsiues to farre in the breakyng downe of images: it maketh nothing at all agaynst our intention. For although it may be inferred ther upon, that our meening extended not so farreforth: yit notwithstāding we agree fully with the opiniō of the kyng and of the Regent, in the point of keepyng cō∣pany with them, and in suffering them to haunt and frequent our howses. And
therfore in so doyng we haue not letted or hindered, but rather furthered his Maiesties good proceedynges and ser∣uis: or else at least wise we haue bin de∣ceiued by the foresayd declaration of his Maiestie and of the Lady Regēt, which is a sufficient excuce for vs agaynste all pretended fauoryng & furtheryng of the cōfederates, for asmuch as they nother be nor were rebels, or at leastwise were not so counted and taken to bee by the kynges Maiestie & the Lady Regent, and by all others in generall. For it is to bee noted that a generall errour or mistakyng, especially where it is caused by the kyng or prince himselfe hath the force of Law and right. To the cōformation wherof his ma∣iestie wrate vnto vs with his owne hād in the moneth of August, It appee∣reth by the kynges let∣ters of the first of Au∣gust. 1566. the transla∣tion whero is inserted hereafter. so that after that the sayd confederacie and the put∣ting vp of their sute came to his know∣ledge, he was very wel contented with our seruis, & misliked not of any thyng that had passed willyng vs not to think the contrary, but that hee did repose his whole trust in vs, and beleued not the things wherewith some malicious per∣sons charged vs, in saying that we dyd our dewty very ill, and many such o∣ther wordes.
And surely considering the cace as it ought to be, his Maiestie had no cause ( rspect of any thyng that is sayd) to iudge otherwise thereof, for asmuch as before the sayd confederacie, I had suf∣ficiently declared that my opinion was, that the Inquisition and the rigour of the Iniunctions could not bee put in execu∣tion, wihout truble and inconueēce, & therupon made sure It appea∣reth by let∣ters sent to the kyng, the. 14. of Iune. 1566. to be discharged of ine offices & gouernement, wherby his Matestie was sufficiently certified, that I tooke not any like confederacie to be a rebellion, and my keepyng stil of myne offices and gouernement confir∣med sufficiently (at leastwise by secrecy) that I continewed in the same opinion and in the thyngs that depend therupō. And therfore ther is no likelihode whyThe words of the Sum∣mons or Citation. they should go about to new christen vs by the names of head author, fauourer, furtherer, and harbrower of rebeis sith it appeereth not that we haue receiued, fauored, prooded for, or authorised any men as rebels. Nother can it be founde that we haue taken any of the confede∣rats, or any other such like into our pe∣culiar protection and safekeepyng: & yet not withstāding they go about to accuse me thereof also, whereby men may per∣ceine what iust dealyng is vsed now a
dayes in the low countreys, seyng that for cases so apparauntly without all ground or likelihode of truth, they haue not only seized vpon my goodes & pos∣sessions, but also partly cōfiscated them and put them to sale, extendyng execu∣tion vpon thē agaynst all order of right. Wherby they shew euidently that they be fully mynded to practise all maner of violence, & in effect to minister extreme wrong in stede of full right, vnder the cloke and couert of Iustice, without re∣garde of any maner of Iustification or defence. To the whiche effect they accuse vs also for that some of the cōfederates had entered into armes, in diuers places: not consideryng that we be not bounde to answere for other mens doyngs, nor ought to be charged though some of the confederates perchaunce became rebels afterwarde, for asmuch as they were none such nor so taken to be at the yme that they haunted and frequented our houses, and that whatsouer was done in that behalfe, was done not only with out our aduice, but also to our vnutte∣rable greef, and farre of from vs, for at that time I was in Holland, wher and not in any other place, I must needes haue leuyed men of warre, if I had bin
minded to vsurpe authoritie against his Maiestie, bycause the townes and for∣tresses there were at my cōmaundemēt. But myne intent hath bin nothyng els, but to pacifie the sayd coūtreys and the Prouinces of Zeland and Utreight beyng all vnder my gouernement, and to keepe them in obedience to the kings Maiesty, accordyng to my Commission and the Lady Regentes expresse com∣maundement geuen vnto me. So that, I haue indeuered to the vttermost of my power, to acquite my selfe well and faythfully of that charge, as the Presi∣dentes, Counsellers, States, Officers, & Magistrates of the Cities of the same Countreyes can wel witnesse: and they are able to say whither I did euer mini∣ster any speech vnto thē, otherwise than to incorage thē in their obedience loyal∣tie, and seruis towardes his Maiestie, lyke as I haue done in all other places where I had any office or authoritie. Whiche thyng appeereth openly by this, that notwithstandyng all theis broyles, I haue by Gods grace vsed such forecast, as no place, towne, or for∣tresse of our gouernement hath bin de∣stroyed, sacked, or turned away frō their dew obedience to the kynges Maiestie or the Regent.
Out of the same forge commeth this forgerie also, which is put into the Ci∣tation of the County of Hoochestraten, wrōgfully slaundered to haue bin a fur∣therer of our ambitious practises: name ly that we should haue hild many suspi∣cious communications and priny pac∣kynges at Hoochestraten, and that at Deuremond we should haue determi∣ned with the foresayd Countie of Eg∣mond, and with the County of Horne, and with the sayde County of Hooche∣straten, to enter into armes agaynst his Maiestie, and to keepe him from com∣myng into the lowe countrey, by force. For I reporte me to the Lordes that were at Hoochestraten when I was there, whither there were any other talke than of makyng good cheere, and of visityng one an other, and of feasting certeine straūge Lordes as frendes & a∣lyes meetyng togither: so as it cā neuer bee auowed that any thyng was con∣cluded there, that was woorthy to bee suspected, or any disloyaltie practised a∣gaynst his Maiestie. Also it shall neuer be foūd true, yt we practised either at Deuremond, or any where els, to stop his maiesties cōming by force, or otherwise. For although we were aduertised that all our dooynges
were misconstrued to his Maiestie, to turne away the good wyll that he bare towards vs: in so much that there came to our handes the copies of certaine let∣ters written by the Lord Frauntes of Alua, his Maiesties Ambassadour in France, to the Lady Regent, It appea∣reth by his two letters sent in the moneth of August. 1566. the con∣tents wherof were, that the three with∣in noted, (whiche were the Countie of Egmond, the Countie of Horne, and Wee) should be punished in tyme and place accordyng to their desertes, vntyll the whiche tyme he woulde that men should make good coūtenance towards vs: and that in effect these letters bla∣med vs for all the euylles that had hap∣pened in the sayd low Countreys, auo∣wyng the same thyng to haue bin the principal cause of the foresaid meting at Deuremond: yet notwithstandyng we trusting altogether to our own innocē∣cie,The inter∣uiew at Deuremōd. did not forbeare to communicate the contentes of the sayd letters to the La∣dy Regent, & to aske her directly what was meant by them. There were cer∣tayne other poyntes treated of, whiche concerned them that were there, & their doynges, wherof I take it that the sayd two Lordes being then prisoners, haue made sufficient declaration. In respect wherof, and because they perteyne not
to the present matter, and for that it is to be presumed, that in this case men should holde them selues satisfyed (at leastwise on our behalfe) for asmuch as in the writte wherby we be , there is no mention made of the fore∣sayd two assēblyes: I wil make no fr∣ther discourse therof. Only this I adde, that he which had foreseene the outrages and violence v∣sed at this tyme in the low countreys, & had done his duetie and indeuor to stop them, accordyng to couenants with the Duchie of Braband, and accordyng to his owne oth and bond: should perad∣uēture not be thought worthy of blame for any other rebellion: consideryng that if he had mynded any such thing, he could haue found no meanes to doo it, than our aduersaries weene, were it not that the opinion which we haue concei∣ued of the kyngs goodnesse, (who not∣withstandyng doth waste, destroy, an spoyle the Countrey so well affectioned to his maiesties seruice, at the onely pleasure of the Cardinall of Granuill) had not turned me away from all suche thoughtes. And therfore to come to other pointsThe words of the Sum∣mons. of our Summons, and nainely to that which importeth that we should haue
ayded and counselled the Lorde of Bre∣derode, (chiefe of the rebels, as is there pretended) to fortifie his citie of Uiane, against the kyngs maiestie: I confesse, that commyng to Uiane certayne yeres before these alterations, and beyng told by the sayd Lord of Brederode, that his late Lord and Father had inioyned and commaunded hym by his last wyll and testament, to goe foreward with the for∣tifyingThe forti∣fying of the Towne of Vianen. of the sayde Towne, and of his house, lately begonne, desiryng me to geue him myne aduice for the fortifying therof: I confesse (say I) that I dyd so: wherupon it may wel be inferred, that I gaue the saide Lorde counsell to per∣forme the last will of his sayd Lord and father deceased: but not that I ayded or counselled any captayne of Rebelles to fortifie the citie agaynst the kynges ma∣iestie. By reason whereof, and for as much as it is no treazon for a man to geue his aduice vpon the fortifying of a place: it appearcth playnly, that those accusations tende but only to the defa∣cyng of the truth, and to the oppressing of innocencie. And that so much the more, because that in the low Countreys it hath at all times bin lawfull for Gentlemē of abi∣litie & liuyng, to furnish & fortifye their
places wherof it hath bin sene, that ma∣ny both of old tyme and euer since, haue bin fortified by vertue of the same liber∣ty, not only vpō the Frontiers, but also euē in the myddes & in the very hart of the Countrey, which fortifying was so much the more lawful for the said Lord Brederode to make, because he held and possessed the said towne of Uiane with all right of soueraigntie. And although his predecessors had bin in controuersie at the law vpon that point of long time before: yet notwithstandyng he had continued styll in possession and seisure of the said royalties. And if a man looke more neare into the aduice: he shall fynd that it is against all reason and equitie, to grounde any crime of treason thereuppon, because it was not geuen vppon the principall poynt, that is to wyt, whether the forti∣fication should be made or no, whereof the Lord of Brederode made no doubt nor scruple at al: but only vpon the ma∣ner and forme of the fortificatiō. Which not withstandyng could not haue bin folowed, vnlesse the poynt goyng afore, were fully concluded and agreed vpon, whereto none but the onely Lorde of Brederode should be bound to answer. And it maketh not to the matter, that
the fortification was put in execution after the commotions. For seeyng that the aduice was geuen before: respecte ought to be had to the same tyme. Wheras it is auouched that we shold haue suffred the said Lord of Brederode to leuie men of warre in the citie of Ant∣werp in the open fight & knowlege of al men, contrary to the expresse order then newly taken and proclaymed, & to shyp them to the towne of Uiauen, with all maner of munitions of warre. This shall serue for answeare, that although my commyng to the citie of And werpe was onely to keepe it in quiet and in o∣bedience to the kinges maiestie, which thing may appeare by the Regents let∣ters It appea∣reth by her letters da∣ted the. 12. of Iuly. 1566. sent both to me and to the Magi∣strate of the town, yea & euē by the con∣fession of the Attorney generall contey∣ned in the said Summons: yet notwith∣standyng as soone as I vnderstood of the sayd leuying, and of the place where it was done: I declared it to the magi∣strate, and to the Markgraue, who is the chiefe Officer of the Towne, & vn∣to whom it belonged to looke to those and such other accidentes, and I com∣maunded hym (accordyng to the tharge that the Regent had geuen me by her letter directed to me in that behalfe) that
he should apprehend and attach the par∣ties that dyd it. Wherupon the Mark∣graue departyng from me, and findyng the parties at a Table together, which were reported to be the makers of the sayd Musters: in stede of executing my commaundement, sate downe with thē, and afterwarde reported to me that he could not find them: by meanes wher∣of they had oportunitie to get them se∣cretly away. It was very true, that long time be∣foreArtilery gi∣uen to the Lorde of Brederode. these alterations, I presented the Lord of Brederode with three peeces of great Ordinance, which I caused to be shot new againe afterward at Utreight (a Towne of the kynges maiesties) in the open sight of all men, and sent them to the said Lord, howbeit long tyme be∣fore the sayd mustryng, when he was yet in the kyngs maiesties seruis, and had the charge of certayne Ordinance, vnder hym. So that it is no lesse a∣gaynst reason to blame vs for geuyng and presentyng the sayd artilerie, than to blame them that preferred the sayde Lord of Brederode to the said Lieute∣nantship of the Ordināce, specially see∣yng that the same Lord of Brederode beyng assured by the Regent (authori∣sed by the kyngs maiestie, as is sayd a∣fore)
that none of the things aforepassed should be layd to his charge, had not a∣ny reason to fortifie hym selfe, agaynst the kyng. Nother was there any like∣lyhood of cause why we should refuse the performāce and deliuery of the sayd gyft, which we had promised hym be∣fore, and which he knew to be redy and appoynted afore hande for hym, and to be as neare Uiane as vtreyght. Therfore to come to ye pithe of ye saidThe wordes conteined in the Sum∣mons. Summons, the effect wherof was that I should forbid certaine of the kynges maiesties places and cities, to receyue his garrisons, and among other places, in Zeland, whether it is expressely said, that we sent men to take it, thereby to shut the kyng out, and to stop his maie∣sties passage by sea: I doo not thinke that euer I vsed any suche speache as might minister occasion to deuise that accusation, or to cause it to be surmised, that if our part had had sufficient proofe of it, they should haue bin driuen to haue specifyed the tyme and place, seyng that all accusers are bounde of right to such specification. Yet notwithstanding for as much as Zeland is named amōg others, I wyllyngly graunt, that kno∣wyng and hauyng oftentymes infour∣med the Counsaile of the importance of
that Countrey, & being aduertised thatAll this ap∣peereth by many let∣ters sent in Marche. an. 1567. there was a drift in practising agaynst it, I sent the Lord Bouxtel thyther, to the end that no men of warre should be receiued there, without myne appoynt∣ment, accordyng to the ordinary maner & custome, which is, that no such thing may be done in those countreys, but by the commaundement of the Gouernour of them. And I confesse also that hauing receyued aduertisement from the Cap∣tayne of Zeburge which is a Fortres in the Ile of Walcheren, a part of Zeland aforesayd, which was all vnder my go∣uernment) that two hundred souldiers were arryued there, sent from the Re∣gent, to enter into the sayd Fortresse, & that he could not receiue them, as well for feare of some mutinie of his owne men, which were vnpayd, and woulde not abide that others stronger than thē selues should so openly step in among them: as also because of the streynesse of the place, and for scarsitie of victuals: I sent him word agayn, that I thought his reasons very good, & that he should not receyue any souldiers there, with∣out further commisson from the Re∣gent, and from vs as Gouernor there. Of the which distresses the Regent be∣yng likwise aduertised by the Captayn,
became of the same opinion that I was of: and sendyng money to pay the soul∣diers, tooke order that of the two hun∣dred, no moe but fiftie should be recei∣ued, whiche entered in anon after, by our commaundement to the Capteine by our letters. Now when report was made to the Regent how I had commaunded the said Lord of Bouxtell to receiue no gar∣rison into the Ile, no not euen though it were sent from her highnesse: I intē∣ded to haue excused my selfe by my let∣ters: howbeit that at that tyme such or∣der had not bin expedient, bycause that as then I was at Antwerp & hir high∣nesse at Brussels, who in like caces con∣cernyng my gouernement, had not bin wont to do any thyng without making of me priuy to it afore, and therefore I assured my selfe that she would not send any garrison into the Ile, without ma∣kyng me of coūsell therewith, seyng she might do it without let or delay: Wher∣as on the contrary part, vnder pretence of the sayd garrison, the fortresse might be surprised, (as hath bin seene to haue happened diuers times vnto others) for the which I might afterward haue bin driuen and constreined to aunswere, by much more apparaunt reasons than are
now made to accuze me withall. In so much that for th more assurance of the sayd fortresse and countrey, I had good reason to forbyd the sayd Capteine and all others, (yea and that euen by special and expresse commaūdement) to receiue any garrison, bycause the fortresse was sufficiently prouided for already, and the want of vittels should bee increaced by the ouer increacing of the garrison. By reason wherof, and for asmuch as the other places and Cities of the Coū∣trey haue alwayes offered to spend their bodies and goods in his Maiesties ser∣uis, & haue certified him that they nee∣ded no garrison, by sendyng their depu∣ties to the Gouernesse for the same pur∣poze: there was no likelihode at all that I shoulde by that meanes surprize the sayd Coūtrey, and by that shift shet out the kynges Maiestie, and cut of his pas∣sage by sea, seyng that the very deede it selfe hath bewrayed and shewed the contrarie. For at such time as certeine Barkes loden with men whom I had put out of And werp by open Proclamation for the better assurāce of the rest and quiet∣nesse of the towne, came before the Ile: the inhabitauntes did set themselues at defence, & woold not suffer them to take
lād, so that beyng fayne to take ship and returne backe agayne, they were after∣ward discofited vpon the riuer about Andwerp, for want of vittels armour & other needefull thyngs, notwithstāding that they had caused it to be bruted that they would go to the ayde of the Lorde of Brrode. Which thing caused great vprore and hurlyburly in the Towne, where both the Lord of Hoochestrate & I, were often in daunger of our lyues, (by reason of the Magistrates coward∣linesse in that he durst not shew himself, which gaue great occasiō of the vprore, to the breach of ye peace there stablished) bycause it was thought that we letted the succours that some intended to haue ministred vnto them, (togither with the outrages that leawd folkes attempted to practize,) howbeit that in the ende through Gods goodnesse we appeazed all without any bludshed. Which dea∣lyng of ours argueth vs to haue bin farre of from sending those mē into Ze∣land to surprize the Coūtrey, in asmuch as all our doynges tended to the con∣trary. For had that bin our purpoze, wee shoulde not haue commaunded the Capteyne and the men of that Coun∣trey to receiue no mē of warre, but con∣trarywise to haue receyued them and
taken them in: and it appeered so much the more, in that wee offered the men of Andwerp, to goe out of the Towne and to discōfite the assembly our selues, with such company as was there which thyng was misliked of for feare of com∣motiō, which discouered it selfe after the sayd discomfiture as hath bin sayd afore. Now then seyng there was no loo∣kyng for his Maiesties cōmyng by sea: there was not any likelyhod that by the takyng of Zeland wee ment to stop his passage and to shet him out of it, whiche thyng (cōsideryng how the townes and fortresses were at his Maiesties deuo∣tion) it was not possible for vs to do by sending mē without head, without cap∣teine, without authoritie, without ex∣presse cōmaundement from vs, & which could not bee receiued there bycause of our order taken to the contrary: but in that cace we should haue bin there per∣sonally in the Countrey, whereby I should haue giuen some cause for men to thinke, that folke would euery where haue stooped to me as to their gouer∣nour, and haue yelded me their accusto∣med obediēce, as they had done in all o∣ther Cities and holdes of our gouerne∣ment: for that had bin a more apparant and sure meanes, than to send thither a
sort of rascall fellowes, vnarmed vngo∣uerned, and vnguided (for whom we should at leastwise haue prouided in a cace, beyng so well able to doe it by meanes of the towne of And werp as e∣uery man knowes) and which were af∣terward dispatched in manner without any resistence or defence, in somuch that no man hauyng any experience of the warres, would haue trusted to them in an exployt of importāce, and much lesse I, who had farre better meanes to as∣sure me of the Countrey, if I had myn∣ded it, as I did not. And therfore I mar uell that men of skill and wisedome wil vse such allegations, whereof they not only nother haue nor euer shalhaue any proofe, but also which haue not in them any shewe of likelyhode. Wherfore to come to the poynt of theThe accusa∣tion concer∣nyng And∣erpe. sayd Summons, which auoucheth that beyng in Antwerp to appeaze the trub∣bles and vprores of the people, we suf∣fered and graunted the exercize of all sectes to go at libertie in the towne in∣differently: it is to be cōsidered that be∣fore I tooke my charge vppon me, I declared opnly in full Counsell of the states, that it laye not in me nor was myne intent to take vppon me to sup∣presse the preachyng (whiche was then
ched with the exercize of the Religiō as a necessary appurtnaunce of the same) which charge (as I toke it) I haue per∣formed wt vnspeakable trauell, thought and care, by the aduice of the mē of law of the citie, & of the faculties of the mar∣chauntes, all the which confessedIt appea∣reth by their owne report made the 4. of Sept. 1566. that by my meanes and order they accoūted them selues assured of the quietnesse of the Towne, thankyng vs for it with al their hartes. Whiche thyng falleth out in effect to be confirmed approued and cōfessed by the Regent also, who hauyng coit∣ted the keepyng of the citie in quietnes, to the County of Hoochestraten, in our absence, while we were pacifying the Countreys of Holland Zeland and U∣treyght, inioyned and appoynted him expreslyIt appea∣reth by her letters of the. 4. 5. and 8. of Octob. 1566. to followe the steppes that I had gone before him. Whiche thyng ne∣uerthelesse they do now go about to de∣face, chaungyng the thynges that were openly allowed, into the crime of hygh treason, agaynst all likelyhode of truth. For I graunted not any Religion one or other in the towne, but only suffered & bare with such as had begō to preach openly before my commyng thither, ac∣cordyng to my declaration heretofore blamed. For although y• Regēt shewed
sufficiently that she hild with all Reli∣gions which agreed not with the Ro∣mish Religiō, & esteemed of them all a∣like, as namely with the Anabaptistes, agaynst whom I was desirous to haue ade publicke defence if her hyghnesse had liked it: yet did I put all such to si∣lence, as did put thē selues forth to be∣gynne any preachynges after my com∣myng thither. Moreouer the preachings that were made without the towne, were not re∣ceiued into the towne by vs: but when I was called to the Court, without ha∣uyng obteined that some other bodye might be substituted in my sted to looke to the quietnesse of the towne, or that I might send a Lieutenant thither, (not∣withstādyng that I did expressy require it): in the meane while some fell to pul∣lyng downe, destroying, and breakyng a sunder of images euery where, & they that preached erst without the towne, began to get them Churches, yea euen by authoritie of the magistrate. And (af∣ter the composition made betweene the Regent authorized by the kyng, and the contederates)It appee∣eth by the agreement made the 23 of August. 1566. when as in the end they were contented to haue left vppe their Churches agayne, and to haue conti∣newed their preachynges in their accu∣stomed
places without the town accor∣dyng to the compositiō: the Magistrate thought it It appee∣reth by their owne report made the 24. of August. 1566. more expediēt for many cō∣siderations, to graunt and assigne them places within the Towne. By meanes wherof, when the parties were once a∣greed, I could do no lesse by vertue of my Commission, but followe the com∣position. For in asmuch as I was sent to kepe the towne in quiet, and in loyaltie to the kyng: it was our dewty to frame our selues to that whiche we sawe they had settled in vnitie and quiet, specially cō∣sidering the weyghtinesse of the reasons that had moued the townesmen to con∣sent to the thynges aforesayd, (whereof I did thē aduertize as well the kyng as the Regent,) It appee∣reth by their letters sent in Sep∣temb. 1566. besides that it was not possible to keepe the peace without suf∣feryng of the sayd preachynges and the exercizyng of the Religion out of hand, the necessitie of which exercize offered it selfe welneere hourely by reason of the multitudes that followed the Sermōs, whiche were sayne to be suffered euery where, in somuch that they were vsed o∣pēly in Churches, which was the cause that the Magistrate thought it good & needefull to suffer, not only the exercize, but also the erection of Churches. And
that so much the rather, byeause winter was at hand, by reason whereof, other∣wise an other secōd inuasion was to be feared, wherin the other churches were like to haue bin taken: and therfore the Magistrate was not only willyng but also desirous to further the sayd Chur∣ches: whereunto bycause we sawe that all others had no lesse good will thā he: wee thought it stoode not in any wise with our dewtye, to hinder the thyng that might assure vs of the execution of our charge. The same may also sere vs for answer, in respect of their cōsistories, in as much as both before our commyng, yea and euē before there was any publike prea∣chyng, the Protestants kept their Con∣sistories, (for in dede they had their con∣sistories euery where euē in all rymes) & also because that although we neuer cō∣sented vnto them, yet we neuer saw a∣ny likelyhood of trouble to insewe by meanes of them. It is very true, that to let the assemblyng of the cōmon peo∣ple vpon euery occasion, I affirmed and thought good, that some should be ap∣poynted to deale in the name of all the rest, because I saw no way els to per∣forme my charge, and to maintee and preserue the peace, and to auoyd all con∣fusion
and disorder. Againe, I could not perceiue that a∣ny inconuenience or danger should fo∣low of their buildyng of Churches (as some surmized,) seeyng that a Church could cause no more euil than a house or any other place? and that for as much as I was sent to kepe the citie in peace and tranquilitie, it behoued me for the auoyding of all inconueniences, rather to disappoynt the occasions and purpo∣sings of attaynyng thereunto, than to styrre vp & prouoke the parties by im∣peachyng the erection of a Church, or by any such other meane, ad so to giue occasion of other troubles, whiche it should haue bin impossible to haue o∣uerruled afterward, without doyg di∣rectly agaynst our Commission, and without settyng of all thynges in a broyle. Also this may serue partly for a so∣lution to the last part of the foresayde Suminons, which conteyneth that I should suffer the leuying, taxing, and gatheryng of money to be imployed af∣terward vpon the reteynyng of souldi∣ers and men of warre. For I know of none other leuyinges, taxations, and gatheryngs, than onely such as were made afore my commyng, for the reliefe
of the poore, and the maintenaunce of the Ministers, and aferwarde for the buildyng of the Churches. And it shall neuer be found that any collection was made to my benefite, or imployed vpon the leuying of souldiers, or vpon the intertaynment of men on myne owne behalf, by reason wherof I should haue apparant occasion to suffer the said tax∣ations and collections. Moreouer, my refuzing of the fiftie thousand Florens that were offered me from the accountantes by the Sates of Holland, for the good seris that I had done to the kyng and the Countrey du∣ryng the troubles, by appeasing the vp∣rores there, dooth (as I thinke) suffici∣ently shew, that it was not mine intent to suffer any such collections, taxations and leuyings, which it was not other∣wise possible to let in Cities of traffike, as in Antwerp, where ther was in ma∣ner nothing els but gatheryng of mo∣ney for diuers purposes. For as much therfore as I haue most euidently (as I hope) shewed that no euyl or inordinate affection of mine, vp∣on any ambitious desire to vsurpe a∣boue the authoritie of the kyng, (wher∣of all our countenances, sayinges, and doinges haue bin cleare, yea and cleane
contrary to it) hath bin the cause of any trouble, as wherby we could not haue hoped for any benefite, so that I was not the cause of any innouation, that might set the people in any broyle or vnquietnesse: but that on the contrary part, the sayd Cardinall of Granuill, was the cause of al the said innouations and of al the mislikyng that was ingen∣dred afterward betweene the king and the people, by his vsurping of extraor∣dinary authoritie aboue all the Coun∣sels, yea and euen aboue the Regent, in hope to mainteyne, augment, and in∣crease the same his authoritie by insti∣tutyng of new Bishops, by confirming of the Inquisition, and by renewyng of the Iniunctions, to satisfi his owne am∣bition and couetousnesse, whiche cary∣ed hym away so headlōg at other times also, that he dyd set dissension and mii∣king betweene great Potentates, yea and euen betweene the late right high and happy Princes. Charles the Em∣perour, and his brother Ferdinand and his sonnes: I thinke that such as are of iudgement, and haue experience in matters, wyll not sticke either to acquit me of the mischiefes and inconuenien∣ces that haue happened in the said coū∣treys, and of the alteration of the appa∣ra
felicitie thereof, into extreme bon∣age, penurie, and wretchednesse: or to charge the said Cardinall with them, whom men go about to set vp againe in authoritie, by the ouerthrow and de∣struction of the countrey, in recompence not of any good seruis of his, (for the which, had he done neuer so many and so great good turnes, he and his had sufficiently cut out their own shares al∣ready, without leauyng any part to the discretion of the kings maiestie) but of the mischiefes & inconueniences aboue∣said, and to giue hym oportunitie to worke mo: wheras al our seuices done to the great damage and hinderāce both of vs and of our auncetours, of whom some haue dyed in his seruis, and euen at the fete of his Emperiall maiestie, are forgotten, and we spoyled, not only of our goodes, by trifling, false, and sur∣mised causes, reasons, and allegations, and by such kind of proceedings as are vtterly against all right, law, and cu∣stome, (as hath bin shewed heretofore, and by It appea∣eth by the lisproofe & uoydance ent to the ttorney enerall, & o the Duke f Alua, the  of March 568. an other writing of ours:) but also of our honour and our childe, which are things dearer to vs than our lyfe: all which is to the preiudice, not only of vs, but also of the kyngs maie∣stie, of whose couenants, bonds, othes,
and promises there is no regard at all had, which is so vnorderly, vnreasona∣ble, and spitefull a kind of dealing, as it can not be auoyded, but that it must one day breede some inconuenience, which I beseech God, that the kyngs maiestie being inlightened with his diuine brightnesse and light, may turne away and preuent, and rightly take intelli∣gence of the dooynges of his good ser∣uants and faithfull subiectes, which are now wrongfully selaundered, persecu∣ted, and afflicted: so as the world may know that the thinges which haue pas∣sed, proceeded not of his maiesties own nature, but of the misreportes, tales, and sclaunders of such as haue disguised the truth, and concealed it from hym, e∣uen to this hore. ¶ The Summons or Citation sent out against the Prince of Orendge. Nouemb. 1. PHilip by the grace of God, kyng of Castile, Lyons, Ar∣ragon, and Nauarre▪ &c. To our chiefe Hussher or Serie∣ant at Armes, vpon this re∣quired, Greeting. We are informed by our welbeloued and faithfull Counsel∣ler
and Attorney general, that the Lord William of Nassaw Prince of Orēdge, hauyng receiued both of our late Lorde and Father the right noble Emperour Charles the fift, (to whom God grant rest) and also of vs since our commyng to our state, many honors and promo∣tions, as our choozing of hym to be a brother of our own Order, our naming and admitting of hym to be of our coū∣sell of estate, and our preferryng of hym to diuers goodly Roomes, Charges, & Offices: as namely to the gouernment of Burgundie, Holland, Zeland, and Utreight, together with the Lieute∣nantship of our Ordinaunce, besides a number of other notable rewardes, wherby he might see the great trust and estimation that I alwayes had of hym, in respect wherof he should do the more amisse, in behauing hym selfe otherwise than becomes a good subiect. Yet not∣withstandyng, hauyng sinall regard of his owne honour, and to the othes of faithfulnesse and loyaltie, which he had geuen to vs as to his soueraigne Lord, and in respect of the sayd Order, and of the sayde Roomes and Offices, hath made hym selfe the head author, furthe∣rer, fauorer, and harbrower of Rebels, Conspirators, Coniurators, mutiners,
priuie practizers, and disturbers of the common welfare and quietnesse. For as it were immediatly after our departure out of that Countrey, towardes our Realme of Spayne, he and certayne o∣thers practised to take vpō them & to v∣surpe the whole orderyng and gouer∣nyng of our Countreys thereawayes. And for the accomplishment thereof, he wrought and conueied many secret and pernicious practises, wherein he ouer∣shot hym selfe o farre, as to determyne to enter into armes agaynst vs, and to exclude vs out of those Countreys, which thing he hath not fayled to do so farre as he was able, by vsyng all kinde of curtiie yly towardes our good sub∣iectes, to withdrawe them from the lo∣uyngnesse and loyaltie which they haue alwayes shewed to vs and our prede∣cessors. Yea, and which is so much the more detestable and horrible, vnder the cloke and pretence of Religion, and through false perswasion, that our in∣tent sould be (which was neuer so) to bring the Spanish Inquisition into those our Countreys, in so much that by his like inductions and impressions, many of our subiects haue rizen vp and rebel∣led agaynst vs, and specially the sayde prince hath seduced, corrupted, and stir∣red
vp a great part of the noble men, & gētlemē, so as they haue made leagues, conspiracies, & coniurations, & sworne to defend & strengthen themselues ther∣by against vs and against our ordinan∣ces which haue bin alwayes kept and obserued in those Countreys. And for the same purpose he hath made assem∣blyes in his owne houses, as well at Breda, as in this our city of Brusselles, yea and afterward receyued the Rebels into his protection and safegard, with promise of his assistence. Whereupon they haue put them selues in Armes a∣gainst vs in diuers places of the coun∣trey. Also the sayd Prince hath coūseled and ayded the Lord of Brederode cheef Capteine of the Rebelles, to fortifie his towne of Uiane agaynst vs, and suffe∣red him to leuye men of warre in our Citie of And werp in the open sight and knowledge of all men, contrary to the orders then newly taken and proclay∣med, and to shyp them to the sayd town of Uiane with all manner of warrelike munitions, moreouer furnishyng the sayd Lorde of Brederode with certeine peeces of artillerie, besides that he for∣bade certeine towns & places to receiue any garrisons frō vs, & among others, our coūtrey of Zeland, vnto the which
he sent men of purpoze to surprize it, & by that meanes to shet vs out, & to stop our passage by sea. Furthermore where as the sayd Prince was sent to our Ci∣tie of. Andwerp to pacifie the trubbles and commotiōs of the people: he of his owne priuate authoritie and besides his commission, hath permitted and graun∣ted the exercize of all sectes indifferently in the Citie, and giuē the sectaries leaue to erect many Temples and Consisto∣ries, according whereunto they were e∣rected in deede, whereof haue insewed the incōueniēces & dangers which eue∣ry man knowes of. Also he hath suffred leuyinges, taxations, and collections of money to bee made, whiche afterward were imployed about the payment and wagyng of men of warre. Many other thyngs hath he done duryng his abode there, whiche our Attourney shall de∣clare more at large, & make apparāt in dew tyme & place, if neede be. Al which thynges tend to his foresayd drift, that by that meanes hee might vsurpe vpon our subiectes, & take vpon him the au∣thoritie that belongeth allonly vnto vs, which is apparātly high trazō not to be borne wt nor to be winked at, but wor∣thy of punishment and correction to the example of others, if it be as our said
Attourney sayth, who requireth that it may pleaze vs to graunt him cōuenient prouision accordyng to the crime, with clauze of authoritie agaynst the sayde prince of Orēdge. Therfore be it knowne to you, that we hauyng considered the thynges aforesayd, doe commaunde and authorize you by theis presentes, that at the request of our sayd Counseler & At∣tourney generall, you put foorth your selfe, and (with such ayde and assistaunce as you shall thinke meete,) attache and apprehende by the body the sayd Prince of Orēdge wheresoeuer ye shall fynde him in our sayde Countreys heere, and him leade and conuey vnder good & sure gard, to the prisons of our Court in our sayd Citie of Brussels, there to appeere before our right deere and trusty Cou∣sin, Knight of our order Gouernour & Capteyne generall for vs of our sayde Coūtreys the Duke of Alua, Marquis of Coria &c. appointed purpozely by vs for the same matter, & to receiue punish∣ment and correction for his sayd crimes and cōspiracies, accordyng to the desert of them, as shalbe founde meete by rea∣son and equitie in that cace. And that if you cannot take or apprehend him, ye sū∣mon him and cite him by publicke pro∣clamation and crye, vnder peine of per∣petuall
banishmēt and forfeyture of his goodes, to appeere personally within . fifteenes then next insewyng (whereof you shal assigne him the first fifteene for the first day, the secōd fifteene for the se∣cōd day, and the third for the last & per∣emptory day of lawe without lookyng for any moe) before our sayd Cousin the Duke of Alua, in our sayd Towne of Brusselles, or in such other place as he shall then bee within our low Coun∣treys, to answere to such points and ar∣ticles as our sayde Attourney generall shall take and chooze agaynst him, con∣cernyng the foresayd matters and others, that by keepyng of the day hee may set them downe and debate them more at large accordyng to his Commissiō, and proceede further therin, and see what is to be done accordyng to reasō. And you shall signifie to the sayd Prince, that if hee come not at the first, second, or third and last fifteene dayes: Iustice shall proceede agaynst him in his absence, as is conueni∣ent in such caces. And whatsoeuer you shall haue done in that behalfe, we will haue you to certifie our sayd Cousin the Duke of Alua thereof sufficiently at the sayd day: to whom we giue commission and speciall charge for the causes afore sayd, that vpon the heeryng of the par∣ties,
hee doe and minister, good, short, rightfull, and reasonable Iustice, as be∣commeth in such caces. And if the Prince of Orendge bee stubborne and make de∣fault: we will that he proceede to ye pro∣nouncyng of the sayd banishment, & to the proclayming of the sayd forfeyture, and to the executyng of all such other thyngs as he shall see meete to be done, by right and reason in that cace. And so to do, we giue you full power and au∣thoritie and speciall commission. Char∣gyng and commaundyng all our Iusti∣ces Officers and subiectes to obey you in doyng hereof, and to attend diligent∣ly vppon you, and to geue you counsell ayde and comfort, and prizonroome al∣so if neede bee & that you require it. For so is our pleasure. And bycause the sayd Prince of Orendge (as we heere say) hath gotten him selfe away out of our coūtveys: our will is in that ace, that the summōs & citatiō which you shal make by Proclamation and open cry within the barres of our Court at Brusselles, & your settyng vp of the Copyes of this our presentes togither with your sayd doynges, and your castyng of them in at the outtermost part of the Prince of Orendges houses within our coūtreys, & your stickyng vp of like Copyes vpō
the doores and Iawmes of the cheef church there, to the intent he may not be able to pretende ignoraunce, shalbe of as good force, valew, & power, as if it had bin done to the sayd Prince of Orēdgis owne person, & for such haue we autho∣rized & do authorize the said Summons and Citatiō by theis presentes. But for asmuch as other men haue commission to deale with the takyng of the Inuen∣torie of the sayd Princes goods, meddle not you with them. Giuen in our sayd Citie of Brussels, the xix. day of Ianua∣ry, the yeere of grace 1567: and the yeere of our reigne, ouer Spayne, Sicile, &c. the xiij: and ouer Naples, the xv. It was subscribed thus: By the kyng. And vnder written thus, Mesdach. And sea∣led with a Seale of red wax vppon a halfe labell. ¶ A Copie of the Serieant at Armes doynges.No. 1▪ BY vertew of the letters pa∣tentes of personall Summōs wherof the Copy is set word for word heere before, I Fraū∣cis Knibber ordinary Serieant at armes to the priuy & the great Counsels, haue this present xxiiij. day of Ianuary the
yeere 1567. at the request and instance of the kynges Maiesties Counseller and Attourney generall the obteiner of thē, came into the Listes of the Court at Brusselles at eleuen of the clocke in the forenoone, where hauyng caused the Trumps to be sounded I haue with lowd voyce and open crye red the sayd letters patentes, and by the vertew of the same, summoned and cited William of Nassawe Prince of Orendge on the kynges Maiesties behalfe, to come and appeere personally, from fifteene dayes to fifteene dayes in. tymes, wherof the first fiftene shalbe the ix. day of Februa∣ry, the second fifteene shalbe the xxv. of the same moneth, and the third and last fifteene which is the peremptorie day of law without lookyng for any mo, shal∣be the eleuenth day of Marche follow∣yng. And this to be done before the hygh and mighty Duke of Ala, (Marquis of Coria &c. Knight of the order, and Go∣uernour and Capteine generall for the kynges Maiestie in his low coūtreys) in the sayd Citie of Brusselles, or in any such other place as my Lorde the sayde Duke shal then be: vpon Peyne of perpe∣tuall bannishement and forfeyture of all goodes belonging to the sayd Prince of Orēdge: there to answere to such points
and Articles as the sayd Attourney ge∣nerall shall list to take & chooze agaynst him, and moreouer, as is reherced more at large in the sayd letters patentes. Done vnder my signe manuell the day, moneth, and yeere aboue written. Un∣derneath was written thus: Conferred and founde to agree, by me. And it was signed thus. Knibber. ¶ An abstract of the last Letters & writynges sent by the kyng to the LadyNo. 2. Regent, togither with the last dispatch concernyng the cace of Religion. FIrst as touchyng the Iniuncti∣ons and decrees as wel old as new wich concerne the cace of Religion, his maiestie vnder∣standyng in what state Religion stode in those quarters, thought it not expe∣dient to make any chaunge or alteratiō of them, but that as well the Iniunctions of the late Emperours Maiestie, as his owne Maiesties Iniunctions should be put in executiō: for he saw that the cause of all the mischief that had happened, & the cause of the increacyng & spreadyng of it so farre, had bin the negligence, co∣wardlynesse, and dissimulation of the Iudges. And therfore if there were any
of them that either durst not or would not execute their office for feare of sūme hurlyburly: they should aduertize his Maiestie, that he might prouide others of more corage and better zele towards the execution of thynges, wherof there ought to be no want in that Countrey where there is such store of Catholikes, and so many desious to do God & his Maiestie seruis: by the doyng whereof & the executyng of the Iniunctions, there was good hope that ye hurt which was done there, would better and sooner be remedied, than by any other way. Secondly, as touchyng the Inquisi∣tors of the fayth, his Maiestie chargeth hir highnesse to beare such an euē hand, as they might be fauored in the executiō of their Commission, as the thyng that was expedient for the benefite and vp∣holdyng of the Religion: for it was his Maiesties mynde that the Inquisition should be executed by the Inquisitors as it had bin thitherto, and as belonged to them by the lawes of God and man: af∣firmyng that it was no new thyng, for asmuch as it had bin vsed cōtinewally, as well in the tyme of the late Empe∣rour, as in his owne time, and the incō∣ueniences that were to be feared were much apparanter, neerer, and greater,
where the Inquisitors were not suffered to prouide for things accordyng to their office, nor ayded in their doynges. And for  as hir highnesse knew what that ment, his Maiestie charged hir to do what she could in that behalfe, (for it was very requisite that shee should so doe) and not to consent that any other thyng should bee treated of in that be∣halfe, bycause hir highnesse knew how neere it touched hys hart, and what pleasure and contentation it would bee vnto hym. Thirdly, his Maiestie tooke order with her highnesse, that sith the holy Councell of Trent was already publi∣shed, so as ther remayned now no more to doo, but the puttyng therof in execu∣tion, which was a thyng that belonged to the Bishops: her highnesse shoulde giue them all the furtherance and helpe that shee possibly coulde, that it might take effect as it ought to doo. Also he would that the Decres of the Councel of Trent that concerned the reformati∣on of the lyues and maners of the Cler∣gie, should be put in execution: char∣gyng as well hir highnesse, as all his Officers, to fauour and further them by all requisite meanes: and that if neede should require any further prouision to
be made on his maiesties behalfe, shee shoulde cause it to be dispatched out of hande, that euen where the men of the Church would not obey the reformati∣on that was to be made by the bishops, there they might be framed and made conformable by the Decrees of the sayd Councel of Trent. And finally he affirmed that the thin∣ges which his maiestie had written to her highnesse, as hath bin sayd hereto∣fore, concerned the prosperitie of Reli∣gion, and of the countreys there, which would be nothyng worth, without that Order, for that was the onely way to kepe them in iustice, peace, and tranqui∣litie. And seeyng that her highnesse knewe what commoditie it brought: he desired her eftsoones to folow that way whereby the foresayde thynges might take effect, for it was the thyng wherby his maiestie should receyne moste con∣tentment, as well at the handes of her highnesse, as of the Lordes that were a∣bout her: to whom he would haue her to geue the same charge, to the end they should imploy them selues therunto, as his maiestie hopeth that they wil, with∣out faile, because they be sure that he wil like well of it, besides that they shall therein doo the duetie of such persona∣ges
as they be, and accordingly as they be bound to doo in respect of their ser∣uis towards God and his maiestie, & in respect both of the benefit of the whole Countrey there, and of their owne pe∣culiar welfare. ¶ Margaret by the grace of God, Duchesse of Parma and Pleasance. &c.No. 2. Regent and Gouernesse. &c. RIght deare and welbeloued, al∣thoughe that euen from the first begynnyng of the reigne of my Lord the kyng, ouer these Coun∣treys, as wel by the reuiuyng and pub∣lishyng of the Iniunctions and Decrees concernyng Religion, made by my late Lord of noble memory the Emperour Charles (whom God hath receiued in∣to his glory) and now ratified and con∣firmed by the kinges maiestie, as by the thynges that he hath written vnto you since, specially from his last departure out of these countreys into his realmes of Spayne, you might alwayes well perceiue his good zeale and most holy affection in mainteinyng our  true fayth and Catholike Religion, and for the rootyng out of all sctes and he∣refies in these Countreys here: yet not∣withstanding
for as muche as it hath pleazed his maiestie for certeyne occasi∣ons, to reuiue his most holy intent by his late letters: we by expresse com∣maundement from hym, haue thought it good to imparte vnto you what he hath written vnto vs, the effect wherof is this: that his maiestie coueting no∣thing more than the maintenance of the said Religion, and of his good subiectes hereawayes in good quietnesse, peace, vnitie, and concord: and to preserue thē from the inconueniences that haue bin seene to happen in many parts of Chri∣stendome through the chaunge of the sayd Religion: purpozeth and inten∣deth that the Iniunctions and ordinan∣ces made as well by the late Emperors Maiestie, as also by hym selfe, shalbe throughly kept and obserued, and like∣wise that men shall most straytly keepe the Decrees of the holy Councell of Trent, and the prouinciall Councelles, specially in respect of the reformation of the Clergie, without gaynsaying of any thing, to the ende that heresies may be punished, and manners also corrected, and men may yeeld all fauour and assi∣stence to the Inquisitors of the fayth in the executing of their office, and that the Inquisition may be put in vre as it hath
bin hitherto, and as it ought to be by the law of God and man, which thyng his Maiestie commaundeth expressely by his said letters. Wherfore according to this his maiesties writyng againe, to the intent to obey the same in a thyng so holy & so worthy to be fauored, I could not forbeare to write thus much  you, praying and beseching you, and on his maiesties behalfe expresly cōmaun∣ding you to rule & behaue your selues herein accordyng to his appoyntment, without withstādyng of it in any point or article, yea and to giue intelligence therof to the Officers & en of Law of the chiefe townes of the coūtrey & Du∣chie of Brabād, that they also may rule thē selues according hereunto, without dissembling or winkyng at thyngs, vn∣der the penalties conteyned in the sayd Iniunctions. And that ye may the bet∣ter intend vnto it, you shall appoy and ordeyne a Counseller of your Col∣ledge, (who notwithstandyng may be chaunged at euery halfe yeare, to the in∣tent that no one man be ouerburthened continually) to doo nothing els but to haue an eye to the Countrey of Bra∣band, for the keepyng of the Decrees of the said most holy Councell, and to ad∣ertize you from tyme to tyme of all oc∣currents▪
that ye may prouide for them accordyng to his Maiesties meanyng. And to the intent we may continually know the state of religion, in the poyn∣tes aboue mentioned: we desire and commaund you, as before, to write vn∣to vs particularly of the successe of thin∣ges from three monethes to three mo∣nethes, & to repayre to vs (if there hap∣pen any hard poynt) or to such as are of his maiesties priuie counsel, that report thereof may be made vnto vs, for the which purpose we likewise wil appoint some Coūseller to take peculiar charge therof, and to be answerable to you, or to hym whom you shall assigne. And to the end that in all the thyngs aboue∣sayd, ye may the better perceiue his ma∣iesties expresse wyl: we haue caused the poyntes of his letters and other wri∣tinges that concerne this matter, to be annexed to this letter, that ye may rule and guide your selues accordyng to th forme & tenor of them, without making any default. And thus right deare and welbeloued, our Lord haue you in his holy keeping. Written at Brussels the . day of December. 1565. H. V. It was subscribed thus: Margaret. And somewhat lower it was signed thus: Of Ouerloepe. Agayne vpon the backe i
was indorsed thus: To our right de and welbeloued the Chauncelor and men of the kynges Counsell in Brabant. ¶ A Supplication of the Noble men of the low Countrey, presentedNo. 3. to the Lady Regent the Duchesse of Parma and Pleasance, the fift of Aprill. 1566. before Easter. MAdame, it is well enough knowen, that the people of the low Countrey haue al∣wayes & yet are styll great∣ly renowined throughout all Christendome for their great faythfulnesse towardes their na∣turall Lordes and Princes, wherin the Nobilitie and Gentlemē haue alwayes gone foremost, as they that neuer spared either body or goodes, in the maynte∣nance and increasement of their Prin∣ces states. And in the saine manner we his masties most humble subiects are mynded to continue styll, from well to better, so as we be ready night and day to doo hym humble seruis both with our bodyes & our goodes. And for as much as we see in what plight thinges stand at this present, we haue chozen ra∣ther
to hazard the bryngyng of some mislikyng and displeasure vppon our owne heades, than to conceale suche thynges from your highnesse, as might hereafter turne to the preiudice of the kyngs maiestie, and therwithal disturb the peace and quietnesse of the Coūtrey. Hopyng that the euent wyll shewe in time, that of al the seruises which we ei∣ther haue done, or shal doo to his maie∣stie hereafter, this is worthy to be takē for one of the noblest, and to best pur∣poze: in respect wherof we be through∣ly perswaded, that your highnesse can not but take it in good worth. There∣fore Madam, although we doubt not but that all that euer his maiestie hath decreed both heretofore, and now new∣ly again at this present, conceryng the Inquisition, and the streight obsernyng of the Iniunctions in the case of Religiō, haue some good grounde and iust title, namely for the continuyng of the thyn∣ges which the late Emperour of noble memorie Charles, had vpon very good meanyng determined and stablished: yet notwithstandyng, seeing that the di∣uersitie of tymes bringeth diuersitie of remedyes with them, and the sayd In∣iunctions haue already geuen occasion of many griefes and inconueniences
now many yeares since, for all the exe∣cutyng of them with extreme rigour. Surely his Maiesties laste resolution whereby he not only forbyddeth the mi∣tigatyng of the Iniunctions any whyt at all, but also commaundeth expresly that the Inquisition should proceede, and the Iniunctions be executed with all rigour: doth giue vs sufficient cause of iust feare that therby not onely the inconuenien∣ces wyl be greatly augmented: but also there wyl in the end insue some general commotion and insurrection, tendyng to the miserable ruine of the whole Contrey, accordyng as the manifest to∣kens of mtinie among the people, (which appeareth already euerywhere) doo shewe vs openly to the eye. Wherfore consideryng the apparāce and greatnesse of the daūgers that ma∣nace vs, we haue hoped hitherto, that either the Lordes or els the states of the Countrey would haue aduertized your highnesse therof one tyme or other, that you might haue remedyed it by remo∣uyng the cause and grounde of the mis∣cheef. But when we sawe that they did not put forth thēselues to do it, by reasō of sum occasions to vs vnknowen, and that in the meane while the mischeef in∣creaced frō day to day, so as it was lyke
to come to a generall insurrection and ceuolt: we hae thought it our dewtie to wayt no longer tyme, but rather ac∣cordyng to the othe of our faith and al∣legeaūce, matched with good meening and zeale towardes his Maistie and the coūtrey, to put forth our selues fore∣most in doyng our needefull indeuer, & that so much the more frankly, as we haue more cause to hope that his Maie∣stie will take our aduertizement in ve∣ry good part, for asmuch as the matter toucheth vs much neerer than any o∣thers, as them that lye more open to the inconueniences and calamities that are customably wont to spryng of like acci∣dents, bycause the most part of vs haue our houses and possessiōs situae in the open fieldes, redy for all men to pray v∣pon: and also forasmuch as if we should follow the rigour of the sayd Iniunctiōs, in such wise as his Maiestie commaun∣deth vs expresly to procede, their should not generally be any man amōg vs, no nor in all the Coūtreys heeraboutes, of whatsoeuer callyng state or degree hee were, which should not roune in daun∣ger of losse both of body and goodes, & bee subiect to the slaunder of hym that would bee his enemye who to haue a share of his goodes so forfeyted, might
accuse him vnder pretēce of the sayd In∣iunctions, wherein there was none o∣ther refuge left for the defēdant, but on∣ly if the officer listed to winke at him, at whose curtesie both his life & his goods did wholly stād. In consideration wher of, we haue the more cause to beseeche your highnes most humbly, (& so do we in deede by this our Supplication) to voutsafe to take some order in the cace, & (bycause it is a matter of great impor∣tance) to send a fit and conuenient per∣son to the Kynges Maiestie with all speede possible, to aduertize him therof, & to beseech him most hūbly on our be∣halfe, that it may pleaze him to prouide remedy in that behalfe as well for heer∣after as for the present tyme. And that for asmuch as that cānot be done by suf∣feryng the sayd Iniunctions to stand in force, bycause they bee the very wel∣spring and roote frō whence all the sayd inconueniences spryng it may pleaze him to giue eare to the abolishyng of them: which he shall finde to be necessa∣ry for the turnyng away of the vniuer∣sall ruine & destruction of all his coun∣treys heere. And to the intent his Maiestie may haue no cause to thinke, that we which haue none other meenyng than to yeld
him most humble seruis, would take v∣pon vs to bridle him and to bynd hym to the stake at our pleasure, as we dout not but our aduersaries will incēse him to our disaduantage: it may please him to make other ordinaūces by the aduice and consent of all the States assembled generally togither, to prouide for the things abouesaid, by sum other meanes more fit and conuenient, and without any euident daunger. Also we most humbly beseeche your highnes, that in the meane seazon while his Maiestie may take intelligence of our inst request, and determine thereof accordyng to his good & rightfull plea∣sure, you will prouide for the sayd daū∣gers by a generall surceassing, as well of the Inquisition as of all executiō of the sayd Iniūctions, vntill his Maiesty haue taken other ordre in the matter. And we protest expresly, that (asmuch as in vs lay) we haue discharged our dewries by this present aduertizement: so that we do now vnburthē our selues of it before God & mē: declaryng plain∣ly, that if any iuconuenience, disorder, sedition, reuolt, or sheadyng of blud in∣sew thereof herafter for want of redresse in tyme, we cannot be blamed of the cō∣cealyng of so apparāt a mischeef. Wher∣in
we take God, the kyng, your high∣nesse, the Lordes of the Counsell, and our owne consciences to witnesse, that our proceedyng therein hath bin as be∣commeth the kynges good & trusty ser∣uaūtes, and faythfull subiectes, without passing the boūdes of our dewty in any point in respect wherof also, we beseech your highnesse so much the more instāt∣ly, to voutsafe to giue eare to it, before any further harme insew thereof. So shall you do well. ¶ The Answere and Replication made to the sayde Supplication in the Counsell of the States by the Lady Re∣gent, was as followeth. HIr highnesse hauying conside∣redNo. 3. the petitions & demaūdes conteined in the said Suppli∣cation, is fully determined to send it to the kyngs Maiestie and to of∣fer it vnto hym with all kynde of dew∣tifulnesse that she cā deuize to serue hir, to moue and incline his Maiestie to cō∣descend to their requestes afore shewed: tellyng thē that there was no cause for them to hope otherwise, than for all thynges meete and agreable to his na∣tiue & accustomed goodnesse for the fur∣theraunce
whereof, hir highnesse by the ayde & aduice of the Rulers of the Pro∣uinces, the Knightes of the Order, and the Lordes of the Counsell, had taken peynes to deuize and penne a modera∣tion of the sayd Iniunctions in the cace of Religion, before the commyng of their informatiōs, to be presented to his ma∣iestie. Which moderation hir highnesse hoped should be such, as should be able to content euery man with reason. And for asmuch as hir authoritie (as the playntifs thēselues might well vnder∣stād and perceiue) stretched not so farre as to surceasse the Inquisitiō and Edictes as they required: and againe it was not meete to leaue the countrey lawlesse in the behalfe of Religiō: hir highnesse ho∣ped that the playntifes would hold thē∣selues contēted with hir sendyng to the kynges Maiestie: promising to take such order in the meane while till his answere were returned, that as wel the Inquisitors themselues where any were alredy, as also their officers should in that respect proceede discretly and mo∣destly in their Commissions, so as men should haue no cause to cōplaine of thē. And hir highnes trusted that the plain∣tifs also would behaue themselues in such sort, as they should haue no neede
to deale otherwize: for she hoped to be∣haue hir selfe so well and dewtifully to∣wardes ye kings Maiestie, as he should be contented to discharge all others of the Inquisition where it was, as may be perceiued by his exemptyng of Brabād frō it at the sute of the cheef Cities ther∣of. And hir highnesse intēded to preferre all good meanes to hys Maiestie so much the more freely, to the end and ef∣fect aforesayd: bycause she did surely be∣leue, that the playntifes had no deter∣minate purpoze or intent, to alter any thyng of the auncient Religion, which had bin obserued in those Countreys, but rather mynded to keepe and mayn∣teine it to the vttermost of their power. Done by hir hyghnesse at Brusselles the xvi. of Aprill. 1565. before Easter, vnder signed. Margaret. ¶The Letters of assurance giuenNo. 4. to the Confederates. MArgaret by the grace of God Duches of Parma and Plea∣sance, Regēt and Gouernesse heere in theis Countreys for my Lord the king to all such as shall see theis presentes, greetyng. Whereas a great nomber of the Gentlemen of this
Countrey togither, did put vp a certein Supplication vnto vs in the moneth of Aprill last past, the effect wherof was that it might pleaze the kynges Maie∣stie to abrogate and abolish the Inquisi∣tion and Edictes, as well old as new, (which they sayd were ouerrigorous & therfore could not be put in execution) and in sted of thē to make others by the generall aduise and consent of the states of the sayd Countrey, beseechyng vs to send the same Supplication to his Ma∣iesty, that he might prouide for it: wher∣upon we hild many great consultatiōs with the gouernours of the Coūtreys, the Knightes of the Order, the Coūsell of estate, & his Maiesties priuy Coun∣sell: after we had preferred ye whole vn∣to him, togither with our aduice therin. For asmuch as we sawe that the sayd Gentlemē might perchaunce haue some scruple or dout, that y• kyng would take in ill part their sayd Supplication to∣gither with the confederacie which they had made therupon amōg themselues, & all that had insewed therupon: which misdoutyng might cause some greater mischeef in those coūtreys: We thought it good by the aduice aforesayd, and vp∣on deliberation as is mencioned afore, to sew to the kynges Maiestie, that it
might pleaze him likewize to giue them letters of assuraunce, that they should not be charged with any thyng hereaf∣ter, that had bin do by the occasiō ther∣of. Whereupon his Maiestie hath certi∣fied vs of his good pleazure and mee∣nyng, accordyng wherto we tenderyng the benefite, rest, and tranquilitie of the sayd Countreys, and to mainteine the sayd Gentlemen in such wise as they may the more willyngly yeld their obe∣dience and seruis to his Maiesty, accor∣dingly as they be bound as well by na∣ture as by othe, and as they themselues haue alwayes offred: we (I say) at their request and information, by the power & authoritie which we haue vnder his Maiestie, as Regent & Gouernesse ge∣nerall of theis his Countreys, and by the aduice of the foresayd Gouerners, Knightes of the Order, and Lordes of the Counsell of state beyng with vs, haue for their sayd assurance giuē them a Charter signed with our hand in ma∣ner and forme followyng. HEr highnesse. &c. We doo you to vnderstande, that all things afore mentio∣ned considered, and by the kings maiesties consent and good will,
and by the power and commaundemēt whiche we haue from hym, we in the name and by the power aforesayd haue promised, and by these presents do pro∣mis, that nother his Maiestie nor we, wyll blame or charge the said Gentle∣men for the foresayde Supplication or the confederacie made therupon, or for any thing that hath insued of them vn∣to this present, so their othe and fayth∣fulnesse whiche they haue giuen and plighted vnto vs, as well for them sel∣ues as for the confederates, be confor∣mable to the poyntes and articles a∣boue specified, and wherunto they haue bound them selues. Therefore on the kings maiesties behalfe, we wyll and commaund all Gouernors, Knights of the Order, Lords of the Counsell of E∣state, the Chiefe, the President, and the Lordes of the priuie Counsel, and all o∣ther his maiesties Iustices and Offi∣cers, to whom this cace perteyneth, to mainteine this present assurance, and to cause it to be mainteyned, iniolably & continually, causing, suffering, and per∣mitting the said Suppliants to vse and inioy it fully, quietly, and perpetually, without causing, procuring, or dooyng, and without suffering to be caused, pro∣cured, or done, presently, or in tyme to
come, directly or indirectly, any trouble or impeachment to the contrary, and also without attempting any thyng a∣gainst the said Suppliants, in any ma∣ner of wise, for any cause aboue specifi∣ed. For so is it the kings maiesties plea∣sure and ours. In witnesse whereof we haue signed these presents with our name, and set thereto our seale. Giuen in the Citie of Brusselles the. xxv. day of August. 1566. Signed vpon the fol∣dyng on the right side of it thus: Marga∣ret. And on the left side of the same fol∣dyng, was written thus: By the ex∣presse appoyntment of her highnesse. And vndersigned: Of Ouerloepe. These letters were sealed with her highnesse owne Seale, in red waxe, vpon a dou∣ble Labell. ¶ The copie of a letter written by the kyng with his owne hand, vnto the Prince of Orendge, translated out of Spanish into French. WIth great good wyll haue I receiued your letters, one the . of May, and afterward an other the. . of Iune. You might haue vnderstoode by that which I wrote to my syster, how small
cause you haue to thinke the thinge that you writ to me in your letter of May, or rather that you ought to thinke the cleane contrary. And surely you should be much ouerseene, if you should thinke that I trusted you not in all thinges, or that if any body had gon about to make me conceiue amisse of your duetifulnes towards me, I would haue bin so light of credit, as to beleue it, hauyng had so great experience of your loyaltie and good seruis. Therefore you may for∣beare your mistrust in that behalfe, and referre your selfe to the letters whiche you haue written heretofore in that matter, and to your owne doyngs, and not to the things that may haue bin put into your head, by some that perchance are enemies both to my seruice, and to your welfare. As touching the leaue that you sue for, to geue vp your Offi∣ces: I am sory that your priuate affay∣res are in suche state as you speake of: howebeit seeing that the state of those Countreys is so tickle as it is, I can not forbeare to tel you, that it is no rea∣son that such personages as you be, in whom I trust, and vpon whom I rest, should nowe abandon them, specially sith I am so farre of from them: but ra∣ther it were more reason that suche as
are at home in their houses, shoulde come running out at such a time of nede and put to their helping hande as they be bound to doo, and as you haue done at this present in goyng to And werpe, whereof I like very well, assuring my selfe that you wyll doo there what soe∣uer is most expedient for my seruis, and for the peace and tranquilitie both of the Citie and of the Countrey, and also for the redresse of such disorders as are ther, according to the truste that I haue in you: and so to doo I geue you expresse charge and commission, knowing that you wyll not shewe your selfe other∣wise towardes me, than you haue bin of all your lyfe long. And to the ende you may see howe freely I deale with you, I can not spare to tell you howe it is much spoken of here, that your bro∣ther is a medler in the thinges that are done there, as you be. For as muche therfore as I can not but greatly mis∣like of it, I charge you to looke to the redresse thereof, that he procede no fur∣ther, and that you doo it out of hande. And if you thinke it conuenient, to put hym from you for certayne dayes, doo so. From the wood of Segouia, the first of August. 1566. vndersigned, Philip. Indorsed: To the prince of Orendge.
And sealed with the kinges owne seale. ¶ A Letter of the kynges Ambas∣sadourNo. 6. in France, to the Regent. MAdame, although I wrote to you at large a fifteene dayes ago, and also by the Post that came out of Spayne, as he passed this way a six & twēty dayes since: yet notwithstandyng for as much as yesterday I receyued ad∣uertisementes from out of Spayne, I purpozed to giue your highnes intelli∣gence of them incontinently, and to send you the copies of the two letters that were writtē vnto me, wherby you may see many suche poyntes, as I am sure you wyll very well like of, and also vn∣derstand the good order which the kin∣ges Maiestie hath taken, and the great preparation that he maketh dayly, as well to withstād the Turkes power, if it should aduenture to arriue vpō those Coastes, & to profer any attēpt, as also to bring all his subiectes to the obedi∣ence of God and of hym selfe. Also your highnes shal vnderstād, how well your manner of dealyng is liked of, whiche you haue vsed since the styrre that hath happened in the coūtrey where you be:
and that the last poynt concernyng in∣telligences and strong places, is found very good, and to very great purpoze aboue all the rest. In so much that now by that meanes the kyngs maiestie ma∣keth full account to bring his matters about with small payne nd resistence, contrary to the doubt which he had of it at the beginnyng: specially for as much as the straungers meddle not o∣ner farre, and also by reason of the con∣tinuall wisedome and cunnyng hand∣lyng of thynges, where with your high∣nesse hath begonne to order the whole matter. For I am well able to assure you, Madame, that his Maiestie attri∣buteth the preseruation of his low coū∣treys vnto you, next after God: who of his grace wyll bring to passe, that this inconuenience whiche is befallen, shall trne so greatly to his benefit and com∣moditie, as he shall see them brought wholy vnder his obedience, and to such state, gouernment, and rule, as his pre∣decessors could neuer attayne vnto, and which he hym selfe had so long desired & labored for, together with this occa∣sion which no good seruant of his wyll counsell hym to looze, wherby he is in forewardnesse to subdue the one sort, and to ryd his handes of the other, as
he hym selfe shall find best, and perceiue to be most expedient for the incounte∣ryng of thyngs hereafter, to the benefit of his affayres in the saide Countreys. And for as much Madame as the point which to my seeming is of greatest im∣portance and of most necessitie as now in this cace, is to make those vizored seruaunts (whom you note of) more & more carelesse, and out of mistrust: your highnesse (by your fauour) muste not thinke amisse of me for that I haue of∣ten warned you, and nowe againe doo put you in mind, to dally with them for the present tyme, and to feed them so far foorth, as to hold talke with them oft∣tymes your selfe, or to cause them to be talkt with by persons appoynted for the nonce, which must feed thē with ye great opinion and good liking that the kings maiestie hath of their doyngs, and with the good wyll which he beareth them, yea euen so farre forth as to assure them that he beleueth, & sayth, that they haue done hym so notable seruis, as he thin∣keth him selfe beholden to them for that his low Countreys are styll vnder his obedience, & that but for their presence and wisdome they had eyther bin a pray to straungers, or els bin bathed in the blud of their own people. For although
madame, such speches be but  & fayned iu very deede, yet doo the tyme and occasion require, that such artificial talke should be vsed for the seruis of his maiestie. And I beleue your highnesse shall see by experience, that they wyll serue to good purpoze for the holdyng of them in, or at leastwise for to hold the fast, as we haue perceyued alreadye, not onely in them, but also in the two that are gone to his maiestie, who haue bin so cunnyngly and skilfully handled, and haue had so good countenance and intertaynment giuen them, that they swear by nothyng els but by the faith that they owe to their maister. And on the otherside, there is so good order taken, and such fetches practized in their houses at home, that accordyng to the meanes that your highnesse coū∣seleth, they can nother doe nor say any thyng, wherof good intelligence is not giuen backe agayne. Besides this, it is determined to holde them a good while at the Court, and not to suffer them to depart thence, no more than they haue suffered the Lord of Ibermount, who thought he should haue retunred out of hand. But I must tell you Madame, that the greatest inconuenience whiche I know to be in this cace at this preset,
is that they which are of greatest pow∣er and credit about the kyng, (that is to witte the Duke and the This Duke is the Duke of Alua: and the Prince is the prince Deboly Ruygomes. Prince) agree well vpon the punishment, but not vpō the meane how to punish them. For the one vrgeth the kinges goyng thither as much as he can, & the other on the con∣trary part letteth & hindereth it, & pro∣poūdeth other new meanes. As for me, I haue alwayes bin of opiniō, yt in such caces the kynges presence would stand in great stead: & that aboue all thynges, diligence and speedy dispatch is neede∣full, and would greatly aduauntage the matter, and that in suddein diseazes it behoueth to vse speedy, yea & euē violēt remedies: which is the opinion, where∣in the kynges Maiestie as I am infor∣med (onely by one litle soule) doth now dwell fully settled and resolued: in so much that the same day that he arriued last at Madrid after his sicknesse, hee sware in the presence of the sayd Lords, how he knew well that in the thynges whiche he had to do in his low Coun∣treys, his going should be, not onely to his own reputation, but also to the ser∣uis of God: and therfore that it touched him so neere, as he would rather hazard all the rest of his dominions, than fayle to punish such Rebelliō to the example
and open sight of all Christēdome. And for the same cause his Maiestie determi∣ned resolutely in the same place, to de∣part out of Spayne as soone as he pos∣sibly might, and to cary with him the Prince his sonne, & the Queene, (who notwithstandyng (as it was thought) might haue passed thorough Fraunce,) leauyng his suster the Regēt of the coū∣trey and his two nephewes the Empe∣rours sonnes with hir, howbeit that the Emperour was mynded afterward to take home the elder of thē: and that the duke should go his way certaine dayes afore to refresh the garrisons of Italy, and to fetche thence the best and aun∣cientest Capteines and souldiers, & in their places to put those whō he should carry with him out of Spaine: and that anon after, his Maiestie shal go into I∣taly and speake with some of the Prin∣ces and potētates of that countrey, and talke mouth to mouth with the Pope,Abouchera. and afterward with the Emperour (if it may be) to link in togither with them in counsell and force: and he hath alre∣dy desired two regimentes of souldiers at the Emperours hands. Which there is no dout but he shal obteine, notwith∣standing that he cannot as yit giue him resote answere, by reasō of the warre
that he hath with y• Turke. This doue, as soone as he hath set cōuenient order in his affaires, his maiestie determineth to tary in the Frenche Countie, and frō thence to come down into the low coū∣treys with such force as shalbe needful, according to the behaueour of his sub∣iectes there, & accordyng to the counte∣nance that they shall shew, of humbling them selues, or of makyng resistence, that he may make them to obey hym, and God first of all. Furthermore ma∣dame, me thinkes I shoulde not for∣get to tel you, howe the Countie Pa∣latine, and the Lantgraue of Hessia, and the other Lutheran Princes haue sent two ambassadours hyther, which beare the name of Doctors, wherof the one is called Iunius, and the other Dauid. They came hyther a moneth or fiue weekes ago, vnder colour to demaund certaine money, which the sayd Princes had lent the Hugonots, duryng the troubles of the Realme, and therewithall to com∣mend the professors of their godly Re∣ligion to the French kyng: but in very deede (as farre as I can learne) to make practises with the sayd Hugonots, and to giue new occasions of attemptes a∣gainst the Catholik state of the kynges maiesties Countrey. And for as muche
as I perceyued by good ground, and in very truth, that some of the kyngs and Queenes Coūsell, yea euen of the grea∣test and oldest sort, (how Catholicke so euer they pretended to be) were myn∣ded to serue their owne turnes by oc∣casiō of this Ambassade, by entryng in∣to league with those Princes, and so to strengthen themselues in their confede∣racie and alyance, I was in some vn∣quietnesse for certaine dayes, how to fynde meanes to breake that broode. But the Cardinall came to the Towne in very good season, who in very deede doth a whole worlde of good turnes heer, and would do many o if he were able. I visited him & had long discourse with him about the weightynes of this cace, and the greate inconueniences that it drewe with it to the ruine of the Catholickes of this Realme: and I ag∣grauated it in such wise vnto him, as I made it seeme to tend, not onely to the harme of the kyng my maister, but also to the harme of his owne Prince. By meanes wherof I gaue him a colour to attach the said Iunius as a subiect borne in the low countrey, so as he wēt hence the nexte mornyng to a house of the Queenes called Monceaulx, where the Court lay. And when he came there, he
sped him so well, that immediatly the kyng & the Queene dispatched a writ to ye Marshal of their house, to put the said Lutherā Ambassadours in prison who were as then in the towne, and to seaze their letters, remēbraunces, & Instruc∣tions. Which thyng had bin put in exe∣cution, but that duryng the contention that happened while the Marshal was about to haue led them to prison, a cer∣teine Counseler beyng thē in the town, aduized him to surceasse the execution of the writ, vntill there came a new com∣maundement. Neuerthelesse, I know that although there was meanes made afterward to salue that sore: yet y• Am∣bassadours thought themselues to haue receiued such a despight, & their Mai∣sters such an iniurie: as I am sure that thereby the practise that was a brew∣yng is so broken of, as it cannot be knit togither agayne. Specially for asmuch as they perceiued themselues to be mis∣used new agayne, in that in sted of a∣mendes for the sayd wrong, they were very ill intreated at the Court, when they came to haue audiēce: & afterward mocked for their labour, by meanes wherof they thought that the kyng and the Queene and their Coūsell had small likyng of them: a thyng that cannot but
turne to the great furtheraunce of the kynges Maiesties affaires, and bereue them more and more of their frēdes and alyances. As for the Lady that you wot of, I take hir to be one of the deepest dissemblers in the world: & the more I haue to deale with hir, the more am I cōfirmed in yt opiniō which I haue oftē aduertized your highnesse of: namely, that there is no trust, no assurednes, no frendshyp, no stedfastnesse in hir, I haue talked with hir many times of the mat∣ter that you know of, which concerneth the kynges Maiestie, and I haue told hir meetly playnly inough how greatly she is bounde thereto, for the releef that she hath receiued by it in hir great nede, and I do dayly still vse all the meanes that I can deuize, to make hir to disco∣uer matters accordyng to his maiesties meenyng and yours. But I can get no∣thyng at hir hād but wordes: and I am as neere my purpoze as I was at the first day neuerthelesse I am fully deter∣mined to vrge hir in such wise at my next cominyng to haue audience, as she shalbe driuen to lay hir selfe open. She sendes me oft the litle blacke mā that I haue written of so oftentyines to your hyghnesse, who hath bin diuers tymes in Spayne since the Lorde of S. Sup∣pli
was Ambassadour there. But howsoeuer the sayd Lady thinke that by his meanes she makes me beleue what she listeth, and wringeth out many se∣cretes from me. I will nother let hir know what I intend, nor draw them frō their opinion, but contrariwise pre∣tend to speake freely to thē. And by this meanes I perceiue I giue them now & then good glikes & to very good effect, and that I sucke more out of them than they do out of me. At leastwise I wil by Gods helpe take such order henceforth, as they shall neuer make their bragges that they haue couzined a Spanyard. I receiued this aduertizement by a poste that went from Madrid with the Lord of S. Supplice, whom the sayd Lady did send now alate to the kynges Ma∣iestie, and left him as Bayone the first of this Moneth to returne into Fraunce. One sent me word that he had had such talke with hir as was behoful, & such as I gaue instructiōs of, which I am sure will do good: neuerthelesse he learned not so much newes as he looked for, and as their intent was that sent hym. The Duke had told him a awe dayes afore, that he intēded to write to me: but bycause the poste sawe him maruelous sad for his sonnes mariage, at his com∣yng
away he durst not speake to hym of it. The death of Sultan Solyman is not yit knowen in Spayne. But as soone as tydinges commes thither of it, I am sure I shall haue adurtizement from thence, whereby I shall perceiue, whither that vppon theis newes there follow any alteration of purpoze in the poyntes abouesayd: wherof I will not fayle to certifie your highnesse out of hand, wh. . ¶ The Princes answere to the At∣tourneyes Summons or Citation. MAister Attourney, I haue recei∣ued a Copie of the SummonsNo. 7. that you haue caused to be exe∣cuted and published agaynst me by open Proclamation and Edict. And for asmuch as I finde my selfe greatly greeued with the accusations therin cō∣teined, as a nobleman of my callyng ought to do: I couet nothyng so much (which thyng I hope also to make ap∣parant) as to aunswere dewly and tru∣ly therunto as becommeth me. For it is no part of my meening, to leaue any su∣spicion in the hartes of the ignoraunt, that I haue not dealt honorably and accordyngly as I am bounde to the king, or that I haue leudly and vndew∣ully behaued my selfe in the Com∣missions,
roomes, and offices, which it hath pleazed his Maiestie to bestow v∣pon me heertofore, or otherwise. But I hope to shew by this discourse & by the laying togither of my defences, that the good, long continewed, & faythfull ser∣uices, charges, and damages, which I haue susteyned in them by reason of thē, doo farre surmount my dueties and re∣wardes. And therefore I haue good cause and reason to desire to enter into this reckenyng, no lesse than he that ho∣peth and looketh for an amendement of his state, by the closing vp and determi∣nyng of his account. But for as much as the thing that we most desire & chie∣feliest intend, is cōmōly last in executi∣on, if we proceede duely and orderly as we should do: in so much that the Phi∣sition or Surgeon goes not about to cure the diseaze, or to heale the wounde, how greeuous or daungerous soeuer it be, tyll he haue first purged the humors, and searched the bottome thereof: ney∣ther dooth the Mason builde a house, without laying of a sure foundation be∣fore: I am inforced and compelled by the maner of your Summons, to defer the alledging and settyng downe of my defence, vntyll your accusations be layd forth before a competent and fit Iudge,
in place vnsuspected, where a man may hope that the things which shalbe spo∣ken, shalbe regarded as they ought to be, and that the Iudge wyl proceede in∣differently to acquitment or condemna∣tion, according as the cace shall require and deserue. In the meane while I must comfort my self with the examples (wherof storyes are full) of suche as in recompence of their mainteynyng and increasing of the honour, Countreys, and dominions of their Princes, kings and soueraigne Lords, with the hazard of their owne lyues, and the expence of their goodes, haue not only bin shame∣fully cited and cryed out vpon, but also receyued bodyly punishment, and bin made a publike example, by being mur∣thered, executed, banished, or driuen a∣way, whereas in the meane while, the rewardes and recompences of their ser∣uices haue bin giuen before their faces to them that least deserued them. Which dealing is so much the lesse straunge in these dayes, for as much as the innocen∣test person that is, maye not ouely be brought in suspition, but also in hatred, & made abhorred of the world, onely by causing him to be taken and reputed for an heretike by some suborned person. For be he once brought to that poynt.
he shall not onely fynd hym selfe defea∣ted of all his good doynges, seruices, and desertes: but also beyng bereft and depriued of all good likyng, he shall be∣come suspected and accusable of Rebel∣lion, Commotion, Sedition, and gene∣rally of all kindes of crimes and faults that can be comprized vnder the name of treason. And for as muche as it is an odious thing, as ye worlde goes now adayes, to accuse mē of pretēsed heresie, to the intēt they may punish it without incurryng the indignation and turnyng away of mens hartes, which they woulde faine holde in bondage: it standeth them in hand to couer it with the cloke of trea∣zon, wherof who soeuer is accused, shall in vaine goe about to purge and cleare hym self, before one to whom he percey∣ueth hym selfe to be suspected of heresie. For in as much as treazon is not the fi∣nall cause, for which he is pursued, arre∣sted, apprehended, and accuzed: though he make his innocencie appeare by ne∣uer so due proofe: yet can he not hope for any acquitment or deliuerance, but must be condemned vnder title and pre∣tence of treazon: or els (be his innocen∣cie too too apparant) he must looke for  perpetuall and miserable deteynyng
in lawe by delay of proceedyng: which thing ought to excuze me sufficiently for not appearing before the Duke of  Gouernor and Capteyne general of the low countreys: Besides that your  which you haue sued out, is for in any reasns vtterly without right, and such as I am not bounde to obey. For e∣sides that the officer of Armes ath not giuen any intelligence, warnyng, or ∣clyng of his doing vnto me, who vpon aduertizement giuen to my Lady the Duchesse of Parma then Regent, dyd withdrawe my selfe  into this y Countie of Nass▪ for certaine vrgent affayres of  ▪ (accordyng al∣so as I certifyed his  long ago that I was mynded to doo) and  of purpoze to flee awaye, or to   head, as your Writ conteyneth▪ the ter∣mes, respites, and distances were  short, as it was vnpossible for me to be aduertized of the proclaymyng of  in Brusselles, & to make my apparance there within the compasse of them, and much lesse in any places further of, ∣ther the Duke of Alua might  in the meane while. For seeing that euery terme and day of respit had his ffect: it is wel knowen that respect ought to be had to ech of them seuerally, and not to
em all three ioyntly and continuingly together. And therefore to set ters  of eene dayes a eece, for suche a  as is betweene this and Brus∣selles: is nothing els but to set out E∣es▪ Summons, and Citations that are vnpossible to be obeyed. Agayne, by the hndlyng vppe of your saide res∣pites, and by your taking of three for one: I finde that notwithstandyng the great importance of the cace, & the state and calling of my persō, your meanyng is to proceede agaynst me by one onely Summons, contrary to all order of iu∣stice: specially seeyng that in like caces, the proceedyng is speedy ynough accor∣ing to right, when there is no more done, but the keeping of the accustomed order: which is, that there should be no proceedyng to the peremptory day, be∣fore there haue  three seuerall  sued out, with sixe dayes distance at the least betweene Summons and Summons, and that the Iudge beyng ely ed of the places & hauntes where the partie absent that is to be summoned abydeth, do appoint the res∣pites accordyng to the farrenes of yt di∣stance that he hath to come. Which thing sith your Summons dooth not, it folo∣weth of necessitie, that it is of no value,
nor any Summons at all. Of like f∣fect are all your Iudiciall actes vndue∣ly and vncompetētly done, so much the more, because your preed Citation and  can take no place or ef∣fect, in as much as they be done against such a one as dwelleth out of the kyngs territorie and iurisdiction, within the boundes of the Empire, and is a mem∣ber and state of the same: (the priuiledge and authoritie wherof is sche,) that if any withdraw them selues out of it,  may of right be required to be sent backe agayne, but it is not lawful to cal them out of the Empire by any Citati∣on, or by any presed Summons, In∣iunction, or Proclamatiō. Which thing hath bin of suche estimation in  past, that chiefly by reason thereof, the sentence that was geuen by the ∣rour Henry, against Robert   Sicilie was reuersed and ▪ the rather because the said kyng  stood in doubt of the Emper  accompanyed with a puissant ary, as the duke of Alua is at this prese wit an army of Spaniardes, bearing suche good wyll to me as all the world ∣weth. And therefore it ought to  for the bewraying of the  of your sayd Citation and Summons,
specially seyng that the Duke is notori∣ously knowen to be a more vncompe∣tent Iudge in respecte of me, than the saide Emperour was in respect of the kyng of Sicilie: Considering that such as are knightes of the Order, can not by the Lawes, Ordinances, and Con∣stitutions therof, be otherwise smo∣ned than before the chiefe of the same Order, and their brethren, no not uen for the woorst, heynousest, and shame∣fullest matters that they can commyt. Nay, there can not any man proceede to the apprehending, attaching, and detey∣nyng of those knightes, vnlesse it be de∣creed by the aduice of sixe of their bre∣thren at the least: and in such cace they must be put by and by in the custody of their owne. Colledge, and of the frendly company of their owne Order, and not be rigorously dealt withall, as our Co∣sins and brethren of the same Order al∣ready apprehended, are vsed: whiche thing doth also confire the insufficien∣cie of the Writ that you haue sued out, and specially of the rigorous clause of boyly attachment put thereinto. For seeing that man is naturally giuen to  hym selfe: it is not likely that we wyll be made to appeare among  men, & before such Iudges, as we
mistrust, and specially to yeelde our sel∣ues into such prizons as are farre more streyt and rigorous, than we of duetie are bound vnto, or than of right belon∣geth vnto vs. For of right the Prizon should serue but onely to keepe the pri∣zoner forthcommyng, and not to  hym from all company, , consel, & aduice: without the which it is impossible that any cace of importāce shoulde be well and duely pleaded and defended: the whiche neuerthelesse I vnderstand in very dede to haue bin v∣sed & to be vsed styll towardes our said Cosins and brethren of the Order, whō we see also to haue bin fetched out of the Countie of Braband, notwithstan∣dyng the expresse Couenants, Lawes, and Conditions, wherby the same coū∣trey is bounde to the obedience of the kyngs maiestie. And I see that the lik is come to passe in the person of myne own sonne the Countie of Bure, with∣out any regarde had of his young age, and apparant innocencie: whiche ser∣eth me for a warnyng, that the Duke of Alua meaneth not to stand to any co∣uenauntes, bondes, lawes, rightes, or customes, and therfore that it should be impossible for me to obteyne any dis∣charge at his hande, though I made
myne innocencie to appeare neuer so sufficietly by like allegations. Wherfore, & forasmuch as both by right of law, & by force of couenaunt, brought in at ioy full enteraunce, conteinyng the lawes whereby the Duchy of Braband  obedience, we whiche haue al∣ways had our dwellyng place in the ame Duchy, haue good groūd to with∣hold and suspend all obediēce which we owe to the kyng, vntill his Maiesty be∣yng better informed, haue amended the thyngs that haue bin done and attemp∣ted contrary to the said ioyfull entrance & in preiudice therof: I thought it good to aduertize you and to tell you playn∣ly by theis presētes, that in respect of the reasons before alledged, we take your sayd Summons and Citation for noue and of no valew. Expry protestyng the like, of all that shalbe done and de∣creed by vertue and confequence of the same, specially bycause of the apparaunt vnsufficiencie of the Duke of Alua, to whom the Commission of this cace is directed in respect of his Gouernershyp and Capteinship generall ouer the low Coūtreys: which protestatiō our wil is to haue to serue for our excuze, & conse∣quētly also for our refusall in respect of him, and so farre forth as is nedefull be∣sides,
bycause we finde in very deede & by experience, that we cannot hope to obteine of him, the right which our cace shall deserue, by reason of the causes a∣foresaid. And we offer to present our sel∣ues before the Emperour, the Electors, the Princes, the States, and other th Lordes of the Empyre, or any othe meete and vnsuspected Iudges, to haue the examining and deciding of our cace, accordyng to the desert of it openly and without partialitie or affection. Prote∣styng yit once agayne, yt all is nothyng, which is or shalbe done, sayd, ordeyned, iudged, or decreed to our preiudice, by the said Duke of Alua, suspected and re∣fuzed as an incompetent Iudge as is sayd afore, or by any that shalbe put in Commission for him and in his steade. And for asmuch as all this serueth to none other end, but to do you to vnder∣stand the sayd declarations, offers, and protestations: that by you and others such regarde may be had of them as is meete: I will pray to the Creator to haue you Maister Attourney in his ho∣ly keepyng. Written at Dillenbourch the thyrde of Marche. 1568. Under∣signed, William of Nassaw. The super∣scription of it was, To Maister Attourney Generall.
¶ An answere sent to the Duke of Alua by the Prince of Orendge, vpon the Citation or Summons. SIr, for asmuch as my doyngsNo. 7. may be a sufficient testimonie, that frō my youth vp I haue desired nothyng more, than to imploy my selfe in the seruis, first of the late Emperour of noble memory, and afterward of the kyng my Maister: I haue hoped that his maiestie (beyng ad∣uertized from me, (lyke as my Lady of Parma then Regent, was also) that I was come into this my county of Nas∣saw for certeine very vrgent affaires of myne) would in respect of my faythful∣nes, & good wil, not haue ceased to haue shewed me so much fauour, as to com∣maūde me wherin soeuer I could haue done him seruis, which I offered hym continewally by my sayd letters of ad∣uertizemēt or at leastwise that I should haue vnderstode at your hand, that the kynges Maiestie was mynded to haue me to leaue myne owne affaires heere, and to returne immediatly thither, as wel as you gaue intelligence of his ma∣iesties minde to all other Lords, states, and Cities. But as I was stil wayting with great longyng, for his Maiesties
commaundementes: I was aduertized that processe was gone out agaynst me, to seaze vpon my Lordshyps, Landes, and goodes: and (whiche woors is) by Proclamatiō vnder the name of the At∣tourney generall, ful of false and vntol∣lerable slaunders: and afterward by the apprehendyng of my sonne, whom I had left at Louane that he might be the better able to serue the kyng and the cō∣mon weale heerafter. Whereat I won∣dered very much, & me thought it was right strange, that they should proceede in such sort against a man of my calling, forgettyng so soone the great and noble seruices, done as well by my predeces∣sours and by my selfe, and in theis last trubbles by name. Wherfore where as I haue reasons & allegations well fra∣med to Iustifie my cace with all, and to cleere & declare myne innocencie, & the wrong that is done me in this behalfe, which I reserue till fit time & place may serue: I thought it inough at this tyme to answere the Attourney general with speede, and to lay open and to shewe to him the insuffiiencie of his Summons by other reasons which I had agaynst the same, before the expiring of the ouer hasty terme that is prefixed vnto me, to the ende that men should not thinke I felt my selfe gilty in any thing, or that I
eene not to pursew my right, so farre forth as I shal finde it expedient by rea∣son. And thereof Syr, I thought good to aduertize you also, by sendyng you Copic of the letter that I wrate to mai∣ster Attourney togither with this let∣ter, to the intent there may be no more proceedyng or dealyng agaynst me or myne through ignoraunce, furtherforth than may be iustified heerafter by order of law, whereto I hope I shall one day haue my recours. And to the ende that this may not serue to any other effect, I pray God Syr, to giue vnto you health and whatsoeuer is for your sal∣uation, and vnto me, that my Prince may once truly vnderstand the sinceritie of my dealynges. From Dillenbourch, this thyrd of Marche. 1568. The sub∣scription of it was, Your brother of the Order, William of Nassaw. The super∣scription was, To my Lord the Duke of Aluaze grace. ¶ The Copie of an other Letter written by the foresaid Frauncis of Al∣ua Ambassadour for the king of Spaine in Fraunce, to the Duchesse of Parma. &c. Regent: besides that whiche is inserted heertofore in the page. 106. No. 6.
MAdame, the aduertizemēt which your highnes hath giuen me of the affaires where you are, hath confirmed the opinion which I haue alwayes had: namely that this styrre was neuer made without the knowledge and supportāce of the grea∣test, and specially of the three He mee∣neth the Prince of Orendge, the Countie of Egmond, and the Countie of Horn. whiche make so fayre countenance. For as your highnesse hath considered with greate care and discretion: you must also beleue that all the mischief spryngeth of them three. I haue not fayled to aduertize the kings Maiestie of all thynges, and spe∣cially of that matter. And I am sure that whereas your highnesse hath infor∣med his Maiestie of them, you shall not neede to handle them as they should be, and accordyng to your owne informa∣tion: for they may be well assured, that they shalbe the first whom his Maiestie will deale with: not to shewe them fa∣uour, for they be not worthy of it: but to punish and correct them as their rebel∣lion deserueth. Therfore your hyghnes shall not neede to giue them any euill countenance, or to make any shewe of misliking, for feare of marring the mat∣ter: But you must hold them stil in hope that the kynges Maiestie taketh them for his faythfull seruauntes: & that will
stand vs in great stead. For, by causing them to beleeue so, you shall ouertake them the eassyer. But when the time cō∣meth, you shal talke to them in an other maner of language. And your highnesse must assure your selfe, that if your will be good to make them receiue the pay∣ment that they haue deserued: his Ma∣iestie wilbe no lesse willyng to do what soeuer is needefull in that behalfe. Also Madame, to aduertize you in what assuraunce we bee of succour in Fraunce, accordyng to the instructions that you gaue me: I must bee fayne to tell your hyghnesse, that we haue pro∣mises inough made vs, but I feare me they will stand vs in no great stead, and in the end all will turne to bare words, bycause they haue not their own willes, nor are able to helpe vs as they pro∣mise, by reason that the Hugonotes heerawayes are strong and doo make head. I will not fayle to do what may be done, and to aduertize your highnesse thereof vpon all occasions. But in any wise I beseech you to behaue your selfe very cunnyngly towards the three per∣sons whom I haue named vnto you. And so &c. From Paris the xxix. of Au∣gust, 1566.
¶ Letters of the Prince of Orend∣gis to the Regent. MAdame, I haue receyued the letters These are the letters with the kings resolu tion sent a∣brod by the Regent, the 18. of De∣cemb. 1565. No. 2. fo. 77. which it hath pleased your highnesse to write vnto me, together with the Coun∣selles letters, concernyng my gouernment: whereby I vn∣derstand the kinges maiesties intent, consi∣styng in three poynts, which he commaun∣deth me very expressely to cause to be ex∣ecuted in all places of my gouernmente. Nowe although Madame, that myne ad∣uice is not asked in the matter beyng of so greate weight and importance: yet not∣withstandyng as a faythfull seruaunt and subiect to his maiestie, being moued with a zelous desire to satisfie the duetie of my calling and othe, I coulde not forbeare to say myne opinion freely and frankly, choo∣zing rather to aduenture the gainyng of displeazure at the present for myne aduer∣tisementes and informations, than to be noted and blamed hereafter as an vnfaith∣ful, negligent, and carelesse Gouernour, for my wiking and silence, to the defamation and desolation of the Countrey. Firste, as touching the puttyng of theThe Coun∣cel of Trent Councel in execution, although there wer some mislikyng and grudging at it at the
beginnyng: yet notwithstandyng, in as much as some qualifications haue bin ad∣ded to it afterward, I beeue there wyll be litle sticking in that behalfe. And as for the reformation of the Clergie, and other Ec∣clesiastical ordinances: seyng they belong not to my vocation, I referre them to such as haue the charge of them, intendyng to satisfie the kynges maiesties commaunde∣ment, as neede shall require. As touchyng the second poynt, whichThe Inqui∣sition. conteyneth that the Gouerners, Counsel∣lers, and other Officers should fauour the Iuquisitours to the vttermost of their po∣wer, and maynteyne them in the authori∣tie that belongeth to them by the lawe of God and man, & which they haue inioyed vnto this day. It may please your highnesse to remem∣ber, that the complaintes, strifes, and quar∣rels that haue byn moued through the whole Countrey here for the stablishyng of Bishops, haue risen vppon nothyng els, but for feare least some forme of Inquisiti∣on shoulde be brought in vnder that pre∣tence. So odious and yrksome is, not on∣ye the execution, but also the very name of it. Besides this, it may please your highnes to vnderstand, (for it is cleare and mani∣festly knowen to the most part of the kings
maiesties subiectes, and specially to al men of any good countenance & calling here∣awayes) that both the Emperours maiestyMary Queene of Hungary. and also Queene Mary, haue oftentimes as∣sured the inhabitantes, as well by word as by writyng, that the Inquisitiō should not be brought into the lowe Countreys: but that they should be mainteyned and ruled as they had bin of all ancient tyme before. Yea and euen the kings maiestie that now is, to the intent to put that imaginatiō out of the peoples heades, hath ofttymes made the like assurance hym selfe. And vndoubtedly Madame, the sayd as∣surances and promises haue kept his ma∣iesties subiectes and other dwellers here from fallyng into any alteration, and cau∣sed many men of good wealth and counte∣nance to forbeare the alienating of their goodes, and the seekyng of any other pla∣ces where they might liue without feare of any Inquisition. And so consequently they haue bin a meane to mainteine the vnion, tranquilitie, trade of Marchandise, and supply of the most part of the treasures for the maintenance of the warres: wher∣as els the Countrey being made bare both of inhabitantes, men, and money, had bin abandoned as a pray to whosoeuer had li∣sted to lay hold of it. As touching the third poynt, whereby
his maiesty wylleth and commaundeth ex∣pressely,The Iniun∣ctions, Pro∣clamations, Decrees, or Edictes. that the Iniunctions or Edictes made as well by the Emperour, as by hym selfe, shoulde in all poyntes and articles be kept, folowed, and executed, with al rigor, and without any qualification or winkyng at them. Madame, (to my seemyng) that likwise is a very hard poynt, because the Iniuncti∣ons are many and dyuers, and haue byn li∣mited, qualified, and restrayned nowe and then heretofore, and not pursued with ri∣gor: in so muche that they were not so sharpe euen in the tyme of the vniuersall misery, as they be now, nother were our people so much inclyned to innouation, as they be now by the instigation and practi∣zes of our neighbors. Wherfore, to vse more extremity pre∣sently, and all at one instant to renue the Inquisition more vehemently, and to pro∣ceede on to execution wyth all seueritie: surely Madame, I can not see howe the kynges maiestie shall wyn aught els by it, than to put hym selfe to payne, and the Countrey to trouble, with the losse of his good subiectes hartes, by makyng euery man mistrust, that his maiesty intendeth to goe an other way to woorke than he hath alwayes assured them of and pretended, and to hazarde the puttyng of all thynges
into hys neyghbors handes, as wel by vn∣peoplyng of the Country by such as wyll forsake it, as by reason of the small truste that can be repozed in them that shall re∣mayne, & al without any profit or redresse of Religion. To auoyde tediousnesse, I omyt the al∣ledgyng of many inconueniences in this behalfe, because I know that both his ma∣iestie and your highnesse haue bin aduer∣tized of them at large already. Moreouer, (I speake it vnder correction) me thynkes the tyme is very vnfit to styrre the braynes and humors of the people, whiche is too muche disquieted and troubled alreadye with the present scarsitie and dearth of corne. It were muche better (in myne o∣pinion) to deferre and let all alone, vntyll his maiesties commyng, who is sayd to be in preparyng hym selfe hytherwarde. And I woulde to God he were so steaded, as he myght be here with speede, to the intent that by his presence suche order might be taken, as shoulde be expedient for the ser∣uice of God and his maiestie, and for the reste and quietnesse of his Countreys and subiectes here. For in caces of trouble, thynges would be remedyed more ready∣ly by his presence than otherwyse. Howbeit, if hys maiesty and your high∣nesse be styll at one staye, and fully bent to
haue all the sayde poyntes folowed to the ful: for as muche as I see clearely and be∣fore myne eyes, that it cā not be now exe∣cuted without great hazarde of the ruine of the whole Countrey, (which it may be that his maiesty would haue regarde of, yf he were here:) If it be so that your hygh∣nesse wyll not deferre the Inquisition tyll then, but wyll needes persist in the present executyng thereof: I had leuer that his maiestye shoulde put some other in my place, that can better skyll of the peoples humors, and is better able than I to keepe them in peace and quietnesse: than to in∣curre the shame that maye lyght vpon me and myne, if any inconuenience should fal vpon the Countrey, vnder my gouernmēt, and duryng my charge. And his maiestye and your hyghnesse may well assure your selues, that I saye not this because I am loth to folowe his com∣maundementes, or desirous to lyue other∣wyse than as a good Christian: for my for∣mer doynges can wel beare witnesse ther∣of, and I hope his maiestye hath well per∣ceyued by experience, that I haue neuer spared eyther body or goodes to doo hym seruice, wherein my desire is to continue styll all my lyfe long. Besides this, if the af∣fayres of the Countrey shoulde goe other∣wyse than well, I woulde (for my duetyes
sake to his maiesty and my natiue soyle) I woulde (I say) aduenture not onely al the goodes that I haue in the worlde, but also myne owne person, my wife, and my chil∣dren, whom euen nature wylleth me to preserue and keepe. Wherefore I beseech you, let it please your highnesse to haue re∣gard of it according to your tryed and ac∣customed discretion, and to take this mine information in good parte, as proceedyng from one that speaketh of earnest affection and good wyll, to doo his maiestie seruis, and to preuent all inconueniences▪ wher∣of I take God to witnesse, whom (hauing commended my selfe most humbly to the good grace of your highnesse) I beseeche to giue you long and good lyfe in health. From Brusselles, the. xxiiij. day of Ianua∣rye. 1565. accordyng to the Computation of Braband.Accor∣dyng to the computatiō of the Em∣pire, it is. 1566. ¶ The Regentes answere to the Princes Letter. MY good cousin, I haue receiued your two Letters of the xvi. e. of this pre∣sentNo. 8. moneth, by the one of which you excuse your selfe of your not cōmyng hither as you would haue done. And by the o∣ther you put me in mynde of the declarations which you haue made to me at other tymes, cō∣cernyng
the inconueniences that might rise of the three poyntes which my Lord the king hath commaūded, which I remember very well. And since that tyme (as I am informed) the discon∣tentement and grudging of the people is growē in such wise, as I am done to vnderstand by di∣uers aduertizementes commyng to me dayly from good places, that the sayd inconueniences are tootoo apparāt, & euē at the poynt to shew themselues to open sight. Which thyng caused me to thinke it meete and expedient, to assem∣ble the Gouerners, (as I haue done) to be heere vpon Monday or Tewsday next at the furthest, that by their helpe I may consult of such things as shalbe most expedient for the preuentyng of the sayd inconueniences, or for the good seruice of the king, for the peace and tranquillitie of his countreys, and for the safety of his vassals, subiectes and inhabitants. And I know your af∣fection and zeale towardes his Maiesties af∣fayres and in the behalfe of the Countrey to be such, as I assure my selfe that you will not fayle (all other matters set aside and omitted) to be here at the same tyme: which I pray you harti∣ly good Cousin to do, for to that ende doth this letter purposely come vnto you. And I pray the Creator to graūt you the thyng that you would most desire of him. From Brussels the xix. day of Marche. 1565.Accor∣ling to the ōmon rec∣ening, it as. 1566. It was vnderwritten. Your good Cousin: and signed, Margaret: and fur∣ther countersigned, Berty. And the superscrip∣tion
was, To my good Cousin the Prince of Orendge, Coūtie of Nassaw, Knight of the Order, & Gouerner of the Coūtie of Bur∣gon, and of the Countreys of Holland, Ze∣land, and Vtreyght. ¶Extractes of certaine points cō∣prizedNo. 9. in the Iniunctions, and ordinan∣ces set forth in the lowe Countreys in the cace of Religion. And first of the generall Iniunction or E∣dict made and decreed by the Empe∣rour Charles, the. xxij. of September, the yeere. 1540. which was made after the paterne of an other as rigorous as that, whiche came foorth in the yeere. 1531. FOr asmuch as in consideratiō✚ aforesayd, we be desirous to the vttermost of our power, to plucke vp, abolish, & roote out the sayd condemned and disallowed sectes, errours, and heresies, & to keepe our subiectes in the feare of God, and in the true obedience of our sayd holy Ca∣tholicke fayth, & likewise in awe of our mother holy Church: we vpō great and substantial deliberation with our Coū∣sell, and by the aduice of our right deare & welbeloued sister the Queene Dowa∣ger
of Hungarie and Beame. &c. Regēt & Gouernesse of our Countreys heere, and also by the aduice of our cheef Coū∣selers, haue of our owne will & certeine knowledge ordeined and decreed, & do ordeyne and decree for an euerlastyng Statute and Law, as followeth. First, that no person of what state, degree, or callyng souer he bee, shall haue, sell, giue, cary, read, preach, teach, maynteine, talke of, nor dispute of, ei∣ther secretly or openly, the doctrines, writynges, or bookes that are made or shalbe made by Martin Luther, Ioh. Wic∣kliffe, Iohn Husse, Marcil of Padua, Oeco∣lampadius, Vlrichus Zuinglius, Philip Me∣lancthon, Frauncis Lambert, Iohn Pome∣rane, Otto Brunfelsius, Iustus Ionas, Iohn Puper, and Gorcian, or by any other au∣thors of their sect, or by any other here∣tickes and : or the errours dis∣allowed by the Church, or the doctrine of their adherentes, fauorers, and com∣plices: no nor euen the new Testamēts Printed by Adrian of Bergues, Chri∣stopher of Rmōd, and Iohn Zell, [nor theis Latin bookes followyng, videl.] The phrases of holy Scripture, The Inter∣pretation of the Chaldey names, Vadians Abridgement of Topographie, The Para∣lippomenon or Chronicles of thyngs wor∣thy
of rememberance, The story of the o∣riginall of the Garmanes, The Cōmētaries vppon the Poetry of Pythagoras, Walcu∣rioze Commentaries vpon Aristotles Phi∣sikes, The workes of Eobanus Hessus, Gri∣phies Prayers vpō the Lordes Prayer, The Method vpō the cheef places of Scripture, The Cathechizin of Erasmus Sarcerius, The same mans Scholies vpon the Gospels of Mathew Marke & Luke, The same mās Postilles vppon all the Sondayes Gospelles through the whole yeere, Also of the ma∣ner of learnyng Diuinitie, Of the framyng of a mans lyfe, and of the reformation of manners. Christopher Hegendorphius ex∣hortation, The same mans instruction of Christen youth, with an exposition of the Lordes Prayer, Philip  abrid∣gement of Chronicles both in Latin and in Duche, Sebastian Munsters Annotations vppon Saint Mathewes Gospell, and the Enterludes played not lōg ago in our Citie of Gaunt by the nineten places of Rheto∣ricke, vppon this question, what is the greatest comforte to a man that is at the point to dye: nor any other bokes writ∣ten or printed within theis xviij. yeeres last past, without declaryng of the au∣thor, printer, tyme, and place nor like∣wise the new Testament, the Gospels, the Epistles, the Prophesies, or any o∣ther
bookes in Frenche or Duche con∣teining Prefaces, Prologes, Appostils, or glozes, sauoryng of doctrines disal∣lowed, repugnant, or cōtrary to our ho∣ly Catholicke fayth, or to the Sacra∣mentes, or to the commaundementes of God or of the Church. Also that no man shall peynt or cause to bee peynted or portrayed, or holde, haue, or keepe any Images, portraitu∣res, or pictures, to the reproche or dis∣gracyng of the virgin Marie, or of the saints that are canonized by the church: nor also breake, deface, or pull down the Images made or heerafter to be made in the honor or rememberance of them: & that if any body haue any such books peyntyngs in his hands or keepyng, he burne them incontinently. Upō peyne (in cace that any be foūd to haue done agaynst any of the pointes aboue declared,) to be executed, that is to say, the mē by the sword, and the wo∣menThat is to wyt, by burnyng of them quick. by the pit so they do not maintein & defend their errours: but if they stand in those errours and heresies, then they shalbe executed by the fire: and in all ca∣ces their goodes shalbee confiscate to our behofe. And we will and declare, that from the day wherin the said heretickes shal∣be
falne into their errours, they shalbe vnable to dispoze of their godes: and all alienatiōs, giftes, cōueyances, sales, settyngs ouer, Testamentes, & last be∣questes by will, made by them after such tymes, shalbe as nothyng and of none effect. Furthermore we obteine and decree it for a perpetuall statute and law, as a∣fore, that no man shall presume to hold or suffer in his house or els where, any coenticles or meetynges, or to talke or dispute of holy Scripture, (specially in matters hard and doutfull) or to read the same holy Scripture to others, or to preach it: vnlesse they be Diuines al∣lowed by some famous Uniuersitie, or admitted thereto by the ordinarie of the place: vnder like penaltie. Also that no man shal Print or cause to be Printed, or otherwise put forth a∣ny booke, that treateth or maketh men∣tion of the holy Scripture, or that in a∣ny wise toucheth our holy fayth and the constitutiōs of the Church: vnlesse it be first ouerseene by the ordinary of the place, & that he haue gotten our graūt & licence to Print it: vnder like penaltie. Moreouer we ordeine & decree, that no man of what state or callyng so euer he be, shall presume to lodge, receiue, in∣ine,
or fauour any heretickes, or A∣nabaptistes, & that all such as shall haue lodged, receiued, interteined, or fauored them, knowyng them to be such▪ shall come and bewray & accuze them to the officer of the place (if it be a priuiledged place): or els (if it be not) to the cheef of∣ficer of the good towne next to the place where they dwell: vnder peyne of being punished as heretickes. And bycause we be desirous to come to the knowledge of the sayd heresies, errours, and abuses: we inact & decree, that the accuzers & bewrayers of them shall haue the one moitie of their goods that are so bewrayed and accuzed before their misusage do appeere, & they dew∣ly conuicted thereof: condicionally that the sayd goodes passe not the summe of one hundred poundes Flemishe of the great: for if they passe that summe, then shall they haue but the tenth penny of that which the said goodes amount vn∣to aboue it, the costes and charges in the law first deducted. And to ye end that our Iustices & Of∣ficers which shall haue apprehended the sayd Heretickes or Anabaptistes, may not haue occasion to beare with them, their complices and fautors, or to pu∣nish them lesse than they deserue, vnder
pretence that the punishementes may seeme to great and rigorous, & to haue bin set but onely for the terrour of offē∣ders, as we see it commeth oftentymes to passe. We will and commaunde that whosoeuer violateth this our ordināce, by keepyng, printyng, sellyng, distribu∣tyng, or settyng forth any bookes, wri∣tynges, or images, that are hereticall or offēsiue, or otherwise against the points aboue declared, or any of thē: shalbe pu∣nished and corrected indifferently by the peynes afore mēcioned. Forbiddyng all our Iudges, Officers, and Iustices, to alter, qualifie, or chaunge the same pu∣nishmentes in any maner of wise: and [chargyng them] onely to denounce the sayd penalties and punishmentes vpon them, as soone as they shall perceiue them to haue violated any of the sayde points: vnder penalty to be depriued of their roomes & offices, & to be denoun∣ced vnable to beare any Office for euer after, and moreouer to be corrected for it at our pleasure. And we commaund all our Officers to aduertize vs or our sayd sister the Queene, when our Iudges, Headborowes, Aldermē, or any others hauyng the examination of such offen∣ders, do make nyce to follow this our decree, and to denounce the sayd penal∣ties:
that we may proceede agaynst thē by the selfe same punishmentes. Furthermore we decree, that if any man chaunce to know any place where any hereticke or Anabaptist doth secret∣ly lurke: he shalbe bound to bewray it to the officer of that place, vpon peyne to be taken for a farer, harbrowgher, and adhent of the heresie wherewith the person so hidden is infected, and to bee punished with the same peyne that the hidden person should bee punished withall, if he were caught. And bycause that heeretofore when some Heretickes or Anabaptistes being appeached and cited, haue gotten them selues out of the Countrey, and shrunke ade or hid them selues in some secret place▪ there could bee no proceedyng a∣gaynst thē by any other conuenient pu∣nishment thā onely by banishment: and that such heeryng that their complies & adherentes were dead or executed, so as it was not possible for ye officer to proue sufficiently that they were rebaptized or heretickes, did vpon hope & confidence therof some forth dayly, and make sute to get leaue to puge them selues, or to get some other benefite of law: whe thyng ministred  of delay of Iu∣stice, and made the heretickes and Ana∣baptistes
bold to returne into our coū∣treys, and there to sow abrode their er∣rours & false doctrines, to the great pe∣ill, offence, & preiudice of our sayd coū∣treys & subiectes: We myndyng to pro∣uide for it, do forbid the cheef Iustices of our hygh Courtes, & the Presidents of our prouinciall Counselles, to giue, graunt, or cause to be sealed to such as are suspected & appeached for  or Anabaptistes, and hayng bin once cyted by order of law, appeere not, but suffer thēselues to be banished through their owne wilfulnesse,) any protection of law to stand to their purgation, or o∣therwize to frequent our sayd coūtreys. And we denounce, that such fugitiues & banishēd olke shalbe taken for conuic∣ted, & that processe shall go out agaynst them vnder the peynes aforesayd. Besides this, we forbyd all men of✚ what state or condition so euer they be, (vnder payne of beyng taken for fauo∣rers of heretikes,) to offer vnto vs or our counsellers, hauyng power to par∣don, any Supplicatiō for the sayd fugi∣tiues, banished men, rebaptized, or o∣therwise defamed, or hauyng bin noted of the sayd disallowed sectes, to  grace for their missages, errours, and heresies: for we wyl not that any grace
shalbe graunted them, vppon payne of being disabled for euer, to haue or exe∣cute any charge or office in our Coun∣treys, and moreouer to be punished at our pleasure. Likewise also we forbyd all Aduocates, Procors, Clerkes, Ap∣prentizes, and Sollicitors, to indite, write, or preferre any such Supplicati∣ons vnder like payne. All whiche poyntes and articles we† wyl and commaund to be kept and ob∣serued inuiolably for euer, accordyng to their forme and tenor. And to the ende that euery man may haue knowledge thereof, we wyll you to proclayme all these thinges incontinently and with∣out delay, in the places where Procla∣mations are woont to be made: and that you proceede and cause others to proceede agaynst such as withstande or disobey, with all rigorous execution of the penalties afore declared, and with∣out any fauor, dissembling, or winkyng at them: notwithstanding any replica∣tion or appeale, made or to be made, or any Priuiledges, Ordinances, Statuts Customes, or vsages to the contrary: al which, our wyll and pleasure is to haue to take no place in this behalfe: but of our owne ayne knowledge, autho∣ritie, and full power, we haue disanul∣led
them, and doo disanul them by these presents. And for the performance of that which† is saide, and of the thinges dependyng therupon, we giue vnto you our Iusti∣ces, Officers, and men of Lawe, to whō this cace belongeth, full power, autho∣ritie, and speciall Commission: com∣maundyng and charging euery man to obey you, and to attend diligently vpon you, in the dooing therof: For so is our pleasure. ¶ Secondly, of the perpetuall De∣creeNo. 9. and Edict, ordeined and set foorth the. 29. day of Aprill. 1550. after the making of other rigorous Decrees, in the yeares. 1544. and. 1546. FIrst, that no person of what estate†† or cōdition soeuer he be, shal print, write, copie out, wittingly haue vnder hym, receyue, beare about, keepe, conceale, holde vnder hym, sell, wy, giue, distribute, sow abroad, or let fall in Churches, streetes, or other pla∣ces, any bookes or writyngs compyled by Martin Luther, Iohn Oecolampadius, Vlrichus Zuinglius, Martin Bucer, Iohn Caluin, or other heretikes and authors of their sectes, or of other wicked & false
sectes, disallowed by the holy Churche, or of their complices, adherents, and fa∣uourers, whiche are gone astray from our holy Catholike fayth, more largely specified in a certaine Declaration, andIn that they forbid in ma∣ner al Bibles & Testamentes, sauing the La∣tin ones: and therin are cō∣teyned an in∣finite number of bookes, & among other, the bookes of Melancthon, Carolostadius, Coruine, Sar∣cer, Lambert, Bullinger, A∣grippa, Wick∣e, Husse, Po∣merane, Ionas, Pupper, Bren∣tius, Spangen∣berg, , Epin, Martir, Vrbane, Mus∣culus, and Bucer. Register ioyned herunto, newly made at our commaundemēt, by the Chaun∣celour and the Students of the vniuer∣sitie of our Citie of Louane, dated the xxvi. of March last, which we auow our selues to haue authorized, and doo au∣thorize it: willyng and commaun∣dyng that it be followed, mayntey∣ned, and published with these our present Letters: and also that no o∣ther bookes made or printed, or that shalbe made or printed hereafter, (be suffered) without declaryng the author, Printer, tyme, and place. ✚✚ Nor also paynt, or cause to be paynted, sell, or set to sale, haue, holde, or kepe any Images, Pictures, or figures reprochful to the virgin Mary, or to the Saintes that are Canonized by the ho∣ly Church, or to the state of the Clevgie: nor breake, deface, or pull downe the I∣mages and Pictures that are made in the honor of them. ✚✚ Nor in their houses or els wher hold or suffer to be held, any secret con∣uenticles or vndue assemblies, nor come
in place where the sayde heretikes and seducers doo secretly and priuily sowe and teach theire errours, rebaptize, and make many conspiracies agaynst holy Church and the common weale. Furthermore, we for all men, as well laye folke as others, to talke or to reazon, openly or secretly, of the holy scripture, specially in great and doubt∣full matters: or to reade or teache the holy Scripture to others: vnlesse they be Diuines brought vp in Diuinitie, & allowed by some famous Uniuersitis, or admitted thereto by the Ordinarye of the place: or finally to preach, defende, alledge, or mainteyn openly or secretly, any doctrine of the sayd Authors. Uppon payne (in cace that anye bee founde to haue incountred or done a∣gainst any of the poyntes aboue menti∣oned) of being punished as seditious persons and distrublers of the state and common weale, and to be executed for suche: that is to wytte, the men by the sword, and the womē by the pyt, so they do not vphold and defend their errors: but if they stande in their errors, opini∣ons, and heresies, then they shalbe exe∣cuted by the fire, and in all caces their goodes shalbe seazed, confiscate, & for∣feyted to our behoofe, and they shal not
be able to dispoze of their goodes from the day that they shal haue done against our ordinance, statute, and prohibition, or bin falue into the said errors. And all alienations, gyftes, conueyances, sales, settinges ouer, Testamentes, and last willes, made or passed by them after the sayd day, shalbe as none, and nothyng worth, and of none effect nor force. Further, we decree, and prohibite e∣uery person (of what state or callyng so euer he be) to presume to harbor, receiue into his house, interteyne, furnishe, or succour with any victuals, money, ap∣parell, or other necessaries, or to releeue with his goodes, or otherwise witting∣ly to fauour any that hath bin counted or suspected for an heretike: and that al such as shall lodge, harbour, receyue, or keepe company with them (knowing them to be suche) shalbe bounde to be∣wray and declare them to the Inquisitor, or to the Officer of the place, if the place be priuiledged, or if it be not, to the chefe Officer of the good towne that is next the place where they dwell: vnder paine (if they make default) to be punished as fauourers of the aid heretikes. Item, we wyll, ordeyne, and decree, that no man of what state or callyng so euer he be, shalbe admitted or receyued
into any towne or village of our Coun∣treys hereawayes, to dwell there, vn∣lesse he bring a Certificat of his conuer∣sation frō the Curate of the place where he dwelt last: which Certificat he shal∣be bounde to exhibite and deliuer into the handes of the chiefe Officer of the Towne or village where he intendeth to lyue: vnder payne, that they whiche bring not such certificat, shall not be ad∣mitted to dwell there, but shalbe taken for suspected. And we commaunde our Officers to lay diligently for informa∣tions against them, & to proceede therin as shalbe expedient. And it shall not be lawfull for our sayd Officers to giue a∣ny respite or protection to such persons. Also we wyll that all our Iustices, officers, & men of Law, together with our vassalles and subiectes, Lords tem∣porall, and high Iustices, shall vppon payne of forfeytyng of their Offices, Iurisdictions, and high Iusticeships, or other penaltie, at our pleazure, accor∣dyng as the cace shall require: be bound to inquire diligētly of them, and to pro∣ceede, or cause their vnder Officers to proceede againste all suche persons, of what state or callyng so euer they be, specially in the poynt of incounteryng of our saide ordinance, and in matters
fallyng within the compasse of their ex∣amination, and dependyng vpon their temporal iurisdiction. And further that at the request and desire of the Inquisi∣tors of the faith, and of the Bishops or∣dinary Iudges, (being mynded to pro∣cede together or as they chance to meet, against any man, because the thing con∣cerneth the Ecclesiasticall crime of here∣sie) they shall minister and giue them al the ayde, fauour, and assistence that they can, for the executyng and performyng of their charges, and also for the appre∣hnding, imprisonyng, and safekeeping of such as they find to be infected, accor∣dyng to theWhiche was very large and maruelous gorous. instructions that the In∣quisitors haue of vs, and the commissi∣on that we haue caused to be graunted vnto them to the same end. The which Officers, Iustices, and vassals, we cō∣mand to minister the said ayd and assi∣stence without any delaye or lingryng, vnder pretēce of any sute hangyng, pre∣uention, or other occasion what soeuer: Chargyng our Attorneys generall, and their deputies, to proceede against such as are negligent, & to procure sentence against them, to the end they may be de∣priued of their roomes, offices, and au∣thoritie of iurisdictiō, & haue such other punishmēt as shalbe found requisit ac∣cording
to the state of the cace. Item, that whosoeuer knoweth or vn∣derstādeth of any that is infected of he∣resie, shalbe bound to bewray, discouer, and name hym incontinently without delay, and to giue knowledge of hym to the Inquisitors, or to the officers of the Bishops, and in their absence to the pa∣stors and Curates of the Churches, that they maye aduertize their superiours thereof. Againe, if any man be found to haue done against our ordinances and prohi∣bitions, shewing hym selfe to be infec∣ted, or a faorer of heretikes, or a dooer of any act against our sayde ordinances and prohibitions, specially tendyng to offence, commotion of the people, or se∣dition: (We wyll) that all such as haue knowledge or vnderstandyng of them, shall be bounde to aduertize our Attor∣neys therof incontinently, or their sub∣stitutes and Deputies, or the Officers of the place where such infected persons the fauorers of them, or offeners dwel. Likewise, if they perceyue where any such heretikes abyde and hyde them sel∣ues, they shalbe bound to bewray them to the Officer of the place, vpon (as is ayd afore) to be taken for faorers, re∣eyuers, and adherentes of their here∣sie,
& to be punished with the same pu∣nishment that the heretike or offender should be, if he were taken. In the same Decree, among other thin∣ges,† are rehearsed and repeated the words and substance of the seuen pontes and ar∣ticles of the Decree going afore, marked at the beginnyng with such a Crosse. ✚ ¶ Thirdly the generall and perpe∣tuallNo. 9. Decree and Edict made and pro∣claymed the XXV. of Septemb. 1550. and renewed and confirmed by the kyng in the yeeres. 1556. 60. 64. &c. FUrthermore we prohibite all men both lay folkes and others, to talkeAll the In∣iunctions or Edictes made for heree, are found togi∣ther in the booke of the statutes of the Low Countreys, printed at Gaunt. or dispute of holy Scripture, open∣ly or priuely, specially in matters hard and doutfull: or to read, teach, declare, or expounde the same Scripture to other men vnlesse they be Diuines, and gra∣duates and allowed in Diuinitie or in the Canon law by some famous Uni∣ersitie, or be admitted therto by the or∣dinary of the place. Prouided alwayes, yt this shall not be ment of such as talke or cōferre simply and sincerely togither of the holy Scripture, alledgyng the ex∣positiōs of the holy & allowed Doctors therupon: but of such as mainteyne and teach propositions & doctrines that are
false & leawd & manifestly taken for he∣resies, contrary to the ordinance of our mother the holy Church, of purpose to seduce others by teachyng them thyngs forbidden. And [we prohibite them] also to preach, defend, say, or vphold, openly or secretly, any doctrine of the authours afore named. Under peyne, that if any be found to haue incountred or done agaynst any of the poyntes afore declared, they shalbe punished as seditious persons and di∣sturbers of our state, and of the quiet of the comō weale, and so executed, that is to wit, the men by the sword, & the wo∣men by the Pitte, so they do not mayn∣teine and defēd their errours: but if they stand in their opiniōs, errours, & here∣sies then they shalbe executed by fire: & in all caces their goodes shalbe seazed, confiscate, & forfeyted to our behofe. And whereas by our late decrees in our former Iniunctions, we haue ordey∣ned that from the day wherin they shall haue done against them or falne into the sayd errours, they shalbe vnable to dis∣poze of their goods, and that all aliena∣tions, giftes, cōueyances, sales, settings ouer, Testaments and last willes made & passed by them after the sayd day, shal stand voyde and be of no force or effect:
we do you to vnderstand, that our mee∣ning was not (as some haue listed to say and brute abrod) by any meanes to im∣peache the subiectes of our Countreys in their lawful traffike and bargayning with straungers, so as they might not freely dispoze of their goods, accordyng to the law written, and according to the customes of the place respectiuely: but only to pruēt such as would do it frau∣dulently, to eschew the penalties of our Statutes, and thereby discharge thēsel∣ues of the feare whiche they ought to haue of the punishmēt for their misdea∣lyng or doyng agaynst them. And ther∣fore our intent is onely to prouide for Gods seruice, their owne welfare, & the health of their soules, that they might not be sedced, nor directly or indirectly drawen or led into any wicked and dis∣allowed errours: wherin we shewe the office of a good Prince. Also we decree and prohibit further∣more, that no persō of what state or cal∣lyng soeuer he be, shal presume to lodge to receiue into his house, to intertein to furnish or serue with vittelles, necessa∣ries or money, or otherwise to helpe with his goods, or willingly to fauour any that haue bin takē or notoriosly su∣spected for : and that all such
as shall lodge, receiue, or interteie thē, (knowyng that them to be such, & that they go about to seduce or infect thēsel∣ues or others openly or priuely) shalbe bound to bewray & preferre them to the Ecclesiasticall Iudges, or to the Officer of the place (if it be priuiledged), or els to the chief officer of the good town next the place where they dwell: vpon peyne (for so makyng default) to be punished as fauorers of heretickes. Prouided al∣wayes that this prohibition shall not touch any Inkeepers, or any other mē that receiue and lodge such as come in∣to our sayd countreys for traffike or o∣ther buzinesse of their owne, of what countrey so euer they be: Sauyng that such straūgers must not incounter this our Decree, but behaue thē selues so as they giue no offence: and if they do, then if their hostes do not bewray them and accuze them, as is sayd afore: we decree and denounce that they shal fall into the penalties aboue mentioned. Also for as much as many of our coū∣tries being suspected of heresie, and spe∣cially of Anabaptistrie, do change their dwellynges, to infect the simple people in places where their disposition is vn∣knowen: we to prouide therefore, do wyll, ordeyne, and decree, that no per∣son of the inhabitants of our low coun∣treys,
of what state, qualitie, or conditiō soeuer he be, shalbe admitted or recey∣ued into any towne or village of those coūtreys to dwel there, vnlesse he bring a certificat from the Curate of the place where he dwelt afore, which Certificat he shalbe bound to exhibit and deliuer into the hands of the chiefe officer of the towne or village where he intendeth to dwel, vpō payne, that they which bring not such Certificat, shal not be admitted to abide there. And we charge our offi∣cers to seke diligent informatiō against them, & to proceede as shalbe expediēt: and it shal not be lawful for our said of∣ficers, or for the peculiar Lordes, or for their officers, to giue licence or pasport to any suche persons. And as touchyng merchant strangers & others that list to come into our sayd low countreys, our meanyng is, not to compel thē to bring such Certificat with thē, or to exhibit it, sauyng that they must lyue there accor∣dyng to our saide ordinances, & behaue themselues without giuyng cause of of∣fence, as is sayd afore. Also we wil that al our Iustices, offi∣cers, & men of law, and al our vassals & subiects, Lords tēporal & high Iustices shal (vpon forfeyture of their offices, iu∣dictions, & Iustice ships, or vpō other penaltie, at our pleasure, according to ye
state of the cace) be bound to make dili∣gent serch, & to procede, or to cause their officers to procede, to the verifying of ye matters aforesaid against al persons, of what state or calling soeuer they be, spe∣cially in the thyngs that cōcerne the in∣counteryng of our said ordinances, & in the caces that belong to their examina∣tion, and depende vpon their temporall iurisdiction. Moreouer, when the Ecclesiasticall Iudges meane to proceede against any man, because he is faulty iu the ecclesia∣sticall crime of heresie: they shall require of the officers of our cheefe Courtes or prouincial Councels, to haue some one of their company or other assistent ap∣poynted thē to be at the informations & procedings which they intend to prefer agaynst suche as are suspected. And we wil, cōmand, & inioyne al our officers, Iustices, & vassals, to yeeld & to giue to the said Iudges, & their felow Cōmissi∣oners, all the helpe, fauour, furtherance, & assistence that they can, for the execu∣tyng & performing of their charge, & al∣so in the apprehendyng imprisonyng, & keepyng of such as they shall finde infe∣cted, without delay or impediment vn∣der pretence of any sute hanging, preuē∣tion or other occasiō whatsoeuer vnder peyne to bee corrected at our pleazure.
And we cōmaund our Attourneyes ge∣nerall and theirdeputies, to proceede a∣gaynst such as are negligent, & to pro∣cure sentence vpō them, to the end they may be depriued of their roomes & of∣fices, & of the priuiledges of their iuris∣dictions, and receiue such other punish∣mentes▪ as shalbe founde meete accor∣dyng as the cace requireth. Itē, that all such as know or vnder∣stād of any that are infected with heresy, shalbe bound to bewray, vtter, name, & geue knowledge of them immediately without delay, to the ecclesiasticall iud∣ges, the Bishops officers, and others to whom the matter belōgeth. Also that if any mā be foūd to haue don against our decrees & prohibitiōs, shewing himselfe to be infected or a fauorer of heretickes, or to haue done any act agaynst our or∣dinances & commaundemētes, specially tending to offence, cōmotion of the peo∣ple, or seditiō: they that know thē or vn∣derstād of thē, shalbe boūd to giue intel∣ligence of thē out of hād to our Attour∣neys, or to their deputies & vnder offi∣cers, or to the officers of y• place, where such infected persons offenders or fauo∣rers of them do wel, & that vnder peyne of beyng punished at our pleasure. Likewise if they know ye place where any such hereticke lyeth hid, they shalbe
bound to bewray him to the officer of yt same place vpō peyne to be taken (as is sayd afore) for fauorers, receiuers, & ad∣herentes of the heresie, & to be punished with the same punishment that the he∣reticke or offender should be, if he were apprehended. And to the end that the said Iustices, & officers which shal haue aprehēded such heretikes, Anabaptists, & trāsgressors of oursaid ordināces & cōmaūdemēts, may haue no occasion to beare with thē, their complices, & fauourers, vnder pretence yt the punishmentes may seeme to great & rigorous, & set out but onely to terri∣fie offēders & euil doers: nor also to pu∣nish them lesse greuously thā they haue deserued, as hath bin found to haue bin done oftentymes heertofore: we will that such as shal wittingly haue done a∣gaynst this ordinance, by keeping to thē selues, or by printyng, sellyng, distribu∣tyng, or puttyng forth any bookes, wri∣tings, or pictures that are heretical and offēsiue, or otherwise agaynst the points heertotore declared or any of thē: shalbe really punished, corrected and chastized with the punishmētes aboue mētioned. Prohibityng all Iudges, Iustices, & officers, togither with our vassals and subiectes, Lordes temporal hauyng, au∣thoritie of Iustice, & their officers, to al∣ter,
mitigate, or chaūge the sayd punish∣mēts, in any wise & cōmaūding thē that as soone as any wtstandyng appeereth, they vtter & denounce the sayd punish∣ment simply according to this decree: v∣pō peyne to be rigorously punished, vn∣lesse that for some great & notable consi∣deratiōs, ye iudges finde some hardnesse in the cace about the preeize execution of the punishmēt that is appointed by our sayd decrees against the trāsgressour: in which cace, notwithstandyng, they shall not of their owne authoritie proceede to any qualification, but be bounde to cary or sēd the same crime in all proces faith∣fully, folded vp & sealed, to the cheef or prouinciall Coūsell, vnder the Iurisdi∣ction whereof they shall resort togither to be there looked vpō, ouersene, & coū∣seled, whither there be fall any alteratiō or mitigatiō of the said penalties, or no. And if any of our sayd Counselles finde that any alteration or mitigation is re∣quisite by good Iustice & accordyng to right and reason, wherewith we charge their cōsciences: In such cace they may be well aduized therof, & put it in wri∣tyng, & sēd it whole backe agayne to the said Iustices & officers to dispatch & de∣termine y• cace according therunto. Ne∣uertheles we charge & cōmaund thē ex∣presly, yea & euen vpon peyne to be cor∣rected
& punished at our pleasure, that they cause not such cōsultatiō to be had, without great & apparāt cause: but that they deale (as farre as they can, euen to the vttermost) accordyng to the tenor of this present dret. In the same Edict, amōg other thyngs, vvere inserted vvord for vvord, the three first points or Articles cōteined in the former Edict, and mar∣ked there at their begynnynges vvith a dubble Crosse. ††. Likewise there vvere rehersed and repeated† the vvordes and substaūce of all the pointes and Articles noted and marked in the sayd Edict of. 1540, vvith a single , sauyng that vvhiche hath a starre added to the Crosse thus.†* ¶The Articles of Agreement made vvith the noblemen that vvere the Confe∣derates by the Regēt in the kyngs name the xxiij. day of August, and aftervvard put at large into hir letters of Assurance set dovvne heeretofore pag. 99. vvhere the begynnyng of it is touched also. HIr highnes caused the gētlemē thatNo. 4. had put vp the supplicatiō vnto hir, to returne to the xx. of August to receiue aunswere to their demaundes duryng which time it fell out so wel, that she re∣ceiued letters from the kynges maiestie whereby she was the better inabled to giue them certeine & absolute answere. And first of all she declareth, that his
maiestie hauing regard of y• thyngs that hir highnesse hath shewed vnto him, is contēted vpon the aduice of his lords, y• knights of the Order, & others as wel of his Counsels of estate, as of his priuy Counsell, that the Inquisition whereof they complayne, shall ceasse. Secondly his maiestie cōsenteth that a new Edict should be made, but he was not resolued whether it should be done by meane of the states in general, or no. Neuerthelesse hir highnesse hoped, that she should shortly haue his full resolutiō therein, accordyng as his maiestie had writtē to her. And she would willingly doo hir indeuer stil at al tymes, that his maiestie might voutafe to cōdescend to y• thynges aforesayd, as he had done by his letters agayne. And as touchyng the assurance wher∣of they made mention in their last sute: her highnes was determined to giue it them, so farre forth as lay in her: And as nowe shee was able to put thē out of all doubt, for as much as his maiestie had consented hereunto, & giuen her autho∣ritie cōcernyng the maner & forme of it, as shee should fynd it cōuenient. Wher∣fore shee said & declared vnto them, that his maiestye abhorryng nothyng more than rigor, & beyng desirous by his ac∣customed clemēcie to put them all out of
suspition, whiche might thynke that he was misinformed of thē, & to discharge thē of ye mistrust which had caused those troubles, was contented that her hygh∣nesse should for the pacifying of al incō∣ueniences, make thē al kynds of letters that might serue to that purpoze, and in such forme as shee should perceiue to be moste for their safetie, for what soeuer was past: Cōditionally that henceforth thei behaued thēselues like good & loyal vassals & subiects towards his maiesty. which thyng her highnesse hopeth that they wyll not faile to do, as becommeth them, like as shee was ready to accept their presentment. And nowe, for as much as they haue ful & whole satisfactiō made vnto them: her highnesse wyl not refuze ye offer that they had made diuers times, cōcerning their imploying of thē selues in the ser∣uis of his maiesty & of her highnesse, for the benefit, rest, & tranquilitie of ye coun∣trey, wherto the duetie of faithfulnesse & of nature bindeth thē. According wher∣unto shee intendeth that they shall giue her their faith, first that they shal nother do nor procure directly nor indirectly, a∣ny thyng agaynst his maiesty, his states countreys, & subiects, but that they shal imploy thē selues wholy to al maner of thyngs that good & loyal vassals & sub∣iectes
ought to performe towards their soueraigne Lord & natural prince. In doyng wherof they shal to the vt∣termost of their power, saythfully helpe to stay the present troubles, cōmotions, & vprores, and to restraine the insurrec∣tion of the people: that the sacking, pil∣ling, & pulling down of churches, chap∣pels, cloysters, & religious houses may cease in al places: yea & they shall helpe to punish such as haue cōmitted such sa∣criledges, outrages, & abominations: & see that no wrong be done to any eccle∣siasticall persons, ministes of Iustice, Gentlemen, or any other of the kynges subiectes and vassalles. Itē, they shal earnestly indeuor, that y• weapōs which y• people haue takē in hād (where through so many mischefes haue bin cōmitted, and may be cōmitted hereafter) may be layd away incōtinēt∣ly. Also they shal do the best they can by al good seruis, to prohibit preachyng in places where none hath bin afore: and to prohibit al force, & cause of offence, & publike disorder where preaching is v∣sed already Moreouer, they shal inde∣nor and put to their helpe, accordyng as they are bound by oth & fealty towards his maiesty, to the expulsing and repres∣syng of al strangers that are enemyes & rebels to his maiestie & the Countrey.
Finally they shal do their indeuor, ac∣cording to the credit which they haue a∣mong such as are now rizen vp for reli∣gion or otherwise, to cause them to sub∣myt them selues to the thyngs that hys maiesty shal decre by the general aduice of his estates, for the furtherance of reli∣gion, & the quietnes and tranquilitie of the same. Geuen at Brusselles, the. 23. of August. 1566. Undersigned: Margaret. ¶ A copie of the letter which theNo. 4. Confederates sent backe in answeare to the Regent. WE Lewis Countie of Nassaw, Eustace of Fiennes Lord of Es∣querds, Charles of Reuel, Lord of Andrignyes, Barnard of Me∣rode Lord of Rumen, Charles of Vander Noot Lord of Risoire, George of Mounte∣gnie Lord of Noyelles, Martin of Sarclas Lord of Tilly, Philip Vander Meeren Lord of Sterbek, Philip of Marbais lord of Lou∣uerual, Iohn of Mountegny lord of Vilers, Charles of Lieuin Lord of Famars, Francis of Haeftē, and Iohn Sauage Lord of Escau∣becke, as wel in our own names, as de∣puties & cōmitties for all the rest of the Lords & gentlemen confederates, that dyd put vp the supplicatiō to the kings maiesty in the moneth of April last, con∣cernyng
the Inquisition & Iniunctions for heresie: Forasmuch as this day we haue receiued certaine letters patents frō the right high & excellēt princesse ye duchesse of Parma & Pleasāce, Regēt & Gouer∣nesse for ye kyng in theis coūtreys heere, authorized therunto by the king our so∣uerein Lord & naturall prince, in maner & forme folowyng, that is to say, Marga∣ret by the grace of God Duchesse of Parma & Pleasance, Regēt &c. as in ye letters of assurance aboue rehearsed: We do you to vnderstād, that according to the same let∣ters of assurāce, we haue promised & do promis solemly by our fayth and in the word of Gentlemen, & as trew & loyall vassals & subiectes of his maiestie, That we will obserue, mainteine, & fulfill, all maner of pointes & articles aforesayd: & as well on our owne behalfe as on the behalfe & in the name of all ye rest whose deputies we be, & whose power, cōmis∣siō, authoritie, & cōmaūdeēt we haue, we giue & will giue our wordes, that both we and the rest of our confederates shal keepe, mainteine, and performe the same: in respect wherof we hold our for∣mer cōfederacie as voyde, broken, & vn∣done, so farre forth & so long as the fore∣said assurance promised by hir highnesse in the kings maiesties name, shall hold. In witnesse whereof we haue signed
theis presēts with our names. Made at Brussels the xxv. day of August. 1566. Signed vnderneath thus: Lewes of Nas∣saw. Eustace of Fiēnes, Bernard of Merode, C. of Vander Noot, Charles of Reuel, Ge∣orge of Moūtegny, Philip vander Meeren, Philip of Marbais lord of Louerual, I. Moū∣tegny Lord of Vilers, Charles Lieuen Lord of Famars, Iohn Sauage, Mart. Tserclas, and Fraūcis of Haeftē. And vpō the backeside was written. This present XXV. of August. 1566. the deputies and cōmitties for the Lordes & gētlemē cōfederate, named in the sayd writyng (sauyng the L. Lilly & Fraūcis of Haeften which were absent) tooke their solemne & requisite othe as well for thēselues as for & on the behalf of the rest of yt cōfederates, to mainteine obserue & performe, all & euery poynt & article conteined in the sayd writyng, in the hands of ye most honorable the prin∣ces of Orendge & Gawre, the Coūty of Horne, the Lord of Hachicourt, and the Coūseller of Assouleuille assigned ther∣to by her highnes. Subscribed thus: In my presence. And signed: Of Onerloepe. Beneath that was writtē again: The. 27 day of the said moneth of August, the said yeare. 1566. the said lord of Lilly & Frā∣cis of Haeften, after the readyng of the sayd writyng vnto them, haue also set to their names & seales, & taken the oth a∣bouesayd
in the handes of the most ho∣norable the prince of Bawre, the Coū∣ties of Manusfeld, & of Horne, the Lord of Hachicourt, & the Counseller of As∣souleuille assigned thereto by her high∣nes, as is sayd afore. Subscribed: In my presence also. And signed: Of Ouerloepe. ¶ A copie of the Letter closed by the Re∣gent, and sent heereupon to the Counsellers and townes of the low Countreys. MArgaret by the grace of God Du∣chesseNo. 4. of Parma and Pleasance. &c. Regent and gouernesse. &c. Right deare and welbeloued, I wyll not omit to let you vnderstand how my Lord the king ad∣uertiseth vs by his letter of the. 13. of the last moneth, of his resolution concernyng the things wherin I asked his coūsell and aduicc in the mo∣neth of May last. Wherof his maiesty could not giue answere any sooner, because  taryed for the cōmyng of the Marques of Berghes, and the Baron of Mountegny sent vnto hym by vs, vpō whose report al the cheefe handling of the mat∣ter consisted. And truly as touching the Inqui∣sition, his maiesty taking regard to the thinges which I informed hym of by the aduice of the knights of the Order, and of the coūsellers both of estate, and of the priny coūsel, being with vs, is cōtented that it shall cease. Likewise also aes touchyng the Iniunctions in the cace of heresie: he is contented that newe shalbe made, so as re∣spect be had to the maintenance of the holy ca∣ faith & of his sties authority. But
he is not yet resolued whether that shalbe done by the states generally, or otherwise. And ther∣fore I haue written very earnestly vnto him a∣gayne, and I looke shortly for his maiestyes good wyll and pleasure in that behalfe. Moreouer, wheras I informed his maiesty of the dout which the Gētlemē that preferred the Supplication to vs in Aprill last, to the ende a∣fore said, dyd east, lest his maiesty should mislike of theyr sute, and of the confedoracie that they made among them selues for the same, which dowt might haue caused distrust, & cōsequētly the trouble and vnquietnes of the Countrey: his maiesty intendyng to deale according co his ac∣customed clemencie, and abhorryng all rigor as much as may be, is cōtented that (if we see that his so doing may cause al vnquietnes to cease, as we be promised that it shall) we shall make re∣quisite assurance, in such maner & forme as we perceyue to be expedient. Which thing is don, so as nothing shalbe imputed to to thē by his ma∣iesty nor by vs, for aught that is past: cōdicional ly that they behaue thēselues hēceforth lik good and loyall subiectes & vassals of his maiesty: wherupō al their cōfederacies must be void, bro∣kē of, & vndon, so long as the things that I haue promised thē in the kings name do hold & stād firme as you may see by the acts passed therupō. And we aduertise you further, that the kings maiesty intendeth and purposeth to mainteyne the true ancient Catholike Religion: and that his gouernors, coūsellers, officers, and magistrats
al do their indeuor to the full, that there may no incōuenience happen in the meane while, tyl he come hyther to take order: which thyng he promiseth to do shortly, if he cā by any meanes▪ possble. Of al which thynges as seruyng to the pacifi∣cation and quieting of these present troubles, as wel in Religion as in the common weale: W▪ thought good to aduertise you, that ye migh indeuor your selues so much the more to do your dueties as becommeth his maiesties true and faythful subiectes, and also folowe his holy and good meanyng, in resistyng the froward and se∣ditious disturbers of the common weale, in maintenace of the Catholike fayth, aud in his maiesties seruis, to the quietnesse and tranqui∣tie of the Countrey and your selues. And so right deare and welbeloued, our Lord haue you in his holy keepyng. From Brusselles, the. xxv. day of August. 1566. FINIS. ❧ Imprinted at London by Iohn Day, dwellyng ouer Aldersgate. Februar. 24. 1575.
