2999 S107833 99843526 8265
Deuout psalmes and colletes, gathered and set in suche order, as may be vsed for dayly medita∣cions. Anno, 1.5.6.7.
¶An exhortacion to prayer. EMonges all other exerci∣ses, (good Christian rea∣der) that god hath prepa∣red for vs, that we may exercise oure selues in: there is none better, none more excellent, then is true prayer, cum∣ming from a cleane hert, and an vnfey∣ned conscience. For in the day of temta∣cion when the olde serpent by his sub∣tyl suggestions shal go about our helth to subuert, we shal easely by prayer (as a present remedy) all hys malicyouse & sondry dartes extynguishe. Also in the day of external affliccion (which often∣times chaunseth for our sinnes & wic∣kednes) by prayer we shall eyther ob∣teyne helpe that it may be mitigated, or elles all together taken away. Fyrst of all, this is to be noted yt we must make our prayers and commen peticions vnto god, and to hym onely: For he is the ge∣uer of euery good and perfecte gifte. It is one chefe operacion and working be∣longing vnto his diuinitie, to graūt vn∣to vs suche thinges as we doe aske and craue of hym. They therfore that dooe aske of other besydes hym, (somuche as is in them) dooe rob god of his po∣wer
and diuinitie. It is written in the epistle of saynt Iames: If any of you want wisdom, let him aske of him that geueth it, that is of god. And god also by hys prophet Dauid exhorteth vs to make our prayers vnto him, his wordes be these: Cal vpon me in the day of tri∣bulacion, and I will delyuer the. Accor∣dyng to thys saynt Paule sayeth: How shall they call vppon him, in whom they beleue not. Therfore we cannot call on hym for help but in whome we dooe be∣leue: we cannot beleue that oure peti∣cions shalbe graunted, excepte we be steyed vpon some promise made vnto vs in the scripture. The promyse in scrip∣ture, as concernyng our peticions to be graunted, is made by the father only, & that in the name of Christ: wherfore vn∣to him only oure prayers is to be direc∣ted. Furthermore this is to be noted in prayer, yt we must pray with our hartes and mindes, not onely with our lippes, & our toung. For yf we do: we may well be compared vnto the Iewes, vnto whō our sauiour Christ sayde: o ye hipocrites Esaie the prophet hath prophecied well of you, saying: This peopell draweth nere vnto me wt there mouth, & they ho∣nour
me with ye lyppes, but theyr heart is far from me. Let vs call to our remē∣braunce the example of Anna mother of Samuel, whiche prayed vehemently vnto god, and her peticion was heard & graunted, & yet she spake not one word with her toung: But powred furth the whole sorow & anguyshe of her mynde afore god. And god sayde vnto Moises, wherfore doest thou crye vnto me whē Moyses spake nothing with his toung, but wt his hart. Therfore in our praiers let vs lift vp our heartes vnto God, earnestly desyring those thinges, that we haue most nede of: se∣parating our mindes frō all cares and desyres of the worlde, & the fleshe.
On the mundaye. The fyrst psalme. Beatus vir qui non abiit. BLessed is that man, that hath not walked in the counsayl of the vngodly, nor stande in ye way of sinners, and hath not sit in the seate of the scorneful. But his delyte is in the lawe of the Lord: and in his lawe wyl he exercise him selfe day and night. And he shalbe like a tree plāted by the water syde, that wyl bryng furth his fruit in due season His leafe also shal not wither, & loke whatsoeuer he doeth, it shal prosper. As for the vngodly, it is not so
with them: but they are like the chaffe which the wynd scattereth away (frō the face of the yearth.) Therfore the vngodly shal not be able to stād in the iudgement, neither the synners in the cōgre∣gacion of the righteous. But the lord knoweth the way of the righteous, and the way of the vngodly shal perishe. The second. Verba mea auribus. Psal. v. POnder my wordes, o Lord, cōsidre my me∣ditacion. O herken thou vnto the voyce of my cal∣lyng, my kyng and my God, for vnto the wyll I make my praier. My voyce shalt thou heare by tymes, o Lord, early in the mor∣nyng wyl I direct my praier vn∣to
the, and wyll loke vp. For thou art the God that hath no pleasure in wickednes, nei∣ther shal any euil dwel with the. Suche as be folishe, shall not stand in thy sight, for thou hatest al them that worke vanitie. Thou shalt destroye them that speake lesyng: the Lord wyll ab∣horre both the bloudthyrsty, and deceitful man. But as for me, I wyl come into thy house, euen vpon the multi∣tude of thy mercy, & in thy feare wyll I worship towarde thy holy temple. Leade me, o Lord, in thy right∣wysenes, because of myne ene∣mies: make thy way playne be∣fore my face. For there is no faythfulnes in his mouth: theyr inwarde partes
are very wickednes. Their throte is an open sepul∣chre: thei flatter with theyr tong. Destroy thou them O God, let them perishe thorowe their owne ymaginacions, cast them out in the multitude of theyr vngodly∣nesse: for they haue rebelled a∣gainst the. And let all them that put theyr trust in the, reioyce: thei shal euer be geuyng of thankes, because thou defendest thē: thei that loue thy name shalbe ioyful in the. For thou Lorde wylte geue thy blissyng vnto the righteous: and with thy fauourable kyndnesse wylt thou defende him, as with a shilde. ¶The third. Domine ne. Psal. vi.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignacion: nei∣ther chasten me in thy displeasure. Haue mercy vpon me, O lord, for I am weake: O lord heale me, for my bones are vexed. My soule also is sore troubled: but lord how long wilte thou pu∣nishe me? Turne the, O lord, and deliuer my soule: Oh, saue me for thy mercies sake. For in death no man remem∣breth the: and who wyll geue the thankes in the pit? I am weary of my gronyng, euery night washe I my bed, and water my couche with my teares My beautie is gone for very trouble, & worne away because of all myne enemies.
Away fro me all ye that worke vanitie: for the lorde hath hearde the voyce of my wepyng. The lord hath heard my peti∣cion, ye lord wyl receiue my praier All myne enemies shalbe con∣founded & sore vexed, they shalbe turned backe and putte to shame sodenly. ¶The fourth. Domine dominus noster. psal. viii. O Lorde oure gouernour, how excellent is thi name in all the world, thou that hast set thy glory aboue the hea∣uens? Out of the mouth of very ba∣bes and sucklinges hast thou or∣dained strength, because of thine enemies, that thou mightest styll the enemye and the auenger. For I wyl cōsidre thy heauens,
euen the workes of thy fyngers: the Moone & the starres whiche thou hast ordayned. What is manne that thou art myndefull of him? and the sonne of man that thou visitest him? Thou madest him lower then the Aungels, to croune him with glory and worship. Thou makest him to haue do∣minion of the workes of thy han∣des: & thou hast put all thynges in subiection vnder his feete. Al shepe and oxen, yea, and the beastes of the felde. The foules of the ayre, & the fyshe of the sea, and whatsoeuer walketh thorowe the pathes of the seas. O lord oure gouernour, howe excellent is thy name in all the worlde.
Let vs pray. ALmighty God the father of mercy, and God of all com∣forte, the whiche onely forgeuest synne, forgeue vnto vs our syn∣nes good lorde, forgeue vnto vs our sinnes, that by the multitude of thy mercy, thei may be couered and not imputed vnto vs, and by the operacion of the holy ghost, we may haue power and strēgth hereafter to resist synne: by oure sauiour & lord Iesu Christ. Amē. ¶The Letany. The lordes praier, The twelue articles of our beliefe. The ten commaundementes. The places cōcer∣nyng Baptisme. The places cōcernyng the supper of the lord. Let vs pray. O Almighty God and mercy∣ful Lord whiche geuest. &c.
On the tuysday. The fyrst. Saluum me fac. psal. xii. HElpe (me) lord, for ther is not one godly man lefte. For the faythfull are minished frō among the children of men. They talke of vanitie, euerye one with his neighbour: they do but flatter with theyr lippes, & dissemble in theyr double heart. The Lord shall rote out all de∣ceiptful lippes, and the tong that speaketh proude thynges. Whiche haue sayd: with oure tongue wyll we preuayle: we are they that ought to speake, who is lord ouer vs? Now for the comfortlesse trou∣bles sake of the neady, & because of ye depe sighyng of the poore,
I wyl vp (sayth the lord) & wyll helpe euery one, from him that swelleth against him, and wyl set them at rest. The wordes of the Lorde are pure wordes euen as the syluer, whiche from yearth is tried and purified seuen tymes in the fyre. Thou shalt kepe them (O lord) thou shalte preserue him frō this generacion for euer. The vngodly walke on euery side: when they are exalted, the childrē of men are put to rebuke. The second. Dixit insipiens. psal. xiiii. THe fole hath sayd in his heart there is no God. They are corrupt, and become abhominable in their do∣ynges, there is not one that doth good (no not one.)
The lord loked doune frō hea∣uen vpon the children of men, to see if there were any that would vnderstand & seke after God. But they are al gone out of the way, they are al together become abhominable: there is none that doth good, no not one. Their throte is an open sepul∣chre: with their tonges thei haue disceiued, the poyson of aspes is vnder their lippes. Their mouth is ful of cursyng & bitternes: theyr feete are swifte to shed bloud. Destruction and vnhappynes is in their waies, and the way of peace haue they not knowē, there is no feare of God before their eyes. Haue they no knowledge that they al are suche workers of mis∣chief,
eatyng vp my people as it were bread, & cal not vpon ye lord. There were they brought in great feare (euen where no feare was) for God is in the generaciō of the righteous. As for you, ye haue made a mocke at the coūsell of the poore, because he putteth his trust in the lord. Who shal geue saluacion vn∣to Israel, out of Syon? When the lord turneth the cap¦tiuitie of his people, then shal Ia¦cob reioyce, & Israel shalbe glad. The third. Domine quis habitabit. psal. xv LOrde who shall dwel in thy tabernacle? who shall rest vpon thy holy hyl? Euen he that leadeth an vn∣corrupt
life, and doeth the thyng whiche is right, and speaketh the truth from his heart. He that hath vsed no disceipte in his tong, nor done euil to his neighboure, and hath not slaun∣dred his neighbours. He that setteth not by him self: but is lowly in his owne eyes, & maketh muche of thē that feare the Lord. He that sweareth vnto his neighbour and disapointeth him not, though it were to his owne hynderaunce. He that hath not geuē his mo∣ney vpō vsury, nor taken reward against the innocent. Who so doeth these thynges, shal neuer fal. The fowerth. Deus deus meus. psal. xxii.
MY God, my God: (loke vpō me) why hast thou forsaken me: and art so farre fro my helth, and frō the wordes of my complaint? O my God, I crie in the day tyme, but thou hearest not: & in the night season also, I take no rest And thou continuest holye, O thou worship of Israel. Our fathers hoped in the, they trusted in the, and thou diddest deliuer them. They called vpon the, and wer helped: they put theyr trust in the and were not confounded. But as for me I am a worme and no mā: a very scorne of men, and the outcast of the people. All they that see me, laugh me to scorne: they shote out theyr lip∣pes
and shake their head saiyng: He trusted in God that he would deliuer him: let him deliuer him if he wyl haue him. But thou arte he that toke me out of my mothers wombe: thou wast my hope when I hāged yet vpon my mothers breastes. I haue bene left vnto the euer syns I was borne: thou arte my God euen frō my mothers wōbe. O go not fro me, for trouble is harde at hand, and there is none to helpe me. Many oxen are come about me fatte bulles of Basan close me in on euery syde. They gape vpon me with their mouthes as it were a rampyng and roryng Lyon. I am poured out like water, & all my bones are out of ioynte:
my heart also in the middest of my bodye, is euen like meltyng waxe. My strength is dryed vp lyke a potsherde, and my tong cleueth to my gummes: and thou shalte bryng me into the dust of death. For (many) dogges are come a¦bout me, and the counsayle of the wicked lay siege against me. They pearsed my handes, and my feete, I may tel al my bones: they stande staryng and lokyng vpon me. They parte my garmentes a∣mong them, and cast lottes vpō my vesture. But be not thou farre from me O lord: thou art my succour, hast the to helpe me. Deliuer my soule from the swearde, my dearelyng from the
power of the dogge. Saue me frō the lyons mouth: thou hast heard me also from a∣mong the hornes of ye vnicornes. I wyll declare thy name vnto my brethren: in the middest of the congregacion wyll I prayse the. O prayse the lorde ye that feare him: magnifye him all ye of the seede of Iacob, and feare him all ye seede of Israel. For he hath not dispysed nor ab¦horred the lowe estate of ye poore: he hath not hyd his face frō him, but when he called vnto him, he heard him. My praise is of the in the great congregacion, my vowes wyll I perfourme in the sight of them that feare him. The poore shal eate, & be satis∣fied: they that seke after the lorde
shal prayse him, your heart shall liue for euer. All the endes of the world shal remembre thē selues, and be tur∣ned vnto the lord: and al the kin∣redes of the naciōs shal worship before him. For the kingdome is the Lor∣des, and he is the gouernour a∣mong the people. Al suche as be fat vpō yearth, haue eaten & worshipped. Al they that go doune into the dust, shall kneele before him, and no mā hath quickened his owne soule. My seede shall serue him: they shalbe counted vnto the lord, for a generacion. They shall come, and (the hea∣uens) shal declare his righteous∣nesse, vnto a people that shalbe
borne, whom the lord hath made. Let vs pray. O Lord God whiche dispisest not a cōtrite heart, and for∣gettest the sinnes & wickednes of a sinner, in what houre soeuer he doth mourne and lament his old maner of liuyng: Graunt vnto vs O lorde now gathered to ge∣ther in thy name, true contricion of heart, that we may vehe∣mently dispise our sinnefull life past, and wholely be conuerted vnto the, by our sauiour & lorde Iesus Christ. Amen. The lordes praier. &c. as vpō monday.
On the wednisday. The fyrst. Ad te domine leuaui. psal. xxv. VNto the (O lord) wyll I lift vp my soule. My God, I haue put my trust in the: Oh let me not be confounded: neither let myne enemies triūph ouer me. For all they that hope in the shall not be ashamed: but suche as transgresse without a cause, shalbe put to confusion. Shewe me thy wayes O lord, and teache me thy pathes. Leade me furth in thy trueth, and learne me, for ȳ art the God of my saluacion: in the hath bene my hope al the day long. Cal to remembraunce (O lord) thy tendre mercyes, and thy lo∣uyng kyndnesses, whiche haue
bene euer of olde. Oh remembre not the synnes and offences of my youthe, but according vnto thy mercy thinke thou vpon me (O lorde) for thy goodnes. Gracious & righteous is the lorde, therfore wyll he teache sin∣ners in the way. Them that be meke shall he guide in iudgement, and suche as be gentle, them shal he learne his way. All the pathes of the lorde are mercy and trueth, vnto suche as kepe his couenaūt and his testi∣monies. For thy names sake O lord, be mercyful vnto my synne, for it is great. What man is he that feareth the lord? him shal he teache in the
way that he shal chose. His soule shall dwell at ease, & his seede shal inherite the lande. The secrete of the Lorde is a∣mong them that feare him, and he wyl shewe thē his couenaunt. Myne eyes are euer lokyng vnto the lord, for he shal plucke my feete out of the net. Turne the vnto me, and haue mercy vpō me: for I am desolate and in misery. The sorowes of my heart are enlarged. O bryng thou me out of my troubles. Loke vpon myne aduersitie & misery, & forgeue me al my sinne. Considre myne enemies howe many they are, and they beare a a tyrannous hate against me. O kepe my soule, and deliuer
me: let me not be confounded, for I haue put my trust in the. Let perfectnes and righteous dealyng wayte vpon me, for my hope hath bene in the. Deliuer Israel O God, out of al his troubles. The second. Dominus illuminatio. psal. xxvii THe lord is my light and my saluacion: whō then shal I feare? The lord is the strength of my life: of whom then shall I be a∣frayde? When the wicked (euen myne enemies & my fooes) came vpon me, to eat vp my fleshe, they stum¦bled and fel. Though an hoost of men were layd against me, yet shal not my heart be afrayde: & though there
rose vppe warre agaynst me, yet wyl I put my trust in him. One thyng haue I desired of the lord, whiche I wyll require: euē that I may dwel in the house of the lord al the daies of my life to behold the fayre beauty of the lord: and to visit his temple. For in ye time of trouble he shal hide me in his tabernacle: yea in the secrete place of his dwellyng shal he hide me, and set me vp v∣pon a rocke of stone. And now shall he lifte vppe my heade aboue mine enemies roūd about me. Therfore wyll I offre in his dwellyng, an oblaciō with great gladnes. I wyl syng and speake prayses vnto the Lord. Herken vnto my voice O lord,
when I cry vnto the, haue mercy vpon me, and heare me. My heart hath talked of the: Seke ye my face: thy face O lord wyl I seke. O hyde not thou thy face fro me, nor cast thy seruaunt awaye in displeasure. Thou hast bene my succoure, leaue me not, neither forsake me, O God of my saluacion. When my father and mother forsake me, ye lord taketh me vp. Teache me thy way O lord, & leade me the right waye because of myne enemies. Deliuer me not into the wyll of myne aduersaries, for ther are false wytnesses risen vp agaynst me, and suche as speake wrong. I should vtterly haue fainted but that I beleue verely to se the
good∣nes of the lorde in the land of the liuyng. O tary thou the lordes leysure, be strong, & he shal comfort thine heart, and put thou thy trust in the lord. The third. In te domine speraui. psal. xxxi. IN the lord, haue I put my trust: let me neuer be put to cōfusion: de∣liuer me in thy righte∣ousnes. Bowe doune thyne eare to me, make hast to deliuer me. And be thou my strong rocke, & house of defēce, that thou mayest saue me. For thou art my strong rocke, & my castle. Be thou also my guide, & leade me for thy names sake.
Drawe me out of the net that they haue layde priuely for me, for thou art my strength. Into thy hādes I cōmende my spirit: for thou hast redemed me, O lorde thou God of truth. I haue hated them that hold of supersticious vanities, and my trust hath bene in the lorde. I wil be glad and reioyce in thy mercy: for thou hast cōsidred my trouble, & hast knowen my soule in aduersities. Thou hast not shut me vp into the hande of the enemye, but hast set my feete in a large rowme. Haue mercy vpon me O lorde, for I am in trouble, & myne eye is consumed for very heuynes, e∣uen my soule and my body. For my life is waxen olde with
heauynes, and my yeares with mournyng. My strēgth fayleth me because of myne iniquitie, and my bones are consumed. I became a reprofe among all myne enemies, but specially a∣mong my neighbours, and they of myne acquaintaunce were a∣frayde of me, and they that did se me without, cōueied them selues fro me. I am cleane forgottē, as a dead man out of mynde: I am become like a broken vessel. For I haue heard the blasphe∣my of the multitude: and feare is on euery side whyle they conspire together against me, & take their counsail to take away my life. But my hope hath bene in the, O lord, I haue sayd: thou art my God.
My tyme is in thy hande, deli∣uer me from the hand of myne e∣nemies, and from them that per∣secute me. Shewe thy seruaunt the light of thy coūtenaunce, and saue me for thy mercies sake. Let me not be confounded, O lord, for I haue called vpon the: let the vngodly be put to confu∣sion & be put to silēce in ye graue. Let the liyng lippes be put to silence, whiche cruelly, disdayne∣fully, & spitefully speake agaynst the righteous. O how plētiful is thy goodnes, whiche thou hast layd vp, for thē that feare the? and that thou hast prepared for them, that put theyr trust in the, euen before the sōnes of men? Thou shalt hyde thē priuely by
thyne owne presence frō the pro∣uokyng of all menne, thou shalt kepe thē secretly in thy taberna∣cle, from the strife of tongues. Thankes be to the Lorde: for he hath shewed me merueilous great kyndnes in a strong cytie. And when I made hast, I sayd: I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes. Neuertheles, thou heardest the voyce of my prayer when I cried vnto the. O loue the lord, all ye his sain∣tes, for the lorde preserueth them that are faythful, and plēteously rewardeth he the proude doer. Be strong, and he shal stablishe your heart, all ye that put your trust in the lord. The fowerth. Beati quorum. psal. xxxii.
BLessed is he, whose vn∣righteousnes is forge∣uen: and whose synne is couered. Blessed is the man, vnto whō the lord imputeth no sinne, and in whose spirit there is no guile. For while I helde my tongue, my bones cōsumed away thorow my dayly complainyng. For thy hand is heuy vpō me day & night, and my moysture is like the drouth in summer. I wyll knowledge my synne vnto the, & myne vnrighteous∣nes haue I not hid. I sayd: I wyl confesse my syn∣nes vnto ye lord, & so yu forgauest the wickednes of my sīne. Sela. For this shall euerye one that is godly, make his praier. vnto the in a tyme when thou
mayest be found, but in the great water fluddes they shal not come nigh him. Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shalt preserue me frō trou∣ble: thou shalt cōpasse me aboute wt songes of deliueraunce. Sela I wyll enfourme the, & teache the in the way wherin thou shalt goo: and I wyll guyde the with myne eye. Be ye not like horse and Mule, whiche haue no vnderstandyng, whose mouthes must be holden with bitte and bridle, lest they fal vpon the. Great plages remayne for the vngodly, but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord, mercye embra∣ceth him on euery syde. Be glad, O ye righteous, and reioyce in the lord: and be ioyful
al ye that are true of heart. Let vs pray. O Mercifull father, by whose power and strength we may ouer come our enemies both bo∣dily and ghostly: graunt vnto vs O Lorde that accordyng to oure promyse made in Baptisme we may ouercome the chief enemies of our soule, that is the desyres of the world, the pleasures of the fleshe, and the suggestions of the wicked spirite, and so after leade our liues in holynes and righte∣ousnes, that we may serue the in spirit and in trueth, & that by our sauiour & lord Iesu Christ. Amē. The letany. &c. As on monday. Let vs pray. O Almightye God & merciful lord whiche geuest. &c.
On the thursday. The fyrst. Benedicam dominum. Psal. xxxiiii. I Wyl alway geue thā∣kes vnto the lorde, his prayse shall euer be in my mouth. My soule shall make her bost in the lord, the humble shal heare therof, and be glad. O praise the lord with me, and let vs magnifye his name toge∣ther. I sought the Lord, & he heard me: yea, he deliuered me out of al my feare. They had an eye vnto him, & were lightened, & theyr faces wer not ashamed. Lo, the poore crieth, & the lord heareth him, yea, and saueth him out of al his troubles. The Angel of the lord tarieth
roūd about them that feare him, and deliuereth them. O taste & see how gracious the Lorde is, blessed is the man that trusteth in him. O feare the lorde, ye that be his sainctes, for they that feare him lacke nothyng. The lyons do lacke, and suffre hunger, but they whiche seke the Lorde, shall want no maner of thyng that is good. Come ye children & herken vn∣to me, I wyl teache you the feare of the lord. What man is he that lusteth to liue, and would fayne see good dayes? Kepe thy tong frō euil, and thy lippes that they speake no guile. Eschewe euil and do good, seke peace and insue it.
The eyes of the Lorde are ouer the righteous, and his eares are open vnto theyr praiers. The countenaunce of the lorde is against thē that do euil, to rote out the remēbraunce of them frō of the yearth. The righteous crye, & the Lord heareth them: and deliuereth thē out of al theyr troubles. The lorde is nigh vnto thē that are of a contrite heart, & wyl saue suche as be of an humble spirite. Great are the troubles of the righteous, but ye lord deliuereth him out of al. He kepeth all his bones, so that not one of them is broken. But misfortune shal slay the vn¦godly, & they that hate the righ∣teous, shalbe desolate. The lorde deliuereth the soules
of his seruauntes: & all they that put theyr trust in him shal not be destitute. The second. Nolite emulare. psal. xxxvii. FRet not thy selfe because of the vngodly: neither be thou enuious against the euil doers. For they shal sone be cut doune like the grasse, & be withered euē as the grene herbe. Put thou thy trust in the lord, and do good: dwel in the lande & verely thou shalt be fed. Delite thou in the lorde, and he shall geue the thy heartes desyre. Commit thy way vnto the lord, and put thy trust in him, and he shal bryng it to passe. He shal make thy righteousnes as clere as the light, and thy iust
dealyng as the noone day. Holde the styl in the Lorde, and abyde pacientely vpon him: but grieue not thy selfe at him whose way doeth {pro}spere against the man that doth after euil coū∣sailes. Leaue of frō wrathe, and let go displeasure: fret not thy selfe, els shalt thou be moued to do euil. Wicked doers shalbe roted out and they that paciently abide the lord, those shal inherite the land. Yet a lytle while, & the vngodly shalbe cleane gone: thou shalte loke after his place, and he shal∣be away. But ye meke spirite shal possesse the yearth, and shalbe refreshed in the multitude of peace. The vngodly seketh counsail a¦gainst the iust, and gnasheth vp∣on
him with his teethe. The Lorde shal laugh him to scorne, for he hath seene, that his day is commyng. The vngodly haue drawen out the swearde, & haue bended theyr bowe, to cast doune the pore and neady, and to slaye suche as be of right conuersacion. Theyr swearde shal go thorow theyr owne heart, and theyr bowe shalbe broken. A smal thing that the righteous hath, is better then great riches of the vngodly. For the armes of the vngodly shalbe broken, and the Lord vp∣holdeth the righteous. The Lord knoweth the daies of the godly, and theyr enheritance shal endure for euer. They shal not he cōfounded in
the perilous tyme, & in the daies of derth, they shal haue ynough. As for the vngodly, they shal perishe: and the enemyes of the Lord shall consume as the fat of lambes, yea, euen as the smoke shal they consume away. The vngodly boroweth and payeth not againe, but the righ∣teous is mercyful and liberal. Suche as be blessed of God, shal possesse the land, & they that be cursed of him shalbe roted out The lord ordreth a good mans goyng, and maketh his way ac∣ceptable to him selfe. Though he fal, he shal not be cast a way, for the lord vpholdeth him with his hand. I haue bene yong, & nowe am old: & yet sawe I neuer the righ∣teous forsaken, nor his sede beg∣gyng
theyr bread. The righteous is euer merci∣ful, and lendeth, and his seede is blessed. Fle from euil, & do the thyng that is good: and dwel for euer. For the lord loueth the thyng that is right, he forsaketh not his that be godly, but they are preser¦ued for euermore. The vnrighteous shalbe pu∣nished: as for the seede of the vn∣godly, it shalbe roted out. The righteous shall enherite the lande, & dwel therin for euer. The mouthe of the righteous is exercised in wisedome, and his tong wyll be talkyng of iudge∣ment. The lawe of his God is in his heart, and his goynges shall not slide.
The vngodly seeth the righte∣ous, and seketh occasion to slaye him. The lorde wyl not leaue him in his hande, nor condempne him when he is iudged. Hope thou in the lord, and kepe his way, and he shal promote the that thou shalt possesse the land: when the vngodly shall perishe, thou shalt se it. I my self haue sene the vngod∣ly in great power, and florishyng like a grene bay tree. I wēt by, & loe, he was gone: I sought him, but (his place) could no where be found. Kepe innocency, and take heede vnto the thyng that is right, for that shall bryng a man peace at the last. As for the transgressours they
shall perishe together, & the ende of the vngodly is, they shalbe ro∣ted out at the last. But the saluacion of the righ∣teous cōmeth of the lord, whiche is also theyr strength in the tyme of trouble. And the Lord shal stand by thē and saue them: he shal deliuer thē from the vngodly, and shal saue thē, because they put theyr trust in him. ¶The third. Dixi custodiam vias. psal. xxxix. I Sayd: I will take hede to my wayes, that I of∣fende not in my tong. I wil kepe my mouth (as it wer with a bridle) while the vngodly is in my sight. I helde my tong, and spake no∣thyng.
I kept silence: yea, euen from good wordes, but it was payne and grefe to me. My heart was hote within me and while I was thus musyng, the fyre kyndled: and (at the last) I spake with my tong. Lord, let me know myne ende, & the numbre of my dayes: that I may be certified how lōg I haue to liue. Beholde, thou hast made my daies as it were a spanne long, & myne age is euen as nothyng in respecte of the: and verely euery man liuyng is altogether vani∣tie. Sela. For man walketh in a vayne shadowe, & disquieteth him selfe in vayne, he heapeth vp riches & cannot tel who shal gather them. And nowe Lorde, what is my
hope? truely my hope is euen in the. Deliuer me frō all mine offen∣ces, and make me not a rebuke vnto the folishe. I became dumme, and opened not my mouth, for it was thy do∣yng. Take thy plage away fro me: I am euen cōsumed by the mea∣nes of thy heuy hand. When thou with rebukes dost chasten man for synne, thou ma∣kest his beauty to cōsume away, like as it were a moth frettyng a garment. Euery man therfore is but va¦nitie. Sela. Heare my praier, O lorde, and with thine eares considre my cal∣lyng: holde not thy peace at my teares.
For I am a straunger with the & a soiourner, as all my fathers were. Oh spare me a lytle, that I may recouer my strength, before I go hence, and be no more sene. ¶The fourth. Beatus qui intelligit. Psal. xli. BLessed is he that consi∣dereth the poore (and nedy) the Lord shal de∣liuer him in ye tyme of trouble. The lord preserue him & kepe him aliue: that he may be blessed vpon yearth, & deliuer not thou him into the wyl of his enemies. The lord comfort him, when he lyeth sicke vpon his bed: make thou al his bed in his sicknes. I sayd, lord be mercyfull vnto me, heale my soule, for I haue sin¦ned against the.
Myne enemyes speake euil of me: when shall he dye, and his name perishe? And if he come to se me, he spe∣keth vanitie, and his heart con∣ceiueth falshod within him selfe: and when he commeth furth, he telleth it. All myne enemies whisper to∣gether against me: euen against me do they ymagine this euil. Let the sentēce of giltynes pro¦cede against him, and nowe that he lyeth, let him rise vp nomore. Yea euen myne owne familiar frende whō I trusted (whiche did also eate of my bread) hath layde great wayte for me. But be thou merciful vnto me (O lord) raise thou me vp again, and I shal rewarde them. By this I knowe thou fauou∣rest
me, that myne enemye doeth not triumph against me. And when I am in my helth: thou vpholdest me, and shalt set me be¦fore thy face for euer. Blessed be the Lord God of Is∣rael, worlde without ende. Amen and Amen. Let vs pray. O Almighty and euerlastyng God, whiche not onely ge∣uest euery good and perfite gift, but also encreasest those gyftes that thou haste geuen, we moost humbly beseche the mercyfull God, to encrease in vs the gift of fayth, that we may truely beleue in the and in thy promises made vnto vs, and that neither by our negligence nor infirmitie of the fleshe, nor by greuousnes of tēp∣tacion, neither by the subtil craf∣tes
and assaultes of the deuill, we be driuen from fayth in the bloud of oure sauioure and lorde Iesu Christe. Amen. The lordes prayer. &c. as afore. On the Fridaye. The fyrste. Miserere mei deus. psal. li. HAue mercy vpon me (O God) after thy greate goodnes: according vn¦to the multitude of thy mercies, do away myne offences. Wash me throwly fro my wie∣kednes, & clense me from my sin. For I knowlege my faultes, & my sin is euer before me. Agaynst the only haue I sīned and doen this euill in thy syghte: that thou myghtest be iustified in
thy saying, and cleare when thou art iudged. Behold, I was shapen in wyc∣kydnes, and in sinne hath my mo∣ther conceyued me. But lo thou requirest truth in ye inward partes, & shalt make me to vnderstand wisdome secretly. Thou shalt pourge me with I∣sope, and I shall be cleane: thou shalt washe me, and I shalbe why∣ter then snowe. Thou shalt make me heare ioye and gladnes, that the bones which thou hast broken, maye reioyce. Turne thy face from my sinnes, and put out all my mysdedes. Make me a cleane hert (O god) & renewe a right spirite within me. Cast me not away from thy pre∣sence, and take not thy holy spirite from me.
O geue me the comfort of thy helpe agayne: & stablyshe me with thy fre sprete. Then shal I teache thy wayes vnto the wicked, and sinners shalbe conuerted vnto the. Delyuer me from bloud gylty∣nesse (O God) thou that art the God of my health, and my tonge shall singe of thy ryghteousnesse. Thou shalt open my lippes, (O Lord) & my mouth shal shewe thy prayse. For thou desyrest no sacrifice, els woulde I geue it the: but thou delytest not in burnt offerynge. The sacrifyce of god is a trou∣bled spirite, a broken and a con∣trite hert (O God) shalt thou not dispyse. O be fauourable & gracious vn∣to Sion, buyld thou the walles of Ierusalem.
Then shalt thou be pleased wt the sacrifice of righteousnesse with burnt offerynges and oblacions, then shall they offer younge bul∣lockes vpon thyne aultare. The second. Quid gloriaris. psalm. l. WHy boasteste thou thy selfe, thou tirant, that thou canst do mischif? Where as the good∣nes of God endureth yet dayly. Thy tong ymagineth wicked∣nes, and with lyes thou curtest like a sharpe rasour. Thou hast loued vngracious∣nes more then goodnes: & to talke of lyes more then ryghteousnes. Sela. Thou haste loued to speake all wordes yt maye do hurte, O thou false tonge.
Therfore shall God destroye the for euer, he shall take the and plucke the out of thy dwelling, and roote the out of the lande of the liuing. Sela. The righteous also shall see this, & feare: and shal laugh him to scorne. Lo, this is that man that toke not God for his strength, but tru∣sted vnto the multitude of his ri∣ches, & strengthed him selfe in hys wickednes. As for me I am lyke a grene o∣lyue tree in the house of God, my trust is in the tender mercy of god for euer and euer. I wil alway geue thankes vn∣to the: for that thou hast done: & I will hope in thy name, for thy saynctes lyke it well.
¶The third. Deus in nomine tuo. psal. liiii. SAue me (O God) for thy names sake, and auenge me in thy strength. Heare my prayer (O God) and herken vnto the wordes of my mouth. For straūgers are risē vp against me, and tirauntes (which haue not God before their eyes) seke after my soule. Sela. Beholde God is my helper, the Lorde is with them that vpholde my soule. He shall reward euel vnto mine enemies: destroy thou them in thy truthe. An offrynge of a free herte will I geue the, and prayse thy name (O Lord) bicause it is cōfortable. For he hath delyuered me out of all my trouble, and myne eye hath
sene his desyre vpō mine enemies. ¶The fourth. Exaudi deus. Psal. lv. HEare my prayer (O God) and hyde not thy selfe fro my peticion. Take hede vnto me, & heare me, howe I mourne in my prayer, and am vexed. The enemye cryeth so, and the vngodly commeth on so fast: for they are mynded to doo me some myschefe, so maliciously are they set agaynste me. My hert is disquieted within me, and the feare of death is fallen vpon me. Fearfulnesse and trembling are come vpon me, & an horrible drede hath ouerwhelmed me. And I sayde: O yt I had winges like a doue, for then wold I flye a∣way, & be at rest.
Lo, then would I get me away far of, and remaine in the wyldre∣nes. Sela. I would make haste to escape, because of the stormy wynde and tempest. Destroy their tonges o lord, and deuide them: for I haue spied vn∣righteousnes & stryfe in the citie. Day and nyght go they about within the walles therof: mischief also, and sorow are in the middest of it. Wickednesse is therein, disceat, and gyle go not out of her stretes. For it is not an open enemye that hath done me this dishonour: for then I coulde haue borne it: nether was it mine aduersary, that did magnifye hym selfe agaynste me: for thē (peraduēture) I would haue hyd my selfe from hym.
But it was euen thou my com∣panion, my gyde, and myne owne familier frende. We toke swete counsayle toge∣ther, and walked in the house of god, as frendes. Let death come hastily vpon thē and let them go doune quicke into hel, for wickednes is in their dwel lynges, and among them. As for me I wyl cal vnto god, and the lorde shall saue me. In the euening and mornynge and at the none day wil I praye, (and that instantlye) and he shall heare my voyce. It is he that deliuereth my soule in peace, frō the battayl that was agaynst me: for there were many with me. Ye euen god that endureth for euer, shall heare me: and brynge
them downe. Sela. For they wyl not turne nor feare god. He layde his handes vpon suche as be at peace with hym, and he brake his couenaunte. The wordes of his mouth were softer then butter, hauing war in hys harte: hys wordes were smo∣ther then oyle, and yet be they ve∣ry sweardes. O cast thy burthen vpon the Lord, & he shal norysh the: & not suffre ye righteous to fall for euer. And as for them, thou (O god) shalt brynge them into the pyt of destruccion. The bludthurstie and dysceat∣full men shall not lyue out halfe their dayes. Neuertheles, my trust shalbe in the (O Lorde.)
Let vs pray. GRaunte vnto vs O merciful god we most hartely beseche, ye knowledge & true vnderstanding of thy worde, that al ignorance ex∣pelled, we may knowe what thy wyl and pleasure is in al thinges, and howe to do our duties, & truly to walke in our vocacion, & that also we maye expresse in oure ly∣uing those thynges that we doo knowe: that we be not only knowers of thy worde good lorde, but also be workes of ye same: by our sauiour & Lorde Iesu Christe. Amē. ¶The Letany. &c. As afore.
On satterday. The fyrst. Eripe me de inimicis. psal. lix. DElyuer me from myne enemyes (O God) de∣fend me from them that ryse vp agaynste me. O deliuer me from the wicked doers, & saue me from the bloude thursty men. For lo, they lye waytyng for my soule, the mightye men are ga∣thered together agaynst me with∣out anye offence or faute of me (O Lorde.) They runne and prepare them selues, without my faute. Aryse, thou therfore to help me, and beholde. Stande vp (O Lorde God of hoostes) thou God of Israell, to viset al Heathen: and be not mer∣cyfull vnto them that offende of
malicious wickednes. Sela. They go to & fro in the euening, they grenne lyke a dogge, & runne aboute thorowe the cytie. Behold, they speake with theyr mouth, and sweardes are in theyr lyppes for who doth heare? But thou (O Lorde) shalt haue them in derysion, and thou shalte laugh all Heathen to scorne. My strength wil I ascribe vnto the, for yu art ye god of my refuge. God sheweth me his goodnes plenteouslye, and god shall let me see my desyre vpon myne enemies. Slaye them not, lest my people forget it: but scatter them abrode amonge thy people, and put them downe (O Lorde) our defence. For the sinne of theyr mouth, and for the wordes of theyr lippes they shalbe taken in their pryde,
and why? theyr preachinge is of cursynge and lyes. Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they maye pe∣ryshe, and knowe that it is God whych ruleth in Iacob, and vnto the endes of the worlde. Sela. And in the euenyng they wyl re∣turne: grenne like a dogge and wil go aboute the cytie. They will runne here and there for meate, and grudge yf they be not satisfyed. As for me, I wyll singe of thy power: and wyll prayse thy mercy be times in the morning, for thou haste bene my defence and refuge in the day of my trouble. Vnto the, O my strength, wyl I syng, for thou (O God) art my re∣fuge and my mercyfull god.
The second. Exau di deus depreca. Psal. lxi. HEare my crying (o god) geue eare vnto my pra∣yer. From the endes of the earth wil I cal vnto the, when my hert is in heuines. Oh sette me vp vpon the rocke that is hygher then I. For thou hast bene my hope, and a stronge tower for me, agaynste the enemye. I will dwell in thy tabernacle for euer, & my trust shalbe vnder ye coueryng of thy wynges. Sela. For thou O Lord, hast heard my desires, & hast geuen an heritage vnto those that feare thy name. Thou shalt graunt ye king a long lyfe, that hys yeares may endure thoroweout al generacions.
He shall dwell before God, for e∣uer: O prepare thy louing mercy & faythfulnes, that they may pre∣serue him: So wil I alway sing prayse to thy name, that I maye dayly per∣fourme my vowes. The third. Nonne deo subiecta: psal. lxii. MY soule trulye wayteth stil vpō God, for of him cometh my saluacion. He verely is my strēgth & my saluacion: He is my defence so that I shal not greatly fal. Howe long will ye ymagin mis∣chife agaynst euerye man? ye shal∣be slayne all the sorte of you: yea, as a totteryng wall shal ye be, and lyke a broken hedge. Theyr deuice is only howe to put hym out, whom God will ex∣alte:
their delyght is in lyes: they geue good woordes wyth theyre mouthe, but curse with theyr hert. Sela. Neuertheles, my soule wayt thou styll vpon god, for my hope is in hym. He truely is my strength, & my saluacion: he is my defence so that I shall not fall. In god is my helth and my glo∣rye, the rocke of my might, and in God is my trust. O put your trust in him alway (ye people) poure out youre hertes before hym, for God is our hope. Sela. As for the chyldren of men, they are but vayne, the children of men are disceatful vpon the wayghtes they ar altogether lyghter thē va∣nitie it selfe.
O trust not in wronge and rob∣berye, geue not youre selues vnto vanitie: yf ryches increase, set not your hert vpon them. God spake once and twyse: I-haue also heard the same: that po∣wer belongeth vnto god. And that thou Lorde art mer∣cyfull, for thou rewardeste euery man accordinge to hys worke. ¶The fourth. Deus misereatur nostri. psal. lxvii. GOd, be merciful vnto vs, and blesse vs, and shewe vs the lyght of of hys countenaunce: (and be mercifull vnto vs). Sela. That thy waye maye be knowen vpon earth, thy sauing helthe a∣monge all nacions. Let the people prayse the O god: yea, let all the people prayse the
O let the nacyons reioyce and be glad: For thou shalt iudge the folke righteously, & gouerne the nacions vpon earth. Sela. Let the people prayse the O god, let all thy people prayse the. Then shal the earth bring forthe her encrease, & God euen our owne God shall geue vs his blessynge. God shall blesse vs, and all the endes of the world shal feare hym. ¶Let vs pray. O Almightie god, whiche hast prepared euerlastyng lyfe to all those that be thy faythful ser∣uauntes, graunt vnto vs Lorde sure hope of ye life euerlasting, that we beyng in this miserable worlde may haue some taste, and feling of it in our hartes: and that not by
our deseruing, but by the merites and deseruing of our sauiour, and Lord, Iesu Christ. Amen. ¶The Letany. &c. As afore. On satterday at after noone. The fyrst Voce mea ad dominum. psal. lxxvii. I Wyll crye vnto God wyth my voyce, euen vnto God will I crye with my voyce: and he shall herken vnto me. In the tyme of my trouble, I I sought the Lord: my sore ranne and ceassed not in the nyght sea∣son: my soule refused comforte. When I am in heuinesse, I wil thynke vpon God, when my herte is vexed, and wil complayne. Se∣la.
Thou holdest mine eies waking: I am so feble, yt I cannot speake. I haue considered the dayes of olde, and the yeares that are past. I call to remembraunce my songe: and in the nyght I com∣mune with myne owne harte, and searche out my spirites Wyll the lorde absent him selfe for euer? And wil he be no more in∣treated. Is hys mercy cleane gone for e∣uer? and is his promise come vt∣terly to an ende for euermore? Hath God forgotten to be gra∣cious? And will he shut vp hys lo∣uing kindnesse in displeasure? Se∣la. And I sayd: it is mine owne in∣fyrmitie: But I wil remembre the yeres of the right hand of the most hyest.
I will remembre the workes of the Lorde, and call to minde thy wonders of olde tyme. I will thinke also of all thy workes, and my talking shalbe of thy doynges. Thy waye, O God, is holie: who is so great a God as (oure) God? Thou art the god that doth won∣dres, and hast declared thy power among people. Thou hast mightely delyuered thy people, euē the sonnes of Ia∣cob and Ioseph. Sela. The waters sawe the, O god, the waters sawe the and were a∣frayed: ye depthes also were trou∣bled. The cloudes powred out wa∣ter, the ayre thundred: and thine a∣rowes went abrode. The voyce of thy thundre was
herd round about, ye lighteninges shone vpon the grounde, the earth was moued and shoke withall. Thy waye is in the sea, and thy pathes in the great waters: & thy footesteppes are not knowen. Thou lededst thy people lyke sheepe, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. The second. Deus venerunt gentes psal. lxxix. O God, the Heathen are come into thy enheri∣taunce, thy holy temple haue they defiled, and made Ierusalē an hepe of stones. The dead bodies of thy seruaūtes haue they gyuen to be meate vn∣to the foules of the ayre, and the fleshe of thy saynctes vnto the beastes of the lande.
Their bloud haue they shed like water on euery side of Ierusalem, & ther was no man to bury them. We are become an open shame vnto our enemies, a very scorne & derision vnto them that are round about vs. Lorde, howe longe wilt thou be angrye? shall thy gelousye burne lyke fyre for euer? Poure out thyne indignacion vpon the Heathen that haue not knowen the, and vpon thy kyng∣domes that haue not called vpon thy name. For they haue deuoured Iacob, & layed waste his dwellyng place. O remembre not our olde sinnes, but haue mercy vpon vs, and that soone: for we ar come to great my∣serie. Helpe vs O God of our salua∣cion,
for the glory of thy name. O delyuer vs, and be mercyful vnto oure synnes, for thy names sake. Wherfore do the Heathen saye: where is nowe theyr God? O let the vengeaunce of thy ser∣uauntes bloude that is shed, be o∣penly shewed vpon the Heathen, in our sight. O let the sorowful syghynge of the prisonners come before the: ac∣cordyng vnto the greatnesse of thy power: preserue thou those ye are appoynted to dye. And as for ye blasphemy (where∣with oure neyghbours haue blas∣phemed the) reward thou them O Lorde, seuen folde into theyr bo∣some. So we that be thy people, and shepe of thy pasture, shal gyue the
thankes for euer, and wyl alway be shewyng forth thy prayse, from generacion to generacion. The third. Qui regis Israel. Psal. lxxx. HEare O thou shepherd of Israel, thou that lea∣dest Ioseph like a shepe shew thy selfe also thou that sittest vpon the Cherubins. Before Ephraim, Beniamin, & Manasses: styre vp thy strength, and come helpe vs. Turne vs agayne O god, shewe the light of thy countenaunce, and we shalbe whole. O Lord God of hoostes, howe longe wilt thou be angry with thy people that prayeth? Thou fedest them with the bread of teares, and giuest them plente∣ousnesse of teares to drinke.
Thou hast made vs a very strife vnto our neighbours: and oure e∣nemies laugh vs to scorne. Turne vs agayne, thou God of hoostes, shewe ye light of thy coun∣tenaunce: and we shalbe whole. Thou hast brought a vine out of Egipt: thou hast cast out the Hea∣then, and planted it. Thou madest rowme for it, and whan it had taken rote, it filled the lande. The hylles were couered with the shadowe of it, & the boughes ther∣of were like ye goodly Cedre trees. She stretched out her braun∣ches vnto the sea, & her boughes vnto the ryuer. Why hast thou then broken downe her hedge, that all they whiche go by, plucke of her gra∣pes?
The wild bore oute of the wood doth rote it vp, & the wilde beastes of the filde deuoureth it. Turne ye agayne, thou God of hoostes, loke downe from heauen: beholde, and visit thys vyne. And the place of the vyneiarde that thy right hand hath planted: & the braunche that thou madest so stronge for thy selfe. It is brent with fyre, and cut downe, & they shall peryshe at the rebuke of thy countenaunce. Let thy hand be vpon the man of thy ryghte hande and vpon the sonne of man whom thou madest so stronge for thyne owne selfe. And so wyll not we go backe from the: Oh, let vs lyue, and we shall call vpon thy name. Turne vs agayne, O lord god
of hoostes, shewe the lyght of thy countenaunce, & we shalbe whole. The forthe. Inclina domine aurem. psal. lxxxvi. BOwe downe thine eare, o lorde, and heare me, for I am poore and in misery. Preserue thou my soule, for I am holye: my God saue thy ser∣uaunt, yt putteth his trust in the. Be mercifull vnto me (o Lord) for I will call dayly vpon the, Coumfort the soule of thy ser∣uaunt, for vnto the (o lorde) doe I lyft vp my soule. For thou Lord art good & gra∣cious, and of great mercy vnto all them that call vpon the. Geue eare Lord vnto my pray∣er, and ponder the voyces of my humble desyres.
In the tyme of my trouble I will call vpon the, for thou hearest me. Among the goddes there is none lyke vnto the, (O Lorde) there is not one that can do as thou doest. All nacions whom thou haste made, shall come and worshyp the (O Lorde) and shall gloryfie thy name. For thou art greate and doeste wonderous thinges, thou art god alone. Teache me thy waye (O Lorde) and I will walke in thy truth. O knyt my hert vnto the, that it maye feare thy name. I wyll thanke the, O Lorde my God with all my herte, and wyll prayse thy name for euer. For greate is thy mercy towarde me, and thou haste delyuered my
soule from the nethermost hell. O god, the proude are rysen a∣gainst me, and the congregacions of naughtie men haue sought af∣ter my soule, and haue not set the before theyr eyes. But thou (O Lorde god) arte full of compassion, & mercy, longe sufferyng, plenteous in goodnes and truth. O turne the then vnto me and haue mercy vpon me: geue thy strength vnto thy seruaunte, and helpe the sonne of thyne hande∣mayde. Shewe some token vpon me for good, that they which hate me, maye se it: & be ashamed, because thou Lorde hast helped me and comforted me.
Let vs pray. O Mercifull God, oure only ayde, soccour, and strength at all tymes, graunt vnto vs, O-lord, that in the tyme of prosperi∣tie, we be not proude, and so for∣get the, but that with our whole power & strength, we may cleaue vnto the: and in the time of aduer∣sitie that we fall not to infidelitie, and desperaciō, but that alwayes with a constante fayth we may cal for helpe vnto the: Graunte this O Lord for our ad∣uocates sake, & sa∣uioure Iesu Christe. Amē. The Lordes prayer. &c. As afore.
On the Sunday. The fyrst. Domine refugium. psal. xc. LOrd, thou hast ben oure refuge from one genera∣cion vnto another. Before ye mountaynes were brought forthe, or euer the earth and the worlde were made, thou art God from euerlastyng & worlde without ende. Thou turnest man to destrucciō agayne thou sayest: come agayne children of men. For a thousande yeares in thy syght are but as yesterdaye, seyng that is paste as a watche in the night. As sone as thou scaterest them, they are euen as a slepe, and fade awaye sodenlye lyke the grasse. In the mornynge it is grene and
groweth vp, but in the eueninge it is cutte downe (dried vp) and wi∣thered. For we consume away in thy dyspleasure, and are afrayed at thy wrathfull indignacion. Thou hast set our misdedes be∣fore the, and oure secret synnes in the lyght of thy countenaunce. For when thou arte angry, all our dayes are gone: we bring our yeares to an ende, as it were a tale that is tolde. The dayes of our age are thre score yeares and ten: and though men be so stronge that they come to foure scoure yeares, yet is their strength, then but laboure and so∣rowe: so soone passeth it awaye, & we are gone. But who regardeth the power
of thy wrath: for euen therafter as a mā fareth, so is thy dyspleasure. O teache vs to noumbre our dayes, that we maye applye our hertes vnto wysdome. Tourne the agayne, (O Lord) at the last, and be gracious vnto thy seruauntes. O satisfie vs with thy mercy & that soone, so shall we reioyce and be glad al the dayes of our lyfe. Comforte vs agayne, nowe af∣ter the time that thou hast plaged vs, and for the yeares wherein we haue suffred aduersitie. Shewe thy seruauntes thy worke, & theyr children thy glorie. And the glorious maiestie of the lorde our god be vpon vs: prosper thou the worke of our handes vp∣on vs, o prosper thou our handy worke.
The second. Venite exultemus. psal. xcv. O Come, let vs synge vn∣to the Lorde, let vs her∣tely reioyce in ye strength of oure saluacion: let vs come be∣fore his presence with thankes ge∣uing, and shewe our selfe glad in him with psalmes. For the Lorde is a great kinge aboue all goddes. In his hand are all the corners of the earth, and the strength of the hylles is hys also. The sea is hys, and he made it, and his handes prepared the drye lande. O come, let vs worshyppe and falle downe before the Lorde, our maker. For he is (the Lorde) our God: and we are the people of hys pa∣sture,
and the shepe of his handes. To day if ye wil heare his voyce, harden not your hartes: as in the prouocacion, and as in the daye of tentacion in the wildernes: when youre fathers tempted me, proued me: & sawe my workes. Fourtie yeares long was I gre∣ued with the generacion, & sayde: it is a people that do erre in theyr hertes: for they haue not knowen my wayes. Vnto whom I sware in my wrath, that they shoulde not enter into my rest. ¶The third. Iubilate deo. psal. C. O Be ioyfull in the Lorde (all ye landes) serue the Lorde with gladnesse: & come before hys pre∣sence with a song.
Be ye sure that the Lorde he is God: It is he that hath made vs, and not we our selues, we are hys people, & the shepe of his pasture. O go youre waye into his gates with thankesgeuing, and into his courtes wyth prayse, be thanke∣ful vnto hym, and speake good of hys name. For the Lord is gracious, hys mercy is euerlastyng, & his truthe endureth from generacion to ge∣neracion. The fowerth. Benedic anima mea. psal. ciii. PRayse the lorde, O my soule, & al that is with∣in me prayse hys holy name. Prayse the Lorde, O my soule, and forget not all hys benefytes. Whiche forgeueth al thy sinne,
and healeth all thyne infyrmyties. Whyche saueth thy lyfe from destrucciō, and crowneth the with mercye and louynge kyndnesse. Whiche satisfyeth thy mouth with good thynges, makyng the yonge and lustye as an Aegle. The lorde executeth ryghteous∣nesse and iudgement, for all them that are oppressed with wronge. He shewed his wayes vnto Mo∣ses, hys workes vnto the chyldren of Israel. The lorde is full of compassion and mercy: long suffring, and of great goodnes. He wil not alway be chiding, ney∣ther kepeth he his anger for euer. He hath not dealt wyth vs af∣ter our synnes, nor rewarded vs accordyng to our wickednesses.
For loke howe hye the heauen is in comparison of the earth, so greate is hys mercy also towarde them that feare him. Loke howe wyde also the East is from the west, so farre hath he set oure synnes from vs. Yea lyke as a father pytieth hys owne children, euen so is the lorde merciful vnto thē that feare him. For he knoweth wherof we be made, he remembreth that we are but dust. The dayes of man are but as grasse, for he florisheth as a floure of the fielde. For as sone as the winde goth ouer it, it is gone: and the place therof shall knowe it no more. But the mercifull goodnesse of the lorde endureth for euer and e∣uer, vpō them that feare hym, and
hys ryghteousnes vpon childres children. Euen vpon suche as kepe hys couenaunt, and thinke vpon hys commaundementes to do them. The lorde hath prepared hys seate in heauen, and his kyngdom ruleth ouer all. O prayse the lorde ye Angels of hys, ye that excell in strength: ye that fulfill hys commaundement, and herken vnto the voyce of hys wordes. O prayse the Lord al ye his ho∣stes, ye seruauntes of hys, that do hys pleasure. O speake good of the lorde all ye workes of hys, in all places of hys dominyon: prayse thou the lorde, O my soule.
Let vs pray. O Almyghtie & mercifull lorde whiche geuest vnto thy elect people the holy gooste, as a sure pledge of thy heauenly kyngdom: Graunte vnto vs o lorde, this ho∣ly spirite, that he may beare wit∣nes with our spirite that we be thy children, and heyres of thy kyng∣dom, and that by the operacion of this spirite we may kyl all carnall lustes, vnlawfull pleasures, con∣cupiscence euell affeccions con∣trary vnto thy wil: by our sa∣uioure and lorde Iesu Christ. A¦men.
The Letany. O God the father of hea∣uen: haue mercy vpon vs miserable sinners. O God the father of heauen, haue mercye vpon vs myserable synners. O God the sonne, redemer of the worlde: haue mercy vpon vs miserable synners. O God the sonne redemer of the worlde: haue mercy vpon vs myserable sinners. O God the holy gost, proce∣dyng from the father & the sonne: haue mercy vpon vs miserable sinners. O God the holy gost, procedyng from the father and the sonne: haue mercie vpon vs miserable synners. O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinitie, three persons and one God: haue mercy vpon vs mise∣rable synners.
O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinitie, thre persons and one God: haue mercy vpon vs miserable synners. Holy virgin Mary, mother of God, our sauiour Iesu Christ: Pray for vs. All holy Angels and Archan∣gelles, and all holy orders of bles∣sed spirites. Pray for vs. All holy Patriarkes, & Pro∣phetes, Apostles and Martyrs, Confessours and Virgins, and all the blessed company of heauē: Pray for vs. Remembre not Lorde, oure offences, nor the offences of oure forefathers, neyther take thou vengeaunce of our sinnes, spare vs good Lorde, spare thy peo∣ple, whom thou hast redemed with thy moste precious bloude, and
be not angrye with vs for euer: Spare vs good lorde. From all euel and mischiefe, from synne, from the craftes & as∣sautes of the deuyl, frō thy wrath, and from euerlasting damnacion: Good lorde deliuer vs. From blindnesse of heart, from pryde, vayneglory, and hipocri∣sy, from enuy, hatred, and malyce, and all vncharitablenesse. Good lorde deliuer vs. From fornicacion, and all deadly synne, and from all the deceiptes of the worlde, the flesshe, and the deuyll: Good lorde delyuer vs. From lightening and tempest, from plage, pestilence, and famine: from battayle and murder, & from sodeyne death.
Good lorde delyuer vs. From all sedicion, and pryuye conspiracy, from the tyranny of the byshop of Rome, and all hys detestable enormities, frō all false doctrine and heresy: from al hard∣nes of heart, and contempt of thy worde and commaundement. Good lorde delyuer vs. By the mistery of thy holy in∣carnacion, by thy holy Natiuitie & circumcision, by thy baptisme, fa∣styng and temptacion: Good lorde delyuer vs By thyne agony and bluddy sweat, by thy crosse and passion, by thy precious death and bury∣all, by thy glorious resurrection and ascencion, by the cummyng of the holy gost: Good lorde delyuer vs.
In al tyme of our tribulacion, to all tyme of our welth, in the houre of death, in the day of iudgement. Good lorde delyuer vs. We synners do beseche the to heare vs, O lorde God, and that it maye please the to rule and go∣uerne thy holy churche vniuersall in the ryght way: We beseche the to heare vs good lord: That it may please the to kepe Edward the sixt, thy seruaunt, & our kyng and gouernour. We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to rule his heart in thy fayth, feare, and loue, that he maye euer haue affi∣aunce in the, and euer seke thy ho∣nor and glory. We beseche the to heare vs good lorde: That it may please the to be
his defender & keper, geuing him the victory ouer all his enemies: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to kepe the noble Quene Katherine dowa∣gier in thy feare and loue, geuing her increace of all godlynesse, ho∣nor, and children. We beseche the to heare vs Good lorde. That it may please the to pre∣serue the lady Maries grace, the lady Elizabethes grace, and the Lorde Protectors grace. We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to illu∣minate all byshopes, pastours, and mynisters of the Churche, with true knowledge, and vnder∣standyng of thy worde, and that both by their preaching and ly∣uyng, they may set it furthe, and
shewe it accordyngly: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to en∣due the lordes of the counsayl, and al ye nobilitie, with grace, wisdom, and vnderstandyng: We beseche the to heare vs Good lorde. That it may please the to blesse and kepe the magistrates, geuing them grace to execute iustice, and to mayntayne truthe: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to blesse and kepe all thy people: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to geue to all nacions, vnitie, peace and con∣corde: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to geue vs an hearte to loue and dreade
the, and diligently to lyue after thy commaundemente: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde: That it may please the to geue all thy people increase of grace, to heare mekely thy worde, and re∣ceyue it with pure affeccion, and to bring furth the fruites of the spi∣rite: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to bring into the way of truthe, all suche as haue erred, and are deceyued: We beseche the to heare vs good lord: That it maye please the to strengthen suche as do stande, and comfort and helpe the weake hear∣ted, and to rayse vp them that fall, and finally to beate downe Sa∣tan vnder our feete: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde
That it may please the to suc∣cour, helpe, and comfort all that be in daunger, necessitie, and try∣bulacion. We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to pre∣serue all that trauayle by lande or by water, all women labourynge of childe, all sicke persons & yong children, and to shew thy pitie vp∣on all prisoners and captiues: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to de∣fend and prouide for the fatherles children and widowes, & all that be desolate and oppressed: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to haue mercy vpon all men: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to for∣geue
our enemies, persecutours, and sclaunderous, & to turne their heartes: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to geue to our vse the kindely fruites of the yearth, so as in due tyme we may enioy them, and to preserue them: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. That it may please the to geue to vs true repentaunce, to forgeue vs al our synnes, negligences and ignoraunces, & to endue vs with the grace of thy holy spirite, to a∣mende oure lyues accordyng to thy holy worde: We beseche the to heare vs good lorde. Sonne of God, we beseche the to heare vs. Sonne of god, we beseche the to heare vs.
O lambe of God that takest a∣way the synnes of the worlde: Graunte vs thy peace. O lambe of God that takest away the synnes of the worlde: Haue mercy vpon vs. O Christ heare vs. O Christ heare vs. Lorde haue mercy vpon vs. Lorde haue mercy vpon vs: Christ haue mercy vpon vs. Christ haue mercy vpon vs. Lorde haue mercy vpon vs. Lorde haue mercy vpon vs. Our father which art in heauen. With the residue of the pater noster. And suffre vs not to be led in to temptacion. But delyuer vs from euyll. Amen. ¶The versicle.
O lorde, deale not with vs af∣ter our synnes. ¶The answere. ¶Neyther rewarde vs after our iniquities. Let vs pray. O God, mercifull father, ye dis∣pysest not the sighing of a cō∣trite hearte, nor the desyre of suche as be sorowfull, mercifully assist our prayers that we make before yt in all oure troubles and aduersi∣ties, when soeuer they oppresse vs. And graciously heare vs, that those euils, whiche the crafte and subteltie of the Deuyll or manne worketh against vs, be brought to nought, and by the prouidence of thy goodnes, they may be dis∣persed, that we thy seruauntes,
being hurte by no persecucions, may euermore geue thankes vn∣to the, in thy holy Churche, tho∣rough Iesu Christ our lorde. O lorde arise, helpe vs and delyuer vs for thy names sake. O God, we haue hearde with our eares, and our fathers haue de¦clared vnto vs the noble workes that thou dyddest in their dayes, & in the olde tyme before them. O lord arise, helpe vs, and delyuer vs, for thy honour. Glory to the father, the sonne, & to the holy gost: as it hath bene from the beginning, is, and shalbe euer world without ende. Amen. From our enemyes defende vs O Christ: Graciously loke vpon our affliccions.
Pitifully beholde the dolour of our heart: Mercyfully forgeue the synnes of thy people. Fauourably with mercy heare our prayers. O sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon vs. Both nowe and euer vouche∣saufe to heare vs Christ: Graciously heare vs, O Christ: Graciously heare vs, O Lorde Christ. ¶The versicle. O lord, let thy mercy be shewed vpon vs. ¶The answere. As we do put our trust in the. ¶Let vs pray. WE humbly beseche the, O father, mercifully to looke vpon our infirmities, and for the glory of thy names sake,
turne from vs all those euylles, that we moost ryghteously haue deserued. Graunt this, O lorde God, for our mediatour and ad∣uocate Iesu Christes sake. Amen. O God, whose nature and pro∣pertie is euer to haue mer∣cy and to forgeue, receyue oure humble peticion, and though we be tied and bound with the chayne of our synnes, yet let the pityful∣nes of thy great mercy leuse vs, for the honour of Iesus Christes sake, our mediatour & aduocate. Amen. ALmyghty and euerliuyng God, whiche onely workest greate meruayles, sende downe vpon oure byshoppes and cura∣tes,
and all congregacions com∣mitted to their charge, the health∣full spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please the: poure vpon them the continuall dewe of thy blessing. Graunt this (o lorde) for the honour of our aduocate & mediatour Iesu Christ. Amen. WE beseche the (O Lorde) to shewe vpon vs thyne exce∣ding great mercye, whiche no tonge can worthely expresse, and that it may please the to delyuer vs from all oure synnes, and also from the paynes that we haue for them deserued. Graunte this (O lord) through our mediatour and aduocate Iesu Christ. Amen. GRaunt, we beseche the, O al∣mighty God, that we in our
trouble, put our whole confidence vpon thy mercy, that we agaynst all aduersitie be defended vnder thy protection. Graunte this, O lorde God, for our mediatour and aduocate Iesu Christes sake. Amen. ALmighty God, whiche hast geuen vs grace at thys tyme with one accord to make our com∣mune supplicacions vnto the, and doest promyse, that whē two or .iii. be gathered in thy name, thou wilt graunt their requestes, fulfil now O lorde, the desires and peticions of thy seruauntes, as may be best expedient for them, grauntyng vs in thys worlde, knowledge of thy truthe, and in the worlde to come lyfe euerlastyng. Amen.
The prayer of our Lord. OVr father whiche arte in heauen, halowed be thy name. Thy kyng∣dome come. Thy wil be done in yearth as it is in heauen. Geue vs this day our daily bread. And forgeue vs our trespaces, as we forgeue them that trespasse a∣gaynst vs. And let vs not be led into temptacion. But delyuer vs from euill. Amen. ¶The Crede, or .xii. articles of the Christen fayth. I Beleue in God the father al∣myghty, maker of heauen and yearth. And in Iesu Christ hys only sonne our Lorde. Whyche was conceyued of the holye gost, borne of the virgin Mry. Suf∣fered vnder Ponce Pylate, was crucified, dead, buryed, and des∣cended, in to hell. And the thirde
day, he rose agayne from death. He ascended into heauen, and syt∣teth on the righte hande of god the father almightie. From thence he shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead. I Beleue in the holye goste. The holy Catholycke churche. The Communion of saynctes: the for∣geuenes of synnes. The resurrec∣cion of the body. And the life euer∣lastyng. Amen. ¶The .x. commaundementes. of almighty God. THou shalte haue none other goddes in my syghte: Thou shalt make the no gra∣uen ymage, neyther any similitude that is in Heauē aboue, eyther in the earth beneth, or in the waters vnder the earthe. Thou shalte not worshippe them,
neyther serue them: for I the Lord thy god, am a gelouse God: & vy∣sitte the synne of the fathers vpon the childrē vnto the thyrd & fourth generacion of theym that hate me: and shewe mercy vnto thousandes in them that loue me and kepe my commaundementes. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lorde thy god in vayne. Remember the Sabboth daye, that thou sanctifie it. Honour thy father and thy mo∣ther, that thy dayes maye be long in the lande, whiche the Lorde thy god geueth the. Thou shalte not kyll. Thou shalt not breake wedlocke. Thou shalte not steale. Thou shalt not beare false wyt∣nesse agaynste thy neyghboure. Thou shalte not couet thy neygh∣boures
house: neyther shalt thou couet thy neyghbours wife, or hys manne seruaunte, or hys mayde, or his Oxe, or his asse, or what soe∣uer thy neyghbour hath. The places of baptysme. Go ye therefore,Math. xxviii. and teache all nacions, baptisynge them in the name of the father, & of the sonne, and of the holy gooste: Teaching them to obserue al thinges, whatso¦euer I haue commaunded you. Go ye in to al the world & preach the gospel to all creatures,Marke. xv he that beleueth & is baptised, shalbe sa∣ued. But he that beleueth not, shal be dampned. Knowe ye not that al we which are baptysed into Iesu Christ,Roma. vi are baptised to dye with hym?
For ye are al children of god, be∣cause ye beleue in Christ Iesu.Gal. iii. For all ye that are baptysed, haue put on Christ. For the supper of the lord. Math. xxvi.When they were eatynge Iesus toke breade, and whan he had ge∣uen thankes, he brake it, and gaue it to the dysciples, & sayde: Take, eate, this is my body. And he toke the cuppe, and thanked, and gaue it them, saying: Drinke ye all of this, for this is my bloude (whiche is of the newe testamente) that is shed for many, for the remission of synnes. Marke. xiiii.And as they did eate, Iesus toke breade: and whan he had geuen thankes, he brake it, and gaue to them and sayd: Take, eate, thys is my bodie: And he toke the cup, and whē he had geuen thankes, he toke
it to them, and they all dranke of it, and he sayde vnto them: Thys is my bloud of ye newe testament, whiche is shed for many. And he toke breade, and when he had geuen thankes he brake it, and gaue vnto them saying.Luke. xxii. Thys is my body, whiche is ge∣uen for you. This do in the re∣membraunce of me. Lykewise al∣so when he had supped, he toke the cuppe saying: This cup is the newe testament in my bloud, whiche is shed for you. That which I delyuered vnto you, I receyued of the lorde.i. Cor. xi. For the Lord Iesu the same night, in whiche he was betrayed, toke breade: and when he had geuen thankes, he brake it, and sayde: Take ye, and eate: this is my bo∣dye; whiche is broken for you.
This do ye in the remembraunce of me. After the same maner also he toke the cup; when supper was doen, saying: this cup is the newe Testament in my bloud. Thys dooe as oft as ye drinke it, in re¦membraunce of me. For as often as ye shall eate this bread: and drinke of this cup, ye shall shewe the Lordes deathe tyll he come. Wherfore, whosoeuer shall eate of thys breade, or drynke of the cuppe of the Lord vnworthelye, shalbe gyltie of the body and blood of the Lorde. But let a man examin hymselfe, and so let hym eate of the bread, & drinke of the cup. For he that eateth and drinketh vnworthely, eateth & drinketh hys owne dā∣nacion, because he maketh no dif∣ference of the Lordes body. For
this cause many are weake & sicke amonge you, & manye slepe. For yf we had iud∣ged ourselues▪ we shoulde not haue ben iudged. Finis.
¶Imprinted at London, in Flete strete, at the signe of the Sunne, ouer agaynste the Conduyte, by Edwarde Whit-churche, the .v. daye of No∣uember, in the yeare of oure Lord. 1547. Cum priuilegio ad imprimen∣dum solum.
