3134 99838476 2857
A RELATION OF THE DEATH, OF THE MOST ILLVSTRIOVS LORD, Sig.r Troilo Sauelli, a Baron of Rome; Who was there beheaded, in the Ca∣stle of Sant-Angelo, on the 18. of Aprill, 1592. With a Preface, conteyning diuers particu∣lers, which are wholy necessary to be knowne, for the better vnderstanding of the Relation it selfe. Domine, quis similis tibi? Psal. 34. O Lord, who is like to thee? Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XX.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. THE Relati∣on following, hath beene translated in∣to diuers lan∣guages; though not at all into ours, nor yet so care∣fully,
into others, out of the true Original Italian, as I could haue wished. The differences between the co∣pies, which walke vp, and downe the world, are not great; sauing, that when there is question of truth; and that, concerning a no∣ble subiect; and the same, accompanyed with variety of naturall, and liuely cir∣cumstance, I cannot find in my hart, to let any diffe∣rence goe for small. I haue therefore, at once, taken both paynes, and pleasure, to draw store of copyes into my hand, and it hath not beene without successe. For if I haue not layd hold vpō the very first Original, which was written by the Relatour himselfe; I dare say, that I am growne very neere it, & that it is precisely true. And this Elogium I will be bold to giue to the Discourse, which we haue in hand, that it hath beene reade in seue∣ral countryes with extreme auidity. Nay perhaps there hath not issued, in many of these last ages, any one hi∣storicall Relation, of a parti∣culer accident, the The relation follow∣ing hath been sel∣dome read without tender∣nes. con∣sideration whereof, hath more often beene attended by teares, then this. The The birth, & person, & parts of this Noble Man. Person whome it concerneth, was a Baron of Rome, Sig.r Troilo Sauelli; a braunch, which sprunge vp, from a root of as noble bloud, as a most certaine extractiō from the ancient
Romans, could tell how to make it. His person, & the parts of his generous mind, are best described in the Re∣lation it selfe, which follow∣eth; so that, I will not heere by putting you to paynes, preuent the pleasure which there you wil haue to ouer∣take them. The cause for which he suffered, is not specified there at all; be∣cause his ghostly Father was the penner of this narrati∣on; and it became not him, who was the others Iudge in foro Conscientiae, to become his Accuser, in foro Curiae. For although his crimes were extant then, and are so stil vpon Record; and that the penitent did besids (for his owne greater confusion, and the exaltation of the inuincible Patience, and Mercy of Almighty God) giue his Ghostly Father ex∣presse leaue, to declare his sinnes to the whole world; the Father yet, would by no meanes accept of that liber∣ty; but speaking only in ge∣nerall wordes, of sinne at large; he The inuiola∣ble seale of the Sacra∣ment of Confes∣sion; & how ten∣der a good Ghostly Father, is, and ought to be. burieth the par∣ticulers in profoūd silence, and vnder the seale of Con∣fession, for reuerence of that holy Sacrament, which must neuer vpon any termes be defaced.
But I, who am free, will not consent to haue my handes tyed vp; but doe think it fit to let you know, that although his yeares were few, his crimes were great, & many; as doth stil appeare vpon the Record of his Processe. And betweene the sixteenth, and the eigh∣tenth yeare of his age (till the former of which tymes, his vigilant, and holy Mo∣ther, was able to keep him in the discipline of piety, & vertue) he sprouted out, in∣to great exorbitances; and in the Company, and at the head of the These are men who for mur∣thers, & other extreme insolen∣cyes vse to be ba∣nished and pro∣scribed. They were wont in Italy, to go, in great troopes vp and downe, & to in∣fest the passages. Sixtus Quintus, was one of the first, who broke their backe. Banditi, he committed both rapes and murthers, with a most tem∣pestuous, and transported mind. Ominis
The bane which is brought vpon young noble men by ill company. inimica amici∣tia, seductio mētis inuestigabilis. He did too early, cast him∣selfe into the hands of flat∣terers, & wicked followers; and they made the way of sinne so smooth to him, as that he could not hold frō sliding through it. Nor was his tender youth so inno∣cent, nor his education so excellent, but that the moath, and canker of lewd company, did soon corrode it. Yet euen heerein, was not his misery so great, as the It is proper to God alone, to draw good out of euill. mercy of God, vpon this occasion, was infinite. His crims were not known, but by such alone, as would not easily aduenture to draw vpon themselues, the displeasure of so greate a house as his, by detecting them. The manner only of his life, in respect of ex∣cesse,
and riot, was such, in the exteriour, as wounded his noble, and tender Mo∣ther to the very soule. The passages, and proceedinges whereof, are deliuered in the Relation it selfe, with so greate tendernes, in the person of her sonne, as stri∣kes the hart of him that reades the wordes. I will not therfore touch that flowre, for feare of strikng off the dew, euery dropp whereof is a pearle. One circumstance only which is not mentioned there, I will heer expresse; because it wil not faile to serue, towardes the increase of compassion, in all their mindes, who reade this story. You
A cir∣cumstā∣ce of great impor∣tance, towards the mo∣uing of compas∣sion. shall therfore vnderstand, that when the Mother had vsed all other possible endeauours, both diuine and humane, for the reduction, and reforma∣tion of her sonne, and all in vaine (for ought that she was able to perceiue) she caused him, for some offen∣ces (which yet, were farre from being Capitall) to be committed to Castle (k) S. Angelo; This is the chiefe prison in Rome, as the Tower may be in Lon∣don. in hope that such a disgrace, with the help of tyme, would make him re∣turne into hmself. To this course she was the more encouraged, & in this hope the more confirmed, be∣cause by this restraint, he would be cut off from that ill company, which was the very pest, and poison of his soule. But see, and won∣der at Gods prouidence. He
Any little en∣trance into pu∣blique disgrace carryeth danger with it, was no sooner in prison, but the fire of eager opposition brake forth of their hartes, whom, by his other more enormous inso∣lencyes, he had offended; for till then, it had beene smoothered vnder the a∣shes of that respect, and re∣uerence, which they carry∣ed towards the Dignity, & Nobility of his house. But now publique Iustice taking notice of his excesses; and Pope Clement the eight, in the beginning of his Pontifi∣cate, being desirous to shew a strong example, of what vnpartiall Iustice, the world was to expect at his hands;
(especially in repressing, & extinguishing that afore∣said damned crue of Banditi, who were so pernicious to the State of Italy, and of whom this yong Lord was growne a leader) did suffer the law to passe vpon his person (for his state was not confiscated, but went to his heyres, in bloud). Being euen yet therin, more Iust, then Clement; though per∣haps he would haue been more
Clement in pardoning, then Iust in punishing; if he could, by way of anti∣cipation, haue seene the beauty, and brauery of that noble spirit, which deser∣ued to liue as longe, as a world can do; as a patterne, of a mind most rarely com∣pounded, between perfect Christian piety, and vn∣daunted incomparable ma∣gnanimity. But whylest the
This Lady dyed in the year 1611. and was bu∣ryed on the 21. of October in the Thea∣tines Church at Sant Andrea della val∣le; wher she ere∣cted ten masses to be sayd e∣uery day, for euer. She was of the house of the Dukes of Cesi; and sister to the Marquesse of Riano; her name was la Signo a Flaminia. Mother, and the Sonne, are both of them restinge now in peace, and glory, as we may piously belieue; I know not how, in this particuler, to be silent, concerning the powerfull, and wise, and infinitely good The proui∣dence of God, de∣serueth to be deeply ponde∣red, in this par∣ticuler. proui∣dence, of Almighty God, towardes both these seruan∣tes of his. For, by the way of the The Crosse is the high way to heauen. Crosse, he brought the sonne, in a few momen∣tes of time, to haue a soule in state of great perfection; and he gaue him, in the last houres of his life, that most happy kind of Purga∣tory, wherin he might not only suffer, in satisfaction of the diuine
Iustice, but passe on by merittes, (all groun∣ded vpon the mercy of Iesus Christ our No action of man is merito∣rious, but by the me∣rits and first mercy of Iesus Christ our Lord. Lord (as all merits are) towards instant, and eternall felicity. And this he did, by as contrary meanes, as in the Ghospell he cured a certaine Blind man, by The omnipo∣tency of God, is not tyed to mea∣nes, but workes his will, how he will. casting durt vpon his eyes. For heer be v∣sed, the most indulgent ten∣der care of the mother, who loued that Sonne, as her owne soule; towardes the bringing that about, which was indeed, to make him happy in the end; but in the
meane tyme, was the occa∣sion of his suddaine, and re∣proachfull death, whereby her very hart was to be bro∣ken. Taking him so from her sight, that so she might enioy a glorious sight of him for euer; & depriuing her of all humane comforts (which (for as much as con∣cerned her) were abridged, & locked vp in him alone) that so she might, with con∣tempt of the world, send her whole hart vp to hea∣uen, whither now her trea∣sure was gone before; and so be rewarded, for that ten∣der and entire care, which she had taken, for his pious education. It The blind & blocke∣headed discour∣se of worldly men. matters not much, what the blind, and dull world conceaues; which placing fayth in fancy; and religious reason in the trea∣cherous sense of flesh and bloud; thinkes all that to be misery, which carryeth the face of paine, or shame, or any difficulty; and that true happines consistes in rowing for a whyle in some boate
A fit emblem to shew the vani∣ty of worldly pleasure. of musike, downe the tide; though it carry them soone after, where they are either to be split vpon rockes, or swallowed vp by quick-sandes. Wher∣as God knowes (yea & men whohaue his grace, are not ignorār therof) that a course of felicity, not interrupted, or checked by contrary windes, is a kind of fortune (for as much as concerneth the next life) which in this, deserueth rather pitty, then enuy; and that, euer fince the death of Iesus Christ our Lord, the way of the Crosse, is The crosse of Christ our Lord, hath made misery, to be∣come happy. not only the more safe, but euen the more honorable; and that the pleasures, and pastimes of this life, ar but a kind of butterfly, for boyes to play withall; & that the greatest earthly felicity, that euer was enioyed by man, if it dyed not as soone as it was borne (which yet is the or∣nary case of
World∣ly plea∣sure speakes faire, but it lyes. worldly ple∣asure) at least, if it liued til it could learne to speake, it told as many lies, as it vtte∣red wordes; and charmed them first, whom quickly after, it might lead towards a precipice. How desolate, would a worldling thinke, that the case of Signor Troylo Sa∣uelli was, in that night when he receaued the newes of his so instantely approa∣ching, cōtumelious death? And of that deare Mother of his, when she heard the blow was giuen, which par∣ted that head from those shoulders? And Af∣fliction, made the Mo∣ther, & the Son, seeme misera∣ble; and be hap∣py. yet with all, is it both well knowne, that the Mothers losse of such a sonne, did cast her
much more close, vpon an vnion and sole dependance for all her comfort, vpon Almighty God; (wherein the happines, which we can haue in this life consists) and it is morally certaine, that the abundant grace of Contrition, and Charity, which God infused into the hart of the Sonne, euen by the occasion of his very sins (so vastly & infinitely good is God) did put him instant∣ly, after his death, into a state so blessed, as that the Pope himselfe, vnder whom
he died, and those Princes amongst whom he liued, and all the Monarches of the whole world, may be ac∣counted to haue bin misera∣ble, according to their pre∣sent state, in respect of him. Our deare Lord Iesus, be eternally thanked (& not only by vs, who know not how to do it well, but by all his holy Angells, and Sain∣tes) for his owne infinite goodnes; since he vouch∣safes to He could easily honour himselfe other∣wise, without any be∣nefit to vs, if he were so pleased. place the point of his Honour, in shewing mercyes, and working won∣ders
vpon man, so instantly, so sweetely, so powerfully, and so like a God. And for hauing suffered, in his owne sacred soule, & body, such desolations, and torments, as obtained, at the handes of the eternall Father, not only the remission of our sinnes, (if we will serue our selues of the Sacraments, and other remedyes which he hath left in the bosome of his holy Catholike Church) but the adorninge also of our soules, with the inhe∣rent giftes, and graces of the holy Ghost. And yet further, for that he hath knowne, how to make our very sinnes, and greiuous crimes themselues, the meanes, some times, wher∣by we obtaine greater gra∣ces, then This indeed is a mer∣cy, which may wel become the gre∣atnes of our God. we should haue done, if we had not com∣mitted those very sinnes. Let the whole world ther∣fore adore thee, O Lord, and sing prayses to thee; and let all the powers of all soules cry out, and say with that holy King, and Pro∣phet Dauid, O Lord who is like to thee?
A great example, and proofe of this power of God, and of the diuinity of Christ our Lord, and the vnspeakable bounty of the Holy Ghost was the so speedy illuminating, & inflaming the soule of this Baron. Who, as soone as he recea∣ued the notice of his death, did, in his proportion, fol∣low the example of the Blessed Apostle. For as he, to Christ our Lord, appearing sayd, O Lord, what wilt thou haue me doe; so did this no∣ble Caualliere of Christ,
when the Preist, & Lieute∣nant of God spake to him, giue himselfe away by these words, as the Relation shew∣eth; Do The instant quiet re∣signatiō of this Baron to the good wil of God. you, in the place of God commaund me, I giue my selfe, as bound into your hands; and further it affirmeth, that he suffered himselfe to be managed, as if he had beene made, of the softest waxe.
It is not impossible for a man to meete with some Roaring Boy, who may thinke that the Baron was to submisse. But it is one thing to be a Roarer of the damned Crue, and another to be an humble member of the body of Christ; who assured vs, by his owne sacred mouth, That Hu∣mility is the true badge, of true Christi∣anity. vn∣lesse we became as children, we should neuer enter into the king∣dome of heauen. The world was lost by the pride, and presumption of the first A∣dam; & repaired by the humi∣lity of the second. And The incom∣parable humili∣ty of Iesus Christ our Lord. he that considers well, how greate that
Humility was; and whose it was; and for whose sake, and at the will of whom, he exercised the fame; had need of a great proportion of stupidity, to make him thinke, that, since God himselfe vouch∣safed to be at the command of those base and impure wretches, who tooke of his cloathes, and required him to submit himselfe to those scourges, those thornes, those nayles, those blasphe∣mies, for our sakes, and sinnes; yet, on the other side, this
An vgly and abhomi∣nable pre∣sumpti∣on. man, this proud rebellious worme, this crumme of dust, this drop of filth; might keep, for∣sooth, a kind of State, and should not rather submit himselfe (in imitation of the humility of Christ our Lord) not only to Superi∣ours, but to equalls, and e∣uen inferiours also, and in fine to al This is the aduice of S. Peter; Subdits estote omni creatu∣rae. the world when iust occasion should be of∣fered.
The soule of this noble Man, was so well softned, & sweetned, by the vnction of the Holy Ghost; as that neither the greatnes of his Nobility, nor the ardour of his youth, nor the naturall boyling courage of his hart, nor the fresh memory of his prosperity, nor the vn∣expected arriual of his mi∣fery, could make A hart which is truely touched by Gods holy spi∣rit, will ouer∣come strange difficul∣tyes. him once repine, or keep him from instantly abasing him∣selfe. But falling deeply v∣pon the consideratiō of his sinnes; and weighing duely how full of demerit he was, in the sight of God; and knowing exactly, that no∣thing is so truly ignoble, as a soule which hath for∣feited his grace; and that
rich, or poore, is little to the purpose; but
wher∣in eter∣nal, true Nobility doth consist. that the thing which imports, is to be, or not to be, the seruant, or sonne of God; it is not strange, to see him cast him∣selfe at the feet of common soldiars; and to stretch out his hands, with such meek∣nes, at the will of the mea∣nest laylours, for the loue of our Lord, to signify ther∣by the detestation wherein he had himselfe, for hauing so presumptuously offen∣ded, that Eternall Maiesty, which by all the Angells is adored. From
The reasons why he was so frequent in con∣fessing his sins. hence also did it proceed, that he so fre∣quently confessed himselfe, in that last night of his life; & could neuer thinke that he had sufficiētly deplored his errours, and detested the discorrespondence, and ingratitude, wherewith he had answered, the vnspeak∣able benefits, of Almighty God. Wherein if any man should thinke, that he did vse excesse; it willbe much more lawfull for me to doubt, that himselfe, either hath a meane conceit of the Infinite Maiesty which is of∣fended; or an ignorant ap∣prehension, of the deformi∣ty of al sinne which is com∣mitted; or a proud, & pal∣try mistaking, of the No∣thing which man was, till he was created; and the worse then Nothing, which after∣ward he grew, by sinning. For If you weigh these thinges wel, you will change your won∣dring at him, in∣to won∣dring at your selfe. he that pōders these particulers, as he ought; and knoweth, that the of∣fēces into which he falleth are innumerable; and that the least of them, which is
committed against an infinit Maiesty, in respect of the obiect, is also infinite; and that, as no one good deed shalbe vnrewarded, by the rich Mercy of God, in Christ our Lord; so no one trāsgression shal be left vn∣punished, by his exquisite Iustice; will easily belieue, that in the space of a night, it is hard for one to be too curious, & too carefull, in setting straight the accoūt of his whole life, vnder the piercing eye of Almighty God. But this Baron, did, euen by moments, in that short tyme which was left, by the goodnes of God, ac∣quire new Great light of God is wont to breed greate loue of him, & greate sorrow, for ha∣uing so shame∣fully of∣fended him. light, & gaine new loue of our Lord, and new contempt, & detesta∣tion of himselfe; and in the strength thereof, he found some actions to confesse, which he had not concea∣ued to be sinnes before; & others which he had confes∣sed, he had confessed with a sorrow, far inferiour, to that which then he felt. For abstracting from the consideration which he
had of his sinnes, against God (in respecte whereof, no soule is sufficiently able to quake, and tremble vn∣der him) I trust there is not a readers eye in the world so dimme, as not to discerne his vndaunted hart. And
The vndaun∣ted cou∣rage of this Ba∣ron. that, no thought of death, had any power, to take the least clarity from his vnderstandinge; the least presence from his me∣mory; the least agility from his witte; the least order from his speach; or so much as the least puntillio, from the ciuill respects and com∣plementes, which are vsed amongst persons of his Na∣tion, and Condition. Nor yet, on the other side, shall any man haue reason to thinke, that the punctuali∣ty, which (throughout the processe of this Relation) he shall find to haue been ob∣serued by the Baron, in this last
This courtesy & com∣plement was not affected, but free and na∣turall. kind of courtesy, did proceed from the least affe∣ctation thereof. Perhaps, if we looke neere home, we may find some example to haue been giuen of this, not longe agoe; but in the pre∣sent case, no suspition of it, can be intertained; both for many other reasons, which will occurre to him that readeth the
Relation; and because (as I sayd before) these exact tearmes of Ho∣nour, and other respects to the company, which then is present, are is it were natu∣rall to men of his country, and quality; and there would cost them more pai∣nes, to omit them (vnlesse their mindes were put into disorder, by some passion) then it would cost others, to obserue them, where they were not so naturall, as be∣ing learnt by industry, and art. But yet, that in so sad a case, this man, would, for good manners, forbeare to set vp his leggs; or would not so much, as stretch him∣selfe in the sight of others, though his body did much incline him to it (according to that mention which the Relation makes therof) may wel go for a great argument in him, of ciuility, of mo∣desty, and of magnanimity.
And this is that which I thought fit to represent to you, by way of Preface, to this Story. You will find the traces & foot-steps of put∣ting men to death, and of the proceedinge which is held with
The seuerall māners, of trea∣ting de∣linquēts in soue∣ral coū∣tryes. delinquents, to be very different, from that of our Countrey, both concerning the body, and the soule. I take not vpon me, to say which are better, and which are worse. With vs, the Processe of criminall persons, is euer made, in the face of the world; but they are not suffered to haue any aduocates who may defend their causes. In most other Countryes, the delinquēts are permitted to haue Ad∣uocates, but the Processe is made, though in publique Court, yet only in presence of the Iudges and some few Aduocates, and Officers. With vs, the delinquēts are suffered to liue some dayes after their comdemnation; which certainely is meant in compassion to them; in other parts, after they are iudged to dye, and that so it is declared, they thinke they do men a greater cour∣tesy, in putting them quick∣ly out of paine. With vs, there is no difference in the manner of death, between a Clowne, & the best Gen∣tleman of the Kingdome, vnder the degree of a Baron, vnlesse it be, in some very rare case, by most particu∣ler fauour of his
Maiesty; but in all other places, that I haue seene, all Gentlemen are beheaded, to distinguish them, frō such as are igno∣ble. With vs, no indignity is euer done to a Noble man of such as Barōs are, and al aboue them. Title, by binding of his hands, or armes, or the like; and that custome I commend, as full of Ho∣nour; but in many other places, they beare no such respects; in regard of the experiēce which they haue found, and I feare, which still they are in, of insolen∣cies. But for as much, as concernes the comfort of criminalls, in the prepara∣tion of their soules, towards the death of their bodyes,
I cannot but note it, as a point of charity, and piety most It is the grea∣test cha∣rity, to help mē to dye well. remarkeable, that in very many of the good townes of Italy and Spayne, there are certain Companies, or
Confraternities, of Gentle∣men, well borne and bred; who put this obligation of duty vpon themselues, to visit the prisons, espe∣cially in the night prece∣dent to any executiō. And, togeather with Religious persons, and Ghostly Fa∣thers, they watch, and pray, and exhort, and comfort the poorest criminalls of the Country, with the same industry, & charity, which is heere, affoarded to this Noble man. And they ac∣company them all, to their death; and sometimes, they discharge their dying harts of care; either by vnder∣taking to pay some of their debtes, or by assisting the poore wife, and children, which are left behind; or by obliging themselues, to get
S. Monies vpō the point of her death, desired S. Augu∣stine her Sonne, that he would pray for her soule at the al∣tar, whē she should be dead: and so he did. Vide August. Confes. l. 9. cap. 11. & 13. Masses celebrated for their soules. And in con∣formity of these good en∣deauours, we see men dye in those partes, with another manner of disposition to∣wardes God, then vsually they haue with vs. Where it is a lamentable thing, to see many of so profane stu∣pidity, that after liues most lewdly lead, they go either drunke, or dauncing to the gallowes. As if, they were but to dye in a play; or as if, after this life, there were no immortality of the soule; or els, at least, no account to be rendred, I say not, of idle words (which yet must be done) but of most wic∣ked deeds, wherof many of them are guilty. The example which heere we haue in hand, will read, to all the Readers of it in generall, a good lesson of humility, patience, cour∣tesy, magnanimity, obedi∣ence, and charity. And
All kind of people may profit, by the good lessons which are heer deliue∣red. it may serue for an instru∣ction, not only to such as dye, by the hand of human Iustice; but to al them also, who are to dye by the hand of God, as we al shalbe sure inough to do. That so, we may the better take heede of sinne, which is to be so bitterly bewayled; and the more deeply we be fallen into it, the more instantly we must implore the mer∣cy, & goodnes of Almigh∣ty God; and dispose our selues to the doing of pen∣nance; that so, by his fa∣uour, we may secure our soules, from the danger of being plunged, into that lake of eternall paine. This lesson I say, may reach to al Readers in generall. But particuler Readers may
friend, The earely, & hum∣ble resig∣nation of this Noble man. sayth he, behould, I am heere, ready to obey thy will, and the will of all the world, since the will of God is such. Hauing manicled him, they By this time others were come in. lead him towardes the Chappell; when, at the issue out of his chamber, he blessed He armed himselfe with the signe of the holy Crosse Ad om∣nem a∣ctum, ad omnem ntcessum manus ping at Crucem: At euery action, and in euery motion let thy hand make the signe of the Crosse, D. Hier. epist. ad Eustoch, 22. cap. 16. himself, the best he could with the signe of the holy Crosse, with both his hands; and casting vp his eyes to heauen, he pro∣foundly sighed. For, seeing perhappes, that there was
more people, then might beneedful for the changing of his lodging, This, sayth he, is another manner of busines, then to change me only, from one place to another; but by the grace of God, I am ready for all. Thus, filently going downe to the Chappell, he was mett by the There are Con∣gregati∣ons of Gen∣tlemen in Rome (as there are also in other great Cittyes of Italy & Spay∣ne) who imploy them∣selues for the helping of con∣demned men, to dye, wol. The Go∣uernour and Bro∣ueditore are chiefe officers of these Congregations. Gouer∣nour, & the Proueditore, and by three others of them, who are called
Confortatori della misericordia, in a fashiō, very sutable to the occasi∣on. Then one of them sayd  to him in this manner: My Lord, the houre which God hath prefixed for you, is e∣uen run out; render your selfe into his mercifull han∣des. And he, without be∣ing troubled, otherwise, then by fetching a sighe (which yet was both soft, & short) did answere thus; Let God be blessed; behold I ren∣der my selfe to him; and dispose you of me And so those good and charitable Brothers of that
Congregation, with some Fathers of the Society of Ie∣sus, casting thēselues round about him; and endeauou∣ring to sweeten the bitter∣nes of that newes, by dis∣creet & decent meanes, did comfort him the best they could. He yielded to all, & did euen preuent them; & then, knocking his brest, and bowing down his head, and kissing the Crucifixe, he demanded pardon, and like gentle waxe, did suffer him∣self to be managed by them all.
One of those Conforta∣tori, did, before all other thinges, put him in mind of making his Confession. V∣pon the very first naming whereof (recollecting him∣selfe) he sayd, And The first thing he did, was to con∣fesse himself. where is the Confessour? And they shewing him a Priest of their Company, with his Albe These are some of the sacerdo∣tall vest∣mentes which are vsed in the celebra∣ting of Masse. vpon his backe, and his Stole about his necke (that afterward he might say Masse, in the proper tyme) the first thing he did, was to be confessed; and we all went out, to leaue the place free to them. He being confessed, and we returned, we began to
dispose him, towards a good end, by diuers spiritual ex∣ercises, fit for that purpose. And after many had spokē, I also beganne thus to say;
Signor Troilo, This is that passage, which whosoeuer doth once make well, doth acquire eternall felicity; & if once it be ill made, it draweth after it, an euerla∣sting misery. It now imports your Lordship to make it well, that you may escape that eternity of torment. This passage is narrow, vn∣euen, hard, & full of stones, and thornes; all the world doth see it, and your Lord∣ship finds it by experience; but Our Lord Iesus, doth e∣uen, the vneuen way of death. behold sweet Iesus, who, by his goodnes, will euen it all. Cast your selfe, my Lord, vpon him; and then you will be able to say with courage, Omnia I can do al thinges in him that cōforts me. pos∣sum, in eo qui me confortat.
He answered thus, with a cheerefull, and euen smi∣ling coūtenance, Omnia pos∣sum in eo qui me comfortat. By the mercy of my deere Iesus, I know the necessity of making this passage well; I acknowledge his prouidence ouer me, and to his prouidence I add, that, of his ioue. Ror as much as with extra∣ordinary loue it is, that he hath brought me hither. I see it, I cō∣fesse it. And how often, deere Father, haue I beene, as I may say, in the very iawes of death; which if at that tyme it had sei∣zed vpon me, infallibly this soule, and body of myne had pe∣rished. Behold He acknow ledgeth, and ac∣cepteth of Gods proui∣dence, with great a∣lacrity. the cunning of my Christ; to saue me, he hath made choyce of this way. And then bowing, & baring his head, and with great life of spirit, raysing himself from
his chayre, he further ad∣ded; I accept of this election, which God hath made; & then casting himselfe vpon his knees, before the Altar, Nay I thanke thee (sayth he) O my good Father, for thy so fayth∣full, and louing care of me; who haue not only beene a wandring, but a contumacious Sonne of thyne. To thee it doth belong, to smooth and euen the rugged∣nes of this way; since thou hast been pleased to addresse me by it. And so, bowing his face euen almost downe to the ground, he remayned a while, in menall Prayer. Being therfore wished to sit downe, he was scarce setled in that posture, when turning towardes me, he sayd thus, in myne eare: You, whom through my good fortune, I haue heere, to help me, in this so weighty and high affayre, in the place of God do yow commaund me. I He giueth himselfe away to his Gho∣stly Fa∣ther. giue my selfe, as bound into your hands. The Prince hath dispo∣sed of my body; do you as much with my soule. I sayd therfore to him: I first desyre, my Lord, that you make the
protestation This is a decla¦ration of his fayth with an entiere submis∣sion to the good will of God. which is wont to be beliuered by such as are going to God. Which being publikely pronoun∣ced by him, with great sense and spirit, (he taking vp & repeating my wordes) I aduised him further thus: Yow shall now make all those actes of Contrition, which I shall call to your mind; hauing the eyes ther∣of, first bent vpon God, being offended, as a Crea∣tour, as a
Preseruer, as a Iustifier, and as a Glorifier. Next, vpon your selfe, who haue offended him; being his creature, his household seruant, his Christian slaue; and one so deeply obliged, by his benefits. Thirdly, vpon the offences themsel∣ues which you haue com∣mitted; and be sory at your hart, for hauing committed them; and For who can euer call to mind all his particu∣ler sins. if not in par∣ticuler for them all, at least for the He had al∣ready confes∣sed his sinne; & now he is but exhor∣ted to renew his sor∣row for them: most greiuous of them, which shall represent thēselues to your memory. Fourthly, vpon the good which you haue omitted; & the tyme which you haue
lost; and the yeares that you haue mispent. Fiftly, vpon the scandall which you haue giuen. And if any thing more be to be done; if
We cannot be saued vnles first we make restituti∣on, as well of fame, as of goods if it lye in our power. to make restitution, eyther of fame, or goods; if to pardon others, or to aske pardon your self; resto∣re, and pardon, and aske pardon. If to perfourme any vowes, or fulfill any promises, performe, and fullfill them. Or finally, if you leaue any debts, or if you will make any signifi∣cation of your repentance, and pious end, you are now to put your hand to worke. To these thinges he offered himselfe most rea∣dily; and did execute them all, with so great deuotion, that euery one now began, to change his style, in spea∣king to him. And finding, that whereas before, they thought they should haue to do but with a yong man, or rather but with a youth, and weakeling,
He infinitly ouer∣came their ex∣pectatiō. they were now to treate, with a manly, generous, and ripe Christian (far superiour to that, which might perad∣uenture haue been expected of him) one of the Confor∣tatori, began with greate discretion, to discourse vp∣on the horrour of Death, which our most sweete Christ Iesus, did by his agony dispossesse of bitter∣nes. Confide, saith he, and cast your thoughts vpon him, and say, Pone Place me, O Lord, neere to thee, & let the hand of any o∣ther fight a∣gainst me. me Do∣mine iuxta te, & cuiusuis manus pugnet contra me. And if now you find any bitter tast in death in this short night, as without fayle you will,
say, Pater O my Fa∣ther, not as I will, but as thou wilt thy will be done. mi, non sicut ego; volo, sed sicut tu, fiat voluntas tua.
The contrite Lord, made answere thus, The wickednes of my life doth fright, me, more, then the bitternes of my death O how wrechedly haue I spent these eighteene yeares? How ill haue I vnderstood my Sauiour? How vngratefull haue I beene for his noble fauours? How rebelliously haue I liued against his lawes? And now haue I run like a wild, vnbridled horse, in these later yeares of mine; without any manner of restraint, wheresoeuer the pre∣sent occasions, or conuersations, or The sinner; is only to blame himselfe for ha∣uing sin∣ned. rather (for I haue sayd ill) wheresoeuer myne owne pas∣sions, and blind affections, had a mind to plunge me? It is I, and none but I, who did precipitate me; and yet you bid me fixe my thoughts, and hopes vpon God; and say, Pone me Domine iuxta¦te, & cuiusuis manus pugnet contra me, fiat voluntas tua. Vpon this, another of the Confortatori, did thus proceed.
It is an acte of magnanimity, not to feare the angry face of death; & of humility, to acknowledge our offences; but of confi∣dence, to hope for pardon, as your Lordship doth; who well may say, Propter nome tuum Domine, propitiabe∣ris peccato meo, muitum est enim. For thy names sake O Lord thou shalt forgiue my sin, for it is great. O how great, sayd Signor Troilo? Euen as greate, after a manner, as is the mercy of God, which is immense. The Proueditere then sayd;
Your Lordship, may, if you so be pleased, make your last VVill, and Testa∣ment; to the end that no o∣ther thought may sollicite you, but of your soule alon. Heereupon the Baron, without the least delay, by way of answere, did bid thē write. And hauing taken out of his pocket, a little note, which he carryed a∣bout him, he did suddainly dictate his Testament; wher∣in he deliuered some parti∣culers, which, in my opini∣on, are very considerable. First,
The conside∣rations which may be made, vpon the man∣ner of penning his will. of tender Deuotiō; for he recommended his soule to God, by most deare, and religious wordes. Se∣condly, of Ripenes, which was more then of a young man; because, in a most par∣ticuler manner, he had re∣membrance of all his ser∣uants. Thirdly, of a most liuely Contrition; because, with a most profound, in∣ternall affection of mind, he demaunded pardon of many, euen by name. Four∣thly, of great Magnanimi∣ty; because he coniured the Lady his Mother, that she would pardon all his aduer∣saryes, as he himselfe did pardon them a thousand tymes ouer. Beseeching what a true, and no∣ble Christi∣an hart was this? her, by a long, and christi∣an circuite of wordes, that she would neuer resent his death; but he layd the fault vpon himselfe, in al things. Fiftly, of Religious Piety; leauing large almes to ma∣ny Churches, & other ho∣ly places; accommodating many poore This is a de∣uotion, and cha∣rity, much v∣sed in Italy. Virgins, with dowryes, at the parti∣culer discretion, and to be performed by the care of his heyres; that God might
the rather haue mercy on him. Sixtly, of entiere Iu∣stice; because he tooke care, that euen more then was due by him, should be re∣stored. Seauenthly, of no∣ble Gratitude; because he rewarded, whosoeuer had done him any scruice in prison. Eightly, of affe∣ctuous Reuerence; because he did in a most sweet, and deere manner, aske pardon; of the Lady his Mother, & of the rest of his kinred, be∣sids the expressing of other complements.
Hauing ended his last VVill, VVell Syrs (sayth he) behold we haue this residue of tyme, now wholy free, for the care of our soule. And turning towards me, he sayd, It He speakes of his soule, for as much as concer∣ned the guiding of it, vn∣der God. is in your hand, and therefore dispose of it; for this only is now, in my power to giue you. I then, by way of answere sayd, Giue your selfe, my Lord, to IESVS.
I do so, sayd he; and he sayd it in∣stantly. And I againe, Giue your selfe wholy to him. He sayd, I do. Consecrate yourselfe; he stil sayd, I do. Make your selfe, sayd I, en∣tierely his. But how (sayth he) O Father, shall I make my selfe entierely his, if I be vn∣worthy, and if perhaps, I be an enemy As al grieuous sinners are, if they do not through∣ly repēt, which no man can be sure that he hath suffici∣ently done, though he may haue great hope thereof. of his. But in the meane tyme, whilest the VVill was in writing, he that wrote it, put vs in mind, that it was to be publikely read; that so it might be shut vp, with a due A re∣stament, is not valide there, if it haue not seauen witnesses at the least. num∣ber of witnesses. And why∣lest this was in doing, that is, whylest the
Notary was reading of it; three thinges of some consideration did occurre. The first, that whē he read how he recommen∣ded his soule to God, My body (sayth he, (drawing neere me, according to his custome) I dispose not of; for now, it is no longer myne. It once was myne, and I would it had not beene so; but
He acknow∣ledgeth the pro∣uidence, and iustice of God, in al things it is more thē reason, that I hauing had so great care of it, in my life tyme, for my punishment, should not be suffered, to haue any power ouer it, now in my death. Let them therefore doe with it what they will; for I sacrifice it to God whatsoeuer it, be. Father, will not such an oblation as this, doe me good? It will, said I; without doubt it will; and what For he that giues his body, doth shew in good earnest, that he hath al∣ready giuen his sou∣le. more acceptable oblation, can be made to our Lord, then that of the body? The se∣cond, That when the Le∣gacies were read; it being obserued, by the manner of expressing one of them, that he deliuered himselfe as faulty, in a certaine thing, wherein indeed he was not so; and therefore the
VVill was to be redressed, as I desired, which serued not only, (as before) for secu∣ring of his conscience, but for the sauing also of his honour. Vpon this, putting off his Montiera, or capp, O Father, saith he (and he did it halfe smiling) are you now taking care of my reputa∣tion, and of the puntillios of Honour, and of that smoake or vanity of the world? Let my soule be saued, & let al the vaine Honour perish, which I eyther had, or might haue had. Do you not remember that which euen This is not mentio∣ned heer before; but he said also many other thinges which are not mentio∣ned in this short
Relatiō. now you sayd, Mihi mundus: The world is crucified to me, and I to it. crucifixus est, & ego mundo. In a word, let not the soule be touched, but let my Honour be blasted, according to that accoumpt, which the blinde world is wont to make of Honour; that it may serue as a part of the punishement, which is due to me. The third, that at the same instant, his hat was brought him; and one of his people, being desirous to take his Montie∣ra from off his head, what are you doing sayth he? They answered, they would giue him his hat. But he bad
them let it alone, saying, That it imported not; and he added, with a soft voyce▪ Looke heer a whyle; they would faine honour this head of mine, which I am to loose, within few houres, for my sinnes.
The VVill being then read, and shut; he throw∣ing himselfe, as it were vpon me, with a most mo∣dest kind of sweetnes, said, Father I am already reconciled; but I would faine make a gene∣rall Confession of my whole life, to your Reuerence. And althogh, since I came into prison, I did the same, in effect, at the instan∣ce of my Lady, my Mother; yet know, that I had then no light, or feeling of my sinnes, in respect of that, which now I discouer in my hart. For, One thing it is, deare Father, for a man to confesse himselfe, when he is in the sight of death; and another, to do it not thinking of death; or at least, but conside∣ring it, as a far off. And so, calling for a There are eue∣ry wher to be had litle bookes, of ad∣dresse, wherby men are taught how to confesse their sins exactly. little booke, which he had aboue in the prison (shewing a man the way, how to confesse his sinnes, exactly well (which
his good MOTHER had rought to him some dayes efore) he began his confes∣on. Wherin, my Lord God oth knowe, that, as it is awfull for me, by that most mple authority, which himself gaue me, to declare as much therof, as I should thinke fit; so if I were able to expresse it, I say not, that
Rome would be astonished at it, but all Italy would be so. For if I speake of the exact manner that he held; for as much as concerned the particuler descending euen to idle wordes, an anie other Con∣fession is no such cursory or super∣ficiall thing, as they which know it not, con∣ceaue, & say. such littl thing, me thought I wa hearing some well exercise Religious man. In the ex∣plicating of circumstances and the vnfolding of intri∣cate and intangled cases, i was, as if he had bin some profound Deuine. In rela∣ting the determinate num∣ber, & the various kindes of his sins; he made proofe of one, who had a most fresh, and happy memory. This rare Gentleman pawsing now and then, be∣tweene
the Confession of his sinnes; and suffering certaine teares to fall qui∣etly vpon my knees, he would be wiping them away; and that being done, he would often vse to say with sighes; O Father, how He had great reason to say so. good hath our Lord been to me? Let him now be blessed, as often, and yet more often, then I haue offended him, in my former life. Why lest he was accusing himselfe of his faults, he would expresse thē, in cer∣taine few, but they, all liue∣ly, and most pious wordes;
and in som particuler cases so dearely tender; that, in his countenance, one might see euident signes, of how his very hart, was euen rent, within. So that between He pawsed some∣tymes between both to resthim∣selfe, & to recall his sins, more freshly to his memo∣ry: for though it were inter∣rupted, it was al but one Confessiō, till the Absolu∣tion were giuen. the times of his confessiō, the Confortatori, (doubting least perhaps he might grow to faint) would be asking him if he needed not somewhat to restore, & comfort him∣self. To which he answered (speaking priuatly, & more then once to me) This
An admirable Contrition. only comfort, or restoratiue I would desire; That my very hart might burst for griefe; and sa∣tisfaction might so be To the iusti∣ce of God; his sorrow being dignified by the death & passion, of Iesus Christ, our Lord. giuen, for my sinnes, if perhaps euen that, would serue the turne. But for as much as, to my thincking, he did melt as it were by so enlardging himselfe in his Confession, I had an eye vpon him, and I ventured to say thus vnto him. My deare Signor Troi∣lo, be not so excessiuely cu∣rious, and particuler, in accusing your selfe; especi∣ally of those your former sinnes, which lye not now
vpon your soule. O
See how truely this hart was tou∣ched with sor∣row for his sins; and the know∣ledge of himself. Fa∣ther (sayd he) I haue wasted my whole life, in offending God; and will you haue me, or shall I content my selfe, in one single houre, to demaund pardon of so many offences? So long in sinning, and so short in confessing my sinnes? That I am trouble some to you, my deare Father, I well discouer; but what can I doe withall, if I be forced to it? And heer againe, he began to make for himselfe, a very bath of teares. And inter∣pretinge what I had said, after his owne conceite, he added, with teares re∣doubled, And this also do my sinnes deserue, by way of pu∣nishment, that hauing cast so much, and so much time away, in preiudice of my saluation, I should now want time, wherein I might euen confesse my sinnes▪ Pardon me, deare Father, and endure this trouble for the loue of God; for you shall
To do a good worke by the grace, & for the loue of God, is merito∣rious; for so Christ our Lord hath made it. merit, in his sight, by helping this poore soule of mine, towards saluation; & I will remaine with obligati∣on to you, when I shall go by the mercy of God & your good mea∣nes, into the place of rest. And finding that still he grew in teares, I confesse my weak∣nes, for I was not able to containe my selfe, from expressing also tendernes, by teares.
As soone as he percea∣ued this, he said; Father, your Reuerence weepes, and yet you weepe not for your selfe, but for me; and yet you will not haue me weepe, for my selfe. But then, both of vs being silent for a time, he after, began againe to confesse, with those accustomed short words, but full of substance, and propriety; making me write down al those things, which he confided to me, for the dischardge of his conscience. Whilest I was writinge, he would needes for his contentment hold the Standish, in his owne hands; and read those lines, when I had done; and kisse them, and then bath them in teares. But of nothing did he accuse himselfe so much, as of all that, which had any relation to the Lady, his Mother. Nor am I able by
any meanes to expresse, with what aboundance of teares, he accompanied those accusations of him∣selfe. For, beginning euen from his very Infancy, Father (sayth he) I
A lardge expressi∣on of the vnspea∣kable greife he had, for his diso∣bediēce and in gratitu∣de to the Lady his mother. haue committed many offences against God; yet at this tyme, me thinks, I am not so much afflicted for any thing, as for not hauing knowne, how to serue my selfe, of that tender loue, and pru∣dence, and patience, which my Lady my Mother, expressed, in the education of me. For euen when I was yet a child, she gaue me in charge, to certaine learned and religious Preceptours; who till I arriued to haue sixteene yeares of age, did with great fi∣delity, and sufficiency, teach me, not only the litterature of Hu∣manity, but Philosophy also. And so did they further shew, how I was to addresse my selfe towardes piety, by their good example, and aduice. Nor yet content with this; how sollici∣tous was she also, to procure by many other meanes, that I might proceed, both in Learning, and Vertue? For
See heer the Image, of a holy and ten∣der-har∣ted mo∣ther. concerning that of Learning, she gaue me store of bookes, of tyme, of opor∣tunity, and a thousand tender fauours she did me, which were conuenient for those yeares of myne. And for the inducing me to Vertue, she addressed me to choyce of good Conuersations, spirituall Discourses, excellent Sermons, and Persons, who might from tyme to tyme giue me counsaile. Commanding me, and causing me to be lead to Confession; not only vpon all the principall Feastes of the yeare, but once moreouer euery moneth.
And, till this very tyme, when I am speaking to your Re∣uerence, you may, if you will take the paynes, find among my papers, most euident testimonyes of what now I am saying; and especially Note the dili∣gences which this holy mother did vse, for the pious educati∣on of her son∣ne. a short manner of Instruction, how to spend the whole day, well. The thinges besides whereof she did admonish me, were in a manner, infinite. VVhen I was yet a little one, she kept me in bridle, by threates, yea and by stroakes sometymes; and when I was growne elder, she endeauoured to do it, by the faire meanes, of requests, and promises; and oftentymes, with
so many teares, as that now, they are as many launces to passe through my hart. For this, did she procure that Bles∣sed Phi∣lippo Nerio, was his Godfa∣ther, at Confir∣mation. The Chiesa Noua was a new Church, wherein God was serued by him and his. I do not ordinarily translate these names, out of Italian, be∣cause they are proper, either to persons, or places. blessed man Philippo, of the Chiesa noua to assiste, and hold me, when I was confirmed; and that af∣ward I should make particuler friendship with him.
She kept me far off from loo∣king vpon ill examples; and held me neere her selfe, after the manner, as I may say, of a Re∣ligious life; exhorting me often, day and night, that I would liue Nobly, True Christia∣nity, is true No∣bility. and like a Christian. Nor did that blessed mouth of hers, euer cease to say, Troi∣lo, my Sonne, feare God, & loue God. For this did she take vpon her, the gouernement of all my Ca∣stella in Itálian, doth sig∣nify both the mansion house, and the Towne, or vilage belon∣ging to it. Castles; and the care of all my affaires; liuing in a continuall state, of between hope, and feare, of the proofe that I would made. Nor was there a Religious House, or Monastery, to the prayers wherof, she recōmended me not Nor came there any Religious persons to her, nor did she meet with any abroad, to whome, all
forgettefull of her selfe, she would not say, Pray Som body prayed so well for him, as to make him a Saint. for my Sonne.
And I, vngratefull to her so great labours, when I grew to haue sixteene yeares of age, did render her, so ill payment, for such a huge summe of loue; as that I euen parted house with her; & did outrage her, both by wordes, and deeds; in such sort, as that the vttermost of all punishment, seemeth a hundred times lesse to me, then my deme∣rit. And when, deare Father, I thincke vpon the teares with she was euer sheading for me, both by day, and in those nights, so sadly spent; and on the ago∣nyes which she suffered vpon my occasion, I find contentment, in that I am to dye; whereby, me thinckes, I grow, in part, to ouershaddowe, so many of my lewd behauiours. Neither The inuinci∣ble loue of this Mother, to her Sonne. yet, after I had separated my selfe from her, did she giue ouer to sollicite me with notes, and letters, and messages, and a thousand other inuentions, that I would be induced to retire my selfe from vitious conuersations; and she wold pray me, & importune me,
& coniure me, that I would take to good. And well I know, that no kind of deuotion was omitted by her, for my reformation, both by visiting as many Churches, and Religious persons, as she knew in Rome. And in fine, she came often to me, both by day and night, whilest I was wandering vp and downe in such company; and It seems to haue been a kind of strife & war, be∣tweene how kind, a Mother could tel how to be, and how vn∣kind a sonne. when she found me out, she would cast her selfe, euen at my feete, that so I might once be drawen to open mine eyes, and would consider the precipice that I was approaching to; and the
ruines, besides the shame, that would ineuitably come vpon me; and that I would returne to Christ; and that once, I would truly weigh (for these were her very wordes) whose Sonne I was; and that I would consider, what thing that was, which euer had beene wanting to me, that so, in that desperate fashion, I should abandone all care of my Estate, of my Life, and of my Honour. And vsually she accō∣panyed these admonitions, and requests of hers, with most ten∣der teares.
Sometimes againe, she would turne aside, and casting vp he eyes to God, she would besee him, either to conuert me, o els Her prayer was hear in a better, though in ano∣ther mā∣ner, then she most desired. to take me to himselfe. And this I can say with al truth, that euen from the beginning, to this very houre, wherein now I liue, she hath neuer ceased to procure my saluation. For euen from the first tyme, that she She was in Rome at his commit∣ment, but whē she saw how the world would go with him, she retyred frō thence, with her load of sorrow. came to see me heere in prison, she exhorted me to Confession, and euer since, she hath come, as thicke as haile vpon me, some∣tymes with Religious men, and
sometymes with pious Books. So long, that now at last, I am by the fauour of God, returned a little into my selfe. And besides the cutting off, of all occasions of doing il, she gaue me many great opportunityes of good; besides the exhortations, which she her selfe made to me, in most feruent manner, that I would restore my selfe, to the seruice of God.
Nor could euer any Sonne desire any fauour, or content∣ment of a Mother, which myne, did not, of her selfe, impart to me. And I, on the other side, haue serued, but to make her life most vnfortunate, by this period of myne. I beseech our Lord for∣giue me, & to receaue the future affliction of her hart, in present discount of my offences. Then towardes the end of his Confession; I desire (sayd he) a fauour of you now, deare Father, which you must not deny me. It is, that I may haue liberty to lament my sinnes with teares; and that, by them, I may giue testimony to the Di∣uine Maiesty, of the That so the penitent himselfe by fin∣ding it, might haue in∣crease of comfort. griefe, wherewith my harte aboundes within. Weepe out, sayd I, since our Lord doth giue
you such a desire of wee∣ping. I had scarce brought forth this last worde, when allready, there beganne to fall, a most aboundant showre of teares from his eyes; in such sort,
An admira∣ble and almost miracu∣lous Contri∣tion. as that he bathed a good part of one of my armes; and my sleeue was as wett through, as if it had rayned from aboue. Which accident I obseruing, after some halfe quarter of an houre; and doubting, least his hart might so discharg it selfe by his eyes, rather for the ap∣prehension which he might haue of death, then other∣wise; I desired, that for the loue of Iesus, he would quiet himselfe, & not mul∣tiply his affliction, nor con∣tinue to torment his mind, in that manner. To this he answered; Father, I giue you my fayth, that I do not, at all, be wayle my death; but I do on∣ly, and purely, lament the offen∣ces, which I haue committed a∣gainst Almighty God. And
A happy coniun∣ction of Christiā sorrow, with no∣ble cou∣tage. I haue so much hope, in the mer∣cy of my deare Lord, that not only I shall shead no teares, for my death; but not so much as change my countenance. Father, I bewayle my most vnfortunate life, and not my most happy death. That life was, indeed, most vnfortunate; whereas this death, is most happy; for in fine, if in that, I liued an enemy to God, I hope, in this, I shall dye his friend. Well then, sayd I, pro∣ceed in your Confession, that so you may dye the friend of God; and lay, a part of your tears, aside, the whyle. Whereupon. The most o∣bedient
young Gentleman, accommodatinge himselfe to my direction, did iust proceed, where he had left. At this I wondred so much themore; for as much as I my selfe had forgotten it, though I also had one of those little bookes in my hand, which instruct how a Confession may be well made. But he going on, did lay before me, (as if it had bin in one single prospect) the whole course of his life; with so great clarity, and breuity, that I found my
selfe, as obliged, to aske him, if during many dayes before, he had not applied himselfe to make such a preparation. To which the yong Noble man made this very answere: So great is the light (as I haue already insinua∣ted) which my deare Lord Iesus vouchsafes to giue me at this instant, of my whole life, that euen whylest I am confessing, me thinkes I behold all my acti∣ons This was a very ex∣traordi∣nary, superna∣turall fauous of Al∣mighty God. as in a glasse; and I read all my thoughtes, and wordes, as in a booke.
And, without doubt, so it was. For he, without euer, mistaking a worde, did so call all his sinnes to minde, that by that time he wanted little of hauing declared them al distinctly. Only at the very end, as it were, of his Confession, he returned to repeate some thinges which he had al∣ready said; and I doubting that he did so, as hauing forgotten what he had ex∣pressed before, I told him of that inaduertence (as I reputed it,) when yet he made me this answere: I
know well, deare Father, that I repeate some thinges; but I do it, to the end that I may now more perfectly detest them, & be confounded in my selfe. And es∣pecially How desirous this soule was, to make God a∣mends. since I haue passed the greatest part of my life in such thinges as these, to the displea∣sure of our Lord, I do now for the better pleasing of him, passe this tyme of my death, in a mis∣liking remembrance of the same. And if it be troublesome to your Reuerence, as I know it is, so of∣ten to heare my so many offen∣ces; do you remember once for all, that this soule, is, of a sin∣ner,
for whome Christ dyed. Nay said I, if your Lord∣ship, haue any such appre∣hension, you may repeate as much, and as often as it pleaseth you; for I only aduised you of it before, as thinking that perhaps you might haue done it by er∣rour. The errour (sayth he) was myne, and a grieuous errour it was, to offend them so many wayes, who did euer stand in my defence. But howsoeuer that be; in this respect, as in some o∣thers, I shall dye contented, in that I can neuer satisfy my selfe,
with cofessing my faults to you, deare Father. VVhich now, by the goodnes of God, are as well knowne by me, as heeretofore they were little esteemed; & are now as bitterly lamēted, as heer∣tofore they gaue me gust, though it were a false one. I
The man did euen melt be∣tweene griefe & loue. wish, Othou most sweet Sauiour of my soule, that I had, as wel, a thou∣sand tongues, that so I might fully confesse them; a thousand eyes, that so, I might bitterly bewayle them; and a thousand harts, that so, eternally I might detest them. And that this grief for my sinnes, committed against God, might so breake my hart▪ as the instrument of Iustice, will take my head, for them, which I haue committed concerning men. I do, good Father, (by the goodnes of God) know what a sinner I am. As a sinner, I lamēt my selfe, and as a sinner I will dye, but a sinner, all humbled, & contrite; and with my teares I will make my Funeralls; then suffer me to performe them, after myne owne fashion. And heer cuen I, not I cannot blame him, being able to containe my selfe from wee∣ping, he obserued it, and said thus.
Most happy Funerals are therfore these of mine, which are solemnized by the seruāts of God. Yet this part belonges not to you, but only as being a Fa∣ther to my soule. VVho knowes, but that by these mutuall teares, and this exchange of tendernes, my impure conscience may in∣deed be cleansed? Thus both of vs, being silent for a while, he then proceeded: VVell, my good Father, it is now high time, that by the This authori∣ty, was giuen to his true Church by Iesus Christ our Lord; & in his name, & by his power, it is exer∣cised. Authority, which God hath giuen you, to loose, and bind men on earth, you loose me, from so many chaines of sinns,
which hang vpon me. To the en that, as you haue taught me, may say, Auditui meo dabi gaudium & laetitiam, & ex∣ultabunt ossa humiliata And first do you giue me Abso∣lution, and then, I may perfor∣me my Pennance. Though in∣deed what Pennance, carrying proportion to my sinnes, is your Reuerence able to impose. At this, he cast himselfe at my feete, and bowed his head to my knee, where I had layd my left hand; and he all bathed it with teares, and kissed it; and expected
the Penance and Absolution. Which I gaue him, fully, in forme of a This is an ap∣plication of the supera∣bundant merits of Iesus Christ our Lord, to the soules which stand in need thereof. Plenary Iu∣biley, according to the most ample priuiledges, By the Popes. which are granted to them of that Congregation, which is called of the It is called a congregation of
Misericordia, because it is so great a worke of charity & mercy wherupon they imploy themselues. Misericordia. Being absolued, and hauing done his Pennance, with incredi∣ble affection of mind, he sate downe againe by my direction; and then, the rest did come, and circle him in round about, after the accustomed manner. I then spake first to him after this sort: Most Illustri∣ous Lord Troilo, our Blessed Saniour IESVS Christ, whom here we haue present, did, by dying vpon the Crosse, gine remedy, in his person, this night, to three thinges, amongst many others. He An applica∣tion full of life & comfort. dyed, in the flower, & vigour of his youth; that your Lordship, might not haue too much tendernes, & compassion of your owne tender youth, and so might say, O, but why is my life taken
away in so tender years? And this is the first. He dyed, and he dyed of a violent death; that to your Lord∣shippe it might not seeme insupportable, to dye vpon necessity, and so you might say, O, but why is the flower of my yeares, cut off by a violent hand? and this is the second. He dyed of the most re∣proachfull death, which in those times was inflicted; that it might not seeme strang to your Lordship, to dye by the hand of Iustice, and so you might say,
O, but why died not I in my cradle, or at least by some other natural accident?
Nay, if your Lordship will accept this death, in so tender yeares, you offer him the best part of your tyme. By dying of a violent death, you may make that which is necessary, to be voluntary; and by dying of a dishonourable death, (ta∣king it as a Pennance for your sinnes) you may fly the shame, of that last terri∣ble day. And so much the better, you may accept ther∣of, for that you are not to dye in publique, vpon the Bridge, as the ordinary Custome beares; but It is there ac∣counted of lesse disho∣nour, to be put priuatly to death. They who dye priuatly, dye within the Ca∣stle, they who pu∣blkely, at the foot of the Bridge. priuately heere below, in the Court, as is wont to be vsed, towards your Peeres. I added also some other cō∣siderations, & so ended my speach. To which the Baro, who was euer ready, made this answere. And
How wise, the grace of God, is able to make a very yong man, vpon a suddaine. I, O Father, for as much as concernes the first, dye willingly in this fresh age of myne; because thus I shalbe sure not to offend my Lord, any more. And, from this instant, I offer him my yeares, my age, & my life; and a hundred yeares, and a hundred ages, and a hun∣dred liues. As for the second; I will make a vertue of necessity; and being to dye perforce, and according to reason; I will dye willingly, that so I may yield willingly, vnto force, & wil∣lingly giue satisfaction to rea∣son. But as for the third; I could wish for a more ignominious death. And be you pleased to know, that to haue dyed in pu∣blique, would haue giuen me I know not what increase of con∣solation, & gust. For so I might haue hoped by Be∣cause publike sinnes, require publike satisfa∣ction. publique Pen∣nance, to haue made a better a∣mendes, for my publique crimes. And God doth know, that I take no contentment, to receaue the fauour of dying priuately. But yet howsoeuer, if the determi∣nation which is made, be such; I resist it not. Our Lord will ac∣cept the promptitude of my wil. Heereupon, the Proue∣ditore tooke vp the speach, and sayd:
Let your Lord∣ship accommodate it selfe, to the will, and prouidence of God; who hath not only one way, of ariuing to saue our soules, nor one only means of drawing them to him. He leadeth one by one meanes, and others by another. It importeth not that Mo∣ny of Gods iudge∣ments are secret but they are all iust. his Iudgmentes be hidden from vs, but it suffi∣ceth that they are iust. Who can tell, if your Lordship should haue dyed in any other sort thē this, whether or no, you should haue bin saued? I am he (sayth the Ba∣ron) who can tell you that; for I should haue tumbled headlong into hell.
Do you not know how God hath proceeded with me? It is iust as a Huntes-man would do, when he would take a wild beast, but he would haue him brought to his hand, whole, and sound; and not to be torne by the teeth or pawes of doggs; nor strocken by the bow, nor bruized by nets, or snares. He driues this beast, sometymes one way, and some∣tymes another; but neuer lets slip the doggs, nor dischargeth the arrow; nor spreads he the net, or Toyle vpon the ground, or sets the snare; but, at the most, with some outcryes, or els by throwing of some stones, he rowseth him, and addresseth him towardes the place designed; & so long doth he driue the beast by seuerall wayes, that, at last, he bringes him thither, where he would haue him. The Hun∣tes-man knowes this well; and did long expect him there; & he takes him, and enioyes him, all sound, and safe. I am
Note how wittily, and pi∣ously, he ma∣kes this applica∣tion to himself. he, O my Good Iesus, who haue beene this beast, hunted hither, and thither; but thou hadst a mind, to haue me safe; thou hadst a mind to haue me sound. And so thou didst not permit, that I should be torne with dogs, nor pierced by arrow, nor taken by nets, or Toyles, or snares; when thou deliueredst me out of so many dangers of death, in which, though very young, I haue found my selfe; & wherin, if I had dyed, with∣out faile, I had perished for all eternity. Thou didst only throw stones at me, and thou cryedst out after me, when by so many admonitions, and inspirations, thou didst solicite me. And now I repent my selfe, that I was so deafe to them. But what mer∣uaile, if I were deafe, who after a sort was By sinne dead? And thus hath his goodnes conducted me to this straite pace, without my knowing of it; that so I may be forced to leap into his lapp. For whither am I able to turne my selfe more securely, then to my deare Iesus? Yea, and yet, if I were able; I would not turne, a∣ny way but to him. It is true, that I am forced; but yet I am content withall. One of the Confortatori then replied: It is inough, Signor Troilo. So great, and so liberall, is the goodnes of God, that he accepteth all,
and he doth it with delight. And one of the Chiesa nuoua said; That although our Lord receaued a Precept, or Commandment that he should dye; yet neuerthelesse it is affirmed, & it is true, that he dyed voluntarily. And hauing accompanied this speach of his, with diuers choice examples, one of our Fathers shut vp that discourse, with shewing, by what means, that which was necessary,
That punish∣ment which is imposed by ne∣cessity, may be made volunta∣ry, by a volunta∣ry ac∣ceptati∣on ther∣of. might so grow to be voluntary, by a volunta∣ry accepting of it: and, that so much more, it would be meritorious, as it should more willingly be imbraced. Then teach me (sayd the Baron) how I may make this necessary death truly voluntary. And then certaine deuout, and apt waies how to do it, being de∣clared, by the Gouernour of the Congregation of the Con∣fortatori, and imbraced by the Baron, I said;
Perhaps Signor Troilo, we weary you to much. How can you weary me? said he. These discourses, make the night short to me, and they make my disastre, fortunat. And heere, all were silent for a while; when he rising vp (for he was sitting) said, That he would speake with the Father. And drawing neere me, the Who∣me the patient, did ac∣compa∣ny ther∣in. Confortatore said the Confiteor; &, that being ended, I desire (saith he) if it please you, Father, to call againe to mind, some of the things aforsaid; both for the bet∣ter repetition of them, & for the additiō of some others. Which I refusing, out of the assu∣rance I had, that it was not necessary, he said; And it is possible, deare Father, that you
will not giue me this last content∣ment? VVill you not permitt, at least, that I may satissiy my∣selfe, with confessing the offen∣ces, which I haue committed against God? And besides, doth not your Reuerence remember, that we must speake togeather of The Father it seems had made him som such promise before. pennance? And I answe∣red, Let that Pennance be, to dye, and to dye well. Then teach me that, (said he.) And I, thus to him: Offer now, this death of yours, to God, with your whole hart, in pennance, for the sinnes with you
haue committed. I do (saith he) offer it with my hart, and with my mouth; and it grieues me, (as our Lord doth know) that I haue not, this night, a thousand heades, that in this one of mine, they might be al cut off, and a thousand liues, that they might all be lost. Nay How much doth he giue to God; & how little doth he thinke it to be: & yet how faythful∣ly doth he ac∣know∣ledge it all to be of God. I con∣fesse, and know, that euen that pennance, would yet fall short; but since more I cannot, more I know not what to do; and since more I haue not, I can giue no more; and euen the doing, and giuing, of this little, do I ac∣knowledge, to proceede from
the hand of God. I told him, by the way of reply, that it was well; and that he should still be doing so.
And when (sayd I) you are laying your head vpon the blocke, say thus in your hart. O Lord, by this act of myne, I protest, to do pennance for my sins, as if I had a thousand heads and a thousand liues; and I acknowledge, and confesse, that it is all but little. But I doubt Signor Troilo, whe∣ther then, you will be able to remember this; for then perhapps you willbe, as it were, not your self. It is no trifle to looke death in the face, take my word for that. The magnanimous Lord made this answere. I wil not presume so much vpon my selfe, but I
He can ne∣uer faile who putteth all con∣fidence in God, & none in him∣selfe. hope well, and confide greatly in God, that he will not let it fall out of my memory. And if, by many accident, you should perceaue that I were vn∣worthy of so great a grace, doe me the fauour to bring me in mind of it; for you shall find me ready to put it in execution. In the meane whyle, I beseech your Reuerence tell me somewhat els towardes this end of myne, and that quickly, for the tyme hath winges. I bad him leaue the care of that to me. For I wil (sayd I) go intimating from time to tyme, whatsoeuer you are to thinke vpon; & whatsoeuer you shall be to say, euē til your last breath. And He exhor∣teth him to a great deuotiō to his good Angell. very now, you shall begin to make a strait friendship with your Good Angell. And first aske pardon of him with your hart, for the little gratitude which you haue expressed,
for the Custody that he hath affoarded you; which hath binso incessant, so pati∣ent, so diligent, & so full of loue. Vpon which wordes, he sayd (casting himselfe vpon his knees;) Yea, not only with my mouth, but with my hart, I begge pardon of him, for the much, and much ingrati∣tude, which I haue vsed, not∣withstanding his so great beni∣gnity, and loue to me; and so kissing my knee, he sate downe againe. So that I proceeded, and said: Consi∣der then with your selfe,
that your
Saint Hierome sayth ex∣presly, That e∣uery soule hath an Augaius Custos assigned to it by Almigh∣ty God, from the first in∣stance of the birth till the last of life. Vi∣de Hier. lib. 3. conc. in 18. cap. Matt. The holy Scriptures and holy Fathers doe also a∣bound in proofe of the ministery of Angella in the help of men. good Angel now is heer, who euen from your very first beginning, when you were borne, & so much more at this houre, which is so full of danger, doth assist you, and especially, in six particulers. First, he hinders the impetuous as∣saults of the diuell, and weakens the force of all those maligne spirits, who do, at this instant, conspire to the damnation of your soule. Secondly, he brea∣thes  into your hart, Pre∣paration, Generosity, De∣uotion, and Contrition. Thirdly, he lightneth this Darcknes, this Anguish, & this Death. Fourthly, with great sollicitude, he carrieth foreward, and backward, those messages, which passe betweene God and you; he gathers vp your sighs, your very countenances, and the humiliations of your hart; there is not one of them, which he suffereth to loose his way. Fiftly, he negotia∣teth with other Angells of superiour We read in holy scripture (Daniel 10.) how one An∣gell hel∣peth an∣other, for the good of men; & both the holy Scriptu∣res, and holy Fa∣thers do euery where a∣bound, with shewing the ten∣der care that the holy Angells haue of all thinges, that con∣cerne vs, either in soule, body, or goods. Quiers, so to procure effectual assistances for your saluation. In most particuler manner, he mo∣ueth S. Michael the Archan∣gell, that he will defend you in this night. Sixtly, he solliciteth my good Angell also, that he may procure me to be a competent in∣strument, in this passage, which you are making to∣wardes your saluation.
Salute him therfore, and say thus with me; Angele Dei, O He ponde∣reth the prayer which Catholi∣kes say dayly, & more often then so, to their good Angell:
Angele Dei, qui custos es mei, me tibi com∣missum, pietate superna, hodie il∣lumina, custodi, rege, guberna. O thou Angell of God, who art my keeper, appointed by the goodnes of God, illuminate me, this day, preserue me, rule and gouerne me. Amen. thou Angell of God, so ill knowne, and so ill vsed by me, qui custos es mei, who keepest me, with so conti∣nual care, and perfect loue, me tibi commissum, who am committed to thee, being a man so faulty, and brought by the prouidence of God to this passage; but yet a sinner who by his mercy, & thy prayers is contrite for his sinnes, pietate superna, by the goodnes of God, for  I find no desert, but do cor∣dially confesse much deme∣rit, in hac morte, & hac nocte, in this death, which is due to me for my offences, & in this last period of my life, illumina, custodi, rege, & gu∣berna, do thou illuminate, defend, protect, and gouer∣ne me, Amen. This good Noble Man, did repeate these wordes, with affectu∣ous and abundant teares; & euen by his countenance, one might see, his very hart split in his body. And not contenting himselfe, to say it only once, he would needs repeate it then, three times; and afterwardes, he did it againe, so much more often, the same night, as that all the times ariued, I thinke, to ten; letting me know withall, that he had not felt greater solace, and gust, in any one spirituall exercise, then in this. Secondly (sayd I) you shal take the Glorious Vir∣gin, for your
To pray for him, as one man may do for an∣other; though all the Saints, & much more, the glo∣rious Mother of God, do per∣forme it, in a far more ex∣cellent manner. interces∣sour; and then S. Iohn the Baptist, and S. Paul, who were both, condēned to the  losse of their heads, as your Lordship is. It is true (sayd he) that they were condemned as I am; but with this difference, That they suffered innocent, & I for my faults; and therefore I I accuse my selfe, of such, and such, and such offences, which I haue committed against God. VVhich howsoeuer I confessed before, yet for the reasons which I haue already touched, I do wil∣lingly repeate the same. After he had ended his
Confession, and receaued Absolution vp∣on his knees, I desired him to sit down againe, that the wonted company might come about him. And euer, some one of them, would be taking vp, some verse of the holy Scrip∣ture, which might be ap∣propriated to the present occasion. As for example, Viam iniquitatis amoue à me, & de lege tua miserere mei. Suscipe seruum tuum in bonum, & iusti∣ficationes tuas edoce me. Bonum mihi, quia humiliasti me, vt dis∣cam iustificationes tuas. Cogno∣ui Domine, quia aequitas iudicia tua, & in veritate tua humilia∣stime. Fiat cor meum immacu∣latum
in iustificationibus tuis, vt non confundar. Miferere mei Deus, secundum magnam mise∣ricordiam tuam, & secundum multitudinem miserationum tu∣arum, dele iniquitatem meam. Erraui ficut ouis quae perijt, quae∣re seruum tuum Domine. Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori. Deus in adiutorium meum in∣tende. And a hundred other, such as these; which now, and then, were declared by some one of The Resigi∣ous men declared them, though the Con∣fortatori might represēt them. vs, accor∣ding to the present occasiō, wherin he tooke much con∣tentment.
But
He was most tenderly deuoted to the B. Virgin. especially he had great cōfort, in vsing these other Iaculatory Prayers, Maria mater gratiae, Mater misericordiae, Tu nos ab hoste protege, & hora mortis suscipe; repeating often these last wordes, & hora mortis susci∣pe. And againe; Eiaergo ad∣uocata nostra, illos tuos miseri∣cordes oculos ad nos conuerte, & Iesum benedictum fructum ven∣tris tui, mihi, post hanc noctem, ostende, O clemens, O pia, O dul∣cis Virgo Maria. Ora pro me peccatore indigno, in hac hora mortis meae, Amen, Amen, Amē. Recordare Iesu pie, Quod s causa tuae viae, Ne me perdas ill die &c. In this exercise, tho brothers, of the Congregati of the Misericordia, were ve∣ry perfect, and discreete; deliuering out, in fit times, a greate number of these versicles, without impor∣tuning, or perplexing him. And so also did other Reli∣gious men, according to the occasion, without either interrupting the one the other, or yet ouerweariyng the yong Noble Man; and they also brought thinges so, as to accompany them with certaine motiues, and considerations, with bre∣uity, but with great life of deuotion. When these thinges were ended, I said: It will not be amisse that we recite the Letanies, if these Gentle∣men shall thincke it fit. And I (said the yong Lord) if you, and they be so contented, will be he, that shall recite them. They all made answere in the negatiue, saying to him;
Your Lordshippe, would but weary your selfe, too much. Nothing lesse, (saith he) but to me it will be, of ex∣treame contentment. And so, (wth out more dispute) they put the book into his hand; and (kneeling euen, by me, against a fourme) he began the Letanyes, to which we answearing, Ora pro eo, Pray for him, there It must needes, be an obiect of great compas∣sion. was not a man amongst vs, who accompanied not the words of his mouth with the tears of his eyes. And especially, when with incredible af∣fection, and deuotion, he repeated, these wordes, A
mala morte, A porestate diaboli, A poenis inferni, libera me Do∣mine. Deliuer me, O Lord from an euill death, from the power of the diuell, and from the tor∣mentes of hell. But
No∣thing but only his sins could moue him to teares. he (O admirable repose of that mind) did not shead one teare. Nay my selfe being in teares, who held vp the can∣dle by him (and not being able to represse them) he stirred me with his elbow, and made other signes to them, that so, giuing o∣uer their weepinge, they might answere him. And speaking of it to me after ward, he said, That there wanted little, of their making him also weep, for company. When the Letanies were ended, he sayd (turning to me) Father, say you the pray∣ers ouer me, that follow. And then, he tooke the light out of my hand, and so giuing me the booke, I said those praiers ouer him, which are wont to be said, ouer such as are in their last agony; Commēao These are as admira∣ble and affectu∣ous prai∣ers, as any are vsed in the whol office of the holy Church; and I wish all the Rea∣ders of this, to procure to see & reade them. te omnipotenti deo &c. And that other which followeth,
Deus misericors, Deus clemens &c. And at the end of these, he sayd with a loud voice, the Pater Noster, the Aue maria, the Credo, & the Salue Regina; and so he returned to sit downe, the others making the accusto∣med circle about him. And so one, with representing some sentence of Holy Scrip∣ture, another, some exam∣ple, another, some other spirituall Consideration, we alwaies kept him aliue, and quicke, and euen all kindled in deuotion; till such time, as the houre of colebrating Masse, approa∣ched. Then the Noble Man sayd thus: If these This rigour is vsed in those partes, for the great in∣solencies which haue so∣metyms been ex∣pressed, in the like ex∣tremi∣tyes, by delin∣quents. mani∣cles be put vpon me to giue me payne, or punishment, let the will of my Prince be done, who is pleased to haue it so; but if the meaning be, but to make me sure; in vaine is he tyed without, who is bound Be∣cause his hart was more chained, by the loue of God, then his handes could be, by a load of yron. within. Vpon which wordes, all of vs being full They had great reason. of tendernes; and in particuler one of those Confortatori (who
shewed himselfe, through∣out that whole night, as a most compassionate Gen∣tleman, in seruice of this Noble Man) caused the keyes to be instantly giuen him, and so tooke the ma∣nicles off; which yet, the Baron would needs An humble, naturall, & most Noble Soule. kisse, and kissing them, he sighed, and so held his peace.
When he had been silent a while, and hauing made a signe that he desired to confesse againe; and when he had blessed himselfe, with the signe of the Crosse; Father He is much solicued by the memory of his disobe∣dience to his Mother., (sayd he) I who haue giuen so many disgustes, and so bitter ones, to my most deare Lady, & Mother, through the whole course of my life; what comfort doth your Reuerence thinke, that I might be able to giue her in my death? By dy∣ing wel (sayd I) & in a holy manner. To which he an∣swered thus; How shall the vn∣fortunate woman come to know it?
I told him, that I would relate it to her by word of mouth; and in fine I would write it for her; and I will not only notify it (sayd I) to her, but to any other whome it may import to know it. It is inough, (sayd he) & he reached his hands out to me, that I might giue him one of myne, and with∣all, my word. And so he kissed it often, and holding it betweene both his, he continued to speake after this manner.
I could wish, deare Father, that in my place, your Reue∣rence would often visit and com∣fort my Lady my Mother, after my death. And when so, you shal see her first, I desire that you will aske forgiuenes of her in my name, a thousand, and a thou∣sand tymes, as heer I haue done, both now, and the other day, since I came to prison. And es∣pecially, begge pardon of her, for such, and such a particuler offence, and then say to her thus; Your Troilus who is dead, begs that blessing frō your most afflicted Ladishippe, which being aliue, he nei∣ther deserued, nor had time to aske. He further recom∣mendes the care of his soule to your Ladiship. He prai∣eth, he beseecheth, he con∣iureth your Ladiship, to graunt him this his last & now only suite; that hauing put your soule in peace, you will not so much as resent, or call to mind, and much lesse procure to If she thought that the aduerse parties, whome he had wron∣ged, had prosecu∣ted him with too much eager∣nes. reuenge your selfe, for any iniury; but that you will remit the whole, and your selfe with∣all, to the Eternall Proui∣dence of God.
Put her in mind, that it is the part of a Roman, and Christian hart, after a generous manner to par∣don offences. And, giuing her all comfort, do you assure her, that I haue particulerly resed, all those irreuerent wor that I haue formerly vsed to∣wardes her; and that I ha remembred all those most sweet, deare benefits, which I ha receaued from her; and all those Maternall fauours, which she hath vouchsafed me. And a∣boue all, let her know, the in∣stimable contentment that I haue to thincke of the This was a Mother, not only of her sonnes body, but of his soule also. Christian loue, which she hath expressed to me, in this last passage; without euer reflecting vpon those offen∣ces, and great demerits of myne.
Say to her moreouer, that I dye her sonne, & a sonne, who is most profoundly penitent, for all the ill wordes, and deeds that I haue euer vttered, and per∣formed against her; and that, in the other world, I will by Gods grace, be as gratefull to her, as I haue beene vngratefull, heer. Relate to her my last passage, in most particuler manner; and o∣blige her, liberally to reward al my followers, who haue been in prison, vpon my occasion. Of whome, I doe with all the very bowells of my hart, aske pardon, for the payne, and perill, wher∣into I did idly, and absurdly cast them. And assure her, in a wo that if for nothing els, yet eu for the very disgustes which  haue giuen to her, I shall dy content; finding a kind of ioy in my hart, that I performe this pennance, in this manner, which I haue so well deserued. And so, I dying in such sort, a your Reuerence may be pleased to let her know, she cannot but receaue some cōfort in my death; and she will also find, that she is euen engaged, so to range her selfe to the will of God, as, by his mercy, I haue done.
To my Lady, my Grand-Mother, what shall I say, deere Father? O how compassiue am I of her great age! VVhat paine doth my soule feele, for that paine of hers! Giue her also to vnderstand, that I begge pardon of her, for so many disgustes, as, in this old age of hers, I haue giuen her; beseeching her in my name, that as long as she shall liue, she will weekly, cause a Masse to be celebrated, for my soule. And in like māner I hum∣bly aske pardon of my Lord Marquesse, my Vncle, from the most inward parts of my soule, as I also doe of the rest of my
bloud; beseeching them all to cuse this youth, or rather ign¦rance of myne. Putting also th in mind, that once we shal al me in heauen. And if euer your R¦uerence can procure to be in my Castles, aske pardon, I beseech you, in my name, a hundred tymes, of all my vassalls. Ma∣king a promise to them, that in∣steed of the ill example which haue giuen them, I will not for∣get them in heauen, when by the mercy of God, I shall be there; and let them, in the meane tyme, excuse my youth.
Forget not also to do this office, with This was a person of great authori∣ty and place, who took his exami∣nation. Monsigr. the Gouernour of Rome, who about some foure tymes, hath ex∣amined me, with so much respect and courtesy. Giuing him assu∣rance, from me, that although my death do grieue me, yet I ac∣cept willingly thereof. And be∣seeching him, that, when tyme shall serue, he wil also vvith how great pi∣ety, he speakes of the Pope, as he was his su∣preme Pastour, & with obser∣uance as of his Prince. assure our Lord, Pope Clement, his Holynes,
that I dye his most deuoted Sonne; and most satisfyed, with the proceeding of his Holynes, towardes me. VVith this moreouer, that am grieued at the very rootes of my A noble circum∣stance of ciuility and cur∣tesy. hart, for hauing ginen Holynes, so much cause  trouble, and griefe; especially  this beginning of his Pontif¦cate, and in the middest of th ioy, which hath beene expressed for his assumption, to the Se Apostolique. And let him b further told, that by placing my selfe, as I doe at your feet,
make accoumpt, that I lay my head vnder the feet of his Ho∣lynes; that so he may vouch∣safe to giue me his benediction. I hauing this comfort, in the midst of all my afflictions, that his sentence, and my death, will serue to his whole State, for a lawfull, and plentifull example of his Iustice. And verily, if it grieue me, at this tyme, to dye, it doth also grieue me, that euen by my death, I am not able to giue complete sat is faction, to his Holynes. For what a noble ciuill Soule was this? as much as he, being my Father, and my Pastour, he cannot, in fine, but feele the death of a Sonne, and sheep, of his, with displeasure, and griefe.
Vpon which wordes, he finding, (euen more then before) that there fell some teares from mine eyes, to his handes, This is well in¦deed, (sayd he) your Reu¦rence, commendes my courage, but why then do you weepe your∣selfe? At least, let not others see you.
Then I replying said. Do you belieue, my Sonne, that I haue no fee∣ling in me? Do you thinke perhaps, that I am some piece of marble? Proceed you on to the rest. And then, naming diuers of his particuler friendes, he de∣sired me to aske pardon for him, of them all; and this he did, with wordes of extreame sweetenes, and prudence. This being then said by him with a most ad∣mirably intrepide hart, he concluded with this desire; I beseech your Reuerence, that in the last place, you will begge pardon for me, of Almigh∣ty God, as I my selfe do now, with the most internall part of my hart; and of your selfe, I aske my Pennance, and Ab∣solution. Which as soone as I had giuen him, the Brothers of that Congregation of the Mi∣sericordia, did put vs in mind
how it was tyme that Mass should be celebrated; and so the Priest, as soone as he was vested, began. The de∣uout yong Lord, & I knee∣ling togeather against a four me, he sayd thus to me. The Priest is beginning Masse; & I (with your good leaue) wil haue a new Reconcilation, according to that, which my Good Angell shall bring to my remembrance, of whome I haue desired this fauour. The Priest was saying the Confiteor at the foote of the
Altar; to whome one of the Congrega∣tion (making answere) was so ouer wrought with ten∣dernes, that he could not get to the end of it; in such sort, as that it was necessa∣ry, that some other should doe it for him. Then the good Noble Man, who an∣swered softly to the Cositeor, leaning towardes me, sayd thus, Giue He had the guift of teares, in a strange measure. me leaue to weep, whylest I say the Confiteor, since that Gentleman weepes so bitterly, to whose office it belon∣geth not greatly, that he should weep.
I answered, that he might weep in the name of God; since he had giue him so great desire so to d And it was an admirable ef∣fect of diuine grace, that in∣stantly, I saw the tears strea∣ming downe his cheekes, and powring themselues, e∣uen vpon the cushion, that lay before him. When the Confiteor was done, and all Till after the Ghos∣pell. the whyle that the Priest was reading with a loud voice, he did not mooue at all, but was most fixedly attentiue, and as it were rapt towards the The Crucifixe was of stone, or wood, but his mind was v∣pon the Original and not vpon the picture, which was but a picture or Ima∣ge. Crucifixe, vpon the
Altar, which was there most deuo∣utly made. And shortly af∣ter, turning towards myne eare, he accused himselfe of diuers little thinges, which suddenly then did surprize his mind. And the Priest being come to A∣bout the middle of Masse. Sursum cor∣da; Father (sayd he) do you thinke indeed, that by such a death as this, and so well deser∣ued, I may yet go straight to heauen?
And why not (sayd I) with so great and so well conditioned affectuousnes of mind, might your Lord∣ship vndergo this death, as that your soule would be sure to flye vp instantly, from the blocke, into hea∣uen. O my God! (sayd he) And what kind of affectuousnes must that be! O teach it me a little! O that our Lord, would graunt it to me! Pray (sayd I) very earnestly vnto him for it, and peraduenture he will graunt it. At which tyme, the
Priest being in the very act of the Eleuation of the bo∣dy of our Lord, the yong No∣ble Man, spake these very, very wordes. O bone Iesu, sis mihi, in hac hora, Iesus. O deare Lord Iesus, be thou, in this houre, a Iesus to me. And this he sayd, with so ardent affe∣ction of mind, though with a low voice, as that after it, he was wholy immoueable, till the Priest went on, to The later end of Masse. Domine non sum dignus, &c. And then, he sayd thus to me. I haue not, Father, beene attentiue, either when the Pater Noster, or the Agnus Dei, was sayd; may I yet neuerthe∣lesse communicate? I answered, that for the present, he should do such a
This was per∣haps, the knoc∣king of his breast, or some such o∣ther thing, which might be done at the in∣stant. pen∣nance, whilest I was giuing him Absolution. Which be∣ing done, he went, of him∣selfe, to the Altar; and kneeling downe, did with exemplar deuotion, receaue the most Blessed Sacrament; & soone after, he came backe from Masse, towardes me, where he remained, with∣out any motion at all.
After this, turning about to all them who did assist, he said, I giue thankes to you all, for your Charity and courtesy; and pardon, I beseech you, the painfull night, which I haue brought vpon you. And then, he desired me, for the loue of him, to repeate those wordes, to euery one of them, in particuler; and so I did. Being thē intreated to sit downe, the wonted circle was made about him. Where euery one procured, to animate him, towardes that combat which was thē at hand; by representing the shortnes of the paine, the immēsity of the reward, the vanity of the world; & aboue all, the aboundant grace, which, in the space of so few houres, our Lord had communicated to his soule; and had giuen him with all, such a pregnant signe of his Predestination; wherein the Noble Youth, did And so he might most iu∣stly doe. shew to find extra∣ordinary gust. Amongst the many disoourses which were made to this purpose, as wel by the Confortatori, as by our Fathers, I vsed this.
And what thinke you, Signor Troilo, will the grace which God hath giuen you, be sufficient to make you beare this punishment? Nay I tell you, that in imitation of Christ, you should do well to desire it, and that desire, would serue to make it, a small matter, to you. Nay it would make it seeme no punishment at all; & lastly it would make it seeme sweet. Euen as it hapned to Christ our Lord himselfe, to The immense loue which our lord Iesus bare to man, made all that he suffered, seeme little to him. whom his Passion, seemed so small a matter, that whereas others called it, by the name of a huge thing, an Ocean, a deep sea, (Veni in altitudinem maris, & tempestas demersit me) himself
doth call it, but a Cupfull, (Calicem quem dedit mihi pater, non vis vt bibā illum?) Againe, after that huge heape of bitternes, and tormentes which he had endured, it seemed nothing to him. For being asked by those dis∣ciples who were going to Emaus, if he knew of that vast cruelty, which had lately then, bin executed at
Hierusalem, vpon the person of the greatest Saint of God; he answeared, by asking, Quae? for in fine he esteemed it all as nothing. There∣fore speaking of his Passion, he vsed the word Baptisme, saying, Baptismo habeo bap∣tizari, et quomodo coarctor &c. And you know that bathes do serue for delicacy. What say you then Signor Troilo? Doth not your punishe∣ment by this time, seeme small to you? Small; (saith he?) it seemeth nothing. Yet can I not say, either that it is no∣thing, or yet very pleasant; but yet neuerthelesse, it is deare to me, and as such I prize it. And
How mightily this no∣ble man, grew vp in grace, euen by momēts. I do assure you, that at the present, it would be as it were, a kind of trouble for me, to escape it. Before I desired to escape; I sighed for it; I laboured for it; and I know not what of that kind. But I had not then, that knowledg of my selfe, which now, by the fauour of God, me thinkes I haue; in such sort, that now, I can affirme to you, in the worde of Truth, that I This so ardent desire, of suffering for his sinnes, must needs be a great dispositi∣tion to∣wardes the ob∣tayning of par∣don for them, through the mer∣cy of Christ our Lord. desire my end, how painfull soeuer it may be, towardes the remission of my sinnes. To this, another Father said;
Your Lordship spea∣keth wisely; for in fine, God knoweth, whether other∣wise, you should euer haue beene so well prepared for death. Whereupon, one of the Cōnfortatori proceeded, saying: If your Lordship had dyed naturally in your bed; what, with the paine of your body, and the anguish of your mind; it may be you would scarce haue beene maister of your selfe. And if you had dyed, by any o∣ther accident, perhaps you would not haue had time, to bring forth, so much as the name of Iesus. Whereas now, it
Sup∣posing first, the grace of God, as is decla∣red af∣terward. is in a manner,  in your owne power, to dye as well as you will, your selfe; with what greife of your sinnes you will; with what loue of christ you will; and, in a word, in that best manner, which the grace of Almighty God will impart to you; which we perceaue, euen so to ouerflow your soule, that we are as much astonished, as comforted, by the knowledge therof.
Heereunto the constant Noble Man, made this an∣swere. You shall know, that by the goodnes of God, I find not in my selfe, any trouble, or tenta∣tion; and me No∣thing but the very hand of God, was able so to haue cō∣ducted him, through these stony wayes. And it seemes, that God commu∣ncated himselfe to the delin∣quent, in a very particu∣ler man∣ner. thinks I am in a hand which beares me vp. I desire, and I resolue to dye, in that manner, which I shall be taught to be the best; and I am most ready, to obey in all that, which for the sauing of my soule shall be commanded me.
This, said I, you shal therfore do. You shal barre you selfe, in that houre, of some ease. That is, you shal for the loue of Iesus, and, in imi∣tation of what he did and suffered for you, depriue your selfe of somewhat,  which you might haue; and which, at that time, might be agreeable to you. For, if you doe well remember it, they gaue twice, vnto our Lord, to drinke. The first time, when they gaue him vinagre, he drunke; but whē they gaue him wine, as soon as he had tasted it, he put it by. But do you know the reason? It was this. To such as were condemned to dye, it was the custome to giue wine, with an infusion of myrrhe; that by the comfort thereof, they might faint the lesse, vnder their tor∣ments. Now our Lord (who was pleased to depriue him∣selfe entierly, and fully, of all consolation, for loue of vs, and for our example) refused that, but he accep∣ted of the vinagre, which was mingled with With Gall. ano∣ther most bitter ingredient; that so, he might suffer the most he could; both for our example, and benefit other∣wise.
The Proueditore sayd, that this was most certainly true; whereupon some ex∣pound those wordes, which Christ spake vpon the crosse, Deus Deus meus, vt quid dere∣liquisti me? That Christ our Lord, did greiue thereat, because the Diuinity, began as it were, to hide it selfe from the Humanity; & con∣sequently by little & little, his life was leauing him; & by occasion thereof, he was able to suffer no longer; which the most enamoured Iesus obseruing, did com∣plaine of the matter, to his Father, by the wordes afore∣sayd.
To these thinges a Fa∣ther of ours, adding other deuout, and short discour∣ses, the Confortatore sayd; That for the tyme his soule was sufficiently fed; & that it would be well done, to re∣fresh his body. The Baron answered, that there was no neede. But they pressing it much, there was brought in some wine, by a seruant of the Lord This Gouer∣nement, is the place of greatest confidē∣ce which the Pope bestowes Gouernour of the Castle, which, one of the Gentlemen there present, powring forth into a glasse, presented to the Baron; who
sayd again, that it was who∣ly needles. And yet (sayd he, turning then towardes me) if I should need it, your
A good memory he had, and a more pi∣ous will. Re∣uerence told me a whyle agoe, that in imitation of Christ, I should doe well to depriue my selfe thereof. Father, is it not so? Neuertheles, being in∣treated by al the Assistants, that he would drinke, or at least, that he would, so much, as wash his mouth; this last he did twice, with∣out swallowing any wine at all. And this was so much more remarkeable, because such as are in that case, vse to be extremely taken with thirst, and it is wont to be held, for one of their grea∣test torments. The wine being then carryed away, diuers que∣stions were asked of this most Illustrious Lord, to which he Note & won∣der at these an∣sweares, which are so ful of piety. wisedom and cou∣rage. answered, with so great prudence & iudg∣gement, that more could not be imagined. He was asked first (for, of many, I will mention only a few) & this first question he was asked often;) Signor Troilo,
will your Lordship haue a∣ny thing? He still answered; that he desired nothing, sauing that once, he held his peace, but made a signe vp to hea∣uen. Besides, he was often asked, Signor Troilo, of what are you thinking? Someti∣mes he āswered, vpon nothing in particuler; Sometimes, v∣pon our Lord; Sometimes, vpon my sinnes; Sometimes; vpon my approaching end; Som∣times, he sayd, I thinke vpon the so many guiftes, which God hath bestowed vpon me, & that I haue been, so very vngrateful;
yea & euen vnmindfull of them all. Being then asked in this manner, Doth your Lord∣ship dye willingly? He an∣swered thus: And what? would you haue me bustle against the order of the Prince? Or should I not be content, with the prouidence, and good pleasure of God? Is it possible, say done, that the Diuell should not striue, to make you thinke your death vniust? I do not, sayth he, esteeme it only to be iust; but most iust; and as for the Diuell, I neither haue, nor wil I haue, any more to do with him,
I haue had inough, and too much of him already.
Another asked him what he sayd, of the Lady his Mother, his Friendes, his Kinred, and himselfe; if he were not much afflicted, with the thought thereof? Concerning my Lady, my Mo∣ther (sayth he) I confesse, that in the most inward partes of my hart, I find extreme affliction; but, on the other side, I reioyce that I am paying the offences, that I haue cōmitted against her, with my bloud. And I hope, that the readines wherewith I in∣brace this pennance, for my wic∣ked carriage towards her, will be so well accepted by Almighty God; that he may, through his goodnes, giue her no small comfort, euen by this very death of myne. I thinke vpon my kin∣red with grief, as hauing been a cause of payne, and trouble to them. Of my friends, as hauing giuen them ill example. Of my selfe, I take no care; for behold who A great fayth, & hope, & loue. doth it for me; making a signe towards the Crucifixe, which he had hard by him.
Being asked, whether the tyme did seeme long to him or short? Neither This doe I find to be a strange answere, in the super∣laciue degree of stran∣genes. long (sayth he) nor short. And another replying to him thus; Is it possible, that you are not grieued, that you must dye? I do not (sayth he) deny, but that I am grieued at it; but yet it neither troubles me, nor somuch as alters me, more thē you see. It being wished, that he should suffer his chaire, to be drawn a litle forward, that so he might sit at grea∣ter ease; To what end (sayth he) should I giue my body ease? I am well heere; and with the help of God, I shall be shortly
free, from needing that, or any thing els. Being desired to raise, and rest his feet, vpon a place of aduantage, where they vsed to kneele, for that so, he should be in a more commodious posture; he sayd (drawing neer towards myne eare,) Father, it is a piece of ill manners, to fit with a mans legs raised vp, in the presence of other men. But I telling him no, and aduising him how∣soeuer, that he would set them vp; he did instantly accommodate himselfe to my desire.
Being asked, to  what deuotions, he had bin most particulerly affected: He answeared, To that of our
He was euer much deuoted to our B. Lady. Blessed Lady, in whose honour, I did dayly recite her Office, but with an impure mouth; and how then, could that be accepted by her? And till within these two yeares, I made said he, much account of going to Confession, which through the mercy of my Lord, I resol∣ued neuer to intermitt, vnlesse it were by some very vnlucky accident, that should haue inter∣posed it selfe. And I euer carri∣ed liuing, in my hart, the me∣mory of manie thinges, which formerly, vpon seuerall occasi∣ons had beene represented to me by sundry Religious Fathers, with whome I had much conuer∣sed, (insinuating therby, as I conceaue, the Fathers of the Chiesa Nuoua.) And when I had meanes, to do it in priuate, I neuer failed any day, to salute the Blessed Virgin vpon my bare knees. And then, I saying (I know not well, vpon what occasion) Ah poore Signor Troilo. Poore (sayd he) I was, when I was without the grace of my Lord God, but now, I take my selfe to be rich. But then the tyme of his end drawing on apace, we rising vp from our seats, did circle him in, vpon our knees. And (after the man∣ner of two Quires, inter∣changeably answering one another) we began the sea∣uen Penitentiall Psalms; pon∣dering some of the verses now and then, and causing him, to resume diuers of them. They being ended, he was aduised to say often, Eia These are parts of some
Hymnes, which are reci∣ted by the holy Church, in ho∣nour of our lord Iesus, & our B. Lady. ergo aduocata nostra &c. And then, Maria mater gratiae. And then againe, Recordare Iesu pie, and the like. Which he pronoun∣ced, with so cleare a voyce, so constant a memory, and with a countenance so se∣rene, that all such as were present (himselfe only ex∣cepted) did weep outright. Which he obseruing, and making silence, and taking his own face into his hands, he stood still a whyle, in mentall prayer. And then turning towardes me, he sayd; Confiteor
The entrance whereby, we be∣gin to makour Confissiō. Deo Omni∣potenti, & tibi Pater. I accuse my selfe of this, and this, and that; Ideo This we vse to say when we haue ended it. precor &c. And then, instantly he added this: Father, I would desire A far greater matter it was to aske this suite, then to grant it. this last fauour of you; that you would confesse me at the blocke; and that, whylest I, on the one side, with my beades in my hand, might say, O bo∣ne Iesu, sis mihi Iesus; O good Lord Iesus, be thou a Iesus to me; and you on the o∣ther, Ego te absoluo &c. I absolue thee &c. at the same instant, the iron might fall vp∣on my necke. Not so, my Lord, sayd I. For so, by
giuing a signe to the execu∣tioner for the cuttinge off your head, I should becom
By the Ca∣nons of the holy Church, a Priest may not cooperat to the death of any man though neuer so far off; but only for the punish∣ment of delin∣quents in course of Iusti∣ce; nor then nei∣ther, but with particuler dispensation, and that in very rare cases. The Inquifition hath nothing to do heerin, but only examineth, and leaueth such as are faulty and impenitent to the secular Iudges. Irregular. No, no, I will not doe it, by any meanes. But then, obseruing that he was much afflicted, by my negatiue, and so rather to quiet him, then for any thing else, I sayd it might perhappes be thus, better done. You may confesse at the blocke; and being con∣fessed, you may begin to in∣uoke  the name of Iesus; and when I shall see, that the Executioner is ready to let downe the iron, I may say with a lowd voice, Ego te ab∣soluo &c. Yet perhapps a∣gaine, this would be more inconuenient; for by giuing you a signe, of when the iron were vpon the point of falling, it might fright you in such sort, as that, if by the motion of your body, it should not fall iust vpon you, it would mangle you, and so afflict you, with a double paine, and a double death. I will not do it, by any meanes. At these words, casting his head vpon my bosome, he sayd;
Ah Father, euen by all that loue which you beare to this miserable sinnefull soule, do me this fauour. I make a pro∣mise to you, in the name, and by the help of God, that you shal not put me into terrour by it. For Gods loue belieue me; I be∣seech you giue me credit. Wher∣upon yet, I continuing, as I had resolued before; O God (sayd he) and might not thy diuine Maiesty, mooue the hart of this my Father, to esteeme me worthy of this fauour? Well, be of courage (sayd I, to quiet him) I promise you, that I will do it. Then giue me (answered he) that The handes of Ca∣tholike Priests, are an∣noynted and con∣secrated with great so∣lemnity. sa∣cred hand of yours. And I gaue it to him, with this purpose, that if he should not remember it at the blocke, as I verily thought that he would not, then I would let it passe; and that if he remembred it, and did franckly call for it, I would performe it. But it seemed (as I said) to me, that a man
could hardly be of so vn∣daunted a mind; as that, in so hard a passage, his me∣mory would serue him for such a busines; and that, wheras all men procure to diuert their mind frō such a blow, this Barō would needs haue an expresse signe ther∣of. But, in fine, where the grace of God doth enter, it produceth effects, which do farre out-stripp all the power of nature; and no wit of man arriueth to them. When I had made him this promise; I
His hart wrought mightily towards humility would know (said he) whether your Reue∣rence, will not thincke it fit, that I giue thankes, and de∣mand pardon, of them who haue had most to do with me, in this place. I told him, that I liked well of it; and hauing giuen him Absolution, I intreated him by a signe, to sit downe. Then he said; Father, take you the care of my iourney from hence to the blocke, as you haue already promised; and you shall go aduertising me, from pace to pace, of such thinges as are fit, that I may haue, my whole soule for God alone.
I will aduertise you, (said I) of all; Keep your selfe prepared, and sit downe. As soone as he was set, all the stringes of our very harts, seemed to be moued at once, to pray him that he would be mindfull of vs in heauen. And It is a signe that they saw strange tokens of Gods fauour in him. euery one of vs who were presēt, both with wordes, and tears, did recōmend himselfe to him, the best he could; and we were not able to satisfie our selues, in the desire we had of expressing kindnes to∣wardes him. And verily,
this was a death, of so much tendernes, that the remem∣brance of it at this time, doth affect me, at the very soule. Only the yong Noble Man, remained with a most Angelicall Countenance; and with a hart which see∣med, not so much as to know, what belonged to feare. This A des∣cription of Signor Troilo's person, and fa∣shion. Signor Troilo, was tal of stature; of delicate constitution; of colour ra∣ther oliuaster, then very faire; of black haire & thick; of face, neither fatte, nor
leane; his eyes were blacke, and full, and quicke; his nose sweetely raised; his mouth of a iust proportion, & rather smiling, thē other wise; his forhead competēt∣ly spatious, & he had not so much as one single haire vpon his cheekes. Of a sweete voice, of ready an∣sweares; & so complete in good fashion, that euen at the block, he failed not to salute, & resalute all men, according to the occasion, & their condition; and not being able to take of his hat
himselfe, to make others do it for him. It hapned once that I desired him to let me wipe his face with a hand∣hercheife; not that he was in any sweate, but only to refresh him a little. But he, hauing suffered me, to be∣gin to do him that seruice, sayd; Father, I need not this. But I desired, that at least he would rub his face with his own hands, for it would refresh him; and instantly doing so, he said, to me in myne eare; Father, I had an extreame desire, to stretch
my selfe, but me thought, it had somewhat of the Clowne. In conclusion, he cau∣sed all those souldiars who had kept guard ouer him, to passe before him, one, by one; and so, It is a true signe, & a certain fruite of true pen∣nance, to sub∣mit a mans selfe mightily for Gods sake. casting himselfe vpon his knees, to euery one of them, as they singly passed, he asked pardon, most humbly of them, with Noble and Christian wordes; and he left them also, liberall donatiues. To the Gentle∣man Porter, he did the like, and more; excusing himself
for the trouble which he had giuen him. But now there remai∣ned no more to be done, for the time was run out, whē the
In those Coun∣tryes there ringeth a bell eue∣ry mor∣ning, noone, & night, when all men re∣cite 3. short prayers, in remē∣brance of the Incarnation of Christ our Lord. This they do wheresoeuer they be, when the bell ringes, though it be in the streets; and there they salute one another, with a wish of the good day, or night. Aue Maria bell, did sound. Vpon the hea∣ring whereof, we al recited that prayer, and he said it also, vpon his knees. Then saluting all the company, he sate down, & was silent. And whilest he held his peace, we spake amongst our selues, with astonish∣mēt at many things, which we had obserued in him, & they were these. He did ne∣uer sweate. He neuer com∣playned of any thing. He neuer placed himselfe, with any shew of wearines vpon his chaire He neuer shew∣ed any vnquietnes. He ne∣uer wept, but whylest he was making his confession. He neuer sought to ease himselfe, in the course of Nature. He neuer had any thirst. He neuer fainted. He was neuer sleepy. He
was neuer ouerwroght with sorrow. He was euer fresh, and strong, hauing been, in that night, so many, and many tymes vpō his knees. He euer answered readily, and with a liuely voice. His memory neuer failed, or so much as wauered. He was handsomely, and modestly apparelled. He
A strange image of perfe∣ction, was this yonge Noble Man. spake not so much as an inconsi∣derate word. He neuer ex∣pressed a desire of any thing. He had, at certayne tymes, and vpon certaine occasions, a discharged, and smiling countenance. He did completely giue euery man those titles of respect, which was his due; without fayling so much as once; as to one, of Reuerence, to an∣other, of Honour; to another of You. He declared, most currantly, his last VVill, which was, a sheet of paper, long. He was not taken by passionate tendernes, but only vpon the speach of the Lady his Mother. He spake most honourably, & chri∣stianly, of the Prince, & of the Iudges; yea and euen of
them, who prosecuted the cause against him. All which particulers, or the most part of them, do hap∣pen otherwise, in others, who are subiect to the like condition. So that all those old experiēced Confortatori of that Congregation, which is called of the Misericordia, were amazed, to see how a∣boundantly the Grace of God, had wrought vpon that soule, in the space of a few houres. When this most deuout Noble Man, had thus held
his peace, and we had been discoursing, amongst our selues, of the thinges afore∣sayd, he calling me towards him, who yet was standing not farre off, spake to me, in this manner. Deare Fa∣ther, let vs make our last Recon∣ciliation with God. And then he made a short recapitu∣lation, of all his faults; and began
A happy soule to be so speedily, and so intierly cleansed. to accuse himself, of thinges so extreamely small; as hath giuen occa∣sion, & matter to this soule of myne, vntill this day, wherein I write, and will, vntil the houre of my death, both to be comforted, and confounded. Being vpon the end of his Confession, he fell into a most ardent weeping; in such sort, as that bowing downe his head towards my hand, I was not able to en∣dure the heat of his breath. And when I sayd to him,
Troylo my Sonne; Cast a bridle vpon those teares of yours; doe not exasperate your own wound; it is now inough, and againe inough; you haue wept inough; you will haue tyme to weep yet againe, when you come to lay your Head vpon the blocke, for
He was to suffer death for his misdeds, but he was to beare it patient∣ly and willing∣ly, for the loue of Christ Christ. His answere was this; I haue al∣ready told you Father, and now I tell you so once againe; I weep for my sinnes, and not for my death. And when your Reue∣rence shall haue giuen me Ab∣solution, and I shall haue per∣formed the Pennance, which you will impose (which only de∣serues to be accompanyed with tears) you shall find, that I will weep no more. And iust so it hapned; for wiping his face when I had absolued him, & I hauing acquainted him, with some necessityes of myne owne, to the end that he might giue me By this holy prayers in hea∣uen. assi∣stance, in the sight of our Lord; he remayned, with eyes as full of serenity, and as voyd of teares, as if, in all his life, he had neuer wept.
But then hauing raised himselfe, it was thought fit, by all the Company, that certaine Psalmes should be repeated, whereof, I was to pōder some of the verses, togeather with the Confor∣tatori; till such time, as his houre should ariue. Wher∣upon he sayd, It is now broade day, and there cannot be much time remayning. Our Great piety & gratitu∣de. Lord be blessed, for making me passe through this night, so happily, and so holily. I thanke you deare Father, & you Gentlemen, for your so greate fauour. The good God reward you for it. And heere, all of vs recommending our sel∣ues againe to his prayers, we also againe beganne the Psalmes.
At this time, the Exe∣cutioner came in, and no man had the hart to tell him of it; but he perceiuing that there was a presse of people, did gently turne his face about, and saw him, As soone as he had set eye vpon him, he was not trou∣bled with it at all; but Vn∣daunted, holy courage. he armed himselfe only with the signe of the Holy Crosse; and making a countenance to me, who stood close by him, he rose, and sayd: VVell, the houre is come; Gen∣tlemen, let vs goe, and that
cheerefully And they all an∣swearing thus: Yea let it be done cheerefully,
Signor Troilo, cherefully, for the loue of Iesus; he turned towardes the Executioner, who kneeling down at his feete, to aske his pardon; Do your office (said he) in the name of God, for so, he will haue it. Your Lordship (said he) is to vnbutton your doublet, about your necke. And he (being as ready on the one side, as he was modest on the other) with his owne hands began to  vnbutton. It is not inough, said the chiefe Executioner; the doublet must be put off. But the rest of those Officers of Iustice, were not desyrous, that he should put of his doublet. Yet the generous Noble Man said, That howsoeuer, be would do it, if they thought it fit. For (said he) it shall not greatly trouble me; and if you haue a mind to it, I will strippe my selfe, from head to foot, for the loue of God. Already therefore, he was beginning to vntye himself; but it sufficed that he was
vnbuttoned to the shoul∣ders. Then, one of the Confortatori putting him in mind, of Non erubescam &c. and the Officer comming to tye his arms, in such a fashi∣on, as that, when he should be arriued at the blocke, his body might not haue much leaue to mooue; In the name of God (sayth he) bind both my armes, and my handes too, if your will be such. For This man had true faith in Christ our Lord, & his sa∣cred Pas∣sion, who in contem∣plation and imi∣tation thereof, was so willing to suffer, as you see. my Lord Iesus, was yet, much worse bound for me. Being therfore thus ac∣commodated, they cast a
gowne about his backe; and he kneeled downe, before the Altar; in act, as if he had craued a benediction, at the handes of our Lord. And, without the least change of colour, beginning the Mi∣serere, of himselfe; and be∣ing come as far as the out∣ward roome, he paused there, with an incredible decency, and grace. And he sayd, to some of the by-stan∣ders, Might I not thanke my Lord, the Gouernour of the Castle, before I dye? And they, presenting I knowe
not what excuse, of his not being risen, he accepted thereof; and commanded a Gentleman, who serued the Gouernour, that he should thanke him in his name. And hauing demanded par∣don of many of the Assi∣stants, & exhorting them in some very few wordes to vertue; by the example, which there they had before their eyes of the contrary, he went on with the very same verse of the Miserere, where he had left before. And sometymes, turning towardes me, he would be saying, Come See whether this Ba∣ron were afraid of death or no. Father, come; to heauen, to heauen. And it was a strang thing, that he being in pantofles, & going downe such a long paire of staiers, as that is; (which stayers are much broken by reason of the Artillery, which vpon frequēt occasi∣ons, is drawne vp & downe by that way) yet did not his foot once slipp. Nay, & I, failing to tread right ma∣ny tymes, though I were in shoos, he willed me to take care of my selfe.
When he was arriued to the other open stayres, where many persons of the Castle were to see him; one of the Confortatori, who was well experienced in those occasions, and stood on the one hand, placing a Crucifixe before him (and as it were couering him therewith) cryed out, with a stronge voice, Let Viua Giesu Christe. Christ Iesus liue; be not frighted, my Lord. To which he, (after he had ended the Verse, which he was pronoūcing) made this answeare; Yea,
let Christ Iesus liue; in whome, whilst I am hoping, I do not feare to be confounded. And then said I, In te Domine speraui, non confundar in aeter∣num; which being repeated by him, he spake thus to them; Take A noble courage. the Crucifixe aside; let all the people see me. For if I be good for nothing els, at least I may serue them, for an example. There passed one that way, with a bottle of wine in his hand, who saluted the
Baron, vpon his knee, and the Baron, cour∣teously resaluted him; and so returned to the same verse of the Psalme, which he had formerly begunne. Soone after, passing through the people, which stoode there, a little, thicke, he sayd; Learne Few wordes, and well chosen. It is not there the fashion, for a man to stand prea∣ching, at the place of his executi∣on. by my exam∣ple, to liue well, and pray for me. And thus with Psalmes, & Iaculatory prayers, he came to the blocke, where there was store of lookers on.
The intrepide Baron pausing there, sayd thus. I would desire, in these last mo∣ments of my life, to see, at least, and salute, & thanke, the Lieu∣tenant Gouernour of the Castle, since I cannot see my Lord, the Gouernour. But the
Lieute∣nant, by no means resoluing to go towardes him (for the extreme tendernes, where∣with he was taken) the No∣ble Youth, perceauing it, and turning to me, sayd; Father, his hart serueth him not to come; and perhaps I make the people stay too longe. O most valiant, & most vndaunted mind, which was troubled more with the sleight in∣commodity of others, then with the apprehension of his owne imminent death. At last, he cheerefully ad∣uauncing forward, the Lieu∣tenant, came before him; & the Baron, casting himselfe vpon his knee, said to me, In courtesy, Father, take off my hat. Which the good Gen∣tleman obseruing,
A kind cō∣tention who should most exceed in cour∣tesy. did, with a most bitter, & lowd crye of teares, euen spread himself, all vpō the groūd; and the by-standers, vpon that occasion, did cast thē∣selues all, vpon their knees; nor was there any thing heard, but a loud voice of teares This generous yong Lord, sayd thē, thus to him. Syr, do not weepe; I had no de∣signe, but to salute you; to thank you; and to begge your pardon; as now I do, both of your selfe, and, in your person, at the hands of al them, who are present heer; desiring them to learne at my cost, and to pray for my soule. This he sayd, with so stronge a voice, as that he was heard, notwithstanding the noise of their weeping. I also, was not able to stay my teares; when he leaning towardes myne eare, spake these very
wordes, now below, as be∣fore he had done, aboue:
Behould, your Reuerence is wee∣ping; and yet still you tell me, that I must haue a Noble Hart. Then hauing repeated, di∣uers times, In manus tuas Do∣mine, commendo spiritum meum; and, Suscipe me Domine, se∣cundum eloquium tuum, & non confundas me ab expectatione mea; he was wished to ascend and then to lay himselfe downe vpon the Scaffold. At the same instant, one of the Confortatori saying to him, Cheerefully Signor Troi∣lo, couragiously Signor Troilo; and a whole crye of prayers being raised, and made by all the company for him; that valiant Hart, did an∣swere euen with a smiling countenance; Know A no∣ble, and holy, valiant hart. Gen∣tlemen, that I dye cheerefully, for the Loue of Iesus Christ, & in Pennance for my sinnes.
As therefore he was laying down his head; where (said he) is the Father? And turning towards the Execu∣tioner, he sayd, Stay a whyle; for I will be reconciled. And beckning me, first, towards him with his countenance; Father (sayd he) on this hand, I place my These Saines he vsed, as interces∣sours for him to Christ our Lord. Good Angell; and on that, S. Paul, and S. Iohn the Baptist; our B. Lady,
shall stand before. Your Reuerence must remēber, to per∣forme the promise, which you made me. I will say, O bone Iesu, esto mihi Iesus; O good Lord Iesus, be thou a Iesus to me; and when you shall see, that the corde is in cutting, you must say, Ego te absoluo &c. that so, when I shall inuoke the name of Iesus; and you absolue me; my soule may begin her iourney, from this body of myne, towards heauē, by the mercy of my Lord, as I confide it shall. I do ingenuously con∣fesse, that I was so mightily amazed within my selfe, & I fell into such an excesse of weeping, that I had not a word to answere, at the in∣stant, but in the language of teares. And he, in laying his head vpon the blocke, expresly spake these very wordes: Deare Father, draw neere me. Let it suffice, and I take you to witnes, That So that his memo∣ry and courage was far from fayling him; & perhaps there is hardly to be found in any hi∣story, a nobler Chara∣cter, of wisdom, presence of mind, magna∣nimity, and san∣ctity. I protest my seife, in my desire to
lay downe a thousand heads, in this one head of myne; and in this one life, to offer vp a thou∣sand liues. I accuse my selfe, for not doing it, with that feruour of deuotion; that vehemency of Contrition; and that prompti∣tude of resignation, which I haue beene told, and taught. But I know not how to do more. I ac∣cuse my selfe, as truly, of all the sinnes, which I haue confessed vnto your Reuerence, as if now I did repeate them to you, one, by one. In Pennance, if it please you, I will giue my head to Christ, as a punishment which is most deserued by me; and of you I desire Absolution. So did this Noble hart, which neither was, nor was to be conquered, or daun∣ted, lay downe that head, vpon the blocke. And say∣ing then, Bring See how this true Christiā courage, cōtinues euen to the end, and in the end. hither the Crucifixe, that I may see it; he began also to say, O bone Iesu, sis mihi Iesus; O good Lord Iesus, be a Iesus to me, being accompanyed by all the people, who were alre∣ady vpon their knees, and who also, inuoked the name of Iesus. And my self, stan∣ding
close, at the one side of his head, and looking still, when the Executioner would go about to cut the corde, as soone as I saw, that the knife was lifted vp, for that purpose, I said out∣right, Ego I ab∣solue thee frō all thy sinnes in the name of the Father, & of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. te absoluo ab omnibus peccatis tuis, in nomi∣ne Patris, & Filij, & Spiri∣tus Sancti, Amen. He did then, both more speedily, and more lowdly then was his custome, say, Iesu, sis mihi Iesus; O Iesus, be thou a Iesus to me. And at the instāt, his head flew off, at once,
from his body. And my selfe, with many others also, did see, that his head being already cut off, did produce the last syllable of the name of Iesus, with a strong kind of hisse, or whisper. And the soule, I trust, did fly vp free, into His body was in∣terred, in the Chiesa Nuoua. Heauen; ador∣ning all his former life, with a holy end; vpon that very day, of the yeare, wher∣vpon the most Illustrious Lord his Father, had de∣parted out of this life, be∣fore this Sonne of his was
borne; that former being the 18. of April, Anno Domini 1574. FINIS.
